T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
April 2014
Vol. 67   No. 8
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Claudia Nelson, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
April 2014
Vol. 67 No. 8
391  the BIg PICture
 
 The Story of Owen: Dragon Slayer of Trondheim  by E. K. Johnston
392  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
397 •  The Soccer Fence: A Story of Friendship, Hope, and Apartheid in South Africa  
by Phil Bildner; illus. by Jesse Joshua Watson
398 • The Here and Now  by Ann Brashares
399 • The Hit  by Melvin Burgess
415 •  A Volcano beneath the Snow: John Brown’s War against Slavery  by Albert 
Marrin
424 • Blue Iguana  by Wendy Townsend
429  ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2014
433  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Kim Naples, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $100.00 or electronic $110.00; combined print & electronic $140.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from The Story of Owen: Dragon Slayer of Trondheim copyright ©2014 and used by 
permission of Carolrhoda Lab. 
April 2014 • 391
the BIg PICture
The Story of Owen: Dragon Slayer of Trondheim
by E. K. Johnston
What if dragons and their insatiable hunger for fossil fuels had shaped the whole 
of human history? If the poison released when one killed a dragon improperly 
(whether on purpose to contaminate an area or by accident because you don’t know 
what the heck you are doing) could create deserts that last thousands of years? If 
Buddy Holly’s plane went down because of a hungry dragon? It’s a cool concept, 
and it is one that Johnston explores with an impeccable eye for detail and great wit. 
The book sets the story in a rural Canadian town, a far cry from usual 
slayer territory, since the prevalence of fossil fuels in cities means that major busi-
nesses snap up them all up to keep their employees and buildings safe. Owen, a 
dragon slayer in training, and Siobhan, our intrepid narrator, have little sense that 
their chance meeting on the first day of grade eleven in that small town’s school 
will lead to an epic friendship and an opportunity to change the dragon-slaying 
culture at large. Siobhan is a gifted musician, and she is quickly talked into being 
Owen’s bard by his insistent aunts, one a retired dragon slayer herself. There is an 
urgent need for dragon slayers, as the creatures seem to be reproducing at a faster 
rate than they can be culled, and some good PR (provided by Siobhan, of course) 
can only help reinforce the need for citizens to be informed, responsible, and active 
in doing their parts to stay alive. 
Siobhan approaches the changes in her life with the snark one would expect 
of a smart teen, but through her burgeoning friendship (and professional alliance) 
with Owen, she is also a sympathetic outside voice to describe the private lives of 
dragon slayers and the loneliness and dangers they endure to keep the world safe. 
If Owen ends up being a bit of a straight man to Siobhan’s sardonic commentary, 
dramatic observations, and musical flair, they both emerge as memorable protago-
nists, bound together by a refreshingly romance-free enduring friendship, and by 
the sacrifices each ultimately makes in the name of community. 
The book offers a clever modernization of the embellished epic tales bards 
would have once told, making it readily apparent that they are still urgently needed 
even in an increasingly jaded world where folks are (recklessly) videotaping battles 
on their smartphones and where corporations buy up as many of the heroes as they 
can. Johnson wisely sidesteps dramatic environmental or political statements: Owen’s 
lesbian aunt and her partner are just part of the family, the necessity of carbon is 
a normal aspect of life with the accompanying need for dragon slayers inevitable 
and unquestioned, and the idiocy of humans and their apparent need to see danger 
firsthand rather than hide in the readily available shelters are handled with irony 
rather than any real outrage. The result is an excellent story, an adventure that 
392 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
celebrates flawed but genuinely heroic individuals and also seamlessly integrates 
some sharp points that will likely linger with the reader. What more could one ask 
of a book celebrating the bardic tradition? (See p. 410 for publication information.)
April Spisak, Reviewer
AjmerA, mAyA Music Everywhere!; by Maya Ajmera, Elise Hofer Derstine, and 
Cynthia Pon. Charlesbridge, 2014 32p illus. with photographs (Global 
Fund for Children)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-57091-936-7 $17.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-57091-937-4 $7.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-670-8 $6.99    
R 4-7 yrs
This latest offering from the Global Fund for Children (What We Wear, BCCB 
3/12) celebrates music from around the world through vivid color photographs, 
a simple narrative line, and detailed captions. Musical topics include ways to use 
your body, (“We clap our hands and stomp our feet”), techniques (“We blow and 
whistle, pluck and strum”), and possible venues (at home, at the beach, at school). 
Of note is the diverse interpretation of music, where classically trained Venezuelan 
violin students are pictured a page away from Togolese kids banging rhythmically 
on the back of a chair; just as all-encompassing is the geographic reach of the 
photoessay, which touches on six continents and a variety of locales, from a U.S. 
community center to a West Bank camp for Palestinian refugees. Far more factual 
information is delivered in the photo captions than in the story itself; each descrip-
tion identifies what is happening in the photo and where the photo is taken. This 
bifurcated text makes a somewhat fragmented readaloud, but this is likely to get far 
more use as a browsing book, and children will love poring over the photographs 
of international music-makers. A two-page map of the world identifies featured 
countries and reiterates the equitable distribution of the book’s focus; additional 
supplemental materials include several pages of ideas on how to enjoy music and 
a glossary of terms from the text.  HM  
Anderson, BriAn Monster Chefs; written and illus. by Brian and Liam Ander-
son. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-808-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Four chefs, all monsters, work for the king (also a monster), who has decided 
April 2014 • 393
that he is tired of eating nothing but eyeballs with ketchup and has issued an 
ultimatum: “Find me something new to eat or you will find yourselves on my 
menu.” The monsters split up and travel to the ends of the earth, searching for 
delectable delights, but three of them return to the castle empty-handed. Just as 
they are about to serve themselves up to the king, ketchup and all, the fourth cook 
bursts in with a pastry chef (a comparatively tiny human), whose cupcakes save 
the day by making the king roar with delight. The repeated story elements lend 
a folkloric tinge to this gently goofy tale, and while there are a few glitches in the 
concept (would the pastry chef agree to stick around a smelly castle to help churn 
out rows of eyeball-decorated cupcakes?), they’re likely to be overlooked in the 
service of an otherwise entertaining story. The mixed-media illustrations, scratchy 
and thin ink outlines with mottled watercolor hues on bright white paper, have 
a soft cloudiness of pigment that provides a pleasing balance to the zany humor. 
The chefs are a motley crew of gentle giants, ranging from a cartoonish crab with 
horns to a doe-eyed, scaly bat, while the king himself is a more conventional lump 
of reddish fur with rows of a pointy teeth and a single eye. This would of course 
make a fine addition to a monster or Halloween storytime that includes snacks, 
but little monsters following along at home will also likely clamor to try out their 
baking skills, a feat facilitated by the inclusion of an eyeball-decorated cupcake 
recipe at the book’s end.  TA
Armstrong, Kelley Sea of Shadows. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207124-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207126-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
The small, rundown village of Edgewood sits at the outskirts of the empire, serving 
as its first defense against the demonic spirits that haunt the neighboring Forest of 
the Dead. Sixteen-year-old twins Moria and Ashyn are essential to this task, leading 
annual trips into the Forest to bring peace to the dead and banish angry spirits. At 
this year’s ritual, however, something goes terribly wrong: flesh-eating monsters 
invade and kill most of Edgewood’s adult residents, the children are kidnapped 
by mercenaries, and Moria and Ashyn find themselves separated during the fray. 
The sisters make their separate ways to the nearest village, each accompanied by a 
broody, handsome guy who also conveniently happens to be good with a sword. 
Bad omens, shadowy figures, and suspicious characters are all brilliantly deployed 
here in the first hundred pages, ratcheting up the tension in the build up to the 
ill-fated ceremony, and the gore-filled imagery of the attack on the village makes 
for some truly terrifying moments. Unfortunately, the girls’ subsequent journeys 
are more contrived, and there’s not much traction as they merely run from one 
danger to the next, with monsters and the occasional slave trader popping up to 
present obvious peril but never really connecting to or advancing the overall sto-
ryline. Characterization is more effective, with bullheaded, mouthy Moria a direct 
foil to the more thoughtful, timid Ashyn, but a shifting focalization between the 
girls allows readers to see the pair as more than simply opposites; their sisterly 
affection, touched with just a hint of resentment and jealousy, brings an element 
of realistic family drama to the more fantastic backdrop. A call for war closes the 
book and ensures a sequel, so readers taken in by the twins’ adventures have more 
to anticipate.  KQG
394 • The BulleTin
BAccAlArio, Pierdomenico Suitcase of Stars; tr. from the Italian by Maria Allen; 
illus. by Iacopo Bruno. Capstone, 2014 [240p] (Enchanted Emporium)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4342-6516-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62370-039-3 $12.95 
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4342-6519-7 $9.25
Reviewed from galleys    
Ad Gr. 5-8
On the coast of north Scotland, just near thirteen-year-old Finley’s small town, sits 
the Enchanted Emporium, a bright red shop that holds a slew of valuable magical 
items, including a flying carpet and a powder that can help the user converse with 
spirits. Finley’s duties as a substitute mail carrier bring him to the Emporium, where 
he meets the shop owners, the Lilys, and their lovely teenaged daughter Aiby, with 
whom Finley quickly is smitten. When a crazed Dutchman wakes a giant in the 
nearby castle ruins and it threatens to destroy the store, Finley must help Aiby save 
the family business—preferably without being killed in the process. This Italian 
import, the first in a series, is slow to start, and there are a few incongruities in 
the plot: based on Finley’s surprised reactions to the objects in the store, magic 
seems to be unknown in Applecross, but the conclusion has townsfolk cheerfully 
and unquestioningly gathering round for the Emporium’s opening. Furthermore, 
the titular Suitcase of Stars, discovered in the Dutchman’s hotel room, is merely 
mentioned once and then never referred to again. The magical action, however, is 
enjoyable, Finley and Aiby are an engaging and intrepid pair, and the interspersed 
illustrations and descriptions of various magical items (pages from the Lilys’ Big 
Book of Magical Objects) are intriguing. Kids willing to skim the slower bits may 
find plenty to entertain them in the scenes of magic gone awry.  JH
BAjAj, VArshA Abby Spencer Goes to Bollywood. Whitman, 2014 [248p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-6363-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year old Abby Spencer is curious about the father she never met. She knows 
her mother knew him in college, when he came to the U.S. from India to study, 
and she’s been happy enough without him, living with her mom in Houston and 
spending plenty of time with her maternal grandparents. She is slightly hurt at 
her father’s rejection, however, and when a previously undetected coconut allergy 
nearly kills her, she begins to wonder what other genetic conditions she may have 
inherited. Together, Abby and her mother track down her father and find that he’s 
now a huge Bollywood star. While he never knew of Abby’s existence (his own father 
had intercepted the letter her mother sent informing him of her pregnancy), he is 
eager to make up for lost time, and invites her to India. Soon Abby finds herself 
on the set of a Bollywood film, staying in a mansion, and getting to know both her 
father and paternal grandmother, all while having to disguise their true relation-
ship to the press. Even the Bollywood echoes aren’t enough to get the story off the 
hook for its continued implausibility; it’s an exhausting venture, as is following the 
jerky, jumpy prose plaguing this novel. While funny at times, Abby’s voice is often 
forced and scattered, jarring the reader with conspicuous slang and confusing with 
plentiful near non sequiturs. There’s some fun in Abby’s first-class travel, budding 
romance, and dream-come-true scenario of one’s unknown parent turning out to 
be a celebrity, but getting there takes more work than such an escapist read can 
fairly expect, and readers will be better off with Krishnaswami’s The Grand Plan to 
Fix Everything (BCCB 9/11).  AA
April 2014 • 395
BAldAcci, dAVid The Finisher. Scholastic, 2014 [512p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-65220-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-65236-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-8
Life is pretty crummy in Wormwood for the Wugs, and the Quag, essentially the 
end of the world right outside the village, doesn’t offer anything better. Vega Jane 
is barely scraping out an existence, torn between watching her parents slowly waste 
away, trying to care for her precocious little brother, and doing a demanding job 
that pays her very little. It’s not surprising that when an opportunity arises to find 
something brand new, even if it seems exceedingly dangerous, Vega Jane would 
decide to pursue it, but her curiosity and bravado are exactly the traits to get her into 
trouble in this dystopic world where the consequences for bucking the status quo 
are dire. Vega Jane is an angry teen, and the reader may be able to spot that she is 
an occasionally unreliable narrator, commenting from her assumptions rather than 
her observations. This insider perspective heightens sympathy for the beleaguered 
protagonist while also offering further glimpses into what drives characters in the 
carefully built world Baldacci has created. The book’s choice to overrely on “wug” 
as a wordstem is distracting, but this is a minor issue in what is otherwise a clever, 
intriguing, and refreshingly different world populated with flawed characters who 
respond to their environment with a unique set of moral guidelines, just as they 
should given their sheltered, intensely controlled lives. The conclusion is clearly a 
set up for a sequel, and readers will likely eagerly anticipate the next installment 
of Vega Jane’s life.  AS
BArnett, mAc President Taft Is Stuck in the Bath; illus. by Chris Van Du-
sen. Candlewick, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6317-9 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
“So, did President Taft actually get stuck in the bath? Maybe. Maybe not. But more 
than a century later, this is the story we’re still telling. And to people like me, that’s 
all that matters.” So reads the author’s note for this delightful, smart, and silly story 
about the most famous bathtub misadventure in U.S. presidential history. Chris 
Van Dusen’s bold gouache illustrations make eager use of double-page spreads, 
creating the scene and capturing the sly jokes and apt personifications within 
Barnett’s rhythmic prose. These larger-than-life renderings and the no-nonsense 
dialogue perfectly suit the occasion, juxtaposing the grandeur of the White House 
with the exposed Taft and the rosacea-tinged government bigwigs surrounding him 
as they suggest butter, dynamite, and deep-sea divers to help the hefty leader (a 
amusing running gag has the vice president quite ready to assume office). Fleshy, 
funny, and fact-checked, this perfect Inauguration Day readaloud will plump up 
any presidential collection.  AA
BAss, KAren Graffiti Knight. Pajama, 2014 288p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-927485-53-8 $14.95    
R Gr. 7-10
“Leipzig was our prison and had been since the war ended. . . . The Soviets were 
our wardens, but the Schupos [German police] were our prison guards.” So says 
sixteen-year-old narrator Wilm Tauber, who is just beginning to piece together how 
post-war occupation governs his life and prospects, disaffection turns to outrage 
when he discovers that his older sister, Anneliese, had been gang raped by Soviet 
396 • The BulleTin
soldiers and abandoned by her ex-boyfriend, who is now a rising star in the Schupo 
force. Wilm and his boyhood buddies had been playing a fairly harmless spy game 
among themselves, but now Wilm takes it seriously and begins to pull pranks of 
escalating seriousness against the police and the occupiers, dragging his skeptical 
but loyal friends into his escapades. A German engineer, assigned to inspect bridges 
in need of repair or rebuilding, mentors Wilm toward the very real possibility of 
self-improvement through education, but anger and a stunt gone wrong send Wilm, 
his chums, and his sister on a run for the border, seeking asylum in the American 
zone. Bass positions her protagonist at a credibly vulnerable point in his life—old 
enough for an intellectually mature understanding of the injustices around him, 
but young enough to rush headlong into action with adolescent impulsiveness. 
So many World War II stories come to an abrupt halt on VE or VA Day, or segue 
awkwardly straight into the Cold War; this is a rare and effective exception that 
pauses to look at the aftermath for vanquished Germans, and to puzzle out who 
the post-war bad guys really are. A historical note is appended.  EB
Bedford, mArtyn Never Ending. Lamb, 2014 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90809-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73991-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89856-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
“Siobhan, I don’t know who you are anymore,” Siobhan’s father says after her latest 
violent escapade, and the fifteen-year-old can only candidly reply “Me neither.” 
Since the death of her beloved younger brother, Declan, Siobhan—or Shiv, as 
she’s generally known—has erupted in violent rages, a mask for the guilt she feels 
about Declan’s fatal accident on the family vacation in Greece. Now she’s at the 
Korsakoff Clinic, a facility specially geared to treating troubled young people who 
feel responsible for another’s death, and its modality is to make her confront her 
memories of Declan and face again the horror of his death. Bedford’s writing is lush 
and atmospheric, especially in the flashbacks to Shiv’s stay on the Greek island of 
Kyritos and her illicit holiday romance with the handsome Nikos (to whom she 
claims to be seventeen). The circumstances and the clinic’s methodology are some-
what contrived, but the emotive narration is compelling enough to compensate, 
and there’s an enjoyably melodramatic flavor to the story. This is an interesting 
complement to Serle’s similarly themed The Edge of Falling (BCCB 3/14); that title 
offers more psychological perception, but this one will engage readers looking for 
romantic and beautifully ugly sadness.  DS
Beil, michAel d. Lantern Sam and the Blue Streak Bandits; illus. by Roman 
Muradov. Knopf, 2014 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75318-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75317-3 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75319-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-5
Riding the Lake Erie Shoreliner with his mother and sister from New York to meet 
his father in Ashtabula, eleven-year-old Henry Shipley finds himself burdened 
with the acquaintance of ten-year-old Ellie Strasbourg, a wealthy girl with an 
aggressive manner of finding friends. Just as Henry’s warming up to her chatter, 
April 2014 • 397
Ellie goes missing, and Henry, conductor Clarence, and Clarence’s telepathic cat, 
Lantern Sam, become detectives in search of the errant heiress. The mystery grows 
more intriguing once it becomes obvious Ellie is still onboard the train, and the 
impromptu gumshoes are faced with a sort of rolling locked-door puzzler. Much 
of the tension deflates, though, when Ellie is found bound up but safe with plenty 
of chapters still to go, and identifying the baddies isn’t quite as fun as searching 
the train. However, alternating chapters that chronicle Lantern Sam’s previous cat 
lives are consistently amusing, and an action climax at the 1937 inaugural run of 
the real life Blue Streak roller coaster in Conneaut Lake, Pennsylvania is a satisfying 
payoff. Beil scatters clues broadly enough for a challenge, yet makes them transparent 
enough for tyro ’tecs to whiff out, assuring that most middle-graders will happily 
reach the mystery’s solution a stop or two ahead of Henry.  EB 
Bildner, Phil The Soccer Fence: A Story of Friendship, Hope, and Apartheid in 
South Africa; illus. by Jesse Joshua Watson. Putnam, 2014 [36p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24790-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Living at the height of apartheid in South Africa, a young black boy, Hector, tries 
to get in on the soccer games that a group of white boys plays in a nearby park, but 
he’s rebuffed for his race, even as watershed events like Nelson Mandela’s release 
from prison and the first open election in 1994 occur around him. As the African 
Cup of Nations galvanizes the country to support the racially integrated football 
team, Hector and one of the white boys get caught up in the sporting frenzy, 
becoming friends and playing together at the Cup’s conclusion. Though the book 
initially focuses on the emotions of the excluded boy, it expands into an effective 
and informative historical work as it documents the progression of the matches in 
the Cup, the Cup’s key players, and the social context. Watson’s boldly outlined 
acrylics are striking and warm in their depiction of the story, dramatically setting 
its characters against backdrops that wash a single color, such as sunset orange or 
rich ochre, over pencil details that often convey historical information through 
newspaper clippings and depictions of political events. This is, then, a remarkably 
effective tale of sportsmanship and overcoming prejudice in an accessible and high-
interest format. The book includes an extensive author’s note, a bibliography of 
sources, and a historical timeline of South African history.  TA 
Boyne, john Stay Where You Are & Then Leave; illus. by Oliver Jeffers. Holt, 
2014 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-62779-031-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Europe is deep in World War I, and life has changed drastically for nine-year old Alfie 
Summers and his neighbors on Damley Road. Only five when his father shipped 
out, Alfie now works as a shoeshine boy at London’s King’s Cross Station, surrepti-
tiously slipping money into his mother’s change purse. When happenstance brings 
a doctor to Alfie’s shoeshine stand and the doctor’s records go flying, Alfie learns 
that his father is not on a secret mission, as his mother claimed, but is confined to 
a hospital north of London. Bent on bringing him home and restoring their happy 
family of three, Alfie concocts a plan to sneak his father out of the hospital, but 
he doesn’t realize the extent of his father’s shellshock and its implications for their 
398 • The BulleTin
life together. Boyne takes on the war to end all wars with a sure but gentle touch, 
surrounding the believable and endearing Alfie with compelling side characters, 
especially his father’s best friend, conscientious objector Joe Patience. Through Joe 
and other figures Alfie encounters, Boyne touches on important aspects of the war 
and its effects on the homefront: anger and violence toward “conchies” (and the 
public shaming of any young man not in uniform through the presentation of a 
white feather); the social alienation and government internment of foreign-born 
citizens suddenly considered suspicious; lack of food and even modest comforts; 
and the nascent psychological study of post-traumatic stress. As much about familial 
love as about war, this novel tugs at the heartstrings, creating a sentimental but 
sound story that would shine as a classroom readaloud.  AA
BrAshAres, Ann The Here and Now. Delacorte, 2014 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90629-6 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73680-0 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97615-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Twelve rules have governed Prenna James’ life for the last four years, and she’s about 
to break nearly every single one. As a time traveler from a plague-ravaged 2098 now 
trying to fit into 2014, Prenna mostly interacts with her fellow time travelers in 
their tightknit community, avoiding any interference with the “natural sequence” 
of time, keeping her past secret, and never developing any emotional or physical 
relationship with any “time native.” Her blossoming romance with Ethan Jarves, 
a time-native classmate, defies these strictures, but Ethan has secrets of his own, 
namely that he’s been in contact with Prenna’s estranged father, who has informed 
Ethan that the event that destroys Prenna’s world is set to occur soon—and it could 
be prevented. The technicalities of time travel mostly fall to the wayside here, making 
room for a swiftly moving but intricately plotted mystery and, of course, a swoon-
worthy romance. Brashares pairs all the sweetness, anxiety, and joy of a first love 
with the high stakes of a pending apocalypse, and the result is both poignant and 
thrilling, especially as events lead Prenna and Ethan to some difficult and world-
saving decisions. Prenna is entirely authentic as a teenaged girl who has seen more 
than her fair share of suffering and struggles with her own desire to be happy. The 
environmental message is surprisingly subtle, while Prenna’s appreciation of the 
comforts of the early twenty-first century and her belief that disaster can be averted 
is refreshingly upbeat amidst the usual doom and gloom of most dystopias.  KQG
Brown, sKilA Caminar. Candlewick, 2014 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6516-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
It’s 1981 in Guatemala, and the war that has been raging for nearly thirty years 
between the military and the farmers who have tried to organize against them has 
reached Carlos’ small village of Chopán. Out in the forest collecting mushrooms 
when the soldiers massacre his entire village, a stunned Carlos wanders through 
the forest, eventually meeting up with a small group of people seeking to join the 
“rebels” and fight the military. He leads them to his abuela’s village just in time to 
warn the villagers of an attack, and he is faced with the choice to stay or join the 
fight. The free-verse poetry in this verse novel is tightly crafted to evoke Carlos’ 
April 2014 • 399
confusion and emotional turmoil both prior to and after the massacre, employing 
both shape and resonant language to pull readers into his hesitations, sadness, and 
terror. Part of him accepts his mother’s verdict that he is too young to take on the 
responsibilities of manhood in protecting those he loves, but his survivor guilt and 
lingering fear make him question whether he will ever become a man. The narrative 
arc is a bit tidy (his quick actions save both his new friends and his abuela’s entire 
village), but the accessible imagery in the poetry will engage readers on a visceral 
level, ably communicating the limitations of Carlos’ understanding, both in terms 
of his youth and his inability to comprehend the full scope of the conflict. A brief 
author’s note at the beginning sketches the bare bones of the conflict, and a glossary 
and author interview follow the text.  KC
Burgess, melVin The Hit. Chicken House, 2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55699-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55700-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
The sins of greedy corporations and corrupt governments are being called to ac-
count in mass protests all over England, and a rebel group, the Zealots, has found 
an unusual weapon to ignite the revolution: a drug called Death, which gives users 
one week of intense vitality before killing them. The Zealots hope that when people 
see masses of young people seeking the ultimate escape from present poverty and 
hopeless futures, they will be moved to overthrow the system. Their plan is work-
ing, especially when a famous rock star dies on stage after blogging about his week 
on Death. Working-class Adam and his upper-middle-class girlfriend, Lizzie, are 
caught up in the euphoria of the demonstrations, but when Adam finds out that 
his brother, Jess, is a member of the Zealots and has been killed, he takes the drug 
himself, determined to give his life some sort of excitement and meaning before he 
dies. Lizzie is by turns flattered and horrified by the idea of helping him realize his 
final dreams; teased by the promise of an antidote, she ends up being the enslaved 
and tortured victim of the psychotic son of a drug lord, while Adam and Jess, who’s 
not dead after all, try in their separate ways to right both personal and societal 
wrongs. Burgess has his hands full cramming a wide range of social ills—income 
inequality, disaffected youth, systemic corruption, club drug use—into a page-
turning thriller punctuated by disappointing sex, grisly murder and hair-breadth 
escapes; fortunately he’s a more than competent juggler. Adam and Lizzie are almost 
touchingly naïve in their seriously poor judgment; their plight, while necessarily 
exaggerated, reads like an anthem for the teenage condition as they face some of 
life’s biggest questions with scant moral and intellectual resources and no adult role 
models. The book raises multiple questions that teens will want to discuss.  KC
cAletti, deB The Last Forever. Simon, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5000-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5001-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
It’s supposed to be a short road trip: Tess and her father head out just before the end 
of her junior year to see the Grand Canyon and maybe get some perspective after 
Tess’ mother’s death. Instead, her father takes Tess to stay with the grandmother 
she’s never known on a Washington island and leaves her there. Despite her fury, 
400 • The BulleTin
Tess finds herself connecting to people on the island, especially Henry Lark, a 
handsome guy who’s just as book-loving as Tess herself. Tess’ romance with Henry 
deepens, and when her beloved pixiebelle plant, a rare specimen that’s a legacy from 
her mother, begins to die, Henry crusades to save its seeds—and Tess’ connection 
to her mother—in a global seed archive that’s securely encased in the Norwegian 
Arctic. However, neither Tess’ plant nor Henry prove to be what they seem. This 
is classic Caletti, with comradely travel, extended families, flawed parents, and 
quirky coastal communities (this is the same fictional Parrish island setting of 
The Six Rules of Maybe, BCCB 5/10) key elements in a girl’s self-defining growth, 
and the author’s lucid, thoughtful prose and effective portraiture is on full display 
here. The reveal that Henry is gay is a little overhistrionic (and the book’s oddly 
silent about the possibility of his bisexuality, despite the fact he seems pretty happy 
to date Tess); the underlying truth that sometimes people care greatly about you 
even if it’s not in the way you want them to is an important one, though, and it’s 
explored through Tess’ relationship with her father as well as the one with Henry. 
Caletti fans and other aficionadoes of solid drama will warm to this satisfying tale 
of a bittersweet summer that changes things, breaks hearts, and heals them in new 
configurations.  DS
cline-rAnsome, lesA Benny Goodman & Teddy Wilson: Taking the Stage as the 
First Black-and-White Jazz Band in History; illus. by James E. Ransome. Holiday 
House, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2362-0 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys    
R 7-10 yrs
Pages and spreads alternately trace the lives of clarinetist Benny Goodman and pia-
nist Teddy Wilson from their childhood introduction to music education, through 
their early years playing in segregated groups, to their early studio recordings in 
an integrated trio, and finally on to their ground-breaking live performances as a 
racially mixed jazz band. Cline-Ransome keeps the rhythm rolling with verse that 
follows the musicians’ experience, tracing them from separate growth to the shared 
stage. Goodman had his roots in Chicago: “All sweet/ All dance/ All white/ All the 
way to New York” while Wilson came up from the South: “All hot/ All rhythm/ 
All black/ All the way to New York.” The text suggests, and the endnotes amplify 
the point, that the initial Goodman/Wilson studio collaboration wasn’t exactly a 
high point in racial rapprochement; it took awhile for Goodman to agree to bring 
his integrated trio (and then a quartet) into public view. Once Goodman, Wilson, 
Gene Krupa, and Lionel Hampton debuted on stage in 1936, however, there was 
no turning back: “The stage was hot/ The dance floor was hotter/ The music was 
hottest.” James Ransome’s paintings, with the deep shadows and dramatic illumina-
tion of stage lighting, catch the musicians at their most joyous, fairly glowing with 
the delight of playing with talented peers. End matter includes deeper biographical 
information on the featured musicians, a timeline of their careers, and brief bios of 
other jazz masters of the period. Pair this with Peter Golenbock’s perennial favorite, 
Teammates (BCCB 4/90), for comparison with the way barriers were broken on a 
very different field.  EB 
April 2014 • 401
comPestine, ying chAng Secrets of the Terra-Cotta Soldier; by Ying Chang 
Compestine and Vinson Compestine. Amulet, 2014 224p illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-0540-3 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Ming’s archaeologist father has been sent by the Maoist government for “reeduca-
tion” in a rural area of 1972 China, and Ming suffers the scorn and ridicule of his 
classmates as much as the grinding poverty that comes with his father’s demotion. 
When farmers come to the gate with a broken terra-cotta figure they unearthed in a 
field and for which they expect to be paid, Ming suspects the statue has something 
to do with the burial of Emperor Qin, builder of the Great Wall, who is suppos-
edly interred in the region. This suspicion is confirmed when the statue comes to 
life, and the reanimated soldier, Shi, works with Ming to protect the tomb of the 
acclaimed ruler under whom Shi was both honored in battle and sentenced to 
death. The Compestines have the demanding task of bringing readers up to speed 
simultaneously on the emperor, the archaeologically significant site of his burial, and 
the Cultural Revolution, and the strain of the effort shows in frequently awkward 
insertion of information into stiff dialogue and the relatively thin development of 
each of the individual themes. There’s enough humor and action, however, to keep 
fiction readers’ attention, and enough black and white photographs of artifacts and 
geographic settings to remind nonfiction fans that this is reality-based. Kids ready 
to move on from The Magic Tree House but still attached to the fantasy/reality 
format will be great candidates for this step-up title. Authors’ note and interview 
are included.  EB
cosimAno, elle Nearly Gone.  Dawson, 2014 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3926-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Nearly just wants to get through high school, score a scholarship, and get the heck 
out of Sunny View trailer park; instead she’s presented with a mystery in the per-
sonal ads, the teens she tutors suddenly dying one by one, and a hunky, dangerous 
boy distracting her from her goals. Drawing on her ability to read the thoughts of 
anyone she touches, Nearly seeks to solve the mystery and stop the criminal. The 
premise is interesting and the book moves quickly, making this an undemanding 
time-passer for summer or travel reading. However, the mystery is poorly developed, 
and most readers will be baffled for so long that the revelation is ultimately unsat-
isfactory (given the significant body count by then). Nearly, for all her ostensible 
brilliance, isn’t much of a sleuth, and even after she figures out the culprit, she is 
so slow to act that she almost adds two more deaths to the list. Hathaway’s Slide 
(BCCB 5/12) is a more effective blend of mystery and magic, but readers may still 
find themselves rooting fervently for Nearly to not only survive but also actually 
thrive even with the poor hand she has been dealt.  AS
crossley-hollAnd, KeVin Bracelet of Bones. Quercus, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62365-112-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62365-113-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
In this British import, a girl’s determination to find her father takes her across 
eleventh-century Europe and outside of any literal and emotional comfort zone 
402 • The BulleTin
she has ever known. Solveig is stunned that her father has left her behind to go and 
serve with another Viking in Constantinople, and she quickly decides that she would 
rather risk her life to follow him rather than live a safe, empty existence without 
him at home. The sharp fourteen-year-old has a lot of courage, but she has little 
life experience or knowledge of other cultures. The growth she experiences on her 
journey is sometimes jarring for her, as she learns, for example, what the grim fate 
of a female slave is once her master has died. Solveig is a compelling protagonist, 
moving through the unknown with little more than her fierce grit, and the world 
through her eyes is at once terrifying and wildly exciting. Crossley-Holland’s elegant, 
poetic language adds richness to the travelogue-meets-adventure plot, and his eye 
for authentic character development is strong. This is one of those rare books that 
will lure history buffs, those seeking strong girl characters, and Viking fans—and 
it will actually please all of them. An author’s note, list of characters, map, and 
vocabulary list add background and context to the complex story.  AS
donofrio, BeVerly Where’s Mommy?; illus. by Barbara McClintock. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-375-84423-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Young Maria and little Mouse Mouse share a house; Maria lives there with her 
human family, while Mouse Mouse and her family inhabit the house’s walls and 
subfloor spaces. While girl and mouse are friends, their friendship is a secret—or 
so they think. One night, when neither girl can find their mother at bedtime, 
the two separately search for their missing mamas. After Maria and Mouse bump 
into each other (literally) on the way to check the garden shed, they get a shock: 
inside the shed sit both mothers, having a cozy chat together. The moms escort the 
children to bed (“Each mother tucked each girl in, kissed the top of her head, and 
told a wonderful story”), and the book’s last line encourages readers to speculate: 
“And what do you think those stories were about?” This is a snugly satisfying tale; 
the storytelling is straightforward and cozily intimate, while the parallel stories of 
girl and mouse are pleasantly symmetrical. McClintock’s captivating pen-and-ink, 
watercolor, and gouache illustrations, with sweeps of warm candlelight yellow set-
ting the tone, draw readers in with their side-by-side home spreads. The elegantly 
drawn interiors will inspire many a kid to rearrange the dollhouse furniture or 
create their own “mouse house” using household objects à la Mouse Mouse’s fam-
ily (a suspended flashlight in the rodent kitchen echoes the hanging pendant lamp 
in Maria’s kitchen; a thimble fills in for a teacup). Pair this with Beatrix Potter’s A 
Tale of Two Bad Mice or perhaps a title from Graham Oakley’s Church Mice series 
for a comfy look at imagined mouse lodgings.  JH
edge, christoPher Twelve Minutes to Midnight. Whitman, 2014 [254p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-8133-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
The thrilling mysteries penned by Montgomery Finch are taking Victorian London 
by storm, and people are beginning to write to the recluse author, requesting his 
help in solving real-life mysteries of their own. There’s one major problem, though: 
Finch is just an actor playing a part, hired by thirteen-year-old Penelope Tredwell, 
the orphan heiress of the Penny Dreadful newspaper and the real talent behind the 
April 2014 • 403
paper’s popular mysteries. When a letter from the director of the Bedlam asylum 
invites Finch to solve a mystery, Penelope can’t resist the opportunity for some true 
sleuthing, bringing along “Uncle Monty” as a cover as she investigates why Bedlam’s 
patients all begin to scribble furiously at twelve minutes to midnight, rambling 
about iron birds, giant buildings, and mushroom clouds. Readers will catch on 
relatively quickly that the inmates are describing events from the modern era, but 
the mystery is still compelling, straddling the line between supernatural happen-
ings and criminal goings-on, headed here by a wonderfully creepy femme fatale 
obsessed with spiders. Unfortunately, a dream sequence in the last few chapters 
moves the book jarringly from paranormal thriller to an almost meta-fantasy, and 
the ultimate solution of waking up a comatose, sleeping population of London by 
telling the sleepers to “fight back” against the future seen in their dreams seems 
oddly pointless, especially when the future in this case has indeed been written. 
Still, the descriptions of Victorian London are vivid without being overwhelming, 
and the storytelling has a direct, focused clip, making this a possible candidate for 
readers just delving into historical mysteries.  KQG
fAmA, elizABeth Plus One. Farrar, 2014 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-374-36007-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-374-36008-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
In Fama’s alternative world, the population of the United States has been divided 
into Rays, people who work during the daytime, and Smudges, people who in-
habit the night, in order to keep overcrowding in check and the workforce in line. 
Seventeen-year-old Sol Le Coeur is keenly aware of the daily discrimination faced 
by Smudges, but she’s especially upset that authorities will not even allow her 
beloved Poppu, her grandfather, to see Sol’s newborn niece, a Ray, before he dies. 
Sol’s plan to fake an injury and gain admittance into the hospital to then kidnap 
the baby goes terribly awry when she meets D’Arcy Benoit, the handsome medical 
apprentice who gets her thrown in jail. Then D’Arcy, having a change of heart, busts 
her out of prison, and the two find themselves caught in an elaborate conspiracy 
involving undisclosed experimentation on half the population, illegal computer 
programming, and a brewing rebellion. All the elements of dystopian romance 
are here but they never quite jell: the divided world is not distinctly drawn, with 
the reasons given for the daytime/nighttime regulations unconvincing; D’Arcy’s 
actions are more motivated by plot necessity than by his actual character; and the 
increasingly complicated nature of the illegal experiments and government authori-
ties becomes confusing. Sol, however, makes an intriguing heroine, someone who 
is driven by grief and desperation and who is as strong as she is irrational, and her 
gutsy determination to help the people she loves, whatever the cost, will stoke a 
fire under even the most passive of readers. Her romance with D’Arcy is sweet and 
tender, and readers will be glad to see Sol get a bit of sunny happiness before a 
rather dark conclusion hints at a sequel.  KQG 
404 • The BulleTin
fArrell, mAry cronK Pure Grit: How American World War II Nurses Survived 
Battle and Prison Camp in the Pacific. Abrams, 2014 160p illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-1028-5 $24.95   
R* Gr. 6-10
The war was raging in Europe, but the Pacific region was still calm—at least in 
public perception—and a posting on the island of Luzon was a plum assignment 
for military nurses, with its gorgeous terrain, comfortable quarters, light duty, lavish 
social life: paradise with a paycheck. Then came Pearl Harbor and in a flash the 
Japanese were moving through the Pacific, the Allies were infamously backed into 
Bataan and onto the tiny island of Corregidor, General MacArthur had decamped 
to Australia, and nurses and their gravely wounded patients were taken captive and 
herded off to internment camps. Farrell tells the gripping story of the nurses’ three 
year ordeal on the college grounds of Santo Tomas in Manila and at the inland 
encampment of Los Baños at Laguna de Bay, highlighting their attempts to provide 
the best medical care possible with few or no supplies, and to keep up their own 
physical strength and morale as starvation set in. Interviews and memoirs supply 
plenty of primary source information on which this title is based, and a wealth of 
photographs, as well as a pair of useful maps, supplements the text. Although the 
discussion of the Japanese military advance is flag-wavingly pro-American, Farrell 
tempers the narration with a discussion of how the popular press demonized the 
captors beyond their actual transgressions. This valuable account shifts the focus 
from World War II nurses as “angels of mercy” to POWs, and replays the rout at 
Bataan with women rather than men in the starring roles. End matter comprises 
a glossary, index, source notes, bibliography, and complete list of nurses in service 
in the Philippines at the time of the invasion.  EB
fisher, cAtherine The Slanted Worlds.  Dial, 2014 [368p] (Obsidian 
Mirror)
ISBN 978-0-8037-3970-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 7-12
After coming together to uncover the secrets of the Obsidian Mirror (in Obsidian 
Mirror, BCCB 7/13), Jake, Sarah, and their compatriots are once again scattered 
across space and time. Oberon Venn skulks around his Devonshire mansion, Win-
tercombe Abbey, losing touch with reality and his own humanity, while his ward 
Jake is trapped in 1940s London searching for his lost father. Meanwhile, Sarah 
hides in contemporary London, researching ways to destroy the mirror, while the 
scarred man Maskelyne and his assistant Rebecca hole up at the seashore doing 
magical research of their own. Now they must all return to Venn’s crumbling estate 
to save Jake from German bombing raids and to save Wintercombe itself from the 
vengeance of the fairy queen Summer. This captivating sequel to the inventive, 
genre-blending Obsidian Mirror manages to maintain and even amplify many of 
that novel’s most essential elements. Fans of the original will delight at the rede-
ployment of the individually realized characters, a multitude of twisting, twining 
narrative strands, a host of intertextual references, and plenty of enigmas and sur-
prise revelations. Add some shifting loyalties, unexpected new partnerships, and a 
few new faces, including three creepy schoolboys who spout prophecy, and what 
results is a pleasing new adventure that ratchets up the intensity and the fun. Since 
the text gives almost no mention of previous events, readers will need to have read 
April 2014 • 405
the first novel to situate themselves, and they may even wish to refresh themselves 
before diving in to this new chapter. They will find the effort well worth it as they 
lose themselves in this challenging, fascinating series.  AM
fishmAn, seth The Well’s End. Putnam, 2014 347p
ISBN 978-0-399-15990-9 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
When a disease starts causing students and faculty to age rapidly and die in a mat-
ter of hours, it doesn’t take long to declare emergency status at the ritzy boarding 
school Mia attends. Unfortunately, it’s too late to stop the spread of the disease, so 
Mia and a small group of her peers decide to make a break for the Cave, a top-secret 
“electronics” company where Mia’s dad works. A remarkable number of convenient 
saves later, they arrive to find that Mia’s dad and his coworkers are intricately tied 
to this virus, and to the only means of stopping it. There’s a cool core to the novel, 
magical water that only appears in a seventeen-year-cycle and that can be used as 
both a devastating weapon and a healing element. However, its impact is diminished 
by the book’s uninspiring bad guy (who isn’t all that much worse than the good guys 
once you actually analyze motivations and results), by the the too-frequent refer-
ences to Mia’s childhood fall down a well, and by awkward exposition scenes that 
get the teens up to date on how the grownups have been mishandling the situation. 
Even with the flaws, there are strengths: Mia’s (ill-advised) steamy romance with a 
new student develops at an authentically frantic pace that matches the adrenaline 
rush of the rest of the novel, and a cliffhanger end opens up a new plot thread that 
may be worth pursuing.  AS
grAy, ritA Have You Heard the Nesting Bird?; illus. by Kenard Pak. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-544-10580-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
As a brother and sister play outside on the wild, spacious grounds of their country 
home, they are aware of the songs of the many birds that perch and dart around 
them: “Woodpecker calls from a tree with a hole,/ cuk-cuk-cuk-cuk-cuk/ Starling 
sings from a metal pole./ whistle-ee-wee-tree.” They are perplexed, though, at the 
silence of the robin that nests in the tree: “‘Not a single tweet or trill.’ ‘This nesting 
bird is so still!’” The days’ avian cacophony gives way to a deep, peaceful night, 
and in the morning there’s a bustle of activity around the nest—tapping, rustling, 
peeping: “The baby birds are here!” It’s a simple story that has seen many iterations 
for the preschool and primary set, but this time the emphasis is on auditory rather 
than visual discovery of the hatchlings. With its many birdcalls that invite imita-
tion, the text is enjoyable in its own right, as are the softly textured, earth-toned 
setting in which children and birds enjoy each other’s company. Additionally, the 
closing notes provide an informative bonus, cleverly styled as an “A Word with a 
Bird” interview, that allows the robin to explain in detail why she was so very quiet, 
how she and her mate work together to care for their young, what will happen to 
the hatchlings, and whether she has a song of her own (“I make lots of different 
sounds to communicate, but mostly the father bird does the singing: In fact, that’s 
why I picked him. I love his song”). Who better to illuminate the finer points of 
robins’ domestic life than the mother bird herself?  EB 
406 • The BulleTin
hAle, shAnnon Dangerous. Bloomsbury, 2014 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-168-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
Danger is literally her middle name, but Maisie, a quiet-living homebody, has never 
lived up to it until she wins a spot at astronaut training camp. Camp turns out to be 
much more sinister than expected: suddenly alien technology is coursing through 
her body, and her pals begin dying off at an alarming rate as their bodies struggle 
to accept the enhancements the alien nanites bring. Maisie, however, seems to be 
coasting along fine with her new brilliance, her exciting new romance, and, if she 
can manage to stay alive and hang onto the alien tokens that hold the abilities, the 
new role she can play in the world with her powers. There are few truly good or 
evil folks in this novel, as everyone seems driven by multiple, intricately layered 
motives. Not much is made of the fact that Maisie only has one arm, other than 
through descriptions of the alien-supercharged robotic arm she makes for herself, 
and the absence of earnest efforts at proving Maisie is like the others is refreshing. 
Hale fans will easily find much to appreciate in the well-developed setting and 
sturdy girl characters in this new genre for the author.  AS
hArrison, hAnnAh e. Extraordinary Jane; written and illus. by Hannah E. Har-
rison. Dial, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3914-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Little white pup Jane is hopelessly ordinary in her family of circus stars: her mother 
rides horses, her dad’s a strongman, and her siblings have their own daring acts. 
Poor Jane tries to find a talent of her own, but she’s neither brave nor musical nor 
artistic nor graceful nor funny; her attempt at an act on a large balancing ball is a 
disaster that sends everyone seeking first aid. It turns out that “Jane . . . was just  
. . . Jane” but that’s perfectly okay. The ending admittedly lacks some punch, but 
the Bichon Frisé-esque Jane, with her slightly pink tummy pooching out, is an ador-
able heroine. Harrison’s vibrant acrylic illustrations are dimensional and detailed, 
offering a a slightly less stylized version of Adam Rex’s circus animals in Gaiman’s 
Chu’s Day (BCCB 1/13). Thoughtful compositions and unusual perspectives em-
phasize the action and derring-do of circus performance, contrasting the action 
humorously with little Jane undertaking more cautious canine activities: while her 
tutu-clad sisters perch precariously on a tightrope in a close-up from above, a tiny 
Jane watches quietly from the opposite page’s corner, for example. This could make 
a fetching addition to circus- or dog-themed storytimes, and while the message is 
well-worn, it’s also reassuring to those kids who worry about whether or not they 
measure up to their peers.  JH
hAwKins, rAchel Rebel Belle. Putnam, 2014 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25693-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
Harper Price has her life and almost everyone in it under control: she’s president 
of student government, head of every committee and service organization, and 
just about to be named Homecoming Queen when she finds herself locked in a 
bathroom with a janitor who is inexplicably bleeding out from a sword wound. 
April 2014 • 407
Before dying, he pulls her in for a strange embrace, and then she’s transformed into 
somebody who’s wielding a four-inch pink pump to penetrate the carotid artery of 
a sarcastic, scimitar-wielding history teacher. A bit stunned, she goes into research 
mode, only to discover that she has become a superhero without a decent origin 
story or a wise mentor. She eventually finds not only those but also a protective 
task; however, the one she is destined to guard, David, is the one boy she hasn’t 
been able to get under control. David, a school reporter who has never written an 
article about Harper without using the word “egregious,” is an Oracle, and his aunt, 
who has been coaching Harper for cotillion, is a Mage; between the three of them, 
they have to figure out how to protect David from the future he can dimly foresee. 
Harper is as quippy as you please, with a sass born of a sharp intellect and an easy 
assurance that if one just follows the time-tested rules of Southern tradition and 
decorum, all will be well; after all, she herself bears witness to the effectiveness of 
proper footwear. The twist at the end is as surprising as it is delicious, hinting at 
further tests of aggressive politeness as she, David, and her set of belles and beaux 
set out to save—or perhaps doom—the world. Fans of Michele Jaffe will not want 
to miss this.  KC
helVig, Kristi Burn Out. Egmont, 2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-479-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-480-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Seventeen-year-old Tora knows that it is time to abandon Earth, as most of the 
remaining population has done, but knowing and actually having the means to 
do so are not the same thing. Along comes Markus, who suggests that all she has 
to do is give up her father’s incredibly powerful gun stash and he’ll fly her to a new 
planet, but Tora knows that her dad didn’t want the weapons used for harmful ends. 
After being refused, Markus returns with a crew of mercenaries who are interrupted 
in their attack on Tora by even more powerful folks who would be happy to see 
them all dead if it means they get the weapons. The “enemies working together 
to defeat other enemies” plot is well developed, and the twists are engaging and 
pleasingly demanding of readerly attention. The conversations about motivations 
and moral compasses are often awkward and forced, though, and the future setting 
is disappointingly similar to the present, with little exploration of possibilities of 
character or even technology. Even so, it’s hard not to care about this scrappy group 
of characters who all just want to get the heck off Earth without being burned by 
the superheating sun or destroyed by the seemingly endless number of people who 
want to profit from that tragedy.  AS
hoffmAn, sArAh Jacob’s New Dress; by Sarah and Ian Hoffman; illus. by Chris 
Case. Whitman, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-6373-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
When Jacob plays dress-up at school, he’d rather wear the princess’ dress and crown 
than the knight’s shining armor. His mom is skeptical about him wearing a dress to 
school, so he fashions a “dress-thing” out of towels to wear over his other clothes. 
Insisting that boys don’t wear dresses, a classmate de-towels Jacob, but that doesn’t 
stop Jacob from asking if he and his mother can sew a fantastic new purple and 
408 • The BulleTin
white dress to wear. Though hesitant, she agrees, and Jacob wears his dress, giving 
him courage and confidence on the playground. The thin plot and over-earnest 
take on its topic makes this story of gender nonconformity more therapeutic than 
entertaining, but Jacob’s concrete emotional reactions to people’s perceptions of his 
behavior (“Mom didn’t answer. The longer she didn’t answer, the less Jacob could 
breathe”) might be helpful to youngsters in similar situations. Case’s illustrations 
are gentle in their use of the textures of watercolor and gouache to create a slightly 
fuzzy world in a realistic palette; his characters’ cartoonishness—big heads and 
dot eyes—also helps with their emotiveness. Although Zolotow’s classic William’s 
Doll (BCCB 7/72) covers similar ground more effectively, this is still a welcome 
addition to the recent uptick in picture books about gender nonconforming kids. 
Back matter includes an author’s note and a note from a social worker on gender 
nonconformity among younger children.  TA
jAneczKo, PAul B., comp. Firefly July: A Year of  Very Short Poems; illus. by Melissa 
Sweet. Candlewick, 2014 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4842-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-5
Noted poet/anthologist Janeczko here collects thirty-six poems (most previously 
published), dividing them into seasonal sections. Spring brings offerings from the 
likes of William Carlos Williams and Ralph Fletcher; Summer includes Langston 
Hughes and Joyce Sidman; Fall features verse from James Stevenson, Alice Schertle, 
and others, while winter concludes with poets such as Richard Wright and, ap-
propriately, Robert Frost. The poems are short indeed, with haiku, cinquains, and 
other unrhymed verse predominating (though a rhyming entry or two slips in as 
well); most of them are bijou bursts of imagery, capturing a moment or provoking 
contemplation with a fresh metaphor. Sweet’s mixed-media art is elegant, quirky, 
and friendly, and it varies from attractive complement to creation of new world upon 
new world, sometimes eclipsing the verse. The spread for Sandburg’s “Window” 
(“Night from a railroad car window . . . ”), for instance, is a dramatic sequence 
of views through window-shaped apertures, often with the figures of train-riders 
silhouetted against the scenes on the other side of the glass. The spread featuring 
two different fog poems moves from Manhattanesque shoreline to fanciful mosaic 
towers obscured by firework puffs of mist correlating to the poem’s “thistledown.” 
While the inviting art and poetic brevity will lure younger readers (and readaloud 
audiences), there’s a sophistication in the poetic metaphors that will keep even older 
elementary readers engaged, and the compactness of the verse and visual translation 
will help reluctant poetry readers look at verse in a new light.  DS
jArrow, gAil Red Madness: How a Medical Mystery Changed What We 
Eat. Calkins Creek, 2014 192p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59078-732-8 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-9 
It started with three symptoms: rash, diarrhea, fatigue. The rash could pass for 
sunburn, except for the predictable patterns in which it presented. By the time it 
was diagnosed, the patient had often reached a state a dementia and was weeks or 
even days from death. The illness was already known among rural populations in 
Europe and named “pellagra” (rough skin) by the Italians. When it reached epi-
demic proportions in early twentieth-century America, doctors took notice, and 
April 2014 • 409
the hunt was on for the culprit and a cure. Jarrow treads in the medical gumshoes’ 
footsteps, tracking clues down blind alleys of poverty and contagion, and follows 
medical reasoning from hypotheses to human experimentation (that would never 
be allowed by today’s standards) while examining the political contentions that 
caused public health setbacks even after effective treatment had been discovered. 
The central figure of the story, Dr. Joseph Goldberger of the Public Health Service, 
and his colleagues eventually eradicate what turns out to be a nutritional deficiency 
disease through dietary changes and the addition of nicotinic acid, or niacin, to flour. 
Though disease is likely not on most kids’ radar, its historical prevalence and peril 
make it a riveting subject, and Jarrow intersperses plenty of brief case histories and 
poignant photographs of sufferers throughout the text to keep the human interest 
angle as compelling as the medical mystery. Index, sources notes, bibliography, and 
timeline are included, as well as a fascinating FAQ section that delves further into 
the interrelationship between nicotinic acid, tryptophan, foods, and food prepa-
ration, and explores why pellagra is thankfully no longer a household word.  EB
jenKins, steVe Eye to Eye: How Animals See the World; written and illus. by Steve 
Jenkins. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-547-95907-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Jenkins continues his anatomical tour of the animal world (What Do You Do With a 
Tail Like This?, BCCB 3/03, etc.) by looking at, well, looking. Beginning by briefly 
outlining the four commonest kinds of eye (from the cluster of light-sensitive cells 
that is an eyespot to the focusable camera eye of humans), the book goes on to offer 
a gallery of animals with different visual capabilities. Each page features an animal, 
a brief paragraph explaining its vision, a facial close-up for good eye viewing, and 
a thumbnail of the animal in its entirety. Subjects include the snail, whose eyes 
mostly detect predatorial shadows; the nautilus, whose lensless pinhole eyes allow 
water to flow in and out; the green pit viper, who has a special organ that allows it 
to see infrared radiation; and the halibut, whose eyes migrate as it gets older so that 
they both end up on one side. Though a bit more explanation or labeling would 
have been helpful in a few spots, it’s an enlightening overview, and the framing of 
eye anatomy, especially the concluding chart explaining the evolution of the eye, 
gives the information a broader context that gives the book impact beyond Jenkins’ 
famously vivid cut-paper illustrations. End matter includes additional facts about 
the featured animals and a glossary of terms.  DS
joBin, mAtthew The Nethergrim. Philomel, 2014 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-399-15998-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-8
Tom is an abused slave, Katherine is a girl who resists the traditional expectations 
her small village places on her gender, and Edmund is boy whose wizarding interest 
and fascination with books have only ever caused him trouble. When the Nether-
grim’s minions begin to kidnap local children, however, the trio springs into action 
as unexpected heroes. They know that the kidnapped children don’t have long to 
live, so they decide to not leave things in the hands of the adults, even while real-
izing the limitations of their approach, which is to set off and hope for the best. 
This is a surprisingly quiet (and occasionally languid) novel for its subject, and the 
410 • The BulleTin
character development is careful and methodical, lending depth to a story that’s 
more about people than adventure. The Nethergrim itself is indeed the stuff of 
nightmares, and Jobin judiciously doles out details about it, heightening suspense 
further. Patient fantasy fans will find much to enjoy in this elegant gem of a novel, 
and the haunting message that the monstrosity of some humans can rival even that 
of ageless creatures is so carefully and effectively inlaid that it will likely linger even 
after other details fade.  AS
jocelyn, mArthe What We Hide. Lamb, 2014 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90732-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73847-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Illington Hall, a Quaker boarding school in northern England in the early 1970s, 
draws students from many different places, and they all have their own individual 
stories. In chapters with formats that include first-person and third-person narra-
tion, attempted film scripts, and letters, the book follows several of those students 
as they struggle with their own challenges and inner demons. American Jenny lies 
that she has a boyfriend in Vietnam; desperate Penelope struggles to keep up with 
her popular friend Kirsten; Luke is in love with Robbie in a town and time where 
being gay is unthinkable; Percy deals with the absence of his famous director dad; 
Nico faces exposure from his mother’s autobiographical book, in which he stars. 
Some of the individual threads are compelling here: there’s poignancy in Robbie’s 
and Luke’s separate takes on their dawning awareness of their sexual identity and 
budding romance, and in day-student Brenda’s attempts to juggle her working-class 
home life with her scholastic ambitions. The casually foul-mouthed exchanges, 
fevered gropings, and grim milieu recall the grittiness of Melvin Burgess’ Smack 
(BCCB 4/98). Unfortunately, the separate narratives never coalesce, and some of 
the strands are contrived and unsatisfying, serving mostly as offputting interruptions 
to the more compelling views; there’s also mixed success in the period atmosphere 
(anachronistic slang crops up frequently, and cultural references are sparse), and 
the voices are poorly differentiated. Still, the combination of angst and boarding 
school exoticism will appeal, and readers may appreciate both their differences from 
and similarities to the teens of another place and time.  DS
johnston, e. K.  The Story of Owen: Dragon Slayer of Trondheim. Carolrhoda 
Lab, 2014 312p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1066-4 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2406-7 $12.95   
R Gr. 8-10
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 391, for review.
Kerr, PhiliP The Winter Horses. Knopf, 2014 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75544-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75543-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Set in the Ukrainian steppe in 1941, this novel follows Kalinka, an orphaned 
Ukrainian Jew on the run, and Max, the elderly caretaker of the Askaniya-Nova 
State Steppe Nature Reserve. The reserve is presently occupied by a band of Nazi 
April 2014 • 411
soldiers, whose leader orders the extermination of most of the animal population 
at the reserve. His main target is the small population of rare Przewalski’s horses, 
horses that Berlin has declared “a forbidden breed” because they threaten to con-
taminate “decent domesticated horses.” Max played a major role in setting up the 
reserve’s breeding program, and Kalinka, hiding out in the woods just outside the 
reserve, has developed an unusually close relationship with a pair of the horses, so 
they each have reasons to resist. Max assists Kalinka, who flees into the steppe ac-
companied by the two horses, pursued by the Nazis. The animal story (drawing on 
the real-life Ukrainian reserve and the killing of its rare herd of Przewalski’s horses) 
offers appealing elements in Kalinka’s friendship and the horses’ need for protection, 
resulting in an unusual wartime tale. The plot, though, is too often implausible 
(Kalinka encounters everything from attacking wolves and ancient burial chambers 
to cannibals, and she’s finally captured by a kindly German officer who supports her 
cause), and Kalinka’s exposition moves the story with a slow pace unsuited to such 
an adventurous survival story. Those willing to ride out the far-fetched storyline 
will likely enjoy the survival story, however, and the social metaphor of identifying 
the horses as an unfit species makes for a useful entry point to discussing World 
War II and the Holocaust. The bound book will include an author’s note.  HM
Kizer, AmBer Pieces of Me. Delacorte, 2014 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98988-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74116-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98429-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 6-10
When a car accident takes Jessica’s life, her organs are donated to some desperately 
ill young people, and Jessica then finds her spirit is tied to those recipients. Vivian, 
who has cystic fibrosis, is a talented painter; Leif is a star quarterback now drawn 
to Vivian and reconsidering his life; Misty, whose liver failure and transplant left 
her impoverished immigrant family stunned and destitute, desperately seeks some 
way to stay afloat; Sam runs both an online game and a website about miracles, 
through which he meets Leif and Misty. Jessica watches as the lives of the four begin 
to intertwine, and as the other three struggle to help Misty, whose condition is 
deteriorating. The organ-donation plot is an interesting premise, but characteriza-
tion is minimal and clichéd (Misty’s family has no cultural identification beyond 
being foreign), with Jessica particularly unformed, going from mousily passive to 
boldly directive without ever getting enough dimension enough to be interesting. 
The writing is strained and sometimes confusing, and the plotting is highly improb-
able (Jessica’s recipients either go to her high school or are related to someone who 
does); the medical information veers from realistic and informative to vague and 
perplexing. There’s some soap-opera enjoyment out of the events that may appeal 
to kids who love classic Lurlene McDaniel books, but those looking for a compel-
ling exploration of the topic should look instead to Chris Lynch’s Pieces (BCCB 
3/13). An author’s note about organ donation and cystic fibrosis is appended.  DS
412 • The BulleTin
KwAymullinA, AmBelin The Interrogation of Ashala Wolf. Candlewick, 
2014 [284p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6988-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Ashala Wolf has heard the rumors, so she knows exactly what is in store for her 
after she is captured by Gull City’s enforcers: Chief Administrator Rose and his 
mad-scientist assistant will torture her and learn the hidden location of her Tribe 
and the other Illegals, teenagers born with superhuman abilities, thus quashing her 
rebellion. What she does not know, at least consciously, and what readers learn right 
along with her, is that being captured was the plan all along, that her memories 
have been purposely manipulated by another Illegal, and that Justin, her jailer and 
the boy she thought betrayed her, is actually the love of her life and the one who 
is going to help carry out Ashala’s plan to destroy Rose and keep her Tribe safe. A 
series of flashbacks slowly unravels the intricate setup, working backwards in a way 
that imbues Ashala’s current situation with more meaning as the past is revealed, 
raising the stakes and the tension. Once all the secrets are disclosed, however, the 
story loses its momentum, becoming a dialogue-heavy stream of Ashala’s plans and 
worries and not a whole lot of action, and the romance between Ashala and Justin 
deflates. The dystopian world here offers a bit more nuance than the traditional 
fare, allowing for good guys to find themselves in bad situations, and emphasizing 
the idea that power can use even a message of peace and balance to corrupt. Feisty 
heroines looking to save the world are by no means losing their popularity, and 
their fans may wish to follow Ashala’s adventures.  KQG
lAidlAw, roB Cat Champions: Caring for Our Feline Friends. Pajama, 
2014 64p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-927485-31-6 $19.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Recent cat population estimates suggest that there are nearly one hundred million 
pet cats in the U.S., and that there are about half that many feral or “community” 
cats. Cat-loving kids who want to help those felines will find plenty of helpful sug-
gestions and youthful role models in Laidlaw’s book. After some cursory informa-
tion about traits and breeds, Laidlaw offers information about helping both feral/
alley cats and those cats who are better suited to be adopted as pets. Topics covered 
include Trap/Neuter/Release programs, building outdoor shelters for feral cats, cat 
shelters and sanctuaries, fostering, cat adoption, and fundraising and education. 
Each section is peppered with engaging profiles of youth who are committed to 
volunteering on behalf of cats and anecdotal sidebars about famous cats; while the 
focus is mainly on North American efforts, there are some brief mentions of the 
cat islands in Japan and volunteer work being done in China. The layout is on 
the stodgy side, with clutter from superfluous borders around photographs and 
numerous sidebars, but the cat pictures are crisp and clear. Browsers will delight 
in the details and adorable photos of cats, and kids who are serious about helping 
will find both practical ideas and inspiration here. End matter includes a cat lover’s 
pledge, a list of resources and links, a glossary, and an index.  JH
April 2014 • 413
lAnders, melissA Alienated. Hyperion, 2014 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-7028-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8699-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
As one of three high school students chosen to host an alien exchange student 
from the planet L’eihr, seventeen-year-old Cara must spend the next school year 
helping her visitor fit in with her family, her friends, and worst, her narrowminded 
community. L’eihrian Aelyx is not only uneasy about staying with the human Cara 
and her family, he questions the wisdom of the entire alliance between their two 
planets, even plotting to join his fellow exchange students in undermining it. Even 
as their plans to create a rift in human-alien relations go forward, though, Aelyx 
finds himself increasingly drawn to his hostess. Soon their growing friendship and 
romance come under attack from those who fear the alien visitors, and by the 
time Aelyx ditches his plans in hopes of a future with Cara, it may be too late to 
save any of them, and the Earth itself could be doomed. This emotionally driven, 
romance-heavy science fiction novel offers a thought-provoking take on a familiar 
story of integration. Told from the viewpoints of the two young people, the ini-
tially separate narrative strands become increasingly intertwined as the two grow 
closer, and the eventual romance provides plenty of heart-stopping moments. The 
conflict over human-alien relations follows convention but still manages to raise 
interesting questions about the value of forcing an alliance between uncooperative 
parties, and Cara and Aelyx’s debates over their differences will give readers plenty 
of food for thought about a variety of scientific issues. Fans of Douglas’ After Eden 
(BCCB 1/14) or Kaufman and Spooner’s These Broken Stars (BCCB 2/14), who 
like their star-crossed lovers served up with a side of sci-fi, will find this satisfying 
and relish the possibility of sequels.  AM
loftin, niKKi Nightingale’s Nest. Razorbill, 2014 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-546-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 4-7
At twelve-years old, “Little John” Fischer isn’t so little anymore. A recent growth 
spurt allows him to help his father earn money chopping and hauling trees—work 
that’s physically demanding and emotionally devastating, given his younger sister’s 
recent fatal fall from a dead branch. Drowning in the guilt of not having caught 
her, Little John plays along when his mother talks as if his sister’s still alive; he also 
ignores his father’s drinking and hides his family’s dwindling solvency from his best 
friend by avoiding him completely. Lonely and unbearably sad, he meets Gayle, 
an abused foster child with a magical voice that enchants the birds and heals the 
wounded. She trusts Little John immediately, leaping into his arms from her “nest,” 
the branch of a tree where she claims her parents will find her one day, and even 
following him into the home of Mr. King, the wealthy and unnerving landowner 
from whom she usually flees. When Little John sells her voice—and her trust—to 
Mr. King for the money to cover his family’s rent, he knows he must make it 
right, no matter the cost. Magical realism meets coming of age in this sensitive 
and haunting novel, with the relentless, eroding effects of family tragedy in full 
relief. Sympathetic but not saccharine, Loftin’s portrayal of Little John, with his 
tremendous sense of responsibility and his unflagging feeling of guilt, as well as his 
414 • The BulleTin
need for love and acceptance, will resonate with readers who carry life’s burdens. 
The otherworldly Gayle will captivate their imaginations as she flutters in and out 
of reach, singing the injured back to health and calling the birds to her with her 
voice, but it’s Little John who will capture their hearts. Read this aloud and have 
both boys and girls alike utterly enraptured.  AA
lucier, mAKiiA 
A Death-Struck Year. 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2014 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-544-16450-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-544-30670-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
At seventeen, Cleo Barry frets over her lack of direction in life, envying the certainty 
felt by her classmates. Then the Spanish influenza epidemic of 1918 hits the Pacific 
Northwest, and she becomes a Red Cross volunteer, delivering instructions and 
basic supplies to neighborhood residents, arranging transportation and care for the 
sick, and tending to the ill at the makeshift hospital within the Civic Auditorium. 
The sights and smells are gruesome and the emotional toll is high, but Cleo’s own 
childhood experience—spending all night in a ravine with the body of her father 
and her dying mother following a carriage wreck—compels her to return day after 
day and to bring succor to the sick and scared. The other volunteers bring new 
friendships, role models (a compassionate but no-nonsense nurse), and even a love 
interest, in the form of a wounded World War I veteran returned to medical school. 
As the epidemic crests and she learns what she’s capable of, Cleo realizes that perhaps 
she’s not so ordinary after all. Lucier has done her research, creating a compelling 
work of historical fiction alongside a more timeless journey of self-discovery. She 
includes thoughtful details of the time period (a new pamphlet on birth control 
circulates among the women), rounding out the reader’s understanding of Cleo’s 
world. The sickbed depictions are sobering but not gratuitous, and the romance, 
while pleasing, takes a backseat to the more pressing details of life and death and to 
Cleo’s personal direction. Readable and informative, this is for a lover of Anderson’s 
Fever, 1793 (BCCB 10/00) or general historical fiction fans who appreciate a touch 
of romance with their world events.  AA
mAchAle, d. j. Storm.  Razorbill, 2014 [496p] (The SYLO Chronicles)
ISBN 978-1-59514-667-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
You can almost imagine a TV trailer: “Previously, on SYLO . . . ” with rapid-fire 
clips of Tucker Pierce and his posse on the lam from intra-U.S. military attacks, 
trying to alert the East Coast about the devious cabal that just been revealed on 
Pemberwick Island. This installment picks up about two heartbeats and half a 
breath after the close of Volume One, as the teens discover that the mainland has 
been virtually wiped out by the mysterious Air Force aircraft that can target people, 
buildings, or both at will. In light of these massive attacks, it’s no longer clear that 
SYLO, which wrought havoc on Pemberwick, is the villain after all, and until 
Tucker’s crew can get some solid indication of who the bad guys are and what this 
war is about, a perilous cross-country race against time will ensue. As if nonstop 
action isn’t enough of a draw, MacHale ramps up the interest with a sort of nod 
to disaster tourism, setting epic showdowns in Fenway Park (the intended site 
April 2014 • 415
for a cryptic Gate to Hell), Fort Knox (a SYLO redoubt commanded by the kids’ 
Pemberwick Island nemesis), and the Venetian in Las Vegas (from which plucky 
survivors launch a sneak attack on the Air Force drones). Interaction among the 
teens is a tad cheesy, with narrator Tucker apt to carry his Rambo self-image a little 
too far, but that hardly matters when there are so many fast vehicles to drive, so 
much technology to fear, so many villains to take down, and so much to blow up 
along the way. Bring on Book Three.  EB
mArrin, AlBert A Volcano beneath the Snow: John Brown’s War against Slav-
ery. Knopf, 2014 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98153-0 $22.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98152-3 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75340-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
By the time young adults reach for this lengthy, double-columned text on John 
Brown, they will likely be familiar with the 1859 debacle at Harpers Ferry, in which 
Brown and fellow zealots attempted to seize a Federal arsenal, arm slaves who would 
rise up in revolt, and strike such terror into the South that the “peculiar institution” 
of slavery would eventually meet a bloody demise. Here Marrin goes far beyond 
the standard treatment that concludes with failure, executions, and a brief hiatus 
before the Civil War, confronting instead the larger and more complex issues of 
what made John Brown tick, and whether his code of “righteous violence” is ever 
justifiable. It’s a courageous approach, and Marrin carefully lays the groundwork in 
several chapters covering Brown’s early life and the global development of slavery. 
By the time readers get to Harpers Ferry, they’ve already met the unstoppable force, 
Brown, who participated in a massacre in “Bleeding Kansas” and lied about that 
participation to his more pacifistic financial backers, and the immovable obstacle, 
slavery, which hunkered down under the protection of politics and legislation. 
Marrin refuses to take an easy way out by writing Brown off as a religious fanatic 
or a madman or even a common criminal, and in so doing forces readers into the 
maelstrom of mid-nineteenth century debate, to determine the most expeditious 
road to justice, unaided by twenty-first century hindsight. This is a rewarding work 
for serious adolescent readers, and educators who are equally serious about nurtur-
ing informed social criticism within their students will welcome this challenging 
title. Index, notes bibliography, and black and white reproductions of historical 
photographs and illustrations are included.  EB
mcclure, wendy Wanderville. Razorbill, 2014 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-700-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
At the turn of the twentieth century, Frances, Harold, and Jack find themselves on an 
orphan train headed from New York to Kansas. Rumors about a work farm prompt 
the trio to bolt from the train before they reach their destination, and in the woods 
the three friends encounter a strange boy named Alexander, who welcomes them to 
Wanderville, his makeshift home in the woods. Alexander has first-hand experience 
with the work farm and the despotic Pratcherd family who run it, but he escaped 
and is now stealing food and supplies from the local town in order to survive on 
his own. The kids agree to throw in their lot with Alexander, but a supply run goes 
416 • The BulleTin
wrong when Harold is misidentified as a runaway from the work farm and is taken 
there. This is the first title in a series, which will be a relief to those readers who 
feel the children’s ultimate escape here is on shaky ground (they eventually rescue 
Harold but the Pratcherds remain a threat). Parts of the plot strain credulity, and 
the characters, particularly the bad guys, are pretty predictable, so there aren’t a lot 
of surprises here. Nonetheless, the kids are a likable bunch, and their exploits may 
not be completely plausible, but they are exciting. The idea of a kid-run town in 
the woods and all the rustically domestic details that entails will appeal greatly to 
the same kind of kids who love the Boxcar Children’s hidden home.  JH
mcQuerry, mAureen doyle Beyond the Door. Amulet, 2014 [384] (Time 
Out of Time)
ISBN 978-1-4197-1016-2 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
An aspiring scientist, practical-minded Timothy James has always thought his 
babysitter’s stories of shape-shifting creatures and changeling babies were simply 
made up. A windblown night brings three mythical creatures to Timothy’s door-
step, however, and the eleven-year-old boy suddenly finds himself in the world of 
the Green Man and Herne the Hunter, caught in a battle between the Light and 
the Dark. Led by his babysitter, who reveals herself to be Cerridwyn, the goddess 
of the hunt, and accompanied by his sister Sarah and the school bully Jessica, 
Timothy travels through portways and into magical realms to face down Balor, an 
ancient spirit bent on the destruction of the Light. Practiced fantasy readers will 
immediately recognize the signs of a quest tale, from the underdog protagonist to 
the prophesied battle to the gifts given by helpful guides, and while the elements 
here are familiar to the point of being derivative (Susan Cooper’s The Dark Is 
Rising is a clear forebear), they still make for a sometimes exciting ride through 
British and Welsh mythology. Characterization is also quite rich, with Timothy 
making some keen (and often amusing) observations about school life and the 
battle between good and evil, while both Sarah and Jessica come in to their own as 
heroines separate from Timothy, giving further dimension to the traditional boy-
savior narrative. The book, however, is oddly divided: the first part covers Timothy’s 
learning of his destiny and initial battle with Balor, offering a self-contained and 
concluded story, while the second half is rushed, introducing several new characters 
and ending rather abruptly and with no real payoff save its promise of a sequel. 
Nonetheless, the tale of an underdog hero is a perennial favorite, and this may 
well find an audience among fans of Percy Jackson, Harry Potter, and Gregor the 
Overlander (BCCB 1/04).  KQG
meshon, AAron Tools Rule!; written and illus. by Aaron Meshon. Atheneum, 
2014 38p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9601-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9602-6 $12.99   
Ad 4-8 yrs
“Okay, crew!!! Who’s ready to build?” calls T-Square, the leader of the backyard tool 
crowd. After all the tools are accounted for (“Workbench? Workbench?” “Ummm  
. . . You are standing on me! Here!”), there begins a flurry of activity as the tools set 
about noisily doing their assigned tasks. In the end, the satisfied tools put themselves 
away in the shed they’ve just constructed, and the lights go out. The story merely 
April 2014 • 417
identifies the tools and watches them work, so it’s light on substance, and while 
there is some satisfaction in seeing the completed shed at the end, there’s not much 
plot development or trajectory involved in getting there. The occasional couplets 
are unpredictably inserted into the prose, and their scansion and rhyme are often 
clumsy (“Let’s work together to build a toolshed!/ We will have a place to rest our 
heads!”). The real draw here is in the witty personification of the tools that comes 
across through humorous quips (Hammer: “Hey, Nails, it’s time to build a wall!” 
Nail: “OK! Ouch! OK! OK! Ouch!”) and the abundant onomatopoeia. Meshon’s 
illustrations are hand inked and digitally colored, and their streamlined simplicity 
suggests coloring-book art, with thick black outlines, bright fields of solid color, and 
the only texture coming from the scanned grain of the workbench. Little builders 
may look past the limitations to find this an enjoyable storytime offering, while 
the final pages of good-night murmurings and snores in speech bubbles among the 
shed add further usability as a bedtime story for sleepy carpenters.  HM
messner, KAte Marty McGuire Has Too Many Pets!; illus. by Brian Floca. Scho-
lastic, 2014 168p
ISBN 978-0-545-53559-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Generous-hearted but a bit impulsive, third-grader Marty McGuire cooks up a 
pet-sitting scheme to raise money for a sanctuary for retired laboratory chimpan-
zees, but soon runs into trouble. For one thing, she overzealously takes on not 
only a hedgehog and a pair of fish, but also a swearing parrot, two hamsters, a 
slug, and a six-foot-long snake. She also doesn’t fully inform her dad and her visit-
ing grandmother what she’s doing, which means she has to rely on her friends to 
help her out with all the pet care. When one of the hamsters and the snake escape 
their cages, Marty is really in a bind—especially when the snake turns up with a 
hamster-sized lump in its belly. After a full confession to her family, Marty faces 
the hard fact that most of the money she has raised will go towards cage repairs, 
but a nick-of-time discovery (the missing hamster was not swallowed but stowed 
away in Grandma’s suitcase) and a last-minute school presentation about the chimp 
sanctuary save the day for Marty, salvaging her pet business reputation and raising 
the money she needs to “adopt” several of the sanctuary’s chimps. Clear, crisp writ-
ing, elementary vocabulary, and a large font make the book a quick read and help 
ease the way for young chapter-book readers. The tidy lines and subtle shadings 
of Floca’s frequent monochromatic illustrations enhance the casually but carefully 
told narrative. Likable no-frills Marty will appeal to both boys and girls, and fans 
of Nagda’s The Perfect Cat-Sitter (BCCB 1/08) or Wells’ Ivy Takes Care (BCCB 
3/13) may particularly enjoy this title.  JH
morA, PAt I Pledge Allegiance; by Pat Mora and Libby Martinez; illus. by Patrice 
Barton. Knopf, 2014 [36p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97109-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-93181-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97556-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys    
Ad 5-7 yrs
Just as Libby’s class is learning the Pledge of Allegiance, her great-aunt Lobo passes 
her citizenship exam and is preparing to recite the Pledge at the courthouse cer-
emony. Libby’s teacher acknowledges the importance of the event and tasks Libby 
418 • The BulleTin
with memorizing the challenging words well enough to lead the class. Of course, 
she’s a success, and she’s allowed to stand beside Aunt Lobo and join in her recita-
tion before the judge. There’s little attempt here either to parse the meaning of 
the Pledge (“indivisible,” according to Libby’s teacher, “means that there are fifty 
states, but we are all one country”) or to trace the steps toward citizenship; mostly, 
this feel-good tale is Mora and Martinez’s mother/daughter tribute to their own 
aunt Lobo, who immigrated to the United States from Mexico and became a citi-
zen in her late seventies. There is, however, useful repetition for listeners who are 
committing the Pledge to memory, with the full text appearing on both endpapers 
and three times within the text. Barton’s cozy illustrations incorporate lots of red-
white-blue, both in the ubiquitous flags and Libby and Lobo’s patriotic clothing, 
but also more subtly in hues slightly deviating from the flag’s colorway. Stippling 
and blending softens the edges of the loosely outlined figures, and the excitement 
and support of the community shine vividly though facial expressions and body 
language. A closing note introduces listeners to Aunt Lobo and briefly remarks on 
the amendment of Francis Bellamy’s original text.  EB 
nAgAi, mAriKo Dust of Eden. Whitman, 2014 [218p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-1739-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
This verse novel offers a poetic sequence in the voice of Mina Tagawa, a Japanese-
American girl living in Seattle at the time of the bombing of Pearl Harbor. First 
Mina and her family face the initial backlash and prejudice, then they are relocated 
to a temporary camp (ironically named “Camp Harmony”), and finally they arrive 
at the Minidoka Relocation Center in near Eden, Idaho. In all, the family spends 
nearly four years away from their home before returning to the boarded-up house 
on their quiet Seattle street in 1945. The free-verse poems, each simply named 
with a month and year, range from longer narrative expositions to quick glimpses. 
While not all the entries shine, the verse sequence suits the subject matter; the 
story’s fragmentation suggests that Mina too is piecing together bits and pieces of 
understanding in an effort to come up with a cohesive, coherent narrative for herself. 
The free-verse format also allows young readers to take on complex subject matter 
in a way that might be out of their reach in a denser prose narrative. The storyline 
surrounding Mina’s grandfather, who does not make it back to Seattle, is tenderly 
wrought; the complexities of her brother’s stance on the family’s situation and his 
eventual decision to enlist add further interest. This is an honest and thoughtful 
exploration of a complicated chapter in American history, and the book’s strong 
narrative voice and solid imagery will help contemporary readers understand those 
complexities. A note provides further information about the Japanese-American 
internment.  HM 
o’connell, cAitlin A Baby Elephant in the Wild; illus. with photographs by Cait-
lin O’Connell and Timothy Rodwell. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 38p
ISBN 978-0-544-14944-1 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Elephant scientist Caitlin O’Connell briefly describes the activities of a baby el-
ephant in Namibia, while also incorporating information on elephants and elephant 
society in general. The selected information has immediate kid appeal, and it’s 
presented in accessible, child-friendly terms: Liza’s learning curve when it comes to 
April 2014 • 419
walking, for example, is compared to that of a humans, and the way elephants greet 
each other with their trunks is described as “shaking hands.” A few vocabulary words 
(such as “matriarch”) and pieces of information (“elephants belong to the order 
Proboscidae”) may require a bit of adult guidance for younger readers, while other 
information that kids will likely want to know (What happens to male elephants? 
Why don’t they live with the female families?) is inexplicably absent. O’Connell’s 
and Rodwell’s photographs are generally clear and compelling, and the large font 
of the text makes it accessible; it is often difficult to distinguish baby Liza in group 
shots, however, and a couple of photos in the end matter would have benefited from 
descriptive captions. Despite its flaws, this is still a solid and useful introduction to 
basic facts of African elephant life for elementary-aged readers, and it’s pretty darn 
hard to resist baby Liza; pair it with Jenkins’ Grandma Elephant’s in Charge (BCCB 
10/03) for even more educational elephant entertainment. Additional facts about 
elephants and an author’s note are included.  JH
oPPel, Kenneth The Boundless; illus. by Jim Tierney. Simon, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-7288-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Will Everett and his father, a laborer on the developing Canadian Pacific Railroad, 
happen to be in just the right place at the right time to rescue the railroad developer, 
Mr. Van Horne, when an avalanche wipes out a section of newly laid track. As a re-
sult, Mr. Everett is promoted within the company and, a few years later, he and Will 
climb aboard the debut run of the Boundless, a seven-mile-long train that features 
accommodation ranging from luxury for the wealthy right down to the equivalent 
of steerage for the “colonists” venturing into Canada’s wild west. Also onboard are 
the remains of the now-deceased Van Horne, sealed with priceless belongings into a 
booby-trapped rail car, and two very different passengers—a brakeman and a circus 
ringmaster—who are determined to break into that car, even if it means deceiving 
or even murdering Will, who is in possession of a critical key. The theft tales chug 
forward with enough life-threatening twists to keep readers involved, but the real 
star is the Boundless itself, which functions as a rolling city of wonders and a clever 
encapsulation of classism in the mid-1800s. Several luminaries associated with the 
actual Canadian Pacific Railroad, as well as a few cryptids from North American 
lore, make guest appearances, and even The Picture of Dorian Gray gets a minor but 
significant nod. Will seems destined for a sequel, perhaps following his romantic 
interest, Maren, into her new life as a circus owner. If Oppel can make a train this 
wondrous, imagine what he will do with a circus.  EB
PAtricelli, leslie Tickle; written and illus. by Leslie Patricelli. Candlewick, 
2014 26p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6322-3 $6.99   
R 6-36 months
   Toot; written and illus. by Leslie Patricelli. Candlewick, 2014 26p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6321-6 $6.99   
R 6-36 months
The bald-headed hero of Patricelli’s successful board books (Tubby, BCCB 12/10, 
etc.) is back in two shiny new stories for the youngest listeners. In Tickle, the very 
determined protagonist announces “I am NOT ticklish!” Unsurprisingly, Daddy 
begs to differ, and a full-out tickle monster attack is soon underway. The baby 
420 • The BulleTin
laughs throughout the scuffle, Daddy gives it everything he’s got (the big-cheeked 
raspberries-on-the-belly illustration is particularly endearing), and soon Mommy, 
the dog, and the cat are all in on the fun. Accompanying tickles are pretty much 
a guarantee with this readaloud, with bonus points for trying to keep a straight 
face through the attack. There will be no straight faces around for the second title, 
however, which celebrates passing gas in all its squeaky, stinky glory. From the 
opening image, where the baby seems all-out surprised by the tiny toot coming 
from behind, to the final declaration that “All toots are funny!,” little listeners will 
delight in the book’s celebration of the joys of body noise. In addition to covering 
the funny side of farting (“Toot, toot, toot, I’m a train!”), the author also offers 
some practical applications (“I toot when I have to go potty. I toot when I have a 
tummy ache”), though the favorite spread will hands-down be the bare-bottomed 
baby tooting in the bathtub (“It’s so bubbly!”). This is definitely not a book for 
teaching restraint or appropriate timing, but for families willing to have some 
flatulence-themed fun, this is a must-have.  HM
Perrin, clotilde At the Same Moment, Around the World; written and illus. by 
Clotilde Perrin; tr. by Chronicle Books. Chronicle, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-4521-2208-3 $17.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
This French import offers a time-zone-demarcated view of the world, with each 
page showing a slice of kid life in a different time zone and proceeding eastward 
by a time zone. Events open at 6 a.m. in Senegal (GMT/UTC zone 0), where a 
boy helps his father with the morning fish catch, and then move to Paris at 7 a.m. 
(GMT zone +1), where “Benedict drinks hot chocolate before school,” and so on, 
traveling across the globe, zipping north and south, stopping in islands and jungles, 
to get representatives from every time zone. The brief views and one-line summaries 
are, not surprisingly, a little reductive at times, but the point about simultaneity 
and difference is effectively made. The book’s format of tall, narrow pages tacitly 
echoes the divisions of the time zones, and there’s cunning craftsmanship in the 
soft pencil and digital illustrations, with recurring motifs (a foxy little dog, a fly-
ing white bird) and visual rhyming (a sprinkling of rain in New Caledonia across 
from a flurry of snow in Russia) connecting the atmospheric bijou scenes. The 
book’s decision to ignore the International Date Line, though, ends up suggesting 
a continuum that doesn’t actually exist, and one or two other locations are unclear 
and even questionable; more unfortunately, since the book’s initial publication 
in 2011, Western Samoa has moved time zones from the zone it appears in here. 
Even that development could provoke an interesting leadoff discussion, though, 
and this introduces a concept that’s a real eye-opener for kids both technically and 
culturally. A foldout world map regrettably lacks demarcation of the actual zones 
but maps the rough locations of the subject kids. Pair this with Marilyn Singer’s 
Nine O’Clock Lullaby or Vyner’s World Team (BCCB 5/02) for another look at the 
same day in different places.  DS
Potter, AliciA Jubilee: One Man’s Big, Bold, and Very, Very Loud Celebration of 
Peace; illus. by Matt Tavares. Candlewick, 2014 [38p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5856-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-8 yrs
He may not have had the staying power of John Philip Sousa, but Irish immigrant 
and band director Patrick S. Gilmore definitely commanded public attention in 
April 2014 • 421
the mid to late 1800s for his large-scale public productions with a literal “cast of 
thousands.” Potter focuses here on an 1869 Boston concert, billed as the National 
Peace Jubilee, which involved the construction of an enormous, short-lived concert 
hall and five days worth of varied musical presentations. It’s a satisfyingly humon-
gous do, but the timeline of events is unfortunately often vague, and many of the 
pertinent details of pulling off so huge an event are relegated to lengthy end matter 
or overlooked altogether. Tavares faces a challenge in translating the aural blowout 
into a visual medium, and his most effective spreads are those that convey the im-
mensity of the hall, the custom-made organ, and the crowd; some of the figures, 
however, are a bit stiff, failing to convey the movement of the music. Still, the 
audacious scope of the jubilee, precursor and, no doubt, rival to thunderous arena 
rock, is a natural hook for young listeners, who will be surprised to learn that their 
staid ancestors also appreciated musical excess. A bibliography is appended.  EB
reynolds, Peter h. Going Places; by Peter H. Reynolds and Paul A. Reynolds; 
illus. by Peter H. Reynolds. Atheneum, 2014 42p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6608-1 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6609-8 $10.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
“Rafael had been waiting all year long for the Going Places contest, a chance to 
build a go-cart, race it . . . and win.” Finally, the big day comes; the kits are dis-
tributed and each child heads home to start building. Rafael is pleased to find “a 
set of precise instructions” and goes about building a go-cart that looks precisely 
as it should. Classmate Maya, however, has a different idea; rather than following 
the directions, she opts to literally think outside the box, and Rafael joins her in 
building a machine that is part go-cart, part airplane, and entirely different from 
anyone else’s. Inevitably, Maya and Rafael are mocked when they arrive at race day 
with their unusual contraption . . . until they take off into the sky and easily fly 
across the finish line first. The story is slight and programmatic, but there is plenty 
of thematic value: working together, problem-solving, challenging the status quo, 
and creative thinking are all explored and celebrated in Maya and Rafael’s partner-
ship. While the digitally rendered art, which feature a multicultural cast of kids, 
lacks the fluidity and vitality of Peter’s previous watercolor work, it’s a cheerful 
documentation of the events. This has some helpful potential uses, and it could 
pair effectively with Reynolds’s classic ode to creativity, The Dot, in a storytime 
focusing on originality.  HM 
ringwAld, whitAKer The Secret Box. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221614-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-221616-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Inquisitive twelve-year-old Jax gets a mysterious birthday package in the mail from 
a previously unknown relative, and inside is a closed metal box that Jax will only 
get ten tries to open. After Jax wastes several attempts, she and her cousins Ethan 
and Tyler make their way to Washington, D.C., where they have calculated the box 
will be able to be opened. Meanwhile, it becomes clear that others are also looking 
for the box, and that whatever is inside the box has a powerful connection to the 
mythological Pandora and her daughter, Pyrrha. The kids race to open the box before 
the evil Mr. and Mrs. Camel get their hands on it, learning to work together and 
overcome personal obstacles to succeed. Impulsive Jax and cautious, crowd-phobic 
422 • The BulleTin
Ethan alternate narration, with a change in font helpfully signaling the change in 
perspective. Aside from Jax and Ethan, however, the characters are fairly one-note, 
and the foray into Greek mythology, while engrossing, is abrupt. The intriguing 
mystery and quick pacing may keep kids reading despite any shortcomings, though. 
A happy ending is in store, but the door is left open for further exploits in this 
proposed trilogy, so readers who like Dan Gutman’s The Genius Files series may 
enjoy the first installment of these cousin capers as well.  JH
sAdler, mArilyn Alice from Dallas; illus. by Ard Hoyt. Abrams, 2014  40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0790-2 $16.95   
R 4-7 yrs
Giddyup! Alice, the cowgirl from Dallas, may be only from Dallas, Pennsylvania, 
but she’s ready for “a hoedown, a roundup, and a showdown.” Undeterred by the 
truth, she croons cowgirl songs, struts her spurs around school, and takes her class-
mates on rollicking imaginary stagecoach rides. Happy as a Stetson-hat-wearing 
clam as the only cowgirl in town, she is upset by the arrival of Lexis from Texas, 
a big-haired blonde who lassos like nobody’s business. Soon everyone wants to 
sing around the campfire with Lexis, and Alice decides it’s time for a showdown. 
When trying to match Alice’s Texas Two-Step lands Lexis with an injured ankle, 
Alice has to decide if there’s room enough for both of them after all. Hoyt’s playful 
watercolor illustrations expand on Sadler’s light-hearted text, providing humor and 
whimsy while capturing the details of an aspiring cowgirl’s world in her clothing, 
books, and ever-changing bandana for her dog. Swift, pale strokes of red, blue, 
green, and yellow in mirror Alice’s rangy spirit, as does the straightforward, lively 
prose. Young readers will enjoy the Wild West tropes smartly used throughout, 
and they will delight in the expressive images that fancifully capture Alice’s spunk 
and frankness. While kids can pore over this one on their own, a readaloud or 
preemptive geography lesson would help explain the oft-confusing idea of different 
places with the same name, such as Alice’s Dallas, Pennsylvania—or Lexis’ surprise 
hometown of Texas, Indiana.  AA
schAefer, lolA m. One Busy Day; illus. by Jessica Meserve. Disney Hyperion, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-4231-7112-6 $16.99   
R 4-6 yrs
The wordless spot illustrations on the front end papers and the first few pages of 
this title make its issue quite clear: little sister Mia wants to play with big brother 
Spencer, but he’s not having any of it. Resourceful Mia finds other things to do—
painting, dancing, building a fort out of chairs and a blanket—and Spencer grows 
increasingly interested. As Mia bakes mud pies, builds a sand castle, and wades in 
her kiddie pool, he creeps more and more into the action, until the two are full-
out engaged in pretend play together, fighting dragons and sailing rough seas. The 
closing page depicts the sleeping pair curled up in a chair together, while the closing 
end papers show the two happily reading, doctoring a teddy bear, and hiding in a 
box together. It’s pleasantly refreshing to see a sibling book in which the left-out sib 
cheerfully musters her own resources for entertainment, and the happy resolution 
between the kids comes about in a natural and non-preachy way. Additionally, the 
layout sets an engaging pattern: the recto text begins Mia’s action (“She explored  
. . .”) and shows her actual enterprise (building the chair and blanket fort); a page 
turn reveals the outcome (“a deep, dark cave”) in all its imagined glory (she’s spelunk-
April 2014 • 423
ing in a lamp-lit helmet and discovering cave art). Earthy tones, shaded blues, and 
verdant greens add life to the scenes, and the dry-brush-style technique combines 
with scratchy linework to add texture. Share this at a sibling-themed storytime, or 
perhaps encourage an older sib to read it aloud to a younger one.  JH
tordAy, Piers The Last Wild. Viking, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01554-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
The animal population has been decimated in the last decade by the red-eye virus, 
and the human population isn’t faring too well either, setting up massive quarantines 
in cities and living on Formula-A (and the company that owns it) as the food supply 
dwindles. Meanwhile, twelve-year-old Kester, mute since his mother’s death and 
locked away in the Spectrum Hall Academy for Challenging Children, discovers 
a cockroach with the ability to talk to him. The insect, along with hundreds of its 
brethren, busts Kester out of his prison, and the boy is taken to meet a majestic 
stag, who informs him that Kester is the “last wild,” the last hope for the survival 
of the remaining animals. His subsequent journey—to find the research left behind 
by his veterinarian father and thwart the company behind Formula-A and the red-
eye—is equal parts thrilling and poignant; Kester revels in new friendships, escapes 
dastardly bad guys, grieves for lost companions, and dares to hope that perhaps he 
can make a difference. A few dashes of humor, in the forms of a confused pigeon, a 
dance-obsessed mouse, and a comically arrogant wolf, add levity to the seriousness 
of Kester’s situation, and Kester himself is an appealing Everykid. Animal lovers are 
the obvious audience here, but so are middle-graders intrigued by post-apocalyptic 
worlds but not quite ready for the grimness of YA dystopias.  KQG
townsend, michAel Mr. Ball Makes a To-Do List; written and illus. by Michael 
Townsend. Blue Apple, 2014 80p (Jump into Chapters Books)
ISBN 978-1-60905-365-9 $12.99   
R Gr. 1-3
Conquering to-do lists is difficult for most people, but Mr. Ball—a Pacman-esque 
yellow circle with arms, legs, and a giant mouth—seems to have a particularly 
difficult time finishing anything that he starts. After a day of predictably failing to 
paint his house or buy tissues, he decides a to-do list might be simpler if he limits it 
to eating meals and giving lots of hugs, but a series of slapstick events leads him to 
being sprayed by a skunk, at which point his friends must help de-stink him. With 
oversized, block-printed hand lettering and much sparser text, this early graphic 
novel aims for a younger audience than the author’s Kit Feeny: On the Move (BCCB 
11/09). Frenzied energy carries the day in both over-the-top physical comedy and 
smaller details that careful eyes will find hilarious: Mr. Ball’s cat, Ms. Kitty Cow, 
follows him around, shouting “MOO-OW” every time he’s obliviously looking for 
someone to hug. The book’s structure of large panels, bigger than average trim size, 
and clearly differentiated sections (“THE INTRO STARTS HERE”) help novice 
readers feel less intimidated. This will make a silly leg-up for kids just starting 
chapter books, and since it looks like Mr. Ball will be bouncing back, this series 
would be a nice addition to younger classrooms unafraid of the graphic novel.  TA
424 • The BulleTin
townsend, wendy Blue Iguana. Namelos, 2014 177p
ISBN 978-1-60898-157-1 $18.95   
R Gr. 7-12
High school junior Clarice has an intense affinity with animals, experiencing 
palpable sympathy pains that hamper her own ability to fully function. Passionate 
and hardworking but struggling academically, she knows she needs direction for 
life after graduation. When her guidance counselor suggests she spend her summer 
away from Pennsylvania working to help animals, Clarice finds herself at the Blue 
Iguana Recovery Program (BIRP) in the Grand Cayman Islands, where she feeds 
and cares for the iguanas at the sanctuary and lends her keen observation skills to 
field research. As she learns what she is capable of—whether driving a car despite 
her fear of harming something or controlling her hurt and anger upon seeing 
injured animals—she also begins to see the difference between compromise and 
defeat. Through tight, measured prose and well-paced plotting, Townsend skillfully 
tells the story of a highly sensitive and impassioned teen struggling to reconcile 
her credibly intense emotions with a need to make her way in life. Informative 
and well-researched details about blue iguanas are intellectually and emotionally 
compelling, bonding the reader to both the animals and to Clarice in her devotion. 
Clarice is a heroine of exceptional quality, a young woman who wades through 
her plaguing self-doubts and reaches the other side, recognizing her personal chal-
lenges but ultimately refusing to let them limit her. Her sensitivity is intense but 
not maudlin, while her dedication is honest and self-respecting; though she’s not 
immune to the hints of romance with a local marine biology student, her priorities 
are to help the iguanas as she figures out herself and her place in the world—and 
she does, in an ending that leaves the reader glad to know she’s out there. Give this 
to a fan of Schrefer’s Endangered (BCCB 1/13), an animal lover, or a sensitive soul 
looking to find her way. An author’s note about the real BIRP is included.  AA
VAn Vleet, cArmellA Eliza Bing Is (Not) a Big, Fat Quitter. Holiday House, 
2014 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2944-8 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
When local celebrity baker Sweet Caroline offers a summer cake-decorating class 
at the area park district, Eliza desperately wants to sign up so she and her friend 
Tony can one day start their own bakery. Her parents are reluctant, though, and 
eavesdropping on them reveals the reason: Eliza’s habit of quitting. Though she 
concedes her ADHD may have interfered with her ability to stay with a hobby 
in the past, her indignation at what she sees as injustice—particularly when her 
older brother just quit his martial arts class—prompts her to strike a bargain with 
her parents: she will take her brother’s place in tae kwon do and, if she sticks with 
it, she can take the cake-decorating class in the fall. Although the path to a yellow 
belt is lined with mean girl Madison, fights with Tony, and anxieties about starting 
middle school, not to mention a bruised tailbone, Eliza begins to learn that winners 
only quit when they’ve won. Van Vleet gives Eliza a compelling voice and winning 
underdog quality, and she handily works in details about living with ADHD (self-
control practices, medication, and what it’s like to be the “weird” kid at school) 
without making it Eliza’s defining characteristic. Though Eliza isn’t the most original 
of heroines, her resemblance to classic protagonists such as Ramona isn’t likely to 
alienate readers. Indeed, Eliza picks up at the age we last saw Ramona; this timing, 
April 2014 • 425
coupled with the unresolved tension with her friend Tony, may mean that, like 
a true martial artist, Eliza will persevere—for another book or two, at least.  AA 
Verdi, jessicA The Summer I Wasn’t Me. Sourcebooks, 2014 [352p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-7788-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Lexi so wants her mom to be happy that she’s willing to try to stop being a lesbian, 
and that’s how the seventeen-year-old finds herself enrolled in a summer camp that 
will help her pray, roleplay, and confess her way to being straight. Not only is it not 
working, but Lexi finds herself falling hard for a girl in her small group, and the 
feelings seem to be mutual. The question of how to balance personal needs with 
those of one’s parents will resonate for many readers, and Lexi’s earnest efforts to 
protect her mom from further grief (they are both still reeling from the death of 
Lexi’s dad) are poignant and powerfully conveyed. For many teens on the GLBTQ 
spectrum who are lucky enough to not even know about these sorts of conversion 
programs, this book may offer a startling perspective to add to their more comfort-
able lives. Unfortunately, the additional subplot surrounding sexual abuse actually 
reinforces stereotypes about closeted gay men and adds unnecessary horror to what 
was already a pretty grim situation. In addition, the emotional growth of minor 
characters tends to happen at a convenient rate rather than an authentic one, making 
them foils for Lexi’s big changes rather than humans in their own right. Danforth’s 
The Miseducation of Cameron Post (BCCB 3/12) is therefore a better book on the 
topic, but as a sweet love story between two protagonists who both heartily deserve 
a break, and who manage to find one another even in the unlikeliest of settings, 
this still offers undeniable appeal to romance buffs.  AS
wAlKer, sAlly m. Boundaries: How the Mason-Dixon Line Settled a Family Feud 
& Divided a Nation. Candlewick, 2014 202p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-7636-5612-6 $24.99   
R Gr. 7-12
In early colonial times, before the New World settled into what came to be seen as 
an inexorable configuration of North/South, free/slave, red state/blue state, royal 
charters and land grants set borders that came up for dispute. Maryland’s northern 
border and Pennsylvania’s southern border were set at 40 degrees north latitude, 
but the surveying wasn’t yet exact enough to determine the line with precision. 
As descendants of the Calvert and Penn families squabbled over the border and 
settlers were doubled-billed for taxes, it became obvious that something needed to 
be done. Enter Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon, astronomer-mathematicians 
whose newfangled calculations based on celestial observation could set the records 
straight. Walker begins at the beginning, with substantive background on the 
founding of the bordering colonies, but the story really comes into focus with the 
challenges facing the first surveyors as they slog through swamps and over hills 
and across rivers to determine boundaries. Their failure brings the ingenious work 
of Mason and Dixon into relief, as the pair finds ways to address every obstacle 
that stymied their predecessors. Many history books for youth gloss over science 
and math in favor of a strictly human-interest approach, but Walker embraces the 
fields and walks readers through both the theory behind the calculations and the 
exhausting (and expensive) fieldwork it took to get results. Plenty of maps and 
diagrams support the text, and even math-resistant readers may find themselves 
426 • The BulleTin
learning more than they expected. The most appreciative audience, though, will be 
the kids who doodle in their notebooks through history class, just waiting for the 
bell to ring for math. Source notes, a bibliography, and an index are included.  EB
weAtherford, cArole Boston Sugar Hill: Harlem’s Historic Neighborhood; illus. 
by R. Gregory Christie. Whitman, 2014 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-7650-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-8 yrs
Essentially a poetic list of the notables who resided in the Sugar Hill section of 
Harlem during the Harlem Renaissance and beyond, this bouncy exercise in 
name-dropping introduces listeners to high profilers whose concentration in the 
well-to-do African-American neighborhood shone a floodlight on black cultural 
achievement and material prosperity. First names and nicknames make the pre-
sentation more intimate: “Where Duke and Count plunk out new tunes/and 
Zora spins stories by the moon.” Figures named more formally, such as Thurgood 
Marshall and Faith Ringgold, rub shoulders with average residents designated by 
neighborhood activity; “Where doctors and lawyers live next door/ to the owners 
of a corner store.” Rhyming and scansion are sometimes clunky, and for children 
unfamiliar with the litany of Big Names, there’s little to encounter in the main text 
other than atmosphere. The real heft of this title is found in the end matter, which 
includes an author’s note on the significance of the neighborhood (and its place 
on the National Register of Historic Places), and brief paragraphs on the residents 
mentioned within the text. Christie’s compositions, which streamline the Sugar 
Hill-ites to softly defined shapes with a few deft touches of individuation, should 
stand up to the kind of group sharing that this book is likely to enjoy. Although 
designed as a celebration of the past, it may serve as a wake-up call for children to 
look around their own neighborhoods and pick out the movers and shakers.  EB
weBB, PhiliP Where the Rock Splits the Sky. Chicken House/Scholastic, 
2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55701-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55702-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
The moon is shattered, creepy aliens invade human bodies, a few billion people 
have died, and a significant portion of the west is simply referred to as the Zone, 
a place where, if you go into it, you will certainly not emerge unscathed. It’s little 
wonder that Megan is as scrappy as she is, having grown up in this new Earth, 
and that she is undaunted by the idea of heading off into the Zone to find her 
missing father, dire warnings or not. It turns out that Megan, a hybrid of sorts, is 
pretty important and may end up saving the whole darn world. In a YA field of 
ever-increasing apocalyptic visions, this is a fresh and clever variant, one that sets 
its end of the world narrative in an Old West–style milieu with saloons, sheriffs, 
and drawling dialect. Webb ably balances the science fiction and coming of age 
elements, giving Megan authentic space to grow while keeping readers busy with 
gripping passages about murderous blue alien tendrils. The rare Western fan will, 
of course, be enthralled, and the sharply written passages about gunslinging justice 
may even win a few converts.  AS
April 2014 • 427
wells, rosemAry Stella’s Starliner; written and illus. by Rosemary Wells. Can-
dlewick, 2014 [26p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-1495-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-6 yrs
Stella the fox loves life in her snug trailer home, which is “as silver as a comet in the 
sky,” but when a mean group of weasels sneer at Stella’s trailer, she’s crushed. Her 
loving mother intervenes by spinning her a Starliner fantasy that restores Stella’s love 
for her home. Many kids will share Stella’s love for a compact and mobile dwelling, 
and the book vividly depicts the joys of her cozy life; the thread of class prejudice 
(“You must be poor!” sneers a weasel) is an unusual one in picture books. The 
story goes off in a strange direction with Stella’s mother’s fantasy narrative, though, 
especially when it confusingly ends up in an idealized real world and concludes 
with a weak and unsatisfying ending. The art has that famous Wells combination of 
adorableness and artistry; the starry motif, which has a Van Gogh flavor at times, is 
echoed in delicate pointillism in the landscape detailing. Gleaming silver framing or 
borders accent most of the spreads, adding to the magic of Stella’s silver home and 
enhancing appeal for viewers. Kids with unusual-home obsessions may overlook 
the story’s flaws to appreciate Stella’s living quarters, and adults could use the title, 
perhaps in partnership with Boelts’ Those Shoes (BCCB 12/07), to discuss the way 
people treat economic difference.  DS
williAms, julie Drama Queens in the House. Roaring Brook, 2014 [432p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-735-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Jessie’s family—which includes, at a minimum, her white mother, her black father, 
two cousins, Grandmama, and a crazy cultist aunt—owns and runs a theater com-
pany and school aptly named the Jumble Players in St. Paul, Minnesota. Graduating 
early from high school, Jessie has decided to forego college for a life in the theater, 
but she can’t seem to find her niche. She’s busy enough, though, since her family 
isn’t content to leave the drama on the stage: when she catches her father making 
out with Brad, the costume guy, both she and her mother retreat to separate rooms 
in their large Victorian home, but when she comes up with the idea that Dad and 
Brad can move into the attic apartment, things seem to settle back down into a 
happy rhythm. But as Bartles, her gay cousin, finds his glory at costume design, 
and Bits, her other cousin, realizes her talents on stage, Jessie remains stressed 
about finding her place in the bustling, buzzing world of the theater. She tries her 
hand at playwriting and directing, and at times the book feels like an energetic 
apprenticeship in these things, as well as in movement, costume design, theater 
games, and backstage management. This attention to the day-to-day workings of 
the theater in the midst of a coming-of-age story makes the page count daunting, 
but Jessie’s effervescent voice and the farcical nature of their daily lives keep the pace 
lively—think Noises Off  but with talented characters. If only all the world were the 
Jumble’s stage, we’d all be content to be merely players there.  KC
428 • The BulleTin
wooding, chris Silver. Scholastic, 2014 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-60392-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-62191-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
The discovery of a strange beetle leads to a horrifying infection that spreads across 
the grounds of a secluded boarding school in the English countryside, transform-
ing its inhabitants into zombie-like creatures with a craving for flesh. Since the 
headmaster is one of the first to turn vicious, followed by most of the other adults, 
it’s up to fifteen-year-old Paul, the new kid who’s well aware of just how terrible 
the world can be, to take charge as students barricade themselves in the science 
building. Meanwhile, Adam, the class bully, finds that the anger he has struggled 
to control is actually an asset in this new scenario; Erika, the golden girl, discov-
ers that perfection doesn’t earn you much with monsters; and Caitlyn, always the 
runner up, initially basks in Erika’s failure but is eventually brought down by her 
own pettiness. The focalization through four very different characters gives this 
end-of-the-world tale broad accessibility, but it’s really the monsters, the Infected, 
that drive the plot forward; though they start out as mindless, shuffling creatures, 
they eventually transform into cunning predators with the ability to strategize and 
(literally) smoke the survivors out into a full-on confrontation. Though Wood-
ing’s direct storytelling makes the most of the action sequences, it unfortunately 
stumbles when it comes to the emotional elements of the story, too often telling 
rather than showing what the characters are feeling, and the teens themselves are 
fairly predictable stereotypes. Summers’ This Is Not A Test (BCCB 7/12) is still the 
school-overrun-by-monsters book to beat, but for fans of the horror genre, this 
fast-paced, occasionally gory tale may well satisfy.  KQG 
young, suzAnne The Treatment. Simon, 2014 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-4583-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 9-12
Having escaped from The Program (BCCB 7/13), teenage lovers Sloane and James 
are now on the run and growing desperate for help. They join forces with an un-
derground resistance group of other young escapees, camping out in safe houses 
and dodging Program handlers. Things get more complicated when Realm, Sloane’s 
romantic distraction from the first book, returns, stirring up resentments within 
the group and confused longings in Sloane’s heart. Meanwhile, Sloane still has the 
mysterious pill Realm gave her, the Treatment that would give her back the memories 
the Program had stolen, but she worries what recovering her past might do to her 
sanity, her new life, and her future with James. Before she can decide what to do 
with the pill, she and her friend Dallas are captured, and the group must decide 
how much they are willing to risk to get the girls back. With its shift to a narrative 
full of near escapes and threats of lobotomy, this sequel is a more conventional 
adventure story than the first volume, but many of the other essential elements 
of the original remain: the intense psychological drama, the passionate romance 
between Sloane and James, the frightening power of the Program to steal one’s past 
away. The fast-paced plot will also keep readers fully engaged, and the introduction 
of the scene-stealing new character Dallas will give them a new heroine to root for 
in future novels.  AM
April 2014 • 429
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Kate DiCamillo for Flora & Ulysses: The 
Illuminated Adventures (Candlewick). Four Newbery Honor Books also were named: 
Doll Bones, by Holly Black (McElderry); The Year of Billy Miller, by Kevin Henkes 
(Greenwillow); and One Came Home, by Amy Timberlake (Knopf).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Brian Floca for Locomotive, illustrated 
and written by Brian Floca (Atheneum). Three Caldecott Honor Books were also 
named: Journey, written and illustrated by Aaron Becker (Candlewick); Flora and 
the Flamingo, written and illustrated by Molly Idle (Chronicle); and Mr. Wuffles, 
written and illustrated by David Wiesner (Clarion).
The Coretta Scott King Book Award for writing goes to Rita Williams-Garcia for 
P.S. Be Eleven (Amistad/HarperCollins). Three King Author Honor Books were 
selected: March: Book One, written by John Lewis and Andrew Aydin and illustrated 
by Nate Powell (Top Shelf); Darius & Twig, written by Walter Dean Myers (Amis-
tad/HarperCollins); and Words with Wings, written by Nikki Grimes (WordSong). 
The Coretta Scott King Book Award for illustration goes to Bryan Collier for Knock 
Knock: My Dad’s Dream for Me, written by Daniel Beaty (Little, Brown). One King 
Illustrator Honor Book was selected: Nelson Mandela, illustrated and written by 
Kadir Nelson (Tegen/HarperCollins). The Coretta Scott King/John Steptoe New 
Talent Award goes to Theodore Taylor III for When the Beat Was Born: DJ Kool 
Herc and the Creation of Hip Hop (Roaring Brook). Patricia and Fredrick McKissack 
are the winners of the Coretta Scott King—Virginia Hamilton Practitioner Award 
for Lifetime Achievement. 
The Pura Belpré Award for illustration goes to Yuyi Morales for Niño Wrestles the 
World, written and illustrated by Yuyi Morales (Roaring Brook). Three Belpré 
Illustrator Honor Books was named: Maria Had a Little Llama/María tenía una 
llamita, illustrated and written by Angela Dominguez (Holt); Tito Puente: Mambo 
King/Rey del mambo, illustrated by Rafael López, written by Monica Brown (Rayo/
HarperCollins); and Pancho Rabbit and the Coyote: A Migrant’s Tale, illustrated and 
written by Duncan Tonatiuh (Abrams). Pura Belpré Award for writing goes to Meg 
Medina for Yaqui Delgado Wants to Kick Your Ass (Candlewick). Three Belpré Author 
Honor Books were named: Pancho Rabbit and the Coyote: A Migrant’s Tale, writ-
ten and illustrated by Duncan Tonatiuh (Abrams); The Lightning Dreamer: Cuba’s 
Greatest Abolitionist, written by Margarita Engle (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt); 
and The Living, written by Matt de la Peña (Delacorte). 
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most 
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is 
Enchanted Lion Books for Truus Matti’s Mister Orange, translated from the Dutch 
by Laura Watkinson. Three Batchelder Honor Books were also selected: The Bath-
ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2014
430 • The BulleTin
ing Costume, or the Worst Vacation of My Life, written by Charlotte Moundlic and 
illustrated by Olivier Tallec, translated by Claudia Zoe Bedrick (Enchanted Lion); 
My Father’s Arms Are a Boat, written by Stein Erik Lunde, illustrated by Øyvind 
Torseter, and translated by Kari Dickson (Enchanted Lion); and The War within 
These Walls, written by Aline Sax, illustrated by Caryl Strzelecki, and translated by 
Laura Watkinson (Eerdmans).
The Michael L. Printz Award for excellence in literature written for young adults 
goes to Marcus Sedgwick for Midwinterblood (Roaring Brook). Four Printz Honor 
Books also were named: Eleanor & Park, by Rainbow Rowell (St. Martin’s Griffin); 
Kingdom of Little Wounds, written by Susann Cokal (Candlewick); Maggot Moon, 
written by Sally Gardner and illustrated by Julian Crouch (Candlewick); and 
Navigating Early, written by Clare Vanderpool (Delacorte).
The Robert F. Sibert Medal for most distinguished informational book for children 
goes to Parrots over Puerto Rico, written by Susan L. Roth and Cindy Trumbore, and 
illustrated by Susan L. Roth (Lee & Low). Four Sibert Honor Books were named: 
A Splash of Red: The Life and Art of Horace Pippin, written by Jen Bryant and illus-
trated by Melissa Sweet (Knopf); Look Up!: Bird-Watching in Your Own Backyard, 
written and illustrated by Annette LeBlanc Cate (Candlewick); Locomotive, written 
and illustrated by Brian Floca (Atheneum); and The Mad Potter: George E. Ohr, 
Eccentric Genius, written by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan (Roaring Brook).
The Theodor Seuss Geisel Award for most distinguished beginning reader book 
goes to The Watermelon Seed, written and illustrated by Greg Pizzoli (Disney Hy-
perion). Three Geisel Honor Books were named: Ball, written and illustrated by 
Mary Sullivan (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt); A Big Guy Took My Ball!, written and 
illustrated by Mo Willems (Hyperion); and Penny and Her Marble, written and 
illustrated by Kevin Henkes (Greenwillow).
The Schneider Family Book Award for books that embody an artistic expression of 
the disability experience goes to A Splash of Red: The Life and Art of Horace Pippin, 
written by Jen Bryant and illustrated by Melissa Sweet (Knopf) in the category 
for young children. Merrie Haskell is the winner of the middle-school award for 
Handbook for Dragon Slayers (Harper/HarperCollins). Rose under Fire, written by 
Elizabeth Wein (Hyperion), is the winning book in the teen category.
The Stonewall Children’s and Young Adult Literature Award, for children’s and 
young adult books of exceptional merit relating to the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 
transgendered experience, was given to Beautiful Music for Ugly Children, written by 
Kirstin Cronn-Mills (Flux). Three honor books were selected: Better Nate Than Ever, 
written by Tim Federle (Simon); Branded by the Pink Triangle, written by Ken Set-
terington (Second Story); and Two Boys Kissing, written by David Levithan (Knopf).
The Andrew Carnegie Medal for excellence in children’s video goes to Paul R. 
Gagne and Melissa Reilly Ellard of Weston Woods Studios, Inc., producers of Bink 
& Gollie: Two for One. 
The Odyssey Award for excellence in audiobook production goes to Scowler, 
produced by Listening Library. The book is written by Daniel Kraus and narrated 
April 2014 • 431
by Kirby Heyborne. Four Odyssey Honor Recordings also were selected: Better 
Nate Than Ever, produced by Simon and Schuster Audio, written and narrated by 
Tim Federle; Creepy Carrots! produced by Weston Woods Studios, Inc., written by 
Aaron Reynolds, and narrated by James Naughton; Eleanor & Park, produced by 
Listening Library, written by Rainbow Rowell, and narrated by Rebecca Lowman 
and Sunil Malhotra; and Matilda, produced by Penguin Audio, written by Roald 
Dahl, and narrated by Kate Winslet.
The 2015 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by author and 
illustrator Brian Selznick.
The Margaret A. Edwards Award for lifetime achievement in writing for young 
adults goes to Markus Zusak. 
The William C. Morris Award for a book written by a first-time author for young 
adults goes to Charm & Strange, written by Stephanie Kuehn (St. Martin’s Griffin). 
Four additional books were shortlisted: Sex & Violence, written by Carrie Mesrobian 
(Carolrhoda Lab); Dr. Bird’s Advice for Sad Poets, written by Evan Roskos (Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt); Belle Epoque, written by Elizabeth Ross (Delacorte); and In the 
Shadow of Blackbirds, written by Cat Winters (Amulet Books).
The YALSA Excellence in Nonfiction Award goes to The Nazi Hunters: How a 
Team of Spies and Survivors Captured the World’s Most Notorious Nazi, written by 
Neal Bascomb (Levine/Scholastic). Four other books were shortlisted for the award: 
Go: A Kidd’s Guide to Graphic Design, written by Chip Kidd (Workman); Impris-
oned: The Betrayal of Japanese Americans During World War II, written by Martin 
W. Sandler (Walker); Courage Has No Color: The True Story of the Triple Nickles, 
America’s First Black Paratroopers, written by Tanya Lee Stone (Candlewick); and 
The President Has Been Shot! The Assassination of John F. Kennedy, written by James 
L. Swanson (Scholastic).
The Scott O’Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Bo at Ballard Creek, written 
by Kirkpatrick Hill and illustrated by LeUyen Pham (Henry Holt).
The Canadian Library Association’s 2013 Book of the Year for Children is The Re-
luctant Journal of Henry K. Larsen (Tundra Books), by Susin Nielsen. Honor Books 
are A Tinfoil Sky (Tundra Books), by Cyndi Sand-Eveland, and The Grave Robber’s 
Apprentice (HarperCollins), by Allan Stratton. The Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon 
Illustrator’s Award goes to Soyeon Kim for You Are Stardust (Owlkids Books), written 
by Elin Kelsey. The Young Adult Canadian Book Award goes to Martine Leavitt 
for My Book of Life by Angel (Farrar, Straus and Giroux). Honor Books are What 
Happened to Ivy, by Kathy Stinson (Second Story Press), and 40 Things I Want to 
Tell You (HarperCollins), by Alice Kuipers. 
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Sally Gardner for Maggot Moon (Candlewick).
The Kate Greenaway Medal for distinguished illustration in a book for children 
was awarded to Black Dog, written and illustrated by Levi Pinfold (Templar). 
432 • The BulleTin
The 2014 NCTE Orbis Pictus Award for outstanding nonfiction for children goes 
to A Splash of Red: The Life and Art of Horace Pippin, written by Jen Bryant and 
illustrated by Melissa Sweet (Knopf); Honor books are: Locomotive, written and 
illustrated by Brian Floca (Atheneum); The Boy Who Loved Math: The Improbable 
Life of Paul Erdos, written by Deborah Heiligman and illustrated by Melissa Sweet 
(Roaring Brook); Brave Girl: Clara and the Shirtwaist Makers’ Strike of 1909 (Balzer 
+ Bray), written by Michelle Markel and illustrated by Melissa Sweet; Parrots over 
Puerto Rico, written by Susan L. Roth and Cindy Trumbore and illustrated by Su-
san L. Roth (Lee & Low); and Courage Has No Color: The True Story of the Triple 
Nickles, America’s First Black Paratroopers, written by Tanya Lee Stone (Candlewick).
The Center for Children’s Books’ 2014 Gryphon Award goes to goes to Battle 
Bunny, written by Jon Scieszka and Mac Barnett, and Alex; illustrated by Matthew 
Myers, but mostly Alex (Simon).  Four honor books were named: Year of the Jungle, 
written by Suzanne Collins and illustrated by James Proimos (Scholastic); Like Bug 
Juice on a Burger, written by Julie Sternberg and illustrated by Matthew Cordell 
(Amulet/Abrams); and Lulu and the Dog from the Sea, written by Hilary McKay 
and illustrated by Priscilla Lamont (Whitman).
April 2014 • 433
Actors and acting–fiction: Bajaj; 
Williams
ADHD–fiction: Van Vleet
ADVENTURE: Baccalario; Balda-
cci; Compestine; Fisher; Hale; 
Hawkins; Johnston; MacHale; 
McClure; McQuerry; Ringwald; 
Torday; Young
African Americans: Marrin; Weath-
erford
Aliens–fiction: Landers
Animals: Jenkins; Laidlaw
Animals–fiction: Messner; Torday; 
Townsend, W.
Animals–stories: Wells 
Art and artists: Weatherford
Asian Americans–fiction: Nagai
Astronauts–fiction: Hale
Babies: O’Connell
Baths–stories: Barnett
BEDTiME sTORiEs: Meshon
Behavior–stories: Hoffman; schaefer 
BiOGRAPHiEs: Cline-Ransome; 
Marrin
Biology: Gray; Jenkins
Birds: Gray
BOARD BOOks: Patricelli
Boarding schools–fiction: Jocelyn 
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Mc-
Clure 
Brothers and sisters–stories: schaefer
Businesses–fiction: Messner
Cats: Laidlaw
China–fiction: Compestine
Circuses–stories: Harrison
Citizenship–stories: Mora
Conspiracies–fiction: MacHale 
Contests–stories: Reynolds
Cowboys and cowgirls–stories: 
sadler
Creativity–stories: Reynolds
Crime and criminals–fiction: Cosi-
mano; Fama; Helvig; Oppel
Death–fiction: Burgess; kizer
Detectives–fiction: Beil 
Disasters–fiction: MacHale 
Diseases–fiction: Lucier
Dogs–stories: Harrison
Dragons–fiction: Johnston
Drugs–fiction: Burgess
Dystopias–fiction: Baldacci; Fama; 
kwaymullina; Torday; Webb; 
Young
Elephants: O’Connell
Emotions–fiction: Townsend, W.
Epidemics–fiction: Lucier
Ethics and values: Landers; 
Townsend, W.; Van Vleet
Eyes: Jenkins 
Faith–fiction: Verdi
Families–fiction: Williams
FANTAsY: Armstrong, k.; Edge; 
Fisher; Hawkins; Jobin; Johnston; 
Loftin; McQuerry; Wooding
Fathers–fiction: Bajaj; Boyne; Fish-
man; Webb
FOLk-LikE TALEs: Anderson
Food and eating–stories: Anderson
Foster care–fiction: Loftin
Friends–fiction: Baccalario; Jobin; 
Young
Friends–stories: Donofrio; Reynolds
Subject and uSe Index
keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPs 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
434 • The BulleTin
Future, the–fiction: Brashares; 
Helvig
Gender–stories: Hoffman
Geography: Ajmera; Perrin; Walker
Germany–fiction: Bass 
GLTBQ people–fiction: Verdi
GRAPHiC NOVELs: Townsend, 
M.
Greece–fiction: Bedford
Grief–fiction: Bedford; Caletti
Guatemala–fiction: Brown
Health: Farrell; Jarrow
HisTORiCAL FiCTiON: Bar-
nett; Bass; Beil; Boyne; Brown; 
Compestine; Crossley-Holland; 
Edge; kerr; Lucier; McClure; 
Nagai; Oppel
History, U.S.: Potter; Walker; 
Weatherford
History, world: Bildner; Jarrow 
Horses–fiction: kerr
Houses–stories: Wells
HUMOR: Anderson; Barnett; 
Hawkins; Patricelli; sadler; 
Townsend, M.
identity–stories: Harrison; Hoffman 
illness–fiction: Fishman
imagination–stories: schaefer
immigration–stories: Mora 
india–fiction: Bajaj
internment camps–fiction: Nagai
Jews–fiction: kerr
Latinos–fiction: Brown
Magic–fiction: Baccalario; Fisher; 
Jobin
Martial arts–fiction: Van Vleet
Medicine: Farrell; Jarrow
Memory–fiction: kwaymullina
Mice–stories: Donofrio 
Monsters–fiction: Armstrong, k.; 
Wooding
Monsters–stories: Anderson; Dono-
frio; Wells 
Music and musicians: Ajmera; Cline-
Ransome; Potter
Music and musicians–fiction: Loftin
MYsTERiEs: Beil; Cosimano; Edge; 
Oppel; Ringwald
Mythology, classical: Ringwald
Nature study: Gray; O’Connell; 
Townsend, W.
Nurses: Farrell
Organ donation–fiction: kizer
Orphans–fiction: McClure
Pets: Laidlaw
Pets–fiction: Messner
Plants–fiction: Caletti 
POETRY: Janeczko
Poverty–fiction: Burgess
Prejudice–fiction: Fama
Presidents–stories: Barnett
Quests–fiction: McQuerry
Race relations: Cline-Ransome 
Race relations–stories: Bildner 
Reading aloud: Boyne; Janeczko; 
Loftin; Nagai
Reading, easy: Messner; Townsend, 
M.
Relationships–fiction: Bedford; 
Caletti; Jocelyn; kizer; Verdi
Reptiles–fiction: Townsend, W.
Romance–fiction: Brashares: Landers
school–fiction: Wooding 
school–stories: sadler; Mora 
sCiENCE FiCTiON: Brashares; 
Fama; Fishman; Hale; Helvig; 
Landers; Webb; Young
seasons–poetry: Janeczko
secrets–fiction: Bajaj; Jocelyn; kway-
mullina; Ringwald 
sisters–fiction: Armstrong, k.
slavery: Marrin
soccer–stories: Bildner 
south Africa–stories: Bildner
sports–stories: Bildner
Storytime: Meshon; schaefer
sUPERNATURAL sTORiEs: 
Cosimano
sURViVAL sTORiEs: kerr
Theater–fiction: Williams
Time–stories: Perrin
Time travel–fiction: Brashares; Fisher
TODDLER BOOks: Patricelli
Tools–stories: Meshon
Trains–fiction: Oppel
Twins–fiction: Armstrong, k.
VERsE NOVELs: Brown; Nagai
Vikings–fiction: Crossley-Holland
April 2014 • 435
Voyages and travel–fiction: Bajaj; 
Crossley-Holland; Jobin; Webb
War–fiction: Brown
WEsTERNs: Webb
Women’s studies: Farrell 
Work–stories: Meshon
World cultures: Ajmera; Perrin 
World War i–fiction: Boyne
World War ii: Farrell
World War ii–fiction: Bass; kerr; 
Nagai
Writers and writing–fiction: Edge
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 67 (2014).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $60.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$100.00 (print); $110.00 (online);  
$140.00 (print & online)
