I LL 
NI
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
S
University of llinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
;· ·
i-dy
I,
41F^
.P:E
" 
Starred in School LibraryJournal
EVERGLADES
by JEAN CRAIGHEAD GEORGE
Full-color pictures by WENDELL MINOR
"An Indian storyteller poles
five children through the
Everglades in his dugout,
and in language as lush as
the land of which he speaks,
he tells them the story
of the river of grass....
The story and the art create
a mystical tale that flows
from a serene start to a
powerful conclusion. This
is a plea for conservation
and a story eloquently
told"-SLJ. "A haunting
plea ... strengthened by
Minor's majestic paintings"
-Publishers 
Weekly
Ages 6-9.
$14.95TR (0-06-021228-4)
$14.89LB (0-06-021229-2)
Recent Jean Craighead George books
ANIMALS WHO HAVE WON 
ACORN PANCAKES,
OUR HEARTS 
DANDELION SALAD, AND
Full-color pictures by 
38 OTHER WILD RECIPES
Christine Herman Merrill 
Full-color pictures by Paul Mirocha
Ages 8-12. $15.00TR (0-06-021543-7) 
Ages 9 up. $14.95TR (0-06-021549-6)
$14.89LB (0-06-021544-5) 
$14.89LB (0-06-021550-X)
JULIE
Pictures by Wendell Minor
Ages 10 up. $15.00TR (0-06-023528-4); $14.89LB (0-06-023529-2)
* HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
iii 
i 
I
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 1995
Vol.49 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
83 
THE BIG PICTURE
Dinah Forever by Claudia Mills
84 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Holiday titles include:
90 
* It's Kwanzaa Time written by Linda and Clay Goss
92 
* The First Christmas adapted and illustrated by Nonny Hogrogian
102 * A Midnight Clear: Twelve Family Stories for the Christmas Season
by Katherine Paterson
104 * Inside-Out Grandma written and illustrated by Joan Rothenberg
110 * A Kwanzaa Celebration Pop-Up Book written by Nancy Williams and
illustrated by Robert Sabuda
112 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
113 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Reviewer (HMW)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Tara L. Rivera, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor Emeritus, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerry Drive, Champaign, IL 61820
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1995 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on add-free paper.
Cover illustration by Eileen McKeating, from Dinah Forever ©1995 and used by permission of
Farrar Straus Giroux.
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 83
THE BIG PICTURE
Dinah Forever
by Claudia Mills
Heroines of middle-grades series generally struggle with fairly manageable prob-
lems. In Dynamite Dinah (BCCB 4/90) Dinah Seabrooke dealt with a new baby
brother and the changing relationship with her best friend, in Dinah for President,
4/92, she ran (unsuccessfully) for class office, and in Dinah in Love, 12/93, she
stormily embarked on her first romance. Now she rolls on into seventh-grade, and
here she collides with an immovable obstacle on a grand scale: mortality.
Not just loss, but final, total obliteration. First it's the planet's death
she's worried about, after her science teacher explains that the sun will go super-
nova and kill off the earth in five billion years; then she's doubly depressed by the
realization that she'll be long gone herself by the time that happens. She'd like to
be the lead in the school production of Carousel, she wants to run again for class
president, she wishes her debating team (she and boyfriend Nick Tribble) would
finally trounce the competition, and she's intrigued by the possibility of having a
star named for her, but ultimately, she decides, none of this matters in the face of
the impending destruction of the universe: "But what difference does it make, in
the end?"
Most children's books about mortality focus on bereavement and on the
fear of death as a physical process. Dinah Forever, without becoming abstruse or
ruling in or out any particular theology, uses a comfortable and familiar character
to examine finiteness as a cosmological question: what difference, indeed, does it
all make? There's no suggestion that Dinah's question isn't valid, but the book
gently implies that the point of existence is not necessarily to last forever, but to
celebrate life while one is here. It emphasizes that suggestion with the death of
Dinah's friend from the last two books, Mrs. Briscoe, which makes it suddenly
clear to Dinah what a difference the existence of one person can make regardless of
her or the planet's eventual fate.
Mills treats her heroine's obsession respectfully, but also affectionately
and realistically: even in an epistemological funk, Dinah is funny and still relent-
lessly performing (after writing reams of poetry-in which the author captures
seventh-grade profundity perfectly but not condescendingly-about death, Dinah
congratulates herself that "other seventh-graders weren't writing poems as dark
and powerful as hers ... they were still writing little singsong poems about their
pets"). Dinah's character is distinctive and complex without overcomplicating the
book, whose treatment of Dinah, who always feels she's acting her life as if it were
a play ("Dinah ... did everything better with an audience"), may ring a particular
bell with many readerly youngsters who feel they're living their lives as if they were
written as novels.
84 
* 
THE BULLETIN
And then there's Dinah's romance with Nick. It could be termed one of
those on-again/off-again things, but it's clear that that's just the way they work-
temperamental Dinah periodically decides Nick has failed in some way, stomps off
refusing to have anything to do with him, eventually regrets her outburst (as Nick
knows she always will), and makes up with him again. Mills keeps the relationship
lighthearted but deeply personal, giving Dinah and Nick more chemistry than
most television couples without ever resorting to precocious sexual banter or sug-
gestiveness.
Just as Ramona Forever was the final outing of that doughty children's-
literature heroine, Dinah Forever, according to Mills, will probably be Dinah's last
adventure. It would be somewhat ironic but also bittersweetly appropriate for
Dinah to come to grips with mortality as her own literary days come to an end.
Dinah has, however, earned her own bit of immortality as a literary character,
belonging as she does in the pantheon of top-class middle-school heroines. While
we would regret not seeing any new escapades from Dinah, it's nice to know that
somewhere out there in the fictional world will remain Dinah Seabrooke, fighting
with Nick, penning more poetry, and hunting for the star with her name on it.
(Imprint information appears on p. 100.)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
BOWEN, BETSY 
Gathering: A Northwoods Counting Book; written and illus. by
Betsy Bowen. 
Little, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-10371-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 1-3
In Antler Bear Canoe (BCCB 11/91), Bowen alphabetized her way through the
Minnesota northwoods, and here she offers a companion counting piece. Starting
unusually with zero ("zero degrees") she moves through "one seed," "two rhubarb
pies," and "three summer memories" onward till she finishes with "twelve inches
of snow." It's harder to evoke a milieu with twelve examples than with twenty-six,
and Bowen has made it more difficult still by linking each number to a month,
showing seasonal progression: the linkages are sometimes tenuous, as in the con-
nection between zero degrees and May; readers will also wonder what happened to
January through April, since those months aren't represented here (several of the
remaining months appear twice instead). Bowen's woodcuts, with their air of
cheerful gravity, are still quite appealing, however, and offer some original view-
points on traditional seasonal scenes; her knowledgeable enthusiasm about the
area shines through in her descriptive prose as well, making this a pleasing, if not
entirely successful, series of northern vignettes. DS
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 85
BOWLER, TIM 
Midget. McElderry, 1995 
159p
ISBN 0-689-80115-7 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Midget is fifteen, and his existence is a living hell: he's as undersized as his nick-
name suggests, he stutters to the point where communication is virtually impos-
sible, and he's subject to sudden and horrifying seizures. Underlying these problems
is his older brother's secret but constant and escalating abuse, which has largely
caused Midget's speech impediment and seizures; Sebastian has sworn that this is
the summer he will finally kill Midget in revenge for the death of their mother,
who died giving birth to the younger boy. So far, the plot is reminiscent of Randle's
The Only Alien on the Planet (BCCB 3/95), but Bowler then adds a supernatural
twist: Midget finds that sailing in his new boat gives him supernatural powers,
and he begins to use his psychokinetic ability to take his own revenge on his brother
for all the years of torment. The book is excellent at depicting Midget's repressed
terror and fury and its somatic consequences, and his eventual nautical ascendancy
over Sebastian is heady for the reader as well as the character. Midget's visits to a
psychologist aren't always smoothly integrated into the plot, but the battle be-
tween power and morality gives the story a satisfyingly bitter edge to the very end.
Cormier fans, who will appreciate the novel's implacability, are likely to find this
just their cup of astringent tea. DS
BRANCH, MURIEL MILLER 
The Water Brought Us: The Story of the Gullah-Speak-
ing People; illus. with photographs by Gabriel Kuperminc. 
Cobblehill,
1995 
106p
ISBN 0-525-65185-3 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Drawing much of her account from resident storytellers and cultural preservators,
Branch gives a history and contemporary portrait of the largely African-American-
populated Sea Islands along the coasts of South Carolina and Georgia. While the
writing often substitutes adulation for detail, the historical chapters are strong,
showing how the early black communities developed during the Civil War under
the watchful eye of the Union garrison as well as those businessmen, missionaries,
and teachers (including the African-American Charlotte Forten-see Peter
Burchard's biography, BCCB 4/95) who came south to help-and sometimes ex-
ploit-a people not quite slaves, not yet free. Branch's chapters on contemporary
Sea Island life and cultural identity are not as lively or involving as Kathleen Krull's
Bridges to Change (BCCB 2/95), but she does give an assured sense of a commu-
nity with strong roots and traditions of handcrafting and storytelling, including
several Gullah folktales (unfortunately unsourced, as are some of the quotations)
among the chapters. A map would have been helpful; black-and-white photos, a
thorough bibliography, and an index are included. RS
BUNIN, SHERRY 
Dear GreatAmerican Writers School. Houghton, 1995 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-395-71645-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Tap lessons from the Perfect Partner Dance Studio, Captain Billy Sparks' How to
Fly an Airplane manual, the Draw Me contest-but fourteen-year-old Bobby Lee's
latest and most lasting correspondence course comes from The Great American
Writers School, first lesson free then ten bucks for nine more. It's 1944, and
Bobby Lee (a girl, as she has to explain several times in her responses to the form
86 
* THE BULLETIN
letters from the School) clearly needs some escape from Twin Branch, Kentucky;
maybe she can write her way out. Consisting of Bobby Lee's letters to the School
and its perfunctory replies and continued demands for the ten dollars Bobby Lee
hasn't yet sent, this novel is an engaging portrait of a coming-of-age refreshingly
untouched by tragedy but enlivened by Bobby Lee's first crush and her nosiness
about other people's lives. "When I see something cute or hear a spicy remark, I
write it down," she confesses in her letters to the School's "editor," Susan Buckley,
and she faithfully reports the goings-on in Twin Branch, such as her curiosity
about a local Jewish girl, her dismay when a more experienced and older girl, Thelma,
takes over Bobby Lee's crush on Dempsey; her interest in Thelma's mother, who is
depressed and voluntarily bed-ridden. The small-town, homefront setting is ren-
dered without sentimentality or affectation; fans of Sharon Creech's Walk Two
Moons (BCCB 1/95) will enjoy Bobby Lee's forthright naivete. RS
CHRISTELOW, EILEEN 
What Do Authors Do?; written and illus. by Eileen
Christelow. 
Clarion, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-71124-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Less quirky and funny but more comprehensive than Janet Stevens' From Pictures
to Words (BCCB 6/95), Christelow's introduction to the book-making process
follows two writers, next-door-neighbors, who are each inspired after seeing their
respective pets chase each other around the neighborhood. The man conceives a
chapter book about his dog, the woman begins a picture book about her cat, and
they write and rewrite and get new ideas and write some more ... finally creating
manuscripts that are accepted by publishers. There's a bit about the mechanics of
book production and life after publication ("Some reviews are wonderful! Some
are not") and then it's on to new ideas for the next book. Christelow gets her
information out in an affable combination of breezy cartoons and a simple text;
while the story-frame about the neighbors has little more originality then the books
they are writing, it organizes the process in a natural way. RS
COLLINGTON, PETER 
The Tooth Fairy; illus. by Peter Collington. 
Knopf,
1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-97168-8 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-87168-3 
$17.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Dainty demeanor notwithstanding, the tooth fairy is one hard-workin' woman, as
we learn in this wordless picture book (which, caveat emptor, contains a cut-out
toy). When a little girl slips her tooth into a box beneath her pillow, the fairy
descends deep beneath the woods, shoulders a pickaxe, and begins a long night's
work mining, melting, and molding a shiny silver coin with the Latin motto "Know
thyself." Once the delivery is made (no easy task for a fairy to scoot under a heavy
pillow), there's still sawing and fitting ahead, as the fairy fashions the retrieved
tooth into ivory veneer for one of her piano keys. Details in the seventy-four
paintings are too tiny for group sharing, but individuals will enjoy searching out
the many uses made of their missing molars, from a gleaming diadem to a carved
umbrella stand. An abundant store of visual surprises will keep toothless tykes
grinning through each fresh loss. EB
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 87
COWLEY, JOY 
The Mouse Bride; illus by David Christiana. 
Scholastic,
1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-47503-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Illustrator Christiana provides a wordless prologue for the story: an adult arm is
shown directing a little girl off to bed on the title page, and on the following pages,
the girl scolds the dog, the dog trees the cat, and the cat chases the mouse. As the
text begins, the mouse cries, "Small and weak! How I wish that I were strong!" and
she sets off to find a strong husband, so that her children will be more powerful
than she is. First, she proposes to the sun, but he points out that a cloud can
completely cover him. The cloud in turn reminds her that the huffing wind can
blow him across the sky. By the end of this (unsourced) traditional tale, the mouse
has discovered an appropriate mate. Cowley relates the story with enough wit and
energy that it could stand alone for telling, but Christiana's watercolors add a
special dash of humor. Often giving the mouse's perspective, with objects loom-
ing above her, Christiana uses color and brushstroke to create different textures,
and gives the sun, the cloud, and the wind each its own distinct personality. Un-
fortunately, he does undercut the final page's revelation ("And, yes, you have guessed
it: Out from the depths of the cellar came another little mouse") by showing the
male mouse on the previous spread, but this is a slight misstep in a storyhour book
that will particularly satisfy its audience of small people. SDL
CREECH, SHARON 
Absolutely Normal Chaos. HarperCollins, 1995 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026992-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026989-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Mary Lou Finney is finding her thirteenth summer complicated by the arrival of
her cousin, Carl Ray, from West Virginia. Carl Ray, slovenly and monosyllabic, is
just something else to deal with along with the romantic travails of Mary Lou's
best friend, the continuing importunations of Mary Lou's family, and Mary Lou's
own gently developing romance with Alex. Published in England prior to Creech's
Newbery-winning Walk Two Moons, BCCB 1/95 (in which Mary Lou plays a
small part), this novel shares some of that book's over-the-top plotting, but where
Walk Two Moons was ultimately convincing in its exhilarating, almost-magical
realism, Absolutely Normal Chaos seems wealdy contrived. The story is told through
Mary Lou's summer journal entries, a school assignment, and while her voice is
authentically that of a thirteen-year-old, her life is that of a thirteen-year-old of an
earlier, gentler era. While lacking the contemporary swing of, say, Rachel Vail's
books (see Ever After, BCCB 4/94), the trials of Mary Lou's first date, first kiss,
etc. will speak to younger girls dreaming about what's in store for them. However,
Carl Ray's circumstances, which give the novel its narrative core, are well-nigh
unbelievable, involving a secret adoption, a fortuitous death, a legacy from an
anonymous benefactor, and, later, a car crash. Where Walk Two Moons under-
stood and played with its own implausibility, this book seems as oblivious as Mary
Lou herself to its hokey devices. Still, Mary Lou is entertaining (if occasionally
longwinded) and readers hooked on happy endings will be pleased to see that
everything works out perfectly. RS
88 
* 
THE BULLETIN
CUYLER, MARGERY 
Invisible in the Third Grade; illus. by Mirko Gabler. 
Holt,
1995 
82p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-4115-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Alex loves to chew gum ("He could chew up his troubles. When he blew bubbles,
he could blow them away") and he's at first delighted when he discovers that his
new pack is magic, each piece enabling him to become invisible for up to two
hours. Alex plays tricks on his babysitter, his classmates, and the school principal;
most of all, he hopes the gum will gain him the respect and attention of his big
brother Pete, a twelve-year-old with his own circle of friends, the "Gang." The
story is set at Halloween, allowing plenty of opportunities for semi-spooky slap-
stick, but the writing is generally flat and overexplanatory, taking the life out of the
humor. Alex's attempts to gain his brother's friendship, however, give heart to the
non-stop action, and new and unsophisticated readers will like the (contrived)
premise, the easy-to-follow plot, and the mischievous zip of Gabler's line-and-
wash cartoons. RS
DANZIGER, PAULA 
Amber Brown Goes Fourth; illus. by Tony Ross. 
Putnam,
1995 [112p]
ISBN 0-399-22849-7 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 2-3
Back from her summer visit with Aunt Pam in London (see BCCB 4/95), Amber
Brown is apprehensive about starting fourth grade without a best friend, her pal
Justin having moved away (in the first book of the series, Amber Brown Is Not a
Crayon, 6/94). Amber has another nagging worry left over from the previous
books: Mom has a boyfriend who is becoming very much part of the scene, so
Amber's hopes that her parents might reconcile are now dimmer than ever. While
Amber, after some misunderstandings, does get a new friend, Brandi, much of the
book uneventfully marks time-Beverly Cleary can pack more into a single chap-
ter-but readers who have enjoyed Amber's spunky self and Danziger's clipped
paragraphing probably won't mind the respite and the promise of books to come.
Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. RS
DEPAOLA, TOMIE 
Country Angel Christmas; written and illus. by Tomie
dePaola. 
Putnam, 1995 32p
ISBN 0-399-22817-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Martha Stewart meets metaphysics. While we normally don't mention promo-
tional blurbs, librarians ought to know that Country Angel Christmas is but part
of a larger marketing effort: "Adding to the wonders of the book is the marvelous
story behind its creation-a line of Christmas ornaments and figurines designed
exclusively by dePaola for Midwest of Cannon Falls, Inc." "Country" angels by
virtue of their polka-dot and plaid pinafores, Ari, Pip, and Kira keep being shunted
aside by the other country angels in their preparations for Christmas. (Why Christ-
mas is being celebrated in Heaven, and why Santa Claus-in a hunting jacket-
leads the festivities begs some really interesting theological questions that are not
answered here.) The little angels are a multicultural trio, and while the book's
determinedly homespun objectives are betrayed by its calculations, the story is
sweet and simple enough to attract listeners who too are told to keep out of the
way during holiday preparations. Employing a moody pastel palette, dePaola ac-
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 89
cents the expected reds and greens with some luscious pinks and fuchsias; the
composition is somewhat mechanical but provides lots of Christmassy things to
look at. RS
DEPAOLA, TOMIE Mary: The Mother of Jesus; written and illus. by Tomie
dePaola. 
Holiday House, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1018-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Rather than presenting a cohesive narrative of Mary's life, dePaola retells fourteen
discrete episodes in which Mary is a prominent figure and introduces each with a
Biblical reflection. His customarily friendly and round figures appeal as ever to a
young audience, but without adult explanations even the simplified text ("Now
Joseph found Mary was with child, and he was very troubled, because they had not
come together") is beyond the grasp of primary schoolers. dePaola states in an
introduction that he has "drawn on scripture, legend, and tradition for this praise
of Mary," but nowhere does he specify the source of each individual section. Cita-
tions to Scriptural passages quoted at the head of each entry will be cryptic to the
uninitiated: "Antiphon, The Benedictus, Lauds, 2nd Sunday After Epiphany."
Despite these shortcomings, this religious title that manages to be reverent but not
stuffy will be welcome even in general collections. EB
EHLERT, LOIS 
Snowballs; written and illus. by Lois Ehlert. 
Harcourt,
1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-200074-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Ehlert's latest picture book is not only illustrated with collage, it is a collage-
scraps of nature study, projects, an affable snow family, and a clothesline of ethni-
cally diverse mittens. Kids will most enjoy the snow-people, pictured in a series of
vertical double spreads and inventively decorated with raisins, buttons, bottlecaps,
even luggage tags. Then everybody melts ("Snow dad's shrinking./ Mom is mush./
Boy's a blob;/ girl is slush"). This isn't as conceptually well-focused as some of
Ehlert's best work, but the book is crisply and invitingly designed. RS
FAULKNER, WILLIAM J. 
Brer Tiger and the Big Wind; illus. by Roberta
Wilson. 
Morrow, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12986-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12985-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Tempera paintings in muted reds and umbers give an old-fashioned feel to
Faulkner's story about how ever-intrepid Brer Rabbit tricked Brer Tiger into shar-
ing the spring and the juicy pear tree in Clayton Field with the other drought-
burdened animals. Brer Rabbit hatches a scheme in which all the animals pretend
to fear a supposed upcoming hurricane; when Brer Tiger hears them pleading to
be tied up for safety he demands the same thing-and thus enter the hungry and
thirsty Brer Bear, Brer Chicken, Sis Possum, et al. into the nourishing delights of
Clayton Field. There are some good sound effects to accompany the coming wind,
and some satisfying repetition in Tiger's demands to meet his fate: "Please tie me,
Brer Rabbit. Tie me, because I don't want the wind to blow me off the face of the
90 
* THE BULLETIN
earth." Bad characters who Ask For It are particularly appealing victims of come-
uppance, and all you'll need to act this story out with the kids is a rope. (You're
the tiger.) RS
GALLANT, ROY A. 
The Day the Sky Split Apart: Investigating a Cosmic
Mystery. 
Atheneum, 1995 
156p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-80323-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 8 up
The Tunguska "event" has long been a topic of interest to scientists, ufologists,
and cranks-and there's still no consensus on exactly what it was that exploded
above Siberia in 1908. Gallant's investigation into the event is an investigation
into the history of Soviet science as well, and while his survey is comprehensive,
the writing regularly bogs down into what for most readers will be too much detail
about the various expeditions into the Tunguska region. Gallant himself joined
an expedition in 1992, but the book is impersonal, coming to life primarily in the
statements of those who saw or heard the explosion: "God in his displeasure with
us tore the sky apart." Maintaining his scientific integrity, Gallant gives short
shrift to some of the more wild if entertaining theories about spaceships and black
holes; readers looking for Close Encounters-like anecdotes will need to get their
thrills elsewhere. This is a sober, solid account, ploddingly organized but thor-
ough. Photos, some by the author, are included; there are also a lengthy bibliogra-
phy and an index. RS
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Sea Turtles; written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. 
Holiday House,
1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1191-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Listeners learn elementary facts of sea-turtle anatomy and physiology, the eight
kinds of sea turtles and how they differ from freshwater turtles and one another,
migration and breeding, and efforts to protect dwindling populations. Textual
information is reliable as far as it goes, but Gibbons does not offer geographic
particulars on habitats or areas of migration, nor does she state explicitly that six of
the eight turtles have been cited as threatened or endangered. Subtle watercolor
renderings fail to emphasize differences among the turtles. The hawksbill's bill
looks like that of the olive ridley beside it and its patterned carapace (prized as
tortoiseshell) is undistinguished; an attempt to show relative size is undermined by
inconsistent depiction of the green sea and loggerhead turtles. Even the humans
happily pillaging an egg clutch look much the same as those removing eggs to
safety. However, with reader guidance, a young audience will appreciate this "just
enough" introduction. EB
Goss, LINDA 
It's Kwanzaa Time; written by Linda and Clay Goss. 
Putnam,
1995 
72p 
illus.
ISBN 0-399-22505-6 
$19.95 
R 
5-10yrs
Illustrated with contributions from noted African-American artists such as Ashley
Bryan, the Dillons, and Jerry Pinkney, this is a good collection of information,
stories, songs, recipes and activities to celebrate Kwanzaa. Along with an explana-
tion of its meaning, each of the seven days of Kwanzaa gets a story or poem de-
voted to that day's theme, such as "Rabbit at the Water Hole" for Ujima, "collective
work and responsibility." Some of the stories, all unsourced, seem to have only a
tangential or even ironic relationship to the day they exemplify (and the selection
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 91
from Eloise Greenfield's Rosa: A Woman of Courage repeats the myth that Rosa
Parks started the Montgomery bus boycott spontaneously), but they are all well-
structured for reading aloud and a couple offer instructions for involving the audi-
ence in the action. While other more imaginatively crafted books each offer a
piece of what's collected here, the compendium is useful and will be especially
welcome for home use. RS
GRANT, CYNTHIA D. 
Mary Wolf. Atheneum, 1995 
16 6 p
ISBN 0-689-80007-X 
$16.00 
R Gr. 9-12
Mary is sixteen, and responsibility has fallen heavily on her shoulders: her family's
been on the road in their RV ever since her father lost his job and seems unable to
hold any new ones, her childlike and malleable mother rarely manages to exert any
control over him or over Mary's three little sisters, and when Mary gains a new
brother his care falls largely to Mary as well. Mary grows more embittered over her
father's lies and her family's dishonesty-too proud to apply for welfare, her father
pilfers from his jobs and her mother shoplifts-and more worried about her family's
future as possibilities diminish. Grant portrays convincingly the desperate self-
delusion of a family fallen on hard times from which they can't extricate them-
selves. Mary's father's problematic character increases the speed of the family's
downward spiral, so the adults in this family aren't entirely blameless, but there's a
strong suggestion that the situational pressures are simply more than he can bear.
Mary is a bit overly noble, but she's a know-it-all teen vindicated by the fact that
she does know better than her parents, and her life is altered permanently by the
shocking tragedy that ends her family's roaming. This is a compelling story, and
kids who find The Grapes of Wrath too dry and distant will relate to a strong
young heroine undergoing more contemporary difficult times. DS
HADDIX, MARGARET PETERSON 
Running Out of Time. 
Simon, 1995 
184 p
ISBN 0-689-80084-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
When diphtheria strikes the children of her 1840s frontier village, Jessie is sent by
her mother to get help, but here's the fabulous catch: Jessie doesn't know that
she's actually living in the 1990s, something of a lab rat in an experiment that
seems to have gone awry. Frightened that the village's erstwhile idealistic planners
have turned wicked, Jessie's mother secretly sends her to the outside world, where
Jessie encounters such unfamiliarities as flush toilets, phones, school buses, Ken-
tucky Fried Chicken, and nasty evildoers. The story isn't quite up to the premise:
Jessie's disorientation upon discovering the modern world surely would have been
more pronounced than it seems to have been here, and her calling of a news con-
ference on the steps of the Indianapolis state capitol is a bit much. Many kids,
though, will be gripped by the concept, and the book, readable throughout, excit-
ing in spots, suggests links with more provocative titles such as Lowry's The Giver
or Sleator's House ofStairs. RS
HAFNER, MARYLIN 
Mommies Don't Get Sick!; written and illus. by Marylin
Hafner. 
Candlewick, 1995 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-287-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Though she is disappointed when Saturday isn't the usual routine of pancakes and
time with parents, Abby springs into action when her mother gets sick. Nothing
goes quite right-the washer overflows, dishes break, the Jell-o won't solidify-
92 
* 
THE BULLETIN
but her mother's pleased expression at lunch makes all the labor worthwhile. While
the idea is nothing new, Hafner's line-and-watercolor drawings will have children
laughing aloud. The house is a glorious disaster, Mommy's got a miserable red
nose, and the baby is just about as helpful as a real baby would be. Hafner tells the
story both through the very brief text and through comments noted in balloons on
the pictures--children will find the running commentary from the family dog
especially amusing. Mommy sure gets better fast, Daddy is annoyingly perfect,
and Abby persists long after most children would have quit in disgust, but it's still
a funny glimpse of family life, and Abby's feeling of competence at the end is one
most children will want to experience for themselves. SDL
HERMES, PATRICIA 
On Winter's Wind. 
Little, 1995 
16 3p
ISBN 0-316-35978-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Papa's ship should have moored in the harbor a year ago; now the family's re-
sources are fairly depleted, Mama is becoming childlike and distracted by their
troubles, and eight-year-old Leila is having disturbing dreams that seem connected
with Papa's disappearance. In an effort to keep the family afloat, eleven-year-old
Gen talks her way into a job at the Quaker-run general store. Discovering that the
backroom is a haven for runaway slaves, Gen soon realizes that one word to the
authorities will set the Fugitive Slave Law into motion and put the coveted bounty
money into her hands. Gen's temptation to turn a slave's misfortune into her
family's salvation is convincing, and Mama's tenuous hold on reality is chillingly
delineated. Many readers will also welcome the characters' frank and diverse testi-
monies to the way God works in or through their lives. However, Leila's dreams
and Gen's temptations are laboriously revisited, and the family's hardships never
seem dire enough, the slaves' danger never perilous enough, and Gen's impending
fall from grace never tangible enough to win and sustain the reader's sympathy.
EB
HINTON, S. E. 
The Puppy Sister; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. 
Delacorte,
1995 
122p
ISBN 0-385-32060-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Aleasha is the narrator of this gentle fantasy; she starts out by recollecting her
arrival, as an Australian Shepherd puppy, at the family home, and then tells the
story of her strange and frustratingly gradual transformation into a genuine child.
The story, of necessity, glosses over technical details but creates an appealing if
unbelievable picture of the new member of the family really becoming the new
member of the family. The idea is fresh and entertaining, and light and easy prose
makes reading a romp in the park for young pups. Gently wispy black-and-white
illustrations are sweet and playful. DS
HOGROGIAN, NONNY, ad. 
The First Christmas; ad. and illus. by Nonny
Hogrogian. 
Greenwillow, 1995 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13580-3 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13579-X 
$15.00 
R* 6-10 yrs
Fear not. These softly rounded figures in traditional Nativity poses do not portend
another forgettable retelling, but offer a thoughtful and reverent view of a troubled
couple metamorphosing into a Holy Family. Through each deceptively simple oil
composition shine expressive countenances that compel viewers to reflect on the
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 
93
well-worn text. Joseph buries head in hand at the news of his fiancee's condition,
townspeople barely disguise their shock at the pregnant bride, and the newlyweds
set off to Bethlehem with all the glee of taxpayers in April. But the Baby quickly
softens his parents, and in successive scenes they regard him with wonder, then
affection, then tenderness. Even androgynous angels are deftly individuated, with
the hesitant hands and sympathetic eyes of Joseph's messenger and the urgent,
outstretched arms of the shepherds' heralds. Hogrogian segues smoothly between
italicized passages from the King James gospels of Matthew and Luke; only the
angel sketches near the text seem unnecessary ornamentation. EB
HOWARTH, LESLEY 
Weather Eye. 
Candlewick, 1995 
224p
ISBN 1-56402-616-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
A near-death experience in a storm gives Telly peace, a vision, and the power to
know how much time any given individual has left on earth. Violent storms have
been racking the world for some time now (the book is set in 1999 Cornwall) and
Telly decides to use her new understanding of the cosmos to do what she can
about the weather. A noble heroine doing battle with the howling winds-it's a
thrilling premise, and Howarth knows how to build a good storm. But Telly's
solutions-synchronized meditation and just generally being calm-aren't very
exciting, and an excess of plot elements makes the story diffuse and the characters,
other than the fierce Telly, skimpy. Still, there's an inventive mind at work here,
and readers who enjoy a good thunderstorm will get a bang out of the atmosphere.
RS
HUDSON, WADE, comp. 
How Sweet the Sound: African-American Songs for Chil-
dren; comp. by Wade and Cheryl Hudson; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Scholastic,
1995 
48p
ISBN 0-590-48030-8 
$15.95 
R 
5-10yrs
Twenty-three selections, including spirituals ("Go Down Moses"), protest songs
("We Shall Not Be Moved"), and composed songs (Billy Strayhorn's "Take the 'A'
Train") comprise this anthology ofAfrican-American musical texts. Because melody
lines and chords are relegated to the back of the book, this isn't a collection that
will be musically useful, but teachers and librarians who know or learn the music
can provide a strong story-hour accompaniment to Cooper's paintings. Done in
the artist's characteristically grainy style, some of the illustrations add narrative
resonance, as in the picture of cotton-field workers for "Over My Head," or the
school play reenacting the Montgomery bus boycott for Stevie Wonder's "Happy
Birthday." Good short notes are appended along with the music. RS
HUGHES, SHIRLEY 
Rhymes for Annie Rose; written and illus. by Shirley
Hughes. 
Lothrop, 1995 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-688-14220-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-5 yrs
These nursery rhymes featuring Annie Rose and her big brother Alfie build on the
important details of a small child's life; though first reading the Alfie books (see
The BigAlfie Out ofDoors Storybook, BCCB 10/92, etc.) would enrich the poems,
they can also stand alone. There are rhymes for counting fingers and toes, and
rhymes about weather, places to go, stuffed animal and doll friends, and even
Annie Rose's ode to Alfie's friend Bernard: "I like Bernard./ Rough Bernard,/
94 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Tough Bernard,/ Stop-it-that's-quite-enough Bernard." Perhaps most successful
are the poems showing the way an ordinary place becomes transformed through
play, as Annie Rose makes a house under tables or lies in bed spooking herself
thinking about "the Thing at the bottom where your feet ought to be." A few too
many of the rhymes rely on the old trick of repeating the first lines at the end, but
overall it's a strong, varied, and satisfying collection. Hughes' tender paintings
show a toddler's world as a beautiful but reassuringly normal place, with loveliness
that is never too perfect. When a child eats a cracker in a Hughes book, her expres-
sion is ecstatic but crumbs get all over. SDL
HUTTON, WARWICK, ad. 
Odysseus and the Cyclops; ad. and illus. by Warwick
Hutton. 
McElderry, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80036-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Finding perhaps more humor than horror in this tale of the man-eating giant,
Hutton employs an even, deadpan tone that matches his customary pale, under-
stated line and watercolor pictures. Readers for whom the gruesome details are the
story's main draw may be unimpressed by this Polyphemus, who looks more oafish
than threatening, or by such blunt statements as "He snatched up two men, one in
each hand, and then . .. he ate them." Although the essentials of this tale are
present, including the "Nobody" word play and the inventive escape scene, no
background about the Odyssey or reference to Poseidon's curse is offered, making
it difficult to relate this tale to Odysseus' other adventures. EB
JAKOBSEN, KATHY 
Meet Me in the Magic Kingdom; written and illus. by Kathy
Jakobsen. 
Disney, 1995 
35p
ISBN 0-7868-3038-7 
$13.95 
Ad 4-8 yrs
Disney Press celebrates Disney World in this souvenir guide thinly disguised as a
picture book. While theme-park extravaganza might not seem as natural a subject
for folk artist Kathy Jakobsen as was Johnny Appleseed (by Reeve Lindbergh, BCCB
10/90) there's no doubt that Disney World is about as all-American as you can get,
and her double-page spread of old-timey Main Street presents a delightful irony:
folk art of faux folksiness. Jakobsen's elaborate, literal style is well-suited to the
chock-a-block excesses of the park and she manages to fit in just about all the
famous attractions, culminating with a surprise vertical fold-out for the evening
SpectroMagic parade and fireworks rendered in, it seems, a thousand points of
light. The art is let down by the innocuous but flatly expository "story" about a
family visiting the park; the cheesy design makes the book look like a vanity-press
production that doesn't know that the pictures are supposed to look this way. RS
JANECZKO, PAUL B., comp. 
Wherever Home Begins: 100 Contemporary
Poems. Jackson/Orchard, 1995 
114p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08781-6 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09481-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Despite the titular emphasis on home, much of the poetry is about motion: mov-
ing in, moving past, moving around, and moving on. Janeczko's predilection is for
small-town and rural scenes (although cities do get a small section) and for free-
verse poetry, so, as with most of his collections, there is a definite sense of a guiding
sensibility behind the anthology. Poets of different degrees of celebrity appear,
some of whom (Jim Wayne Miller, David Alan Evans, Naomi Shihab Nye, and
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 
95
Gary Soto, for instance) will be familiar to experienced readers of poetry in general
and of Janeczko's collections in particular. Despite some similarities there's an
intriguing variety of textures in the poems here: Jim Wayne Miller's pokerfaced
but rueful "Small Farms Disappearing in Tennessee" rubs shoulders with Richard
Snyder's intricately detached "A Grammar of the Sea," Jack Anderson's singable
"blues on the ranch," and Katherine Soniat's sensual evocation of place in "Fore-
cast: New Orleans." While the poems vary in difficulty, the language, concepts,
and events keep them teen-accessible without being condescending. DS
JOHNSON, STEPHEN T. Alphabet City; illus. by Stephen T. Johnson. 
Viking,
1995 
32p
ISBN 
0-670-85631-2 
$14.99 
R 6-9 yrs
What Jerome Wexler does in micro in Everyday Mysteries (BCCB 9/95), showing
the unusual patterns familiar things make up close, Johnson does in macro. Each
page here offers a relatively normal urban scene, but each scene somehow contains
a letter of the alphabet: a fire-escape stairway forms an angular B, an iron railing
seen from above curls into aJ, and Tappears in the gaps between buildings. The
fascination increases when it becomes clear that these images are not, as it first
appears, color photographs, but instead photorealistic art in which Johnson has
created a reality to suit his alphabetic needs, so the need to look closely is doubly
emphasized. This would actually pair quite well with Wexler's book of photo-
graphic mysteries, and it could also make an unusual entry in an art unit or just a
springboard for "what shapes can you see?" activities. DS
KILWORTH, GARRY 
The Electric Kid. Kroupa/Orchard, 1995 
137p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08786-7 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09486-3 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-9
The year is 2061, and society is throwing children to the trash heaps. Hotwire and
Blindboy survive in the city dump with their combination of technical skills, quick
thinking, and fierce friendship: "Blindboy, he's the finder. Me, I'm the fixer.
Hotwire and Blindboy, that's us. A team." Blindboy can hear electrical pulses
below mountains of garbage, and Hotwire digs up old components and works her
mechanical magic, and they both live on the proceeds from the sale of souped-up
junk. Their activities bring them to the attention of Mouseman, the city's under-
world boss, who snatches the kids and exploits their talents for his crime syndicate.
It's a thriller, a survival story, and science fiction all rolled into one tightly devel-
oped adventure. The writing is sharp and the plot never strays into cheap sensa-
tionalism; the kids are alone in a hostile world that could care less about their
welfare, but the good guys (cops) are as enterprising and weak as the bad guys.
Some of the futuristic slang wears thin ("swazz" has half a dozen different mean-
ings), but Hotwire and Blindboy are meaty characters with plenty of humor, sar-
casm, and attitude to spare. HMW
KOSCIELNIAK, BRUCE 
Geoffrey Groundhog Predicts the Weather; written and illus.
by Bruce Koscielniak. 
Houghton, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-395-70933-4 
$13.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Last year it was easy-Geoffrey emerged from his burrow on February 2nd, called
in his Spring report to the Daily Gazette, and got on with his life. This year the
media have conspired to make Geoffrey's prediction into an EVENT, and as the
96 
* 
THE BULLETIN
unwitting oracle hibernates, Geoffrey billboards spring up hawking everything from
jogging shoes to sunglasses, and the press assembles to await his appearance. When
Geoffrey pops out of his den, he can't see the ground in front of him for all the
lights and cameras; now without his forecast nobody knows "whether to wax the
skis or the surfboard." Koscielniak's snappy line-and-watercolor cartoons cleverly
spoof the annual hoopla at Punxsutawney, PA, although that town is never men-
tioned by name. Some of the jabs at the media circus, however, are likely to miss
the child audience, and the resolution to the dilemma (Geoffrey calls Mom for her
shadow report) is clumsy and limp. For bigger laughs, turn to the real thing on the
six o'clock news. EB
KRASKE, ROBERT 
Asteroids: Invaders From Space; illus. by Robert Kraske and with
photographs. 
Atheneum, 1995
ISBN 0-689-31860-X 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The premise is irresistible: what would happen if an asteroid collided with earth?
It's already occurred numerous times, scientists say, and will occur again-possi-
bly with devastating planetary results. Kraske milks the explosive drama with such
chapter titles as "Asteroids Bombing Earth," "Loose Cannonballs," and "Target
Earth." There is a lot of action here, with some respectable science, too. Kraske
covers everything relating to these space rocks: cosmic formation, size, craters,
comets, evolutionary effects, and true stories of asteroids bombarding our planet
(and even hitting people on the head). The explanations are clear and accurate,
although sometimes important definitions are placed too far along in the text.
Chapters don't always follow each other in logical sequence and the text is choppy
at points, but the information itself is solid and understandable (the photo cap-
tions are particularly well detailed). An index and reading list provide valuable
access points for further research. Young astronomers and geologists can share
some common interests here, and their explorations may take them right into their
own backyards to gaze at the stars and uncover the ground at their feet. A plethora
of diagrams, drawings, and photos invite browsing. HMW
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
Lives of the Artists: Masterpieces, Messes (and What the Neigh-
bors Thought); illus. by Kathryn Hewitt. 
Harcourt, 1995 
96p
ISBN 0-15-200103-4 
$19.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
After biographizing musicians (BCCB 4/93) and writers (10/94), the Krull/Hewitt
team now turns to artists, offering the series' familiar mix of gossipy tidbits and
slightly caricatured portraiture. The book includes a varied lot of painters and
sculptors, hailing from all parts of the world and representing both genders and
several races, so that the obvious figures (Michelangelo, Da Vinci, Van Gogh) are
balanced out by some fresher choices (Isamu Noguchi, William Johnson, Sofonisba
Anguissola). It's glossy rather than deep, but it's a painless introduction to a color-
ful cast of characters, and kids will enjoy this entertaining brush with greatness. A
list of suggestions for further reading is included, as is an index to artists men-
tioned in the text. DS
LAIRD, CHRISTA 
But Can the Phoenix Sing 
Greenwillow, 1995 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-688-13612-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
Misha Edelman, one of the few Polish Jews to survive Dr. Janusz Korczak's doomed
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 97
orphanage in the Warsaw Ghetto, recounts what happened afterwards in this se-
quel to Shadow ofthe Wall (BCCB 5/90). Written many years later as an overture
to his alienated stepson, the story has an intensity undiluted by either the stepson's
occasional outbursts in letters to a girlfriend-which frame the narrative-or by
the kind of historical explanation that occasionally marked the previous book.
This is an intricate novel that compresses many aspects of the World War II expe-
rience into one individual's fate: Misha's relationship with the forest partisans
who take him in, their struggle to survive and their eventual decimation, his work
as a courier for the underground resistance movement, his capture by the
Wehrmacht after the 1944 Warsaw Uprising, and his life as a refugee after libera-
tion by the Allies. Laird is patient enough with the fictional development to ren-
der each situation credible, including the tragic deaths of the protagonist's comrades
and the tempered happiness of a bittersweet ending. It's a tribute to Laird's re-
search that she has so completely absorbed factual information into the depth of a
story. BH
LAWLOR, LAURIE 
The RealJohnny Appleseed; illus. by Mary Thompson and with
photographs. 
Whitman, 1995 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-8075-6909-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Spinning the sparse verifiable details of John Chapman's life into some fifty pages
of biography is a real challenge, which Lawlor meets with frequent "would have"s,
"might have"s, "probably"s, and "undoubtedly"s along with a heavy measure of
colonial and national period history. Even so, she paints a credible portrait of an
astute, albeit eccentric, entrepreneur who, despite financial setbacks, amassed and
maintained extensive landholdings. Lawlor debunks a few myths along the way
(Chapman never wore a tin-pot hat and he never went by "Johnny"), indicating
whenever possible how a legend may have developed and how it is inaccurate.
Period reproductions romanticizing Johnny Appleseed are supplemented by
Thompson's wood engravings, based closely on descriptions offered by Chapman's
contemporaries. A children's reading list, bibliography, and index are appended.
EB
LEVINE, ELLEN 
A Fence Away from Freedom: Japanese Americans and World War
II. Putnam, 1995 
[288p]
ISBN 0-399-22638-9 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5 up
As she did in Freedom's Children (BCCB 3/93), Levine here uses the transcribed
memories of Americans who lived through a difficult and crucial event, in this case
the internment ofJapanese Americans in concentration camps during World War
II. Unlike, for example, Jeanne Wakatsuki Houston's Farewell to Manzanar or
Jerry Stanley's IAm an American (BCCB 11/94), Levine takes a broad journalistic
approach, visiting thirty-five witnesses from a variety of backgrounds who lived in
several different camps. The research is impressive, and much of the history re-
lated here is new to children's books, such as the stories of the Japanese who lived
in Peru who were for all intents and purposes bought by the United States and
imprisoned, possibly with an eye toward exchanging them for POWs. The ar-
rangement of material, though, is confusing. Levine divides the book chronologi-
cally ("Pearl Harbor," "Life in the Camps") and topically ("The Littlest 'Enemies':
98 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Homeless Children," "Nisei Soldiers and the Fight for Democracy Overseas"),
and most of her respondents appear in several chapters, their stories split and dis-
tributed among them. It's hard to keep track of who is who. There's also an odd
imbalance in an otherwise comprehensive analysis of the internment: while many
of the interviewees speak bitterly about the placative wartime policies of the Japa-
nese-American Citizens League, no representative of the JACL's position appears.
Still, there is a wealth of material here and a host of gripping personal accounts;
appended documentary material is exemplary. RS
LISLE, JANET TAYLOR 
A Message from the Match Girl. Jackson/Orchard,
1995 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08787-5 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09487-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The stakes are especially high in this third mission for the Investigators of the
Unknown (see also Looking for Juliette, BCCB 12/94)-Walter Kew is receiving
messages from his deceased mother and is on the verge of discovering his true
identity. Although the theme of a child tracking his unknown parent is not new to
children's literature, it is seldom handled with such a successful blend of tender-
ness and drollery. The mystery is cunningly fraught with twists and uncertainties,
and Walter's touching tendency toward self-deception (he is convinced the statue
in the park is a medium for his mother) is more than matched by Lisle's comic
touches (Walter was left on the doorstep in a casserole dish, recently emptied of
Mrs. Docker's famous Chicken Wiggle.) An ambiguous ending will leave readers
arguing about whether or not Walter's mother is still alive, but that issue aside,
they will be assured he is content and loved. 
EB
LUSSERT, ANNELIESE 
The Christmas Visitor; tr. by Rosemary Lanning; illus. by
Loek Koopmans. 
North-South, 1995 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-450-1 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-449-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Part Baboushka and part The Giving Tree, this Christmas parable traces the moral
regeneration of the richest man in town, who finds the infant Jesus only after
sacrificing his own finery to clothe the needy. Simple in structure and folkloric in
tone, the message can be grasped by quite young listeners. (They may wonder,
however, why the kind-hearted wife offers a poor stranger her shawl saying "It is all
I have to give," when she drips with jewelry.) Twilight-hued, diaphanous water-
colors, although undeniably attractive, have a creepy air more evocative of Hallow-
een shivers than Christmas joy. A pretty, if unessential, addition to the Christmas
collection. EB
MCCUTCHEON, MARC 
Grandfather's Christmas Camp; illus. by Kate
Kiesler. 
Clarion, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-69626-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
"Grandfather and I can't find Mr. Biggins." Lizzie abruptly launches her narra-
tion of their Christmas Eve adventure into the mountains to "fetch the old three-
legged fool." Fruitlessly searching long into the snowy night, the pair bivouac in a
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 99
rudely piled igloo; morning finds the errant Mr. Biggins heartily breakfasting on
bacon and, much relieved, the trio rumble back to their cabin on a makeshift
wooden sled. McCutcheon guards Mr. Biggins' exact identity until halfway through
the story, but when Biggins does arrive-"a three-legged brown missile with a
jangling collar"-no listener will be disappointed with the close up of the pounc-
ing, in-your-face golden retriever. While the plot is simple enough for a pre-
schooler, the prose is sophisticated enough to catch the ear of an older listener:
"'Mr. Biggins!... You're a contemptible mongrel to be pulling this on Christmas
Eve! I've a mind to leave you to your own devices!'" Handsomely executed oil
paintings capture the frigid gray chill of the evening snowfall; pristine flecks on
Grandfather's checked jacket fairly drift off the page. This title will be equally
welcome as a cozy bedtime tale or a seasonal story hour selection. EB
MACGREGOR, ROB 
Prophecy Rock. 
Simon, 1995 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-80056-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
A body has just been found staked to the ground near Prophecy Rock, a funda-
mentalist preacher is luring Hopis away from traditional ways, and Will Lansa is
visiting his father-the tribal police chief--on the "rez" to learn about his Hopi
heritage. Sound like a Tony Hillerman mystery? Well, there are some striking
similarities, and like Hillerman, MacGregor has combined Native American myths,
authentic landscapes, and cultural clashes into a southwestern mystery with some
spice. As a crime novel, the book offers changes in viewpoints (including the
murderer's demented state of mind), shifting suspicions, and well-concealed evi-
dence that create a realistic atmosphere for a somewhat formulaic, if entertaining,
story. The novel is less successful with its young-adult contrivances; father and
son barely communicate except in cliched "lessons" ("I believe the Hopi can ben-
efit by the technology as long as we realize it's not a substitute for our traditions.
But if our values don't survive, we have nothing") and Will's character is flat and
detached, even in romance. Mystery mavens won't find anything new here, but
the contextual insights into Hopi culture and mythology are worth digging into.
HMW
McGUIRE, RICHARD 
What Goes Around Comes Around; written and illus. by Ri-
chard McGuire. 
Viking, 1995 
34p
ISBN 0-670-86396-3 
$13.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
A little boy is shown loitering nonchalantly near an open window, and we can
guess how a tiny brown doll fell into its round-the-world journey: "When he was
asked if he had seen his sister's doll, he said 'no.'" The map on the endpapers
outlines the doll's trip via box, boat, bird, and other means of transportation. In
keeping with the retro-style illustrations also seen in McGuire's last book Night
Becomes Day (BCCB 12/94), the doll's stops, as it journeys through Casablanca,
Cairo, Bombay, Shanghai, and San Francisco and some unnamed ports as well,
sound exotically old-fashioned. The people inhabiting the book's version of those
places fit in more with older conceptions than with modern sensibilities: we see a
snake charmer, a sultan, and Kachinas doing "a rain dance." The story highlights
one of McGuire's particular strengths; with a remarkably spare style, he creates the
illusion of movement as the doll hurtles, flies, bounces, and sweeps through the
air, returning at last to bonk the young boy in the head: "What goes around comes
around." SDL
100 
* 
THE BULLETIN
McLERRAN, AICE The GhostDance; illus. by Paul Morin. 
Clarion, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-63168-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
7-10yrs
In a difficult match between theme and picture-book format, McLerran takes on
the subject of the Ghost Dance revivals among the Sioux in the late nineteenth
century. Readers who don't know about the Ghost Dance will be as puzzled when
they finish this book as when they began; those who do may become impatient
with the cliches ("Oh, for the days of the grandfathers! Ah, the baskets filled with
pine nuts, the fish that leaped in crystal waters, the herds of buffalo and elk!") that
oversimplify what was a complex matrix of cultural, theological, and political forces.
You do have to wonder what this book is for: it's too vague and solemn for story
hour, yet lacks the historical grounding that older kids could appreciate and learn
from. Morin's paintings and assemblages, while sometimes individually striking,
add up to a generic catalog of Indian motifs; source notes for both text and pic-
tures are more inspirational than informative. RS
METZGER, LOIS 
Ellen's Case. Atheneum, 1995 
189p
ISBN 0-689-31934-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Picking up a few years after Barry's Sister left off, this sequel is narrated by Ellen
Gray, Barry's sixteen-year-old sister, who tells of the family's suit for malpractice
against the doctor who delivered Barry and, they believe, caused his cerebral palsy.
The courtroom drama, a genre not usually found in children's books, is quite
absorbing; Metzger is good at weaving tasty and intriguing bits of courtroom strat-
egy and gossip into the story, and the adversarial nature of such a proceeding
makes it naturally suspenseful. The book is less successful at depicting Ellen's
crush on her family's lawyer and her eventual attraction to the son of a family
friend, and her viewpoint sometimes sounds like an adult of the previous genera-
tion rather than that of a teen of understandable maturity. Nonetheless, the pace
and drama of the trial and the honest depiction of Ellen's protective love and
unquestioning responsibility for her brother make this a thoughtful and readable
story. DS
MILLS, CLAUDIA 
Dinah Forever. Farrar, 1995 
134p
ISBN 0-374-31788-7 
$14.00 
R* 
Gr. 4-7
See this month's Big Picture, p. 83, for review.
NAMIOKA, LENSEY, ad. 
The Loyal Cat; illus. by Aki Sogabe. 
Browndeer/Har-
court, 1995 
40p
ISBN 0-15-200092-5 
$15.00 
R 6-9 yrs
Too humble and modest to attract rich and important visitors to his temple, priest
Tetsuzan sadly watches his temple fall into disrepair and his cat Huku go hungry.
However, the funeral of a powerful lord inspires Huku with an idea that will raise
his self-effacing master to a position of respect: the magical cat secretly causes the
lord's coffin to levitate, and he doesn't release it until Tetsuzan is summoned to
"pray" it back down. The priest claims a reward just large enough to refurbish the
temple, which became known as Hukuzo-ji (Cat Temple), a site "you can visit... in
northern Japan." Listeners will find Tetsuzan endearingly naive, Huku charm-
ingly devilish, and the episode of the flying coffin a delightful twist to a tale that
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 
101
begins so gently and piously. Intricate black paper cuttings which overlay tinted
rice papers are displayed to advantage on spacious white pages and invite close
examination. Source notes, unfortunately, are relegated to the jacket cover, so
readers might overlook the fact that the tale comes from "a priest at the real 'cat
temple' in Japan." EB
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Ice. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1995 
199p
ISBN 0-689-80005-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
When Chrissa's resentful silences become intolerable, her mother, Lorraine, packs
her off to Gram's home to spend her eighth-grade year. There Chrissa toes the line
for her no-nonsense grandmother, begins to appreciate the serene beauty of Gram's
rural neighborhood, and searches for clues concerning her missing father-miss-
ing, that is, for Chrissa, since Mom and Gram clearly know where he is. Readers
will probably guess early on that Dad's in the slammer; the mystery thread of the
tale is less rewarding than the confrontation each of the three women finally makes
with the truth: they've allowed themselves to be emotionally manipulated by the
errant Nick, and he's just not worth it. The powerful simplicity of this story line
could easily stand alone, but Naylor weaves in subplots that are less successful.
Gram is beset by a pair of unscrupulous evangelists out to grab the family land,
and Chrissa babysits for young siblings who are stalked by their deranged father,
from whom the family has fled. Although Chrissa's daring and implausible rescue
of her charges (in an ice storm, pursued by the knife-wielding dad) supplies a
flutter of terror for readers to savor, it seems a gratuitously sensational addendum
to an otherwise involving family-problem novel. EB
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB, comp. 
The Tree Is Older Than You Are: A Bilingual Gath-
ering of Poems & Stories from Mexico with Paintings by Mexican Artists. Simon,
1995 
112p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-80297-8 
$19.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Nye, a gifted poet and anthologist, here collects a wide variety of contemporary
Mexican poetry and art into one alluring volume. Poets included range from the
famous, such as Octavio Paz, to the unknown, such as eight-year-old Jesuts Carlos
Soto Morffn ("A banana left/ at night/ on a plane// Since then/ he's been stuck/ in
the sky/ and we call him moon"-"The Moon, a Banana"). Entries range from
haiku to longer lyrics to short prose folktales; those originally written in Spanish
appear in Spanish and English and those originally written in Indian languages
appear only in English. The poems are generally elegant and eloquent, often richly
imaged and dreamy. Sometimes delicate, sometimes joyous, and sometimes shad-
owy, the art often demonstrates the eerie solidity of magical realism. The noctur-
nal and surreal cover will entice readers to look beyond the picture-book format,
and they'll be intrigued by the worlds they find within. Also included are an
introduction, notes on the contributors, notes on the folktales and translators,
indices of poets and titles in both languages, and a list of illustrations. DS
O'SULLIVAN, MARK Melody for Nora. Dufour/Wolfhound, 1995 
217p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-86327-425-0 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
It's 1922, during the civil war following Ireland's independence from England,
and Nora, fourteen, is a gifted Dublin pianist whose alcoholic father disperses his
children to relatives after her mother's death. Bitter about her loss and resentful of
102 
* 
THE BULLETIN
the Tipperary household she's been forced to adopt, Nora is drawn into the bloody
hostilities between the government forces whom her uncle favors and the Irregu-
lars for whom his younger brother fights. The details of this conflict and of Nora's
gradual adjustment to a new life are realistic, and the characters-including an
idiosyncratic musician who plays for the weekly cinema-are well drawn. While
the plot climaxes melodramatically and concludes didactically, the setting and situ-
ation will deepen the understanding of young U.S. readers interested in Irish his-
tory, particularly in that this period is less frequently represented than the
nineteenth-century famine or immigrations to America. BH
OUSSEIMI, MARIA 
Caught in the Crossfire: Growing Up in a War Zone. 
Walker,
1995 
[120p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8364-3 
$20.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8363-5 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Stating in a note that her experience as a childhood refugee from Lebanon gave her
a special interest in war's youngest victims, Ousseimi, a documentary filmmaker,
here looks at children in five contemporary battlegrounds: Lebanon, El Salvador,
Mozambique, Bosnia-Herzegovina, and in a subtler twist, Washington, D.C. Al-
though the writing is disorganized, sometimes repetitive, and needlessly preachy,
the accounts that Ousseimi has gathered speak honestly about deprivation, brutal-
ization, and, everywhere, death. If a calculus of atrocity can indeed be determined,
then the chapter on Mozambique's plight is the most horrific, telling of the "wolf
children," children brainwashed and terrorized into murderous service by the
RENAMO guerillas. While not showing us anything new about drug and gang
cultures, the chapter on inner-city life in Washington gains meaning from its con-
text. Black-and-white photos of many of the young people interviewed are often
melodramatically captioned but do what they are supposed to: bring the horror
closer. There are no notes nor bibliography; there is an index. RS
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
West by Covered Wagon: Retracing the Pioneer Trails;
illus. with photographs by William Mufioz. 
Walker, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8378-3 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8377-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
A present-day pioneer-reenactment society, the Montana Wagoneers, serves as a
referent for discussion of migrants' experiences along the Oregon trail. Patent
draws clear and careful comparisons between the relatively pleasant and easy week-
end jaunt of the Wagoneer families and the rigorous trials of the pioneers, high-
lighting such diverse details as the gear packed by each group, the advantages of
today's horses over yesterday's mules and oxen, and even the luxury of plastic
liners in contemporary rainbarrels. Captioned photos are crisp and plentiful; Munioz
frequently allows landscape to dwarf figures and landmarks, conveying the magni-
tude of space the pioneers traversed. Readers unfamiliar with the Oregon Trail
will find this an engaging introduction. EB
PATERSON, KATHERINE 
A Midnight Clear: Twelve Family Stories for the Christmas
Season. Lodestar, 1995 
212p
ISBN 0-525-67529-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Paterson offers a second collection of Christmas pieces (see also Angels and Other
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 
103
Strangers, BCCB 10/79), twelve stories in all. Most notable are the poignant "In
the Desert, a Highway," with its three oddly assorted Comrades in a Maoist "re-
education" camp, and the light-hearted "Star Lady," in which an ebullient Bible
schooler diligently bombards his neighbor with the Good News, until he discovers
he's at the wrong house. Settings are nicely varied and most tales (written for
Paterson's husband to read to his congregation on Christmas Eve) are accessible to
a broad range of ages; however, pathos and sentimentality suffuse the collection as
a whole. While probably more appealing as an annually awaited treat from the
pulpit than a silent read in print, this volume should be a serviceable resource for
Christian church and school groups, as well as family sharing. EB
PLUMMER, LOUISE 
The Unlikely Romance of Kate Bjorkman. 
Delacorte,
1995 
183p
ISBN 0-385-32049-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
During Christmas vacation of her senior year, Kate Bjorkman finally embarks on
romance with the guy she's had a crush on for years: her older brother's best
friend, Richard. The romance is at first complicated and then abetted by Richard's
glamorous (and, it turns out, platonic) friend Fleur; it's then seriously undermined
by Kate's supposed friend Ashley, who is actually a Machiavellian romantic rival.
Plummer, author of My Name is Sus5an Smith. The 5 is Silent (BCCB 7/91),
creates some memorable characters here and demonstrates again her gift for subtle
observation of interpersonal dynamics. She hints at incipient problems in Kate's
newlywed brother's marriage, explores Kate's gradual friendship with Fleur, and
implicitly compares Kate's parents' relationship to every pairing in the book. The
book is marred, however, by its deliberately self-conscious framing as a romance
novel in the making: the repeated references to genre manuals and comparisons to
classic romances don't point up the themes so much as interfere with the story,
and the momentum, always an important thing in a love story, is jerky as a result.
It's still a lively and often extremely funny book, and those who like their ro-
mances with a more speculative slant will enjoy it. DS
REGAN, DAN CURTIS 
Princess Nevermore. 
Scholastic, 1995 
[224p]
ISBN 0-590-47582-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Princess Quinn lives under the earth in Mandria, where all details of her life are
dictated by protocol and "Mandrian truth." She sees glimpses of the world above
through the "wishing pool," and is both thrilled and frightened when, through a
magic spell gone awry, she ends up on "outer earth" alone. Regan writes in the
third person but maintains Quinn's point of view, adding atmosphere by referring
to maidens, lads, garments, and goblets throughout. Quinn's puzzlement with the
foreign Earth customs, and her contemplation of the freedoms of Earth versus the
traditions of Mandria provide most of the novel's interest; the occasional magical
intrusion (as when a tree spirit talks to Quinn during class) into our normal world
is especially amusing. Unfortunately, the plot in other ways is an entirely conven-
tional teen soap opera: Quinn is attracted to handsome Adam, but his sister Sarah
is angry that the boy she likes, brutish Zach, likes Quinn better. There is no
explanation for the medieval clothing and societal structure of Mandria, and by
the time Quinn returns, she does not plan to assert herself any more than by dark-
ening her eyelashes. Though romance fans may sigh over the lovelorn Adam,
everyone else, fantasy fans included, will be left wishing the wishing pool had
taken Quinn on a more satisfying journey. SDL
104 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ROSE, DEBORAH LEE 
The Rose Horse; illus. by Greg Shed. 
Harcourt, 1995 
60p
ISBN 0-15-200068-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In 1909, a premature baby's greatest hope for survival is placement in the sideshow
incubator clinic at Coney Island, where being displayed pays for the medical care.
In this early chapter book, Lily is distressed at her baby sister's vulnerability and at
being separated from her mother, but she enjoys the sights and sounds of Coney
Island and learns from her uncle's family about their job creating carved and painted
carousel horses. Rose conveys the now-exotic setting strongly, working some real
people in with her fictional ones. She lovingly depicts the world of the new Jewish
immigrants, sprinkling Yiddish words throughout (defined in a glossary at the
end). Plotting, however, is minimal-the baby is born at the solemn time of
Pesach, remains hospitalized for the ritual counting days of Omer, and is predict-
ably released seven weeks later at the feast of Shevuos-as well as slight. The focus
on time and place overwhelms characterization as well, with Lily remaining two-
dimensional. Though the attempt at historical fiction for such young readers is
commendable, children generally want more action, less nostalgia. Mistily pretty
pencil drawings are spacious but provide more atmosphere than elucidation. SDL
Ross, RAMON ROYAL 
The Dancing Tree. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1995 
59p
ISBN 0-689-80072-X 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
This spare, first-person narrative by the author of Harper e-Moon (BCCB 9/93) is
a series of recollections: a trip when Zeenie was only four and beginning to sense
the alienation between her parents; two episodes in her twelfth year just before her
mother leaves the family; and, most pivotal, a visit to her grandmother Blanche,
who tells a story about a tree that seems magical in its protective power. The old
sycamore sheltered Blanche after her own mother died, stood as silent witness to
Blanche's wondrous dance with a passing troupe of gypsies, and finally saved her
life when she was pursued by wild dogs. The tale brings Zeenie close to her grand-
mother and closer to bearing her acute loneliness. It's a complex story in compact
format; the flashbacks are vivid but require a bit more sophistication than the
book's brevity may suggest. Readers will be rewarded, however, with a rich expe-
rience of intersections between childhood, adulthood, and old age. BH
ROTHENBERG, JOAN 
Inside-Out Grandma; written and illus. by Joan
Rothenberg. 
Hyperion, 1995 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2092-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0107-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Grandma is wearing her clothes inside-out and young Rosie wonders why she is
being so silly: "I may look silly to you, my little Rosie Posie, but I have an excellent
reason. Hanukkah is coming soon and I have to remind myself to buy enough oil
to fry the potato latkes." The rest of the book is spent in a question-answer format
that gradually enlightens Rosie about Hanukkah traditions while following the
bizarre train of Grandma's ditzy logic. The cumulative effect has a mild rhythm
that lulls the reader into forgetting what the point was in the first place-somehow
Grandma's sartorial reversal reminds her of family members, red hair, new pen-
nies, a silver dreidel, an old menorah, and back again to cooking oil-and the
convoluted progression of events takes the same joke to too many places. How-
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 
105
ever, the doughy abundance of the pictures add lively momentum; festive borders,
pastel scenes of cookery delights, and a gargantuan penny jar are rendered in a
homey, country-style folk art that portrays the classic grandma's kitchen-clean,
cozy, and deliciously inviting. And for those kids with hearty appetites, a recipe
for potato latkes is included at the back. HMW
RYAN, MARY E. 
The Trouble With Perfect. Simon, 1995 
170p
ISBN 0-689-80276-5 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Too short for basketball, rotten in math, awkward around the girl he likes-these
problems are all on Kyle's mind as he starts the school year. But these are dwarfed
by the central issue in Kyle's life, a father who periodically is replaced by "The
Stranger," who is drunken, belligerent, and impossible to please. Complications
add up when his dad's new boss, brought in to clear out "dead wood," has a son
Kyle's age who tries to win his friendship by shoplifting and cheating. With so
many difficult situations to sort through, the ending feels too neat, with justice
and/or happiness all around. Though Kyle does seem overly besieged, funny touches
such as the frenzied disorganization of his friend's house help lighten the tone.
Quick pacing and brisk dialogue (particularly with Kyle's older brother Brian)
keep the pages turning. Readers may also gain some insight into the often frustrat-
ingly passive role of a child of an alcoholic, as Kyle reasons out why he makes up
with his father after a drunken episode: "Because it's better than nothing, I thought.
Because it's a way of helping instead of hurting. Because he's my dad, and he
asked." SDL
SAY, ALLEN 
Stranger in the Mirror; written and illus. by Allen Say. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-61590-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
6-9 yrs
After his Grandpa is cavalierly shunted away (to where, we don't know), Sam is
alarmed to wake up one day to discover that he's turned into an old man. The kids
at school tease him ("Rip Van ... Wrinkle," laughs Sam's best friend Josh), his
little sister suggests he move down to Grandpa's old room, and "even Mom and
Dad think I'm somebody else." A wild ride on a skateboard convinces Sam that
he's still the same inside, and he wakes up to discover that it was all a dream,
maybe. While children may appreciate the core image-what if I looked in the
mirror and saw somebody else?-this is a lumpy, confused story that tries to go
into too mnany directions without enough development to make any of them co-
herent. The lines between fantasy, reality, and dream, for example, are vaguely
drawn to no particular point, and we don't know why we don't know where
Grandpa has gone. The full-page paintings, too, while demonstrating Say's cus-
tomary serene elegance, are stiff and too sober, exhibiting facial expressions that
are often at odds with the text. RS
SEMEL, NAVA 
Flying Lessons; tr. by Hillel Halkin. 
Simon, 1995 
119p
ISBN 0-689-80161-0 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
"Everything is possible ifyou practice.... Swallowing nails or flying," says Hadara's
neighbor Monsieur Maurice, a cobbler and the survivor of a Nazi concentration
camp. Unfortunately, Hadara takes his words all too literally and launches herself
from the top of the tallest tree in her father's citrus grove near their small Israeli
106 
* THE BULLETIN
village. This is a Chagallian novel of mystically connected scenes clustered around
the protagonist's relationships with her widowed, still-grieving father, a compas-
sionate boy who stutters, a woman who schemes to become Hadara's stepmother,
and the mysterious Monsieur Maurice. On the one hand, Hadara seems too old a
preadolescent to be confusing fantasies of flying with reality; on the other hand,
she seems poised on the brink of a precarious emotional state from which it might
be easy to slip and from which she seems to begin recovering after her inevitable
fall. The book suggests a great deal that might better have been developed to the
extent of Semel's Becoming Gershona (BCCB 6/90), but it is atmospheric and does
delve authentically into a child's inner life. BH
STANLEY, DIANE 
The True Adventure of Daniel Hall; written and illus. by Diane
Stanley. 
Dial, 1995 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1469-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1468-8 
$15.99 
R Gr. 3-5
Independent readers and even some younger listeners will find plenty of action in
this fact-based account of a fifteen-year-old's first voyage on a whaling ship. Sur-
viving stormy seas and perilously exciting whale hunts, Daniel is finally broken in
body and spirit by the vicious attacks of Captain Whiteside. He and a mate aban-
don ship on the Siberian coast, only to face illness, hard labor, wolves, and bears
before eventual rescue. The text, substantial for a picture book, sails right along,
and Stanley does a fine job of putting nineteenth-century attitudes toward whal-
ing into perspective. Her signature artwork is somewhat over-tidy for this rough-
edged story. The deck that "became a slippery mess of grease and gore" as the
whale carcass is processed could merit a Good Housekeeping seal, and Daniel's
cabin in Oudski is portrayed as a spacious and comfortable hideaway. In itself, the
overall design is crisp and appealing; atop each text page a medallion features an
image from Daniel's adventures or a map that shows how heartbreakingly far from
home Daniel is at that point. A postscript relates the demise of Captain Whiteside's
career, the few known facts concerning Daniel's later years, and the source from
which the tale is drawn. EB
STRAUSS, VICTORIA 
Guardian of the Hills. Morrow, 1995 
[240p]
ISBN 0-688-06998-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Pamela is upset when the exigencies of the Depression force her and her mother to
move from their comfortable Connecticut home to her grandfather's Arkansas
house. Pamela is one-quarter Quapaw Indian; her grandmother rejected Quapaw
life and ways when she married a white man, but local prejudices, in a legally
segregated Southern town, haunt Pamela as well as her mother. With the encour-
agement of her Quapaw great-aunt, who identifies her as the next Guardian of the
clan, she begins to learn the history and culture of her people. She grows increas-
ingly certain that the archaeological dig unearthing local tomb mounds will dis-
turb the spirit buried there, and pressure mounts until she finds herself reenacting
a tribal legend as she tries to stave off disaster. The realistic small-town setting
offers a slightly different look at racial prejudice, and the theme of the return of the
repressed past is a durable and resonant one. Unfortunately the book is overwrit-
ten and rambling, with descriptions and interpolated stories slowing down its
momentum; the portrait of the Quapaw has some authentic touches but bogs
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 
107
down in romanticized philosophy ("Blood calls to blood. The break tries to heal
itself. Life is all choice") and the fantasy of the legend, and it's not clear why the
adventure is set as a flashback from Pamela's twenty-sixth year to her sixteenth. A
beginning note offers a brief history of the Mound Builders and lists a few books
for further reading, but gives no source note for the tales within the book. DS
SWITZER, ELLEN 
The Magic ofMozart: Mozart, The Magic Flute, and The Salzburg
Marionettes; illus. with photographs by Costas. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1995 
90p
ISBN 0-689-31851-0 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Confessing in her introduction that, until a Salzburg Marionettes production, she
never saw a performance of The Magic Flute that matched the ideal in her head,
Switzer here tries to pass along the magic. She is variably successful: the book
begins with a biography of Mozart, then retells The Magic Flute using photos from
a Marionette performance as illustrations, and then devotes a brief third section to
the puppets themselves. The biography is the longest section and will put off
readers who came for the puppets; the lack of any illustrations in the book's first
forty-five pages will be a letdown after the theatrical cover photo. The retelling of
the opera is a competent synopsis, but The Magic Flute does not have the kind of
plot that makes a whole lot of sense on the page, and, excepting the Queen of the
Night's two famous arias, Switzer doesn't discuss what the music sounds like. The
third section gives some information about the history of puppetry and the Salzburg
puppets, but surprisingly little coverage of the workings or design of the puppets
themselves. While this wouldn't be a first choice for books about Mozart, opera,
or puppets, only the third receives anything like regular attention in children's
books (try Lasky's Puppeteer, BCCB 7/85) and used with a Magic Flute recording,
this could open some ears as well as eyes. RS
TORISEVA, JONELLE 
Becoming Ballet. Simon, 1995 
151p
ISBN 0-689-80289-7 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
For Alex's twelfth birthday, she gets a completely undesired present: five calves.
She had hoped that she'd be able to get out of her farming town for the summer
and study at ballet camp, but now she's stuck tending her new bovine charges
instead. She determines to enter the talent show at the county fair and win money
for dance camp, and with a little help from her sympathetic piano teacher, her
friends, her father, and even the calves (for whom her affection has grown), she
succeeds. The writing is sometimes awkward and inclined to gush and many of
the smaller plot points-Alex's maturation, for instance-are stated rather than
being developed. Toriseva evokes an atmospheric Minnesota farming milieu, how-
ever, with tuna hot-dish a dietary staple and the county fair the social event of the
year, and Alex's obsessive yearning for a dancer's life far away from the prairie is
convincingly and sympathetically portrayed. Young ballerinas-to-be or kids who
have their own problems with divergent dreams will appreciate Alex's struggle.
DS
VAN METER, VICKI 
Taking Flight: My Story; by Vicki Van Meter with Dan
Gutman. 
Viking, 1995 
134p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 
0-670-86260-6 
$14.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Vicki Van Meter's story from start to finish is a captivating whirlwind tour of her
life as a ten-year-old pilot. From Ground School (where sixth-grader Vicki is the
108 
* THE BULLETIN
only one who completes the homework) to her daring flight across the Atlantic
Ocean ("We couldn't go up, and we couldn't go down. And we were running out
of time ... at that moment there was a real danger we were going to crash"), Vicki
is an amazing kid. As the youngest girl ever to fly across the U.S., she has received
global attention and national kudos even though, as her father wryly points out,
"she may be the honorary Mayor of Oklahoma City, but she still has to clean her
room." Everything about Vicki is unassuming as she nonchalantly reveals such
details as how she copes without a bathroom at 10,000 feet. Included with Vicki's
funny and straightforward narration are quotes from family and friends, excerpts
from her flight diary, and information about planes and flying techniques ("Land-
ing the plane is probably the most important part of flying. After all, it is sort of
like crashing as gently as possible"). Here is a follow-your-bliss story, and Vicki
has accomplished what few people, adult or child, can claim-she found her dream
and tried her best to attain it. Snapshots, often amateurish, punctuate the text.
HMW
VITORIoNI, DOMENICO, ad. 
The Thread ofLife: Twelve Old Italian Tales; illus. by
Mary GrandPr6. 
Crown, 1995 
80p
ISBN 0-517-59594-X 
$20.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
First published in a different form in 1958, these tales, newly illustrated for this
edition, offer some old favorites ("Cenerentola") and some less familiar stories
("March and the Shepherd"). The style here is faraway without, being austere,
which gives a pleasing otherworldliness to the tales, but the momentum some-
times peters out at the stories' ends. Visually, this is a very pretty piece of book-
making indeed, with hand-lettered title pages for each story and swirly initial capitals
setting off the slender typeface; Mary GrandPr6's angular art has some of Rayevsky's
spikiness but exists in a ruddy and full-bodied world of its own. This would also
be a good source for individual readalouds of a dreamy flavor; it's too bad no
source notes are provided. DS
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Edward In Deep Water; ISBN 0-8037-1882-9; Edward Un-
ready for School; ISBN 0-8037-1884-5; Edward's Overwhelming Overnight; ISBN
0-8037-1883-7. 
Each book: written and illus. by Rosemary Wells. 
Dial,
1995 
[26p] 
$7.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
3-6 yrs
What a relief it will be for caregiver and child to meet a protagonist who is not
perfectly adjusted to new situations by the end of the book! Edward the Unready
is the frequently distraught hero of this series, and he is perfectly accepted by his
parents, who declare amiably after each fiasco, "Not everybody is ready for the
same things at the same time." It's a commonsensical fact, but one which many
competitive adults seem unable to grasp. The fact that Edward is a bear won't
preclude total empathy among young listeners who have decided that (a) deep
water and/or (b) school and/or (c) overnights (select one or buy all three) are just
not their cup of tea-yet. Nor do the simple story lines (Edward stuck at Anthony's
house during a snow storm, for instance) preclude witty lines ("'I was not ready for
overnights away from home,' said Anthony's father, 'until I was twenty-one years
old!'"). And Wells' warmly patterned illustrations, literal as they are, have never
precluded rich texture and expression. These are a step more complex than the
Max and Ruby series but equally sly and, at the same time, telepathic. BH
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 
109
WESTON, 
MARTHA 
Tuck in the Pool; written and illus. by Martha
Weston. 
Clarion, 1995 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-65479-3 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Tuck is a piglet with a problem: he's scared of swimming. This makes swim class
as much of a torment for him as it is a delight for his cheerful sister Bunny, who
splashes about with gay abandon while Tuck strives valiantly to keep his eyes and
ears from getting wet. When Tuck's lucky rubber spider sinks to the bottom of
the pool, however, he overcomes his fears to rescue his arachnid buddy and realizes
the water is not so terrible after all. It's more predictable than Wells' Edward in
Deep Water (reviewed above), but there's a sympathetic and concise aptness to the
text (when asked what part of swim class he prefers, Tuck responds, "I like going
home best") that makes the story ruefully endearing as well as readily understand-
able. The watercolor-and-colored-pencil artwork, tidily boxed on every page, shows
amusingly angular porkers who nonetheless possess a bit more texture and gravity
than their often cartoonish picture-book cousins. Even now that the dog (hog?)
days of summer have passed, this'll make a nice splash. DS
WHELAN, GLORIA 
Once on This Island. HarperCollins, 1995 
186 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026249-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026248-6 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 4-7
As the fort on Michilimackinac, the island at the confluence of Lakes Michigan
and Huron, falls to the British in 1812, islanders must swear allegiance to the
occupying regime or be exiled to Detroit. Loyal to the American cause, Mr. O'Shea
leaves his children to manage the farm while he fights with the militia. Apart from
natural concern for their father's safety, twelve-year-old Mary and her teenage sib-
lings cope amazingly well: neighbors are supportive, the farm is productive, sister
Angelique even nabs a British soldier sweetheart. That's the fundamental problem
of the story-it's hard to worry about kids who overcome adversities with such
ease. Some subplots involving the Indians (a love interest for Mary and fiancee for
brother Jacques) oversimplify the complex tensions and alliances among warring
nations and tribes and contribute to a too-cozy ending achieved without much
struggle. EB
WILLARD, NANCY 
Gutenberg's Gift; illus. by Bryan Leister. 
Wild Honey/Har-
court, 1995 
13p
ISBN 0-15-200783-0 
$20.00 
M 
Gr. 4-6
As a rare-books expert tactfully points out in an afterword, Nancy Willard's rhym-
ing story about the printing of the first Gutenberg Bible is entirely invented, but
this pop-up book has trouble even succeeding on its own terms. Gutenberg is
described on the first page as a printer "of modest fame" before he has actually
printed anything; his desire to gift his wife with a printed Bible for Christmas (a
fiction: Gutenberg was probably a bachelor, and his Bible took years to produce)
and subsequent epiphany about movable type will only make sense to those who
already understood the nature of the invention before they opened this book. While
the pop-up picture of a Gutenberg press is striking and reasonably accurate-look-
ing, most of the movable art is perplexing (in how the press works, for example), or
is trivial (Mrs. Gutenberg shaking her head in disbelief) in its aims, and, at least in
this reviewer's copy, the pull-tabs break or get stuck too easily. Although she's
110 
* 
THE BULLETIN
none too clear about explaining Gutenberg's invention, Willard sounds some nice
notes in her poetry ("They called the neighbors in to look/ five hundred years
before this book/ you're holding in your hand was born"); special effects aside, the
actual painting is stiff and literal. RS
WILLIAMS, KAREN LYNN 
A Real Christmas This Year. 
Clarion, 1995 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-395-70115-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Megan is twelve, and she's beginning to enjoy junior high and her first real friend-
ship there when things get complicated at home. Her multiply disabled five-year-
old brother, Kevin, regresses after wrecking his expensive hearing aid and glasses,
and without those Kevin is a whirlwind of angry destruction, putting strains on
Megan, on her younger sister Lisa, and on their parents' marriage, and making it
impossible for the family to have the Christmas tree they had hoped for this year.
Williams treats the family situation deftly and matter-of-factly, credibly depicting
Megan's anguished love for Kevin, her disapproval of her frustrated father's joking
about him, and her struggle with her peers' responses to her brother. The ending
is predictably but not unrealistically happy, with a cozy Christmas finale that the
characters have earned and readers will appreciate. An interesting complement to
Ellen's Case, reviewed above, or June Rae Wood's When Pigs Fly, reviewed below,
this offers a warm but unsaccharine portrait of a loving sister trying to help her
brother through the world. DS
WILLIAMS, NANCY 
A Kwanzaa Celebration Pop-Up Book; illus. by Robert
Sabuda. 
Little Simon, 1995 
14p
ISBN 0-689-80266-8 
$11.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Nobody is doing better work in the pop-up mode these days than Robert Sabuda;
here he lends his talents to a simple outline of Kwanzaa, its seven days, and its
symbols and concepts. Williams' text confines itself to brief definitions and expla-
nations: "Kwanzaa means first fruits of the harvest. On the first day we celebrate
Umoja (oo-MOH-jah) or Unity." It's the pictures that supply the pizazz. Bright,
bold, Eric Carle-style paintings leap into three dimensions as a boy lifts the unity
cup to his lips, a girl lights two candles in the kinara, or a gift box opens to reveal
a doll inside. As with his The Christmas Alphabet (BCCB 10/94), Sabuda here
demonstrates an understanding of the kinetic nature of pop-ups: making them
pop is half the fun and a great deal of the art as well. RS
WOOD, JUNE RAE 
When Pigs Fly. 
Putnam, 1995 
[240p]
ISBN 0-399-22911-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Buddy's parents work hard to make ends meet, but they love her, her older brother
Jim Bob, and her little sister, Reenie, who has Down syndrome; their affection
even stretches to include Buddy's best friend Jiniwin, whose neglectful mother
offers her goods instead of attention. Money finally becomes so tight, however,
that the family has to move out of town to the rundown old family farm. Buddy
hates the increasing distance, both emotional and physical, between Jiniwin and
herself; she hates the farm as well, until she learns a few things about a classmate
and neighbor, and a dramatic ending demonstrates the farm has its own contribu-
tion to make to Buddy's family. The story is periodically preachy and the plot is
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 
111
overladen, with additional threads about school-assigned egg-babies, Jiniwin's family
and alcohol problems, and Buddy's neighbor's struggle to make do; the final reso-
lution is also quite contrived. The central stories of human relationships, however,
are well-written and engaging, especially the story of Buddy's tender relationship
with Reenie. Wood missteps occasionally but is generally deft with her character-
ization, and Buddy and Reenie are vivid and memorable personalities. Kids who
appreciate a down-to-earth yet upbeat story of family life will enjoy Buddy's narra-
tion. DS
YORINKS, ARTHUR 
The Miami Giant; illus. by Maurice Sendak. 
diCapua/
HarperCollins, 1995 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205069- 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205068-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
6-9 yrs
Find the child who is amused by Semitic stereotypes and inside jokes about Miami
Beach, and you've found the audience for Yorinks' latest. Giaweeni, a Columbus
parody, sets sail for China but lands in Miami, where he discovers "a lost tribe of
dancing giants! The Mishbookers of Miami." Giaweeni takes giant Joe back to
Paris to put on display, but the audience riots, Joe is packed off home, and Giaweeni
goes on "to discover Boca." Without the narrative cohesion of Hey, Al! (BCCB 3/
87) or even the daffy absurdity of It Happened in Pinsk (4/84), all that's left is
shtick, most of which will sail right over a child audience. Sendak's paintings hit a
bit closer to the mark, with Mishbookers crammed onto or spilling off of the page,
a statue that flees the giant, and a tailor that takes Joe's measure from a ladder; even
so, few children will excuse a gaffe such as the brick dangling above Joe's foot when
the text clearly states that "the police dropped a brick on Joe's head." While chil-
dren will enjoy the boisterous pictures of big-guy Joe, the story will probably con-
fuse them, perhaps leading them to echo Joe's sentiments, "For this I gave up
bowling?" EB
YOUNG, ED 
Cat and Rat: The Legend ofthe Chinese Zodiac; written and illus. by
Ed Young. 
Holt, 1995 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-2977-X 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
The Emperor decrees that each of the twelve victors in the great animal race will be
honored by having a month of the new calendar named after him. Betrayed by his
old friend Rat, Cat finishes thirteenth after a valiant struggle and, unconsoled by
the sympathetic words of the Emperor, remains Rat's enemy to this day. Shadowy
charcoal and pastels on grainy ricepaper, together with white text on sleek black
space, tinge the tense action with eeriness. In several particularly effective spreads,
Young doubles the images to capture the animals' breakneck speed and strenuous
effort. Handsome design and execution aside, listeners are likely to be most in-
trigued by the opening roster of zodiacal animals (with written Chinese characters)
and enjoy comparing the brief descriptions with their own glowing personalities.
Although jacket copy refers to a "Chinese legend," there is no source note. EB
44r
112 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Sorensen, Marilou R. and Barbara A. Lehman, eds. Teaching with Children's Books:
Paths to Literature-Based Instruction. NCTE, 1995. 270p. Paper ed. ISBN 0-0-
8141-5292. $19.95
Twenty-seven articles grouped into eight sections offer an introduction to a grow-
ing trend in education. Educators and other professionals, as well as librarians
whose expertise may be called upon to support such a curriculum, will get an idea
from this overview about aspects ranging from underlying theory, methods of dealing
with recalcitrant administrators, ways to work with different kinds of literature
(poetry, history, informational books), and places to go for further information
and support. Veterans of the process may find a few helpful tips and references,
but the book will be most helpful (if occasionally dizzying) to the neophyte who
wants to start down this road. Each article has a bibliography of professional
references cited; those articles that mention children's books also have a bibliogra-
phy of titles cited (although editions and publication dates cited sometimes seem
arbitrary) and several have additional children's-literature suggestions. DS
Rudman, Masha Kabakow. Children's Literature: An Issues Approach. Third edi-
tion. Longman, 1995. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8013-0537-3. $34.95
This new edition of Rudman's book offers twelve thematically organized chapters,
each dealing with children's books on a particular topic (Siblings, Divorce, Sexual-
ity, Death, Heritage, Abuse, etc.). Each chapter includes suggested criteria (ab-
stract statements about what is desirable in a book on this topic), a discussion of
children's books (description of some concrete ways specific books address aspects
of the chapter topic), references to professional writing or sources on the subject,
and an annotated bibliography of children's books on the topic; also appearing
periodically are "Try This" boxes with suggestions to enable readers to analyze
their own feelings on a particular issue. Rudman's approach is strongly prescrip-
tive of a specific (albeit unacknowledged) ethos, and even those who agree with her
underlying intentions will be startled by her propensity for sweeping and unsup-
ported statements ("Most traditional books show females dressed in skirts or dresses,
even when they are engaged in activities for which this sort of costume is inappro-
priate"). Her discussions are provocative, however, and her choice of books is
wide-ranging, diverse, and thoughtful. The generous bibliographies are useful
sources; also included are appendices of scholarship on literature-based curricula,
professional writing on children's literature, literature-related classroom activities,
children's book awards, and publishers' addresses, as well as author/illustrator, title,
and subject indices for the books mentioned in the text. DS
NOVEMBER 1995 
* 113
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans-poetry:
Hudson
African Americans: Branch
Alcoholism-fiction: Ryan
ALPHABET BOOKS: Johnson
American Indians-fiction:
MacGregor; Strauss; Whelan
American Indians-stories:
McLerran
Angels-stories: dePaola Christmas
Animals-stories: Faulkner; Young
Art: Ehlert; Johnson; Krull; Nye
Asian Americans: Levine
Astronomy: Gallant; Kraske
Bears-stories: Wells
BEDTIME STORIES:
McCutcheon
BIBLE STORIES: Hogrogian
BIOGRAPHIES: Krull; Lawlor;
Stanley; Switzer
Books and reading-fiction:
Christelow
Books and reading-poetry:
Willard
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Metzger; Williams, K.
Brothers and sisters-poetry:
Hughes
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Hinton
Brothers-fiction: Bowler; Cuyler
Cats-stories: Namioka
Christmas-fiction: Paterson;
Williams, K.
Christmas-stories: dePaola
Christmas; Hogrogian; Lussert;
McCutcheon
Christmas: dePaola Mary
CONCEPT BOOKS: Bowen
COUNTING BOOKS: Bowen
Cousins-fiction: Creech
Cows-fiction: Toriseva
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Grant; Naylor
Current events: Ousseimi
Dance-fiction: Toriseva
Death-fiction: Mills
Disabilities-fiction: Metzger;
Williams, K.
Disney World-stories: Jakobsen
Dogs-fiction: Hinton
Dogs-stories: McCutcheon
Dolls-stories: McGuire
ESP-fiction: Howarth
FABLES: Young
Family problems-fiction: Grant;
Naylor; Williams, K.; Wood
FANTASY: Bowler; Hinton;
Howarth; Regan
Farm life-fiction: Toriseva; Wood
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Naylor
Fathers and sons-fiction:
MacGregor; Ryan
Fear-stories: Wells; Weston
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Faulkner;
Namioka; Vittorini; Young
Food and eating-stories:
Rothenberg
Friends-fiction: Danziger
Geology: Kraske
Giants-stories: Yorinks
Grandmothers-fiction: Naylor
114 
* THE BULLETIN
Groundhogs-stories: Koscielniak
Hanukkah-stories: Rothenberg
HISTORICAL FICTION: Bunin;
Hermes; O'Sullivan; Rose;
Whelan
History, U.S.: Branch; Lawlor;
Levine; Patent; Whelan
Holocaust, the-fiction: Laird
Homelessness-fiction: Grant
Illness-fiction: Rose
Illness-stories: Hafner
Ireland-fiction: O'Sullivan
Israel-fiction: Semel
Italy-folklore: Vittorini
Japan-folklore: Namioka
Jews-fiction: Laird; Rose; Semel
Jews-stories: Rothenberg
Kwanzaa: Goss; Williams, N.
Literature, children's: Christelow
LOVE STORIES: Creech; Mills;
Plummer; Regan; Whelan
Mexico-poetry: Nye
Mice-stories: Cowley
Minnesota-fiction: Toriseva
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Hafner
Music: Hudson; Switzer
MYSTERY STORIES: Lisle;
MacGregor
Mythology, classical: Hutton
Nature study: Gibbons
Northwoods: Bowen
Oregon Trail: Patent
Pigs-stories: Weston
Pioneer life: Patent
POETRY: Hughes; Janeczko;
Nye; Willard
Puppets: Switzer
Quakers-fiction: Hermes
Reading, aloud: Paterson;
Vittorini
Reading, easy: Cuyler; Danziger;
Hinton
Reading, family: dePaola Mary;
Goss; Paterson; Wells
Reading, reluctant: Haddix;
Naylor; Plummer; Regan
Religious education: dePaola
Mary; Hermes; Paterson
Rural life: Branch
Russia: Gallant
School-stories: Wells
SCIENCE FICTION: Kilworth
SHORT STORIES: Paterson
Sisters-fiction: Wood
Slavery-fiction: Hermes
Storms-fiction: Howarth
Story hour: Cowley; dePaola
Christmas; Faulkner; Goss;
Hafner; Hughes; Hutton;
Koscielniak; Lussert;
McCutcheon; McGuire;
Namioka; Rothenberg; Wells;
Yorinks; Young
Swimming-stories: Wells; Weston
TOY BOOKS: Willard; Williams,
N.
Turtles: Gibbons
Vacations-stories: Jakobsen
Voyages and travels: Stanley
War-fiction: O'Sullivan
War: Ousseimi
Winter: Ehlert
WORDLESS BOOKS:
Collington
World War II-fiction: Laird
World War II: Levine
Writers-fiction: Bunin;
Christelow; Mills
_vyo
DAVID COPPERFIELD
ABRIDGED FOR PUBLIC READING BY CHARLES DICKENS
ILLUSTRATED BY ALAN MARKS
"[A] creative abridgement done by Dickens for one of his
public readings....The fragile pen-and-ink drawings have been
flooded with watercolor and given a smudged, atmospheric
look. Marks zeroes in on the basic dramatic premise of each
scene-wet and dark exteriors, warm and dry interiors, char-
acters engaged in lively conversation or sending each other
meaningful looks. Marks's storytelling skills are further dem-
onstrated by the different sizes of the pictures, their distribu-
tion, and layout-on the whole, they evocatively conjure this
hearty tale, and will send readers off to the original." Kirkus
A MICHAEL NEUGEBAUER BOOK
AGES 8-12 / GRADES 5-7 / TRADE EDITION: 1-55858-45q-6, $18.95
"Prolific anthologist Hopkins has gathered 21 of his own
light-hearted poems... into an engaging collection
that captures the wonder and exuberance of childhood.
The simple verses express childlike sentiments on a
variety of subjects, from pets to favorite pastimes, from the
awesomeness of thunder to the quiet magic of the seasons.
Lessac's 
vibrant, primitive paintings are equally childlike
and enormously appealing. The title says it all-
Good Rhymes, Good Times."--SLJ
AQes 
4-7. 
$14.95TR 
(0-06-023499-7); $14.89LB 
(0-06-023500-4)
A New 
Resource 
Book 
by Lee 
Bennett 
Hopkins
PAUSES
Autobiogaphlcal 
Reflections
of 101 Creators 
of Children's 
Books 
(r~LL
)· 
$23.00TR (0-06-024748-7)
~ 
HarperCollinsChildrenSBooXs
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
Kik 
, 
Reiw 
pone 
hilshr 
Wekysa
'S.THE.
T, 
LLg,. 
J
Also by Aidan Chambers
DANCE ON MY GRAVE
A 1983 ALA Best Book for Young Adults
Ages 12 up. $5.95PB (0-06-440579-6)
fi HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
FAITHFUL FRIEND
-Wobert 
ZI. 
San cSoucir ilustraieod6y S•rian 7nýiney
* "By the same collaboration that gave us Sukey and the
Mermaid, this rich tale ... is filled with dark and glorious
elements that take shape in Pinkney's impressive scratch-
board-and-oil artwork." 
-
Starred, Booklist
"A folktale from Martinique tells the story of two young
men, one black, one white, who were brought up together
from childhood in the same house and were as brothers.
... [An] exciting tale of friendship." 
-
The Horn Book
* "Pinkney's distinctive scratch-
ets better
- Starred,
rs Weekly
6131-7
16.00
& SCHUSTER
R YOUNG READERS
of Simon & Schuster
Publishing Division
mue of the Americas
York, NY 10020
+ Kirkus Reviews pointer 
Publishers Weekly star '
BY WILL
WEAVER
"Billy Baggs is a painfully
shy 14-year-old farm
boy with a passion and
talent for baseball...
who, [when he] must
assume the responsibility
for the family dairy
farm, sees his dream
of playing summer
baseball disappear....
A sequel to Striking Out, this [fast-moving, engaging novel]
will be welcomed by teens who already know Billy, but it easily
stands on its own considerable merit."-ALA Booklist.
"The narrative pulls readers along, every event staged with
precision."-Kirkus Reviews. "Weaver combines wickedly sharp
wit with a love of baseball and intimate knowledge of farm life
to yield an emotionally satisfying tale."-PW.
Ages 12 up. $14.95TR (0-06-023588-8); $14.89LB (0-06-023589-6)
Also by Will Weaver
STRIKING OUT
A 1994 Best Book for Young Adults
Ages 12 up. $15.00TR (0-06-023346-X); $14.89LB (0-06-023347-8)
$3.95PB (0-06-447113-6)
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
01 E) *- 
A Qt 
. XT 
Vt 
& 1 nY 
10)
as 
r 
ree 
, 
ew 
or
I1
J 
E 
A 
N 
E 
T 
T 
E
S
e6o 
rlie
THE 
STORY 
OF 
CHARLES 
M. 
RUSSELL
Younrg e; orlie Russell fas o &ream. He wants to go west, to be a
cowboy. At fifteen, Charlie leaves St. Louis for the frontier, where he finds
his true home among the buffalo and Indians on the open range of the
1880s. And there he becomes a cowboy and a painter, but not just any
painter. Charles M. Russell is one of the great artists of the American West,
a painter who explored the frontier through his art and inspired others to
follow their dreams.
A "Stylized, slightly primitive characters and settings are rendered in a wholly unexpected
palette [to create] an effect that's both timeless and cutting-edge." -Publishers Weekly
* "This is a book [intent] on depicting American dreams and American history and
recording them both, and it does that superbly." -The 
Bulletin
Ages 4 and up * 0-15-200857-8 * $15.00
HARCOUR
'IBAC
W 
I 
N 
T 
E 
R
" 
Starred in School Library Journal
THE STORY OF THE
THREE KINGDOMS
by Walter Dean Myers
Full-color pictures by Ashley Bryan
An original fable about three kingdoms-the forest, 
-
ruled by Elephant; the sea, ruled by Shark; and the air,
ruled by Hawk-and how People, through the wisdom
gained by telling stories, came to share these realms with
the beasts. "In folkloric style, Myers has woven this tale that
demonstrates the power of wisdom. Bryan's jewel-toned
primitive-style paintings glow warmly. This appealing com-
bination of prose and artwork provides a strong motivational
spark for storytelling or creative writing"--SLJ
Ages 6-9. $14.95TR (0-06-024286-8); $14.89LB (0-06-024287-6)
Univrsity of llnois Prss
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
Rrums 
POSTAGE Gu•ANrEED
;· 
·~, 
I
· F"" 
-~~:l 
i I:-sr:;:.i.; ·
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
BCCB GOEs ONLNE
The University of Illinois Press has produced an online version of the Bulletin of
the Center 
for Children's Books for you to download and evaluate. This is an experi-
mental supplement to-not a replacement for-the print Bulletin, and it is avail-
able at the Bulletin' new World Wide Web site. We expect to add other features
to this web site in the coming months; look for details on the home page and in
future issues of the print Bulletin.
The BCCB web site currently includes downloadable issues of Volume 48 (Sep-
tember 1994 through July/August 1995) of the Bulletin and is available without
charge.
You may download any or all of the online Bulletin issues from the following
World Wide Web site:
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edulcollections/bccb/BCCBhome.html
This web site contains the issues of the Bulletin in Adobe Acrobat (.pdf) format,
instructions for obtaining the Acrobat Reader software (available at no charge
online), and a set of evaluation questions, your answers to which will help us in
determining ways, means, and advantages of electronic access to BCCB.
La-
~:
r
