T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
June 2015
Vol. 68   No. 10
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Claudia Nelson, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
June 2015
Vol. 68 No. 10
477  the BIg PICture
 
  Lost in NYC: A Subway Adventure  by Nadja Spiegelman and Sergio García 
Sánchez; illus. by Sergio García Sánchez
478  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
489 • By Mouse & Frog  written and illus. by Deborah Freedman
490 • Endangered  by Lamar Giles
494 •  Cuckoo Song  by Frances Hardinge
516 • Challenger Deep by Neal Shusterman; illus. by Brendan Shusterman
520 •  The Walls around Us by Nova Ren Suma
527  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
528  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2015 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Lost in NYC: A Subway Adventure by Sergio García Sánchez copyright ©2015 and 
used by permission of TOON Books.
June 2015 • 477
the BIg PICture
Lost in NYC
By Nadja Spiegelman and Sergio García Sánchez; illustrated by Sergio García 
Sánchez
What’s not to love about a class field trip? A day off. No textbooks. No quizzes. A 
fresh setting. Looser supervision. Unless, of course, you factor in the lurking anxi-
eties: who will I partner with? What if the group leaves without me? And where 
the heck am I, anyhow? Whereas class outings have long provided inspiration for 
picture books, the giddy nervousness that older kids experience when wrenched 
from their familiar schoolgrounds has been largely overlooked. Spiegelman sets this 
to rights in a crowd-pleaser of a graphic novel that embraces the looniness of silent 
movie comedies while respecting the stomach-roiling worries of kids embarking 
on the big trip. 
Pablo shakes off his helicopter parents at the gates of his new school on 
Manhattan’s Upper West Side, the sixth school in his academic career, thanks to 
Dad’s frequent job moves. The class greets him politely enough, but they’re focused 
on the day’s trip to the Empire State Building. As they discuss the NYC transit system 
with their teacher, Mr. Bartle, and plan their route, Pablo maintains a studied air of 
indifference, resisting classmate Alicia’s overtures of friendship—or at the very least, 
guardianship. She tries to help him read the transit map at the 96th Street Station, 
but he’s too wrapped up in his own cool to listen. Next thing you know, they’re 
separated from their class, squabbling between themselves, and then separated from 
each other. As the entire cast bumbles its way among local and express trains in an 
effort to reconnect, everyone learns a transit lesson—there’s more than one correct 
way to get from here to there in NYC. Pablo learns an additional lesson—maybe 
he could use a friend after all.
Writer Spiegelman is deft at sketching personalities through the eco-
nomical dialogue demanded of the GN format. Readers can sense the world of 
embarrassment pressing down on Pablo’s shoulders courtesy of well-intentioned 
but clueless parents: “Do you want me to come in with you?” “No! Bye!” “Are you 
sure?” “Yes, please just go away!” “Bye, little man! We love you!” Likewise, the strain 
between Alicia and Pablo, sorely mismatched in local street smarts, is palpable. 
“You dummy! We should have stayed with the class!” “I’m a dummy? You’re the 
one who dragged us on this train!” “Whatever.” Even curricular blitzes, delivered 
on the hoof by Mr. Bartle, ring true: “The [Empire State Building] has its own 
zip code. Anyone know what it is?” “It’s 10118!” “Wow . . . ” “I just Googled it!” 
It’s Sánchez’s artwork, though, that steals the show, imbuing the madcap 
adventure with visual humor while keeping readers off-balance and slightly disori-
ented in the labyrinthine underground system. Even seasoned comics readers will 
478 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
appreciate his approach to movement, changing up the conventional evocation of 
progression (through small, sequential panels) with more chaotic but stunningly 
effective single large frames in which characters appear in multiple positions and 
the viewer is directed along unexpected paths. Competing feelings of claustropho-
bia and heady excitement are pervasive, as pedestrians jam every available inch 
of space around the isolated kids, and even cutaways of their train cars zooming 
over a city map seem like airless tin cans. Also tucked within the cheek-by-jowl 
crowd scenes is a hidden mini-drama (loosely based on Sánchez’s own debut visit 
to NYC) featuring a camera-happy tourist who catches the unwanted attention of 
a policeman, who follows him around town. 
Comics are not generally distinguished for thoughtful end matter, but 
this title is a happy exception. Six pages of NYC transit history and Empire State 
Building information, illustrated with contemporary and period photographs, are 
included, as well as an annotated list of additonal print and online resources. Even 
the endpapers—a Manhattan/Brooklyn transit map almost guaranteed to baffle 
the uninitiated, and a stylish cartoon recap of the class odyssey—are too much fun 
to miss. (See p. 518 for publication information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
Ahdieh, Renée The Wrath and the Dawn. Putnam, 2015 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17161-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
By marrying a common girl from his kingdom each night and having her killed the 
next day, the eighteen-year-old Caliph of Khorasan has earned his reputation as a 
monster among his people. When Shahrzad’s best friend becomes one of his victims, 
Shahrzad offers herself up as his next bride, intent on taking his life before he can 
take hers. She manages to stave off death by telling the Caliph stories each night, 
stories that never quite end and thus must be continued the next night. Khalid, 
as she comes to know him, is not quite what he seems, though, and during their 
nights together, Shahrzad finds herself falling in love with him. Her quest then shifts 
from designing his demise to discovering the source of his obvious suffering, even 
if that means betraying the friends and family back home who still believe him to 
be a monster. Sumptuous detail of clothing, food, and the arid desert setting make 
for a truly immersive experience, enchanting the reader just as Shahrzad captivates 
Khalid with her stories. Unfortunately, the romance that develops between the two 
June 2015 • 479
doesn’t share that specificity and instead comes off as a generic retread of the good 
girl falling for the brooding bad guy. It’s also never clear why, despite many obvious 
obstacles, they fall so deeply for each other in the first place—other than the fact 
that they are both almost painfully attractive, something the reader is reminded 
of frequently. Still, once Shahrzad and Khalid admit their feelings for each other, 
there are plenty of satisfyingly steamy scenes, along with some angsty push and 
pull moments between the two for optimal romantic tension. A subplot involving 
magical vengeance and Shahrzad’s eventual leaving of the palace ensure that this 
tale, like one of Shahrzad’s, has not yet reached its end.  KQG
AndRews, TRoy Trombone Shorty; illus. by Bryan Collier. Abrams, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1465-8 $17.95   
R 4-8 yrs
New Orleans musician and band leader Troy “Trombone Shorty” Andrews recalls 
for young listeners how he got hooked on music. First, he made his own instru-
ments to emulate the local jazz players who paraded through his neighborhood, 
Tremé; later, he scored his own battered, secondhand trombone and learned from 
other musicians, including his older brother, who generously mentored him. His 
aspirations began at such an early age (thus, his nickname) that he sometimes “fell 
right over to the ground because [the trombone] was so heavy.” Never parted from 
his instrument, he carried his trombone along to the New Orleans Jazz & Heritage 
Festival, where his playing earned him an invitation from Bo Diddley himself to 
join him on stage. The storytelling is imbued with a touch of storybook glamour 
and generous humor, with the gleeful repetition of Andrews’ catchphrase, “Where 
y’at?” Collier’s vibrant mixed-media illustrations ably complement the text with a 
skillful melding of paint and photo collage that underscore the “gumbo” of street 
sounds and musical styles that influence Andrews’ works. In closing notes Andrews 
discusses his love of music and his commitment to New Orleans musical preserva-
tion, and Collier comments on the imagery within his illustrations. The audience, 
however, will be most interested in the trio of photographs, two of which feature 
a very young Shorty, handling an instrument his own size, and the final a portrait 
of the impressive man he has become.  EB
ARnTson, sTeven The Trap. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-547-82408-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
As the summer of 1963 draws to a close, seventh-grader Henry Nilsson and his 
three best friends, including his twin sister, Helen, find themselves on an unex-
pected adventure. What starts as the search for a friend’s missing brother becomes 
a metaphysical mystery when they discover a book that teaches them the art of 
“subtle travel,” which lets their spirits wander free while their physical bodies are 
sleeping. Their nocturnal explorations soon lead them to a local widow and her 
late husband’s dangerous enemy, who wants to use subtle travel to rid the world of 
kindness and diversity. After Henry’s spirit gets stuck in a trap, his waking self will 
need all the help he can get to uncover the secret behind the book to save himself 
and maybe even the world. With its entertaining mix of mystery, history, science 
fiction, and old-fashioned bike-riding adventure, this novel offers up a story that 
is both engaging and thoughtful. Henry is a witty, self-deprecating narrator who is 
relatably awkward and innately heroic, and his friends provide a diverse, if somewhat 
480 • The BulleTin
clichéd, cast that allows the novel to reflect on issues of racism and intolerance in 
a way that has personal resonance. The underlying message about acceptance and 
compassion is at times heavy-handed, but it never detracts from the narrative’s 
emotional poignancy. This novel is a strong choice for readers new to science fiction 
who appreciate the power of storytelling to change the world.  AM
AsTon, diAnnA huTTs A Nest Is Noisy; illus. by Sylvia Long. Chronicle, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-4521-2713-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
With this title, Aston and collaborator Long seem to have come full circle in their 
popular run of elementary nature books. The focus now shifts from the babies in 
their debut An Egg Is Quiet to the nursery itself. Once again, readers are directed 
to consider not only young birds but also fish, reptiles, and even a mammal who 
begin life within an egg, nestled in a, well, nest. Organization is free form, but 
within each themed double-page spread there are aspects of nests to compare (e.g., 
size from three inches to thirty-six feet; material from paper to pebbles to bubbles) 
and fascinating info nuggets to enjoy (“peculiar” nests may be made of interlocked 
army ants or swiftlet saliva; the kingfisher risks his life crashing headlong into a 
termite hill he hopes to “adopt” as a nest). The intricacy and textural variety of 
nests displays Long’s artistic skill to advantage, and despite a couple of visual slips 
(the orangutan nest appears pages before it’s introduced in the text, and the mea-
surements of the tiny hummingbird and massive scrubfowl nests are not clearly 
delineated), illustrations are a delight even viewed apart from the text. As an added 
bonus, separate spreads of nests and their transient residents appear toward the front 
and back of the volume, offering the nature lovers an entertaining self-quiz.  EB
BAkeR, MATThew If You Find This. Little, 2015 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24008-6 $17.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24010-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
When his elderly grandfather is released from prison and comes to live with Nicho-
las and his mother, Nicholas is intrigued by the man’s stories of hidden heirlooms 
and mysterious maps. Though his mother dismisses these claims, Nicholas feels 
compelled to seek out the truth—and, hopefully, much needed fortune. It’s a race 
against time, as their house is up for sale (Nicholas’ dad is already in Michigan’s 
Upper Peninsula trying to find work), and, with it, the backyard tree planted to 
commemorate his stillborn younger brother. Nicholas’ conversations with this tree 
provide some of the most beautiful moments of this novel. Baker paints a poignant 
picture of a sad, lonely boy, isolated from his peers due to his constantly associat-
ing his surroundings with numbers and music, and isolated from his parents due 
to strains of life and circumstance. Though the use of italicized subscript musical 
terms to describe vocal quality can be distracting, Nicholas’ melodic yet melancholic 
narration beautifully captures pain and sadness and hope. Ultimately, the writing 
here is as sophisticated as Nicholas’ way of thinking; this is a book of insight and 
treasures for those tweens with spirits old enough to discover them.  AA
June 2015 • 481
BAllieTT, Blue Pieces and Players. Scholastic, 2015 306p
ISBN 978-0-545-29990-9 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
When a museum in Chicago suffers a bizarre theft, Petra, Calder, and Tommy 
eventually manage to get on the case, and elderly Mrs. Sharpe, their acquaintance 
from Chasing Vermeer (BCCB 7/04) teams them up with Zoomy (from The Danger 
Box, BCCB 11/10) and Early (from Hold Fast, BCCB 9/13). The five kids turn 
their love of numbers, patterns, and art to the case, discovering a web of intrigue 
and enmity between museum trustees that might be relevant to the theft. There’s 
a supernatural angle as well, as they each dream of an individual missing artwork 
that’s clearly sending them a message, and Sarah Chase Farmer, the museum’s 
founder, seems to be benignly haunting the museum. The love of art again shines 
through Balliett’s writing, with intriguing references to and detailed description of 
the missing works, and the museum (based on Boston’s Isabella Stewart Gardner 
Museum) is evocatively depicted. Characterization is perfunctory, though, so read-
ers who haven’t met all the kids before won’t get much sense of them here, and 
the writing is uneven, with some awkward showing instead of telling. While Mrs. 
Farmer’s ghost is pleasing, the supernatural elements are too convenient, with the 
kids given answers more often than they find them, which overshadows their decod-
ing skills. Fans of Balliett’s earlier works will be pleased to see her characters meet, 
though, and they’ll be glad to see beloved artwork returned to its proper place.  DS
BARTon, ChRis The Amazing Age of John Roy Lynch; illus. by Don Tate. Eerd-
mans, 2015 48p
ISBN 978-0-8028-5379-0 $17.00   
Ad Gr. 3-5
John Roy Lynch, son of an Irish overseer and a slave, lost his first shot at emancipa-
tion when his father died and the man to whom he’d entrusted his wishes failed 
to manumit John Roy and his family. Nor did John Roy consider the end of the 
Civil War as the beginning of his personal freedom: “It came instead when he sold 
a chicken for a dime to a Yankee soldier and bought himself a boat ride across the 
river back to Natchez.” There the sixteen-year-old would quickly improve his for-
tune, expand his meager education, and assume a role in Reconstruction politics. In 
1868 he became a justice of the peace at twenty-one; a year later he was elected to 
the Mississippi House of Representatives, becoming Speaker two years later. Then 
it was on to the U.S. House, where he served for two terms, championing a civil 
rights bill that became law but wasn’t enforced. As the title implies and Barton’s 
closing note affirms, this is as much about the era of Reconstruction as the remark-
able man who experienced both its promise and its ultimate dissolution. Readers, 
however, are bound to be somewhat disappointed that Barton’s account stops 
abruptly after Reconstruction, with only the sketchiest of information included in 
an appended timeline to describe the subsequent life of a very interesting subject. 
Nonetheless, the storytelling is spirited and Tate’s line and watercolor illustrations 
are lighthearted yet respectful. This title makes a useful contribution to a period 
of American history largely unexplored in picture-book format, and it might pair 
well with Nelson’s Bad News for Outlaws (BCCB 1/10), another story of a former 
slave’s rise to lawman.  EB
482 • The BulleTin
BeAufRAnd, M. J. The Rise and Fall of the Gallivanters. Amulet/Abrams, 
2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1495-5 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
1980s Portland seems overrun with darkness to eighteen-year-old punk-rocker 
Noah, what with girls disappearing from the streets at the hands of a serial killer, 
his best friend Evan’s unexplained failing health, and the haunting memories of his 
own violent childhood. Happy to distract himself, Noah turns his focus to reuniting 
his band, the Gallivanters, with the help of a mysterious, and possibly imaginary, 
Bowie-lookalike lead singer, Ziggy. Noah also finds himself drawn to the neighbor-
hood where the girls go missing, and he’s compelled to solve the case and catch the 
killer. Then a big break for his band brings his two distractions crashing together: 
lead suspect, creepy German brewer Jurgen Pfeffer, hosts a band competition, and 
the Gallivanters make the cut. A triumphant night that sees the band confronting 
a killer and emerging as rock stars can’t put off Noah’s personal darkness, though, 
and he is forced to face the unavoidable. This gripping, emotional mystery is 
also a compelling coming of age narrative. Noah springs from the pages in all his 
dysfunctional glory, a well-drawn teen struggling to overcome self-absorption and 
trauma in the face of fear and loss. Observant readers will likely solve the mystery 
early, but there are plenty of other surprises along the way. Part serial-killer thriller, 
part abuse-survivor tale, part friend-with-cancer tearjerker, the novel at times takes 
on too much, but readers looking for a character-driven story with plenty of plot 
and heart will find a lot to love here.  AM
BRooks, Jen In a World Just Right. Simon, 2015 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1660-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1662-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
After surviving a plane crash that killed his family years ago, eighteen-year-old 
Jonathan Aubrey discovered he had a gift to make alternate worlds that he can 
slip in and out of at will. The most significant alternate realm is Kylie-Simms-is-
my-girlfriend, a reality-based world where his scars from the accident don’t matter 
and popular Kylie is in love with him. The worlds have always been completely 
separate from each other and from reality, so he’s a little weirded out one day when 
real-world Kylie notices him and alternate-world Kylie asks for space; it seems that 
the two are merging, and it’s adversely affecting both Kylies’ mental health. As he 
finds out more, he realizes that creating and controlling fantasy beings who must 
behave the way he wants them to may not be entirely ethical. While readers may 
have lingering questions about the physics of Jonathan’s worlds, they will cycle 
through sympathy and moral uncertainty as he confronts his deepening understand-
ing of what he has done and what he now must do. Moreover, they will appreciate 
Brooks’ pacing as she slowly brings both Jonathan and the reader to the knowledge 
that something is not right in this paranormal romance, so that the reveal is both 
unexpected and exactly what they suspected all along. Jonathan is both profoundly 
sad and profoundly boy in his struggle with what it means to be a good person 
when your moral compass has been shattered and you are left with the power to 
be your own god. Readers will find multiple points for empathy and reflection in 
this intriguing take on what-if.  KC
June 2015 • 483
BRooks, kevin The Bunker Diary. Carolrhoda Lab, 2015 260p
ISBN 978-1-4677-5420-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
A runaway from his posh boarding school, Linus has been on the streets in Lon-
don for months when he’s abducted and rendered unconscious, waking up to find 
himself in a self-contained, thick-walled bunker, dense with hidden cameras and 
microphones, whose only access is through an elevator (with controls accessible 
only on the other end). Five more people (one for each small room in the bunker) 
arrive in turn: perceptive nine-year-old Jenny; glamorous and shallow twentysome-
thing Anja; tough ex-junkie Fred; slimy management consultant Bird; and elderly 
philosopher Russell. As days go by, food, rewards, and sometimes punishments 
and mind games are delivered to the six via the lift and they become increasingly 
desperate to escape this madman-created captivity; meanwhile, Linus writes his 
experience in one of the few items allotted to them, his notebook. The plot is 
strongly reminiscent of Sleator’s classic House of Stairs (BCCB 11/74), but British 
author Brooks (Candy, BCCB 2/05, etc.), who won the Carnegie Medal for this 
title, brings his own disturbing take to the premise; where Sleator was cool and 
clinical, Brooks is messy, angry, and nihilistic. Characterization of the inhabitants 
isn’t always deep, but they’re there to be types, and the focus on their various re-
sponses to the situation is gripping. The mystery behind their tormentor’s identity 
simmers in the background, but the group’s desperate attempts to find a way out 
and their increasing dissolution are more significant, savage, and shocking, placing 
the reader along with their mad captor in watching these people’s road to destruc-
tion. There’s no easy out or absolution, but that’s going to interest readers with 
horror-story tolerance; if you’re looking for discussion, introduce this along with 
Foucault’s concept of the panopticon, or merely prompt students to consider if 
there’s a religious allegory here.  DS
CAloniTA, Jen Flunked. Sourcebooks Jabberwocky, 2015 244p (Fairy Tale 
Reform School)
ISBN 978-1-4926-0156-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year old Gill has an axe to grind with the royals: after her cobbler father 
designed glass slippers, Princess Ella’s fairy godmother began mass-producing them, 
driving Gill’s father’s business down and leaving the family in poverty. Gill considers 
it fitting that she steal from the royals when they visit downtown Enchantasia, but 
then she gets caught snatching a dragon’s tooth comb for her sister’s birthday. Her 
beleaguered parents cooperate with the authorities in sending smart-mouthed, fast-
talking Gill to Fairy Tale Reform School, a correctional facility founded by Princess 
Ella’s (formerly) wicked stepmother and staffed by other villains made good. As 
in any fairy tale worth its salt, evil lurks on the fringes of a tranquil scene, making 
FTRS neither as safe nor as reformed as it seems and putting Gilly and her new 
crew of new friends there—and the whole population of Enchantasia—in grave 
danger. Readers will recognize and enjoy the various fairy tales referenced here, as 
Calonita nods to movie adaptations as well as the original stories, and they’ll enjoy 
her sly incorporation of social media to provide important background informa-
tion and character sketches. With abundant, winking references, absorbing (if a 
bit unevenly paced) action, and wise absence of a happily-ever-after ending, this 
clever novel and its smart, endearing cast of characters will have readers enchanted 
and eager for the implied sequel(s).  AA
484 • The BulleTin
CoTugno, kATie 99 Days. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 376p
ISBN 978-0-06-221638-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 10-12
Molly might have screwed up when she slept with her boyfriend Patrick’s brother, 
Gabe, during a temporary break-up, but her real mistake was telling her author 
mother, who used the tale in a bestselling novel and publicly revealed her inspira-
tion. Immediately cast as the town slut, Molly disappeared to boarding school for 
senior year, but now she’s back for the summer, and no one seems to have forgiven 
or forgotten her transgression. Gabe is a surprise, though, as he reaches out to 
Molly, reminding her that he is as involved in the mess as she is, and telling her he 
has no regrets about being with her. She and he start a secret relationship that is 
as sweet as it is hot and heavy, but things get complicated when Patrick confesses, 
with kisses, that he isn’t over Molly even though he’s dating someone else. Although 
Patrick is behaving like a jerk, the difference between him and Gabe and her his-
tory with both boys makes it as hard for the reader to take sides as it is for Molly. 
This is a complicated, compelling summer romance set in a fully realized world 
with appealing secondary characters and subplots, including Molly’s discovery of 
her talent for business, Gabe’s hipster friends, Molly’s boss’ cute kids, and Molly’s 
path to forgiveness with her former best friend. These details and a whole lot of 
kissing make this one to stick in the beach bag.  KC
CouRTAuld, sARAh Buckle and Squash: The Perilous Princess Plot; written and 
illus. by Sarah Courtauld. Feiwel, 2015 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-05277-3 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-08015-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Sisters Lavender and Eliza both want to get away from their bleak lives (and their 
Black Death–obsessed grandmother) on the Old Tumbledown Farm in the Middle 
of Nowhere in the Forgotten Corner of the Kingdom of Squerb. Lavender is intent 
on being a fairy-tale princess and marrying a prince, while Eliza wants a bit more 
adventure as a slayer of dragons, destroyer of monsters, and all-around hero. Eliza 
does get to come to the rescue (riding their rather reluctant goat, Gertrude) when 
her sister’s attempt to find a prince ends up landing her in the dungeon of the evil 
and entirely ridiculous Count Mordmont. This gleefully absurd British import 
packs both witty wordplay (their family’s coat of arms is a literal coat with several 
sleeves) and potty humor. The scraggly-lined art includes several brilliant visual 
gags—Prince Kanye the Anachronistic makes an appearance in Lavender’s gallery 
of potential suitors, while Mordmont’s pantry is a tree sprouting underwear on 
its branches. Some of the humor may go over the heads of younger readers, but 
there’s still plenty of playfulness (various authorial asides, direct addresses to the 
readers, and notes from Sidney the Tree) to keep even the most reluctant audience 
engaged. Fans of Captain Underpants may find that fairy-tale send-ups can be just 
as giggle-inducing as superhero satire.  KQG
CRespo, AnA The Sock Thief; illus. by Nana Gonzalez. Whitman, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-7538-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
The target of young Felipe’s thieving habits on his way to school in his small Bra-
zilian town is a bit odd. Every week he swipes freshly laundered socks hanging on 
June 2015 • 485
clotheslines or draped over window sills, and he leaves a mango on the property of 
his victims. What he does with the socks is also surprising: he stuffs the first with 
newspaper, and then twists and tucks layer upon layer of successive socks until he 
has just what he and his classmates need for recess—a tightly packed soccer ball. 
This cheery little crime spree is bound to raise some ethical scruples, even though 
Felipe compensates the sock owners with mangoes and eventually returns the socks 
(seemingly no worse for wear) with a thank-you note. The closing line, however, 
should mitigate much of the concern: “What Felipe doesn’t realize is that everyone 
knows his secret and everyone is happy to help—and to eat the mangoes.” Crespo’s 
appended note explains that her story is based on her father’s experience in 1950s 
Rio de Janeiro, where hand-stuffed soccer balls were something of a tradition. 
Bright colors, rounded shapes, and the commentary of early-rising animals who 
witness Felipe’s pilfering (“‘Au, au, au!’ the dog woofs in Portuguese”) add to the 
charm of the tale, and a glossary of Portuguese terms “you can learn and practice 
with your friends” extends the fun. Provide a tub of thrift-store socks for an easy 
storytime program.  EB
CRossAn, sARAh Apple and Rain. Bloomsbury, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-690-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-691-0 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Apple has long wished her mother would return from America; 
Nana is too strict, and Apple’s also not thrilled about having a new stepmother and 
forthcoming half-sibling. Mum’s return doesn’t go as Apple expects, though: at first 
Apple is enamored with her young, glamorous mother who throws parties and lets 
her drink, but it’s soon clear that the woman is unpredictable and irresponsible. 
What’s worse, she brings with her Apple’s troubled ten-year-old half-sister, Rain, 
whom she never told anyone about. Mum hopes that a real sister will help Rain, 
who believes her beloved doll is real, and she asks Apple to stay home and watch 
her while Mum goes out for auditions. As Apple tries to fill in her mother’s gaps 
in care, her eyes are slowly opened to the reality of her situation, including the 
value of Nana’s love. Apple’s emotional journey is documented through poetry 
she writes for school but doesn’t turn in until the teacher gets hold of a poem by 
accident. These poems and the witty dialogue between Apple and a new boy, Del, 
who supports her in various ways, elevate this story above its rather hackneyed 
plot; Crossan’s ear is flawless in capturing the cries of a young girl’s heart. Del is 
the manic pixie dream boy that Apple needs in her doldrums, and while this guy is 
becoming a stock character, it’s one that’s easy to like. There is sufficient action in 
this character-driven narrative to move the plot, but the real draw is the language; 
give this to readers who enjoy literary middle-school fiction.  KC
dAwson, delilAh s. Hit. Simon, 2015 324p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2339-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2341-0 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Same financial meltdown, different outcome. In the scenario for this YA thriller, 
the bank bails out the United States government, relieving it of its indebtedness to 
foreign investments. Now, due to a clever bit of fine print embedded in credit-card 
agreements during the most miserable years of the Great Recession, Valor National 
486 • The BulleTin
Bank is clearing out its bad assets. Patsy Klein is among the first to be approached 
by Valor suits with an offer she’d be unwise to refuse: she and her mother, a cancer 
sufferer, will be murdered, or Patsy can take on a five-day period of indenture to 
Valor, during which she will make the same offer—kill or be killed—to ten other 
debtors. It’s a crafty premise for the teen assassin genre, despite the mammoth 
suspension of disbelief it entails. The plot thickens nicely as Patsy discovers that all 
her assigned hits are in some way connected to her personal life. Predictably, she 
falls for Wyatt, who takes her murder of his father with surprising good grace, and 
even joins in her government sanctioned killing spree. The problem, however, is 
neither the over-the-top plotline nor the predictability of the romance, but rather 
it’s the ease with which the two teens adopt the them-or-us justification for their 
actions, an attitude at odds with the good-kids-in-a-bad-situation image that 
Dawson attributes to them. A sequel must certainly be on the way, and with any 
luck it will clarify whether Patsy and Wyatt’s escapade will settle into a genuine 
nail-biter or a dark comedy.  EB
delACRoix, siBylle Prickly Jenny; tr. from the French by Karen Li; written and 
illus. by Sibylle Delacroix. Owlkids, 2015 24p
ISBN 978-1-77147-129-9 $16.95   
R 2-4 yrs
Jenny is having a bad day from the get-go (“Jenny doesn’t say good morning because, 
really, what’s so good about it?”), and no amount of indulgence or attempts at fun 
(including a trip to the fair and ice cream for dinner) will cure her grumpiness. 
Parents will recognize the contrary developmental stage at the heart of this short 
and simple story, and Delacroix’s pithy acknowledgment of a common toddler/
preschooler problem (“Jenny doesn’t know what she wants today”) is spot-on. 
Particularly refreshing is Delacroix’s declaration that “Jenny is feeling out of sorts, 
but she doesn’t want to talk about it. She just wants to be loved.” Short lines of text 
in a blocky blue font are printed on a white background on the verso, while the 
recto features a full-page, fuzzy-edged illustration in calm tones against a neutral 
background. The clean layout of the book lets the minimal text and the depictions 
of Jenny (in various states of peevishness) take center stage. The gingery-pigtailed, 
round-headed Jenny is amusingly defiant as she does handstands instead of nap-
ping, and then touchingly sorrowful as she cries at the bedroom door (after telling 
Mommy “Leave me alone!”). The small trim size makes this import (French author, 
title first published in French in Canada) more effective as a one-on-one share than 
as a group readaloud, but it will find plenty of use as a lapsit story; in fact, parents 
who find it useful with their preschoolers may want to pull it out again to share 
with their future middle-schoolers, after a particularly difficult day.  JH
desTefAno, lAuRen Burning Kingdoms. Simon, 2015 312p (The Intern-
ment Chronicles)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8064-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8066-7 $10.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Morgan escaped her small airborne island home, Internment, and its tyrannical 
king (in Perfect Ruin, BCCB 12/13) and landed in the kingdom below, but now 
the sixteen-year-old girl and her comrades have been taken into custody by local 
forces. Under glorified house arrest in the home of a ranking court official and his 
family, including studious son Nimble and quirky daughter Birdie, Morgan and her 
June 2015 • 487
fellow refugees struggle to find their footing on new ground. Morgan seems happy to 
bide her time, but best friend Pen is anxious to keep connections to this new world 
at bay, while princess Celeste naïvely embraces her new role as ambassador. Their 
new home is not the safe haven they hoped, though, because the country is at war, 
and the young people soon find themselves fighting for their own future and the 
future of the home they left behind. With the shift from the isolated Internment 
to the more conventional alternative-history world below, the series loses touch 
with many of its more compelling elements, but it still manages to tell a moving 
story. A new cadre of possible allies and enemies, including some truly intriguing 
ones, are introduced and brought to the fore, while Morgan continues to develop 
into a dynamic, introspective heroine, with Pen as her enigmatic sidekick. Though 
not as philosophical as the first volume, this equally intense sequel is still sure to 
please fans and its steampunk-esque scenery will pick up new ones, and they’ll all 
be excited to see where Morgan’s adventures take her next.  AM
doMinguez, AngelA Knit Together; written and illus. by Angela Domin-
guez. Dial, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-8037-4099-0 $16.99   
R 4-6 yrs
A young girl likes to draw, while her mother prefers to knit. The girl thinks knitting 
trumps drawing “because you can wear it,” so her mother tries to teach her how 
to knit. Her early efforts aren’t covered in glory, though, so the girl goes back to 
drawing until she and her mom come up with a new idea: “A collaboration! We’ll 
make something together.” First, the girl spends time thinking and trying out ideas 
on paper. Once she has her design (a sailboat against a blue and turquoise back-
ground), she and her mom gather supplies and the mom knits a blanket featuring 
the sailboat design, with input from her daughter. “It’s a drawing we can wear. 
Together,” the girl proclaims, while the last illustration shows her and her mom 
at the beach, wrapped in the new blanket. The clear trajectory of the storyline is 
satisfying and easy to follow; it’s also resonant with meaning for kids (and adults) 
who have tried, and sometimes failed, at creative pursuits. The girl’s misery at her 
knitting failure is amusingly palpable in one illustration, as she lies prostrate on 
the floor with the yarn and needles flung down beside her and her sympathetic dog 
looking on in concern. The art, done in gouache, tissue paper, ink, colored pencil, 
“and a dab of digital,” is as clean and crisp as the text, with the brunette girl and 
mother (wearing oversized round glasses) dynamically posed against backdrops 
featuring plenty of white space. Add this to the lineup for knitting- or art-themed 
storytimes, or use it as a springboard to a class or family collaborative project.  JH
duBuC, MARiAnne The Bus Ride; tr. from the French; written and illus. by Mari-
anne Dubuc. Kids Can, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-1-77138-209-0 $16.95   
R 5-7 yrs
With her basket and red sweater in tow, little Clara is taking the bus to visit her 
grandmother, and the bus ride (which goes through the forest) provides her with 
many social encounters with the various animals and people who share portions 
of her journey. While riding, she receives a flower from a goat carrying a bouquet, 
shares her cookies with a little wolf in a striped shirt, mysteriously changes seats 
on the bus (as do many other riders) when it travels through a tunnel, and helps 
thwart a foxy pickpocket in an overcoat. By the time she arrives at Grandma’s bus 
488 • The BulleTin
stop, she can rightly claim, “I have so much to tell you.” While the brief stream-
of-consciousness narrative in this French import is engaging, Dubuc’s softly shaded 
illustrations, with textured hatching and cozy linework, truly steal the show, comple-
menting and expanding upon the printed words. Careful comparing of the spreads 
reveals multiple mini storylines: the interplay between a family of young hedgehogs 
and a turtle can be followed over several pages, as can the sloth that seems to sleep 
(but who also somehow ends up changing places in the tunnel). There’s also the 
human rider whose face is always blocked by the newspaper he/she is reading, 
the headlines of which change to reflect the various characters that come and go. 
Further richness is added through the “Little Red Riding Hood” references: a visit 
to Grandma, a basket and red outerwear, an encounter with wolves. This is a title 
with which to spend some quality time, and it offers kids proof of the adage that 
it’s not the destination that’s important but the journey.  JH
edwARds, gAReTh Never Ask a Dinosaur to Dinner; illus. by Guy Parker-
Rees. Scholastic, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-81296-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 3-5 yrs
This story in verse offers many handy tips on animal-related pitfalls in your evening 
routine: you don’t want to ask a dinosaur to dinner (“Because a T. rex is ferocious/ 
And his manners are atrocious”), for instance, and you don’t want to use a bison 
as a blanket (“Because although it’s warm and woolly,/ You will find it is a bully”). 
But there are some appropriate animals, especially when you’re going to bed: “Stick 
to one teddy . . . and a flock of sheep./ And THAT’S how you can have a lovely 
sleep.” The absurdity of the featured situations is perfect for tickling young ribs, 
and the sleep-geared ending makes this a natural for a winding-down bedtime 
story. The text makes for a joyous and droll readaloud; the scansion’s a little tricky 
at times, but the verse’s variations add to its charm as it moves from repetition to 
exploration and from animal to animal. In the colored-pencil and watercolor art, 
Parker-Rees displays Christine Davenier’s creative approach to color combinations, 
highlighting the bison in teal and the shark in lavender; the glowing colors contrast 
sweetly with paler backgrounds, and there’s a comic touch to the depictions of the 
mostly wide-eyed animals that makes clear it’s all in good fun. The dark-skinned 
young protagonist is only mildly thrown by things like shark and tiger attacks but 
he bounces back readily. Sharp-eyed viewers will spot not only the patient teddy 
but also signs of impending sheep as bedtime gets nearer. Even with its bedtime 
theme, this is plenty lively enough for a library readaloud, and it’s likely to be a 
favorite of youngsters at home as well.  DS
floRiAn, douglAs How to Draw a Dragon; written and illus. by Douglas Flo-
rian. Beach Lane/Simon, 2015 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7399-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7400-0 $12.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
This fanciful rhyming guide offers helpful art advice for the challenging task of 
dragon-drawing (“Dragons may be large in size./ You’ll need lots of art supplies”). 
The book offers tips to keep your subject calm (“Soothe your dragon with a song”) 
and to get the best perspectives (“Draw your dragon’s wings in flight,/ but don’t look 
June 2015 • 489
down—and hold on tight!”). Established poet Florian capably anchors the whimsi-
cal scenario in specifics, and the second-person address adds humorous immediacy. 
There’s not a lot of plot, however, and the climax—the art ends up in a show—is 
pretty anticlimactic. The mixed-media illustrations have the artist’s usual translucent 
colors and rough, organic lines that give a childlike flavor to his draftsmanship; 
collage elements add further interest to the dreamily unstable backgrounds. The 
compositions are sometimes murky and complicated, however, obscuring the focus 
and lacking Florian’s usual punch; the foldout for the conclusion doesn’t really earn 
its special effect. It’s still an entertaining conceit and a lively verse, though, and 
eager dragon artists will appreciate the detailed diagram on the endpapers.  DS
fReedMAn, deBoRAh By Mouse & Frog; written and illus. by Deborah Freed-
man. Viking, 2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78490-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 5-8 yrs
Precise little Mouse is creating a story, drawing the setting and events at the same 
time as narrating. That’s until bumptious Frog bounces into the proceedings and 
takes over the story. Finally a frustrated Mouse shouts and explains Frog into self-
awareness, and a chastened Frog sadly sits the storytelling out; Mouse then kindly 
expands the storytelling to be a two-critter project and they create it together. The 
text, which neatly avoids committing to the gender of either of the friends, is almost 
entirely dialogue, and it’s a treat to read aloud. Frog’s ebullient exclamations are 
both silly and well timed, and audiences will snicker at some familiar references 
when the eager amphibian explodes into a page-long breathless monologue that 
hat-tips to Ferdinand, Don’t Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus, Chicken Soup with Rice, 
The Stinky Cheese Man, and many others. The mixed-media art, largely line and 
watercolor with gouache for extra oomph and pastel for extra texture, maintains a 
tasteful restraint in the depictions of the animals, even slightly cartoonish Frog. The 
scenes Mouse is describing and drawing provide the real energy of the art, especially 
when Frog’s excitement mounts and brings colored elements to the previously black 
and white interpretations. This is an endearing take on the complementary-friends 
story; make sure kids have a chance to look through the copyright page, endpapers, 
and jacket flaps for additional doings by Mouse and Frog.  DS
fReiTAs, donnA The Tenderness of Thieves. Philomel, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17136-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
A months-long investigation has yet to turn up the men who robbed seventeen-
year-old Jane at knifepoint and killed her police officer father. Jane would prefer 
to forget all about that awful night, but crime in her small New England town 
is a rarity, and her harrowing ordeal continues to be a hot topic of conversation. 
Much to the dismay of her tightknit group of girlfriends, Jane gives the town gos-
sips new fodder when she starts a summer romance with resident bad boy Handel 
Davies. Jane finally feels some of the numbness of her grief fall away when she is 
with Handel, but she also suspects he may have more secrets that she can handle— 
especially when she finds in his possession the necklace that was taken from her in 
that tragic robbery. Freitas’ dramatic prose gives a noir-like tone to the beachside 
setting, and the tension between the town’s wealthier and working-class residents 
490 • The BulleTin
lends a bit of grit to this romantic thriller. Readers will guess relatively early on 
exactly what Handel’s secret is, though, and Jane’s back and forth relationship with 
him is frustratingly banal. The best scenes of the book are actually when Jane is 
with her three girlfriends, as the girls dissect their own troubles with boys, support 
each other through various dramas, and offer one another grace and compassion in 
a portrayal of young female interactions that is refreshingly positive. There’s not a 
mean girl in sight, and the depth of these girls’ love for each other is clearly shown. 
It is therefore fitting that it is into the arms of her girlfriends that Jane falls after 
Handel’s betrayal, and the book wisely leaves her there at its conclusion.  KQG
giles, lAMAR Endangered. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2015 282p
ISBN 978-0-06-229756-3 $17.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
Lauren “Panda” Daniels, former bullying victim, is now a high school junior who 
devotes herself to her website Gray Scales, on which she posts snarkily captioned 
photographs of wrongdoers from her school. She sees herself as an avenging angel, 
delivering vigilante justice to the downtrodden by instigating social shaming against 
school A-listers who prey on weaker classmates. Her latest coup, breathlessly fol-
lowed by the Portside High chattering class, is a graphic expose of Keachin Myer 
and her affair with a teacher, after Panda digitally captures them having sex in his 
car. This episode does not culminate in humiliation, however, but in murder, with 
Keachin dead and the teacher apprehended as her killer. Panda is outed as the writer 
of Gray Scales by an online contact, identified only as her Admirer, who has up 
until now seemed nothing more than a friendly rival for photography skills. The 
tables are turned, classmates who once cheered anonymous Gray now shun Panda, 
and her Admirer has attacked her best friend, Ocie, and is now after Panda. Fans 
of Giles’ Fake I.D. (BCCB 3/14) will be overjoyed to find his debut success was no 
fluke. This title delivers another skillfully devised plot, supported by a fully fleshed 
cast whose identities (biracial Panda and Ocie, emotionally abused Keachin, unap-
preciated “Admirer”) complicate but do not solely define their characters. Second-
ary players contribute directly to Panda’s ultimate reevaluation of the sublimated 
motives that drive her vengeance and to her acknowledgment that she has hurt 
not just her targeted victims but her dearest friend, her parents, and herself.  EB
gRABensTein, ChRis The Island of Dr. Libris. Random House, 2015 242p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38846-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38844-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38847-4 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Billy is out in the boonies in a cabin that has no electronics, his dad and mom 
might be separating, and he hasn’t made any friends yet. Luckily, Billy is willing 
to dive into books as company, and he soon realizes that the mysterious library of 
Dr. Libris (owner of the cabin) might offer way, way more than just the printed 
word. Billy soon discovers that whatever he reads comes to life on an island a short 
rowing distance away, and he is there swept into dramatic adventures involving 
Hercules, Robin Hood, the Three Musketeers, and other literary characters. Along 
the way Billy makes a real-life friend and manages to keep his parents together, 
and he even fends off the money-hungry Dr. Libris, whose secret experiment on 
thought waves apparently set all of this into motion. Readers who don’t delve too 
deep may find the book’s concept quite entertaining, as Pollyanna “glad games” her 
June 2015 • 491
way through horrifying encounters and Hercules allies himself with Robin Hood 
after a quick power struggle. Unfortunately, the impending divorce and Billy’s near-
magical reversal of it doesn’t ring true, and the devices make his parents, who were 
initially flawed but earnest, flatter characters than they should be; in addition, the 
nefarious Dr. Libris is woefully underutilized. Even so, bookish readers will like 
spotting characters they recognize and may enjoy imagining which of their favorite 
protagonists they’d like to encounter in person. A list of sources at the end will lead 
curious kids to the books featuring the characters from the island, though some 
might be a stretch for this book’s audience.  AS
gRAu, sheilA Dr. Critchlore’s School for Minions; illus. by Joe Sutphin. Amulet/
Abrams, 2015 276p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1370-5 $14.95   
R Gr. 4-6
As a proud resident of the School for Minions, Runt Higgins has been waiting 
for his chance to be a Junior Henchman, and it looks like it’s finally come, if he 
can just beat out the competition. It turns out there are bigger challenges, though: 
the formerly unrivaled training school seems to be coming apart at the seams, and 
Runt suspects that active sabotage is taking place as one disaster follows another in 
only a few months. Runt’s kindness sometimes works against him, and his latent 
werewolf abilities don’t seem to be waking up despite the danger he’s encountering; 
nonetheless, he has a stellar group of monster classmates and friends who adore 
him and want him to be happy, and he’s got a sharp brain under all that naïveté. 
Grau carefully develops all her characters, and this rich cast helps to establish the 
setting as much as the descriptions of the school itself; elements of hierarchy and 
power structures emerge seamlessly from the way the characters engage with one 
another and respond to school changes. Boarding school fantasy fans will flock to 
this new series, and it is refreshing to see one that features such a kind, amiable 
protagonist. Pair this with Vernon’s Castle Hangnail (reviewed below) for two looks 
at kids who muster their skills, ingenuity, and grit to save the place they love best. 
Amusing quotes from school ads and various monster textbooks begin each chap-
ter, and occasional illustrations add humor to tense scenes. A map and illustrated 
character list help orient readers.  AS
gRey, JACoB Ferals. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232103-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232105-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
After his parents inexplicably cast him out as a child, Caw was kept alive by crows, 
with whom he is mysteriously able to communicate. He lives in Blackstone, a 
place that was ruined during the horrific crime wave known as the Dark Summer. 
Though it was believed those who caused the Dark Summer were killed or captured, 
disturbing hints that this may not have been the case are now surfacing eight years 
later, and Caw learns that he may be at the center of an impending battle. The 
idea of ferals who can communicate with and control one type of animal offers 
possibilities both disgusting (millions of roaches or centipedes) and cool (as with 
Caw’s snarky but loyal crows); either way it is an effectively memorable concept. 
However, Caw’s seemingly limitless innate abilities are implausible, even in a fantasy 
context, and they make it hard to identify with him. Nevertheless, Caw deserves a 
492 • The BulleTin
lot better than the life he has lived so far, and readers will likely be relieved to see 
him defeat this round of bad guys and consider a life that would include people, 
education, and comfort.  AS
gRey, MelissA The Girl at Midnight. Delacorte, 2015 [368p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99179-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74465-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39099-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Echo was saved years ago from the usual grim fate of child thieves by a member 
of the Avicen, who then raised her. The rest of the feathered, intensely private, 
underground-dwelling beings never fully accepted her, so Echo has kept her ties 
to the world above, using a secret home in the New York Public Library as a rest-
ing spot. When Echo is caught by the Drakharins, the enemies of the Avicen, she 
never expects to find them allies, but it seems that they, like the Avicen, have been 
searching for a legendary firebird, which is rumored to bring peace. The narration 
jumps between the two sides, offering insider views on both the Drakharins and the 
Avicens (though the latter is primarily described through the viewpoint of Echo, 
a human who, despite her years with them, is still an outsider). This counterpoint 
helps to establish the necessary depth to create a world in which no one is truly 
good or bad, and everyone should have been finding paths to peace rather than 
hostility a long time ago. This novel offers a bit of everything: cool species of not-
quite-humans who flit around the edges of humanity, both literally and in their 
interpretations of morality; a key access point through the snarky, street-smart Echo; 
and sharp drama that leads to a conclusion begging for a sequel.  AS
hAlBRook, kRisTin 
Every Last Promise. 
HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2015 277p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212128-8 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Though Kayla loves her small Missouri town, she flees to Kansas City in the after-
math of a post-party accident that resulted in the death of a high school football 
player. She was driving, but she wasn’t drinking; still, everyone blames her, and 
her disappearance seems like an admission of guilt. When she comes home for her 
senior year, former friends are hostile until Jay, the captain of the football team and 
the other guy in the car that night, openly acknowledges that it wasn’t her fault. 
He only does this, however, when it becomes clear that Kayla has no intention of 
talking about what happened, claiming that she doesn’t remember. Kayla’s narra-
tion, which alternates between the spring before the accident and the fall after, is 
too often flat, from her repeated insistence on the perfections of her small town 
and loving friends to the endless hints at what happened to precipitate the crash. 
Her dilemma of whether to come clean about the sexual assault she witnessed is 
quite real, though, and readers will clearly see how difficult it is to take action at 
the cost of destroying your own happiness. The arrest scene and revenge are more 
cinematic than plausible, but they do follow the story’s logic. Readers looking for 
justice may find that ending sufficient reward, and Kayla’s dilemma is sadly pertinent 
in contemporary culture.  KC
June 2015 • 493
hAle, shAnnon Princess Academy: The Forgotten Sisters. Bloomsbury, 
2015 324p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-485-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-486-2 $12.99   
R Gr. 6-9
In this final installment of Hale’s Princess Academy series (Princess Academy, BCCB 
9/05, etc.), Miri is prepping to return to her beloved mountain home and announce 
her betrothal to her childhood friend Peder when she is summoned by the king for 
an important task. In order to prevent war with a neighboring country, the king is 
offering up three of his distant cousins as potential brides for a political alliance, 
and he wants Miri to train them in the art of being princesses. The king’s cousins, 
however, live in the literal backwaters, and upon Miri’s arrival in the swampy area 
known as Lesser Alva, she finds three nearly feral sisters living on their own, a town 
that shuns them, and a host of secrets that could completely change the future of 
Danland and its rulers. Hale’s conclusion to her popular series offers a satisfying 
wrap-up of the previous installments’ themes of friendship, female empowerment, 
and citizenship, but it also offers a slightly more sophisticated and mature look 
at the nuances of political strategy. That’s appropriate, given that Miri herself has 
matured quite a bit; she has begun to recognize that good people are capable of 
terrible deeds and that forgiveness often comes in halting, sputtering steps. She’s still 
the same wonderfully outspoken nonconformist, though, and her verbal takedown 
of several members of the royal family is both powerful and satisfying. Hale once 
again manages to create a cast of female characters diverse in their qualities and 
distinctly individual, offering an inclusive portrait of what girlhood and woman-
hood look like. Readers will be sad to see Miri go but satisfied that she leaves on 
an ultimately happy and memorable note.  KQG
hAll, TiM Shadow of the Wolf. Fickling/Scholastic, 2015 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-4-545-81664-9 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82313-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
At seven, Robin Loxley is left alone in the woods by his father to fend for himself. 
When he returns to his village, he finds his family gone and himself an outcast. 
Living in the woods over the next several years, he meets young Lady Marian, a 
fellow lost soul who yearns to escape the gilded cage her father’s wealth affords 
her. As teenagers, their plan to finally run away together is thwarted by the sadis-
tic sheriff; a series of increasingly violent encounters between the three eventually 
leaves Robin blind and Marian in the hands of the sheriff. Desperate to save his 
friend, Robin calls upon the spirits of the forest but nearly loses his humanity in 
the process. Hall’s darkly disturbing revision of Robin Hood includes not a single 
merry man but rather a host of mostly terrible, often sadistic ones, with Robin 
himself alternating between beastly rage and bloodthirsty fury. Elements from 
Celtic and English mythology are effectively and creepily deployed, but as terrify-
ing as the supernatural creatures here are, the humans are much worse, with vivid 
detail given to various torture scenes and bloody fights. Marian and Robin’s story 
and their friendship, however, gets lost amidst much of the violence, and although 
the reader is given vague clues about a prophecy, the sheriff’s reason for pursuing 
them is frustratingly unclear and ultimately not all that intriguing. Still, if there’s 
a reader out there looking for the bloodiest version of Robin Hood they can find, 
they’ll hit the jackpot with this one.  KQG
494 • The BulleTin
hARdinge, fRAnCes Cuckoo Song. Amulet/Abrams, 2015  [416p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1480-1 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
After the death of her older brother in World War I, young Triss Crescent took ill 
and never really recovered. Her frailty seemed to please her parents and stave off 
their grief, so she continued to feign sickness, even as her behavior enraged her 
younger sister, Penelope. Now, however, an accident Triss can’t quite remember has 
left her truly disoriented, inexplicably hungry all the time, and trailing leaves and 
branches wherever she goes. Initially convinced she’s lost her mind, Triss eventu-
ally discovers the brutal bargain her sister made with a sinister creature, a creature 
bent on the destruction of Triss’ family unless she and Penelope can find a way to 
stop it. The English post-war setting, a time and place rife with grief but poised 
for progress, makes a fascinating complement to Hardinge’s take on the changeling 
tale, and she mines the tension between modernity and the old world to great ef-
fect. The family dynamics are thoughtfully and subtly played out here as well, with 
the Crescent parents’ stubborn adherence to the stiff-upper-lip approach to loss 
clashing with their daughters’ devastating need for comfort, a need that essentially 
creates a monster. Hardinge’s quiet but elegant prose moves the story seamlessly 
from an effectively creepy horror tale to a powerful, emotionally resonant story of 
regret and forgiveness. Readers who enjoyed the haunted atmospheres of Hartnett’s 
The Children of the King (BCCB 3/14) or Barraclough’s Long Lankin (BCCB 9/12) 
will find this just as satisfying.  KQG
hARkey, fAiTh Genuine Sweet. Clarion, 2015 277p
ISBN 978-0-544-28366-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Shortly after Genuine (pronounced “Gen-u-wine”) Sweet’s twelfth birthday, 
Gram tells her the big news: “You and me, and your ma too—all of us MacIntyre 
women—we’re wish fetchers.” Though this means that Gen can call magic down 
from the stars to grant wishes for others, she can’t fetch them for herself—a chal-
lenging caveat given her family’s grinding poverty and empty stomachs. With the 
help of Jura, a savvy city girl new to small-town Sass, Georgia, Gen tries to find 
workarounds to this rule that will allow her to help others while providing for Gram 
and for her chronically drunk, chronically unemployed widower father. While her 
first acts of wish fetching go smoothly, she soon finds herself overwhelmed and 
under attack for both the inherent and self-imposed limitations of her powers, 
and she must rely not only on unlikely friends, but her own best judgment and 
inner strength. Insightful, self-effacing, and sympathetic, Gen beguiles with her 
candor and ready supply of regional adages. Harkey adroitly and wisely metes out 
the folksiness, using it to add depth to her characters and create a sense of place so 
that Gen and her community feel both believable and likable. By turns funny and 
moving, this charmer of a novel recalls DiCamillo’s Because of Winn Dixie (BCCB 
6/00) while providing a unique exploration of the meaning of magic, self-worth, 
and relationships. Give this to readers who want a poignant story that, like its 
heroine, is genuinely sweet.  AA
June 2015 • 495
hAsAk-lowy, Todd Me Being Me Is Exactly as Insane as You Being You. Simon 
Pulse, 2015 646p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9573-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9569-2 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 10-12
In this book written almost entirely in lists, fifteen-year-old Darren is dealing with 
family changes since his dad moved out—his mother has become successful in her 
new business, and his brother, Nate, has left for college. Then his father drops a 
bombshell a few days before he and Darren are heading to Ann Arbor to visit Nate: 
his dad is gay. The thought of spending hours in the car having a heart-to-heart 
about his feelings spurs Darren to ask a stoner girl, Zoey, to give him a ride; instead 
they end up at the bus station and she joins him in his own getaway to Ann Arbor. 
While there, they drink, smoke up, and almost have sex, and Darren falls completely 
for Zoey. Because Darren’s life has fallen apart in any number of ways, a book writ-
ten entirely in descriptively labeled lists seems a decent method to regain a sense 
of control; the lists run the gamut from single-word items to episode-length event 
descriptions. The shift from the granular detail of, say, Darren’s pot-hazed sexual 
encounter with Zoey, to the effacement of great swaths of narrative time may be 
artful in highlighting how time speeds up and slows down depending on what’s 
happening, but ultimately the book doesn’t really justify its gimmick or its hefty 
page count; both plot and character arcs slump toward a banal and problematic 
conclusion. For readers interested in literary experimentation beyond the verse 
novel, though, this provides a new wrinkle.  KC
hAuTMAn, peTe Eden West. Candlewick, 2015 310p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7418-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
The secure enclave of Nodd is pretty much all Jacob knows, as he has spent most 
of his seventeen years there. Jacob has been told the outside world is evil, and that 
only by following the strict rules of Father Grace can he ascend to heaven at the end 
of the world, which, according to the cult, is coming very soon. Jacob’s small world 
is upended with a series of events including the new arrival of some jaded converts, 
a nascent friendship with a girl from the other side of the fence that Jacob patrols, 
and some disturbing changes in Father Grace himself, whose judgment is clearly 
becoming unreliable. Hautman draws on every cult trope out there: polygamy and 
teenage brides, end-days proclamations, self-flagellation and harsh punishment for 
wayward thoughts, and intense asceticism that cuts people off from all comforts 
of the modern world. It’s all intriguing, though, and characterization is effective. 
Jacob, genuinely torn between his faith and his desires, is a compelling character, 
and his experience will resonate with readers; they’ll worry about his fate, particu-
larly given the ambiguous ending where he must weigh his options with very little 
life experience, education, or guidance to help him. Readers who appreciate novels 
with a sturdy amount of moral ambiguity will find much to mull in this one.  AS
hAwkins, RAChel Miss Mayhem. Putnam, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25694-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Since the disastrous shake-up at Cotillion (in Rebel Belle, 4/14), Harper and her ex-
boyfriend, Ryan, have been using their newly acquired powers to protect Harper’s 
new boyfriend, David, who turned out to be a very powerful Oracle. They had been 
496 • The BulleTin
warned that the Ephors, a group of über-baddies, would try to either kill David 
or co-opt his gift, but what really scared Harper was how David’s oracular visions 
seemed to be killing him on their own, so she and Ryan have been dampening his 
powers. An Ephor summons David and Harper to a meeting, telling Harper that 
she must submit to a series of tests to hone her ability to protect David. The Ephor 
returns Harper’s best friend, Bee, who disappeared at Cotillion, to them, indicat-
ing that if Harper fails her tests, she will die and Bee will take over, a circumstance 
neither wants. In fact, what they all want is for things to return to normal, but they 
have different ideas about how to make that happen. Harper’s controlling tenden-
cies, as well as her faith in politeness as the most formidable weapon in a Southern 
lady’s arsenal, are tempered here, perhaps by her new relationship with David; it 
seems that with him as a kissing rather than sparring partner, her repartee is not 
as sharp. Additionally, more of the plot is taken up in relationship roulette than in 
deepening the supernatural angle, making the ending anticlimactic at best. Still, 
while not as full of snappy wit and winking Southern ironies as the first book, fans 
of Harper, David, Ryan, and Bee will want to know what happened after the after 
of the first book.  KC
heos, BRidgeT I, Fly: The Buzz about Flies and How Awesome They Are; illus. by 
Jennifer Plecas. Holt, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9469-5 $17.99   
R* Gr. 2-4
To paraphrase Rodney Dangerfield, “Flies don’t get no respect,” and the fly narrator 
of this humorous and informative title believes they are worthy of more attention. 
Through word bubbles and the book’s text, the fly describes the many qualities 
that make flies a species worth studying, from their humble beginnings (“Scientists 
called us larvae. Humans called us maggots. Our parents called us adorable”) to 
their metamorphosis, flight skills, and remarkable reproduction rate. Heos has a 
knack for selecting and presenting the kind of factual information that is both 
fascinating and revolting (in other words, perfect for middle-graders), such as her 
blithe declaration that the fly’s “mother tucked us into a warm, smelly bed of dog 
doo,” or that a fly will “throw up” on solid foods in order to break them down for 
slurping up with its “spongy mouth.” Plecas’ pictures, created using traditional 
media and Photoshop, also keep the tone light while still being instructive, as 
the bulbous-eyed, shaggy gray fly makes his case before a diverse class of attentive 
students. The fly’s apologetic eyebrows give him a charmingly imploring look that 
will go a fair way towards making his species less repugnant to youngsters. For 
maximum info-tainment value, pair this with Gravel’s similarly themed but less 
comprehensive The Fly (BCCB 5/14). An amusing glossary, a select bibliography, 
and a list of consulted experts are included.  JH
hodge, RosAMund 
Crimson Bound. 
Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 
2015 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222476-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222478-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
At fifteen, Rachelle encountered a forestborn (a fey-like creature) in the Great Forest; 
now she’s marked as a bloodbound and left with two choices: kill a human within 
three days or die herself. Three years later, Rachelle is still very much alive and us-
June 2015 • 497
ing the supernatural abilities gifted to the bloodbound to repent for her murder of 
her beloved aunt; as a member of the king’s elite, she stalks and kills the forestborn 
who terrorize the kingdom’s villages. Ultimately, though, her goal is to destroy the 
Devourer, the leader of the forestborn, but her plans are hampered when the king 
insists that she instead guard his heir, Armand, a man whom Rachelle believes to 
be a liar and a con while the rest of the court sees him as a saint. Hodge blends 
elements from “Little Red Riding Hood” and the lesser known folktale “The Girl 
with No Hands” to create an intoxicatingly dark story of love, lust, murder, and 
redemption. Descriptive prose details the opulence of the king’s palace and his royal 
court (bearing a marked resemblance to eighteenth-century Versailles) as vividly as 
it portrays the gruesome, dark power of the Great Forest (details include a house 
built of bone and mortared with blood). There’s also a refreshing flip of gender 
roles to Rachelle and Armand’s inevitable romance, with Rachelle as the brooding 
monster with blood on her hands and Armand as the innocent bent on saving her. 
Romantic, immersive, complex, and oh so satisfying, this will please fans of Hodge’s 
previous Cruel Beauty (BCCB 2/13) as well as readers of Rutkoski’s Winners trilogy 
(The Winner’s Curse, BCCB 3/14, etc.).  KQG
JohnsTon, e. k. Prairie Fire. Carolrhoda Lab, 2015 298p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-3909-2 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-6181-9 $9.99   
R Gr. 8-10
In this poignant sequel to the stellar The Story of Owen (BCCB 4/14), Owen and 
his bard, Siobhan, return to fight more dragons and try to keep humans safe. That’s 
an important skill in this parallel world that closely resembles our own but includes 
carbon-eating, city-ravaging dragons. Owen and Siobhan are still very close in this 
new volume, undergoing military training together and trying to recover from 
emotional wounds that will never really heal. While the last volume was about both 
Owen and Siobhan, this outing is focused more closely on Siobhan, in spite of 
her insistence that she is merely the bard; her vulnerability and wisdom stand out 
more than Owen’s quiet fortitude. Johnston isn’t afraid to write for a world where 
happy endings are rare, but there is such grace and dignity that heartbroken readers 
will likely forgive what was almost an inevitable tragic ending for some characters. 
Knowledge of the first volume will go a long way in adding nuance and background 
to the characters; more importantly, readers are likely to want to go back just to 
absorb as much of Owen and Siobhan’s story as they can.  AS
JohnsTone, iAn The Mirror Chronicles: The Bell between Worlds. HarperCol-
lins, 2015 511p
ISBN 978-0-00-749122-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 6-8
In this British import, a boy leaves his lonely life and enters the Other, a parallel 
world where he discovers that he is magical, and he learns that his mother may not 
have been dead for years as his uncle always claimed. Sylas may have been destined 
to enter the Other all along, as he is likely a key player in a prophecy that could 
unite divided worlds and his innate talents are extraordinarily rare. Even with the 
legion of slavering beasts out to kill him, Sylas is better off in the Other, as it is 
a place where he can start being the bold, kind, stouthearted boy he was clearly 
always meant to be rather than the stifled, silent, abused child his cruel uncle has 
turned him into. There’s admittedly little nuance to the plot, but Sylas follows 
498 • The BulleTin
the appealing and familiar path of the reluctant hero, working toward defeating 
the very bad guys while garnering help and knowledge from the impeccably good 
ones. It’s a sturdy fantasy and readers will undoubtedly sympathize with Sylas, and 
they’ll likely want to stick around for the anticipated two more volumes to make 
sure that he helps save both worlds—and ends up okay.  AS
Jones, pATRiCk Guarding Secrets. Darby Creek, 2015 89p (Locked Out)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-5801-7 $27.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-6038-6 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 6-10
        Taking Sides. Darby Creek, 2015 97p (Locked Out)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-5800-0 $27.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-6037-9 $9.99   
R Gr. 6-10
Jones’s new urban lit series, Locked Out, focuses on teens whose parents’ crimes 
and incarceration have sent their children’s lives into a downward spiral. Guarding 
Secrets, set in Anaheim, California, focuses on high school junior Camila Hernandez, 
who has spent the past ten years bouncing among relatives and trying to keep her 
family secret from classmates—her mother, once involved in a Latino gang, is on 
death row for the fatal shooting of a police officer. Appeals have been abandoned, 
the execution date is set, and Camila is torn between the fear that she may have 
inherited her mother’s propensity to crime and the impulse to find her way toward 
forgiveness before the opportunity is gone forever. The slight page count isn’t robust 
enough to fully support additional problems and themes, ranging from adoring 
her model citizen boyfriend, dodging the blackmailing attempts of a gang-banger 
classmate, shoplifting a new dress for her mother’s funeral, and seeking guidance 
from a parish priest. Taking Sides is more tightly focused and, consequently, more 
successful. Narrator Todd and his sister Tina witness their father stab their mother 
to death, but each attributes culpability to a different parent. Swept into the foster 
care system and separated from each other in advance of their father’s trial, the pair 
has a few opportunities for covert communication, and her father pressures his son 
to convince Tina to change her interpretation of the tragedy in her father’s favor. 
Both of the titles are quick reads, constructed with plenty of dialogue, controlled 
vocabulary, and a chronological trajectory that allows less skilled readers to con-
centrate on content rather than structure. The riveting plots, however, will have 
appeal well beyond the reluctant reader set.  EB
kiM, yeshil My Best Buddy; tr. from the Korean; illus. by Miguel Tanco. Nor-
wood House, 2015 32p (MySelf Bookshelf)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-59953-658-3 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 2-3
Going to his African school every day, young Kamau walks with his “best buddy,” 
Mamello, who is in the same second-grade class as Kamau. Mamello, however, is 
eighty-five years old, and he’s determined to get the education that poverty, war, 
and other events kept him from. This title is an entry in the MySelf Bookshelf 
series, which is an interesting collection of titles initially published in South Korea 
(though illustrators aren’t limited to that country—Tanco, for instance, is Span-
ish) and then published for curricular use in English under the guidance of New 
Zealand author and educator Joy Cowley (Stories of the Wild West Gang, BCCB 
11/12, etc.). The story here is somewhat generically African and it has a didactic 
June 2015 • 499
element, but the translation is nicely fluid despite the short sentences; the particu-
lars of Mamello’s life and his friendship with Kamau will be both intriguing and 
horizon-broadening to young readers. The mixed-media art is compelling, with 
stylized figures set against painterly backdrops and accented with collage elements; 
Mamello’s past is documented in thought-provoking, even slightly startling scenes 
about both the war and the coffee farm Mamello owned. Like many of the titles 
in the series, it’s not a neat fit for American curricula or tastes; the originality of 
viewpoint and attractive art nonetheless makes the series worth a look, and this 
volume has particular emotional resonance. There are no factual notes to contex-
tualize the story, but activity guidelines for learning are appended, and a readers 
theater script is available on the web.  DS
kiRBy, Jessi 
Things We Know by Heart. 
HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-06-229943-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
It’s been 400 days since the death of her beloved long-term boyfriend, Trent, and 
eighteen-year-old Quinn still hasn’t moved on. Having had contact with all the 
recipients of Trent’s donated organs but one, she illicitly sleuths out the identity of 
the teenager who received his heart, and she hopes that seeing him (he lives in a 
nearby coastal town) will bring closure. Colton doesn’t bring closure but complexity, 
however: Quinn ends up hanging out with him more and more and completely 
falling for him, leaving her racked with guilt about Trent—and about the fact that 
she’s hiding the reason for her initial interest in Colton. This is about as far as you 
can get from Chris Lynch’s donation story Pieces (BCCB 3/13); Kirby’s writing is lush 
and emotional, turning what’s admittedly a somewhat corny plot into a satisfying 
romance. The book effectively evokes the coastal scenery and natural wonders that 
Quinn encounters when kayaking with Colton, with some truly lovely moments 
enhancing the atmosphere. There’s a realistic depiction of the protectiveness Colton’s 
family and friends still feel about him, and a nice edge to the secondary characters, 
especially Quinn’s older sister, Ryan, helps fill out the cast. Like Ockler’s similarly 
themed and similarly enjoyable Twenty Boy Summer (BCCB 9/09), this brings all 
the poignancy and sentiment that a genre fan could wish.  DS
kiRBy, MATThew J. 
The Arctic Code. 
Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 
2015 [336p] (Dark Gravity Sequence)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222487-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222489-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
The Earth has entered a new ice age in this novel set in the near future, and Eleanor’s 
mother is a key scientist trying to find ways humans can survive. When Eleanor’s 
mom goes missing in the Arctic, Eleanor manages to get herself from Arizona all the 
way to the Arctic, where she flings herself headlong into conspiracies, blizzards, and 
danger to singlehandedly save her mother. Luckily, she gathers a few allies who spot 
her determination, and together they face a mega-company with a sneaky CEO, 
discover a secret Paleolithic civilization, and shut down an ancient extraterrestrial 
machine that, along with other machines around the world, has been causing the 
ice age problems. Eleanor is certainly plucky, and her fierce determination to save 
500 • The BulleTin
her beloved mother will resonate with readers. Unfortunately, her tendency to 
frequently teeter on the brink of getting killed because she won’t plan sufficiently 
and the necessity of her then being saved repeatedly wear thin quickly. In addition, 
the science is so baffling, even before the aliens come along, that readers will likely 
be pulled out of the story as they try to make sense of it. Even with those concerns, 
however, there may be enough excitement and quick-paced danger to keep read-
ers intrigued throughout this volume and for subsequent entries in the series.  AS
koRdA, leRRyn So Cozy; written and illus. by Lerryn Korda. Candlewick, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7373-4 $15.99   
R 2-5 yrs
Dog revels in the coziness of his dog bed when Goose shows up and wants to join 
him. Next Cat climbs in the bed (“I’d like to be cozy, too”), followed by a passel of 
bunnies, Mommy and Baby Bear, Goat, Snake, and even Elephant. When Mouse 
climbs up Elephant’s trunk to join the cuddle-fest, Elephant sneezes, and the fur 
(and feathers and scales) goes flying as all the animals (except Dog) flee from the 
now-flattened bed. Ready to make the most of the quiet, Dog happily makes room 
for little Mouse; the last page, however, shows that pair surrounded by all the other 
animals as everyone now dozes contentedly. The story is reminiscent of the appealing 
folktale “The Mitten,” and the simplicity and solid structure of the narrative make 
it very well suited to a toddler or preschool crowd. The large, attractive illustrations, 
rendered in gouache, pencil, and crayon, convey a cheery retro sensibility, thanks 
to the playful but soft nursery tones (accented by the starker black and white of the 
dog and by the brighter orange of the cat), the simple animal figures, the slightly 
textured and handcrafted feel of the art, and the matte paper. The increasingly 
crowded bed will amuse little ones, and the mouse’s pivotal entrance into the story 
is given extra drama from his solo placement against a two-page background spread 
of scarlet. The size of the pictures and the large, clear font give this additional value 
for group sharing, but it would also be ideal for a cozy bedtime snuggle session.  JH
kügleR, TinA In Mary’s Garden; written and illus. by Tina and Carson Kü-
gler. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-544-27220-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Even as a child, Mary Nohl likes making things with her hands; as she grows 
older, her love of art and art-making evolve as she transforms the grounds of her 
Lake Michigan home into an informal outdoor sculpture gallery, filling it with 
creations made from cement mixed with beach sand and studded with a variety 
of found objects. Her dogs offer loyalty and moral support as Nohl constructs her 
“creatures” from things washed ashore, and “Mary always had room for one more 
stone, one more shell, and one more friend.” This is an appealing and kid-friendly 
introduction to Nohl’s art, and creative kids (and collectors of natural objects) will 
respond to her impulse to make things out of the stuff she had at hand. Though 
this presentation of her life and her art is pared down and simplified for its young 
audience, an author’s note does provide more information about Nohl, including 
the controversy her art caused both during her life (she was derided and her art 
vandalized) and afterwards (some lakeside neighbors deplored the increased tourist 
June 2015 • 501
traffic). More photos of her actual artwork (only two small ones are included in 
the end note) would have been appreciated, but the Küglers’ softly angular mixed 
media art (which includes traditional watercolor, digital painting, collage, and 
vintage papers) does a credible job of capturing the friendly and slightly abstracted 
sensibility of Mary’s folk art creations. This could be paired with Ashley Bryan’s 
Puppets (BCCB 10/14) for a closer look at making three-dimensional figures from 
beach detritus or Slaymaker’s Bottle Houses (BCCB 5/04) to expand the look at 
folk artists, or it could be used as a springboard to making smaller-scale creations 
out of found objects.  JH
lAndsTRöM, lenA Where Is Pim?; tr. from the Swedish by Julia Marshall; illus. 
by Olof Landström. Gecko, 2015 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-927271-73-5 $16.99   
R 2-4 yrs
The pairing from Pom and Pim is back; Pom is a sturdy orange-haired little kid and 
Pim is his beloved stuffed toy, with an undefinable four-limbed shape that looks 
like a nearsighted grandma’s attempt at making an octopus. This time Pom and 
Pim are out in the park having fun—until a dog eagerly catches the flying Pim and 
gallops off. An upset Pom hunts high and low, with a little canine help, but finds 
only park detritus; fortunately, Pim’s abductor happily romps back and reunites 
the two, then bounds off in the company of the pooch who assisted Pom. Text is 
spare, only a few deftly chosen words per page, which gives the narrative a staccato 
rhythm that emphasizes the situational urgency and also puts more focus on the 
art. The illustrations are cleanly designed line and watercolor touched with colored 
pencil; while some compositions give amusing takes on Pom’s retrieval of objects 
that turn out not to be Pim, the major focus is on Pom’s distress. Pom is amusingly 
rather Pimlike, with no identifiable gender and a round head with eyes halfway 
down, just as Pim’s round center body has eyes (wittily turning, cartoonlike, into 
crosses when the dog runs off with Pim) in the middle. Some viewers might not 
realize that the dog who’s helping Pom isn’t the one who took Pim (they’re both 
brown-spotted white dogs but their markings are mirror opposites), but they’ll 
just see the revelation as a rather pleasing twist. With as much suspense and much 
more pathos than Taken, this will keep young viewers on the edge of the rug until 
the joyous resolution.  DS
lARBAlesTieR, JusTine Razorhurst. Soho Teen, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-61695-544-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-olds Kelpie and Dymphna, who live on opposite ends of the violent 
Razorhurst neighborhood in 1930s Sydney, have nothing in common but their 
secret gift for seeing the spirits of the dead. Tiny, homeless, and naïve, Kelpie 
scrapes by, only hoping to find food and avoid the trouble that ghosts bring, while 
Dymphna is a star, a high-paid prostitute working for Razorhurst’s second most 
powerful crime-boss, surrounded by luxury but plotting her way to independence 
and power. When the two young women meet over the brutally murdered corpse 
of Dymphna’s lover, their lives become entwined, and over the course of one long, 
fateful day, they must find a way to help each other survive as they dodge cops and 
criminals alike. The two progress through the poorest and wealthiest areas of the 
city, catching in their wake a plethora of memorable characters, including Neal 
502 • The BulleTin
Darcy, the would-be writer; Bluey Denham, the psychopath assassin; the ghost of 
Jimmy Palmer, the murdered lover; and Snowy Fullerton, the man who killed him. 
Reading like a detailed painting in novel form, this haunting, gorgeously rendered 
supernatural/historical novel captures the rough and tumble world of gangsters and 
molls in all its bloody, vicious glory. Kelpie and Dymphna alternate narration, while 
brief vignettes about other people and places interspersed throughout bring color 
and life to historical Razorhurst and its inhabitants, living and dead. Dymphna 
is the more alluring of the two heroines, but Kelpie holds her own as she emerges 
slowly from her shell to take control of her destiny. The novel is as much about the 
place and time as it is about the young women, and readers interested in immersing 
themselves completely in an unforgettable setting will revel in this well-researched, 
true-to-life adventure.  AM
lARsen, AndRew See You Next Year; illus. by Todd Stewart. Owlkids, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-926973-99-9 $16.95   
R 5-7 yrs
A young girl recounts the pleasures of an annual vacation at the same beach-front 
motel, including swimming, digging in the sand, concerts in the park, writing 
postcards home, bonfires on the beach, and making new friends. The details of 
the girl’s experience may seem a bit mundane to kids who favor more energy and 
action on a summer trip, but the girl clearly appreciates the simple familiarity 
of events. The short sentences of the narration, each printed on a separate line, 
are crisp and accessible: “On Thursday my new friend and I have nothing to do. 
So we dig a hole. We want to dig all the way to the center of the earth. We don’t 
quite get there. But we hit water.” Stewart’s illustrations are strikingly composed 
and colored, with each spread utilizing a restricted palette, the hues of which 
change from scene to scene. A picture of the girl on the motel balcony at twilight, 
for example, features deepening shades of blue, accented with the pale yellow of 
the motel’s artificial light (highlighting the balcony and the girl) and the black of 
shadows and vegetation, while a smudge of coral at the horizon indicates the just-
set sun. Slightly splotchy texturing of the landscapes and backgrounds and thick 
outlines of some figures give substance to the elegant compositions. Stewart also 
rarely depicts the girl from the front, instead giving viewers the same perspective 
(almost) as the girl herself. Use this along with Perkins’ Pictures from Our Vacation 
(BCCB 7/07) in summer- or beach-themed storytimes, or share it as a prelude (or 
postlude) to a similar summer getaway.  JH
leAveR, TRishA The Secrets We Keep. Farrar, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30046-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Twins Ella and Maddy have followed separate paths in high school, and when 
Ella drives Maddy home late one night, the simmering tension between the two 
explodes and Ella angrily swerves the steering wheel on the rain-soaked road, an 
action that results in a crash that takes Maddy’s life. Waking in the hospital, Ella 
is drug-fogged and confused about who she is, but Maddy’s boyfriend assures her 
that she is Maddy. By the time Ella’s confusion clears, she is beset by guilt and 
undone by the fact that many people seem grateful that Maddy survived, so she 
decides that pretending to be her twin would be giving Maddy back the life Ella 
took from her. While the details have been carefully laid out to make the switch 
June 2015 • 503
plausible, it’s one thing to be able to do your make-up like your twin sister, but 
wholly another to fit in to someone else’s friend group, complete with hovering 
boyfriend, without raising so much as smidge of suspicion. Apparently, though, 
these aren’t friends who talk much about the past, so Ella is able to keep up the 
ruse until she chooses to end it, where the novel again strains credulity by making 
her revelation go surprisingly smoothly. What does work here, however, is Ella’s 
psychology: her wrong-headed feelings regarding her parents’ preference for her 
sister, her mistaken conflation of popularity with affection, and her total misread 
of her best friend Josh’s feelings for her are pure teen girl, so while the premise may 
miss its mark for believability, the emotional content will feel palpably real. For a 
better twin story, look to Jessica Warman’s Beautiful Lies (BCCB 9/12), but this 
story may make readers living in the shadow of more popular siblings reexamine 
the true nature of their position.  KC
lewis, gill Moon Bear; illus. by Alessandro Gottardo. Atheneum, 2015 368p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0094-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0096-1 $10.99   
R Gr. 5-8
To help his family after his father’s death and the military removal of their Laotian 
villages, twelve-year-old Tam takes a job in the city. He’s caretaker at a bear farm 
run by the unpleasant Doctor, who “milks” the bears’ gallbladders for valuable bile 
sold as medicine, a process that repulses Tam almost as much as the horrible condi-
tions in which the bears are kept. When the Doctor buys an ailing moon bear cub 
named Sȏok-dìi, Tam recognizes the cub as one he once met in the mountains, and 
he begins secretly giving it extra food and care. Of course, Sȏok-dìi is eventually 
“milked” as well, and when Tam realizes the process has harmed the bear, he plans 
their getaway. Despite some tense moments, events take a turn for the happier as 
a bear sanctuary is established, the over-logged mountains begin to be replanted, 
and Sȏok-dìi finally seems to be recovering. The tidily optimistic ending is a little 
contrived, but the story itself is a riveting one, and Tam’s rock-and-a-hard place 
status is credibly conveyed. Animal lovers will need a bit of perseverance to get 
past the animal abuse, but they can rest assured that the vicious Doctor will get 
an appropriate comeuppance. Tam’s tale provides plenty of food for thought and 
substance for discussion, from the bears’ role in Asian medicine, to the militaristic 
undertones of the relationship between the fearful citizens and the soldiers. The 
stylistic flatness of the grayscale digital illustrations leaves them somewhat stiff, so 
they do little to enhance the lively text. Hand this to fans of Applegate’s The One 
and Only Ivan (BCCB 2/12).  JH
lewis, J. pATRiCk The Wren and the Sparrow; illus. by Yevgenia Nayberg. Kar-
Ben, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4677-1951-3 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 7-10 yrs
In the dark days of the Holocaust, the Jews of an unnamed Polish hamlet must 
surrender their musical instruments to the Nazis. Accompanied by his devoted 
student, a girl known as the Sparrow, the elderly Wren brings his hurdy-gurdy to 
the town square. There he leads the villagers in song—an act of protest that gets 
him killed and inspires the Sparrow to steal back the instrument and hide it, along 
with a note telling its story, in her building, where it is found years later by our 
504 • The BulleTin
narrator, one of the few children to survive the Holocaust. He faithfully brings the 
hurdy-gurdy with him on his journey to the United States and now, as an old man, 
will pass along this “precious token from a dark time” to his great-grandchildren. 
This fable has a lyrical style, with plenty of striking similes (“The town shriveled 
up like a rose without rain”) fitting from Lewis, a U.S. Children’s Poet Laureate. 
The gorgeous illustrations echo Chagall in their angles and ethereality; working 
with a mostly somber palette contrasted by splashes of vermilion and cobalt, 
Nayberg conveys light against darkness, hope against despair. Together, prose and 
pictures imply much about pain and suffering without becoming too graphic for 
the audience. Whether children encounter this book independently or through its 
multiple potential curriculum connections, they will benefit from discussion of 
the complex content; to that end, a thoughtful afterword describes Poland’s Lodz 
Ghetto—the inspiration for this tale—and the role of music in the lives of Jews 
during World War II. This lyrical story of bravery in a horrific time asks a lot from 
its readers in way of vocabulary, figurative thinking, and appreciation of subtlety, 
but offers much in return.  AA
lighT, sTeve Boats Go; written and illus. by Steve Light. Chronicle, 2015 16p
ISBN 978-1-4521-2900-6 $9.99   
R 1-4 yrs
Eight boats sail the seas of this elongated board book, each making a signature 
sound that will challenge the reader-aloud’s skills at aural effects. “The fireboat goes, 
WHEE whee WHEE whee WHEE whee” as its nozzles spray. “The paddle boat 
goes, chum-splish chum-splash chum-splish choooooTOOTOOOT” as it churns 
the water. In the closing double-page spread, “The gondola goes, O sole Mio!”—a 
witty surprise that will make more sense to the reader than the listener but will 
certainly delight if belted out in a hearty Italian tenor. The pictures, simple designs 
visually propelled by billows of steam, smoke, cloud, and wave, are engaging, and 
the onomatopoetic text slips and arches neatly into the composition. The rigging 
that accounts for the sailboat’s clanging, the sonar that accounts for the submarine’s 
binging, and the horn that accounts for the cruise ship’s honking are implied rather 
than displayed. Older listeners may proffer some queries, but lapsitters will be more 
than happy to hear Mom’s “Bings,” Dad’s “GRRRRs,” and sibling’s “toot-toots,” 
especially if delivered with exaggerated gusto.  EB
loRd, eMeRy The Start of Me and You. Bloomsbury, 2015 376p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-359-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-360-5 $12.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Paige had only been dating Aaron for two months when he tragically drowned, 
but a year later, his death still defines her at school and in the community, with her 
parents, and sometimes even herself. Only her staunchly loyal group of girlfriends 
and her Alzheimer’s-stricken grandmother offer her respite from the looks of pity, 
but no one can save her from nightmares where she is the one who is drowning. 
Desperate for her junior year to mark a new start, Paige opens herself up to pos-
sibilities, including athletic, good-looking Ryan, the boy for whom she has long 
harbored a crush, and his adorably nerdy cousin, Max. Lord weaves a fully realized 
world of caring friends and eye-opening situations around Paige’s central problem; 
character development and warm, witty dialogue is strong across ages and genders. 
As Paige realizes that Ryan, while remaining fully crushworthy, is no longer the 
June 2015 • 505
object of her affections, Max effectively demonstrates the equal worthiness of a smart 
boy. Several chapters end with Paige’s friends closing sympathetic ranks around one 
another as they celebrate successes, share outlier fandoms, and weather disappoint-
ments. This is the teen world as it should be, full of good times and good friends 
to temper life’s inevitable sorrows, big and small. Fans of Sarah Dessen and Deb 
Caletti will want to add Emery Lord to their summer reading list.  KC
lynCh, ChRis Hit Count. Algonquin, 2015 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-61620-250-7 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Arlo Brodie’s ascent begins as soon as he enters high school with a linebacker posi-
tion on the junior varsity rather than the freshman team—and just as his older 
brother, Lloyd, is debilitated with injuries and tossed off the JV team, where he was 
slated to languish as a senior. Arlo is determined not to be a burnout like Lloyd, 
whom he faults for playing with more aggression than strategy, but in no time at 
all he succumbs to the same pressure from coaches and teammates to revel in the 
violence, and to the adrenaline rush of bone-crushing hits that delivers as much 
pleasure as pain. Arlo recounts his progress in this four-part cautionary tale. In 
freshman year he lands a truly wonderful girlfriend, Sandy, keeps up his grades, 
and catches the head coach’s eye. Sophomore year finds Arlo on the varsity team 
and showing signs of academic underperformance and physical over-training. By 
junior year, he’s on his way to becoming a lost soul, carrying the nickname Starlo 
with false modesty while falling into fits of rage that he can’t control and suffering 
from crushing bouts of headaches and even loss of consciousness. There will be no 
football senior year—he can’t even make it through opening practice—but despite 
his public humiliation and private crisis of identity, his new sports-free state may 
save his life. Arlo’s voice is objective and clear-headed, implying that his addled 
brain has been set to rights, but it carries the bittersweet memory of real joy in the 
mayhem he caused and punishment he endured throughout his short-lived career. 
It’s that honesty that will ring true with fans and players, perhaps for that moment 
just before they toss the book aside with a “Won’t happen to anybody I know.”  EB
MAloney, BRennA Ready Rabbit Gets Ready!; illus. with photographs by Chuck 
Kennedy. Viking, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01549-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
It’s time for Ready Rabbit to get ready for his day, but his imagination makes 
this a slow process. He builds a Lego spaceship, tries on multiple outfits (before 
remembering that “rabbits don’t wear clothes!”), saves “the life of an incapacitated 
[toy] whale” during breakfast, drives a stagecoach, squeezes out all the toothpaste, 
and rides his imaginary motorcycle. With his school bag finally packed, he makes 
a quick potty trip, then gets in his rocket . . . or is it actually his school bus, as the 
last illustration shows? There’s not much plot here, but the real point is the art: the 
photographs depict the cleverly crafted Ready Rabbit, created from a stripey gray 
sock, and various other realia against clean white backdrops. Ready Rabbit effec-
tively expresses emotion through Maloney’s novel approach of attaching different 
faces (all cut from the same cream-colored fabric with varying facial features drawn 
on in black) in keeping with the different situations. Dollhouse props and other 
506 • The BulleTin
miniatures provide Ready Rabbit’s milieu, and the scenes will appeal to kids who 
enjoy pretend play with their stuffed animals, action figures, and/or dollhouses; 
there’s often plentiful humor in the juxtaposition of different-scale items or the 
inclusion of familiar objects. Families for whom morning readiness is an issue won’t 
find a useful lesson here, as Ready Rabbit apparently suffers no ill consequences as 
a result of his many distractions, but the pictures may be diverting; crafty adults 
(or older kids) might enjoy whipping up their own sock bunnies afterwards.  JH
MCsTAy, MoRiAh Everything That Makes You. Tegen/HarperCollins, 
2015 346p
ISBN 978-0-06-229548-4 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
When she was five, Fiona had an accident that left one side of her face horribly 
scarred. Though she is supported by a fiercely loyal brother, Ryan, an outspoken 
lesbian best friend, Lucy, and a boyfriend, David, she pines for lacrosse-playing 
Trent, and she can’t get past her self-consciousness to play her music at open mic 
night at her favorite coffeehouse. In a parallel narrative, Fi is Fiona if she’d never 
had the accident: she isn’t that close to Ryan and barely knows Lucy, but she is best 
friends with Trent and aims to play lacrosse in college until she snaps her ankle. 
While recovering, she meets and falls in love with Marcus, not realizing his health 
problems will take his life just after her high school graduation. Fiona’s and Fi’s 
stories unfold in alternating chapters, and while the girls are very distinct in tem-
perament and experience, keeping track of the shared secondary characters through 
their very different trajectories requires a fair bit of concentration. It’s worth it, 
though: the book effectively demonstrates the way every event and relationship, 
even the things that seem so terrible that you wish they’d never happened, shapes 
you, your relationships, and even your talents. While Fiona and Fi end up on dif-
ferent paths with different guys (though they both make it to Northwestern for 
college), they each find vocational passion and make peace with painful histories. 
Given the premise of one girl having such widely divergent possible stories, it’s 
impressive that McStay makes readers invest in both Fi and Fiona simultaneously; 
teens who have ever wondered what it might be like to live a totally different life 
will appreciate this experiment.  KC
MCvoy, TeRRA elAn Drive Me Crazy. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232243-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232245-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
When Lana’s Grandpa Howe married Cassie’s Grandma Tess, Lana was more excited 
than Cassie about gaining a new step-cousin. The two twelve-year-olds couldn’t be 
more different, as Cassie is struggling to fit in with the popular crowd at school while 
Lana enjoys hanging out with her parents and her one good, offbeat friend. When 
the newlyweds invite the girls along on their honeymoon, the pair are reluctant 
to go: Cassie knows that a week away from her friends may well mean they ditch 
her altogether, while Lana worries that she is being sent away because her mother’s 
headaches are more serious than anyone is letting on. The alternating narration of 
Cassie and Lana shows their divergent priorities and highlights their realistic mood 
swings, and while Lana is definitely more likable than Cassie, Cassie may in fact be 
more relatable to readers who know how precarious junior high friendships can be. 
June 2015 • 507
Lana’s efforts to jolly Cassie out of her sulks are admirable, but Cassie’s complaint 
that Lana hasn’t been open with her about her worries is justified. In the end, both 
girls have a lot to learn and teach each other about friendship, and readers may end 
up wishing their grands were as cool as Grandpa Howe and Grandma Tess.  KC
MoRRison, MegAn Grounded: The Adventures of Rapunzel. Levine/Scholastic, 
2015 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63826-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-64270-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
Morrison’s version of Rapunzel has no interest in being rescued, thank you very 
much, and she’s perfectly content to stay in her tower where her every need is met 
by her beloved Witch. So when Jack Beanstalker manages to trick Rapunzel out of 
her tower, she’s desperate to get away from the filthy “grounded” peasants and back 
to her elevated home; however, a powerful Red Fairy captures Rapunzel and tasks 
her with finding the Woodmother. Terrified that the fairy will kill Witch, Rapunzel 
agrees, and with Jack as her guide and her long braid in tow, she travels across the 
land of Tyme, facing down fearsome magical creatures and merciless bandits. It’s 
the revelations of the Woodmother, however, that end up being the greatest chal-
lenge to Rapunzel as she learns uncomfortable truths about herself, her history, and 
Witch. Morrison has a deft hand with both world-building and pacing, carefully 
constructing the geography and various politics of the fairy-tale world of Tyme in 
between chase scenes, bridge collapses, narrow escapes, and bargains with all sorts 
of devious beings. Rapunzel and Jack have an easy, witty banter going as they quest, 
adding a much appreciated dollop of humor to their tale, but the beating heart of 
this story lies with Rapunzel, whose love for Witch remains steadfast even as she 
discovers the woman’s monstrous deeds. Their final encounter is a devastating dis-
play of the complexities of love and the virtue of forgiveness, giving this fractured 
fairy tale a surprisingly deep emotional element. Fans of the recent Maleficent and 
readers who are wise enough to understand that there is more than one side to a 
story will find this to their liking.  KQG
MyeR, Andy Henry Hubble’s Book of Troubles; written and illus. by Andy 
Myer. Delacorte, 2015 151p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99164-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74439-3 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38526-8 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Whether getting sick on the class field trip, bringing a live squirrel to school for his 
presentation on mammals, or making his teachers burst into laughter at his forgery 
of his mother’s signature, aspiring cartoonist and poet Henry Harrison Hubble 
has problems aplenty. Luckily for readers, he also has his journal, the titular Book 
of Troubles, wherein he chronicles his middle-school misfortunes and punctuates 
them with cartoon drawings and humorous verse—all well and good until his 
rival in love gets a hold of the book and publicizes it to the world. Conversational, 
self-effacing, and unashamed of his obsession with his namesake, President Wil-
liam Henry Harrison (whose pet canine, Jupiter, left certain remnants in Henry’s 
great-great-great-grandmother’s yard that have since become a family heirloom), 
Henry is an underdog’s underdog, one who knows and accepts his own shortcom-
508 • The BulleTin
ings and quirks while still finding a way to stand up for himself. Scads of images 
nicely supplement the abundance of poop jokes and cringeworthy catastrophes. 
The result is a slightly frenetic story of misadventures, individuality, and friendships 
that will have readers so busy laughing aloud at Henry’s scrapes and cheering for 
his success, and they’ll easily forgive minor inconsistencies in plot. Give this story 
to quirky kids, fans of Diary of a Wimpy Kid, or any one looking for a relatable 
read and easy laugh.  AA
pAige, dAnielle The Wicked Will Rise. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 293p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-228070-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-228072-5 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Emerald City is in flames and Amy Gumm, recent recruit of the Order of the 
Wicked, has failed to kill the evil Dorothy at the beginning of this sequel to Dorothy 
Must Die (BCCB 5/14). At least Dorothy and her crony Glinda seem to be on the 
run and the magic that they had been essentially hoarding from Oz is returning to 
the land. There’s still a ways to go before Oz can be entirely saved, and Amy is now 
charged with retrieving the Lion’s courage and the Scarecrow’s brain (to accompany 
the heart she tore out of the Tin Man’s chest) before she can murder Dorothy. 
The other members of the Order, however, are either injured or lost, and as Amy 
embarks on the task alone, she ends up dabbling in dark magic and finds herself 
wondering if she, like Dorothy before her, will be transformed into something truly 
wicked by the power of Oz. Unfortunately, the breathless pacing and intriguing 
world-building of the first volume sputter here, with Amy’s narration taking an 
introspective turn that is often frustratingly narrow. If she’s not excessively detailing 
her own emotional turmoil then she’s directly describing someone else’s, leaving 
little for the reader to infer and robbing scenes of emotional depth. Still, Paige is 
creating a rather brilliantly twisted version of the familiar world of Oz, continuing 
to turn references from the original works on their heads, subverting any notions 
of good and evil, and establishing a place of power-hungry players and shifting al-
liances that will have readers wondering whom they can trust. The action and the 
plot eventually gather steam in the latter half, so there’s hope that the third book 
and Amy will rise to the occasion and save Oz once and for all.  KQG
pAss, eMMA The Fearless. Delacorte, 2015 354p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74447-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39014-9 $10.99   
R Gr. 9-12
In the wake of a drug trial gone wrong, waves of the Fearless, silver-eyed humans 
with super-strength and no emotions, sweep across the world turning more people 
into Fearless and killing those they can’t alter. Seven years later, seventeen-year-old 
Cass Hollencroft and her best friend Sol Brightman grow restless on the tiny English 
island where survivors have eked out a meager but safe existence. Then Myo, a teen 
from the outside, breaches the island’s defenses, and then two Fearless kidnap Cass’ 
little brother. Desperate to save him, Cass teams up with Myo, and they escape the 
island and begin a cross-country trip in pursuit. Meanwhile, Sol joins a mainland 
team of soldiers bent on destroying the Fearless at any cost. When their paths cross 
again in the heart of Fearless territory, dangerous secrets are revealed, loyalties old 
and new are tested, and the teens realize that the monster may not be what gets you 
in the end. Bleak but compelling, this fast-paced survivor story offers a refreshing 
June 2015 • 509
take on the plague-apocalypse tale. The plot is well paced to ramp up the sense of 
desperation right into a series of nail-biting final conflicts. Cass is the primary focus, 
but the book’s shifting narrative structure allows insight into hidden motivations 
and moves the story beyond a simple humans versus the monster conflict, especially 
as Myo’s and Sol’s secret pasts link them to the supposed enemy. Readers need to 
pay close attention to chapter headings to know who is narrating, since there is no 
discernible difference in voice, but ultimately the draw of this novel is the story, 
which will make it a strong option for fans of Yancy’s The 5th Wave (BCCB 9/13) 
and Kizer’s A Matter of Days (BCCB 10/13).  AM
peTeRfReund, diAnA Omega City. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-231085-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-231087-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old conspiracy theorist Gillian Seagret is convinced that secret forces 
destroyed her father’s career in a desperate attempt to stop his research into the work 
of the mysterious Cold War scientist, Dr. Aloysius Underberg. So with the last hid-
den clue to Underberg’s clandestine experiments in hand, Gills sets out—with the 
aid of her brother, her best friend, a classmate, and his older brother—to redeem 
her father’s reputation and save her family. The trail quickly leads to trouble, of 
course, and the kids soon find themselves trapped in a vast underground bunker 
with the gun-toting enemy closing in behind them. Still undeterred, Gills and 
company overcome flooded caverns, a half-wrecked hidden city, and malfunction-
ing old technology to find a way out, and they discover a secret more surprising 
than they ever expected. Misfit kid-heroes take center stage in this edge of your 
seat adventure that pairs consistent action with a smartly crafted treasure hunt to 
create a crowd-pleaser in the spirit of The Goonies. With its series of well-plotted 
near escapes, the central narrative will have readers speed-reading while holding 
their breath. Yet the novel is also emotionally touching at times, as characters who 
aren’t close friends learn to appreciate each other, and it’s occasionally laugh-out-
loud funny. Though Gills is the narrator and core character, the group’s success 
is clearly a team effort, and each character gets a chance to shine. The book will 
please adventure readers and mystery fans, and there are just enough space-themed 
elements to draw in the science fiction crowd as well. The first adventure comes 
to a satisfying conclusion here, but plenty of loose ends are left dangling to weave 
together in planned sequels.  AM
peTTy, dev I Don’t Want To Be a Frog; illus. by Mike Boldt. Doubleday, 
2015 26p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97334-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37866-6 $16.99   
R 3-5 yrs
We are who we are, and our young protagonist is a frog, much to his/her chagrin. 
As a parental-seeming grownup frog explains why Junior can’t be a cat, rabbit, pig, 
or owl—all for a variety of good reasons, but namely because Junior is a frog—audi-
ences will giggle with recognition. Petty clearly knows the drill with kids’ questions 
and parents’ responses, playfully juxtaposing childish desires and parental exaspera-
tion. Bold and bright illustrations amp up the humor, imbuing large and small frog 
with perfectly fitting facial expressions; the spectacle-wearing grownup is suitably 
510 • The BulleTin
forbearing, while young frog is unselfconscious and inquisitive. Side characters prove 
equally enjoyable, particularly as cat, rabbit, pig and owl bound across the endpapers 
in a cameo appearance as the little frog looks on. With encompassing full-page 
spreads and relatable, laughter-inducing dialogue, this lighthearted exploration of 
identity will delight as a readaloud, no occasion needed.  AA
pilgeR, seAMus Fart Squad; illus. by Stephen Gilpin. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2015 [112p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-236631-3 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229045-8 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229046-5 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Let’s get this out of the way right now—yes, this book is absolutely a celebration 
of farts and flatulence-related humor. Our four intrepid heroes must face school 
lunch after their own packed meals were stolen, and burritos are on the menu. All 
experience digestive discomfort, but these are no ordinary burritos: they have been 
microwaved so many times that they now impart supernatural, albeit disgusting, 
powers. The kids don’t actually get to use their new superhero abilities too much, 
though they do save the day when a butt-scratching device threatens the whole 
town (best not to ask too much about the plot); a hinted-at sequel could see them 
using their new gifts for even grander purposes. This is the gem for those who 
revel in potty humor, and the fact that it also sneaks in a bit of social commentary 
about school hierarchies, some clever non-fart-related humor, and a genial group 
of antiheroes is all just bonus. Small goofy and spirited black and white drawings 
add to the fun.  AS
pReBle, Joy Finding Paris. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 259p
ISBN 978-0-06-232130-5 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Leo and Paris Hollings are the closest of sisters, though they couldn’t be more dif-
ferent. Paris, the elder, is artistic and spontaneous, while deliberative Leo is focused 
on her goal of going to Stanford and becoming a doctor. Paris dares Leo to approach 
a guy sitting in the diner, and when the guy, Max, responds to Leo’s nerdy physics 
joke, she is interested. When Paris disappears into the Las Vegas night, leaving a 
cryptic clue, Max volunteers to assist Leo on her quest to find her sister. The single 
clue turns into a scavenger hunt that takes them from Vegas to LA and allows Max 
and Leo share each other’s secrets. By the time they realize that Paris has never left 
Las Vegas and is in serious trouble, they have fallen in and maybe out of love, as 
Leo comes to realize that her trip with Max has been a Paris-managed set-up. The 
pace of the novel races with the intensity of first love and mounting panic, though 
it doesn’t always map plausibly onto real time, and the unexpected reveal at the 
climactic moment is surprising largely because it hasn’t been foreshadowed well 
enough. Therefore the novel succeeds at setting and sensation, but it is clunkier in 
other aspects of craft. Still, much depends on a sense of place here, and readers will 
enjoy the peek at Las Vegas and LA (though more Santa Monica than LA proper) 
from the townie perspective.  KC
June 2015 • 511
RAidT, geRdA In the New World: A Family in Two Centuries; tr. from the 
German by Susi Woofter; by Gerda Raidt and Christa Holtei; illus. by Gerda 
Raidt. Charlesbridge, 2015 37p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-630-6 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-783-5 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 2-5
In this fact-based German import, Raidt and Holtei follow the migration of Robert 
and Margarete Peters and their two children from Germany to Nebraska in 1869. 
The family is no longer able to raise a sufficient flax crop in their homeland to 
support the Peters’ linen weaving business. Lured by plentiful land in the United 
States, Robert and his wife decide to auction their property, bid farewell to their 
extended family, and make their way to Hamburg, across the Atlantic in steerage, 
up the Mississippi on a stern wheeler, across the prairie by train, to finally claim 
land in Nebraska. After five years of homesteading, they own their land outright 
and their family expands; 150 years later, their descendants make the reverse trip 
to Germany, hoping to locate the original house vacated by their ancestors. The 
picture-book format suggests a young audience, but vocabulary and attention to 
detail will recommend this to middle-graders who are studying immigration in 
social studies. Unfortunately, the Peters’ experience in Nebraska has been fortu-
itously condensed to the point of incredibility. Within their first year in America 
they have built a sod house, planted and harvested a crop, and built and furnished 
a commodious two-story wooden house, complete with outbuildings and fenced 
fields, and added another member to the family. Careful examination of the 
mixed-media illustrations rewards readers with insight into the social dynamics of 
mass immigration for the migrants, those they leave behind, and those who meet 
them. Older readers may appreciate the decades of social change that brought the 
Peterses—now a mixed-race family—back to their roots.  EB
RAuCh, geoRg Unlikely Warrior: A Jewish Soldier in Hitler’s Army; tr. from the 
German by Phyllis Rauch. Farrar, 2015 325p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30142-2 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30277-1 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30143-9 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
This memoir, self-published under the title The Jew with the Iron Cross: A Record of 
Survival in World War II Russia just prior to Rauch’s death in 2006, is now released as 
a book for young adults. Although he never attempted to hide his identity, Rauch, 
a Mischlinge (a mix of Aryan and Jewish) under the Nazi regime, was drafted into 
the German army at age nineteen. He served for two years, first in the trenches in 
Russia and then as a telegrapher in Romania, where he earned the Iron Cross by 
repairing a broken radio and ignoring protocol to reestablish communication ahead 
of a Russian attack. Toward the war’s end, Rauch attempted to desert but ended up 
as a prisoner of war in a Russian prison; armistice finally allowed him to make his 
way back to Austria, where his sister and mother had survived the war. Although 
younger readers with a strong interest in World War II and the Holocaust will be 
caught up in the details of Rauch’s soldiering experiences, it will take a reader of 
some maturity to parse the relationship between event and memory as it plays 
out in Rauch’s writing, which is inspired by letters (many included here) he wrote 
home as a young adult and revisited at the urging of a writers’ group some forty 
512 • The BulleTin
years later. Additionally, there’s no exploration of what presumably was considerable 
and conscience-nagging ambivalence about his peculiar status, apart from a sense 
of irony that he was officially lauded by those who wanted to exterminate his kin. 
This very omission, however, could spark discussion in a class focused on the art 
of memoir or the challenges of historiography.  EB
Reed, AMy Invincible. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 325p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229957-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229959-8 $10.99   
R Gr. 8-12
Extensive treatment has failed, Evie’s cancer has metastasized, and Evie refuses 
additional treatment. After a last glorious outing with her best friend and fellow 
cancer patient, audacious Stella, Evie is stunned when Stella dies and her own 
cancer miraculously disappears. Suddenly she’s thrust back into a junior year she 
thought she’d never complete, and she can’t figure out who she’s supposed to be 
now that she’s not “Cancer Girl.” A stealthy new romance with handsome Marcus 
gives her fresh possibilities, but she still turns to her prescription painkillers and 
pot to soften the world’s edges, and her unwillingness to stop using endangers even 
her new relationship. Reed draws on some conventions here—the hospital scenes 
are classic tearjerkers—but takes them to a new and interesting place with Evie’s 
survival. Evie’s transformation from good girl to rebel is effectively gradual, and while 
her flailing is understandable the book is also realistic about how cruel she’s being 
to those who love her. The family and friend dynamics are perceptively depicted, 
cleverly keeping reader sympathies oscillating between Evie and the others; they 
unreasonably wish her to be the Evie they used to know but reasonably can’t cope 
with the seemingly incorrigible Evie that is now. Evie’s interspersed letters to Stella 
are sometimes maudlin, and Marcus is a little too perfect, but Evie’s ironic spiral 
into self-destruction after her wondrous survival makes for a compelling tale, and 
the cliffhanger ending will leave readers eager for the sequel.  DS
RehR, henRik Terrorist: Gavrilo Princip, the Assassin Who Ignited World War I; 
written and illus. by Henrik Rehr. Graphic Universe, 2015 231p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-7279-2 $33.32
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-7284-6 $11.99   
R Gr. 9-12
The confluence of World War I centennial commemorations and a flourishing 
market for graphic novels has already produced the brilliantly illustrated Trench 
Poets collection Above the Dreamless Dead (BCCB 11/14). Now this fictional ex-
ploration reconstructs the life of Serbian nationalist Gavrilo Princip, organizer of 
a cabal to assassinate Archduke Franz Ferdinand (heir apparent to the Hapsburg 
throne) and the man who fired the fatal bullet. Rehr portrays Princip as a serious, 
impressionable boy, raised on stories of victories and defeats of his ancestors, and 
radicalized among anarchists in Belgrade during a chaotic period in which Serbs 
were politically and militarily squeezed between Austro-Hungarians to the north 
and Turks to the South. Rehr also pays heed to the philosophical underpinnings 
of Princip’s adherence to anarchism, a bonus for teen readers who appreciate some 
intellectual heft in their GNs. Even young adults who skim past the kitchen table 
and coffeehouse political discussions, however, will be drawn in as Princip me-
thodically strips his life of ephemeral relationships (including his attachment to a 
young woman he once loved) and dedicates himself to becoming an avenging hero 
June 2015 • 513
for the Serbian people. Black and white artwork, grainy and hatched to resemble 
etching, moves skillfully between Princip’s life and that of Franz Ferdinand and his 
wife, who, despite warnings of an assassination plot, drive willingly and directly 
to their death. Particularly affecting is Rehr’s segue into the war itself; a series of 
potent images highlight not only the violence of the battlefields, but the suffering 
that lingered in its aftermath. End matter includes a map of Europe just before 
World War I, and an afterword discussing Rehr’s interest in Princip. Source notes 
are not included.  EB
RuBin, lAnCe Denton Little’s Deathdate. Knopf, 2015 346p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49697-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49696-3 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49699-4 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49698-7 $10.99   
R Gr. 9-12
In a time when scientists can predict the date a person will die, seventeen-year-
old Denton Little is preparing for his funeral. With his day of demise looming, 
Denton plans to celebrate his short, unremarkable life in the conventional ways: 
attending a party where friends and family give eulogies, getting drunk with his 
best friend, and finally having sex with his girlfriend. However, a creepy cop has 
started mysteriously following him around, and his girlfriend’s psychotic ex seems 
to lurk around every corner; additionally, his best friend’s hot older sister is giving 
off romantic vibes. Things get weirder when an old family friend shows up at the 
funeral, claiming to have secrets about Denton’s past that might just keep him 
from dying. Suddenly Denton’s last few hours are jam-packed with life-changing 
events as he juggles two girls, uncovers a possible conspiracy, and finds himself on 
the run from people who want to make sure he dies when he’s supposed to. With 
its over-the-top combination of dark humor, teen hijinks, and conspiracy theories, 
this novel is an utterly enjoyable, engrossing page-turner. Denton is an endearing 
narrator, snarky but sincere, resigned to his fate yet willing to fight for every last 
moment of his life. The rest of the novel is populated by an eclectic cast of lov-
able goofballs, unexpected allies and villains, and intriguingly layered characters. 
While the ending (and its lack of clear resolution) is somewhat predictable, the 
narrative maintains tension, and as the final moments of Denton’s deathdate tick 
by, readers will be right there with him, holding their breath and wondering about 
possible sequels.  AM
RyAn, JeAnne Charisma. Dial, 2015 376p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3966-6 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Aislyn appears to have it all together, but her crippling social anxiety keeps her from 
achieving all that she wants. An encounter at a Nova Genetics gathering for her 
brother (who has cystic fibrosis and is eligible for various experimental treatments) 
leads Aislyn to a rogue doctor who offers her a dose of Charisma, an untested genetic 
therapy intended to completely change the personality of the recipient. Suddenly, 
Aislyn can flirt, give speeches, and be who she always dreamed she was—headaches 
and weird side effects be damned. When other people who also secretly received the 
treatment start going into comas and even dying, however, Aislyn realizes that she 
may have given up more than she gained. The science is both sharp and accessible 
here, and readers will get a sense of the nuances and messiness of genetic alterations 
514 • The BulleTin
while staying in Aislyn’s world. Unfortunately, Aislyn is not very likable, and men-
tions of her gorgeousness and perfection are wearying even before she becomes a 
social dynamo with a smoking hot, adoring boyfriend. In addition, once things veer 
into thriller territory, with a fake suicide and secret plans everywhere, the focus on 
the startling death count and dire health of most of those infected gets lost. Even 
so, readers seeking a quick-moving book that mostly sticks to the realm of possible 
scientific advances will find much to explore here.  AS
sAndeRs, Ted The Keepers: The Box and the Dragonfly; illus. by Iacopo Bru-
no. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 534p
ISBN 978-0-06-227582-0 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Horace is a quiet kid, a patient boy who loves his parents and generally observes 
life from the sidelines. He surprises himself, then, when he wanders into a strange 
building because he believes it had his name on it; he then gets roped into an 
ancient battle between two secret groups, the Makers and the Keepers, who have 
never agreed on how to handle mystical artifacts. Horace turns out to have some 
latent powers of his own, and once he receives the Box of Promises, a device possibly 
fated to be his, he is ready to do his part to help the good guys—though maybe 
the division here is more complicated than merely good vs. evil. Horace makes a 
true friend in Chloe, a lonely, headstrong girl who has been dealing in magic since 
she was much younger, and their initially tentative then fierce alliance is one of the 
book’s most memorable elements. Horace’s dedicated parents are a plus—it is a 
relief to see a child character who is clearly formed by love and effective guidance, 
and the fact that the mother might be hiding some magical awareness of her own 
is an effective twist. Patient readers who are not daunted by hefty page count or a 
slow-building pace will find this well worth the investment, and they’ll likely relish 
the idea of further adventures to come.  AS
sCoTT, kieRAn What Waits in the Woods. Point/Scholastic, 2015 273p
ISBN 978-0-545-69111-6 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Chicago transplant Callie hates nature, but she goes camping to solidify her place 
in the popular crowd in her new upstate New York home town. A-lister Lissa is 
a bully, but Penelope seems nice, and Callie’s boyfriend of six months, Jeremy, is 
along too, so what can go wrong? Well, just about everything, when it becomes 
clear that someone sinister is following them, they lose their way and run low on 
food, and the slasher stories told around the campfire seem too real for Callie’s 
enflamed imagination. Fortunately, a friendly stranger shows up to help them get 
back to civilization, but can they trust him? When Callie finds out that her friends 
have been hiding Penelope and Jeremy’s former relationship from her, can she even 
trust them? This is pure page-turning, up-all-night genre fiction, with no distracting 
morals, psychological depth, or literary pretensions to mar the adrenaline pump of 
paranoia, mystery, and, finally, murder that strains relationships and confuses loyal-
ties every step of the way. Callie is kind, straightforward, and never overly heroic, 
making her relatable as a girl out of her depth but determined to get through an 
increasingly impossible situation. Her frequent encounters with things like freshly 
blood-soaked clothing, abandoned hunting knives, and looming figures in the 
shadows lead to cliffhanging chapter endings of the campfire story variety—both 
the kind where the figure who grabs you in the dark turns out to be your boyfriend 
June 2015 • 515
and the kind where the scream you hear is as bad as you imagine. Interspersed 
journal entries written after the survivors’ rescue alert readers that some of the key 
players will live and some won’t, but the identity of the psychotic murderer remains 
uncertain until the climax, with red herrings and possibilities skillfully doled out 
along the way. Readers looking for a quick read to stick in their backpack on a real 
or virtual camping trip of their own will enjoy being vicariously creeped out.  KC
seidMAn, dAvid What If I’m an Atheist?: A Teen’s Guide to Exploring a Life without 
Religion. Simon Pulse, 2015 245p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58270-407-4 $19.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-58270-406-7 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7524-3 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-12
If belief or disbelief in a god can be a contentious issue among independent, self-
confident adults, how much riskier must a public admission of disbelief be for a 
teen who has solid reason to fear censure from parents, relatives, and peers? Seidman 
offers practical guidelines for teens who wish to state their views with clarity and 
calm, anticipating a range of responses from outrage, to condescending dismissal, 
to dogmatic challenge, and even to unexpected acceptance. Although the title 
refers specifically to atheism, Seidman’s scope encompasses agnosticism as well 
and distinguishes diverse approaches to atheism, from a take-no-prisoners scorn of 
religious belief to a cultural approach to faith that may still involve participation 
in religious rituals. This isn’t itself an argument for atheism (there’s even a chapter 
on the possibility of turning from atheism back to religion), but teens questioning 
their religious identification will find confirmation here that there’s nothing outré 
about their position, that life can be meaningful without religious belief, and that 
there are many like-minded persons beyond their immediate circle of acquaintance. 
Citations and an appendix of resources for research and support are included.  EB
seigel, AndReA Everybody Knows Your Name; by Andrea Seigel and Brent Brad-
shaw. Viking, 2015 335p
ISBN 978-0-670-01562-7 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Ever since her dad died, Magnolia can’t say no to her attention-seeking mother, 
even if it means appearing on the reality TV show Spotlight—a nightmare for the 
introverted California girl. Arkansas boy Ford, on the other hand, sees Spotlight as 
an opportunity to escape his highly dysfunctional, frequently criminal family. The 
two find themselves drawn to each other with a speed and intensity that surprises 
them both, though their relationship is not immune to the drama—and drama-
inducing nature—of reality television. As the authenticity of their feelings and also 
their personal stories comes into question, Ford must decide how much of himself 
to reveal and Magnolia must learn to see the world with nuance. The backdrop of 
Spotlight—a reality TV show that’s also a singing competition—provides an element 
of pop culture interest and fitting soundtrack, and it’s the perfect time-sensitive 
foil for angst-ridden teens to express their love or rebel against their parents. Seigel 
and Bradshaw remain laudably restrained in their engaging telling (laid out here 
in alternating first-person narration), giving their characters and their relationships 
dignity and credibility. Both Magnolia and Ford possess awareness and insight well 
beyond their seventeen years, but because they’re likable and relatable, readers will 
want to believe in them, their romance, and the futures they’ll live on their own 
terms.  AA
516 • The BulleTin
shusTeRMAn, neAl Challenger Deep; illus. by Brendan Shusterman. Harper-
Teen/HarperCollins, 2015 308p
ISBN 978-0-06-113411-1 $17.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
Caden Bosch is split between what he sees and what he believes to be true. On the 
one hand, he is a smart high school kid who has friends and gets good grades. On 
the other, he’s aboard an outré ship whose mission is to explore Challenger Deep, 
the deepest part of the Mariana Trench. The tragedy is that while Caden knows 
his reality is fractured, he can’t control what he believes, and that terrifies him; 
finally his parents have no recourse but to admit him to a psychiatric hospital. His 
shipmates, then, are the doctors, volunteers, and other teen patients in the ward, 
and while the adventure morphs into surreal images, their meanings surface in 
ironic bits of wit when he is at his most lucid; that is, when his meds are starting 
to work. The trial and error of getting the cocktail right, however, sends him more 
deeply into his delusion. Shusterman does a masterful job of warping Caden’s 
reality into his fantasies, subtly highlighting how seemingly random strands of 
dissociative thought connect to reality. For instance, Dr. Poirot with his colorful 
Hawaiian shirts easily transmogrifies into the parrot of Caden’s crew, and his role 
there as mortal adversary of the captain signifies the intensity of the battle Caden’s 
mind is waging within itself. Drawing on the experiences of his son (who provides 
loose-limbed sketches throughout), Shusterman spools out the trajectories of 
Caden’s illness in ways consistent with the progression of schizoaffective disorder 
without pinning Caden down to a diagnosis, and he treats Caden’s character with a 
loving compassion clearly born of strong empathetic understanding. The intensity 
of living inside Caden’s mind makes this a wrenching read, particularly at those 
moments when he is clear enough to articulate the fragile, tenuous borders of his 
inner landscape; it is a work that engenders respect for those fighting to stay afloat 
on choppy mental seas.  KC
siMpson, dAnA Unicorn on a Roll: Another Phoebe and Her Unicorn Adventure; 
written and illus. by Dana Simpson. Andrews McMeel, 2015 281p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4494-7076-0 $9.99   
R* Gr. 3-5
Unicorn and snark fans rejoice—Phoebe and her unicorn (or Marigold and her 
human, as the unicorn sees it) have returned in a second collection of individual 
comics that combine to form a cohesive narrative. A year has passed since the two 
met, and any early wariness has long since given way to a remarkably rich and well-
balanced friendship, where each tempers the flaws and bolsters the good features 
of the other. Phoebe is still struggling with her nemesis Dakota, though by book’s 
end they have progressed to now being frenemies, and Marigold has been getting 
hassled for choosing to befriend a lowly human; mostly, though, the two just go 
through life as best friends, which improves pretty much everything. It’s a glorious 
feature that everyone knows Marigold is real; Dakota snobbily assumes that any 
unicorn hanging around Phoebe must be totally lame, and Phoebe’s parents dryly 
acquiesce to working around the presence of a large, egomaniacal being in their 
home. The main format is the traditional panels and speech balloons, but Simpson 
breaks free of both on occasion for dramatic impact, and she sometimes depicts 
exaggerated contrasts between real life and the perspective of a dreamy kid and 
her sardonic unicorn pal. The drawings themselves are accessibly simple, and they 
June 2015 • 517
may inspire young comic artists to make up their own human/animal pair and try 
them out in a comic strip. New fans will be able to dive right in, and they’ll likely 
be thrilled to hear that there are more Phoebe and Marigold adventures available 
from the earlier volume, Phoebe and Her Unicorn (BCCB 10/14).  AS
siMukkA, sAllA As White as Snow; tr. from the Finnish by Owen F. Wites-
man. Skyscape, 2015 214p (Snow White Trilogy)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-2063-6 $9.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Lumikki Andersson travels to Prague for a well-earned rest, following the harrowing 
brush with a crime syndicate that brought her to the verge of death in As Red as Blood 
(BCCB 10/14). There’s to be no rest for the weary, though, when a stranger named 
Lenka announces she is Lumikki’s older sister, offspring of their father’s extramarital 
affair two decades ago. Lumikki is not naive enough to trust Lenka immediately, 
but the existence of an illegitimate child could explain the strain between Lumikki’s 
parents and the family secrets she knows they have been keeping from her. Even 
if Lenka’s story isn’t true, Lenka herself is a mystery worth pursuing, especially 
since she seems to be in danger from the “family” that now claims her—a collec-
tive self-dubbed the Holy White Family, living in a remote, broken-down house 
under the direction of Adam, a man determined to keep his housemates isolated 
from outsiders. That Lumikki will get herself perilously entangled with this cult is 
a foregone conclusion, but the themes that freshen the plot—the manipulation of 
the cult by a media conglomerate, and Lumikki’s yearning for Blaze, a young man 
undergoing gender transition—supply layers of intrigue and emotional turmoil that 
keep the pages turning. Simukka continues to reel out hints regarding the skeletons 
in the Andersson family closet, and even readers who find Lumikki’s propensity for 
near-fatal encounters to be improbable will anxiously await the series’ conclusion 
and, hopefully, a ray of light in her troubled life.  EB
singleTon, lindA Joy The Curious Cat Spy Club. Whitman, 2015 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-1376-7 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5 
After finding kittens abandoned in a dumpster, shy, lonely Kelsey, pretty, popular 
Becca, and nerdy, arrogant Leo form an unlikely alliance. They adopt the titular 
moniker and dedicate themselves to caring for the kittens and also to discovering 
who could perform such a cruel act. Under the leadership of aspiring detective Kelsey 
(our narrator), they together uncover a pet-napping ring and forge a solid friend-
ship. Kelsey’s a fairly bland character who lacks dimension, providing a blank slate 
on which readers might project themselves; we know she loves her “orange honey” 
of a kitten and has learned to accrue secrets, and that will be enough for many a 
reader. While her family’s struggles could be relatable, with her out-of-work father 
and annoying older siblings, the treatment of her situation is too superficial for 
her dilemmas to have any resonance. But banality is not a sin, and any shortcom-
ings or oversimplification in characterization or exposition will have little bearing 
on the book’s appeal; the key story elements (the title says it all) make it a slam 
dunk. Ultimately as fuzzy and accessible as a kitten chasing a ball of string, this 
story—and subsequent titles in the series—will likely find a ready audience among 
animal lovers, amateur sleuths, and the fairly common combination of the two.  AA
518 • The BulleTin
skye, oBeRT Witherwood Reform School; illus. by Keith Thompson. Ottaviano/
Holt, 2015 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9879-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Siblings Tobias and Charlotte Eggers have pushed their widowed father too far 
with their latest horrible trick played on their latest horrible nanny. Furious and 
exasperated, he drops them off at the top of a remote mesa with the intent of 
teaching them a lesson. Unfortunately, when he circles back after twenty minutes, 
he crashes his car and winds up with amnesia, forgetting his name and, alas, his 
children. Tobias and Charlotte, in the interim, have made their way through the 
gates of the eerie Witherwood Reform School—a move they soon regret as they 
find themselves prisoners of the institution, where hard labor, cold showers, and 
systematic brainwashing are all de rigueur. Author Skye has a knack for gallows hu-
mor, tempering the bleakness with plentiful humorous asides directed at the reader 
and occasional grossout moments spot on for the age of the intended audience (not 
to mention certain adults). Charlotte and Tobias are believable as spunky eleven 
and twelve-year olds, respectively, and while the ending is somewhat inconclusive, 
it sets the stage for sequels. Overall, it’s dark and funny, and it will appeal to kids 
with a sharp sense of humor and a budding interest in Lemony Snicket.  AA
sMiTh, elwood h. How to Draw with Your Funny Bone; written and illus. by 
Elwood H. Smith. Creative Editions, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-1-56846-243-1 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
This addition to the much frequented draw-it-yourself shelf offers a scattering of 
hints to help young artists pump more laughs out of their creations. After a lot of 
chatter about funny bones and some suggestions about detailing standard models 
of pigs and cars with exaggeration and anthropomorphization (concepts that are 
implied rather than defined), the how-to part arrives at page seventeen: “Most stuff 
is made up of circles, squares, and triangles.” Three examples yield a pig, a dog, 
and a bird from the basic shapes; from there, Smith bounds among ideas such as 
shading to add dimensionality, his own use of a lightbox, how to draw monsters 
inspired by a goat skull, several renditions of an old sofa, putting costumes on 
dogs, and funny-ing up the alphabet. Large blank spaces on two pages invite chil-
dren to produce their own pictures—an enticement that librarians can only hope 
their young patrons will decline. By book’s end, readers will have looked at a lot 
of goofy pictures, but they may not have garnered much solid advice on how to 
emulate them or learned why some approaches or embellishments are just funnier 
than others. Still, kids are likely to come away with a little inspiration and quite 
a few giggles.  EB
spiegelMAn, nAdJA Lost in NYC: A Subway Adventure; by Nadja Spiegelman 
and Sergio García Sánchez; illus. by Sergio García Sánchez. TOON Graphics, 
2015 48p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-935179-81-8 $16.95
Spanish ed. ISBN 978-1-935179-85-6 $16.95   
R* Gr. 3-6
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 477, for review.
June 2015 • 519
sTeRnBeRg, Julie Bedtime at Bessie and Lil’s; illus. by Adam Gudeon. Boyds 
Mills, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59078-934-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-7 yrs
It’s bedtime for bunny sisters Bessie and Lil, but this is no tidy Goodnight Moon 
tale; while Mama Rabbit tries to read a bedtime story (one she fondly remembers 
from her own youth), her girls are easily distracted and won’t stay in bed, preferring 
instead to practice skipping, look out the window at the moon, and rush into their 
sleeping baby sister’s room to blow her goodnight kisses. When they eventually 
get tucked in, they still haven’t settled down completely, but after being shushed a 
couple of times by their mother, they finally drift off. It’s refreshing to see a bedtime 
book in which everything isn’t all cozy snuggles and smooth lullabies, but the story-
within-a-story doesn’t quite pack the punch of Rosen’s energetic bedtime tale Send 
for a Superhero (BCCB 9/14) and the narrative trajectory lacks focus. Gudeon’s 
artwork is done in ink and gouache with some pictures (mainly the interspersed 
“pages” of Mama’s readaloud book) stained and textured with tea bags for a vin-
tage feel; unfortunately, some of the images and outlines are slightly blurry. The 
lanky-limbed white rabbits with their long ears are cute without being saccharine, 
though, and their lively antics add some sass to the more soporific lavenders and 
pinks of the backgrounds (as do their bright orange stuffed carrot toy, carrot-shaped 
car, and carrot-shaped toy rocket). Weary parents are probably going to get more 
out of this than their kids, but it might make an amusing family readaloud.  JH
sullivAn, deRek e. Biggie. Whitman, 2015 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-0727-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Henry, nicknamed “Biggie” since second grade, is perfectly happy being over three 
hundred pounds. He’s doing just great, thank you, with his robust roster of online 
girlfriends, terrific grades, and a part-time job that lets him gaze upon customer/ 
classmate Annabelle, who will, he’s sure, one day be his real-time girlfriend. It’s 
everybody else that has a problem with his weight: the kids at school who ridicule 
him; Mom, who’s always nagging him; his stepfather, who only respects kids who 
play sports; his doctor, who treats him, well, like a patient with a problem. Henry’s 
self-assessment takes a hit, though, on the day he miraculously pitches a perfect wiffle 
ball game in gym class, Annabelle offhandedly remarks to Coach that Biggie should 
pitch on the baseball team, and Biggie’s young stepbrother, Maddux, convinces him 
he could be the first player in baseball-crazy Finch, Iowa, to pitch a perfect high 
school game. Think you know where this is going? On a straight line to respect, 
romance, and baseball glory? Biggie gets most of the way there, eventually, but 
not before confronting a boatload of uncomfortable truths: his online behavior is 
creepy; his weight has made him dangerously hypertensive; his schoolmates ridicule 
him not because he’s fat but because he’s weird and condescending; his stepfather 
has always been ready to meet him halfway; Annabelle isn’t worth the effort; Mom 
is right. Biggie’s road to enlightenment is by turns hilarious and devastating, and 
although he doesn’t end up with ripped abs, sports-page headlines, or the girl of 
his dreams, he does get a life—and despite his self-deluded protestations, that’s 
exactly what he wanted.  EB
520 • The BulleTin
suMA, novA Ren The Walls around Us. Algonquin, 2015 319p
ISBN 978-1-61620-372-6 $17.95   
R* Gr. 9-12
At Aurora Hills Secure Juvenile Detention Center, there’s Amber, in for man-
slaughter (an abusive stepfather died in a slightly too convenient car fire), one of 
the forty-two the institution can contain. Outside, there’s eighteen-year-old Violet, 
dancing the title role of the Firebird and headed toward Juilliard. Between them 
there is Ori, Violet’s long-time best friend and supremely talented fellow dancer; 
after a horrific crime behind the ballet school, Ori was sent to Aurora Hills and 
became Amber’s cellmate. As Amber’s and Violet’s narrations alternate, it becomes 
clear that something strange and supernatural happened—or is happening—at 
Aurora Hills that’s bringing the two stories together, and that there’s more to the 
terrible event three years ago than Violet’s admitting. Suma craftily sets the two 
stories against one another, moving between Violet’s fiercely grounded account 
and Amber’s hauntingly destabilized one, enticing readers to figure out how the 
pieces go together; it’s clear right from the opening that something is off-kilter at 
Aurora Hills, so the uncertainty is gratifyingly disturbing. Hints of the truth about 
the crime intensify in Violet’s narrative but remain oblique (“You can’t ever blame 
someone for putting herself first,” she thinks coolly), but surprises still remain right 
until the end. Readers who loved the author’s spooky but redemptive 17 & Gone 
(BCCB 3/13) and who are looking for something a little more vengeful will curl 
up happily with this.  DS
syMes, sAlly Funny Face, Sunny Face; illus. by Rosalind Beardshaw. Nosy Crow/
Candlewick, [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7606-3 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 1-3 yrs
Adorable animals and a cast of multicultural children act out the rhyming text that 
guides listeners through a typical toddler day, from start (“Bunny face, sunny face, 
wake up . . . with a funny face!”) to finish (“Nosy heads, cozy heads, all tired out . . .  
and dozy heads”). In between, the toddlers and animals comb their hair (if they 
have any), eat a meal, walk and dance, play ball, enjoy some ice cream, and feed 
the ducks at a pond, before bathing and getting ready for bed. The text itself is 
more of a list than a story, but the jump-rope-like rhyming pattern is consistent and 
pleasingly musical, and the activities presented are inviting and kid-friendly. Body 
parts are frequently mentioned as well, offering opportunities for little listeners to 
participate by locating their own lips, noses, and so on, and to imitate the activities 
described (dancing, kissing, etc.). The sunny mixed-media illustrations create a cozy, 
lively world in which little pigs wear hair bows, children hold hands (hooves?) with 
baby giraffes, and little kids play catch with squirrels dressed in overalls. The large 
trim size and tidy compositions ensure that the illustrations are easily seen from a 
distance, while smaller details (a tractor bib, a pair of discarded socks on the floor) 
and patterned elements add texture and interest. Like a fresh, warm oatmeal cookie, 
this appeals to the senses and attracts children; it will be equally enjoyed at library 
storytimes, preschool classrooms, and family lap-reading sessions.  JH
June 2015 • 521
TAhiR, sABAA An Ember in the Ashes. Razorbill, 2015 [464p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-803-2 $19.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Laia is a member of the conquered Scholars, who have lived under the rule of 
the oppressive Martial Empire for 500 years. Elias is on the winning side, close 
to graduating from a harsh program that produces Masks, creepy but powerful 
individuals who sport silver masks molded permanently to their faces, a fate he 
feels trapped by. The two stumble into each other because Laia, a slave in the 
household, is attempting to spy on the Commandant, Elias’ mother. As things get 
more dangerous, the two will need each other as well as their networks of allies to 
survive. Though the romantic tension between the daughter of the Resistance and 
the son of a key figure in the oppressive regime is not terribly realistic, the author 
keeps it complex by providing much more politically and socially appropriate 
temptations (for Laia, a handsome resistance fighter who thinks for himself, and 
for Elias, a childhood friend, Helene, who is ambitious and adoring). Politically 
minded readers will spot the important point Tahir makes about the ways in which 
five hundred years of battles can leave both groups oppressed, wary, exhausted, and 
generally less than what they could be, though she doesn’t shy away from the fact 
that life is still quite a bit better on the side of the conquerors, particularly for the 
citizens. Ultimately, this is a gripping fantasy, and readers seeking a lengthy novel 
into which to dive fully will appreciate the effective world-building, well-drawn 
characters, and nail-biting tension.  AS
ToMp, sARAh My Best Everything. Little, 2015 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-32478-6 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-32476-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Luisa Mendez wants to get out of her tiny Virginia town and start her life over at 
University of San Diego. Her well-laid plans are torn apart when her father tells 
her that he has lost her college fund in a bad business deal, so Lulu decides to go 
into business herself, roping a few close friends and a boy she hardly knows into a 
moonshine operation. She falls for the boy, Mason, who is a recovering alcoholic 
estranged from his family of functional alcoholic moonshiners. His expertise is still 
intact, though, as is his love for the scientific process of making homemade liquor, 
making him an ideal match for analytically minded Lulu. The staunchly Catholic 
Lulu threads her moral needle finely here, as does the author: making moonshine is 
okay from a Catholic standpoint (that is, there’s no objection to alcohol) as well as 
from a libertarian political perspective (which holds that the government shouldn’t 
be in the business of regulating liquor), just so long as your business is clean and 
doesn’t stray into meth. Still, it’s a dangerous undertaking, and Lulu finds herself 
facing some complex moral issues as she realizes the implications of drawing Mason 
back into a lifestyle he had left behind. Tomp draws on a deep knowledge of her 
southwest Virginia setting and its inhabitants. Carefully crafted metaphors wend 
their way through the setting and other characters, including Lulu’s mother’s ago-
raphobia, her father’s perpetual travel, Mason’s skill in building things, and Lulu’s 
job at a salvage yard. Each element combines into a thematic exploration of the 
compromises and challenges of both loving and leaving home.  KC
522 • The BulleTin
ToTen, TeResA The Unlikely Hero of Room 13 B. Delacorte, 2015 289p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50787-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50786-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50788-1 $10.99   
R Gr. 8-10
When Robyn joins the Young Adult OCD Support Group, fourteen-year-old Adam 
falls immediately and totally in love. He already plenty on his plate: since his parents’ 
divorce and his father’s remarriage, his mother has started hoarding, and his new 
little stepbrother suffers from sadness that only Adam can manage. Meanwhile, 
Adam seems to have informally taken control of Group as well, introducing them 
to the comforting space and rituals of his Catholic church. He helps Robyn, too, 
and they do fall sweetly in love, but as his mother’s hoarding and other symptoms 
escalate, so do Adam’s compulsions, until finally he is unable to breach the threshold 
of his own home. Adam is thoroughly likable and thoroughly liked by the other 
characters, who come to see him as a hero. Readers spend so much time in his 
head with him that his rituals take on heartbreaking immediacy; his desperation 
to save his mother, his stepbrother, and his beloved Robyn render the fact that he 
is losing himself all the more tragic. Toten never plays coy in her depiction of his 
and others’ illness, but she also shows Adam as someone straining toward normal 
and sometimes achieving it. While Adam’s altruism never falters, his vulnerability, 
humor, and thoughtful responses keep him from seeming too good to be true; he’s 
just a guy who’s chosen compassion over bitterness in the face of his suffering, and 
his plight is sure to inspire compassion in readers as well. An interview with the 
author follows the text.  KC
vAughT, susAn Footer Davis Probably Is Crazy. Wiseman/Simon, 2015 229p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2276-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2278-9 $10.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Footer Davis wants to be a journalist, and her best friend, Peavine, 
wants to be a detective, so the two set out to solve the mystery of their neighbor’s 
murder and the fire that may have killed his two grandchildren. Footer’s distracted 
from her investigations, though, when her mother is hospitalized for bipolar dis-
order. Now Footer has to deal with a nosy social worker, a teacher she hates, and 
some pesky hallucinations that might be traumatic memories of abuse she actually 
witnessed or might be, she fears, indications that she too will suffer from the same 
mental illness as her mom. Footer’s tongue is as sharp as her mind, and she has no 
problem sticking up for herself, even when the odds are against her. Vaught keeps 
up the energy of the reading experience by mixing in various other elements, in-
cluding Footer’s illustrated school reports and lists, witness interviews transcribed 
by Peavine, and journal entries written by Peavine’s precocious little sister. A busy 
cast of likable small-town southern folk brings authentic variety to the mix; Peavine 
has cerebral palsy, for instance, and Captain Armstrong, a neighbor, suffers from 
PTSD, but like Footer’s mom’s bipolar disorder, these are just things you cope with 
as you go about your business. Footer ends her journalism career with a solved 
crime and a new understanding of the mentally ill, social workers, and herself; 
readers who appreciate a mystery with heart, humor, and a little trauma will enjoy 
this. An interview with the author and suggestions for further reading, fiction and 
non, on brain disorders follows the text.  KC
June 2015 • 523
veRnon, uRsulA Castle Hangnail. Dial, 2015 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4129-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Castle Hangnail needs a new master or mistress to boss around the minions 
and terrorize the realm, but those minions aren’t convinced that twelve-year-old 
sweetheart Molly is the right one for the job, even if she is carrying one of their 
invitations. It turns out that she stole it, though that fact isn’t revealed until well 
after she has already completed most of the tasks required to get the castle up to 
snuff, and after the staff has already fallen in love with her. What Molly lacks in 
true evil, she makes up for with her sharp wit, cleverness, and willingness to see bad 
guys get their due; these traits ably compensate for her youth and for her core of 
goodness, which startles the minions who were pretty certain up until now that if 
they aren’t being tormented, then they weren’t doing their jobs. The plot neatly gets 
the parents out of the way, giving Molly free and unsupervised rein and allowing 
readers to live vicariously through a girl who is pampered by minotaurs, animated 
armor, and various other cool, slightly spooky characters. The drafty castle is care-
fully described in ways that highlight the personality and mystery such a location 
can offer, becoming a character in itself that creaks and sighs, houses bats and 
moles and misfits, and serves as a true icon of magic for the area. Frequent black 
and white illustrations mostly add humor, keeping the scarier elements tolerable 
for skittish readers. Fans of Ibbotson and Vande Velde will be right at home with 
this novel, and all readers will likely hope that Molly returns for more adventures 
now that she’s truly earned her place.  AS
wARdlAw, lee Won Ton and Chopstick: A Cat and Dog Tale Told in Haiku; illus. 
by Eugene Yelchin. Holt, 2015 33p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9987-4 $17.99   
R Gr. 2-4
In this follow up to Won Ton, Won Ton the cat narrates in verse a change to his 
life—the addition of a puppy to the household. Twelve titled sections, each a spread 
or two in length, document in senryu (a Japanese verse form metered like haiku) 
the shift from dislike and jealousy on the part of the cat (never from the clueless 
puppy) to grudging acceptance to relative contentment. The verses are collected 
into titled sections, each only a spread or two in length; the poetry is concise and 
witty (“Who. Ate. My. Dinner./ Your eyes say ‘no-no,’ but your/ breath brags of 
tuna”), technically deft, and age-accessible. Yelchin’s graphite-lined gouache art 
craftily echoes the verse, with a restrained spareness of style in the figures delicately 
partnering with comic touches such as the puppy’s exaggeratedly adoring gaze and 
the cat’s envious sulking. This has readaloud as well as readalone potential, and it 
could certainly add interest to a poetry unit. A note on the copyright page explains 
senryu (though not why the subtitle calls them haiku).  DS
wARMAn, JessiCA The Last Good Day of the Year. Bloomsbury, 2015 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3662-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3664-2 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
In 1986, on New Year’s Eve, someone dressed as Santa Claus came into Samantha’s 
basement while her parents partied upstairs and abducted her sleeping younger 
524 • The BulleTin
sister, Turtle. She was never seen again, and seven-year-old Sam and her best 
friend, Remy, identified the abductor as Steven, the boyfriend of Sam’s older 
sister, Gretchen. Now it’s 1996, and Sam and her family have moved back to the 
neighborhood after a difficult decade. As Sam slowly reconnects with Remy, who 
has his own troubles, she begins to acknowledge the demon that’s driven her over 
the years about her response to the crime. The narrative switches back and forth 
between 1996 and 1986, with occasional inserts from the fictional true-crime book 
written about the case. Between them is a picture of a family that has put itself 
back together awkwardly and not entirely successfully. Warman writes with keen 
intimacy and compelling intensity as Sam’s narration describes the fission of her 
old life and the growing unease about what’s happening in the current time. The 
plot swerves around some hairpin turns toward the end, requiring some work to 
keep up with it, but the resolution is genuinely startling. More memorable than 
the mystery, though, is the way Sam and her family are eternally haunted by both 
their loss and their exposure to the ugliest side of humanity; readers will be too.  DS
wein, elizABeTh Black Dove, White Raven. Hyperion, 2015 357p
ISBN 978-1-4231-8310-5 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Emilia Menotti and Teodros Dupré are growing up without fathers, but their 
larger-than-life mothers more than compensate. A barnstorming aviator team in 
1930s America, Rhoda Menotti and Delia Dupré are enough of an oddity, but the 
fact that they are a mixed race team (Rhoda is white; Delia is African American) 
further complicates both their relationship and their career. Their bond, though, 
is unbreakable, and when Delia is killed in a freak bird-strike accident, Rhoda not 
only commits to raising Teo as her own son but also to fulfilling Delia’s dream of 
emigrating to Ethiopia, which under the reforms of Haile Selassie seems to hold the 
promise of personal liberty that the United States does not offer. Momma sets up 
shop as a pilot and aerial photographer, but the grim reality of the family’s newly 
adopted land becomes painfully clear when Mussolini sends in his air force with 
intent to occupy the country, and incomplete internal reforms expose Teo’s legal 
status as a slave. Wein describes a fascinating period of hope and challenge, but 
the various political threads are presented as mini history lessons stiffly embedded 
in characters’ conversations. The novel’s structure—a packet of essays, stories, 
and flight log commentary sent by Em to Haile Selassi in an effort to secure Teo’s 
freedom—add unnecessary complication to an already intricate story. Moreover, 
the first half of the novel deals mainly with family background and the grief about 
Delia’s death; not until the second half does Em’s and Teo’s story gain traction. 
When it does, though, the action becomes thoroughly gripping, as the aviation 
skills learned from their mothers become both their burden and their salvation. 
A closing note comments on Wein’s fictionalization of Ethiopian history and of 
actual persons who inspired characters in the tale.  EB
wieChMAn, kAThy CAnnon Like a River: A Civil War Novel. Calkins Creek, 
2015 336p
ISBN 978-1-62979-209-5 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8
After his older brother’s accident leaves him paralyzed, Leander Jordan carries 
the brunt of the farm labor; tired of the extra work and endless criticism, he lies 
about his age and reports for muster to fight the Rebs with his brother’s friend, 
June 2015 • 525
Given. His negligence in caring for his own rifle results in loss of his arm during 
a minor skirmish, and while recuperating in a makeshift hospital in Georgia, he 
meets “Paul” Settles, whom he discovers to be really a girl, and who has followed 
her father into battle. Before Leander and Paul can admit their mutual attraction, 
Leander is shipped home and Paul, now fatherless, joins an Indiana company and 
leaves without a goodbye. With Leander offstage in Ohio, the story turns to Paul/
Polly, who is apprehended with a foraging party by Rebel troops and sent to the 
prison camp at Andersonville, Georgia. Despite her resourcefulness, it’s the friend-
ship of fellow prisoner Given that ultimately keeps her safe and sustains her will to 
live—and offers the possibility of again encountering Leander. Although details of 
Leander’s and Polly’s experiences are well researched and convincing, the orchestra-
tion of their separate journeys to converge in a happy ending puts this squarely 
in the realm of romance. Readers who read between the lines will surely wonder 
what happened to Given’s quest to help a pair of Southern women rebuild their 
farm, or how Leander fares working his father’s farm with one arm, but those who 
put their faith in fairy-tale endings may be satisfied with the sweethearts’ reunion. 
Historical notes and photographs are included.  EB
willis, JeAnne Supercat vs. the Fry Thief; illus. by Jim Field. HarperCollins, 
2015 [224p] (Supercat)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-000-758596-0 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Ten-year-old James wishes he had an exciting pet instead of the overweight, lazy cat 
that he owns, but the ingestion of a French fry with a bit of moldy sock attached 
to it unexpectedly transforms Tiger into a walking, talking, singing, guitar-playing, 
and foreign-language-spouting feline superhero. Tiger creates a snappy uniform for 
himself (out of underpants and James’ sister’s leotard) and renames himself “Su-
percat,” after the hero of one of James’ comic books. When it becomes clear that 
the comic’s villain, Count Backwards, is not a fictional entity but a real-life baddie, 
James and Supercat try to capture the Count, who is sabotaging the world’s potato 
supply in a misguided attempt to blackmail the Secret Service. Is the premise of 
this British import utterly ridiculous? Of course, but it’s skillfully and entertain-
ingly executed. Logic may be readily abandoned here, but wordplay (including 
amusing anagrams), gleeful absurdity, and poop humor abound: “Supercat flicked 
a blob of manure off his costume. ‘He spattered my sequins! No one gets away with 
that!’” The quick pace and funny dialogue will encourage both readers-aloud and 
readers-alone to plow full steam ahead, and the numerous black and white draw-
ings add humor and clarity to the text. Captain Underpants fans or devotees of 
Mary Amato’s various funny titles will probably take a shine to Supercat as well, 
and they’ll eagerly anticipate new volumes in the series.  JH
yolen, JAne Stone Angel; illus. by Katie May Green. Philomel, 2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16741-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
A young, unnamed Jewish girl finds her tranquil world upended when the Nazis 
occupy France. The once-friendly baker will no longer sell her or her younger 
brother croissants, her father loses his job, and the family leaves their home to 
seek refuge in the forest with other partisans. Certain that angels are guarding 
526 • The BulleTin
her family, the girl never loses hope that they will all will remain safe, even when 
Nazi troops pass close by or when climbing through snowy mountains to Spain. 
The girl’s narration, in ragged right margin prose, describes a resistance experience 
relatively unexplored in children’s literature, and veteran author Yolen gives her tale 
attractive smoothness. Indeed, the prettiness of the telling and of the angel imagery 
(and the girl’s minimal losses) tends to bury the harder truth, as when the narra-
tor “did not cry” at the seeming deaths of her comrades because she “knew they 
had flown off to be with the angels”; overall, the effect is more fairy tale than slice 
of relentlessly tragic history. Additionally, the decision to reveal the root of girl’s 
belief in guardian angels, the titular stone angel on her Parisian building, only at 
the end makes her belief seem puzzling, and the revelation isn’t climactic enough 
to atone for its lateness in coming. The mixed-media illustrations at times echo 
Garth Williams in their rounded lines and gentle shading; the softness cushions the 
somber subject matter while a subdued palette keeps the mood serious. The girl’s 
faith is admirable, and this may serve, in context with more factual information, 
to acquaint audiences with the French partisan and refugee experience. An author’s 
note in child-friendly language explains the historical basis of the partisans and of 
the stone angel itself.  AA
CoRReCTion:
In the April issue’s review of Kathi Appelt’s When Otis Courted Mama, the name of 
the illustrator, Jill McElmurry, was misspelled in the heading. The Bulletin regrets 
the error.
June 2015 • 527
hAMMond, heidi k.  Reading the Art in Caldecott Award Books: A Guide to 
the Illustrations; by Heidi K. Hammond and Gail D. Nordstrom. Rowman & 
Littlefield, 2014 253p
ISBN 978-1-4422-3923-4 $32.00
The authors walk readers through the art of fifty-six Caldecott award and honor 
books, providing a close examination of the titles that have earned the committee’s 
recognition as outstanding picture books. The book begins with an introduction 
to both Hammond and Nordstrom and their experiences on the Caldecott com-
mittee; the insider’s perspective on committee work will be of particular value to 
those professionals interested in serving on a committee as well as to readers who 
wonder exactly how the decision making process unfolds. The book then moves 
onto the nitty-gritty examination of the awardees; entries are arranged in alphabeti-
cal order by title and each entry offers a lengthy analysis of the art, a quick note 
on style and medium used, points for further consideration, and a note from the 
illustrator. The prose of the analysis is more sturdily practical than elegant, and a 
few entries fall into the trap of describing the content of the illustrations more than 
technique of the art and its complement to the text. More often than not, though, 
the authors make an effort to look at how style, composition, medium, palette, 
and other elements work together to successfully fulfill the Caldecott requirement 
of “delineation of plot, theme, characters, setting, mood, or information through 
pictures.” Quotes from other evaluative sources are used quite liberally (but always 
cited), as are ones directly from the illustrators discussing their choices of medium, 
technique, and style. The “For Further Consideration” section elaborates on some 
point brought up in the analysis and sometimes offers an interesting look at the 
author’s creative process (as in Brian Floca’s Locomotive and David Wiesner’s Mr. 
Wuffles!) or the publishing process (as in Ian Falconer’s Olivia). This will be especially 
useful to readers who have never thought about picture book art beyond “cute” or 
“colorful,” and it provides a strong foundational vocabulary for analyzing picture 
book illustrations.  End matter includes selected sources (including online) about 
art; ALSC’s Caldecott Medal criteria; an alphabetical by author bibliography of 
the entries; a reverse chronological list of Caldecott medalists; a glossary; and an 
author, title, and illustrator index.  KQG 
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
528  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Beaufrand
Adventure: Courtauld; deSte-
fano; Grabenstein; Grau; John-
ston; Kirby, M.; Pass; Peterfreund; 
Preble
Africa–fiction: Wein
Africa–stories: Kim
African Americans: Andrews; Barton
Alcohol–fiction: tomp
Animals: Aston
Animals–fiction: Lewis, G.
Animals–stories: edwards; Korda; 
Symes
Art and artists: Kügler; Smith
Art and artists–stories: dominguez; 
Florian
Assassins–fiction: dawson
Astral projection–fiction: Arntson
Aviation–fiction: Wein
Baseball–fiction: Sullivan
Beaches–stories: Larsen
Bears–fiction: Lewis, G.
BedtiMe StorieS: Korda; Stern-
berg
BioGrAPHieS: Andrews; Barton; 
Kügler; rauch
Birds–fiction: Grey, J.
Black people–fiction: Wein
BoArd BooKS: Light
Boats: Light
Body image–fiction: Sullivan
Books and reading–fiction: Graben-
stein
Brothers–fiction: Hasak-Lowy; 
Lynch
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Jones; 
Skye
Bullies–fiction: Myer
Buses–stories: dubuc
Camping–fiction: Scott
Castles–fiction: vernon
Cats–fiction: Singleton; Willis
Cats–poetry: Wardlaw
Civil War–fiction: Wiechman
Clothing–stories: Crespo
Clubs–fiction: Singleton
Conspiracies–fiction: Peterfreund
Corporations–fiction: dawson
Crafts: Maloney
Crime and criminals–fiction: Bal-
liett; dawson; Freitas; Giles, L.; 
Grey, J.; Halbrook; Jones; Kirby, 
M.; Larbalestier; rehr; Scott; 
Simukka; Suma; tomp; vaught; 
Warman
Cults–fiction: Hautman; Simukka
death–fiction: reed; rubin
diaries–fiction: Brooks, K.
dogs–poetry: Wardlaw
dogs–stories: Landström
dragons–fiction: Johnston
dragons–stories: Florian 
drawing: Smith
dystopias–fiction: Pass; tahir
emotions–stories: delacroix
Ethics and values: Brooks, J.; 
Cotugno; Grey, M.; Halbrook; 
Hale; Hautman; McStay; Pass; 
Seidman
ethiopia–fiction: Wein
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
June 2015  •  529
Families: raidt
Families–fiction: Crossan; Harkey; 
Sanders; Seigel; toten; Wein
FAntASy: Arntson; Brooks, J.; Calo-
nita; Courtauld; deStefano; Gra-
benstein; Grau; Grey, J.; Grey, M.; 
Hale; Hardinge; Harkey; Hawkins; 
Hodge; Johnston; Johnstone; Mor-
rison; Paige; Pilger; Sanders; tahir; 
vernon
Fathers–fiction: Hasak-Lowy
Flies: Heos
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: Ah-
dieh; Calonita; Hardinge; Hodge; 
Morrison
Football–fiction: Lynch
Foster parents–fiction: Morrison
Friends–fiction: Baker; Freitas; Hall; 
Johnston; Lord; McStay; reed; 
Simpson; Suma; vaught
Friends–stories: Freedman; Land-
ström; Larsen
Frogs–stories: Freedman; Petty
Gardens: Kügler 
Genetics–fiction: ryan
German Americans: raidt
Ghosts–fiction: Larbalestier
GLBtQ people–fiction: Hasak-Lowy
Grandparents–fiction: Crossan; Mc-
voy; dubuc
GrAPHiC noveLS: rehr; Simpson; 
Spiegelman
Grief–fiction: Baker; Kirby, J.; Lord; 
reed
Guilt–fiction: Leaver
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Ahdieh; 
Larbalestier; Lewis, J.; Wein; 
Wiechman
History, U.S.: Barton
History, world: rauch
Holocaust–stories: Lewis, J.
Horror: Brooks, K.
HoW-to BooKS: Smith
HuMor: Courtauld; Crespo; 
edwards; Florian; Freedman; 
Hawkins; Heos; Myer; Petty; 
Pilger; rubin; Simpson; Skye; 
Smith; Sternberg; Sullivan; vernon; 
Wardlaw; Willis
identity–fiction: Leaver; Lynch; Sul-
livan
identity–stories: Petty
illness–fiction: reed
imagination–stories: Maloney
immigration: raidt
insects: Heos
Jews: rauch
Jews–stories: Lewis, J.
Journals–fiction: Myer
Kidnapping–fiction: Brooks, K.
Knitting–stories: dominguez
Language arts: dubuc; Wardlaw
Laos–fiction: Lewis, G.
Latinos–fiction: Jones; tomp
LeGendS: Hall
Literature, children’s: Paige
Lost and found–stories: Landström
Magic–fiction: Harkey; Hawkins; 
Johnstone; Paige; Sanders; vernon
Mental illness–fiction: Shusterman; 
vaught
Mice–stories: Freedman
Missing persons–fiction: Warman
Moods–stories: delacroix
Morning–stories: Maloney
Mothers–fiction: Crossan; Kirby, M.
Mothers–stories: dominguez 
Museums–fiction: Balliett
Music and musicians: Andrews 
Music and musicians–fiction: Beau-
frand
Music and musicians–stories: Lewis, J.
MySterieS: Balliett; Beaufrand; 
dawson; Freitas; Giles, L.; Larbal-
estier; Preble; Simukka; Singleton; 
vaught; Warman
Nature study: Aston; Heos
nests: Aston 
new orleans: Andrews 
new york–fiction: Spiegelman
obsessive-compulsive disorder–fic-
tion: toten
oppression–fiction: tahir
organ donation–fiction: Kirby, J.
Parents–stories: delacroix 
Pets–fiction: Singleton
Pioneer life: raidt
Poetry: Wardlaw
530  •  The BulleTin
Poverty–fiction: Harkey
Prison–fiction: Jones; Suma
Quests–fiction: Morrison
rabbits–stories: Maloney; Sternberg
rape–fiction: Halbrook
Reading aloud: Wardlaw; Willis
Reading, easy: Courtauld; Kim; 
Pilger; Willis
Reading, reluctant: Jones
reconstruction: Barton
relationships–fiction: Brooks, J.; Mc-
voy; Preble; reed; rubin; Seigel; 
toten
Religious education: Seidman
reputation–fiction: Cotugno
rHyMinG StorieS: edwards; 
Symes
romance–fiction: Ahdieh; Cotugno; 
Hawkins; Hodge; Kirby, J.; Lord; 
Wiechman
royalty–fiction: Hale
rural life: raidt
School–fiction: Calonita; Giles, L.; 
Grau; McStay; Pilger; Skye; Spie-
gelman; Sullivan
School–stories: Kim
SCienCe FiCtion: Arntson; 
Hautman; Kirby, M.; Pass; rubin; 
ryan
Secrets–fiction: Halbrook; Hale; 
Leaver; Peterfreund; rubin
Sisters–fiction: Courtauld; Crossan; 
Hale; Hardinge; Preble; Warman
Sisters–stories: Sternberg
Soccer–stories: Crespo
Soldiers: rauch 
Sports–fiction: Lynch 
Storytelling–fiction: Ahdieh
Storytelling–stories: Freedman
Storytime: Crespo; Korda; Larsen; 
Symes
Subways–fiction: Spiegelman 
Summer–fiction: Cotugno
Summer–stories: Larsen
Superheroes–fiction: Willis
SuPernAturAL StorieS: Arn-
tson; Hall; Suma
television–fiction: Seigel
tHriLLerS: Beaufrand; Freitas; 
ryan; Scott
toddLer BooKS: Landström; 
Light; Symes 
torture–fiction: Brooks, K.
toys–stories: Landström
treasure–fiction: Baker
twins–fiction: Leaver
uncles–fiction: Johnstone
unicorns–fiction: Simpson
vacations–stories: Larsen
voyages and travel–fiction: Hasak-
Lowy; Johnstone; Mcvoy; Peter-
freund; Sanders; dubuc
War–fiction: deStefano; Grey, M.
World War i–fiction: rehr 
World War ii: rauch
World War ii–fiction: Wein
Writers and writing–fiction: Crossan
