H
I L 
I N
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
C~ arnscus~- ;
Universty ot Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
4- 
9si 
t"
I·:.i 
.; 
~II
bouncing rhyme about trains [1949]
has been inventively re-imagined by [the Caldecott Medalists].
A silver 'streamlined train' puffs off to the West, while a tiny
toy train is its echo and shadow in a comfortable, warmly
kid-inhabited home. . . . The artists have chosen exactly
the right expression of pure and simple art to accompany the
equally uncomplicated rhyme. Sure to delight yet another
generation of children." 
-Starred 
review/Kirkus Reviews
* 
"This beautiful new edition is in the same spirit as
Brown's Goodnight Moon and should please the same broad
audience. It's wonderful to have it back in such appropriate,
and handsome, new garb."
-Starred 
review/ The Horn Book
~ 
"A handsome reinterpretation [of] Brown's remarkable text."
-Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
Ages 3-6. $15.95 Tr (0-06-028376-9); $15.89 Lb (0-06-028377-7)
I HarperCollins Children'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
WAMUWMWAý
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
September 2001
Vol. 55 No. 1
A LOOK INSIDE
3 
THE BIG PICTURE
Amber Was Brave, Essie Was Smart written and illus. by Vera B. Williams
5 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
5 
* The Adventures ofBert by Allan Ahlberg; illus. by Raymond Briggs
9 
* Larky Mavis written and illus. by Brock Cole
17 
* Among the Impostors by Margaret Peterson Haddix
19 
* Cat's Pajamas written and illus. by Thacher Hurd
20 
* Find Where the Wind Goes: Moments from My Life by Mae Jemison
29 
* Bad Boy: A Memoir by Walter Dean Myers
42 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
43 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Sabrina Austin
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road,
Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O.
Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. E-mail:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2001 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Vera B. Williams from Amber Was Brave, Essie Was Smart ©2001. Used by
permission of Greenwillow Books.
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
3
THE BIG PICTURE
Amber Was Brave, Essie Was Smart
written and illustrated by Vera B. Williams
It's hard to be a good poem and tell a story.
It's hard to balance verbal and visual images
so neither overwhelms or limits the other.
It's hard to create a memoir that fills the space
between picture book and middle-grade reading.
It's hard to be sad and happy at the same time.
In Amber Was Brave, Essie Was Smart, Vera Williams does all of the above with an
organic ease that nearly disguises the book's innovative nature-the book seems
born to be what it is without self-conscious authorial effort. Her twenty-eight
one-page, free-verse poems relate the daily events of two sisters often thrown to-
gether on their own as their mother works to keep the family together in their
father's absence. We learn quite naturally through the children's arguments that
Daddy forged a check and went to jail ("It is too stealing, Essie told Amber,/ and
it's very bad"). Their lives are detailed poignantly but without sentimentality.
They comfort each other by cuddling into a "Best Sandwich" with Wilson The
Bear "right in the middle up against them both," and they befriend a new neigh-
bor, juggle help from neighbors and extended family, and suffer dramatic ups and
downs-literally, at one point, when they break a bed with overexuberant bounc-
ing.
Integrated with the text are graphics as varied as these experiences. The
opening full-color portraits and equally bright concluding picture album sand-
wich the body of the text in a tonal reflection of the girls' own "Best Sandwich."
In both sections, striking colored-pencil lines accent the vertical and play sudden
contrasts of hue against subtle blends. The first portraits show the backs of Amber
and Essie first and then their faces, an arrangement that signals we will get to know
these characters through a back door of action and dialogue that reveals their core
of strength and joy. (The fact that their father is much loved despite the girls'
inner conflict over what he has done introduces a complexity unusual in this com-
pressed a story.) A heavy multicolored line extends through the text under each
italicized poem title, tying together the full-color illustrations in the beginning and
end. Facing a number of the poems are full-page, heavily outlined black-and-
white drawings that echo the typeface and even seem to form a rhythmic visual
extension from the black marks that form letters to the black marks that form
pictures. An especially good example is "Sad Lullaby," in which one of the lines in
each of three stanzas features extra space between words in a way that calls atten-
tion to the space in and around the picture opposite, which depicts Amber and
Essie's mother "just sitting/ On her bed." Every poem ends with an unobtrusive
4 
* 
THE BULLETIN
diamond-shaped icon pointing the reader toward another page. The fact that such
varied formatting and design does not call attention to itself but rather serves to
unify effects for cohesive impact is a tribute to creative bookmaking.
Children's and young adult literature has, of course, been recognized for
hosting a renaissance of graphic innovation, but the rise of poetic narrative is more
surprising, given the generally conservative nature of juvenile literary forms. Es-
sentially, a poem contracts and a story expands. Satisfying the dynamic of both at
the same time involves a technical tug of war. William Merwin does it in his
recent adult epic of Hawaiian history, The Folding Cliffs, but that's 325 pages long,
with space to maneuver. Then there's Beowulf. The Odyssey and a few others
spring to mind, but you notice they're pretty old-the fad for narrative poetry has
perhaps faded in the world of adult literature. Books for children and young
adults, though, seem to be hosting a revival of the form, with Karen Hesse's Out of
the Dust (BCCB 5/01) winning a Newbery Award and Virginia Euwer Wolffs
Make Lemonade (7/93) and True Believer (5/01) riveting critical and popular at-
tention.
Perhaps it helps that stories for young people demand the same kind of
compression poetry does. What many if not most children want, after all, is to
find out what happens next; if it happens with rhythm and brevity, so much the
better. Wolff says, in a Horn Book interview with Roger Sutton, that "meaning
ought to radiate more fiercely in poetry than it does in prose .... 
Poetry should
have more ergs per word." With that standard in mind, we can measure Vera
Williams' achievement here by its compactness: an artistic mini-epic with two
mini-heroes overcoming all odds of the inevitably bewildering, irrepressibly hope-
ful journey called childhood. (Imprint information appears on p. 41.)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor
ANNOUNCEMENT
It is with great pleasure that we finally welcome the Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books to its new home in the Graduate School of Library and Informa-
tion Science building. This long-anticipated move brings the Bulletin and the
Center into enlarged, specially designed space suitable not just for continued pub-
lication of the Bulletin and maintenance of its tradition of excellence but also for
expansion of the Center for Children's Books into a genuine and vital center for
education, outreach, and development.
Such a mission will require much more from the director of the Center,
and we are happy to announce that Janice Del Negro, editor of the Bulletin since
1996, will be taking on those additional responsibilities. Janice will retain her
connection to the Bulletin as Contributing Editor, continuing to bring invaluable
knowledge and experience to the Bulletin with her reviews.
Deborah Stevenson will take over the reins as Editor of the Bulletin ofthe
Center for Children's Books. A PhD in English from the University of Chicago
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
5
with credits ranging from membership in the Caldecott Committee of 2001 to a
senior editorship on the in-progress Oxford Encyclopedia of Children's Literature,
Deborah will be most familiar to subscribers from her eleven years of reviewing
and nine years' editorial service at the Bulletin.
Our thanks to Bulletin subscribers and readers for your support and in-
volvement. We hope you'll enjoy the new and exciting development of the Center
for Children's Books as you continue to rely on the tradition of excellence at the
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books.
Leigh Estabrook, Dean
Marlo Welshons, Director of Publications
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
The Adventures of Bert; illus. by Raymond Briggs. 
Farrar,
2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-30092-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
Bert lives with his wife, Mrs. Bert, and baby, Baby Bert, and his life is crammed
with unusual event. He gets stuck in a shirt he's putting on and ends up in Scot-
land as a consequence; he's chased by a large sausage (which proves to be a man in
a sausage suit, who gives Bert a free sausage); he dives into the river to rescue a box
that's barking and winds up with a puppy. The lightning-quick "chapters" are
quizzically humorous, and they're well pitched and paced for the attention spans
of very small audience members (and they allow for easy pauses and skipping to
favorite sections if desired); the tension is genuine (Bert is fleeing from a giant
sausage! Bert can't swim!) but it's also relieved quickly (the sausage reveals its
humanity; Bert realizes that the river's shallow enough for him to stand up) and
padded by the cozily familial touches (the book begins and ends with salutations
to the Berts and the unintentional waking of the baby). Briggs makes Bert a ro-
tund, cheery gent with a definitely childlike demeanor; he takes his travails in
stride, calmly greeting the kilted shepherd and thumbing a ride home in the rain,
restored to peace and joy by his free sausage, and reveling in his newfound puppy.
The colored-pencil compositions are airy and uncluttered, but they offer a few
details worth lapsitting investigation-the mice fleeing into their hole while the
cat's tail reveals his presence under the bed, the holes in Bert's socks (in the same
places in both the purple and the orange pair), and the spider weaving a web
between Bert's slippers. Bert is an endearing and surprisingly charismatic hero,
and his adventures will be just right for kids a little daunted by the stretch to a
longer story. DS
6 * THE BULLETIN
ARNOLD, TEDD 
More Parts; written and illus. by Tedd Arnold. 
Dial, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-1417-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Our young narrator, who in Parts (BCCB 10/97) was convinced that belly-button
lint, earwax, and other loose body bits were indication of his corporeal dissolution,
here finds new sources of alarm in the words of those around him. His mom
suggests that he broke his heart, his dad wants his son to give the old man a hand,
his friend's sister screams her lungs out every night, and all this casual contempla-
tion of physical destruction has him beside himself until his parents explain that
these nightmarish notions are merely figures of speech. This verse narrative over-
stretches in both scansion and concept to make its point, and it's not as effective as
its predecessor in capitalizing on body anxieties. The protagonist is still eminently
sympathetic in his frantic confusion and perturbation, however, as most kids have
also been baffled a time or two by arcane adult rhetoric; there is also sufficient
dwelling on the physical aspects ("My tongue's a slimy, jiggly, squishy/ Slippery
little squirt") for emotional and readaloud appeal. Arnold's line-and-watercolor
illustrations offer his usual hugely bug-eyed figures clinging to the edge of hysteria,
and scenes of plummeting tongues (dropped after being held), spaghetti-noodle
arms and legs (from stretching one's limbs prior to exercise), and the narrator's
desperate attempts to keep it all, literally, together provide the humorous energy
the text doesn't quite muster on its own. Kids dissolved into laughter by the first
title may find that this cracks them up. DS
BARNER, BOB 
Dinosaur Bones; written and illus. by Bob Barner. 
Chronicle,
2001 
30p
ISBN 0-8118-3158-2 
$15.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
For children newly infected with dino fever, here's a remedy in kids'-strength dos-
age. Across the top of each double-page spread snakes a hand-lettered rhyme re-
minding viewers that those fascinating fossilized bones were shaped to perform a
specific function: "They had bones for legs and bones for hips,/ dinosaur bones
used on long dinosaur trips." Admittedly, great poetry it's not, but the point is
made, and the real meat of the matter embedded in pint-sized paragraphs that
explain a bit of how scientists interpret the fossil record: "Some dinosaurs had hips
like birds. Others had hips like lizards. Many dinosaurs were giants, but some
were the size of a chicken." 
Cheerily grinning crayon-hued behemoths, owing
more to Barney than to Industrial Light & Magic, dominate each scene with their
alluring bulk, and consecutive spreads that move from skeleton to "live" figure
aptly convey the relationship between bare bones and fleshed beast. A concluding
graph of comparative dino heights and a colorful box chart of dino data will not
only edify the child audience but delight primary math teachers on the prowl for
an enticing hook. EB
BATEMAN, TERESA 
The Merbaby; illus. by Patience Brewster. 
Holiday House,
2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1531-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
While fishing in dangerous waters, Tarron and his ambitious brother, Josh, are
lured nearly to their deaths by a mermaid's song. Although Tarron saves Josh's
ship and their lives, Josh scolds him for not also capturing the mermaid, saying
"She would have been both our fortune and our fame." The next day, when the
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 7
brothers find a merbaby in their fishing nets, Josh is delighted, hoping to sell
admission tickets and make their fortunes. Tarron, however, is captivated by the
affectionate merbaby and, breaking a long tradition of fear and mistrust between
humans and mermaids, returns the child to her mermaid family while Josh is sleep-
ing. The merpeople reward him for his kindness in returning the lost child by
giving him human treasures that had been lost at sea, and soon the boat is loaded
down with gold coins and jewels. Tarron generously shares his reward with his
brother and then sells his treasures to fulfill his dream of buying a boat of his own.
The text is well honed with a smooth, lyrical storytelling gait that will engage
listeners even as Tarron ponders the ethical issues in mermaid-human relation-
ships. Brewster uses lines that flow like water in whirls and swirls reminiscent of
Trina Schart Hyman's art, and the pages are washed with the colors of the sea.
Although faces are stiffly drawn, Tarron's tenderness is evident in his gestures, and
the fluidity of line and detail of the nautical environment more than compensate
for this slight flaw. In a maritime storytime or for more intimate sharing, this story
will provide smooth sailing. KM
BRADLEY, KIMBERLY BRUBAKER 
Pop!: A Book About Bubbles; illus. with photo-
graphs by Margaret Miller. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[33p] 
(Let's-Read-and-Find-
Out Science)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028701-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028700-4 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-445208-5 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Those seeking to add some sparkle to their easy-science-project collection can pause
right here for this simple overview of the wonder that is bubbles. Bradley explains
what bubbles are, why they're round (no matter what shape wand is used to blow
them), why they pop, and how to make them. Clean, clear color photographs in
various configurations (full-page, full-and-half-page, and a variety of inserts) fea-
ture a culturally inclusive cast of children gleefully engaged in bubble-blowing
activities with plastic wands and straws. Text blocks are set on brightly hued pages
(blue, gold, pink, green, violet) that pick up the colors in the accompanying pho-
tographs. Bubbles are some of kids' favorite things, and hearing or reading this
introduction to the science of the soapy spheres will add to the pleasure of blowing
them. A recipe for making bubble solution and instructions for two simple science
demonstrations are included. JMD
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
Skeleton Man. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029076-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029075-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Sixth-grader Molly is alone for three days before the authorities discover her par-
ents are missing. Children's Services is more than happy to turn Molly over to the
creepy great-uncle who suddenly appears to claim her, despite Molly's unwilling-
ness to go with him. Her show-tune-singing sixth-grade teacher, Ms. Shabbas,
realizes that something is not right and offers to help, but it is Molly alone who
must discover her great-uncle's true identity. Molly is a brave, believable character
who remembers her father's stories and heeds her dreams, and the combination of
stories, dreams, and determined action enables her both to discover the hideous
8 
* 
THE BULLETIN
truth about her false great-uncle and to rescue her parents. The end is somewhat
abrupt, but Molly's first-person narration will quickly draw in readers, and the
suspenseful buildup to the foreshadowed conclusion will hold them fast. Bruchac
gives full play to his talent for the creepy, and the introduction of bits of American
Indian lore and story (the frame for the novel is an American Indian tale, here
unsourced, about a powerful, cannibalistic Skeleton Man) are smoothly and capa-
bly integrated. Reluctant as well as eager readers, perhaps with their interest awak-
ened by Simms' The Bone Man (BCCB 12/97), will relish this fast-paced
supernatural chase. JMD
CABOT, MEG 
Princess in the Spotlight. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[24 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029466-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029465-5 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
In The Princess Diaries (BCCB 12/00), Mia adjusted, slowly and reluctantly, to
her change from ordinary Manhattan teenager to princess of the small European
country of Genovia. That change was easy compared to the new alteration in her
life: her mom (never married to Mia's father) is pregnant with Mia's algebra teacher's
child, and the happy couple is planning to wed. Mia is embarrassed to the hilt,
determined that nobody know-until she accidentally spills the beans on national
TV, whereupon her opinionated grandmother (who isn't even the mother of the
bride) decides a formal state-occasion wedding complete with celebrities and weird
relatives is the appropriate response. While readers are laughing at shallow, breathless
Mia as often as laughing with her, Cabot's inspired scenario (now fulfilling its
natural destiny by becoming a motion picture) retains its campy charm. The
juxtaposition of Mia's education in the ways ofprincesshood with her gushy, head-
long style and everyday travails continues to prove a comic success. Though there's
a bit too much extraneous contrivance shoehorned in here (the side plot about
Mia's country cousin's development into an underwear model is utterly dispens-
able), the disastrous wedding brings amusing star-guest turns from real-life celeb-
rities (especially Martha Stewart, who helpfully whips up a Halloween costume for
Mia). Fine beach fodder, unburdened by weight or depth, this is as successful a
frothy frivolity as the first title. DS
CART, MICHAEL, ed. 
Love & Sex: Ten Stories of Truth. 
Simon, 2001 
226p
ISBN 0-689-83203-6 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Joan Bauer's "Extra Virgin," about the choice of sexual abstinence, opens this pro-
vocative collection, but abstinence is not necessarily the rule in the remaining nine
stories. Themes revolving around the consequences of first love/first lust between
various gender combinations predominate: Louise Hawes' teenage heroine ques-
tions her abortion ("Fine and Dandy"); Garth Nix's supernatural hero saves the
girl he loves from a homicidal rapist ("Lightning Bringer"); Chris Lynch's con-
fused main character has his heterosexuality reconfirmed by his sexually adventur-
ous girlfriend ("The Cure for Curtis"); Michael Lowenthal's young homosexual
protagonist suffers through his first crush/sexual encounter ("The Acuteness of
Desire"); and Emma Donoghue's lesbian heroine recalls her passionate crush on a
transsexual ("The Welcome"). Whether dealing with infatuation, confusion, or
personal responsibility, the stories offer an intimate look at the complex balancing
act of human involvement. JMD
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 9
CASEY, PATRICIA 
One Day at Wood Green Animal Shelter; written and illus. by
Patricia Casey. 
Candlewick, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-1210-3 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
A lot goes on in a day at this particular animal shelter, as Casey makes clear: people
bring their pets to work, owners bring animals to the clinic for veterinary care,
workers take care of the cats in the sanctuary, the staff rescue a confused deer, and
the shelter deals with various animals dropped off for their permanent care. Though
readers may wonder about an animal shelter that doesn't seem to adopt any critters
out and it's hard to find a connecting thread or person, they'll enjoy the three-
ring-circus aspect of a day with a passel of animals. The visuals capture the pace;
combining photographs and watercolor, they run text blocks in squares through
the spreads, they pepper scenes with speech balloons, and they convert into cap-
tioned panels when it takes their fancy. The loud and jostling effect is occasionally
overwhelming, but it usually just smacks of friendly and frenetic disorganization.
Though there's no further information about the animal shelter (it's never even
mentioned that it's in Britain), a brief index is included. Animal-loving kids will
relish this literary menagerie. DS
CATALANOTTO, 
PETER 
Emily's Art; written and illus. by Peter
Catalanotto. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83831-X 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Emily loves to draw and paint, so when her teacher tells her class they will be
participating in a painting contest she is pleased. While her best friend, Kelly,
paints only butterflies, Emily paints something different every day, each painting
reflecting both the real-life images she sees and the emotional life she feels, and her
contest entry depicts her beloved dog, Thor. When the art judge arrives (her
credentials? "My cousin is married to an artist"), she first mistakes Emily's dog for
a rabbit and then rejects it on subject alone ("I hate dogs!" screeches the judge),
giving a blue ribbon to Kelly's most recent butterfly. Emily takes her painting off
the wall and hides it ("I'll never paint again," she whispers). 
Her disheartened
state is noticed by her teacher and she's sent to the nurse's office, where an encoun-
ter with a frazzled Kelly makes her realize the worth of her own work. The tale
pushes credibility more than Karas' similarly themed The Class Artist (reviewed
below) or Say's Emma's Rug (BCCB 11/96), but Emily's sensitive recoil will be
easily understandable to youngsters. The visuals are appropriately Emily-focused.
Her own art features prominently, illustrating some pages as photo-like inserts fill
viewers in on classroom activities. After Emily's art is disparaged by the judge,
Catalanotto depicts her as becoming more transparent, almost as if she is a ghost
or shadow; Kelly's encouragement restores her to her solid self. Faces are poorly
articulated and their expressions sometimes difficult to interpret, but the emotions
will carry audiences past the awkwardness. This title avoids being messagey by its
specificity: Emily's feelings are genuinely hurt, her discovery of a stronger sense of
her artistic self will provide a good discussion point. JMD
COLE, BROCK 
Larky Mavis; written and illus. by Brock Cole. 
Farrar,
2001 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-374-34365-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
Larky Mavis is an innocent soul. She comes down the road, "mooning about, and
mooning about" in her patched clothes and wooden clogs, and suddenly discovers
10 
* 
THE BULLETIN
something. As she tells the parson, "It's a little baby I found in a peanut. I call him
Heart's Delight because he makes me glad." Mavis, despite her somewhat dis-
tracted air and apparent homelessness, obviously knows more than the more con-
ventional townsfolk, and she carts Heart's Delight everywhere. When she becomes
a nuisance that's bad for business, however, the townsfolk decide to confiscate the
child. "No, get your own baby!" cries Mavis, and off she runs. In the course of the
chase the blanket wrapped around Heart's Delight begins to come undone, white
wings flutter madly, and a golden glow suffuses the pages. The angel that is Heart's
Delight rescues Mavis: "Heart's Delight smiled and held her tight, and off they
flew, higher and higher." Cole's tale can be read as a gentle fable about homeless-
ness, as a story of faith, as a literal tale of a young girl who finds magic in the
middle of the road. The folktale-like structure shapes the momentum of the story
and the language is that of a traditional tale honed to smoothness by many tellings.
Mavis is a charismatic outcast, and she is so obviously in the right she exerts an odd
sense of spiritual authority. The appropriately larky watercolors set Mavis on the
outskirts of a prosperous town in a bucolic countryside, depicting the same sort of
pseudo-English, turn of the century fairy-and-folktale-land Cole used in Buttons
(BCCB 3/00). This is a gentle, sweet tale with echoes of Andersen in its moral
conclusion. JMD
COOPER, ELISHA 
Dance!; written and illus. by Elisha Cooper. 
Greenwillow,
2001 
[3 2 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029419-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029418-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 3-5
Few illustrators, save perhaps James Stevenson, can coax quite so much expression
and animation from a few dashes of fine brushwork and a smear or two of water-
color fill. Here Cooper's agile shapes spring across pristine white space and dart
among sinuous lines of text as dancers who bring a show through four grueling
weeks of rehearsal to the opening curtain of a debut. There's plenty of informa-
tion tucked within to illuminate the groans and blisters and duct tape behind the
spotlit glamor of a performance, but as in his previous titles (Building, BCCB 4/
99, etc.) Cooper offers his audience an experience more visceral than cerebral. All
senses are on full alert: for the tang of sweat, the shock of ice on an abused ankle,
shadows that "crouch when a dancer crouches and leap when a dancer leaps," the
pulse of drumbeats that "run through the floor and up the dancers' legs and into
their chests," the directions of the choreographer whose every word "HAS! AN!
EXCLAMATION! POINT!" Any reader who would happily trade all the bed-
room furniture for a barre will be on Cloud Nine, and listeners whose sophistica-
tion has just about outrun picture books will also revel in both the wry humor and
the artistry. EB
CULLEN, CATHERINE ANN 
The Magical, Mystical, Marvelous Coat; illus. by David
Christiana. 
Little, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-316-16334-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Leggy but readable rhythms and rhymes propel the reader through a cumulative
plot in which a young girl goes out each day "to see what I'd see" and ends up
using one of the six magic buttons on her coat to rescue one of a diverse group of
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
11
people and fairy folk, starting with a young giant in distress. Each of the grateful
recipients then creates an appropriate adjective to describe the coat's magical capa-
bilities: for example, the giant whose head was frying in the sun (until given an icy
button to hold) calls it "megacooliferous." Eclectic watercolor patterns-on ev-
erything from the coat to a "snake searching for something for tea"-add another
layer of ordered whimsy, while the consistency of David Christiana's soft palette
lends coherence to the stylistic diversity of his sophisticated illustrations. This
airy-fairy and peaceable walk on the wild side ends in triumph and at home, offer-
ing younger audiences a lively and comforting glimpse of a fantasy world outside
over there. FK
CUMMINS, JULIE 
Tomboy of the Air: Daredevil Pilot Blanche Stuart
Scott. HarperCollins, 2001 
[80p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029243-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029138-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Bessie Coleman, Beryl Markham, and Amelia Earhart may command name recog-
nition, but lesser-known aviator Blanche Stuart Scott racked up her own series of
firsts before her better known colleagues took to the air. During her active career
from 1910 to 1916, she became (by closely argued reckoning) the U.S.'s first woman
pilot, the first woman test pilot, and the first woman stunt flier. Cummins makes
it clear that Scott's daring was not limited to corkscrews and plummets behind the
wheel (and directly in front of the open-mounted engine) of a precariously bal-
anced "huge tricycle with transparent wings" but also in defying social standards of
the time: "People accused her of blasphemy, saying if God had wanted her to fly,
He would have given her wings. Others said it was indecent for a woman even to
attempt to fly." Although cumulative injuries forced Scott's early retirement, death
threats, attempts on her life, and the morbid curiosity of spectators who "paid
money to see me risk my neck, more as a freak-a woman freak pilot-than as a
skilled flier" took their toll as well. Cummins offers a brief but well-documented
biography, packed with plenty of quotes from Scott, plenty of period photographs,
and plenty of action. Buzz it by reluctant report-writers or any middle-grader with
a taste for true adventure. EB
DONALDSON, JULIA 
Room on the Broom; illus. byAxel Scheffler. 
Dial, 2001 
26p
ISBN 0-8037-2657-0 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Donaldson's rhyming tale features a high-spirited witch and her cat going out for
a quick spin on her broomstick. The wind blows the witch's hat off and she
descends to retrieve it, but she cannot find it until "out of the bushes/ on thunder-
ing paws/ There bounded a dog/ with the hat in his jaws." The dog begs prettily
for a ride, and off they go, until the wind blows the bow out of the witch's braid.
The bow is retrieved by a bird, who joins the party; the subsequent loss of a wand
results in its retrieval by a frog who, in his enthusiasm for his broomstick ride,
jumps for joy and snaps the broom in two. All plummet to earth except the witch,
whose remaining half-broomstick propels her into a cloud where she has the mis-
fortune to meet a hungry dragon. Faint with fear, the witch is rescued by her
animal friends who, disguised as a four-headed beast covered in mud, feathers, and
fur, scare off the dragon, after which the witch conjures a deluxe broomstick with
room for all. Donaldson's rhyming couplets (as well as her plot) are occasionally
12 
* THE BULLETIN
stretched, but the illogical silliness of the tale (how come the witch doesn't use her
magic to escape the dragon?) is unapologetic. Scheffler's cartoony characters have
a pop-eyed exuberance that carries the slight plot quite nicely over the various
terrains (from forest to field to mountain) pictured. The text does run on, making
this a little too long for the youngest listener, but primary graders will enjoy hear-
ing it-and perhaps even reading it on their own. JMD
DRUCE, ARDEN 
Halloween Night; illus. by David W. Wenzel. 
Rising Moon,
2001 
25p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-87358-797-9 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87358-762-6 
$6.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
The rhythmic text asks simple riddles: "On Halloween Night,/ when it's dark and
scary,/ who can swoop through the air/ with a swish and a flurry?// 'I can,' said the
witch.// In a haunted house,/ surrounded by mist,/ who can spin/ shimmering
webs with/ a swirl and a twist?// 'I can,' said the spider." A jack-o'-lantern, ghost,
scarecrow, and skeleton, etc. each have their moments, leading up to the conclud-
ing riddle: "All in their costumes,/ ready for fun,/ who can frighten/ everyone?//
'We can!' said the children." The progression is predictable and the verse some-
times lackluster, but Wenzel's watercolors depict a satisfyingly spooky neighbor-
hood and its various Halloween-relevant denizens (including the merry band of
trick-or-treaters that opens and closes the book), just scary enough to satisfy the "I
am so old enough!" preschooler. The style evokes Paul Galdone's rustic vigor, but
with cleaner drafting and slightly more detailed compositions. Each spread gives
clues to the next riddle's answer, and a quick storytime read-through will enable
attendees to answer all the riddles, making it clear just who's really in charge on
this particular holiday. JMD
DUPRE, KELLY 
The Raven's Gift: A True Story from Greenland; written and illus.
by Kelly Dupre. 
Houghton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-618-01171-4 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
On an odyssey of fifteen months and 3,200 miles by kayak and dogsled, Lonnie
Dupre fulfills a boyhood dream with an expedition along the Greenland coast.
Although he starts out a traveler seasoned by trips to Alaska, Siberia, Canada, and
Scandinavia-along with two years preparation and long term study of Inuit life
ways-Lonnie and his friend John are almost overwhelmed by hardships along the
way. It is an eerie encounter with a Raven, magical in Native American lore, that
keeps Lonnie going. As they finish the long journey, he remembers "the one who
taught me that strength and spirit is in the land, in the sea, and in all living things.
It is within us all, but we must search and find it for ourselves." This is a moving
first-person narrative (scripted by Lonnie's wife in Lonnie's voice) that combines
information about the Arctic and its inhabitants with an account of modern visi-
tors who are touched by ancient natural elements. Her linoleum block prints,
primarily blue and black against a spacious white background, use heavy outlines
for rhythmic composition and varied page design, with some images projecting
the voyagers' experiences while other blocks of illustrated text deliver facts about
history and wildlife. There's never a sense of crowding or confusion, and the naive
style of the figures creates as refreshing an effect as the honest textual tone. This is
a first-class ticket for adventurous lapsitters. BH
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
13
EVANGELISTA, GLORIA 
In Search of the Perfect Pumpkin; illus. by Shawn
Shea. 
Fulcrum, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 1-55591-994-4 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
The narrator and his family have been chasing a pumpkin-pie dream for a few
autumns now. The first year their pies, made with pumpkins from the grocery
store, are pretty good; the second-year pies, made with pumpkin-patch purchases,
are also quite acceptable; and the third-year pies, from organic-farm squash, are
fairly well received. The fourth year, however, they decide to grow their own
pumpkins, and after a lot of labor they're rewarded with a panoply of pumpkins
that prove to make "the greatest, most unbelievably scrumptious" pies ever. The
telling is even tastier than the plot, with the narrator both demanding and amus-
ingly imaginative in his taste standards ("How unbelievable are these pumpkins?
Are they, 'Our turtle lived in the vacuum cleaner for an entire month and is still
alive,' unbelievable, or are they, 'You just won $500 worth of merchandise from
the toy store-shop till you drop,' unbelievable?"). The tumble from prose into
rollicking poetry come harvest time seems perfectly sensible, and the family's an-
nual project is authentic as well as inviting; the pumpkin facts seeded throughout
the spreads are often genuinely interesting and informative. The art's a tad on the
glitzy side, but there's a generous slice of humor in Shea's interpretation of the
narrator's hyperbolic account (viewers will love the way various animals' eyeballs
float just above their heads), and homey touches (little Sis perches on a phone
book at the feast) keep the exaggerated images well grounded. Between the food-
related subject and the multi-holiday relevance, this is a solidly useful as well as
highly entertaining book. A pie recipe is, of course, included. DS
GEISERT, ARTHUR 
Nursery Crimes; written and illus. by Arthur Geisert. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-06487-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Jambo and Marva, immigrant pigs from Amiens, France, have established a thriv-
ing topiary and salvage trade just outside of Ames, Iowa. With the help of their
twelve offspring-skilled topiarists all-the couple has even garnered local acclaim
for their annual Thanksgiving offering of turkey-shaped trees. But this year-
gasp!-the trees are missing, and suspicion immediately falls on Voler, a "notori-
ous topiary thief." After fruitless attempts to foil the thief, Marva succeeds in
outwitting him by leaving turkey-styled deciduous trees in Voler's greedy path,
which turn golden right on cue and fairly glow in his yard. The crime plot is quite
gentle, but the solution is clever and child-accessible; the story's true charm lies in
the spare, wry narration and the wealth of detail Geisert incorporates into his por-
cine milieu. The pigs make the most of their salvage goods, and their house is
wittily constructed of school bus, caboose, church steeple, and miscellaneous ar-
chitectural jetsam, with enchanting ingress through a pair of pillars and egress
down a playground slide. Pumpkins (big enough for little porkers to hide in)
glow, turkey trees glow, and the Jambonneau mansion glows invitingly under a
cloudless autumn night sky, and as neighborhood pigs assemble for a happy end-
ing replete with cider and cookies, listeners who've never heard of Ames, Iowa will
regard it as (at least for one magical night a year) the most desirable spot on God's
golden earth. EB
14 
* 
THE BULLETIN
GERAS, ADILE 
Troy. 
Harcourt, 2001 
34 0p
ISBN 0-15-216492-8 
$17.00 
M 
Gr. 9-12
Geras presents the fall of the ancient city of Troy from numerous points of view:
orphaned Xanthe and her sister, Marpessa; Helen, whose beauty toppled a king-
dom; Theano, Danae, and Halie, kitchen maids in the palace of King Priam, and
others. The effort to provide the inside scoop on the epic's major female characters
impedes the development of the minor characters that are supposed to carry the
story. The gods and goddesses of the Greek pantheon make sporadic appearances
to foreshadow coming events, but otherwise their shallow characterizations have
little impact. The opening chapters switch from location to location-from Blood
Room (where wounded Trojan soldiers are brought to be healed or die) to battle-
field to palace to the wall surrounding the city-in order to establish the charac-
ters' history and to provide context for events to come. The constantly shifting
point of view makes the progression of the novel choppy and interferes with the
building of any sense of momentum. Stilted dialogue and occasional anachronistic
language further impede the action of the tale. Although some lip service is given
to economic reasons behind the war, lust is the motivating force behind much of
the action. In the final third of the novel the momentum of the lost cause that is
Troy finally takes hold, and the novel spirals to its inevitable conclusion. This
novel is ambitious but nonetheless predictable, and it lacks sufficient pace to sup-
port its length. JMD
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI 
Fox Eyes; written and illus. by Mordicai Gerstein. 
Golden,
2001 
[73p] 
(Road to Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-307-46509-8 
$11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-307-26509-9 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Young Martin is spending the month of August with his great aunt Zavella "in her
grand, rickety, old house in the mountains." He enjoys tramping through the
woods, listening to his aunt's stories from "the Old Country," and playing his
violin, especially when he finds that a local fox is drawn to his melodies. Sharpnose
the fox enjoys the woods, too, but he longs to be a human with human hands, to
play the violin, and maybe to get his hands on one or two of Aunt Zavella's chick-
ens. Despite Zavella's warnings, Martin falls prey to Sharpnose's foxy tricks, find-
ing himself inside the fox's body and Sharpnose inside the boy. Boy/fox and fox/
boy take advantage of their respective transformations: Martin enjoys the smells,
sounds, and speed he can experience as a fox; Sharpnose eats almost more than he
can hold of Zavella's good cooking (two chickens!) and then dashes upstairs to play
the violin. Gerstein's easy chapter book opens with whimsy, but the matter-of-
factness of his prose (and the solid character of Aunt Zavella) anchors the fantasy.
Full-page black-and-white line drawings featuring a lively Martin and a scruffily
attractive fox enhance each chapter. JMD
GILMORE, RACHNA 
A Group of One. 
Holt, 2001 
[18 4 p]
ISBN 0-8050-6475-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Though ostensibly structured around a conventional boyfriend plot, this novel's
centerpiece is the dramatic story told by Tara Mehta's paternal grandmother
("Naniji"), whose fourteenth birthday party in 1942 was interrupted when British
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
15
soldiers searching for seditious pamphlets arrested her brother and mother. When
Naniji describes her subsequent participation in the Gandhi-led "Quit India"
movement, Tara feels "we're all in the circle, hammering the poster with her."
While this connection with their family history is a breakthrough for Tara and her
sisters, Naniji is shocked and hurt to realize that her granddaughters had heard
only a comparatively "feeble" version of the story from their father, who has been
the nervous bridge between his fervently Indian parents and, first, his compara-
tively westernized wife and, now, the children who are tired of being perceived as
an exotic contrast to "plain old regular Canadians." The novel's occasional the-
matic heavy-handedness is leavened by its refreshing irreverence about things like
ethnic accents and parental perfection. A faceted exploration of the way family
history complicates present identity, this involving domestic fiction is likely to hit
many readers where they live. FK
GOODMAN, JOAN ELIZABETH 
Bernard Goes to School; illus. by Dominic
Catalano. 
Boyds Mills, 2001 
[26 p]
ISBN 1-56397-958-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Upon arriving at school for the first time, Bernard (a short purple elephant wear-
ing a backpack) immediately announces that it's "time to go home." He is not a
bit tempted by the delights of school, though they are enthusiastically demon-
strated by the regal-looking adult elephants who accompany him: his father gravi-
tates towards the blocks, his mother to the art supplies, and his grandmother to the
fireman's helmet in the dress-up box. Deserted by his folks, Bernard tentatively
accepts his teacher's invitation to feed the fish and eventually helps a classmate
name them. The next time he announces that it is "time to go home," Bernard
himself has decided to stay: it's his folks who need to leave, which they do, reluc-
tantly, after noticing "all the other mothers and fathers had gone." While there's
clarity and quiet humor here, the story is sedate and predictable. The clean white
space surrounding the text makes a contrast with the softly shaded jewel tones of
the illustrations (in which we can identify the characters as Indian elephants be-
cause the women wear saris), but overall the effect is sweet, gentle, and perhaps
overly calming. Though stylistically unadventurous, this empowering approach
to first-day jitters is likely to evoke giggles from nervous preschoolers, seasoned
young scholars, and their elders. FK
GOODMAN, SUSAN E. 
Ultimate Field Trip 5: Blasting Off to Space Academy; illus.
with photographs by Michael J. Doolittle. 
Atheneum, 2001 
42p
ISBN 0-689-83044-0 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Goodman offers a breezy, fun-and-games view of a week with Team Europa, a
cadre of sixteen kids who attend a session at Space Camp in Huntsville, Alabama.
The focus here is on the simulation gadgetry they try out (1/6 gravity chairs, multi-
axis trainers), the experiments and demonstrations they conduct (cooperation in a
"weightless" environment, toy rocket launches), and of course the giggly behind-
the-scenes information they cull (zero-gravity bathing, camera-assisted defecation
training). Although themed chapters impose some organization, much of the in-
formation here seems loosely constructed and glued together with chuckly com-
ments from participants ("Lindsay tried to breaststroke her way back to the wall-it
was hopeless. 'Oh, well,' said Charles, 'she's Lost in Space'"). Even more problem-
16 
* THE BULLETIN
atic are the myriad unanswered questions that seem relevant for hopeful readers-
How were these kids chosen for the camp? How old do you have to be? What are
their living quarters like? How exactly do they bond as a team? What happens if
the gadgetry makes participants sick? Scrapbook-style photos abound, but they
don't necessarily depict participants or activities connected to nearby text. While
this is hardly the "ultimate" treatment of the Space Camp experience, space enthu-
siasts and kids yearning for a week away from home will want to check it out. EB
GRAHAM, BOB 
"Let's Get a Pup!" Said Kate; written and illus. by Bob
Graham. 
Candlewick, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-1452-1 
$14.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Kate wakes one summer morning ready to roll, crying, "Let's get a pup!" as she
bounces on her parents' bed. Her extremely tolerant parents agree, and "with their
breakfast uneaten, they dressed and left immediately" for the animal shelter. At
the shelter they find "happy dogs, sad dogs, 'take me' dogs, and dogs who couldn't
care less. They saw smelly dogs, fat dogs, lean and mean dogs, chew-it-up-and-
spit-it-out-at-you dogs, and dogs like walking nightmares. Then they saw ...
Dave." Boisterous puppy Dave is everything they want so off they go, but on the
way out they see Rosy. Rosy is old, but she "radiated 'Good Intention"'; sadly
realizing they can't take them all, they leave her and go home. Not surprisingly,
the next day they return to the shelter for Rosy, who provides the necessary grounded
counterpoint to Dave's wildly energetic puppyness. Graham (who peoples this
tale with the same tolerant parents from Queenie, One of the Family, BCCB 2/98)
is right on the mark with this affectionate look at pet-seeking, from his heart-
grabbing opening lines ("The end of Kate's bed was a lonely place. Tiger the cat
no longer slept there. Tiger died last winter, so there were only Kate's two feet to
keep each other company") to his light-filled line-and-watercolor depictions of
Kate's cheerily chaotic household. Both dogs and people have personality plus,
and the story itself is an emotional grabber with a conclusion sure to evoke sighs of
satisfaction. JMD
GUEST, ELISSA HADEN 
Iris and Walter: True Friends; illus. by Christine
Davenier. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2001 
44p
ISBN 0-15-202121-3 
$14.00 
R Gr. 1-3
Friends Iris and Walter (from, logically enough, Iris and Walter, BCCB 12/00)
return with a four-chapter tale of problems overcome and fears conquered. First,
Iris very much wants to ride Walter's horse, Rain ("Iris dreamed of riding Rain
over green meadows, down a path of pines, straight into the sparkling stream"),
but her attempts to make friends with the unwilling horse go awry. Walter tells
the shouting, cookie-offering Iris that "horses like clucking and carrots and gentle
hands," and when the two next go to visit Rain, "they had carrots. They had hope.
They had a plan." Day after day Iris clucks, speaks softly, and offers carrots, and,
finally, she takes a successful solo ride. Iris may seem fearless in this episode, but in
the next she reveals that she is afraid to go to school; fortunately, Walter is there to
encourage her ("'Iris, you are very brave,' said Walter. 'I know you are brave enough
to go to school"'), and she manages quite well. Walter has a different school
problem-when he is called the hated diminutive "Walt" by their otherwise reas-
suringly friendly teacher Miss Cherry, he is at a loss ("'Why don't you just tell her?'
asked Iris. 'I just can't,' said Walter"); this time it's Iris who sparks the solution.
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
17
The two friends are a genial pair, whose conversations and concerns will ring true
to young readers. Davenier's soft-hued pen-and-ink illustrations enhance the two-
some with a combination of energetic black lines and watery smears of color that
infuse the pages with energy. The varied compositions contain just enough detail
to catch the viewing eye, and the characterizations, from human to horse, are warm,
friendly, and comfortingly familiar. JMD
HADDIX, MARGARET PETERSON 
Among the Impostors. Simon, 2001 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-689-83904-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Picking up where Among the Hidden left off, Haddix follows the life of ten-year-
old Luke Garner as he enters a school under the alias of Lee Grant, a boy who died
on a skiing trip, but whose family donated his identity to allow a forbidden third
child to come out of hiding. Though expecting a milieu vastly different from his
attic bedroom and rural upbringing, Lee is unprepared for the skewed academic
world he encounters at Hendricks School for Boys, filled with strangely unrespon-
sive teachers and students. His only hope lies in a note from Mr. Talbot (a family
friend who has taken him to this school), but when Luke finally finds a private
space to open it, the contents make him realize he is on his own. In addition to
developing a plot that creates a kind of reality quicksand for young Luke, wherein
he must constantly reevaluate the trustworthiness of those around him (he discov-
ers his first "friend" is an informer for the population police, for instance), Haddix
allows Luke to grow from a participant to a leader in this milieu, surprising himself
with his own solutions when confronted by the mysterious Mr. Hendricks and
Mr. Talbot. Haddix once again hits the mark with her ability to ask intriguing
questions (what would happen if there were only two children allowed per family,
and any third child had to die?) and successfully weaves them into a believable
plot-driven, edge-of-your-seat tale. Fans of the previous title will not be disap-
pointed, and they'll clamor for a third book. EAB
HAGUE, MICHAEL, ad. 
Kate Culhane: A Ghost Story; ad. and illus. by Michael
Hague. 
SeaStar, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-58717-059-0 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58717-058-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Kate Culhane is mourning by her mother's grave when she realizes that the sun is
setting and she must hurry from the graveyard. Too late-she steps on newly
turned earth and finds herself held fast. When against her will she follows the
instructions of the voice from the grave-"Open this grave for me"-she uncovers
a coffin and releases the dead man, who forces Kate to carry him into town for
sustenance. They enter a house and Kate finds some oatmeal; the dead man drains
blood from the sons of the house to mix with the oatmeal. When the dead man
divides the oatmeal into two portions, Kate wisely avoids eating hers, instead drop-
ping the bloody meal into her kerchief and leaving the kerchief on the floor. On
the way back to the graveyard the dead man, thinking his secret safe because he
plans to have Kate lie with him in his grave, tells her where his gold is buried and
how to bring the boys back to life. Slightly adapted from a tale collected by Jeremiah
Curtin in nineteenth-century Ireland, this is a bone-chiller of a ghost tale. Some
readers may be familiar with this story from Molly Bang's The Goblins Giggle,
where it was retold as "Mary Culhane and the Dead Man," or from storyteller
18 
* THE BULLETIN
Carol Birch's retelling on her recording Nightmares Rising. Hague's watercolors
have a brooding darkness that suits this creepy tale and his settings have an occa-
sional Rackham-like air (complete with endpaper silhouettes) in their baroque
spookiness. This is a popular tale for storytelling, and listeners, readers, and tellers
will appreciate this evocative version. JMD
HORNIK, LAURIE MILLER 
The Secret of Ms. Snickle's Class; illus. by Debbie
Tilley. 
Clarion, 2001 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-618-03435-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Ms. Snickle is a most unusual teacher, offering spelling whys (you have to explain
why you'd want to spell that word) as well as spelling bees, insisting that home-
work is work that stays at home ("If you were supposed to take it to school, it
would be called schoolwork"), and enacting a class rule forbidding the telling of
secrets. She has a bit of bias there-she is, most unusually of all, living secretly in
the classroom, which turns into a luxurious apartment at the touch of a special
magic button. Students have their own secrets, too, some of which they consigned
to paper for an assignment the first day: Oliver wets his bed, Nathan loves his little
sister, Dennis' mother is the famous Tooth Fairy, and Eva is a swan transformed
into a girl. Determined to find out everybody's secrets, Lacey the class snoop
delves, spies, and eavesdrops her way to knowledge-and a few surprises. This
doesn't have quite the edge of Sachar's Wayside School stories, offering a more
meandering, gentle scholastic weirdness, but some young readers (and even younger
listeners to a readaloud) will appreciate the dreamy logic. The secrets (and snoop-
ing) theme will catch youngsters' attention, and the night life of Ms. Snickle will
satisfyingly confirm their long-held suspicions about teachers' post-school lives.
Big print, enticingly frenetic spot art by Tilley, and the occasional inclusion of
student writing, formal and informal, add accessibility to this eminently approach-
able title. DS
HOROWITZ, ANTHONY 
Stormbreaker. Philomel, 2001 
192 p
ISBN 0-399-23620-1 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Horowitz, author of The Devil and His Boy (BCCB 3/00) and screenwriter for
many British television mysteries, here turns to thrillers with a youthful slant. Alex
is only fourteen when his uncle and guardian is killed in a strange car accident;
upon investigation, he finds that the "accident" involved a hail of gunfire and that
there's a great conspiracy to ensure silence about the matter. His uncle's employ-
ers, a division of the hush-hush intelligence agency MI6, consider Alex a useful
replacement for his uncle and send him off to investigate Herod Sayle, the Egyp-
tian-born creator of the Stormbreaker (a lightning-fast computer), who's about to
give thousands of the machines away free to British schoolchildren. Now trained
as an agent and disguised as a young computer-nerd contest-winner, Alex battles
danger to discover Sayle's secret agenda. This baby Bond tale lacks the adult spy
series' humor, and it's certainly too serious to be entertaining pastiche; as a conse-
quence the clich6s (elaborate methods of execution), stock dialogue ("In a way it's
appropriate that MI6 should have sent me a real English schoolboy. Because, you
see, there's nothing in the world I hate more.... You bliddy snobs with your stuck-
up schools and your stinking English superiority! But I'm going to show you. I'm
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
19
going to give you what you deserve!"), and stereotypes (evil German servants, evil
disfigured servants, evil ugly foreigners) are merely cliches, stock dialogue, and
stereotypes rather than affectionate homage or sendup. On the other hand, this
has many of the escapist appeals of 007's exploits, including techno-gimmicks
(Alex saves himself with metal-eating zit cream) and hand-to-hand combat (Alex is
a karate expert), and the existence of a fourteen-year-old spy is all the more alluring
for its complete impossibility. This improbability recalls old-fashioned adventure
stories; Alex has more than a touch of an updated Jim Hawkins, and that may be
all that young adventurers need. DS
HOWARD, ARTHUR 
Hoodwinked; written and illus. by Arthur Howard. 
Harcourt,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202656-8 
$16.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
Mitzi the young witch longs to join the ranks of pet owners ("Uncle Churly had
piranhas. Aunt Malice had a crocodile. Even Madam Vex had a pet, though no
one was quite sure what it was"), but the initially attractive "toad that was covered
in slime," bullfrog, and matched pair of bats prove to be disappointing and end up
returned to the store. She decides to hold off for a bit, but serendipity strikes and
an "adorable" kitten arrives at her door. While Mitzi is initially put off by her pet's
distressing absence of creepiness, she eventually capitulates to the kitten's charms,
wisely conceding that "looks aren't everything." This is a well-tuned read for
storytime, balancing the right amount of text with the right amount of illustra-
tion. Howard has a knack for poetic pacing, drawing out the first sentence for
three or so pages ("Mitzi liked creepy things. Creepy bedroom slippers. Creepy
breakfast cereal. Creepy relatives. So, naturally, when she decided to get a pet, she
wanted the creepiest pet possible") to build the tension and enhance the comic
flavor. His expressive charcoal drawings enhanced with watercolor underline the
subtle humor infusing the story. Grab this one to entertain ghouls and goblins for
some Halloween fun. EAB
HURD, 
THACHER 
Cat's Pajamas; written and illus. by Thacher
Hurd. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
14p
ISBN 0-694-01058-8 
$5.95 
R 
1-3 yrs
Exuberance abounds in this board book that follows a group of cats who have
donned pajamas only to participate in an active night life before settling down for
bed ("Cat's pajamas/ Doodley-doo/ Kitties on the prowl/ Two by two"). The
frolicking felines search for food ("Cool cats, hip cats, kitty cats/ MEOW./ Bopping
down the dark streets/ Looking for CHOW.") and make music ("Cats on the
garbage cans/ BUM BUM BA-DUM! ") until they finally slow down ("Put away
the kittyhorn/ Put down the drums/ Off to Pajamas Land/ rum tum turn/ SWEET
DREAMS/ PAJAMAS CATS/ yum yum yum"). There's a speed and vivacity here
unusual in toddler board books, and though the cats' jazzy retro hipness may elude
youngsters, viewers will certainly thrill to the notion of enjoying nocturnal adven-
tures while still in your pajamas. Hurd's illustrations echo the frenzy of the story,
with expressive line and paint cutouts of the frenetic felines spread across photo-
graphic backdrops allowing the energized figures of the kitties to gleam amid the
nighttime cityscapes. This will be music to the audience's ears at a toddler story-
time or a pre-bedtime romp. EAB
20 
* 
THE BULLETIN
IBBOTSON, EVA 
Dial-a-Ghost; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Dutton, 2001 
192p
ISBN 0-525-46693-2 $15.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
The Wilkinson family-Mr. and Mrs., son Eric, and Grandma-is preparing to
take shelter when a German bomb hits their home in the English countryside. In
that fateful instant they are turned into ghosts, and their wandering begins. Since
the bomb destroyed their home they have no place to haunt, and they wander
post-World War II London, along with other displaced ghosts, seeking a proper
ghostly domicile. Luckily, two doughty Englishwomen recognize a need (even a
spectral one) when they see it, and set up an agency (Dial-A-Ghost) to match
homeless ghosts with ghostless houses. Enter the Snodde-Brittles, Fulton and
Frieda, unscrupulous heirs to Helton Hall-at least, they'll be the heirs if current
heir Oliver Smith, age ten, can be scared to death. To that end the Snodde-Brittles
employ the Screamers, horrible ghosts who hate children. A color-blind clerk
mixes up some folders, and presto! The Screamers go to a quiet convent in the
country and the kindly Wilkinsons go to Helton Hall, where they become the
friends and protectors of the lonely Oliver. Ibbotson's friendly ghosties have such
a homely air they seem most desirable, while the Screamers are truly frightening.
The predictable but enjoyable plot moves quickly, the text has wit, and the charac-
terizations are specific and funny. The bereft Oliver, removed from his happy
orphanage and thrown to the mercy of his unmerciful relations, will elicit a great
deal of sympathy when he wanders around the gloomy, empty mansion and a
great deal of admiration when he stands up for himself-and for his ghosts. Use
this for an offbeat classroom readaloud, but do show your audience Hawkes' hatch-
ing-heavy line art, which captures the novel's domesticated spookiness. JMD
JANE, PAMELA 
Monster Mischief; illus. by Vera Rosenberry. 
Atheneum,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80471-7 
$16.00 
R 3-6 yrs
Two monsters prepare a monster stew, complete with spotted frog and hairy spi-
der, for Halloween, and their concoction is made richer by additional ingredients
(a lizard, a bat) added by additional monsters. When Little Moe arrives ("The
fifth was Moe, the little one./ He only tagged along for fun/ to feast on monster
stew"), he stands on a chair to take a look at the brew and "he toppled over with a
shout... // and all the monster/ stew spilled OUT." The monsters are chagrined
when their ingredients (spider, lizard, frog, bat) scuttle out the door, but all ends
happily with the arrival of a sixth monster bearing a sackful of trick-or-treat candy.
Jane's text is composed of rhythmic rhyming couplets with a repetitive refrain
(various adjectives paired with "monster stew") that little listeners will shout with
glee. Rosenberry's watercolors (large enough for group viewing) depict bumbling
monsters, smirking jack-o'-lanterns, and seriously displeased stew ingredients that
are more funny than frightening. While the compositions are sometimes crowded
and a touch run-of-the-mill, thoughtful design--objects occasionally spill over
their frames or stand freely next to text blocks, and white borders set off the single
and full-spread paintings-adds punch. This is a solid addition to Halloween
storytimes that ought to hit the spot with preschoolers. JMD
JEMISON, MAE 
Find Where the Wind Goes: Moments from My Life. 
Scholastic,
2001 
196p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-13195-2 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Mae Jemison, doctor, scientist, astronaut, and professor, here tells of the formative
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
21
incidents of her life. In a bracing, conversational tone, the author discusses her
youth-her days in the South, her family's move to Chicago's South Side, school
experiences, and growing up-as well as her later life and her place in the space
program. Through it all Jemison emphasizes her love, respect, and gratitude for
her parents, her siblings, and the teachers and mentors who encouraged and sup-
ported her. She also stresses that, through conscious and deliberate choices, she
was then and is now in total control of the direction of her life. Jemison's tone is
like that of a favorite aunt or big sister; her comments on her own behavior, on
politics, and on the crucial events through which she lived and in which she par-
ticipated have a confident edge. This is a remarkable autobiography of a remark-
able woman, and she invites readers along for the ride in a voice that encourages
them to aim high, work hard, and have fun. An insert of black-and-white photos
is included. JMD
JOHNSON, PAUL BRETT, ad. 
Fearless Jack; written and illus. by Paul Brett
Johnson. 
McElderry, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83296-6 
$16.00 
R 
7-10 yrs
Jack's ma sends him off to get "a job of work" before they both starve, and, being
a dutiful son, off he goes, sorghum biscuit in hand. A bunch of yellow jackets try
and join Jack for lunch, and "Jack got mad. Real mad. He took off his bill cap and
brung it down with a mighty WHACK!" He kills a half-score of the "pesky bees"
and commemorates the deed on the bill of his cap: "FEARLESS JACK KILLED
TEN AT A WHACK." The feckless Jack arrives in a town troubled by varmints-
a wild hog, a grizzly bear, a bad-breathed unicorn-which the sheriff, piqued by
the claim on Jack's cap, challenges him to best; he eliminates them with great
dispatch in a variety of ways, collecting a monetary reward each time. Audiences
familiar with folktales will recognize this story as a Jack tale, an Appalachian ver-
sion of the English "Jack the Giant-Killer." Johnson's retelling has the easy inflec-
tion of a told tale; his affection for both his story and his hero is apparent in his
tone as he lets the listener in on the joke. The acrylic paintings bear a passing
resemblance to Andrew Glass' style, although not as exuberant or precisely drafted;
the compositions are flat and not particularly inspired. Facial expression of char-
acters (both human and animal) reflect the story's sly humor, however, and fluid
storytelling makes this a winner for reading or telling aloud. A note on Appala-
chian Jack tales is included. JMD
JOHNSTON, TONY 
Any Small Goodness: A Novel of the Barrio. Blue Sky/Scho-
lastic, 2001. 
[12 8 p]
ISBN 0-439-18936-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-9
Arturo's gently courageous Mexican immigrant father spells out the lesson of this
slim volume about the ups and downs of life in a Los Angeles barrio: "In life there
is bueno [good] and there is malo [bad]. If you do not find enough of the good,
you must yourself create it." The first chapters of the novel offer example after
example of the "bueno": positive role models include an African-American jazz
musician who sacrifices her own career to teach piano to kids in the barrio, a self-
effacing professional basketball player who serves as a volunteer coach, the old
gringo who rescues the family cat in spite of his allergies, and a "book warrior"
librarian. After a drive-by shooting shatters the family's peace-and his six-year-
old sister's prized pink lunchbox--Arturo has to find a way to fight the feeling that
22 
* THE BULLETIN
it is no use starting anything because "lowlifes just come and turn it ugly." In a
resolution that temporarily misleads the reader into thinking that Arturo's desire
for vengeance has drawn him into the cycle of gang violence, Arturo reinvents the
"gang" (defined in a chapter epigram as "A bunch of armed lowlifes hanging out
with intent"): his Green Needle Gang anonymously leaves Christmas trees and
presents for needy families. Like a Mexican-American Father Knows Best, Johnston's
first novel, written in a dynamic mix of English syntax and Mexican Spanish ter-
minology, plays too insistently on the same positive note throughout. Still, its
earnest hopefulness-appropriately played out in a Christmas finale-will reward
readers hungry for depictions of an L.A. whose "humor and humanity" is as real as
the "freeway chases and drive-bys and death." FK
KARAS, G. BRIAN 
The Class Artist; written and illus. by G. Brian
Karas. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17815-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17814-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Young Fred yearns to be an artist, but so far the best he's managed, with the aid of
his older sister, is a nice line in drawing Pilgrims. He sees his chance for real
artistry when a class assignment gives students a week to complete an art project.
Fred runs into some difficulties in executing his dream project (a tipi covered with
art), though, and his determination to make the tipi a surprise keeps him from
asking for help even when it's clear he badly needs it. Finally, time runs out ("It
was sharing time, and Fred had nothing to share"); when Fred's teacher, puzzled
by Fred's unhappy nonperformance, wisely suggests he draw how he feels, Fred
uses that instruction as a starting place for a thrilling pictorial saga featuring his
classmates, thus establishing his artistic reputation. A jacket note states that the
plot is rooted in Karas' own experiences, and the story certainly has the ring of
authenticity. Most readers will feel an empathetic lurch in their own innards as
Fred's time ticks by, and they'll know how frustrating it can be when one's ideas
are more advanced than one's production skills. The art uses color to great emo-
tional effect, often restricting the palette for emphasis: on project day, the rest of
the classroom is washed in neutralizing gray while Fred is enveloped in raw and
painful red, and he's sunk into black with only a dim yellow glow to illuminate
him when he despairs of ever being an artist. There's plenty of cheer here as well,
though, so never fear; while in real life mean classmate Frances might not turn so
easily to admiration, Fred's triumph will be a relief to young viewers as well as a
reminder that setbacks aren't the end of possibility, just part of the process. DS
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Lady Lollipop; illus. by Jill Barton. 
Candlewick, 2001 
125p
ISBN 0-7636-1269-3 
$14.99 
Ad Gr. 3-5
Princess Penelope is a spoiled brat, and she wants a pig for her eighth birthday.
Her overly indulgent royal father has promised her anything she wants, and a call
goes out for all the pig-keepers in the land to show up at the proper time (with
their pigs) so the princess can pick the one she wants for her own. She picks an
intelligent little porker named Lollipop, who responds to the commands of her
keeper, Johnny. The pig will not, however, respond to the commands of the
impatient princess, so Johnny is kept on, presumably to train the pig to answer to
the princess, but in reality to train the princess to be a little more patient and a
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
23
little less selfish. King-Smith's tale of a spoiled princess and the swineherd who
teaches her about friendship (and pigs) has moments of offhand humor that lighten
the somewhat purposive narrative. Characterizations of king, queen, princess, and
swineherd are folktale-shallow but effective, and the relationship between Penelope
and Johnny is an amiable one. The novel's tone contains more than a whiff of the
preachy-teachy (similar to Farjeon's literary fairy tale, "The Little Darner"), but
that drawback is somewhat offset by the occasionally tongue-in-cheek text and the
comfortable exuberance of the art. Barton's black-and-white pencil illustrations
makes Lollipop a most attractive pet (her plump roundness and endearing expres-
sions make her nearly irresistible), and Johnny has some of the same qualities. The
short, balding king and his tall, willowy wife are a visual chuckle, and the princess
is the picture of cuteness run amok with her solid stance and stubborn scowl. This
might also make a popular readaloud with kids too young to read it on their own,
since kids of many ages may enjoy a royal family run by a royal pain-in-the-neck.
JMD
KIRK, DANIEL 
Bus Stop, Bus Go!; written and illus. by Daniel Kirk. 
Putnam,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23333-4 
$15.99 
R 5-7yrs
Kirk combines narrative text and dialogue into a rhyming tale of a hamster (Hammy)
escaped from his cage on a school bus. The format is pure Sunday funnies: comic-
style frames contain the action, and the speech-balloon commentary of the bus
riders provides the humor. The story is tight and the rhyming flow hits only an
occasional arrhythmic bump. The chattering kids on the bus are focused on re-
capturing the elusive hamster-except for those who aren't-and the counter-
point of voices combined with the repeating "Bus stop. Bus go!" refrain results in
a merry mayhem that rings (unfortunately for the bus driver) true. Kirk's flat
graphics (oil painting on gesso) give the impression of precise computer images,
and they work well in these controlled compositions. By the end of the bus ride,
Hammy is back in his cage, but the concluding painting indicates (to the certain
delight of the audience) that the adventurous hamster is about to take off for parts
unknown once again. JMD
KITTREDGE, FRANCES 
Neeluk: An Eskimo Boy in the Days of the Whaling Ships;
illus. by Howard "Weyahok" Rock. 
Alaska Northwest, 2001 
88p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88240-545-4 
$18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-88240-546-2 
$11.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
These fictional accounts of a late-nineteenth-century Inupiat village attempt to
capture a way of life already past when Kittredge, an Anglo-American temporary
resident in the Alaskan community, recorded them in the 1930s. The dozen brief
stories-one for each month from July (when the relentless sun throws off the
children's sleep cycle) to June (when the trading ships arrive with coveted manu-
factured goods)-revolve around Neeluk, a seven-year-old who divides his time
between play, mischief, and a fierce desire to join his elders as a hunter. Kittredge
employs the choppy, pedagogical prose that has mercifully fallen by the wayside
over the decades ("'What would we do without seals?' asked Neeluk. 'We eat their
meat, and we eat the oil from their fat with meat and with dried fish.' 'And we
make boots and trousers and belts from their skins,' added Konok, 'and nets to
catch fish'"), and her observations are obviously filtered through the experience of
24 
* THE BULLETIN
an outside observer. Nonetheless, she manages to convey the Inupiat people's
growing dependence on the outside world through such telling details as Neeluk's
mother's frantic search for a missing metal needle, the hunters' use of a forged adz
for chopping ice, and the caps and fabrics that are valued for both their novelty
and utility. While these tales are not as inherently gripping as Jacqueline Briggs
Martin's The Lamp, the Ice, and the Boat Called Fish (BCCB 2/01), their simplic-
ity, together with Inupiat painter Rock's expressionistic oils, provide a child-acces-
sible window into this indigenous culture. EB
LAURENCE, 
DANIEL 
Captain and Matey Set Sail; illus. by Claudio
Mufioz. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[64 p] 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028957-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028956-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
In a quartet of easy-reader adventures, pint-sized, pigtailed Captain and lanky,
sun-broiled Matey do just what all self-respecting fictional pirates do-adopt a
parrot, sing shanties, pick up shipwrecked seafarers, and dig up treasure. The
Captain's petulance and Matey's fastidiousness, however, ensure that they con-
duct their missions with enough comic flair to delight read-aloners. They acquire
their parrot, Squawk, in a department-store raid, tempers flare over the appropri-
ate tune for deck-swabbing ("'First,' said Matey, '"yo-ho-ho" means nothing, and
you do not even like rum. I saw you drink rum one time and it made you sick'"),
a human behemoth with full body tattoos can't get the hang of dancing like a
"real" pirate, and Captain and Matey achieve complete satisfaction with a meager
treasure that demands no change in their piratical ways. Mufioz's watercolor pic-
tures are a hoot, with exuberant lines and swabs of color energizing everything
from the tried-and-true portrayal of the physically and temperamentally mismatched
mariners to backdrops that slyly set them in the here and now. This is just the
ticket for a maiden voyage under the black flag. EB
LAWLOR, LAURIE 
Helen Keller: 
Rebellious Spirit. Holiday House,
2001 
168p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1588-0 
$22.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
The much-celebrated blind and deaf woman is now fairly well locked into legend,
but Lawlor does a fine job of peeling back layers of her achievements to reveal their
cost and assess the extent to which Keller fulfilled her own dream ofmainstreaming
with the sighted, hearing world. All the standard biographical data are covered in
smooth, seamlessly organized text, but there is additional spark from Lawlor's sharp
insights into the irony of the vulnerable, dependent girl's gradually (and probably
reluctantly) becoming the mainstay of women like teacher Anne Sullivan and sec-
retary Polly Thomson, who depended on her for their livelihood. Although Sullivan
necessarily has a prominent place in this account, the focus never strays from Keller
herself, her status as a media darling, her determination to claim a position as a
social reformer, and her ultimate frustration with a public that passed over her
Socialist message and clamored for stories of cunning triumph over disability. A
gallery of photographic portraits (carefully posed, as Lawlor notes) conveys as clearly
as the text just how attractive a public persona Keller could be. A chronology,
index, and a comprehensive themes list for further reading are included. EB
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
25
LEE, MILLY 
Earthquake; illus. by Yangsook Choi. 
Foster/Farrar, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-374-39964-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A young girl from Chinatown narrates the events of April 18, 1906, when "the
earth shook and threw us from our beds" and turned San Francisco into pandemo-
nium. Dodging collapsing buildings and outrunning sweeping flames, the child
and her family join the confused throng of evacuees herded toward temporary
shelter in Golden Gate Park, burdened by all the clothing they could wear and all
the possessions they could push, pull, or carry. The intensity of the disaster is not
matched by the tone of the narrator, which is matter-of-fact nearly to the point of
dispassion: "In the early morning rush to leave, we had not eaten anything. PoPo
gave us crackers and dried fruit." Choi's paintings, however, make the extent of
the devastation perfectly clear, as power lines dangle overhead, chunks of masonry
topple among the fleeing crowds, stray animals prowl the streets, and tongues of
yellow-orange flame backlight the crumbling city. The girl's day ends in a make-
shift tent camp: "We were safe for now while the city burned and the earth still
shook." Although a concluding note assures readers that the family reestablished
their life in a rebuilt San Francisco (the tale is, in fact, based on the experiences of
Lee's relatives), the child audience will almost certainly question how they sur-
vived until then, and adults may wonder how the Chinese fared in relation to
other citizens. EB
LERNER, HARRIET 
Franny B. Kranny, There's a Bird in Your Hair!; by Harriet
Lerner and Susan Goldhor; illus. by Helen Oxenbury. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029503-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024683-9 
$15.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
We've had various hair picture books of late (Stewart's Harriet's Horrible Hair
Day, BCCB 2/00, for instance), but this one has a twist: others may think Franny's
wild waves of red hair are a pain, but Franny adores her wayward mop ("She could
brush it down in front of her face and pretend she was in a cave.... She loved to
press her hair flat against her head and watch it boing out again"). She's therefore
resistant to the topknot into which the hairdresser reshapes her carroty mane-
until, much to her delight, a bird chooses it for its nest, which makes Franny quite
the celebrity. The finale is a touch on the weak side (the notion that Franny
donates her hair to the nest is plausible, but the text may slide over its audience's
heads), but Franny is magnetic in her self-willed self-adoration, and the bird devel-
opment is a delicious absurdity that's beautifully suited to Franny's character.
Oxenbury fires up her often soft palette with the sharp scarlet beacon that is Franny's
hair, and she's got a distinct line that gives real bite to the figures and surroundings
(and that helps delineate the bird blissfully ensconced in Franny's tresses). Family
scenes, especially the family reunion where Franny makes a hit with her new acces-
sory, are engagingly specific: Mom and Dad are a fetching couple, and Franny is
a star from her crown of hair to her toes and whether dressed or undressed. Here's
an amusing demonstration that good hair is in the eye(s) of the beholder. DS
LINDENBAUM, PIJA 
Bridget and the Gray Wolves; written and illus. by Pija
Lindenbaum; tr. by Kjersti Board. 
R&S, 2001 
33p
ISBN 91-29-65395-9 
$14.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Though Bridget is hardly the kind of child to stray from the path, she nonetheless
loses the rest of her day-care group on an outing. When she encounters a pack of
26 
* THE BULLETIN
wolves in the forest, she first demands her rights ("I am a child who has lost her day
care!") and then attempts to engage the wolves as playfellows. The wolves are
plaintive and uncooperative ("When gray wolves don't understand something, they
just fall over and play dead"), but Bridget chivvies them into compliance through
romps and bedtime ritual, finally slipping off to return to day care on her own.
Those familiar with Lindenbaum's gaily skewed reality in Boodil My Dog (BCCB
12/92) and Else-Marie and Her Seven Little Daddies (2/92) will recognize the win-
ning blend of sweetness and weirdness here. The end is abrupt and Bridget's
transformation from scaredy-cat to bossiest wild thing has no particular logic, but
there's entertainment aplenty in her sojourn with the wolves, especially the com-
ponents of the bedtime ritual ("The wolves obediently go to their pee trees. And
soon it sounds as if it's raining in the forest") finishing with a mournful lullaby
("The wolves . . . love sad things"). Watercolors show Bridget as a wiry-haired
young miss with watchful eyes (and a red sweatshirt with hood in place of the
traditional cape); her composure in the face of the disorderly lot of wolves is admi-
rable, while the scrawny, sharp-toothed wolves, all geared up for mayhem, make
comically cowed followers. This doesn't shed much light on Red Riding Hood,
but as a charmingly peculiar tale in its own right it will find its aficionados. DS
LOEWEN, NANCY 
Four to the Pole: The American Women's Expedition to Antarc-
tica, 1992-93; by Nancy Loewen and Ann Bancroft. 
Linnet, 2001 
96p 
illus.
with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-208-02518-9 
$25.00 
R Gr. 5-9
Coauthor Ann Bancroft, first woman to cross the ice to the North Pole, became
the first woman to cross to both poles when she headed an all-female Antarctic
expedition. Diaries and viewpoints of all four participants and a few outsiders
illuminate the experience of preparing for such a trip (including the crucial com-
ponent of fundraising) as well as the grueling journey itself. Bancroft's trip is
particularly interesting for its aura of uncertainty: traveling in debt, she could only
afford to traverse the continent, her initial goal, if travel speed was great enough; a
pragmatic leader, she chose to terminate her trip at the South Pole with her origi-
nal team. Some of the supporting material could be better clarified (the supply list
doesn't indicate how many pounds each woman would be hauling, for instance),
but there's information enough in addition to the very personal reflections to make
this account enlightening as well as provocative in comparison with older Antarc-
tic narratives. Photographs are small and limited in number, but the pages are
pretty airy nonetheless; entry headings make clear which woman is the source and
provide temperature and map coordinates for each day, enhancing the sense of
time and distance passing. The epilogue makes it clear that the tripmates have
continued their involvement with the Antarctic, and the overall sense is one of a
continuing story in which readers may someday take their part. A resources list of
books and URLs includes Bancroft's website documenting her own recent Antarc-
tic crossing; an index is also provided. DS
LYONS, MARY E. 
Knockabeg: A Famine Tale. Houghton, 2001 
[128p]
ISBN 0-618-09283-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
The town of Knockabeg is hard hit by the potato famine, and none but the faeries
know that the blight is the work of the Nuckelavees, wicked sprites determined to
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
27
drive out the humans and take over the land. The faery queen calls for war and
demands that Sticky, member of the faery high council, turn over her human boy
Eamon since the faeries need a mortal to fight with them if they are to have a
winning chance. Sticky flees the faery host with Eamon, as her plans for him do
not include fighting in a faery war; she is pursued by two friends seeking to return
her and her boy to the faery host. Most of the action takes place among the faeries,
who train for war, battle their enemies, and observe various human happenings;
the fantasy plot sits uneasily against the backdrop of the real historical horror that
was the potato blight and ensuing famine. The author's depiction of the contrast
between rich English and poor Irish, the descriptions of starving children, and the
literal transformation of a spoiled boy into a vegetable (he becomes "an idjit" with
cabbage growing out of his ears) jar against the lighter fantasy elements. While
Lyons' faeries are trooping about, her human characters are starving to death, and
the contrast is simply too great to be reconcilable. The precious tone conflicts
with the human tragedy, making this uneasy combination of fairy tale and histori-
cal fiction an unsuccessful one. JMD
MCCULLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
Grandmas Trick-or- Treat; written and illus. by Emily
Arnold McCully. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[48p] 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028731-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028730-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
The grandmas who have been at the lake (BCCB 5/90) and at bat are now cel-
ebrating Halloween with their beloved granddaughter, Pip. Grandma Nan wants
to keep trick-or-treating orderly while Grandma Sal is out for serious fun ("'Is
everyone ready to play some tricks?' asked Grandma Sal. 'The children will not
play tricks,' said Grandma Nan. 'They will have good manners'"), and between
them Pip and her friends are going crazy. They finally ditch their minders ("We've
lost the grandmas"), but when they run into bullying Big Bertha they begin to
regret their unsupervised state. Young Pip gets plenty of limelight (and youngsters
will be sympathetic to her desire for escape), but the polarized grandmas as usual
galvanize the story; it's entertaining to see Grandma Sal, the mummy, scaring the
bejeebers out of would-be treat-givers, and it's heartening to know that the grand-
mas are just around the corner (and are capable of overlooking their differences to
defend their granddaughter) when Big Bertha threatens. The illustrations are as
rich as the text is pared down: McCully's watercolors bleed freely to page edges
and across the gutter, enveloping the spreads in a glimmering Halloween world of
rattling leaves and darkening gloom through which the grandmas and their charge
boldly stride. Old friends of the grandmas and eager new readers will consider this
neatly spooky and easily manageable early reader a definite treat. DS
McDONOUGH, ALISON 
Do the Hokey Poey; illus. by Jackie Urbanovic. 
Front
Street/Cricket, 2001 
112p
ISBN 0-8126-2699-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
"Never act strange. That was Brendan's philosophy." This precept hasn't yet
garnered Brendan, a new fifth-grader, any real friends (though he thinks they might
come in time), but he has at least escaped being thought weird. He's therefore
mortified to discover that his mother has taken up work as a party DJ, providing
music and leading dances for groups; he feels his doom is sealed when those groups
28 
* 
THE BULLETIN
prove to include his own class. The book's plot is fairly predictable new-kid stuff
(Brendan eventually makes a friend, loosens up, and follows a subplot to its logical
conclusion), and the dense and stodgy format makes the text look more demand-
ing than it really is. Style and detail put McDonough's text above many of its kin,
however, with familial and classroom dynamics particularly well evoked, so there'll
be plenty of reader sympathy for Brendan. The line-drawn illustrations have a
commercial glibness not well suited to the story, but they do at least capture the
humor of the events. Younger middle-graders with some reading stamina and
older middle-graders looking for a break will both get a kick out of Brendan's
inexorable progress towards a public Hokey Pokey. DS
MCKISSACK, 
PATRICIA C. 
Goin' Someplace Special; illus. by Jerry
Pinkney. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81885-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
'Tricia Ann-an African-American preteen-feels she's ready to go across town all
by herself, but Mama Frances knows that her granddaughter's journey through
1950s Nashville is likely to challenge 'Tricia Ann's moral compass as much as her
navigational ability. However, she lets the girl go with one last reminder-"hold
yo' head up and act like you b'long to somebody"-and with that 'Tricia Ann
skips out of the idealized verdure of Jerry Pinkney's impressionistic landscape into
the sober reality of back-of-the-bus seating and whites-only park benches. The
reader follows her turquoise yellow-flowered dress all the way to the mysterious
"Someplace Special," the increasing drabness of the people and surroundings thrown
into relief by 'Tricia Ann's vitality. The expressive narration and soft-focus illus-
trations of this forthrightly purposive picture book sometimes become oversweet,
but there is a solid core of experiential detail in both the pencil sketches that un-
derpin Pinkney's watercolors and the social (and personal) history that undergirds
McKissack's story. And you'll be especially glad to know that 'Tricia Ann's "favor-
ite spot in the world" turns out to be... the public library, which a brief afterword
by McKissack says "was one of the few places where there were no Jim Crow signs
and blacks were treated with some respect." While a little lengthy for the youngest
listeners, this shows the pervasiveness of segregation and celebrates the strength of
mind of those who said to African-American children, "Don't let those signs steal
yo' happiness." FK
MONTRESOR, BENI, ad. 
Hansel and Gretel; ad. and illus. by Beni
Montresor. 
Atheneum, 2001 
27p
ISBN 0-689-84144-2 
$17.00 
Ad 4-6 yrs
Gone are the wicked and/or weak (step)parents, gone the pebbles and breadcrumbs,
gone the gingerbread house and clever Gretel's tricking of the witch into the oven.
In this stripped-down version, Hansel and Gretel's mother sends them out to gather
strawberries and worries when they don't return-with good reason, since "in the
woods there was sometimes an evil monster, not to mention terrifying devils and
witches." After dreaming that angels come down from heaven to protect them,
the children enter a castle with very good cooking smells and a very bad child-
eating witch who puts Hansel in a cage. Gretel seizes the witch's magic wand, frees
her brother, and they both push the witch into the fire for a joyful ending. Al-
though seemingly adapted for younger listeners, this is actually scarier than more
detailed traditional versions such as Lesser and Zelinsky's Hanseland Gretel (BCCB
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
29
3/85). Silhouetted pictures feature angular shapes, flat perspectives, and contrast-
ing collage overlays of intense hues: red, blue, green, yellow, black, and white (for
the children). The dramatic full-page illustrations would make an effective Hal-
loween display, but the often-flat text lacks the depth and imagery that have sus-
tained the Grimm Brothers' version for nearly two centuries. BH
MYERS, WALTER DAN 
Bad Boy: A Memoir. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
21 4 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029524-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029523-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Walter Dean Myers grew up in 194 0s Harlem, his days full of school, family, and
neighborhood. The author rather ruefully recalls his troublemaking in school and
his various teachers'-and his mother's-reaction to that troublemaking. His
memories are a riot of color, filled with sensual impressions of his neighborhood
and his neighbors, the sights and sounds of his community. The events of Myers'
school days will be heartening to less-than-perfect kids, who will be relieved to see
that here is someone who, though resolved to be responsible and good, did not
always live up to his own expectations. Though his reminiscences are laced with
the humor and insight of hard-gained maturity, Myers' sense of himself as he once
was-wide-eyed child, confused adolescent-keeps this memoir on its revelatory
track. Myers traces his loss of innocence to his growing awareness of race and
racism and to his dawning realization that he could not depend on that in which
he had placed his faith and trust-the inherent fairness of the world. The author's
recollections of his young life are both poignant and funny, and his determination
to honestly evoke his environment and his own developing character is apparent.
This memoir joins the ranks of stellar literary autobiographies, such as Fleischman's
Abracadabra Kid (BCCB 9/96) and Zindel's Pigman andMe (BCCB 12/92). Myers'
particular slice of life concludes with his joining the army at age seventeen, and
inquiring minds will want to know: what happened next? JMD
NACE, DON 
Bowling for Beginners: Simple Steps to Strikes & Spares; illus. with
photographs by Bruce Curtis. 
Sterling, 2001 
96p
ISBN 0-8069-4968-6 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 4-12
Writing with authority, Nace provides information with information from equip-
ment and warm-up exercises, to scoring and the four-step delivery sequence, to get
young bowlers started. Later chapters cover more advanced technical information
and strategy, troubleshooting and bowling-ball anatomy (e.g. "coverstock," "axis
of rotation," and "radius of gyration"). Coverage of "The Mental Game" winds
up the instruction. Sharp and vibrant photographs and instructive diagrams, fea-
turing carefully placed boys and girls and offering some unusual and helpful per-
spectives (the game from behind the player), assist in relaying the information;
special attention is given to both right and left-handed techniques. Particularly
clear is the two-part section on scoring, first leading the reader through "What
Happened" in an imaginary game, then describing exactly how the scoresheet is
calculated. Though pictures and the two-column format will attract browsers, the
technical style means that few will choose to read Nace's book cover to cover.
However, kids and teens looking for introductory pointers for getting started or
new strategies for their game will find a plethora of information and then some in
a package that vastly updates the titles of this genre from twenty years ago. A
30 
* THE BULLETIN
detailed table of contents in addition to an index will help youngsters to get to the
information they need. EAB
NAIDOO, BEVERLEY 
The Other Side of Truth. HarperCollins, 2001 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029629-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029628-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
Sade's mother is the first casualty of the truth in this event-filled novel. Her shoot-
ing death-political vengeance for her husband's journalistic integrity-precipi-
tates twelve-year-old Sade's and her younger brother's departure on a hastily arranged
flight from Lagos to London, where, reeling from shock and deserted by their paid
escort, they are scooped up by the British child welfare system "like two parcels
with no address." This thought-provoking novel offers readers a gripping, open-
eyed exploration of what happens when principles meet practical reality in hand-
to-hand combat. Naidoo skillfully takes readers through unfamiliar territory
(Nigerian politics, immigration bureaucracy) and also meets them on common
ground (school), laying out the basic similarity between political and schoolyard
bullying. When Sade's father tells her "We have to stand up to bullies . .. other-
wise they get inside your head," she believes him, but she has also learned that
telling the truth can be lethal, and she wonders, "What could you do when you
were up against people who told powerful lies?" Seamlessly integrated informa-
tion and even more telling details introduce readers to the ethical complexities of
global politics and well-intentioned but rule-bound bureaucracies while giving equal
attention to family dynamics and individual psychologies. A brief endnote and
glossary sort fiction from fact and define Nigerian terms (most clear in their origi-
nal context). Winner of the 2000 Smarties silver medal in Great Britain, this story
about the power of the stories we tell-and don't tell-deserves an international
readership. FK
NELSON, MARILYN 
Carver: A Life in Poems. 
Front Street, 2001 
103p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 1-886910-53-7 
$16.95 
R* Gr. 7 up
While one wouldn't really term George Washington Carver forgotten, one might
consider him too often reduced, historically speaking, to a caption-sized contribu-
tion involving peanuts and just maybe the Tuskegee Institute. A sequence of
poems (most initially published elsewhere, appearing here in chronological sequence
so as to suggest biography) occasionally punctuated with historical photographs
would seem an odd counteractant to that sad fate, but it's startlingly effective. In
her free-verse lyrics, Nelson (herself the daughter of a Tuskegee Airman) employs
a variety of perspectives: an astonished teacher, a grateful student, an envious
colleague, the regretful subject of his broken-off courtship, and, obliquely, Carver
himself. Together, these voices evoke a man of genius, whose gift for understand-
ing and intellectual curiosity were profound and enduring; a man of faith, who
considered the botanical intricacies he uncovered to be proof of the Creator; a man
of commitment, who consciously chose to turn his brilliance to agriculture in
order to best help his struggling people trying to eke out a post-slavery life in
southern fields amid lynchings and grinding poverty. The poems are rich with
people, with academic politics, even with economics, giving an unmatchable pic-
ture not only of Carver's life but also of his impact within his time as well as in
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
31
history. This is often sophisticated writing and readers may be inspired to seek out
a Carver biography to fill in some gaps, but the book has a resonance and heart
that will gratify the knowledgeable and naive alike (and that also invites reading
aloud). This will open many readers' eyes not just to Carver but to brilliance and
the paths it may take. An alphabetical index of poems is included. DS
PHILIP, NEIL, ad. 
Noah and the Devil: A Legend of Noah's Ark from Romania;
illus. by Isabelle Brent. 
Clarion, 2001 
[26 p]
ISBN 0-618-11754-7 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Philip weaves a number of Romanian folktales together in this story about the
biblical Noah and his ark. The titular episode occurs when all the creatures have
boarded and Noah is waiting for his wife to join them. When she refuses, Noah
curses his stubborn wife, saying "Oh, you devil, come in!" and inadvertently invit-
ing the devil onto the ark in the form of a little mouse. Philip's tone is breezy and
direct, presenting Noah as a simple man who addresses God quite colloquially
when God announces the flood that will drown all the humans: "'All?' said Noah.
'All except you,' said God." Episodes within this larger tale present smaller pour-
quoi tales, offering explanations for the napping habits of cats and the origin of
fleas, and Philip includes a thorough concluding source note which helps situate
these variations in Eastern European culture. The pages are framed top and bot-
tom with borders that reflect elements of the story, such as the waves and fishes
that run along the bottom of a spread show the ark on the open ocean. Brent's
watercolor illustrations depict characters in a folk-art style, making frequent use of
further borders and frames to inset the images on the page, and both borders and
images are highlighted with gilt lines and shapes that catch the light. Young listen-
ers will enjoy the new twists in this familiar tale. KM
PRELUTSKY, 
JACK 
Awful 
Ogre's Awful Day; illus. 
by Paul 
O.
Zelinsky. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[39p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07779-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07778-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Prelutsky, poetic tackler of the terrible in Monday's Troll (BCCB 3/96) and other
titles, here focuses on the existence of a single hideous creature, the awful ogre.
The A.O. leads a quiet life, sending admiring letters to his beloved ("I long for the
sight/ Of your craggy gray face"), puttering in the garden ("I'm growing carnivo-
rous roses/ And oceans of overblown mold"), enjoying a quiet repast ("It's ideal to
be an ogre/ When it comes to dining out"), and finally settling down for bedtime
("Good night to furtive spiders/ That lurk in murky wells./ Good night to loath-
some vermin/ With nauseating smells"). Prelutsky's monstrous poetry does the
ogre proud in a variety of verse forms, lengths, and even moods-"Awful Ogre
and the Storm," for instance, introduces a note of genuine and atmospheric fore-
boding amid the clever and comedic exploration. Zelinsky's line-and-watercolor
art is cheerfully robust where Sfs' illustrations were sinuous and delicate; the result
is an ogre of fascinatingly repellent habits but rather an endearing aspect with his
peach-fuzzy hair, twinkling blue eye (just the one in the middle of his forehead),
and chubby cheeks. The ogreish scenes play both on scale (Awful Ogre towers
over the populace) and elements (the pages are charmingly vermin-ridden), and
32 
* 
THE BULLETIN
there's a deliciously wicked satire in the spread for "Awful Ogre's Awful Dream,"
where A.O. suffers through a nightmare about cavorting in a sun-dappled meadow
with big-eyed, long-lashed kittens. Even non-reading youngsters will relish an
ogreish readaloud, and readers will find this a giggle-worthy entry into the daily
life of the gruesome. DS
PULLMAN, PHILIP, ad. 
Puss in Boots: The Adventures of That Most Enterprising
Feline; illus. by Ian Beck. 
Knopf, 2001 
26 p
ISBN 0-375-81354-3 
$16.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
The traditional tale of the fancily shod cat gets a little gussying up in this retelling
based on a play Pullman wrote for the Polka Dot Theater. The adaptation takes
some folkloric license with the more familiar version, adding a kidnapping and
some ghouls to the hero's usual litany of troubles. The result is rollicking, with
swift action and humorous dialogue. Beck's illustrations add to the slightly breathless
tone: full-page and framed pictures, insets and spot art keep the (mostly) primary-
colored spreads lively; characters are expressively drawn, and the apparently casual
but intense crosshatching makes each picture especially energetic. Puss isn't one of
the more popular tales for picture-book retellings, and this galloping version makes
an intriguing contrast with Lincoln Kirstein's (BCCB 4/92). JMD
RICE, DAVID 
Crazy Loco. 
Dial, 2001 
135p
ISBN 0-8037-2598-1 
$16.99 
R Gr. 6-9
This semi-autobiographical collection of short stories is a winning combination of
sturdy sentiment, comedy, and pathos. All the entries revolve around relation-
ships and change: a boy develops a loving relationship with his maternal grandfa-
ther ("Papa Lalo"), a young woman takes the educational opportunity offered by
an elderly aunt ("She Flies"), and assimilated family members learn about the dan-
gerous combination of firecrackers and outhouses ("The California Cousins"). The
narratives are told in the first and the third person, with a comforting sense of
intimacy that makes the voices personal and familiar. Although not all of these
tales are funny, they all contain a good-natured humor that acts as ballast to the
undercurrent of tension created by living astride two cultures, Anglo and Latino.
A strong sense of class and economic reality underlies the tales, and the universality
of the immigrant struggle-adults working hard labor for long hours to provide a
better future for their children-is present on nearly every page. Rice's easy style is
straightforward and involving, and his points of view are always true to his charac-
ters' ages and predicaments; a joyous sense of ethnic pride and strong family ties
prevails throughout. Spanish words and phrases are undefined but understand-
able in context. JMD
ROBERTSON, JAMES I., JR. 
Standing Like a Stone Wall: The Life of General Thomas
J.Jackson. Atheneum, 2001 
185p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-82419-X 
$22.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Robertson recounts the life of Confederate general "Stonewall" Jackson with a
reverence that falls just short of hagiography. From his orphaned childhood (which
Robertson portrays as more unloved than Jackson himself did), to his single-minded
academic struggle through West Point, to his teaching career at Virginia Military
Institute, to his undeniably cunning troop deployment and valor in battle, Jackson
is cast larger than life. To say that coverage is comprehensive (right down to the
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
33
myriad character testimonials) is a wild understatement, and many prospective
readers will find the double-columned text daunting indeed. However, Robertson's
prose is accessible, occasionally to the point of simplistic choppiness ("A local resi-
dent named Holt had owed ten dollars to a widow for a long time. She appealed
to the court for help. Constable Jackson was assigned to collect the money"). He
also does a creditable job of explaining how a staunchly religious nineteenth-cen-
tury Southerner reconciled slavery with his spiritual beliefs and viewed the righ-
teousness of the Southern cause: "The Southern Confederacy existed because the
Heavenly Father deemed it so. Jackson was a soldier of the South; hence, he
would be a soldier of the cross." This isn't the smoothest of chronicles, but those
who count Jackson among their military heroes will appreciate seeing his legend
polished to a brilliant shine. Period illustrations, battle maps, notes, bibliography,
and index are included. EB
ROGASKY, BARBARA, comp. 
Leaf by Leaf: Autumn Poems; illus. with photographs
by Marc Tauss. 
Scholastic, 2001 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-590-25347-6 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Accomplished anthologist Rogasky (compiler of Winter Poems, BCCB 1/93) pulls
together twenty-five seasonal poems in honor of the autumn. She's clearly scuf-
fling through leaves on the path less traveled; her imaginative selections draw from
poets historic and contemporary, writing for old and young, in entries ranging
from "The Frost," by fourth-century Chinese poet Tzu Yeh, to a selection from
Edgar Allan Poe's "Ulalume," to Shirley Hughes' "Wild Weather." The book is
particularly strong on contemporarily less-feted poets of the late nineteenth cen-
tury (W. E. Henley, famous as the model for Long John Silver) and shortly there-
after (Edwin Arlington Robinson will be new to many kids); this makes for
occasionally sophisticated vocabulary and style, but the lyrics are so brief and so
evocative in imagery that readers may be seduced into stretching. While there are
plenty of readaloud possibilities here, the art has its own impact: Tauss uses differ-
ent cameras and color approaches in a range of photographic effects, and vivid and
dramatic visuals fill the oversized pages to the edges. Though a few images are a bit
brassy and showoffy, those in subtler shades (blues and browns, sometimes in
monotone prints, predominate) accentuate form, movement, and chiaroscuro and
set off the verses especially well, and the print (sometimes white, sometimes black,
and most often autumnal gold) returns the favor. This is a collection of polished
elegance that makes a cool counterpoint to Rogasky's previous seasonal volume.
DS
RUBIN, SUSAN GOLDMAN 
There Goes the Neighborhood: Ten Buildings People Loved
to Hate. Holiday House, 2001 
96 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1435-3 
$18.95 
R* Gr. 5-9
There's nothing like hot controversy to capture adolescent attention, and Rubin
draws readers right into the vortex of debates that raged when (now) respected
architects foisted their dream children onto a (then) unappreciative, even hostile
public. The Washington Monument was likened to an asparagus spear and the
Eiffel Tower to a giraffe; Phillip Johnson's glass house was a local embarrassment,
and Frank O. Gehry's an unfinished junk heap; the Pompidou Center was de-
signed by foreigners, and McDonald's renowned motif represented the worst of
34 
* 
THE BULLETIN
American culture imposed on the cultural purity of other lands. While never quite
dismissing vitriolic criticism as devoid of merit, Rubin brings a keen sense of hu-
mor to bear on the fact that all these edifices eventually worked their way into
public affection. Even the picture composites that open each chapter seem to poke
equal fun at design and critique-a giraffe's head tops off the Eiffel Tower; the
back of a refrigerator is set against the Pompidou Center. Monochrome photos
and typeface in deep indigo cleverly evoke architectural blueprints, but readers will
probably regret the absence of a complete palette when considering indictments of
garishness against the Pompidou Center's color-coded piping and McDonald's
neon arches. Any chapter could make a spirited, offbeat readaloud and spring-
board for discussion. Readers/listeners should look at their own neighborhood
monstrosities with fresh vision and decide which are worthy of affection or execra-
tion. EB
RYAN, SARA 
Empress of the World. Viking, 2001 
[192p]
ISBN 0-670-89688-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Away for the summer at a program for gifted youth in order to study archaeology,
Nicole-Nic-is surprised and pleased to find herself a member of a small band of
friends. Funny, self-deprecating Isaac would be the obvious choice for her special
interest, but instead Nic falls head over heels for Battle, a beautiful Southern girl
with family issues. Love initially runs fairly smoothly, but soon Nic is frustrated
by Battle's withdrawal in the face of Nic's continued habit of scrutiny, and she's
devastated to find Battle in the arms of a boy in the program. Ryan writes percep-
tively about (and sometimes with) the gawky uncertainty of young love, with Nic's
desire and doubt warring with each other. The romance itself is sweet, more emo-
tionally than physically intense; while there is some questioning of the import of
this new turn in Nic's life, there's angst for all the group of friends, and the focus
here is on Nic's love for Battle, not on lesbianism. The book also perceptively
evokes the hothouse atmosphere of the residential program and the intensity of
friendships there; that atmosphere is bolstered by witty conversations and by strong
characterizations of the other kids in Nic's group, especially the hyperdramatic
Weetzie Bat wannabe Katrina, a loyal friend who gets her own reward in the form
of a relationship with Isaac. No problem novel but a good, solid, and in some
ways nice and old-fashioned romance, this is a tender tale of first love. DS
SALDAl^A, RENI, JR. 
The Jumping Tree: A Novel. Delacorte, 2001 
181p
ISBN 0-385-32725-0 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
A Mexican-American kid growing up in Texas in a close-knit family with strong
ties to both Mexico and the United States, Rey lives in two worlds: the tight
insular one of his cultural community and the larger, more demanding one that
encompasses it. He is both participant and observer, and his voice is solidly grounded
in the day-to-day realities of his life. In incident after incident the author shows
him making choices about what it means to be a man: when he admires his father
for not drinking despite the teasing of his uncle; when he refuses to go into the
forbidden pool hall even though his best friend calls him a sissy; when he won't
speak to the border guard in English because he's angry at the necessity of proving
himself an American. This first-person novel has the flavor of a personal reminis-
cence, a life seen through the eyes of the adult who lived it. Saldafia depicts Rey's
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
35
struggle to define his manhood and his cultural identity with autobiographical
precision, and that may act as bridge between the somewhat distanced, adult point
of view and the young adult reader. JMD
SCHMIDT, GARY D. 
Straw into Gold. Clarion, 2001 
172p
ISBN 0-618-05601-7 
$15.00 
R* Gr. 6-9
"Rumpelstiltskin" has recently received attention from Vivian Vande Velde in The
Rumpelstiltskin Problem (BCCB 2/01) and Donna Jo Napoli in Spinners (9/99).
Schmidt (author of Anson's Way, 5/99) puts his considerable imagination to the
construction of a lengthier, more intricate tale of greed, betrayal, and the redemp-
tive power of love in this spin on the old tale. Tousle is thrilled to be going to
Wolverham with his Da to see a royal procession, but he never anticipates the
outcome of his very first trip to town. A hundred rebels against the evil Lord
Beryn are condemned to the gallows by the king; Tousle finds himself standing
before sovereign and Great Lords, pleading for their lives. He is supported by the
Queen, and her intercession gives him-and the rebels-one chance for life: he
must answer a riddle within seven days, or all will perish. Tousle is given a blinded
boy rebel, Innes, as a guide, and the two of them set off to find the Queen in her
exile at St. Eynsham Abbey, for only she knows the answer to the riddle. They are
pursued by Lord Beryn's men, and by the King's Grip; Beryn wishes them dead,
for they hold a secret even they do not know that threatens his power, and the
King's Grip has been sent to protect them. The King's Grip has his own motives
for saving Tousle, however, and they have nothing to do with queens, lost princes,
or the might of kings-he is interested only in finding Tousle's Da, a little man
with spindly fingers who has the gift of turning straw into gold. Richly drawn
characters and evocative language enhance a novel that's tightly constructed and
emotionally resonant. Fantasy and adventure lovers will appreciate the thrills of
the chase-and-escape plot, and they will most certainly come looking for other
novelizations of traditional tales. JMD
SMITH, CYNTHIA LEITICH 
Rain Is Not My Indian Name. 
HarperCollins,
2001 
135p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029504-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17397-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Journal entries providing snapshots of the past supplement the narration of fourteen-
year-old photographer Rain Berghoff, a devotee of sci-fi fanzines and Chinese
takeout who describes herself as "Creek-Cherokee and Scots-Irish on Mom's side,
Irish-German-Ojibway on Dad's." Rain is one of just a few "Indian" kids in
Hannesburg, Kansas, where "the subject of Native Americans pretty much comes
up just around Turkey Day ... and the so-called Indians always look like boogey
men on the prairie, windblown cover boys ... or baby-faced refugees from the
world of Precious Moments." This summer, she's being pressured by her family to
participate in a summer camp for Native American youth run by her Aunt Georgia.
Rain stops short of joining, but she gets drawn in when she is asked to photograph
the camp for the local newspaper and eventually starts to believe that "it might
not be too late for me to connect with the Ojibway part of my heritage."
Unfortunately, Rain's story does not come into focus quickly or clearly enough.
Two short chapters introduce and then kill off Rain's best friend/boyfriend; after
that, the complexities of the local backstory make it difficult for the reader to put
36 
* THE BULLETIN
together the big picture, in which issues of friendship and family are explored
through fragmented views of interrelated plots. Still, Rain's observations are
appealingly wry, and readers who stay with her until these themes are fully developed
will find food for thought in this exploration of cultural identity. FK
SPINELLI, EILEEN 
In My New Yellow Shirt; illus. by Hideko Takahashi. 
Holt,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6242-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
A spunky narrator receives, among other toys, a yellow shirt for his birthday. Ig-
noring his friend Sam's reaction ("That's no fun!"), the young narrator goes on to
share how wearing his yellow shirt allows him to pretend he's something else: "In
my new yellow shirt... I am a duck quacking, splashing/ through a big puddle of
sun." He goes on to imagine himself as other animals and various inanimate ob-
jects (trumpet, taxi, yellow submarine), and he ends his day safely, because his
"new yellow shirt is a smile of moon/ in my very own room." Spinelli's text flows
well and makes effective use of repetition, but young viewers aren't likely to share
the narrator's unrealistically sustained enthusiasm for an article of clothing. Acrylics
in clear, strong colors radiate the energy of the yellow-clad child, but at least one
spread seems to miss the point by failing to include the all-important shirt. Still,
preschoolers may enjoy imagining what they can be when they're similarly color-
fully garbed. EAB
SPINELLI, EILEEN 
A Safe Place Called Home; illus. by Christy Hale. 
Cavendish,
2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7614-5085-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Spinelli's young narrator braves numerous scary situations on his way home from
school: "When the stray dog barks,/ When the lightning sparks,/ when a storm
cloud follows me, / when the big kids shout/ as they race about / home is the place
to be." After passing sirens, deep puddles, restless animals, and windswept objects,
he finally ends up safely in the arms of his parents: "Home is the place all safe and
snug/ when I'm scared as I can be,/ with Mommy's smile and Daddy's hug/ home
is the place for me/ for sure./ Home is the place for me." Christy Hale's mixed-
media illustrations, in dark hues with orange and yellow highlights combining
with sweeping lines for eerie effect, contribute some dramatic tension to this mild
adventure. The narrator's expressions are occasionally awkward, however, and the
mid-book brightening of weather and mood breaks the tension and makes the
narrator's fears incongruous. Nonetheless, in an age when Halloween storytimes
may make some adults uncomfortable, Spinelli's book fills a niche, providing a
spooky alternative grounded in the everyday experience of children and sprinkled
with the occasional jack-o'-lantern, scarecrow, and black cat. EAB
SPRINGER, NANCY 
Rowan Hood: Outlaw Girl of Sherwood Forest. Philomel,
2001 
170p
ISBN 0-399-23368-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
After the murder of her woodwitch mother, thirteen-year-old Rosemary cuts off
her hair, renames herself Rowan, and sets off to search for her father, the fabled
outlaw Robin Hood. She journeys to Sherwood Forest, and along the way she
acquires three companions: Tykull, an arrow-catching wolf-dog; simple Lionel, a
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
37
gifted singer with the strength of ten men; and brave princess Ettarde, escapee
from an arranged marriage. Encounters with Robin Hood, Guy of Gisborn, and
the Sheriff of Nottingham make for a pretty rousing tale, and Rowan, plucky
victim of tragedy that she is, is a most sympathetic character. The contrivance of
the tale is undeniable, and there are quite a few awkward moments (most caused
by anachronistic language) where even the most willing suspension of disbelief
may waver. Springer, however, knows her adolescent angst: Rowan mourns her
mother, searches for her father, and tries to reconcile herself to her mixed heritage
(human and aelfe, the fairy folk) with all the emotional turmoil of any modern
young-adult protagonist. The added frisson of dangerous adventures, daring es-
capes, and poignant reunions will keep young fantasy/adventure lovers turning the
pages. JMD
TOWNLEY, RODERICK 
The Great Good Thing. Jackson/Atheneum, 2001 
[232p]
ISBN 0-689-84324-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Princess Sylvie is the protagonist of a book in a world where Readers prompt char-
acters to stage their story anew each time the book is reopened. No one has read
Sylvie's book in a long time, and she and the other characters are taken by surprise
one day when a little girl opens the book. This new Reader is enchanted with the
story, reading it over and over again, and Sylvie discovers a way to travel out of the
land of her tale and into the dreams of this Reader. This ability comes in handy
when their book is destroyed by fire, and Sylvie rescues as many of the characters as
she can by transporting them into the Reader's mind. For a time, characters from
the story are summoned to appear in dreams, but eventually they are no longer
called, and Princess Sylvie moves with the royal family and their entourage into a
little-used part of the Reader's mind while the Reader grows older. Finally, as the
Reader is dying, Sylvie finds a way (with help from the Reader's own grandmother
who still lives inside her mind) to encourage the Reader's now-grown daughter to
write the story of The Great Good Thing down again, thereby renewing the lives
of the characters and the story. Although this self-conscious tale has the attraction
of a complicated puzzle, the logic doesn't always work, and there are sections in
which this artificial story-of-a-story drags with lack of tension. However, it's a
change from more conventional folktale novelizations, and readers who have al-
ready been delighted by fairy stories might be interested in this fantasy about the
lives of characters when the book is closed. KM
TUNNELL, MICHAEL O. 
Brothers in Valor: A Story ofResistance. Holiday House,
2001 
26 0p
ISBN 0-8234-1541-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Tunnell bases this fictionalized account on the true-life experiences of Helmuth
Hiibener and two teenaged friends who were tried and convicted by the People's
Court for distributing anti-Nazi handbills. Rudi, the youngest of the trio, tells
how the boys moved from a crisis of conscience over their Mormon congregation's
tacit cooperation with Nazi policy to putting their convictions into action by gath-
ering war information from Allied radio broadcasts and disseminating it through-
out their neighborhoods. This is definitely the stuff of high drama, all the more
powerful for its basis in reality, but a tonal shift in the prose makes it difficult to
pinpoint a receptive audience. Throughout the first half, Tunnell flits among
38 
* 
THE BULLETIN
episodes of escalating anti-Jewish discrimination and turbulence at home, church,
and school without lingering to examine harbingers of the coming maelstrom in
any depth. When the boys are finally apprehended, the text fairly explodes with
harsh, explicit detail of brutal interrogations, terrifying incarceration, a sham trial,
and ultimately Helmuth's beheading and the others' imprisonment. It's problem-
atic, though, whether readers with the sophistication to handle the grim aftermath
of the boys' resistance work will have followed the tale through its choppier, more
child-oriented preliminaries. A final note offers background regarding the boys on
whom the characters were modeled, and a timeline of World War II sets events
into broader context. EB
VAN LAAN, NANCY 
Teeny Tiny Tingly Tales; illus. by Victoria Chess. 
Schwartz/
Atheneum, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81875-0 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Van Laan uses elements from traditional folklore to create three rhyming tales that
have just enough creepiness to please horror-seeking preschoolers and primary grad-
ers. "Old Doctor Wango Tango" rides his poor horse to the top of a windy hill
and is blown away; "It" pulls itself together from a variety of parts and takes a stroll
through town; and an old woman out picking peas finds "The Hairy Toe" and
later meets its owner. The tales themselves are brisk, rhythmic, and eminently
tellable. Chess' mixed-media (acrylics, watercolor, pastels, colored pencil, and
pencil) illustrations are a stylistic match to Van Laan's tiny terrors; the pop-eyed,
long-nosed doctor, maniacally expressioned It, and long-nailed hairy toe just look
like creepy trouble waiting to happen. The little girl on the cover (walking along-
side a cemetery wall with spooky fingers reaching over the top) is an inside joke:
she reappears on the title pages of the stories, dressed in pajamas and bunny slip-
pers, reading this very book and becoming progressively more horrified. This
semi-send up of baby horror tales will evoke just the right mixture of shivers and
giggles. JMD
VAN LEEUWEN, JEAN 
Sorry; illus. by Brad Sneed. 
Fogelman, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2261-3 
$15.99 
R 
6-10 yrs
Brothers Ebenezer and Obadiah get along just fine on their "poor farm with more
rocks than good soil, more winter than sun." They divide the chores during the
day and play music on the porch every evening, and they seem content to go on
doing so-until the day Obadiah insults Ebenezer's oatmeal ("'Lumps,' said
Obadiah. 'Lumps?' said Ebenezer. 'Not in my oatmeal'") and Ebenezer dumps
the bowl of cereal on Obadiah's head. Neither brother will apologize to the other,
and things go from bad to worse, driving Obadiah to cut the house in two and
haul his half over to the next hilltop. Walls of stone and silence keep the two
separated as over the years the brothers marry, have children, and perpetuate their
feud, until finally their great-grandsons meet and manage not to repeat the mis-
takes of their ornery great-grandfathers. The energy and humor of Van Leeuwen's
rueful fable about foolish stubbornness and the power of apology are matched by
Sneed's powerful watercolors. The illustrations are set in panel, full-page, and
double-page layouts, and the compositions are balanced and absorbing but not
crowded. The figures are elongated and monumental, and the fluid lines give an
elastic, expressive emotionality to the images of man and beast. The subtle tragedy
of the brothers' estrangement is given humor by the larger-than-life illustrations,
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 39
but it remains to be seen which listeners remember more, the humor or the lesson.
JMD
VANDE VELDE, VIAN 
Being Dead. Harcourt, 2001 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-15-236320-4 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Each story in this collection of seven short tales has an unusual take on ghostly
happenings, from the tricky "Drop by Drop" (about a teenager haunted by the
young victim of a hit-and-run accident) to the cleverly pithy "The Ghost" (about
college students moving into a haunted house) to the romantic "October Chill"
(in which a teenage girl with an inoperable brain tumor finds true love with the
ghost of a young man from the eighteenth century). Whether the narrative is first
or third person, whether the protagonist is living or ghostly, the main characters
have engaging voices. Vande Velde is handy with the unexpected plot twist, the
turnaround that both shocks and delights, and her writing style is precise and
entertaining. Even in short stories her characters have emotional depth; she's care-
ful to give them contextual life before introducing elements of the supernatural, a
choice which makes the stories even more effective. There's something here for
everyone, from adults seeking a readaloud for Halloween to young adults looking
for a more sophisticated-than-Stine thrill. JMD
VENOKUR, Ross 
The Autobiography ofMeatball Finkestein; written and illus. by
Ross Venokur. 
Delacorte, 2001 
153p
ISBN 0-385-32798-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Lifelong vegetarian Meatball is revolted when bully Rufus forces him to eat his
namesake, but the effects are even stranger than he imagined: he discovers he can
change into anything he thinks about (animal, vegetable, mineral) for two minutes
and thirty-nine seconds. Fortunately, he has developed this superpower just in
time to avert the dastardly plan of an organized cell of kid-hating principals and
save the family business from a consuming conglomerate. Venokur (author of The
Amazing Frecktacle, BCCB 9/98 and The Cookie Company, 2/00) tosses logic to
the winds in this farfetched tale, and he won't be winning any prizes for plotting,
but Meatball has such a comfortable, confident voice that readers can't help but
root for him. While the adults are strictly straight men to the kids (the principals'
villainous personalities are right out of central casting), the characterizations of
Meatball's friend Max and Max's girlfriend Jessica are solidly appealing, and even
bully Rufus and Meatball's precious sister Precious come around in the end. JMD
WARD, HELEN 
The Tin Forest; illus. by Wayne Anderson. 
Dutton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46787-4 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
"There was once a wide, windswept place near nowhere and close to forgotten,
that was filled with all the things that no one wanted. Right in the middle was a
small house, with small windows, that looked out on other people's garbage and
bad weather." The old man who lives there does his best to cope with the rising
tide of trash, but he has no success until he decides to work with it instead of
against it. By creating a forest from this detritus, the old man attracts a real bird,
which returns with his mate and some seeds and thereby helps the old man realize
his dreams of living among "tropical trees, exotic flowers, toucans, tree frogs, and
40 
* 
THE BULLETIN
tigers." Reminiscent of both Cherry's The Great Kapok Tree and Yorinks' Hey, Al,
this is less coherent philosophically but nonetheless interesting visually: the tin
forest is intricately detailed, its metallic monochrome relieved by the more organic
warmth of the old man's pastoral vision. While the book's lush resolution may
strike environmentally minded readers as delusional, this dreamy volume would
make a poetic addition to discussions of recycling and found-object art. FK
WATKINS, RICHARD 
Slavery: Bondage throughout History; written and illus. by
Richard Watkins. 
Houghton, 2001 
136p
ISBN 0-395-92289-5 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In this ambitious overview, Watkins argues that human chattel bondage is an in-
stitution whose past reaches to the earliest historical records and has been sup-
ported at some point by every race. Chapters are thematically organized to promote
cross-cultural comparisons-Reasons for Slavery, Buying a Slave, Types of Slave
Labor, Rebellion, etc. Slavery in the Americas receives particular attention in chap-
ters on the "triangle trade" and abolition, but the larger world view is never far
from sight. The title suffers somewhat from compression of so massive a topic into
a limited format, and although Watkins leads off with a concise working defini-
tion of slavery ("A slave is a person owned by another as a piece of property. ...
[S]imply put, a slave belonged to a master who could make the slave do anything
he wanted"), he doesn't always have the luxury of space to justify his inclusion of
systems that vary from this definition. Nonetheless, the text makes a laudable and
reasonably successful attempt to offer American readers perspective from which to
view their country's more shameful historical roots. Black-and-white illustrations
range from blandly diagrammatic to emotional and oddly sensual; a glossary, time-
line, bibliography, and index are included. EB
WILD, MARGARET 
Nighty Night!; illus. by Kerry Argent. 
Peachtree, 2001 
[34 p]
ISBN 1-56145-246-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
The barnyard animals are trying to get their babies to sleep, but the kids just won't
stop playing: when Mother Sheep goes to tuck the lambs in, she discovers the
chicks have snuck in instead; Father Duck is startled to find himself tucking in
piglets; Mother Hen encounters mischievous lambs in place of her chicks; and
Father Pig, of course, ends up with Father Duck's ducklings. The scamps of vari-
ous species are sorted and returned and, in the face of protests (the lambs want
another story, ducklings want more kisses, the chicks want a drink of water, and
the piglets "have to wee, wee, wee!"), gradually put to bed for the night. The text
is a bit long and formless for its appeal level, but there is a lot of charm in that
appeal; good readers-aloud will make hay out of the multitude of barnyard noises
required, and the audience will relish the silly animal mismatchings and the jocu-
lar imprecations upon their discovery ("You sassy scalawags! You 're not my darling
ducklings!"). Argent's smooth watercolors make the most out of rural earthtones
and mauve-touched twilight, and the bright-eyed animals are plump and endear-
ing and almost (oh, well) mouthwatering; touches of humor, as in the crowd scene
of crestfallen babies and the anxious, leg-crossed pigs, are homey as well as amus-
ing. Parents with noted gifts for mimicry and youngsters just getting ready for
Dick King-Smith's animal-lovers' oeuvre will find this just right to end the day.
DS
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 
41
WILES, DEBORAH 
Love, Ruby Lavender. Gulliver/Harcourt, 2001 
188p
ISBN 0-15-202314-3 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Poor Ruby Lavender: her beloved grandfather died last year, her grandmother,
Miss Eula, is off to Hawaii for an extended visit with a new grandchild, and her
nemesis Melba Jane (of the tippy-tappy patent leather shoes) is making her life a
trial. Ruby is trying to concentrate on taking care of her chickens and writing
letters to her absent grandmother, but she seems to have a talent for trouble; the
trouble usually revolves around Melba Jane, who holds Ruby responsible for the
car accident that killed Ruby's grandfather and Melba Jane's father. In spite of her
tough talk Ruby secretly agrees with Melba Jane, and it's only when she confesses
to new friend Dove that she learns the truth and finds release from her unnecessary
guilt. The journey to that absolution, however, is littered with egg-sitting chick-
ens, escaping chickens, and greedy chickens, Miss Eula's pink house, Melba Jane's
blue hair, and the letters that fly back and forth between Ruby and her grand-
mother. The pace is quick and the tone is companionable, and if the final resolu-
tion between Ruby and Melba Jane is sentimental and sweet, well, as Ruby would
say, sweet garden of peas! It couldn't end any other way. JMD
WILLIAMS, VERA B. 
Amber Was Brave, Essie Was Smart; written and illus. by Vera
B. Williams. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
72p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029461-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029460-4 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr. 3-5
See this month's Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
WRIGHT, CATHERINE 
SteamboatAnnie and the Thousand-Pound Catfish; illus. by
Howard Fine. 
Philomel, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23331-8 
$15.99 
R 
5-9 yrs
Folks in the river town of Pleasant are "uncommonly musical," but their singing
doesn't suit Ernie, the local thousand-pound catfish, so he takes to eating their
boats, their rafts, and finally their church. Steamboat Annie, as the town's mayor
as well as its tallest person, rushes to the rescue, but her arch-nemesis Jefferson
Jackson ("who has that wonderful, wormy fishing smell") tells her she's not up to
the task of ousting the omnivorous Ernie and slinks off "thinking sinister, cheating
thoughts." Despite Jefferson's attempted underhanded dealings with the ornery
fish, Annie does oust the rapacious Ernie ("slimy chicken-belly-ugly fish of a fish,"
as she calls him), whirling him by the end of her fishing line and sending him
flying out of the Midwest and towards California. As with some tall tales, this is
light on plot, but it's nevertheless delightful in the exaggerated specifics and the
swinging storytelling style of Wright's text. Fine's bright acrylic colors depict an
enthusiastic cast of expressive townspeople in a small-town setting shaded in tones
that tend toward Mississippi-mud brown, and his use of perspective to magnify
details such as Annie's foot playing the calliope as Ernie tugs the boat down the
river mesh well with Wright's text. Steamboat Annie is a tall-tale heroine of gigan-
tic proportions with an oversized smile to match; your storytime audience will fall
for her hook, line, and sinker. KM
42 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Zipes, Jack, ed.. The Great Fairy Tale Tradition: From Straparola and Basile to the
Brothers Grimm. Norton, 2000. Paper ed. ISBN 0-393-97636-X; $13.75. 991p.
One hundred sixteen fairy tales drawn from Italian, French, and German sources
comprise this formidable volume. While a number of the tales will be familiar to
the well-read fairy tale fan, many of the stories are more obscure, or they're offered
here in their first English translation. Stories by Straparola, the Brothers Grimm,
d'Aulnoy, Basile, Leprince de Beaumont, Perrault, and others are arranged in thirty-
eight thematic divisions such as Clever Thieves, Dangerous Sirens, Triumphant
Apprentices, Faithful Sisters, Abandoned Children, and Bloodthirsty Husbands.
Each theme is introduced by Zipes, who briefly comments on the place of particu-
lar tales in literary history. Concise author biographies are appended, along with
source notes and an extensive bibliography. Seven critical essays (by Jack Zipes,
W. G. Waters, Benedetto Croce, Lewis Seifert, Patricia Hannon, Harry Velten,
and Siegfried Neumann) on the nature of fairy tales and Italian, German, and
French fairy tale traditions are also included, and twenty illustrations from perti-
nent volumes accompany the texts. This is a boon to the serious student of fairy
tales, to storytellers, and to comprehensive folk and fairy tale collections. JMD
Association for Library Service to Children. The Newbery and CaldecottAwards: A
Guide to the Medal and Honor Books. American Library Association, 2001. Paper
ed. ISBN 0-8389-3517-6; $18.00. 173p.
In addition to the obvious-criteria for the Newbery and Caldecott awards, chro-
nologically arranged annotated lists of honor and medal winners, author/illustra-
tor and title indices-this revised edition of the Association for Library Services to
Children's guide to the honor and medal books includes "Reflections and Thoughts
of the 2000 Newbery Award Selection Committee" by chair Carolyn S. Brodie
and Christine Behrmann's article on "The Media Used in Caldecott Picture Books:
Notes Toward a Definitive List" with accompanying definitions and suggestions
for further reading. Betty Peltola's opening piece, "Newbery and Caldecott Awards:
Authorization and Terms," gives a brief history of the awards, addresses changes in
the awards' requirements, and then clearly states the current terms, definitions and
criteria for the Newbery and Caldecott awards. A brief history and physical de-
scription of the actual medals are also included, as is information on the appoint-
ment and election of the award committees. The annotations are concise and
informative, and this will prove handy for quick referral and reader advisory. JMD
SEPTEMBER 2001 
* 43
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Haddix;
Horowitz
Aeronautics: Goodman, S.
African Americans: Jemison; Myers;
Nelson
African Americans-stories:
McKissack
Agriculture: Nelson
American Indians-fiction: Smith
American Indians-folklore: Dupre
Angels-stories: Cole
Animals: Casey; Wild
Antarctic: Loewen
Archaeology: Barner
Architecture: Rubin
Arctic, the: Dupre
Art: Rogasky; Rubin
Art and artists-stories: Catalanotto;
Karas
Asian Americans-stories: Lee
Astronauts: Goodman, S.; Jemison
Aviation: Cummins
Babies-stories: Cole
BEDTIME STORIES: Hurd; Wild
Bible: Philip
BIOGRAPHIES: Cummins;
Jemison; Lawlor; Myers; Nelson;
Robertson
Birds-stories: Lerner
Books and reading-fiction: Townley
Bowling: Nace
Brothers-stories: Van Leeuwen
Bubbles: Bradley
Bullies-fiction: Venokur
Careers: Goodman, S.
Cats-stories: Hurd; Pullman
Chickens-fiction: Wiles
Christmas-fiction: Johnston
Civil War: Robertson
Clothing-stories: Spinelli In My
New
Contests-stories: Catalanotto
Creativity-stories: Catalanotto;
Karas
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Horowitz; Williams
Crime and criminals-stories: Geisert
Current events: Naidoo
Dancing and dancers: Cooper
Death and dying-fiction: Wiles
Dinosaurs: Barner
Disabilities: Lawlor
Disasters-stories: Lee
Dogs-stories: Graham
Earthquakes-stories: Lee
Ecology: Ward
Ethics and values: King-Smith;
Naidoo; Smith; Tunnell; Van
Leeuwen; Watkins
Explorers and exploring: Loewen
Families-fiction: Rice
Famine-fiction: Lyons
FANTASY: Bruchac; Gerstein;
Lyons; Schmidt; Springer;
Townley; Venokur; Ward
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Springer; Williams
Fathers and sons-fiction: Schmidt
Fear-stories: Spinelli A Safe Place
Fish-stories: Wright
FOLK AND FAIRYTALES:
Bateman; Cole; Hague; Johnson;
Montresor; Philip; Pullman;
Schmidt; Van Laan
44 * THE BULLETIN
Food and eating-stories:
Evangelista; Jane; Wright
Friendship-fiction: Guest; King-
Smith
FUNNY STORIES: Arnold;
Laurence
Gangs-fiction: Johnston
Gardens and gardening-stories:
Evangelista
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Ryan
GHOST STORIES: Hague;
Ibbotson; Vande Velde
Grandfathers-fiction: Gilmore
Grandmothers-fiction: McCully;
Wiles
Growing up-fiction: Saldania
Hair-stories: Lerner
Halloween: Donaldson; Druce;
Howard; Jane
Halloween-fiction: McCully
Halloween-stories: Spinelli A Safe
Place
Hamsters-stories: Kirk
HISTORICAL FICTION: Lyons;
Tunnell
History, classical: Geras
History, U.S.: Kittredge; Robertson
History, world: Watkins
Homosexuality-fiction: Ryan
Immigration-fiction: Naidoo
Inupiat-fiction: Kittredge
Ireland-fiction: Lyons
Language arts: Arnold
Latinos-fiction: Johnston; Rice;
Saldania
Libraries and librarians-stories:
McKissack
Literature, children's: Myers
LOVE STORIES: Cart; Ryan
Magic-fiction: Gerstein
Magic-stories: Cullen
Mermaids-stories: Bateman
Monsters-poetry: Prelutsky
Monsters-stories: Jane
Mothers and sons-fiction:
McDonough
Pets-stories: Howard
Photography-fiction: Smith
Physical education: Cooper; Nace
Pigs-fiction: King-Smith
Pigs-stories: Geisert
Pirates-fiction: Laurence
POETRY: Nelson; Prelutsky;
Rogasky; Williams
Postcolonialism-fiction: Gilmore
Princesses-fiction: Cabot; King-
Smith
Racism-fiction: McKissack
Reading aloud: Hornik; Ibbotson;
Prelutsky
Reading, beginning: Laurence;
McCully
Reading, easy: Gerstein; Guest;
Hornik; McDonough
Reading, reluctant: Bruchac;
Prelutsky
Religious instruction: Philip
RIDDLES: Druce
SCARY STORIES: Hague; Van
Laan
School-fiction: Guest; Haddix;
Hornik; McDonough
School-stories: Goodman, J.; Karas
Science: Bradley
SCIENCE FICTION: Haddix
Seasons: Rogasky
Sex-fiction: Cart
SHORT STORIES: Cart; Kittredge;
Rice; Van Laan; Vande Velde
Sisters-fiction: Williams
Slavery: Watkins
Spies and espionage-fiction:
Horowitz
Stepparents-fiction: Cabot
Storytelling: Hague
Storytime: Ahlberg; Howard; Hurd;
Jane
TALL TALES: Wright
Transportation: Cummins
Voyages and travel: Dupre; Loewen
Voyages and travel-fiction: Springer
Voyages and travel-stories:
McKissack
War-fiction: Geras
Witches-stories: Donaldson;
Howard
Wolves-stories: Lindenbaum
Women's studies: Cummins; Geras;
Jemison; Lawlor; Loewen
World War II-fiction: Tunnell
A Memoir
n:
S"This superb memoir begins with an account of Myers's family
Shistory and boyhood ... in the Harlem of the 40's. Soon, readers
are caught up in his turbulent adolescence and his slow, painful
Sdevelopment as a writer. .. .Young 
writers will find inspiration
Shere, while others may read the book as a straightforward account
of a colorful, unforgettable childhood." 
Schoo Libra Jo
-School Library Journal
S"Myers is arguably one of the most important writers of children's
^ books of our age, and this glimpse into his own childhood is
Swonderfully valuable, fascinating, and even inspiring."
-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 12 up. $15.95 Tr (0-06-029523-6); $15.89 Lb (0-06-029524-4);
Unabridged cassette $24.00 (0-694-52535-9)
-
Walter Dean Myers's 2000 Michael L. Printz Award Winner -
Monster
Ages 12 up. $15.95 Tr (0-06-028077-8);
$15.89 Lb (0-06-028078-6); $6.95 Pb (0-06-440731-4)
ld 
HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
rY~i O
c
c
f
The M 
j
FIVE OWLS
7 publication for readers personally and professionally
involved in children's literature.
THE FIvE OWLS is a bimonthly
publication devoted to children's
literature, bringing together many
of today's finest books with writers
whose contributions are shaping the
future of children's books. A yearly
bscription is available for $35.00.
THE FIVE OWLS for Parents
Schools, libraries and other institutions that have a subscription
to the magazine can receive free quantities of THE FIVE OWLS for
Parents-it's short on advertising and long on book picks,
parenting information, and child development content that
is of real value to families.
1I
For more information,
call 612-377-2004
or visit www.fiveowls.com
ll6-rr-uilnh Ha-ry K 
/ghrnmt 
Elhs (Silum .. 
Shtih-,. 1955)
GREAT
EPI SO D E S
I 
TURNNG 
OINT 
INAmizic~N 
r 
iz
NEW PAPERBACK EDITIONS
Air Raid-Pearl Harbor!
The Story ofDecember 7, 1941
Theodore Taylor
0-15-216421-9 pb
Ages 10 to 14 * $6.00
Behind Rebel Lines
T^ Th-A'I, 
I 
d 
-l 
St
Emma Edmonds, Civil War Spy
Seymour Reit
0-15-216427-8 pb
Ages 10 to 14 * $6.00 * August
Guns for General Washington
A Story oftheAmerican Revolution
Seymour Reit
0-15-216435-9 pb
Ages 10 to 14 * $6.00 * August
The Riddle of Penncroft Farm
Dorothea Jensen
0-15-216441-3 pb
Ages 10 to 14 * $6.00 * August
The Coffin Quilt
The Feud between the Hatfields and the McCoys
Ann Rinaldi
0-15-216450-2 pb
Ages 10 to 14 * $6.00
ALSO AVAILABLE 
IN 
PAPERBACK
An Acquaintance with Darkness
0-15-202197-3 pb * Ages 12 and up * $6.00
A Break with Charity
A Story about the Salem Witch Trials
0-15-200101-8 pb * Ages 10 and up * $6.00
The Captain's Dog
My Journey with the Lewis and Clark Tribe
0-15-202696-7 pb * Ages 10 and up 
$* 
6.00
Cast Two Shadows
The American Revolution in the South
0-15-200882-9 pb * Ages 12 and up * $6.00
Earthquake at Dawn
0-15-200099-2 pb * Ages 10 to 14 * $6.00
The Fifth of March
A Story of the Boston Massacre
0-15-227517-7 pb * Ages 10 and up * $6.00
Finishing Becca
A Story about Peggy Shippen and Benedict Arnold
0-15-200879-9 pb * Ages 12 and up * $6.00
Hang a Thousand Trees with Ribbons
The Story ofPhillis Wheatley
0-15-200877-2 pb h Ages 12 and up 
$* 
6.00
Indio
0-15-200021-6 pb * Ages 12 and up $* 
6.00
Jenny of the Tetons
0-15-200481-5 pb * Ages 10 to 14 
$* 
6.00
The Legend of Jimmy Spoon
0-15-243812-2 pb * Ages 10 to 14 
$* 
6.00
The Primrose Way
0-15-200372-X pb * Ages 12 and up * $6.00
Quanah Parker
0-15-264447-4 pb h Ages 8 to 12 * $4.95
A Ride into Morning
The Story of Tempe Wick
0-15-200673-7 pb * Ages 12 and up * $6.00
The Secret of Sarah Revere
0-15-200392-4 pb * Ages 12 and up * $6.00
Where the Broken Heart Still Beats
The Story of CynthiaAnn Parker
0-15-295602-6 pb * Ages 8 to 12 * $7.00
For ordering and information contact your
Harcourt sales representative or call
toll-free 1-800-543-1918.
GHarcourt
525 B Street, Suite 1900, San Diego, California 92101
Prices and availability are subject to change without notice. Prices are higher in Canada.
I 
I
contessions otr
Georgia Nicolson
RENNISON
Louise Rennison's 2001 Michael L. Printz Honor Book
Angus, Thongs, and Full-frontal Snogging
Ages 12 up. $15.95 Tr (0-06-028814-0); $15.89 Lb (0-06-028871-X); $6.95 Pb (0-06-447227-2)
* HarperCollins Children 'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 . www.harperchildrens.com
-~l 
I! 
-
-
-
-
c- 
-' 
-I- 
II..........
7&tv.O
"Lest anyone doubt that writing for children is both an art and a craft, here's
strong evidence. An experienced writer and teacher of writing, Judy Morris
leads would-be authors through the nuanced stages of developing plot, char-
acter, setting, structure, style, and voice. She combines practical exercises
with specific examples from landmark fiction, underscoring the whole with a
deep respect for children and the stories that engage them. For those aspir-
ing to publish in the realm of children's literature, this book will prove a valu-
able companion." -
Betsy Hearne, author of Choosing Books for Children
www.press.uillinois.edu/f01/morris.html
Hardcover, $19.95
I 
UNIVERSITY OF 
PRESS
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
*************3-DIGIT 618 19 9
40590 BCCB 5501 REM=106
CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
51 E ARMORY AVE
CHAMPAIGN IL 61820-6601
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2000 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age, or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.orglccbl
4$
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bblletin of the Center for
Children's Books at our homepage: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
I I 
0008-9036(20
IIII-5
0008-9036(200109)55:1 ;1-5
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
_ 
I~· 
I~I
1:: 
·~
a0·r
,x 
i
:,g
r.
;t
-rir -·
·:II
1AAt
-··: ·
:"
;a-· :
i
