ILLINOI S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
Ui er 
o I
Nc 
U 
UI
?·;·w~""r~~
I `
"~ 
'·~~E
e
vs
r,
Tutankhamen's
I 
_ 
C 
G ftI
By ROBERT SABUDA
Illustrated in five colors by the author
*'"As in Sabuda's Saint Valentine, this equally arresting five-color
picture book appropriates the art of another culture to evoke a specific
historical setting....Sabuda neatly distills the history of a celebrated
young ruler while offering a visual treat on each page."
-Starred, Publishers Weekly
"While not much is really known about Tutankhamen, his persona
continues to intrigue young and old alike. Here is a book geared
toward younger children about this fascinating figure....The unique-
ness of this book is in its extraordinary illustrations....For sheer beauty,
Sabuda's book is a winner."- School Library Journal
$15.95 SBE/0-689-31818-9/Ages 6-9
SBE indicates a reinforced hardcover edition.
SATHENEUM BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children's Publishing Division
._1~ý4-
II
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 1994
Vol. 48 No. 2
'3
A LOOK INSIDE
35 
THE BIG PICTURE
It's Perfectly Normal written by Robie H. Harris and illus. by Michael
Emberley
36 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
40 
* The Magic School Bus in the Time of the Dinosaurs written by Joanna
Cole; illus. by Bruce Degen
45 
* Julie written by Jean Craighead George; illus. by Wendell Minor
54 
* John Henry written by Julius Lester and illus. by Jerry Pinkney
59 
* Darnell Rock Reporting by Walter Dean Myers
63 
* The Best School Year Ever by Barbara Robinson
72 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
73 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1994 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Michael Emberley, from It's Perfectly Normal ©1994 and used by permission of
Candlewick Press.
OCTOBER 1994 
* 35
THE BIG PICTURE
It's Perfectly Normal:
A Book about Changing Bodies, Growing Up,
Sex, and Sexual Health
written by Robie H. Harris; illustrated by Michael Emberley
"Most kids wonder about and have lots of questions about sex," the introduction
says, and this frank and cheerful book attempts to answer those questions. There
are seven sections: Lots of Questions, What Is Sex, Our Bodies, Puberty, Families
and Babies, Decisions, and Staying Healthy; within these sections the author ex-
plores puberty, sexual feelings, reproduction, contraception, and other topics. The
text is simple, friendly, and specific, relating valuable information in an unsensa-
tional manner.
The user-friendliness of the book, however, comes mainly from Michael
Emberley's candid and lighthearted illustrations. 
Diagrams ranging from male
and female sex organs to the position of birth control devices are clear and under-
standable; an open-minded bird and an embarrassed bee flutter through the pages
providing marginal dialogue and comic-strip skits; little Woody-Allen-ish exploits
of a released egg and onrushing sperm appear occasionally and are funny and memo-
rable. The lightness of touch is welcome and serves a useful purpose: where some
kids' books on sex leave themselves open for giggling silliness by trying to avoid it,
this one accepts those giggles, acknowledging that readers may be both individu-
ally and collectively a blend of curiosity, disinterest, and apprehension, and giving
so much to giggle at that eventually nervousness will die down and interest will
proceed unimpeded.
Many adults want their children to have information about all the things
this book's subtitle promises, but it's easy to forget the range of facts children want
to know as they fight their way through puberty wondering if they're doing it right
and what the other sex is doing. It's Perfectly Normal does a good job of demystifying
some of those details: particularly useful illustrations depict a circumcised penis
and an uncircumcised penis, the placement of tampons and sanitary napkins, and
other aspects of the subject that both sexes want to know but are probably too
embarrassed to ask about. And naked human bodies appear throughout the book
in a reassuring variety of sizes, shapes, colors, and sexes-there are adolescents
peering in the mirror, homely and recognizable masturbation scenes, tactful but
honest depictions of intercourse, and a terrific double-page spread of rows of dif-
ferent nude people, ranging from young to old, fat to thin, that should make
stripping off in the locker room a lot easier for young readers. "Sooner or later,
kids get used to, become comfortable with, and feel good about their more grown-
up bodies," the book says, and it does what it can to make that happen sooner.
Acceptance and respect, after all, go hand in hand, and readers will clearly
get the message that respecting yourself and others is a part of sex and growing up.
36 
* THE BULLETIN
The book makes it clear that families are as diverse as individual bodies and that
there are a lot of different ways-platonic, gay, and straight-of caring for people.
It also makes it clear that part of that caring should be for yourself-that you're
stronger if you know how to keep yourself safe from disease, safe from sex if you
don't choose to have it, and safe from people who may make these decisions diffi-
cult. It's good to be comfortable with your body; it's also good to be comfortable
with your decisions about it.
At first glance, there seemed to be several illustrations in this book that
would make an eye-catching cover for the Bulletin. Thinking about it more, how-
ever, we decided that pulling pictures of naked people out to stand alone on our
cover might mislead our readers and distort the book. One of Harris' and Emberley's
most valuable achievements is the creation of a low-key atmosphere in which vul-
nerable readers can explore this touchy subject. They didn't create that milieu
with only one page and we can't convey it with only one picture. It's not a perfect
book-there are a few scale problems, and the puberty section really ought to
discuss female orgasm as well as male-but this is one of the most unintimidating
and informative sex books to come along for this age group. That inspired spread
of all those unclothed men and women brings home a good message in a way that
furtive peeks at magazines or classmates won't. The book's title, It's Perfectly Nor-
mal, is a politely impersonal version of the statement young readers really want to
hear: you 're perfectly normal.
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALAVEDRA, JOAN 
They Followed a Bright Star; based on a poem by Joan Alavedra;
illus. by Ulises Wensell. 
Putnam, 1994 
[4 4p]
ISBN 0-399-22706-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A slight tale with a complicated pedigree (English language adaptation of a Ger-
man work based on the Spanish poem ElPessebre), this variation of the Christmas
story follows the journey of the shepherds to Bethlehem. Along the way they
invite a man at a well, a fisherman, a plowman, and a couple harvesting grapes to
join them. All politely refuse, explaining that an angel has charged them to con-
tinue their work, as the child will one day need this water, fish, bread, and wine.
Many nascent theologians will have grasped the significance of this produce well
before the concluding passage observes, "Jesus would need ... water to cleanse the
souls of the weary, fish to multiply to feed the many, and bread to break with the
wine on another night of miracles." Although the text abandons the poetic form
of its literary predecessor, the language is fluent and the shepherd's repeated fare-
well, "We wish you peace on this good night," smoothly closes each leg of the
journey. Atmospheric mixed-media illustrations, generously surrounded by white
space, set the familiar tale in a fantasized landscape. Wensell illuminates his scenes
with obvious delight in light's possibilities. The well and spring glow white hot;
the yellow luminescence of the three kings' lantern fairly bursts the fragile confines
OCTOBER 1994 
* 
37
of their tent; the radiance from the stable outshines the herald star. Although
readers and listeners may be initially attracted to the handsome artwork, they will
go on to enjoy comparing the story of a journey not taken with one of the Baboushka
and the Kings variants. EB
ASHABRANNER, BRENT 
A New Frontier: The Peace Corps in Eastern Europe; illus.
with photographs by Paul Conklin. 
Cobblehill, 1994 
104p
ISBN 0-525-65155-1 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 5-12
Ashabranner, a former Peace Corps executive, here travels with his frequent pho-
tographer-partner Paul Conklin to look at Peace Corps activity in its newest arena:
the developing democracies of Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia, and Ro-
mania-perhaps the grimmest of the nations surveyed. Through profiles of sev-
eral volunteers-new college grads, business executives, retired professors-he
explores the reasons people join the Corps, the variety of assignments, and the
reactions of the locals. What readers will get is not only a picture of dedicated
volunteerism, but an anecdote-spiked outline of the recent history of Eastern Eu-
rope, the problems currently being faced (environmental damage, shaky econo-
mies, orphaned and homeless children, for example), and the assistance offered by
the Corps (scientific research, business consulting, teaching, managing shelters).
It's a people-to-people kind of operation, and so is the book. Conklin's black-and-
white photos give faces to the issues and increase the book's browsability; it's too
bad that the address of the Peace Corps is not provided. RS
BANG, MOLLY 
One Fall Day; written and illus. by Molly Bang. 
Greenwillow,
1994 
24 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-07016-7 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-07015-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
A series of mixed-media compositions-prints, cut paper, and assemblage-and a
second-person narration recount the simple activities of a child's day: eating, play-
ing, observing, painting, bathing, sleeping. A tousle-haired, chocolate-brown plastic
doll lives in a fantasy world of stuffed animal friends its own size, matchbox and
bottle-cap toy cars, cloth and snipped-paper trees, and a painted sea; the viewer
peeks over the doll's shoulder as its plastic fingers clutch a painting tool, or we gaze
directly down from a cloud as bugle-bead raindrops spill over the doll and its toy
friends. By omitting articles before many of the nouns, Bang personifies the child's
playthings, turning them into playmates ("Yellow ball rolls, and car waits on the
floor. Crane watches yellow leaves fall... "), but this rhetorical ploy, the absence
of any visible "human" company, the rigidly bordered scenes, and the doll's wide-
eyed, vacant stare all contribute to an air of isolation and loneliness in an oppres-
sively surreal world. While Bang's artwork is indeed fascinating, its eeriness finally
questions the flyleafs promise of "secure and happy hours." Still, the intriguing
selection of realia and the varied angles and distances from which her composi-
tions are photographed give the book character and interest. EB
BOSSE, MALCOLM 
The Examination. Farrar, 1994 
[320p]
ISBN 0-374-32234-1 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
When Hong, brave and cunning, determines to take his intellectually brilliant if
impractical older brother Chen to the provincial capital for the scholars' examina-
38 
* THE BULLETIN
tion, the two boys find themselves caught up in the tapestry of landscape and
events of sixteenth century China. The provincial exam, at which Chen excels, is
but the first step; the brothers then need to travel from Sichuan to Beijing for the
palace examination, and this journey proves the ultimate test. The boys, each with
secrets and secret messages, find floods, poverty, and pirates, the last of which
kidnap Chen and torture Hong. This is tremendous adventure, impelled as much
by moral force as by events, with each brother turning to his ideals for truth and
guidance: Chen in his Confucianism, Hong in his new-found allegiance to the
White Lotus, a secret group dedicated to overthrowing the corrupt Ming dynasty.
The brothers' virtues are complementary as often as conflicting, "the brothers turning
away from each other, as if taking different paths across a field," but there's no easy
dichotomy in the characterization, as both boys learn to temper and strengthen
their visions with hard reality. While the novel is long, it is always straightforward,
with explanations of history and philosophy growing from the story rather than
impeding it, and the narrative suspense-will they get to Beijing? will Chen pass
the examination?-is never forgotten. The book's end is satisfying, yet leaves plenty
of room for more. Sequel? RS
BOWEN, GARY 
Stranded at Plimoth Plantation 1626; written and illus. by Gary
Bowen. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
82p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022542-4 
$19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022541-6 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Students and teachers searching for a fresh twist to the Thanksgiving story will
welcome this fictional portrait of the Puritan settlement six years after its found-
ing, when it still struggled for its livelihood but had begun to develop its own
routine and customs. Through the journal entries of Christopher Sears, a thirteen-
year-old indentured servant who spends months at Plimoth awaiting a ship to
Jamestown, the reader learns much about the Puritans' religion and governance,
superstitions and punishments, firefighting and feasting, clothing and bill of fare.
As he explains in his journal, Sears has been cheated out of an apprenticeship in a
print shop; fortunately, his talent for engraving is encouraged by Governor Bradford
himself, so Sears illustrates his journal with woodcut prints. Admittedly, Bowen
introduces a gimmick here, but the gimmick works: the reader observes Sears' skill
blossom as the crude images, which appear early in the journal as he experiments
with woods and inks, develop into intricate pictures, embellished with dyes sup-
plied by the physician. Sears' tale is so convincingly drawn, and historical figures
so deftly integrated into his observations, that some note from Bowen sorting fact
from fiction should have been appended. While the short, brisk entries are perfect
for a classroom readaloud, students may want to hide this title from their teachers,
who are bound to be inspired with ideas for further social studies and art projects.
EB
BUNTING, EVE 
A Day's Work; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Clarion, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-67321-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Street-smart, aggressive Francisco fast-talks the owner of a gardening service into
hiring his abuelo, a recent immigrant, for day labor: "And my grandfather is a fine
gardener, thought he doesn't know English." Although grandfather protests in
Spanish to his grandson that he's a carpenter with no knowledge of gardening,
OCTOBER 1994 
* 39
Francisco assures him it will be okay. Returning to inspect the job site that after-
noon, the employer is furious to find the weeds in place and the flowers uprooted,
and Abuelo realizes Francisco has lied their way into the job. He insists on return-
ing the next day to rectify the damage and is rewarded for his honesty with a
promise of future work, as his employer remarks, "The important things your
grandfather already knows. And I can teach him gardening." The vagaries of day
labor are concisely sketched-the scramble for a seat on an employer's truck, diffi-
culties of communication between Spanish-speaking workers and American em-
ployers, long, hot hours of toil across the fence from inviting backyard swimming
pools. The focus of Bunting's work, however, is the price of Francisco's lie-
another day's hard labor for a single day's pay-but adults seeking a palatable dose
of lying-doesn't-pay moralizing to pour into young listeners must look elsewhere,
for implicit in this tale is the strong probability that, but for Francisco's lie, Abuelo
would never have had even the opportunity to display those qualities of fortitude
and honor that so impressed his employer. Himler's watercolors in tans, yellows,
and grays nicely catch the parched rises and heat-soaked pavements that circum-
scribe Francisco and Abuelo's world. EB
CAMPBELL, ERIC 
The Shark Callers. Harcourt, 1994 
[240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200007-0 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200010-0 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
The destinies of two boys join when Andy, whose family is traveling the Bismarck
Sea off Papua New Guinea, and Kaleku, a novice shark-caller on his first sea jour-
ney to hunt the treacherous sharks, encounter the tidal wave caused by volcanic
upheaval on the island of West New Britain. Their stories suspensefully alternate
as Andy's vagabond family, on their cantankerous boat, seeks to flee the predicted
explosion and Kaleku learns the shark-calling magic from Old Sea-Bird, an eccen-
tric but revered village elder. Each chapter ends with a cliffhanger ("Red Alert.
Begin the evacuation," "Then there was only blackness," "It was the first step in
their battle for survival") and while the prose sometimes recalls old-fashioned men's-
magazine adventure stories, Campbell demonstrates a narrative control and meta-
phorical restraint that recommends the book to impatient reluctant readers. RS
CHANG, MARGARET, ad. 
The Cricket Warrior: A Chinese Tale; ad. by Margaret
and Raymond Chang; illus. by Warwick Hutton. 
McElderry, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-689-50605-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When the Chinese emperor decrees a new tax to be collected in crickets in order to
satisfy his passion for cricket fighting, Cheng Ming can neither find nor afford the
rare insect and so faces imprisonment and loss of his farm. Chance sends a fine,
broad-chested cricket his way, but his son Wei nian accidentally releases it; heart-
broken, the boy agrees to take its place, transformed by a mysterious old man he
meets in a moonlit pomegranate grove. The tiny red cricket proves to be a fero-
cious fighter and the emperor's delight, but the homesick creature at last makes his
escape from the court, aided by the old man who transforms him back into a boy
because he has now honored his family. Although the theme will appeal to listen-
ers with a pugnacious bent, transitions between scenes involving the insect warrior
and his human family are awkward, descriptions of cricket fighting are a long time
coming, and the parents' facile recognition of their son's alter identity is uncon-
40 
* THE BULLETIN
vincing; the audience may also ponder why the lad who comes home so proud of
his victories and muscles will grow up to be an accomplished calligrapher and
poet. Hutton's line-and-wash artwork is gentle and bland; depictions of the cricket
bout are too tame to illuminate the slam-and-bite action within the text. An endnote
provides a brief history of the tale, which was first recorded in Shantung Province
in the seventeenth century. EB
CHARLES, N. N. 
WhatAm I?; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. 
Blue Sky/Scho-
lastic, 1994 
[34 p]
ISBN 0-590-47891-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
NR 2-4 yrs
What am I, indeed. Four simultaneous concepts are three too many in this offer-
ing for the toddler set. First, it's a color-concept book, in which pages of concen-
tric shapes each display four shades of a primary or secondary color. Second, it's a
fruit-identification game, with two-line rhymes that hint at a fruit which is pic-
tured on the following page ("I'm green, I'm nice/ to eat by the slice." An avo-
cado, of course). Third, it's a shape-identification book, in which geometric forms
appear as die cut openings (a rectangle appears with the text "I'm blue, I'm small/
I'm shaped like a ball," and a diamond shape peeks through to a banana). This is
all going on at the same time, and then comes a let's-all-be-friends exhortation,
with an arch of children's hands forming a "rainbow of the human race." The
Dillons' double-page fruit paintings are quite luscious: large details of individual
fruits facilitate the guessing game for the youngest viewers, while close-ups of foli-
age and symbiotic insects offer additional visual information for a slightly older
audience. But this volume's hazily conceived mission and overload of contradic-
tory visual and textual detail make it a weak choice for sharing with preschoolers.
EB
COLE, JOANNA 
The Magic School Bus in the Time ofthe Dinosaurs; illus. by Bruce
Degen. 
Scholastic, 1994 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-590-44688-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Cole and Degen keep their magic formula intact: a frenzied layout belies consis-
tent organization of text and an engaging, if cursory, overview of a popular topic.
The fashionable Ms. Frizzle warps her students back to the late Triassic period,
where they begin a journey forward through time in search of Maiasaura eggs for
Jeff, the Friz's paleontologist friend from high school. (Not only does she have a
past, she even has a first name-Valerie.) Sidebar information provides the hard
science, timelines, and maps of continental drift; "Dinosaurs Were Special" plaques,
despite their sappy title, offer enlightening comparisons between dinos and present-
day reptiles. A few glitches appear: Ms. Frizzle says, "Look at those terrific
prosauropods!" while examining plants with a magnifying glass; some dino teeth
are labeled "actual size" while others aren't. Although the asteroid-dino extinction
connection is accepted without question, other gray areas are approached with a
nod toward the controversy: scientists' reasons for believing Maiasaura were raised
in nests, the arrangement of Stegosaurus plates, the horizontal stance of T. Rex.
Have your purchase orders ready-a fall PBS show, ALA promotions, and the
proven popularity of this series may spark an epidemic of Frizzle Fever. EB
OCTOBER 1994 
* 41
DAWSON, IMOGEN 
Food & Feasts in the Middle Ages; ISBN 0-02-726324-X.
STEELE, PHILIP 
Food & Feasts in Ancient Rome; ISBN 0-02-726321-5.
Each book: New Discovery, 1994 
32p 
illus. with photographs (Food &
Feasts) 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
This series examines the eating and farming habits of various eras and locales,
providing an appealing social history with a tasty theme. Each book has roughly
the same structure: an introductory historical overview; a chapter on agriculture
and country dining; one on city eating; one on provisions for travelers, which
includes information ranging from sales practices to methods of preservation; sample
recipes, modified for the present-day kitchen; and finally a glossary, list of books
for further reading, and an index. Both books synthesize a surprising amount of
information in their thirty-two pages, helped by boxed quotes or bits of informa-
tion, sample menus, contemporaneous art, and photographs of artifacts, and they
make the important but rarely mentioned point that the poor and the rich ate very
differently. Ancient Rome is the better-written book, and its subject is more homo-
geneous and therefore better suited to the tight focus here; its design is also some-
what less cluttered by the multiple small images that give the series a rather textbooky
look. Both books, however, will be useful and unusual adjuncts to period study,
and they'd be indispensable for any class that's planning an end-of-unit theme
feast. DS
DEFELICE, CYNTHIA 
Mule Eggs; illus. by Mike Shenon. 
Jackson/Orchard,
1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08693-3 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06843-9 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Patrick may be an ex-urbanite who "wouldn't know beans if his head was in the
pot," but this neophyte farmer is savvy enough to figure out that the "mule egg"
(pumpkin) a neighboring farmer has sold him for $25 isn't going to hatch. Yes,
he's been had, but Patrick gets the last laugh by convincing his neighbor that twin
mules (purchased on the sly) actually were hatched, with the aid of a special
transmogrification potion. Patrick unloads a bottle of the bogus concoction on
the farmer for $50 and leaves his neighbor rubbing the potion on a pumpkin and
braying, "Hee-haw!" It's a fairly thin and predictable joke, but young listeners will
relish being one-up on both Patrick and his sly neighbor as much as they will enjoy
the rivals' nonsensical fast-talk. Oil pastel pictures, boldly outlined in black ink,
are simple and expressive; the purple-faced, whiskered farmer is appropriately dev-
ilish, while Patrick, in short sleeves, tie, and wristwatch, is innocent and gullible.
Thick typeface may also entice novice readers to give this one a crack on their own.
EB
DESIMINI, LISA 
My House; written and illus. by Lisa Desimini. 
Holt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-3144-8 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
The very simple shapes of a plain house-square with a triangle on top, chimney
off to one side, two windows and a front door-become transformed into seven-
teen dramatically different versions of itself. The artist combines her own paint-
ings, photographs, and cut paper in a collage technique with three-dimensional
results which encourage close looking. The house is shown throughout the day
42 
* THE BULLETIN
and year standing alone on a hill, with a wide sky behind it. It "gets dressed in the
fall" and is shown covered with bright red and yellow leaves; it is "safe in a storm,"
with glowing white windows and huge lightning streaks shooting down behind it
as it sits on a hillside colored silver with jagged edges. Children and adults can
pore over the pictures, looking for the quirky details such as a chicken walking up
the front path and figuring out the connections between the textures used and the
time of day or year. The text is very brief, even catalogish, and is almost over-
whelmed by the art's intensity. Desimini dedicates My House to her friends, cre-
ating eleven more houses on the dedication page that are equally intriguing. An
excellent choice for highlighting artwork in picture books for children. SDL
DONOVAN, STACEY 
Dive. Dutton, 1994 
[175p]
ISBN 0-525-45154-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Virginia, known familiarly as V, is leading a jagged existence these days. Her
brother is a troublemaker with a drug habit he successfully hides from his parents,
she and her best friend, Eileen, are inexplicably on the outs, her mother's drinking
is increasing, her beloved dog has been hit by a car and seriously wounded, and her
father has suddenly been hospitalized with a serious illness. As she struggles to
help her dog recuperate, care for her little sister, and keep some kind of balance
amid the turmoil, she falls for a sexy new student, Jane, and they begin a love
affair. The story is intense in a way many young adults will appreciate, but it's
overladen and sometimes overwritten; the format of the book, which separates the
first-person narration into several non-indented and separate blocks of text per
page, interferes with the telling of the story and could just as well have been plain
ordinary paragraphs. More interesting than the love story with too-good-to-be-
true Jane is Virginia's troubled relationship with Eileen, who turns out to be dat-
ing the boy who hit V's dog, and V's thorny relationship with her crumbling
mother, whose husband's death may well destroy her too. The fragmented narra-
tive and sophisticated poetic references (Jane and Virginia share a love for Rimbaud)
will appeal to teens of a world-weary and intellectual bent. DS
DUFFEY, BETSY 
Coaster. Viking, 1994 
114 p
ISBN 0-670-85480-8 
$13.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
For reasons that elude twelve-year-old Hart, his mom, now divorced, is falling fast
for what might be the world's most embarrassing suitor-Dub Dugan, the TV
weatherman who parades around in comical hats and draws total strangers into
conga line dancing at every opportunity. Hart idolizes his dad (more a roller-
coaster riding buddy than a father) and resists Dub's overtures of friendship, but
over the course of Mom's full-speed-ahead courtship, he slowly begins to realize
that Dub's sincerity and goodness might be more valuable traits than Dad's thrill-
seeking. Duffey makes much of the dual meaning of the title-the thrill ride to
which Hart is addicted and the tendency of an object "to continue to move for-
ward after effort has stopped," the definition Hart applies to his own life after his
parents' divorce. But the analogy is strained: a boy who will clandestinely con-
struct a roller coaster down a ravine and energetically plan to subvert his mother's
romance can hardly be called unambitious or effortless. Details of Dub's public
shenanigans become repetitive, and many of Duffey's stabs at comic relief fall flat,
confusing the novel's otherwise serious tone. Still, Hart's dilemma is convincingly
OCTOBER 1994 
* 
43
drawn and his final resolve to face his mother's remarriage as the beginning of a
new ride ("The unknown stretching out, waiting to be experienced .... 
It was
scary") is realistic. EB
ELFMAN, ERIC 
Almanac ofthe Gross, Disgusting and Totally Repulsive: A Compen-
dium ofFulsome Facts; illus. by Ginny Pruitt. 
Random House, 1994 
80p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-85805-9 
$4.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The back cover copy promises, "Here's everything you ever wanted to know about
household dust, pus, insect cuisine, barf bags, bird's nest soup, premature burial,
your bladder, and many more things too numerous (and nauseating!) to men-
tion ... ." The book lives up to that promise-in fact, for many adults it has a lot
more than they ever wanted (disgusting nasal complaints, mutant one-eyed lambs,
etc.), but the author has certainly got his young audience's number. Elfman should
write biology textbooks, because he can make even the most innocuous function
sound fascinatingly revolting ("The Heart: This meaty double pump spews out
two thousand gallons of blood a day"). He's not above stacking the deck on the
side of the sickening, though-he stops short of mentioning that most bacteria
don't affect people in any way at all, and he happily accepts the strongly challenged
theory of widespread cannibalism; the "Barf Bag" warnings-one, two, or three
pictured barf bags to identify particularly noisome tidbits-are gimmicky and seem
fairly randomly placed. Black-and-white illustrations appear throughout, cheer-
fully depicting bodily wastes, two-headed calves, and insects of all kinds. Kids
who won't read much will want to read this: if you can bring yourself to read a
paragraph or two in a booktalk, you'll have quite a few takers. Since part of the fun
of this book is its utter social unacceptability, however, you might just want to
leave it lying around accessibly and look shocked if anyone asks you about it.
There is, believe it or not, an index. DS
FOREMAN, MICHAEL 
War Game; written and illus. by Michael Foreman. 
Arcade,
1994 
72p
ISBN 1-55970-242-7 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Young Will is an avid soccer player, but his idyllic ball-playing days are over when
he and his friends are shipped off to fight in World War I, and he finds life in the
French trenches a far cry from his rural English village. Throughout the autumn
of 1914, Will survives on the front lines, and at Christmas he participates in the
legendary spontaneous carol-fest and soccer game between German and English
troops ("A single German voice began to sing 'Silent Night.' . . . The British
replied with 'The First Noel' to applause from the Germans"). Soon after Christ-
mas a new division of Germans fill up the trenches, launching the English into the
attack in which Will loses his life. This companion to Foreman's War Boy (BCCB
6/90), which focused on his homefront life in World War II, is dedicated to four
of his uncles who died in the earlier war; this book too has a picture-book trim size
and appearance that older kids may need to be steered beyond. The storyline
conveys the daily and appalling grind of the average Tommy, and captions for the
art explain small details (such as how British soldiers got the nickname "Tommy").
Despite the distance of the subject and the unfamiliarity of certain symbols (such
as the final red poppies), American kids will appreciate the struggle of the young
soldiers. The watercolor artwork depicts incendiary skies against the mud-covered
ground, young men goofing off as if it were a Sunday outing, and scenes of mute
44 * THE BULLETIN
and frozen devastation as bodies lie unretrieved between the trenches; interspersed
with Foreman's illustrations are period advertisements and public service appeals
for assistance with the war effort, whether by buying merchandise to send to a
distant soldier or by joining up oneself. The core anecdote provides an effective
focus, and as an unusual war story, this will grab some kids; the book would cer-
tainly help to humanize a faraway but significant event for young students. DS
FORWARD, TOBY 
Traveling Backward; illus. by Laura Cornell. 
Tambourine,
1994 
132p
ISBN 0-688-13076-3 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Fanny's beloved old Grandpa is dying, and her beastly relatives are hanging around
hoping to get his money when he dies. Fanny's grief takes her to her friend Mrs.
May, who gives Fanny a special potion for her grandfather, and after drinking the
potion, Grandpa recovers: he rockets out of bed, riles up the awful relatives, picks
up his beloved old car from a friend, and heads out for an excursion with Fanny.
Fanny is under orders from Mrs. May to get the potion back from Grandpa, but
he won't let her near it-whenever he feels a little shaky, he drinks some more, and
the potion takes him farther and farther backwards. From being an old man he
goes back to Fanny's parents' age, then Fanny's age (he accompanies her to school
and speaks vividly of London during the Blitz), and then younger and younger
still. Finally he realizes what Mrs. May knew all along-backwards isn't better,
and that it is right for him to age and die-so he relinquishes the potion, passes on,
and leaves all his worldly goods to Fanny. Forward (apparently his real name)
writes entertainingly of Grandpa as energetic pal and Fanny the reasonable com-
panion attempting to restrain him, and the bystanders' general acceptance of the
backwards phenomenon smooths the plot as well as adding amusement. The book
also makes a gentle point about the rightness and inevitability of death, and it
makes it in a way that doesn't alter the essential lightheartedness of the book but
that also allows it to serve as a conceptual bridge between simple picture-book
treatments and harder-edged junior-high novels of grief. There's also a fair amount
of fun in the idea of being peers with your grandfather (reminiscent of picture
books such as Houghton's The Backwards Watch, BCCB 10/92). The cheeriness
of the book, which is enhanced by occasional but lively ink-and-wash illustrations,
allows readers to avoid or contemplate the death question as they wish, and they'll
enjoy the magic and hijinks throughout. DS
FREEDMAN, RUSSELL 
Kids at Work: Lewis Hine and the Crusade against Child
Labor. Clarion, 1994 
104p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-58703-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-12
Like Russell Freedman himself, child labor photographer Lewis Hine "knew that a
picture can tell a powerful story," and his photographs not only depict the miseries
of working children in the early decades of this century but also implicitly depict
the humanity of the photographer himself, a balance equally achieved by Freedman's
fluent text. Hine began his career in 1901 as a teacher at New York's Ethical
Culture School, but soon became a roving photographer on behalf of child welfare
advocates, joining the National Child Labor Committee full-time in 1908. His
photographs, large and cleanly reproduced here, provided eloquent witness to a
national scandal, showing children as young as three years hard at dangerous, dull-
ing work in factories, mines, fisheries and farms. The portraits have dignity and
OCTOBER 1994 
* 45
poignancy, with children lined up against impossibly large machines, toting enor-
mous sacks of produce or cotton, or sorting through bins of coal. The text gives
the stories-Hine's as well as the larger social picture-behind the photos, includ-
ing Hine's later projects photographing European war refugees, the construction
of the Empire State Building, and the sad decline of his photographic reputation
and death in poverty in 1940. Spaciously designed, the book moves easily be-
tween words and pictures and will invite thoughtful browsing as well as more
concentrated study in history and photography curricula. While there are no notes,
a bibliography and index add reference value. RS
FRITZ, JEAN 
Harriet Beecher Stowe and the Beecher Preachers. Putnam,
1994 
144p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-399-22666-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Harriet Beecher Stowe is today the most famous of the Beechers, but in this biog-
raphy Jean Fritz discusses the fame and importance of the whole celebrated family
as well as Harriet and her accomplishment in writing Uncle Tom's Cabin. Fritz
displays her usual ability to interpret original sources and give her account a per-
sonal touch, making the Beecher family come alive with all its strains and talents:
we learn that older sister Catharine, a noted educator and author, was really rather
a pain; that Harriet always owned a dog; that Harriet's beloved brother George's
"accidental" death may have been a suicide. She also describes convincingly the
principles that led Harriet to write the book that, as Abraham Lincoln said, started
the Civil War. The book is less detailed than Norma Johnston's Harriet, reviewed
below, and it essentially ends with the war (there is an afterword describing the
remaining lives of all the Beechers); the portrayals here are livelier, however, and
the style is informative but conversational and unintimidating, qualities that make
it more suitable for preteens than is Johnston's book. Stowe's magnum opus is
more than most middle-schoolers can deal with, but Fritz will give them a good
idea of the impact it, its writer, and its writer's family made. A helpful genealogical
chart of the Stowe and Beecher families, explanatory endnotes, and a bibliography
of sources are included, although there are unfortunately no individual source notes
for in-text quotes or information. DS
GEORGE, JEAN CRAIGHEAD 
Julie; illus. by Wendell Minor. 
HarperCollins,
1994 
22 6 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023529-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023528-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
It's been a long wait for the sequel to Julie of the Wolves, but here it is. The story
picks up just where the first book left off, with Julie returning to the home of her
father, Kapugen, and his new non-Eskimo wife despite the knowledge that he had
killed the wolf who saved Julie's life. Julie settles in to her father's North Slope
home, gradually growing to understand and love her stepmother, who came to
Alaska to teach, and respecting her father's attempts to keep the village strong (he
shot the wolves because they were a threat to the musk-ox herd that represents
economic hope for the village). To allay the danger of and to the wolf pack, she
leads the wolves away to moose country, where they can feed without having to
prey on domestic animals; when they return, she must try to convince her father
that the Eskimo way of coexistence is preferable to the "Minnesota law" of de-
46 
* THE BULLETIN
struction. This sequel seems to soften but also to complicate interestingly the
ending of the previous book, because Kapugen is an honorable man helping his
village try to live in a changing world. As she did previously, George packs a wealth
of information about ways of life into the book without losing the emotional mo-
mentum of the story, and the middle section, in which Julie moves her pack to
safer territory, provides plenty of rich lupine interaction. Her gentle budding ro-
mance with a young Siberian Eskimo is part of her gradual exploration of the
world rather than a sappy fix-up, and her final looking towards the future is satis-
fyingly open-ended. George's understanding of and ability to convey Julie's world
to readers has not diminished with the passing of time. This is that rare thing, a
sequel worthy of its original; use its appearance to introduce both books to new
audiences. DS
GERSON, MARY-JOAN, ad. 
How Night Came from the Sea: A Story from Brazil;
illus. by Carla Golembe. 
Little, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-316-30855-2 
$15.95 
R 
4 -8 yrs
This pourquoi tale incorporates elements of African religious tradition which crossed
the Atlantic from West Africa to the Bahia region of northeast Brazil during the
African slave trade. At the beginning of time before night and day appeared on
Earth, the daughter of Iemanjai the sea goddess marries a mortal, and although she
deeply loves her husband and admires the beauty of his land, she longs for the
"dark, cool blanket" of night to rest her sun-strained eyes. Three servants are sent
to Iemanjai to fetch a bag of night, but they disregard a warning to leave the bag
tightly closed and so release the creatures of night. The young wife greets the wild
spirits as her kinsmen, calms them, and blesses her husband's land with three her-
alds of dawn-morning star, rooster, and singing birds. Naive, stylized oil-based
prints feature vibrant pink and turquoise sand and sky as backdrop to ebony fig-
ures delicately etched in white. Despite their formal, often rigid composition, the
illustrations retain a sensuous quality that harmonizes with Gerson's soothing im-
agery of night ("like the quiet after crying")-imagery that may inspire listeners to
ponder their own perceptions of the smell, sound, and feel of night. EB
GHERMAN, BEVERLY 
The Mysterious Rays of Dr. Rintgen; illus. by Stephen
Marchesi. 
Atheneum, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-31839-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
This brief, well-crafted account focuses on Professor Rdntgen's serendipitous dis-
covery of X-rays in 1895, the enthusiastic response by the scientific community to
his findings, and early experiments by Thomas Edison and other scientists and
dilettantes, many of whom suffered physically from overexposure to the radiation.
Gherman is less interested in discussing the hard science behind the electromag-
netic rays than in demonstrating how Rbntgen's work is part of the continuum of
scientific research, owing a debt to previous experiments and laying the ground-
work for later research and technological applications. Deftly selected details (Mrs.
R6ntgen's horror upon viewing the X-ray of her wedding-banded finger, modern
uses of X-rays in searching for weapons and examining mummies) tenaciously grip
the readers' attention; oil paintings, grainy and often eerie, are both illuminating
and appealing. A chronology and a bibliography of the author's references are
included. EB
OCTOBER 1994 
* 47
GIBLIN, JAMES CROSS 
ThomasJefferson: A Picture Book Biography; illus. by Michael
Dooling. 
Scholastic, 1994 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-59044838-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
This accurate and attractive addition to the extensive body of work on the third
president traces Jefferson's life from his earliest memory-as a three-year-old, riding
with a family slave to Tuckahoe farm-to his death, which occurred, notably, on
July 4, 1826. The usual range of information is covered: education, membership
in the House of Burgesses, drafting the Declaration of Independence, etc. Giblin
places particular emphasis on Jefferson's personal life, especially his relationship
with his surviving children, his grief over his wife's death, his romantic attachment
to miniaturist Maria Cosway, and his achievements following retirement from
political life. A seamier side appears as well. Giblin tackles head-on Jefferson's
vacillation on the slavery issue, adverse effects of the famed Louisiana Purchase on
Native Americans, and Jefferson's mounting debt, which forced him to sell his
personal library to Congress; however, his flight from British attack during his
governorship and its subsequent political repercussions are not mentioned.
Dooling's large, thickly brushed oils have the stately, almost reverent, composition
of period paintings of the founders, yet facial expressions humanize rather than
mythologize his figures. A chronology, quotations, a description of Monticello,
and a detailed index round out the volume, which will complement rather than
supplant other books for this age group (such as Quackenbush's Pass the Quill...,
BCCB 2/90, and Adler's Thomas Jefferson, BCCB 1/88) on Jefferson's life. EB
GRAHAM, JOAN BRANSFIELD 
Splish Splash; illus. by Steve Scott. 
Ticknor,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-70128-7 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Beginning readers can plop right into this collection of twenty-two concrete po-
ems about water in its many manifestations. Aided and abetted by illustrator
Scott's vigorous graphic design, the poems undulate across the page ("Ocean"),
bounce against a wall ("Hail"), float down and pile up ("Snow"). Changing col-
ors, typefaces, and print sizes add to the fun, and some of the poems have a puzzle
quality that kids will enjoy teasing out. The poems themselves are limber, often
funny, and have plenty of sound effects ("babble/ banter/ burble/ blab/ prattle/
tattle/ gossip/ gab"-"Babbling Brook") that will make reading aloud as pleasur-
able as the visual decoding. RS
GREGER, C. SHANA, ad. 
The Fifth and Final Sun: An Ancient Aztec Myth of the
Sun's Origin; ad. and illus. by C. Shana Greger. 
Houghton, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-67438-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 3-6
As the prominent but incomplete source note states, this picture book is based on
Aztec mythology with some alterations and additions by the author/illustrator.
The myth is complicated, as one sun after another is struck down by a jealous rival;
concurrently, the inhabitants of the earth change from giants to monkeys to tur-
keys until the Fourth Sun, Chalchihuitlicue, the Goddess of the Waters, takes over
and the gods send Man and Woman to care for the newly green earth. Their
descendants, save two, are wiped out by a flood 675 years later (the turkeys turni
into fish) and the stage is set for a Fifth Sun, which has a story all its own. This is
48 
* 
THE BULLETIN
excessively involved for the traditional picture-book age, and Greger's intricate
paintings, combining Aztec design motifs with some sentimental effects and a touch
of Fantasia, are busy and not always clearly connected to the action at hand. Espe-
cially when ornamented rather than simplified, myth does not always take to cul-
tural translation as easily as do folktales, and while younger kids will only be
perplexed, older ones not put off by the format will find a spectrum of rich images
with great metaphorical reach if not evident narrative design. RS
GRIMM, JAKOB LUDWIG KARL 
The Seven Ravens; adapted by Laura Geringer; il-
lus. by Edward S. Gazsi. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023553-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023552-7 
$16.00 
M 
4-8 yrs
Jettisoning two powerful images of the brief folktale-the brothers' failure to fetch
water for their sickly baby sister's baptism and the sister's sacrifice of her own
finger to save her brothers-Geringer instead assembles a burdensome pastiche of
embroidered shirts, dusty baby rattle, glass-shard needle, and fantastic flights through
the air, resulting a retelling more in the tradition of dark Disney than Grimm.
The original outlines is still discernible: brothers cursed by their father are trans-
formed into ravens; the sister discovers this dark chapter in the family history and
sets out to save them; rebuffed by sun and moon, she is guided by the stars to the
Glass Mountain where she breaks the curse. Geringer transmutes the sun, moon,
and stars into a little boy, goat, and dwarf; in fact, the boy is the sun, who burns a
holes in the eldest brother's embroidered shirt, which is actually the raven's wing,
and then the goat kicks a hole in the shirt, and.... These embellishments might
have worked had the illustrations supported them, but the Tweedledum-looking
boy lacks radiance, the goat bears no resemblance to a crescent moon, and the
dwarf is decidedly unstellar. Despite the pleasantly shadowy and creepy hues of
Gazsi's glitzy and intricate paintings, other visual problems pop up-photorealistic
faces ill-match their less successfully drafted bodies, the sister's expressions are lim-
ited to gaping mouth and sad eyes, matte mirrors in the glass banquet hall don't
reflect, complex piers and arches and the crystal table lack transparency and lumi-
nosity. In a foreword Geringer carefully explains variations from other Grimm
translations, and her rationale for softening the sister's sacrifice. EB
HALL, DONALD 
Lucy's Christmas; illus. by Michael McCurdy. 
Browndeer/Har-
court, 1994 
40p
ISBN 0-15-276870-X 
$14.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
The jacket's scratchboard illustration of a moonlit, lamplit house amidst the snow
and hills and trees promises seasonal delight of an old-fashioned order, and that's
just what's inside, as Lucy whiles away the autumn making Christmas presents for
her friends and family to be given away at the annual small-town village festivities.
Set in turn-of-the-century New England (and based on reminiscences of the author's
mother), this picture book has more mood and detail than story, but the cadences
of Hall's prose are snow-clean: "In summer the wagon had wheels. In winter it
was a sleigh." The small gifts (a clothespin doll, a pen-wiper) are neatly made, and
a child's fascination with household change (the arrival of a new stove is a major
event here) easily harmonizes with the natural suspense of the season. McCurdy's
colored scratchboard drawings have a cozy wintertime appeal, old-fashioned but
not quaint, and carefully catch the particulars celebrated in the text--every lever
OCTOBER 1994 
* 49
and knob of the new stove, for example. Children, like adults, can have nostalgia
for a time they never lived (especially when it comes to Christmas), and Hall and
McCurdy's homespun setting makes for pleasant winter daydreams. RS
HAMANAKA, 
SHEILA 
All the Colors of the Earth; written and illus. by Sheila
Hamanaka. 
Morrow, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11132-7 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11131-9 
$15.00 
M 
4-6 yrs
Message is undermined by metaphor in this determinedly multicultural picture
book that celebrates physical diversity of skin color ("The roaring browns of bears
and soaring eagles/ The whispering golds of late summer grasses") and hair ("Chil-
dren come with hair like bouncy baby lambs./ Or hair that flows like water") and
wraps the whole thing up with Love ("Children come in all the colors of love/ In
endless shades of you and me"). These are nice sentiments, but since when do
"children come in all the colors of the earth and sky and sea"? It is possibly offi-
cious to point out that a green or blue child is not a healthy one, but younger kids
will tend to take things fairly literally. Where the book really falters is in its cliched
catalog of Hallmark sentimentality ("Children buzz with laughter that kisses our
land,/ With sunlight like butterflies happy and free") that may please right-minded
adults but will bore the intended audience, who will be wondering when the story
is going to start. While the double-spread oil paintings of sunny children are big
and often eyecatching, they each strike the same note of smiling amity, reinforcing
the list-making tone of the text. RS
HARRIS, ROBIE H. 
It's Perfectly Normal: A Book about Changing Bodies, Growing
Up, Sex, and Sexual Health; illus. by Michael Emberley. 
Candlewick, 1994 
[87p]
ISBN 1-56402-199-8 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-9
See this month's Big Picture, p. 35, for review.
HELLDORFER, M. C. 
Gather Up, Gather In: A Book of Seasons; illus. by Judy
Pedersen. 
Viking, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-670-84752-6 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
In a work that insists on being read aloud for full effect, Helldorfer steps beyond
the here-comes-December-so-here-comes-Santa approach to the seasons, delicately
developing images which attune seasonal human activities to other elements in
nature. "Winter is deep in secrets"-bears' secret dreams, lost keys buried beneath
the snow, secret ribboned packages hidden under the stairs. Summer "grows round"
with rolling waves, spinning Ferris wheels, pyrotechnical fire flowers, and the leaf
that inevitably twirls down as Autumn approaches. An intriguing dynamic is con-
tinually at play between text and illustrations, for while Helldorfer's lilting prose
poem fairly glides from page to page and season to season, Pedersen's scenes-
boldly brushed, with simple forms elegantly arranged in spacious settings-are
startlingly diverse. Spring arrives, throwing "thunder tantrums, cracking the sky
like a silver egg," in a deep, dusty teal double-page spread; then, abrupt as a change
in the weather, Pedersen's following scene greets us with two topsy-turvy children
dangling openmouthed and bare-bellied from a jungle gym ("We spring out of
doors ... our legs too long for last year's pants-for there is no stopping Spring!").
50 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Visual and verbal imagery are accessible to the youngest listeners but will be sa-
vored by children throughout the primary grades. EB
ISADORA, RACHEL 
Firebird; ad. and illus. by Rachel Isadora. 
Putnam, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22510-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Isadora has previously performed a picture-book Swan Lake (BCCB 10/91); here
she uses the form to tell the story of another ballet, The Firebird. Prince Ivan hunts
through the dark forest for the legendary tree of magical golden fruit, and he finds
not only the tree but the dazzling scarlet Firebird. He catches the bird but then
releases it, and in gratitude she pledges the prince her magical assistance. When
Ivan battles the sorcerer Katschei for the freedom of the enchanted princesses who
also came seeking the golden fruit, he calls upon the Firebird; with the bird's help,
Ivan vanquishes Katschei and his demons and marries the most beautiful princess.
According to the flap copy, this retelling of the story is based on the Balanchine
version of the ballet; unfortunately there's no source note or explanation in the
book proper. While the ballet's plot is streamlined enough for a picture book, the
retelling lacks the motion and emotion that the dance gives it. Isadora's water-
color tableaux are luminous, but they are distanced and occasionally clashing; the
worlds of folktale and ballet mix as the Firebird appears as a long-limbed ballerina
while undergrowth is far more realistically lush than any stage set could make it.
Non-dancers may prefer a heartier story, but this will be a useful introduction to,
or memento of, a significant ballet. DS
JOHNSON, DOLORES 
Seminole Diary: Remembrances ofa Slave; written and illus.
by Dolores Johnson. 
Macmillan, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-02-747848-3 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
When her mother finds an old diary in the attic, young Gina learns about her
ancestress Libbie, who escaped slavery with her father and younger sister to live
with the Seminole Indians in Florida. From the first entry-"Master Evans whipped
me kinda bad"-we know that we're far from the picturesque territory of Wright's
Jumping the Broom (BCCB 7/94), and throughout, there's a strongly individual-
ized voice and specificity of detail that was missing from Johnson's previous slave
narrative Now Let Me Fly (11/93). Libbie and her family are taken in as "slaves" by
the Seminoles, a legal fiction that keeps slave hunters away, and while Libbie en-
joys her new life and freedom, she worries that she's losing her sister: "Clarissa
don't come around much anymore. And when she comes, she makes sure we call
her Swift Sparrow." Slaves and Indians alike are threatened when the government
wants to move them to Oklahoma; in the end, Libbie and her father leave for the
new home while Clarissa stays with those Seminoles who choose to retreat into the
Everglades. While the diary device is contrived, the story has tension and truth,
matched by slightly awkward oil paintings that show a pastoral community of
blacks and Seminoles working together. RS
JOHNSTON, NORMA 
Harriet: The Life and World ofHarriet Beecher Stowe. 
Four
Winds, 1994 
24 3p
ISBN 0-02-747714-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Harriet Beecher Stowe came from a charismatic and important family, rubbed
shoulders with significant and famous people, and wrote a pivotal work in Ameri-
can history. Norma Johnston provides a detailed account of the author's life,
OCTOBER 1994 
* 
51
times, and experiences, starting with the background of the Beecher family and
continuing through Stowe's birth, upbringing, writing, and international fame.
This book offers a more technically complete account than Jean Fritz's biography
(reviewed above), containing an occasionally dizzying array of names and places
and a great deal of useful information about Stowe's writing generally. The book
is well organized, and chapters are helpfully headed by the dates covered within
them; so many people (and some similarly named, particularly in the Beecher
family) appear, however, that one might benefit from more frequent explanations
or reminders of identity. Generally, though, the book is capable and comprehen-
sive, providing a multitude of information about the period and its issues as well as
Harriet Beecher Stowe herself. Johnston includes source acknowledgments and a
bibliography but regrettably does not include specific source notes for her infor-
mation (this absence in both the Fritz and Johnston biographies makes the contra-
dictions between them particularly vexing); black-and-white photographs appear
throughout the text, and an index is appended. DS
JUSTER, NORTON 
Otter Nonsense; illus. by Michael Witte. 
Books of Wonder/
Morrow, 1994 
[64 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12283-3 
$9.88
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12282-5 
$9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Juster's fascination with the oddities of the English language, which showed itself
in The Phantom Tollbooth and As (BCCB 3/62 and 5/89), here finds more jocular
expression: puns. Juster takes the animal world at its word, literally-each page of
the book has a simple word or phrase redefined, with an appropriate illustration:
the book's first subject is a heroically blue-clad "Patriotter"; later appears a leather-
clad "Wrenegade" atop a motorcycle, "Baseball bats" suited up for America's na-
tional pastime, a musk ox cannonballing off a diving board onto a defenseless
inner-tubing dolphin "oxidentally on porpoise," and so on. Some of the puns are
neat and quickly funny (a sated and suspiciously lumpy "piethon" slithers away
from the Mom's Apple Pie factory); some are silly but logical linguistic extrapola-
tions (three animals construct a house-the one building walls is a walrus, the one
building the roof is a roofrus, and the one laying the floor is a floorus, of course).
Too often, however, there is more labor than play on words, and the phrase is
simply altered without providing any connective humor ("Larks and bagels" is
simply a group of larks wearing bagels). The line-and-watercolor art is lively,
cartoonish, and exaggerated, providing a great deal of the humor; unfortunately
the compositions sometimes distract from the depiction of the punning point with
their busyness. The book is still cleverer than most joke books, and it's a zippy
little language-arts treat in cozily unintimidating, near-pocketsize dimensions that
may get kids thinking about words and will certainly prompt a copycat assignment
or two. DS
KIRKPATRICK, PATRICIA 
Plowie: A Story from the Prairie; illus. by Joey
Kirkpatrick. 
Harcourt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-15-262802-9 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
"A long time ago when there were still horses on the road, a little girl lived with her
mother and father and sister in a wooden house in Iowa." And that little girl works
with the family on their farm, responding to the seasons in work and in play, and
52 
* THE BULLETIN
one spring her father's plowing turns up a doll in the cornfield. The girl calls the
doll "Plowie" and takes her as a special friend; after the girl grows up, moves to the
city, and becomes first a mother and then a grandmother, her grandchildren love
hearing the story of Plowie. Eventually a now-grown grandchild takes custody of
Plowie and displays her in her home as a last remnant of the farm now that "the
prairie and the wooden house and the apple trees are gone." As an author's note
states, this is family incident made picture book, and it's made so fairly success-
fully. The illustrations (casein, according to publisher's info) depict in naive, oc-
casionally awkward lines an abundance of vegetation (even when there's no external
view, plants hang in the kitchen and the wallpaper and china are flower-patterned)
and a peaceable kingdom of farm animals. Although slow-paced, the text conveys
farm life and prairie atmosphere quite well, with prose that's frequently melodic
and occasionally incantatory ("Pink thistle and goldfinches, a family of quail, milk-
weed, and cream wild indigo"); Plowie herself provides a useful focus point that
helps lift the book above more mundane farm-nostalgia books. The book's turn-
of-the-century setting and quietly intriguing tone make it a rural counterpoint to
Jacqueline Briggs Martin's The Finest Horse in Town (BCCB 7/92); where that
book invited questions about the nature of storytelling, this one asks about origin
and history, finding importance not only in what happened, but in what history
can be and how it is passed on. DS
KOSSMAN, NINA 
Behind the Border. Lothrop, 1994 
96 p
ISBN 0-688-13494-7 $14.00 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Kossman lived in Moscow until she was ten, and while the text proper gives no
dates or contextualizing references, the jacket flap states the 1960s as the time
period in question-specifically, when Kossman was in the second grade. All but
one of the thirteen brief episodes are political memories: the time Nina could not
retrieve her beach ball because it floated "behind the border," Nina's teacher en-
couraging them to denounce their parents, the same teacher warning students not
to take candy from tourists because "many Russian children who accepted candy
from foreigners are dead now, because these foreigners hid tiny bombs in the candy."
This advice comes just two days after Nina has in fact chewed a Finnish gumball,
a coincidence that, true or not, seems artificial, particularly given the relentless
message of the book. While the viewpoint is occasionally self-congratulatory, each
of the episodes is effectively theatrical and simply written, as in the closing scene
where Nina's teacher denounces her after learning that Nina's family is emigrating
to the U.S.: "Your father will die of a heart attack in the plane on the way there.
That's how traitors die." What the book lacks most is wholeness, a sense of Nina's
life away from her dreadful teacher that could convey more subtly-and convinc-
ingly-what it was like to live in a totalitarian society. Upon learning her parents'
plans, Nina thinks, "To leave Russia! What could be more terrible than that?"-
but she's not given us any evidence for why she would want to stay. RS
KROLL, VIRGINIA 
Pink Paper Swans; illus. by Nancy L. Clouse. 
Eerdmans,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8028-5081-2 
$14.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
A multicultural lesson is lightly handled in this story about Janetta, an African-
American girl who becomes increasingly enraptured with the origami created by
her neighbor Mrs. Tsujimoto. Despite her mother's warnings about "botherin'
OCTOBER 1994 
* 
53
folks," Janetta befriends the woman and turns out to be a real lifesaver when Mrs.
Tsujimoto's arthritis prevents her from constructing the graceful paper animals
she sells in local shops. Janetta has an idea-"You be the mind. I'll be the fin-
gers"-and thus a partnership is born. It's a somewhat longish text, but kids will
enjoy the conversations of these coworkers, an ebullient girl and a gentle elderly
woman, as well as the fanciful products of their cooperative occupation. Clouse's
cut-paper collage illustrations have a crisp, bright angularity that suits the subject,
and while her work is more sharply defined, there's a touch here and there of Ezra
Jack Keats, a recall echoed by Kroll in her theme of friendship across race and age.
Instructions for making a "pink paper swan" are appended. RS
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
Lives ofthe Writers: Comedies, Tragedies (and What the Neigh-
bors Thought); illus. by Kathryn Hewitt. 
Harcourt, 1994 
96p
ISBN 0-15-248009-9 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
In a companion volume to their Lives of the Musicians (BCCB 4/93), the duo of
Krull and Hewitt offer a collection of literary lives. The nineteen writers featured
are a varied lot: some are American (Mark Twain, Edgar Allan Poe), some not
(William Shakespeare, Jane Austen); most wrote in English (Zora Neale Hurston,
E. B. White) but some did not (Murasaki Shikibu, Miguel de Cervantes); most are
writers of children's books or of literature now frequently read by children (Hans
Christian Andersen, Robert Louis Stevenson, Isaac Bashevis Singer). The biogra-
phies are thumbnail sketches, gossipy and confiding about the experiences and
whims of their subjects in a way that personalizes Famous Authors without dimin-
ishing them in kids' eyes; the book won't expand kids' understanding of the litera-
ture much, but it will help them put real people to the bylines. The colored-pencil
and watercolor art offers droll, big-headed caricatures reminiscent of the New York
Review ofBooks as well as small vignettes of aspects of that author's life or interests
(some of the vignettes represent awfully peripheral aspects, such as roach powder
for E. B. White's brief stint, mentioned in the text by all of three words, of selling
the stuff). Young bookworms especially will enjoy the pageant of personalities,
but many kids will relish the appropriate bio when used in conjunction with that
author's literature-try it as a come-on for a readaloud. DS
KURTZ, JANE 
Fire on the Mountain; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Simon, 1994 
34 p
ISBN 0-671-88268-6 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Alemayu was a shepherd in the Ethiopian mountains until his parents died, where-
upon he joins his sister, who works in the house of a rich man. When the rich man
brags of his strength in spending the night alone in the mountains, Alemayu qui-
etly points out that as a shepherd he himself had done the same many times; the
angry rich man bets him that he cannot repeat the feat, but Alemayu does, keeping
himself warm with the sight of another shepherd's fire on a distant mountain.
When the rich man tries to renege on the deal, saying that a fire, whether in the
mind or on the ground, was cheating, his servants teach him his lesson by feeding
him with only the smell of food and soothing him with the appearance of music.
The rich man concedes, Alemayu gets his prize, and he grows up to be happy,
generous, and successful. The tale flows smoothly and some of its elements are
pleasantly familiar-the fire-on-the-mountain equals smell-of-food recalls the east-
ern European smell-of-food equals sound-of-money tale. The author's note states
that she heard the tale from many different tellers when she was a child in Ethio-
54 
* 
THE BULLETIN
pia, but that Alemayu's sister did not appear in those versions; it's not clear whether
that's the only change she made, whether she blended those remembered versions
together, or if she used a textual source to refresh her memory. While Alemayu's
sister does seem a little extraneous and the various stages of the story don't fit
together seamlessly, the character of Alemayu is enough to keep the audience's
interest. The watercolor illustrations have a heavy-paper texture that, combined
with the muted but intense tones of olive and sand, gives the pictures a pleasing
weight; the quiet and distant faces of the people underscores the archetypal,
everyman nature of folkloric personages. Many kids will enjoy this quiet story of
a little guy's victory. DS
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Days of the Dead; illus. with photographs by Christopher
Knight. 
Hyperion, 1994 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2018-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-022-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-6
When Lasky and Knight followed the monarch butterfly to its winter home in
Mexico (see BCCB 11/93) they evidently found another annual cause for celebra-
tion, the Days of the Dead as observed in a small Mexican town. Like George
Ancona in Pablo Remembers (BCCB 12/93), Lasky and Knight convey the beliefs
and traditions of the holiday through the experience of one family, but they also
texture their subject with a greater sense of rural daily life (and butterflies). Knight's
color photographs are livelier than Ancona's (whose book is for younger readers),
capturing the Halloween mischief of the time as well as the more solemn moments
of prayer and recollection, and Lasky's text is clear and vivid, aware of the mystery
of a holy day that dissolves the border between the dead and the living. RS
LESTER, JULIUS 
John Henry; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
Dial, 1994 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1607-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1606-0 
$16.99 
R* 
5-9 yrs
The newest version of this popular American tall tale bursts to life under the re-
prise collaboration of Lester and Pinkney (see the Uncle Remus tales reviewed in
BCCB 2/94, etc.). Based on published versions of the folk song and some verses
from Lester's memory, this tale includes Henry's showdown with Ferret-Faced
Freddy and some nifty rock smashing for a road building crew as prelude to his
famous race against the steam drill. Lester's telling, while accessible to kindergart-
ners, transcends an age ceiling with its front-porch humor and intimacy. Witty
similes and shameless hyperboles abound, inclusive language advocates take a tweak-
ing as Henry sips a "soda mom," and even the Almighty gets into the act, hollering,
"It's getting too noisy down there." Had Pinkney chosen to match Lester's tone
with comical sight gags, the rendering could have dissolved into farce. Instead the
earthy, craggy watercolors capture the sober, thoughtful side of Henry's story-his
tenuous relationship with his surroundings as both larger-than-life hero and smaller-
than-nature mortal. Henry's chiseled muscles appear to be chipped out of the very
mountain he conquers, and the single scene in which he clearly stands apart from
the rocky terrain, framed by the tunnel's mouth and a victory rainbow, is immedi-
ately followed by that of his own conqueror-his funeral train. The successful
melding of rich prose and challenging visual imagery should make this the pre-
ferred choice among extant print versions of the tale. EB
OCTOBER 1994 
* 55
LIES, BRIAN 
Hamlet and the Enormous Chinese Dragon Kite; written and illus. by
Brian Lies. 
Houghton, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-68391-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Quince, porcupine pal of the title pig, tries to talk his friend out of buying a kite:
"They're dangerous! You'll get string burn!" Throwing caution to the wind, Hamlet
acquires a gorgeous red Chinese dragon kite, and he is promptly swept away with
it on the first strong breeze. Thinking the airborne animal is under attack by a
vicious dragon, well-meaning eagles shred the kite and send Hamlet plummeting
into a tree. There he is lectured by some cattle, who point out, "You really shouldn't
be flying in the first place, you know. You don't have the wings for it." After a
long walk home and a cup of hot chocolate with his friend, Hamlet is clearly ready
for another foolhardy adventure. The plot is overextended and the flatness of the
composition often makes the line-and-watercolor illustrations bland, but the whim-
sical details Lies incorporates into his artwork are diverting. "No shoes, No shirt,
No problem," reads the sign in the general store, where a lady swine examines a
box of "Swill." A cow sports a cameo of her bull boyfriend, and Hamlet's foot-
stool boasts carved human feet. Quince's allusions to his friend's past mishaps,
and Hamlet's sudden, unspecified brainstorm which concludes the tale seem to
indicate that Lies may have more Hamlet stories in mind. EB
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Condor's Egg; illus. by James Chaffee. 
Chronicle,
1994 
[26p]
ISBN 0-8118-0260-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The California condor is the rarest bird in North America. In 1987 the last of the
wild condors were captured, and in 1992, a male and female were released into the
wild as the number of condors grew. London tells the presumably fictitious story
of a pair of condors living in a cave in a cliff, where they protect their egg. Rocks
are hit by lightning and the egg is cracked, but the following day, the baby condor
is born safely. The text is spare but poetically evokes the lives of the condors in the
wild. The male, who has landed for a meal, is described as "Carrion-eater. Bone-
picker. Nature's cleaner-upper, feathered giant of the sky." Children are sure to
have questions, wondering when the female gets to eat, and adults may puzzle over
the duration-it is unclear, for instance, when in the egg's gestation the female
rings it with pebbles, or, for that matter, how long the gestation takes. Notes at
the end by the Coordinator of the Condor Recovery Program are helpful, and
overall the book will catch the attention of children who may then want to learn
more about the subject. Paintings by James Chaffee in pen-and-ink and water-
color nicely give the condor's perspective. He does not romanticize the birds,
which are after all vultures, but they are individuated and majestic-looking in flight.
The contrast between the blue skies with billowing clouds and rocky cliffs, and the
cozy, golden light of the cave is especially effective. SDL
LOURIE, PETER 
Everglades: Buffalo Tiger and the River of Grass; written and illus.
with photographs by Peter Lourie. 
Boyds Mills, 1994 
4 8p
ISBN 1-878093-91-6 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 4-6
In his latest river adventure (see also Amazon, BCCB 11/91, and Yukon River, 10/
92) author/photographer Lourie goes into the "river of grass," the Everglades, re-
56 
* 
THE BULLETIN
porting as much upon the Miccosukee Indians (to whom the region is home) as on
the ecosystem itself. It's a lot to cover in an amply margined forty-eight pages, but
while there's some skimming along the surface, Lourie generally does a good job of
focusing both natural and social history through his Miccosukee guide. Buffalo
Tiger takes the author deep into the Glades to a hidden "hammock," or island,
where Tiger has built a traditional shelter, and where Lourie, somewhat apprehen-
sively, spends a night alone. Color photographs add some visual interest, and the
book on the whole could introduce titles such as Jean Craighead George's novel
The Talking Earth (BCCB 12/83). RS
MCCLAIN, ELLEN JAFFE 
No Big Deal. Lodestar, 1994 
187p
ISBN 0-525-67483-7 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Janice doesn't care if her favorite teacher, Mr. Padavano, is gay. But what had only
been rumor among the students turns ugly when Janice's nemesis, Kevin Lynch,
spraypaints FAGGOT on Mr. P's car, starting a spiral of gossip that culminates in
some "concerned" parents-including Janice's mother-trying to get Mr. P fired.
This is certainly an issue book, with all sides of the controversy covered, particu-
larly baldly in a parents' meeting where a whopper of a speech is delivered by one
parent to the others, and by author to readers: "I did some research in the library,
and I also called a friend of mine who works in the New York City schools. In fact,
last year she started teaching in the city's special school for gay teenagers ....
"
Despite the preaching, the novel is still a solid school-trouble story, and Janice a
sympathetic protagonist, whose narration of her conflicts with Kevin and her mother
is heartfelt and likable. Mr. P. is overidealized-the man is perfect-which allows
McClain to draw clear lines that in real life might prove more fuzzy. RS
MCEWAN, IAN 
The Daydreamer; illus. by Anthony Browne. 
HarperCollins,
1994 
192p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024427-5 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024426-7 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Peter Fortune is ten years old and a daydreamer. His daydreaming occasionally
causes him trouble (he once leaves his sister on the bus) but it fills his head with
wonderful stories, seven in total: in one, the dolls in his sister's room come alive
and threaten him; in another, he and the aging family cat exchange places for a
day; in another he lays a trap for the neighborhood burglar. The stories have a
mundane yet dreamy tone that makes the strange events all the more peculiar, and
the exploration of different states (the best story, "The Baby," switches Peter and
his small cousin for one edifying day) is clever. The writing lacks the momentum
and gothic bizarreness of McEwan's adult work, and the philosophy is sometimes
too much an adult's version of childhood, but the tales' tight focus and contempla-
tion of the unusual will appeal to readers just exploring the world of the other-
worldly. Large print and each chapter's black-and-white headpiece and ominous
Anthony Browne illustration for each story enhance the book's accessibility. DS
McKISSACK, PATRICIA C. 
Christmas in the Big House, Christmas in the Quarters;
written by Patricia C. McKissack and Fredrick L. McKissack; illus. by John
Thompson. 
Scholastic, 1994 
80p
ISBN 0-590-43027-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
It's a delicate job, eliciting the joys of Christmas and the sorrows of slavery in the
OCTOBER 1994 
* 
57
same book, but, by and large, the McKissacks have managed it. Their fictionalized
account of a Virginia Christmas in 1859 on the eve of the Civil War flows smoothly
between the elaborate preparations in "Massa's" plantation mansion and the home-
lier observances in the slave quarters. While the former are more deluxe, it's the
latter that have the spirit, echoed by the authors' segues from formal prose to a
more relaxed phrasing: "Reckon it won't hurt to hang yo' stockings by the fire."
The tensions of race and slavery are never forgotten, at least by the slaves; they
show up in the ritual of the Mistress's handing out presents to the slaves ("gra-
ciously given and humbly received") and the favor returned ("humbly given and
graciously received") as well as in the slaves' relief when the whole charade is fin-
ished. There's plenty of detail of the kind that kids will like: how they decorated,
what kinds of gifts were exchanged, and what was eaten, including a slave recipe
for sweet potato pie. Sometimes the tone is little too sweet ("Happy boys and girls
skip and dance; happy voices shout and sing") and Thompson's full-page acrylic
paintings are photorealistically attractive but somewhat glamorized, with the cozy
firelight of the slave cabins as welcoming as the glowing Christmas candles of the
Big House. That may be the point, but the illustrations, like those in Courtni
Wright's Jumping the Broom (BCCB 7/94), uncomfortably teeter into the pictur-
esque. The text is more balanced, ending with forebodings of war and emancipa-
tion, and explanatory notes and a comprehensive bibliography add historical
legitimacy. RS
MADSEN, SUSAN ARRINGTON 
I Walked to Zion: True Stories of Young Pioneers on
the Mormon Trail. Cinnamon Tree/Deseret, 1994 
182p
ISBN 0-87579-848-9 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
This collection of adult memoirs of childhood journeys describes the Mormon
migration to Salt Lake City from the late 1840s (following the assassination of
prophet Joseph Smith) through the close of the Civil War. Accounts are arranged
topically under such headings as Narrow Escapes, Fun and Romance, Teenage
Drivers, and within each chapter a broad range of ages and experiences are repre-
sented. The tone of the narratives varies from the rough-edged parlance of inter-
view typescripts to the flowery prose of published autobiographies, but from these
diverse voices similar themes emerge-early settlers' disappointing first glimpse of
the desolate Salt Lake region; joy of being greeted, or even rescued, by relief parties
sent to meet the migrants; universal confidence in the spiritual and temporal lead-
ership of the Elders. Readers familiar with other Overland Trail tales will discover
features unique to the Mormon experience, particularly the religious impetus of
the journey, the transplantation of entire communities, and the highly organized
handcart trains. Impeccable source citations, brief biographical notes, and an adult
photo of the narrator accompanies each entry; a map on the endpapers traces the
Mormon Trail. An introductory chapter is light on historical background, and
non-Mormon readers may be baffled by the terms Prophet, Apostle, and President
as used by the Latter-Day Saints. But the title's focus is on the journey itself, and
these accounts speak eloquently and fully of its rigors and rewards. EB
MAGUIRE, GREGORY 
Seven Spiders Spinning; illus. by Dirk Zimmer. 
Clarion,
1994 
132p
ISBN 0-395-68965-1 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
The old boys-against-girls school story gets a new twist with the fanciful introduc-
58 
* 
THE BULLETIN
tion of seven prehistoric spiders, long frozen in Siberian ice, now thawed out enough
to cause trouble for Josiah Fawcett Elementary School in Hamlet, Vermont. It
seems the spiders have "imprinted" upon the members of the Tattletales (girls)
and become tied up in their quest to best the Copycats (boys) in the upcoming
school Halloween Pageant of Honor. The humor is flip and sometimes adult, as
when Tattletale empress Thekla Mustard explains the glory of their club name:
"The tales we Tattletales tell are the new legends of dominance and power! The
tattling we do is to ourselves! Only by self-criticism will we arise to take our
rightful place in the corridors of power!" Although you kind of wish the author
would take his tongue out of his cheek every once in a while, the farce is swiftly
spun as the spiders, one by one, meet with unfortunate schoolroom accidents while
pursuing their Tattletales. There's a good balance between verbal and pratfall
humor, but the arch tone and determined off-beatness of the writing will keep
many kids at a distance from the story. It's easy enough to read, though, and the
zaniness is balanced by swiftly sequenced events culminating in a life-or-death
climax, as beloved teacher Miss Earth is felled (temporarily) by a well-placed bite.
RS
MARSDEN, JOHN 
Lettersfrom the Inside. Houghton, 1994 
[16 0p]
ISBN 0-395-68985-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Mandy and Tracey become penpals after Tracey places an ad for such in an Aus-
tralian teen magazine. At first the missives are friendly and chatty, with each girl
breezily writing about friends, school and family, but gradually darker truths are
revealed: Tracey is in prison, Mandy is becoming increasingly frightened of her
older brother. The story is entirely told through their letters, and while the voices
could have been more sharply differentiated, the growing bond and trust between
the girls is convincingly etched and made acute even through their fights, such as
when Mandy discovers Tracey has been lying about her perfect suburban life. Even
as the girls become closer, secrets remain. We (and Mandy) never do learn why
Tracey is imprisoned, although her complicity in a murder is strongly hinted at;
the true shocker of the story comes when Mandy stops writing, and the possibility
of her death at the hands of her brother looms large. Teenaged girls will love the
epistolary format and the blend of girl-life drama and melodrama; the mystery of
Mandy's final silence will occasion much excitement and speculation. RS
MOLLEL, TOLOLWA M., ad 
The Flying Tortoise: An Igbo Tale; illus. by Barbara
Spurll. 
Clarion, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-68845-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
The vain and gluttonous tortoise Mbeku-insufferably proud of his shell, "so
smooth and clear and shiny, it even glowed in the dark"--convinces the birds they
will need his services-as spokesperson on their enviable visit to the Skyland king.
Introducing himself as Aaaaalllll-of-You, king of Earthdwellers, Mbeku tricks the
Skylanders into allowing him to devour the entire feast they have prepared for
their visitors, but his cunning doesn't sit well with the birds, who throw his make-
shift wings down to Earth, stranding him in the sky. Just when the birds are ready
to relent, Mbeku tricks them again, so this time they arrange for his free fall back
home to result in a shattered shell. This is why the rebuilt model which tortoise
sports to this day is "rugged and checkered and dull." Spurll's illustrations muddle
OCTOBER 1994 * 59
traditional motifs with cartoonish fantasy. While narrow beadwork borders around
illustrations and text insets and the feathered masks of the Skylanders add an Afri-
can touch, Earth-bound backdrops are composed of generic foliage, and the stiff-
jointed, green-digited limbs of the Skylanders appear more science-fictional than
folkloric. An end note discusses the recurrence of the tortoise trickster figure and
how traditional tales such as this one are used "to teach children accepted norms
and mores" within Nigerian Igbo society; however, no further reading suggestions
or source notes for this particular tale are provided. EB
MURPHY, CLAIRE RUDOLF 
Gold Star Sister. 
Lodestar, 1994 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-525-67492-6 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Gram O'Leary is dying of cancer and her steady failure is hardest on granddaugh-
ter Carrie, who has always been devoted to her. When Gram moves in with the
family, Carrie suffers from watching Gram's deterioration, but also treasures the
additional time they have together and the opportunity to explore some of the
memorabilia in Gram's trunk. Among the souvenirs are letters from Billy Sweeney,
a brother Gram never mentioned having; his death by friendly fire in an little-
known World War II battle in the Aleutian Islands had always been a topic too
painful for discussion. Through the letters Carrie discovers that Billy had aided
dying soldier James Mitchell and promised to deliver a letter to his baby son-a
letter which, of course, never reached its destination due to Billy's own death.
Now, out of love for Gram, Carrie is determined to trace the addressee, deliver the
letter, and thus give her great-uncle's memory its due honor. Murphy handily
juggles these dual story lines (as well as others involving Carrie's problems with a
hyperactive friend, and her struggles with two "perfect" sisters and her stressed-out
parents) until, at the big finish, they collapse under their own weight; the meeting
of the O'Learys and Mitchells is overloaded with toasts, maudlin letter reading,
rewards, newspaper photos, introduction of helpful neighbors, and tributes to Gram,
which conspire to bring each strand to a feel-good conclusion. Still, Gram's illness
and death are honestly described, and Carrie's efforts to balance her own life with
genuine concern for Gram's needs are sensitively portrayed. Readers looking for a
fresh spin on World War II fiction and those who enjoy a good cry over a family
story may find the tale equally enjoyable. EB
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Darnell Rock Reporting. Delacorte, 1994 
135p
ISBN 0-385-32096-5 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Seventh-grader Darnell Rock isn't really sure how he fits into the world: he's not
as verbally quick as his twin sister, Tamika, he's not terrific in school, and he hangs
around with some other aimless kids (dubbed the Corner Crew by the school
librarian). Things change when Darnell joins the school paper and decides to find
out more about the homeless people he's encountered. He writes an editorial
suggesting that the school use its empty lot as a garden for the local homeless
people instead of as a parking lot as planned, and when the piece is picked up by
the local paper he finds himself caught up in a civic battle. Myers' writing is
unflashy but telling, with easily flowing dialogue and empathy for junior-high
judgment (about the nice librarian, Darnell thinks, "He liked her, but he didn't
like a teacher being so friendly. It made him look bad"); he's particularly deft in
scripting snappy schoolkid conversation. The plot never becomes saccharine-
although there is hope for a garden at another location, the contested space be-
60 
* THE BULLETIN
comes a parking lot. And while the book makes its point about homelessness, it
focuses more on the myriad ways anyone can be lost; it's clear that Darnell's find-
ing himself is a significant victory. This is an energetic read, unintimidating but
thoughtful, that many Darnell-age kids in search of self will find rewarding. DS
NARAHASHI, KEIKO 
Is ThatJosie?; written and illus. by Keiko Narahashi.
McElderry, 1994 
26 p
ISBN 0-689-50606-6 
$14.95 
R 
3-7yrs
Animal lovers will delight in this guessing game book which follows Asian-Ameri-
can preschooler Josie through her day. She may appear to be a four or five-year-
old little girl, but as far as Josie is concerned, she is a kangaroo hopping down the
stairs with a baby in her pouch or a cheetah running through the grass. Children
will enjoy guessing which animal Josie is being before they turn the page to find
out: "Is that Josie making waves in her bath? No, it's a dolphin diving deep." The
illustrations capture the animals expressively and economically and tenderly depict
Josie and her parents in soft, glowing watercolors. Although the concept of the
book will be better understood by older children, they may consider Josie herself
too young, as the text reflects baby games and contexts. Older preschoolers and
kindergartners will love this cleanly designed picture book right down to its end-
papers, which show Josie on one side in five different poses and animals on the
other in a variety of matching actions. SDL
NOVAK, MATT 
Mouse TV written and illus. by Matt Novak. 
Jackson/Orchard,
1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08706-9 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06856-0 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The mouse family, ten in all, can never agree on what to watch on the tube: Papa
wants action and adventure; Mama prefers comedy; Pinky loves science; "Scary
stuff for me," says Melba. And so on. Each mouse gets a page devoted to several
images from his or her favorite genre, and some of the examples-all round-corner
TV-framed-are mini-mousterpieces of crisp humor. Moments on the history
channel, for example, are devoted to cave-mice escaping a Tyrannosaurus Tabby;
tri-corner-hatted mice signing a Declaration of Independence ("We the mice are
free free free free ... 
"); Allied Forces mice, riding on turtle-tanks, attacking the
enemy, whose flag features a cat-shaped swastika. Each of the vignettes is wittily
detailed without clutter; the panache of each small picture recalls the economical
flair of Sendak's sketches for A Hole Is to Dig. Novak's book does have a plot,
albeit a slender one--one night the TV won't work, and what's a mouse family to
do? Their solutions-making things, singing songs, reading a story, etc.-are
diverting, and while each gets a full page, neither the activities nor the larger-scaled
paintings seem quite as much fun as what the family is missing. Still, the jokes are
ever hip (in a way that kids and adults can share) and the drawing is clean and
confident. RS
O'CONNOR, BARBARA 
Barefoot Dancer: The Story oflsadora Duncan. Carolrhoda,
1994 
95p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-87614-807-0 
$13.13 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Isadora Duncan is one of the great figures in twentieth-century dance, and
O'Connor offers a brief survey of her life and art. In simple language and gener-
OCTOBER 1994 
* 
61
ously sized print, the book covers Isadora's childhood and artistic beginnings in
San Francisco; her moves with the "clan Duncan" to New York, then London and
Europe; her increasing fame, string of lovers, and personal tragedies; and her terp-
sichorean legacy. Attractive period photographs are scattered throughout, and
there's a useful incorporation of many quotes from Isadora's autobiography, which
help give a glimpse of Isadora's combination of self-regardant pretentiousness and
sincere love for her craft. In some ways the book is rather too neat, lacking the
elaborate and messy emotions that Isadora's dramatic life engendered in herself
and others, and O'Connor mentions the controversy about the veracity of Isadora's
own memoirs but doesn't analyze it; there are also no specific source notes, merely
an appended bibliography. It's a competent and easy-reading survey of a glamor-
ous life, however, and young dancers and iconoclasts will appreciate it. In addi-
tion to the short bibliography, an index is included. DS
OLALEYE, ISAAC 
Bitter Bananas; illus. by Ed Young. 
Boyds Mills, 1994 
33p
ISBN 1-56397-039-2 
$14.95 
R 
4 -7yrs
Oh no! Oh no! Baboons are stealing the sweet palm sap that the young African
boy Yusuf sells at market, and it takes patience, ingenuity, and several trials before
Yusuf outwits his forest rivals with a lure of tempting sap and bananas-laced with
wormwood. This authored tale with a folkloric ring is a natural readaloud with its
smooth cadence, idiomatic phrases (all quite clear in context), and lots of animal
sounds and Oh yes. and Oh no. which invite listeners to chime along. Young
ventures again into a paper-collage medium; although this work's design resembles
that of Seven Blind Mice (BCCB 3/92) with its black background and white type
face, papers embellished with streaks of brilliant pastel here produce an effect closer
to that of his customary work in watercolor and pastel. Yusuf s bright image bounds
through the landscape, giving an airy feeling to dense jungle scenes, and the viewer's
search through the thick growth is rewarded with glimpses of ghostly eekh and
ooh. coiling through the foliage, and Yusufs jubilant reflection in the disappointed
baboon's eye. EB
OODGEROO 
Dreamtime: Aboriginal Stories; illus. by Bronwyn Bancroft. 
Lothrop,
1994 
96 p
ISBN 0-688-13296-0 
$16.00 
Ad Gr. 4-6
Thirteen autobiographical vignettes followed by fourteen brief folktales and myths
comprise this collection by Oodgeroo, a renowned Aboriginal writer and activist.
The memoirs are best, matter-of-factly conveying the author's girlhood on
Stradbroke Island with her six siblings and parents, growing up fishing, hunting,
squabbling with her sisters, and getting into trouble. Each of the vignettes is a
discrete memory, and some call out for further elucidation. What happened, for
example, after Oodgeroo, in a fit of frustration for being forced to sew right-handed,
smashed her teacher's wristwatch? Still, the initial scene is a powerful one and
throughout Oodgeroo demonstrates an effective economy of words and a fresh,
unsentimental memory. The folktales that follow the reminiscences are less en-
gaging, mostly because they take us from the concrete details of the author's child-
hood into a mythic plane, and since the first part has only whetted the appetite for
more of the same, the mythological stories of the Dreamtime feel anticlimactic.
Illustrated with full-page paintings that deftly blend contemporary themes with
traditional Aboriginal patterns, the large format looks at first like a picture book,
but will require the sophistication of independent readers. RS
62 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PETERS, LISA WESTBERG 
This Way Home; illus. by Normand Chartier. 
Holt,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-1368-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
This birds'-eye view of migration follows a flock of young finches on their first trip
from their summer home in the prairie to their winter home on the gulf shore, and
back again in the spring. The birds navigate using "three compasses-the sun, the
stars, and the earth itself." They also are born with a mapping ability that allows
them to find their way back. The author writes poetically of their flight (although
"sun-dazzled sand dunes" is an odd phrase if one stops to wonder whose eyes are
being dazzled) without giving the birds any inappropriate human qualities. Un-
fortunately, the brevity of the text leaves the reader with many unanswered ques-
tions: What is a compass? Where are the older birds? Does the whole flock live
together on the farm? Why would a fog throw off the birds' magnetic compass, so
that their mapping skill is needed? The scientific principles are complicated to
explain, remaining unclear despite author's notes at the end, and are impossible to
depict in the illustrations; children will probably not know much more about mi-
gration or navigation after they have finished. However, the illustrations by Chartier
are luminous. Because the birds travel at night, the watercolors fill each page with
the glowing pinks, golds, and purply-blues of sunsets and night skies. Like Jim
Arnosky, Chartier is a keen observer of animals and the natural world, and his
softly realistic paintings may make the book a worthwhile purchase despite the
too-limited information in the text. SDL
PEVSNER, STELLA 
Jon, Flora, and the Odd-Eyed Cat. Clarion, 1994 
[190p]
ISBN 0-395-67021-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Jon, thirteen, is still slowly recovering from rheumatic fever when his family moves
from suburban Chicago to a small town in South Carolina, and he's not happy.
While his illness keeps him in bed, he becomes intrigued with a white cat, its neck
garlanded with flowers, that visits at night and soon leads him to a strange young
girl, Flora, who supposedly had disappeared from the town some years before and
who now seeks to involve Jon in a secret druid ceremony. It's a satisfying summer
mystery (with a satisfyingly spooky cover) with supernatural overtones that are
resolved on the side of reality in a dramatic conclusion. Pevsner sometimes spells
too much out, but her evocation of the boredom of achy bedrest and subsequent
allure of dangerous diversion is steadily and suspensefully told. The author's fans
will enjoy it; so will those of Mary Downing Hahn. RS
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
Ned Feldman, Space Pirate; written and illus. by Daniel
Pinkwater. 
Macmillan, 1994 
4 8p
ISBN 0-02-774633-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr 2-5
Ned Feldman, age nine, is so fond of space that he draws space battles all over his
homework, and he isn't at all sorry when his kitchen sink turns out to hold a
spaceship with a little "sort-of-humanlike person" inside. Captain Lumpy Lugo,
who comes from the planet Jivebone in the galaxy Foon-ping-baba, takes Ned on
an adventure which involves giant space chickens, sliding on warm snow, and an
encounter with a yeti. Along the way, the captain, who also calls himself Bugbeard
the pirate and claims to be "extremely bad," turns out to be not very ferocious and
not very competent either. Told in Pinkwater's fast-paced, zany style, with lots of
OCTOBER 1994 
* 
63
dialogue, the story has many touches that will tickle both adults and children.
Chapters are short, laced with Pinkwater's pen, ink, and marker illustrations in
black-and-white and in color. Older children will enjoy reading this alone, but it
also works well as a readaloud. SDL
POWELL, 
ROXANNE 
DYER 
Cat, Mouse and Moon; illus. by Will
Hillenbrand. 
Houghton, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-59348-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
"It is night and Cat is out," stalking through the night looking for prey as "Moon
looks over Cat's shoulder." Sleek, sinuous Cat fixes on careless Mouse, but when
"Moon throws off his cloud-cloaks and floods the night with light," Mouse sees
Cat and runs for safety. Disappointed Cat returns to the house, becomes a Day
Cat, and sleeps peacefully in his basket, dreaming of the night hunts to come. The
book's cat is recognizable, eccentric, and occasionally funny, possessing the won-
derful dichotomy of house pet and lion that kids will have seen in the cats they
know. The text is poetic but focused-the tension of Cat's hunt keeps the story
moving even in the occasional moments where the metaphoric imagery perhaps
oversteps the understanding of its audience ("Cat's eyes become glowing saucers
and a small whitefoot mouse is trapped in the middle of them"). Hillenbrand's
luminous illustrations have a smoky stillness in their nocturnal vision (although
the solidity of the clouds may sometimes give a viewer pause), with spiky-edged
foliage and the twin beacons of Cat's eyes lending an enjoyably shivery touch to
the spreads. As a quiet and unusual readaloud, this would be useful on the periph-
eries of Halloween, for a dark afternoon, or as an offbeat bedtime story. DS
RAND, GLORIA 
The Cabin Key; illus. by Ted Rand. 
Harcourt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-15-213884-6 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Snowy-evening endpapers frame this evocative picture of a family's mountain cabin
filled with history and memories, where even hardships (no indoor plumbing)
have their pleasures (fetching water from a creek). Some privations are chosen:
"The cabin got electricity when Mom was about my age, but we don't use it much.
We'd rather burn kerosene lamps like they did in the olden days." Although there
is virtually no plot here, what will hold kids are all the fantasy-building details of a
cozy hideaway, such as cooking steaks in the fireplace, playing records on a wind-
up machine, listening to Mom tell scary stories, and cuddling up to sleep under an
old quilt. Ted Rand's black-crayon and acrylic paintings have plenty of frosty,
woodsy allure, effectively contrasting the cold night and the warm fire, and while
his depiction of the little-girl narrator is a bit sweetsy, readers will wish they were
in her place, with their own little house in the woods. RS
ROBINSON, BARBARA 
The Best School Year Ever. HarperCollins, 1994 
117p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023043-6 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023039-8 
$14.00 
R Gr. 4-6
The six demon Herdmans, introduced in the perennially popular The Best Christ-
mas Pageant Ever (BCCB 12/72), return to wreak havoc, and although by now
they should be old enough to hold political office, the storyteller's liberty has sus-
pended time at the Herdman battleground, Woodrow Wilson School. Their ex-
ploits are as wickedly creative as before: setting off community panic at a gala
64 * THE BULLETIN
laundromat opening, for instance, or coaching a second grader to crack walnuts
against his forehead until he passes out. Sixth-grader Imogene Herdman has singled
out Howard McCluskey, the toddler brother of a classmate, for her special atten-
tion, "borrowing" him, decorating his bald pate with permanent marker, and ex-
hibiting him ("See the Amazing Tattooed Baby! 25 cents"). But through Howard's
dependence on his gross but beloved blanket, the reader glimpses a tender spot
under Imogene's spiny armor: she secretly sympathizes with this blanket attach-
ment and in her bristly fashion champions him against all classmates who would
part him from his rag ("You leave that blanket alone ... or I'll wrap your whole
head in chewing gum so tight they'll have to peel it off along with all your hair and
your eyebrows and your lip skin and everything!"). Although this title lacks the
tightly focused story line of Christmas Pageant, Robinson again tacitly suggests
that readers pity these neglected brats even while they cheer their antics. EB
ROCHELLE, 
BELINDA 
When Jo Louis Won the Title; illus. by Larry
Johnson. 
Houghton, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-66614-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-7 yrs
"I don't want to be the new girl in a new neighborhood at a new school," says Jo
Louis to her understanding grandfather. While she's worried about lots of things,
her real fear is that they'll make fun of her name, so her grandfather tells her a
story: when he first came to Harlem from Mississippi, he encountered jubilant
celebration in the streets at the news of Joe Louis' winning the World Heavy-
weight Championship ("It was a special night, my first night in the big city, and
Joe Louis won the fight"), and he met his wife-to-be, Jo Louis' grandmother, that
night. Jo's newfound pride is enhanced when her seatmate at the new school says
admiringly, "Wow, what a great name!" It seems a little odd that no one had told
Jo Louis the story of her name before, especially if she had already been teased
about it, and kids unfamiliar with the original Joe Louis may need more informa-
tion than the book provides. Nonetheless, this is a cozy intergenerational story
about pride and connections. The near-poetry of the text missteps occasionally
("His words were like wings and other things") but generally spins its storytelling
web effectively. Johnson's paintings, controlled by strong brushstrokes of color
rather than by line, take the viewer into Jo Louis' and her grandfather's worlds
with cozy close-ups and full-page bleeds; the book has cleverly situated the tete-a-
tte on the front steps, a location that few books exploit and that many kids spent
a great deal of time on. This will be an effective prompt for many family and how-
you-got-your-name stories, and many youngsters, especially reading with relatives,
will appreciate the loving evocation of bonds to kin and history. DS
SABUDA, ROBERT 
The Christmas Alphabet; written and illus. by Robert
Sabuda. 
Orchard, 1994 
14p
ISBN 0-531-06857-9 
$19.95 
R* 
Allages
Pop-up and tasteful are not two words you'll often find in the same sentence, but
Sabuda's lift-the-flap alphabet book offers both surprise and elegance. Softly col-
ored doors, one per letter, open to reveal crisp, white, three-dimensional motifs
from the Christmas season: Angel, Bell, Candle... Xmas, Yule Log, Zzzzzz (Santa
sleeping after his Christmas chores). The engineering is ever ingenious, with the
Bell tolling in a steeple; a Gift box enclosing a kitten; Joy, in the form of a star,
leaping into the sky. The uniform whiteness of the pop-ups calls attention to the
OCTOBER 1994 
* 65
structure, cutting, and layering of the pieces; the book is a model not only for how
pop-ups work but why they work, surprising the eye with the jump from two to
three dimensions. While the book is probably too fragile for library circulation,
it's perfect for lap use or around-the-tree perusal. Go ahead-treat yourself. RS
SAN Souci, ROBERT D., ad. 
More Short and Shivery: Thirty Terrifying Tales; illus.
by Katherine Coville and Jacqueline Rogers. 
Delacorte, 1994 
163p
ISBN 0-385-32102-3 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Transmogrified snakes, vengeful ghosts, seductive but lethal spirits-all these and
more appear in this followup to Short and Shivery Tales. As with the previous
volume, the tales here are drawn from a wide variety of locations, including Japan,
Russian, Britain, and the U.S. San Souci's retellings are more literary than el-
emental, which tends to make the tales into short stories rather than sinister yarns
(the retelling of the classic urban legend "The Boyfriend's Death" as "Knock ...
Knock... Knock," for instance, is still compelling but far less ominous); the use of
dialect sometimes makes a story denser rather than more atmospheric. The pan-
ethnicity of the collection, however, makes for entertaining breadth, and the sto-
ries will make good readalouds for older kids on a dark and thundery afternoon.
San Souci's exemplary and complete notes on the stories appear in the back of the
book. The occasional black-and-white illustrations provide some eerie visual en-
tertainment. DS
SCRIBNER, VIRGINIA 
Gopher Draws Conclusions; illus. by Janet Wilson. 
Viking,
1994 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-670-85660-6 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Gopher (of Gopher Takes Heart, BCCB 3/93) is back, and he's got a big problem:
he draws a picture of a dinosaur-robot for a contest, but instead of entering it he
gives it to his friend Kevin; now the drawing, with Kevin's name as artist, has won
the contest and the $25 prize. Kevin doesn't acknowledge the theft, and Gopher's
fury leads him to retaliate by stealing Fried Clyde, the cherished skateboard that
Kevin purchased with his ill-gotten contest gains. Eventually the underlying friend-
ship of the two boys, Kevin's little sister, and their consciences bring them back
together, with Gopher even getting a pet snake out of the deal. Scribner again
shows her understanding of emotional intensity and combines it with a easygoing
and readable style; this is a wronged-and-revenged drama nearly a la Greek trag-
edy, with the temptation, betrayal, and guilt all too clear to readers-the scene
where Gopher sits in stunned silence as the teacher praises Kevin's artwork to the
whole class will make a strong impression. Both Gopher and Kevin are good kids
and both are capable of terrible deeds; young readers who might miss that point in
stories on a more global scale will have no trouble understanding it-and empa-
thizing with the characters-here. DS
SHREVE, SUSAN 
Lucy Forever, Miss Rosetree, and the Stolen Baby; illus. by Eric Jon
Nones. 
Tambourine, 1994 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-0-688-12479-8 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Lucy Childs and Rosie Treeman, also known as Lucy Forever and Miss Rosetree,
Shrinks (BCCB 6/87), return to solve another problem. Lucy, at eleven still an
66 
* THE BULLETIN
only child, has always wanted a sibling, and she's thrilled that her parents are
adopting the baby that was recently abandoned at a local hospital. Baby Emma,
however, is kidnapped from under Lucy's nose and held for ransom, whereupon
Lucy and Rosie set out to find and recover her. Shreve is a gifted writer about
human dynamics and daily life, which is why the implausible plot rings true and
seems adventurous rather than melodramatic. The drama of the situation and the
determination of the girls under duress (Lucy, too, is eventually kidnapped, and
Rosie mounts a rescue) makes for solid, desirable action, while the easy detail of
the plucky pair's friendship is as appealing here as in the first book, although their
psychiatric practice is falling off a little these days. Shreve never mentions the
foiled kidnappers' fate, which may leave questions in the minds of some, but that
glitch is overshadowed by our heroines' victory and Lucy's happy sisterhood. Re-
viewed from an unillustrated galley. DS
SKURZYNSKI, GLORIA 
Zero Gravity. Bradbury, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-02-782925-1 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Readers drawn to the topsy-turvy astronaut on this volume's cover may expect a
book about space flight... and they'll be half right. A fluent essay on the relation-
ship between gravitational pull and centrifugal effect actually constitutes the first
half of the book, and it is not for the impatient scanner. Statements such as "All
objects fall toward the Earth at the same speed, no matter how big or heavy they
are" may seem misleading or even false until the complete explanation is in place,
and that explanation sometimes takes several pages to develop thoroughly. But
those who stick with the argument, which is enlivened and illuminated by clear
photos, helpful diagrams, and an appended glossary, will be well prepared to ap-
preciate the second half-a study ofzero-g on space shuttle astronauts. Skurzynski
employs careful wording and precise vocabulary to avoid or debunk misconcep-
tions about zero-g and shuttle travel ("Shuttles never-ever-travel beyond the
pull of Earth's gravity;" "Zero-g does not mean that gravity doesn't affect the
shuttle"), and she frequently interjects comparisons with gravitational effect on
Earth. Although many of the kid-pleasing facts about life aboard the shuttle can
be found elsewhere (see especially Sally Ride's To Space and Back, BCCB 6/94),
integration of hard science with this popular topic is particularly well handled
here. Although photos are not captioned, photo acknowledgments which precede
the text do name the astronauts and their missions, providing leads for readers
who want to fly off on their own research projects. EB
SOBOL, RICHARD 
Governor: In the Company of Ann W Richards, Governor of
Texas; written and illus. with photographs by Richard Sobol. 
Cobblehill,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-525-65194-2 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
"Being Governor is the best job in the world," says Ann Richards, and this
photodocumentary shows her working hard. The text describes the workings of
her office, her packed schedule, and her occasional recreations as photos show one
of our more photogenic governors making speeches, laboring in the capitol build-
ing, and playing with her grandchildren. The book is nonpartisan in tone, and if
it's somewhat adulatory, enough of the wit of Ann Richards shines through to
make the admiration understandable (in response to the question "How do you
maintain your weight?" Richards responds, "I buy larger sizes"), although her words
OCTOBER 1994 
* 67
are oddly both italicized and placed in quotes. There's not much information
about Richards' pre-gubernatorial life, so this is not so much a biography as a
picture of a governorship; that picture, however, is lively and intriguing, and kids
will see from it that this job might well be worth having. Ann Richards provides
the book's foreword; a brief "Getting to Know Ann Richards" section and a page
of "More Facts about the Governor" are appended. DS
SPRINGER, NANCY 
Toughing It. Harcourt, 1994 
[14 4 p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200008-9 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200011-9 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 8-10
When his brother Dillon is murdered with a booby-trapped shotgun, sixteen-year-
old Tuff must deal with shock, horror, and the loss of the most important person
in his life. Foul-mouthed Shawn has gotten his nickname Tuff as a child and is
determined to "kill somebody, not to cry." His life to this point has been bleak,
living with a mother he freely terms a "slut," with her other illegitimate children he
calls "the brats," and with her "old man" who clearly hates Tuff and Dillon. He
dreams about his unknown father, and, after Dillon dies, his mother finally reveals
his father's name and whereabouts. Although readers keep turning the pages to
solve the twin mysteries of who killed Dillon and who Tuffs father really is, the
book is more a coming-of-age story as Tuff comes to terms with his life and rela-
tionships. Springer's fast pace never lags a moment, and the characters are quickly
and vividly drawn. However, she sets up a very messy situation for her main
character, and she resolves it all, from Dillon's murder to his funeral, in an ab-
surdly short span of time. By the end of the book, the murderers are caught,
Shawn has developed some sympathy for his mother, he has established a bond
with his younger brother, he has realized he really likes a girl from school, he has
found a father-figure, and he has said good-bye to his beloved older brother. Any-
one who has endured the loss of an important person knows that grief continues to
knock you sideways unexpectedly for months to come, not days, and the message
to young readers here is far too pat. SDL
STANLEY, DIANE 
Cleopatra; written by Diane Stanley and Peter Vennema; illus
by Diane Stanley. 
Morrow, 1994 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10414-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10413-4 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The talented picture-book-biography team of Stanley and Vennema here take on
one of their most romantic subjects: the famed Cleopatra. The text describes her
life and its dramas, including her return to power in Egypt with the help of Julius
Caesar, her long affair with him, her union with Mark Antony, her questionable
behavior in the naval battle that Rome waged against Egypt, and, finally, her memo-
rable suicide after her capture and Antony's death. 2000-year-old anecdotes being
hard to come by, there is less a sense of the character of this subject than in the
authors' other works; nonetheless, the book does a good job of expanding a leg-
endary figure into an important historical personage and placing her into context
of both past and present. Stanley's flat, stylized art is sometimes a little too flat
here, and the colors sometimes lack shading and subtlety, but the historical re-
search shows through in the details, including the decor, tilework, and even
Cleopatra's face. The tile-style cover portrait and the subject will lure readers, who
68 
* 
THE BULLETIN
will find out more about the lady than most people know. An explanatory preface,
a note on ancient sources, a map of Egypt and the Roman provinces, a pronuncia-
tion guide, and a list of adult and children's books for further reading are included.
DS
STEELE, PHILIP 
Food 6d Feasts in Ancient Rome.
See review under Dawson, p. 41.
SUN, CHYNG FENG 
Mama Bear; illus. by Lolly Robinson. 
Houghton,
1994 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-395-63412-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
Mei-Mei yearns for the huge bear in the store window, but Mother's earnings
from her job at ChefWong's restaurant must first be used to fix the heater. Mei-
Mei's argument-that a soft and warm bear would keep them both more comfort-
able than a heater-fails to convince her mother, and so the pair begin to save their
coins. To make the glass vase fill faster, the enterprising little girl sells the almond
cookies she has received from her mother's employer. And then comes the happy
ending-but probably not the one young listeners will expect. Their savings still
don't match the price of the bear, but when Mother tickles and cuddles her teary-
eyed daughter and asks, "Am I soft? ... Am I warm?" Mei-Mei laughs again and
agrees, "Hey, you are my mama bear." For listeners who are not satisfied by this
cozy ending, hope remains. In the final frame, a sign taped to the store window
advertises Mei-Mei's services as a toy-sitter, suggesting that the bear might find its
home yet. Translucent line-and-wash pictures are uncluttered and carefully com-
posed. The grays and beiges which temper Robinson's palette are quite soothing
and harmonize well with the gentle tone of the tale. Early primary grade teachers
might consider comparing this Chinese-American story with Williams' A Chair
for My Mother (BCCB 12/82), which shares the theme of mother and daughter
saving for a coveted item but contrasts sharply both in outcome and visual presen-
tation. EB
TUCKER, KATHY 
Do Pirates Take Baths?; illus. by Nadine Bernard
Westcott. 
Whitman, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-1696-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
Through Tucker's thirteen brief, bouncy verses, buccaneer wanna-bes can explore
their career choice from job interview ("You show the captain,/ who picks the
crew,/ that you're a special case-/ that you can run/ and kick and climb/ and
make a fearsome face"), through workplace conditions (refer to "Do Pirates Have
Pets?"), to remuneration (under "How Do Pirates Divide the Gold?"). Any little
employment concerns left unanswered by Tucker's text are addressed by the host
of goofy, line-and-watercolor cartoon pirates who play pin-the-tale-on-the-whale
and caper about in their skivvies when they're not diligently swabbing the deck,
capturing a ship, or unearthing treasure. The question-and-answer format and a
large map presume a non-fiction authority that won't fool the audience for a minute,
but will add to their fun. A good scratch for any story hour crowd itching for some
silliness. EB
OCTOBER 1994 
* 69
WESTALL, ROBERT 
Christmas Spirit: Two Stories; illus. by John Lawrence. 
Farrar,
1994 
[160p]
ISBN 0-374-31250-5 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
These two short stories by the late Robert Westall appear here in their first Ameri-
can publication. In "The Christmas Ghost" a boy eagerly anticipates Christmas in
his small English factory town, but when he sees a ghost of ill-omen, the Christmas
of all is threatened. "The Christmas Cat" is the story an old woman tells of one of
her youthful Christmases, when she was sent to stay with her uncle the vicar; he
was ruled with an iron and self-serving rod by his housekeeper until a cheeky local
boy, a stray cat, and the narrator restored the proper and joyful order of things.
Both stories display Westall's gift for atmospheric particularity and for just plain
yarning; the use of seasonal themes and the tone of both stories are deftly con-
trolled, with enough suspense and plot for interest but with conclusions of un-
forced rejoicing and good will. Fans of Yuletide cheer who resist the saccharinity
of many literary Christmas sweets will relish this original duo. Each story is bro-
ken up into chapters, so one might quite easily make this a series of holiday read-
alouds. DS
WESTRAY, KATHLEEN 
Picture Puzzler; written and illus. by Kathleen
Westray. 
Ticknor, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-395-70130-9 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
In her previous volume A Color Sampler (BCCB 9/93), Westray introduced a few
of the tricks that color juxtaposition plays on the eye; here she expands that theme
into an exploration of optical illusions achieved by manipulating color, line, shape,
and space. Many of the featured illusions can easily be found in other works on
the subject: gray dots which appear at the white interstices between dark squares,
parallel lines that seem to tilt due to the skewed diagonal lines along their edges,
and the ubiquitous face/vase illusion. As with her previous work, this title's suc-
cess relies not on novelty but on Westray's concise explanations, which are adroitly
geared to the age level of her audience, and her clean and attractive illustrations
(unfortunately on thin paper), which this time are based on Pennsylvania Dutch
decorative motifs. The concentric circles which seem to rotate are wheels on a
stenciled flower cart; the example of a reversible image is the Fraktur cover--or is
it the inside?--of a family record book. Young children who are intrigued by the
computer-generated stereograms now in vogue, but who can't quite get the knack
of them, will especially enjoy a romp in this optical playground and may even
learn a thing or two. EB
WILLARD, NANCY 
An Alphabet ofAngels; written and illus. with photographs by
Nancy Willard. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1994 
[64 p]
ISBN 0-590-48480-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
Illustrating a whimsical A-to-Z sequence of rhyming couplets, pretty photographs
show angel dolls and figurines hovering benevolently among their particular charges:
"The angel of oranges shakes them all free./ The angel of planets is small as a bee."
The poem has the sort of artless charm that Willard often does so well, but the
whimsy needs bridling. 
Why is the angel of planets bee-sized? Why does the
"angel of games" let "nobody pass"? (The facing photograph of an angel above an
70 
* THE BULLETIN
empty checkerboard offers no elucidation.) It's all more than a bit precious, but
kids may enjoy the lilt of the rhyme and the mystery of the visual images which
place a Christmas tree's worth of ornamental angels amidst a host of eccentric
backdrops and realia. RS
WINKLEMAN, KATHERINE K. 
Firehouse; illus. by John S. Winkleman. 
Walker,
1994 
[32 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8317-1 
$15.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8316-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
Firehouses and the firefighters who work there are explored in this cheerful picture
book by a first-time author/artist married couple. Winkleman addresses the dif-
ferences between urban and rural firefighters, noting that "while some volunteer
firefighters might fight five fires in one year, city firefighters often fight fires five
times-or more--each day!" The changes in firehouses, which date back to the
use of horses, are discussed, and Winkleman throws in some tidbits about fire
poles, Dalmatians, and the ways water gets to a fire. Occasionally the book is
overinclusive, such as when we find out that firefighters like to recycle. Two fire
prevention features are included: a diagram of a house riddled with fire hazards
(the book's high point), and a list of what to do in case of fire (with a grammatical
error-children are told to "shout loud"). The illustrations are bright and infor-
mal, but the artist's strong suit is clearly buildings; the people, unfortunately, are
weakly executed-they are awkward, misshapen, and simply ugly. Other flaws
include little organization of the text, and a book design with poor use of space, a
person's face running through the gutter, and a complete lack of any helpful label-
ing or subject headings. SDL
WORMSER, RICHARD 
Hoboes: Wandering in America, 1870-1940. Walker,
1994 
136 p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8280-9 
$18.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8279-5 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 6-12
Wormser here gives voice to the other side of the tracks depicted in Morris' The
Harvey Girls (BCCB 9/94); his subject is the hoboes, tramps, and bums (a hierar-
chy strictly regarded by the hoboes themselves if no one else) that took advantage
of the expanding railroads of the late nineteenth and earlier twentieth centuries to
find variously work, booze, trouble, and escape. While Wormser acknowledges
the difficult and dangerous lives these (mostly) men led, his account edges toward
romanticism here and there, helped along by the frequent quotes of hobo poetry:
"You call me Christ Jesus with intelligence slim/ But I was a rebel called Jerusalem
Slim/ And my brother: the outcast, the rebel the tramp/ And not the religious, the
scab or the scamp." It's a vivid portrait, and the anecdotes about hobo toil and
trouble are illuminated by Wormser's discussion of the changing social conditions
that at first brought the hoboes to the fore (railroads, the end of the Civil War) and
what diminished their numbers in the end (the automobile, the Depression) as
well as their connection to such political organizations such as the Wobblies. There's
an index and chapter-by-chapter bibliography but no source notes; black-and-
white historical photos bring immediacy to the history. RS
OCTOBER 1994 
* 71
YOLEN, JANE 
The Girl in the Golden Bower; illus. by Jane Dyer. 
Little,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-96894-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A magic comb, a mysterious beast, an innocent maiden and a wicked sorceress are
some of the traditional fairy tale elements Yolen weaves together in this original
tale. A child is born to a woodsman and his wife, whom he had found wandering
lost in the woods. They name their daughter Aurea, but, after their death, the
sorceress renames her Curry, because of Aurea's habit of grooming the woodland
animals with a comb she has inherited from her mother. The sorceress eventually
realizes that the comb is the charm she has been searching for, but when she at-
tempts to starve Curry to death so she can "cut the comb from the dead child's
hair," the animals build the sleeping girl a nest and use the comb to create a golden
bower. Yolen's phrases are lyrical, with some powerful passages and a particularly
poignant ending, but many parts of the story are summarized so quickly, particu-
larly in the opening, that the story is confusing and less than satisfying. Dyer's
watercolors saturate each page in glowing golds with touches of green; romantic
curves, curls, and tendrils are everywhere. The pictures are lovely, but one's eyes
may yearn for more variety by the end. One double-page spread has only a border
accompanying the text, but the story is sufficiently involving at this point that
groups may be willing to listen without pictures. SDL
YOUNG, ED 
Little Plum; ad. and illus. by Ed Young. 
Philomel, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22683-4 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
"Small as I am, there is nothing I cannot do." This is no idle boast from seed-sized
Little Plum, who with quick wit and agility recovers the poor villagers' livestock
that was stolen by a greedy lord, and foils that evil lord's attempt at revenge. Young
bases his retelling of this Chinese folktale on two versions from recent collections,
neither of which, presumably, is available in English translation. The narration
moves as nimbly as Little Plum himself; even the youngest listeners will appreciate
the tensely paced rescue of the animals from under the guards' noses and cheer as
the mighty mite yanks the villain's whiskers, calling down a rain of blows "on the
lord's own chin." Young has a field day playing with perspectives in his ruggedly
textured pastels: sometimes Little Plum is rendered as a mere speck, cupped in his
father's hand; then suddenly he looms large overhead, hang-gliding on a leaf over
the city walls. While the minuscule images of Little Plum present an obstacle to
sharing this title with a group, children will delight in privately searching the pic-
tures' crooks and corners for the tiny hero. A good match with any of the "Peach
Boy" stories (see Hook's Peach Boy, reviewed 4/92) or with the Changs' The Cricket
Warrior, reviewed above. EB
* J
72 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Carter, Betty. Best Booksfor YoungAdults: The Selections, the History, the Romance.
Young Adult Library Services Association/ALA, 1994. 21 4 p. ISBN 0-8389-3439-
0. Papered. $25.00
Librarians working with teens will find the "Selections" section of this book-a
complete annotated list of every Best Books for Young Adults selection from 1966
to 1993-fabulously useful. Even better, though, are the witty and illuminating
introductory chapters Betty Carter, a former chair of BBYA, on the history, meth-
ods, and madness of this perennially controversial teen book list and selection aid.
She quotes many research studies, with a graph, for example, showing the rise and
fall of the percentage of adult books selected for BBYA; another handy survey
shows "Repeat Best Books for Young Adult Authors," with champion Gary Paulsen
weighing in with eleven titles chosen for the list over the years. An interview with
Booklist YA editors (and committee consultants) Barbara Duree and Sally Estes
provides perspective on the concerns and squabbles of the committee over the
years, and Carter gives plenty of space to the Eternal Questions: How long should
the list be? Should teenagers have a say in the selections? Is it a Best Book if
"nobody" is going to read it? Veteran BBYA'ers (such as your reviewer) can in-
dulge their nostalgia, aspirants can see what they're in for, selectors and library
school students can get a well-organized picture of what "Best" has meant over the
past quarter-century in young adult literature. RS
Trousdale, Ann M., ed. Give a Listen: Stories of Storytelling in School; edited by
Ann M. Trousdale, Sue A. Woestehoff, and Marni Schwartz. NCTE, 1994. 136 p.
ISBN 0-8141-1846-1. Paper ed. $12.95
English teachers (elementary through college) share their classroom storytelling
experiences and experiments in a series of seventeen primarily anecdotal essays.
Included are both stories about using stories to teach, and stories about using sto-
ries to learn, as instructors and students tell and listen in turn, awakening possibili-
ties all around. The tone and the anecdotes are inspirational, if sometimes
self-indulgent; while would-be tellers won't learn how here (an annotated reading
list does point to practical handbooks) they will learn why, and the accounts of
different classroom (and playground) scenarios will be of value to novices and
experts both. RS
Staff Note: Assistant Editor Deborah Stevenson's article, "'If You Read This Last
Sentence It Won't Tell You Anything': Postmodernism, Self-Referentiality, and
The Stinky Cheese Man" appears in the Spring 1994 issue of Children's Literature
Association Quarterly.
OCTOBER 1994 
* 73
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Aborigines: Oodgeroo
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Campbell
Africa-stories: Olaleye
African Americans-fiction:
McKissack; Myers
African Americans-stories: Kroll;
Lester; Rochelle
Alaska-fiction: George
Alcoholism-fiction: Donovan
ALPHABET BOOKS: Sabuda;
Willard
Angels-poetry: Willard
Art: Bang; Bowen; Desimini;
Sabuda
Asian Americans-stories: Kroll;
Narahashi
Australia-folklore: Oodgeroo
BEDTIME STORIES: Bang;
Desimini; Gerson; Powell; Rand
BIOGRAPHIES: Fritz; Gherman;
Giblin; Johnston; Kossman;
Krull; O'Connor; Oodgeroo;
Sobol; Stanley
Birds: London; Peters
Brazil-folklore: Gerson
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Grimm
Brothers-fiction: Bosse
Bullies-fiction: McClain
Cats-stories: Powell
Child welfare: Freedman
China-fiction: Bosse
China-folklore: Chang; Young
Christmas-fiction: McKissack;
Westall
Christmas-stories: Alavedra; Hall
Christmas: Sabuda
Colonial life: Bowen
CONCEPT BOOKS: Charles;
Helldorfer; Sabuda; Willard
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Marsden
Current events: Ashabranner
Dance-Isadora; O'Connor
Death-fiction: Donovan; For-
ward; Springer
Dinosaurs: Cole
Divorce-fiction: Duffey
Dogs-fiction: Donovan
Dolls-stories: Kirkpatrick
Ethics and values: McClain
Ethiopia-folklore: Kurtz
Everglades: Lourie
FANTASY: Forward; McEwan
Farm life-stories: DeFelice;
Kirkpatrick
Fathers and sons-fiction: Duffey
Firefighting: Winkleman
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Chang; Gerson;
Greger; Grimm; Isadora; Kurtz;
Lester; Olaleye; Oodgeroo;
Yolen; Young
Food and eating: Dawson
Friends-fiction: Donovan;
Scribner; Shreve
Friends-stories: Kroll
FUNNY STORIES: Maguire;
Pinkwater; Robinson
Government: Sobol
Grandfathers-fiction: Forward
Grandfathers-stories: Bunting;
Rochelle
74 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Halloween: Lasky
Health: Harris
HISTORICAL FICTION: Bosse;
Bowen; Foreman; George;
Murphy
History, ancient: Dawson, Stanley
History, Middle Ages: Dawson
History, U.S.: Bowen; Freedman;
Fritz; Giblin; Johnson;
McKissack; Madsen; Wormser
Homelessness-fiction: Myers
Homelessness: Wormser
Homosexuality-fiction: Donovan;
McClain
Houses-stories: Desimini
Insects-stories: Chang
Kidnapping-fiction: Shreve
Language arts: Juster
Latinos-stories: Bunting
Letter-writing-fiction: Marsden
Literature, American: Fritz;
Johnston
Literature: Krull
LOVE STORIES: Donovan
Mexico-folklore: Greger
Mexico: Lasky
Mormons: Madsen
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
McClain
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Sun
MYSTERY STORIES: Pevsner;
Springer
Native Americans: George; Lourie
Nature study: London; Lourie;
Peters
Nigeria-folklore: Mollel
Night-stories: Gerson
Occupations: Winkleman
Optical illusions: Westray
Peace Corps: Ashabranner
Photography: Freedman
Pigs-stories: Lies
Pirates-poetry: Tucker
POETRY: Graham; Hamanaka;
Helldorfer; Tucker; Willard
Railroads: Wormser
Reading aloud: Graham; Krull;
Pinkwater; Robinson; San
Souci; Westall
Reading, beginning: DeFelice;
Graham
Reading, easy: Cole; Graham;
O'Connor; Pinkwater
Reading, family: Johnson;
Kirkpatrick; Narahashi; Novak;
Rand; Rochelle; Sabuda; Sun
Reading, reluctant: Campbell;
Cole; Elfman; Juster; Marsden;
Myers; Pevsner; San Souci;
Springer
Religious education: Alavedra;
Madsen
Russia-history: Kossman
Safety education: Winkleman
SCARY STORIES: San Souci
School-fiction: Maguire;
McClain; Myers; Robinson;
Scribner
Science: Cole; Gherman;
Skurzynski; Westray
Seasons-poetry: Helldorfer
Sex education: Harris
SHORT STORIES: McEwan; San
Souci; Westall
Slavery-fiction: McKissack
Slavery: Johnson
Social studies: Ashabranner;
Freedman
Space flight: Skurzynski
Spiders-fiction: Maguire
Story hour: Alavedra; DeFelice;
Desimini; Gerson; Hamanaka;
Helldorfer; Isadora; Kroll;
Lester; Lies; London; Mollel;
Narahashi; Novak; Olaleye;
Powell; Rochelle; Sun; Tucker;
Yolen; Young
Television-stories: Novak
Texas: Sobol
Thanksgiving: Bowen
Vacations-stories: Rand
Water-poetry: Graham
West, the: Madsen
Wolves-fiction: George
Women's studies: Fritz; Johnston;
O'Connor; Sobol
Work-stories: Bunting; Kroll; Sun
Work: Freedman
World War I-fiction: Foreman
World War II-fiction: Murphy
"Two titles about a winning duo that
will strike a chord with youngsters.
They can easily stand alone, but reading them
together enhances both experiences. I Can is
told from the perspective of an older brother.... 
A
Me Too chronicles the younger sibling's efforts 
CN
to keep up with her brother. Wonderful water- 
.
iuN
color pictures nignlignt
the love and friendship that the siblings share."
-School 
Library Jour
Written and illustrated by Susan
Grades: PreS-1
ISBN: 1-56458-197-7 (I Can)
ISBN: 1-56458-198-5 (Me Too)
Price: $9.95 each
r"i
florlin,, Kindrslrzv PhlishinQ Inc * qS Madi~n Avpniip *N
Dorling Kindersley books are distributed by Houghton Mifflin Company For information call 1-800-225-3362
Ninety-nine Gnats,
Nits, and Nibblers
May R. Berenbaum
Illustrated by John Parker Sherrod
"This delightful collection of
99 insect cameos is designed to
enlighten the lay person about a
few of our most abundant fellow
voyagers on this planet. . ..
This illuminating book may
turn the disgust with which
many people greet these
fascinating creatures
to curiosity and admira-
tion." -
Library Journal
Illus. Paper, $10.95
Order toll free 800/545-4703
I~ ~~~~~~ Unvriyo 
liosP 
rs 
135SutOa 
i(c 
-C 
mpý,L
29r,&qta "
"There is no book more important
to me than this one." - Alice Walker
Their Eyes Were
Watching God
ZORA NEALE HURSTON
Foreword by Ruby Dee
Introduction by Sherley Anne Williams
Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney
Upon its initial publication in 1937 this
novel about a proud, independent black
woman was generally dismissed by male
reviewers. It was out of print for over
thirty years. Since its reissue by the
University of Illinois Press in 1978, Their
Eyes Were Watching God has been the
most widely read and highly acclaimed
novel in the canon of African-American
literature. With this publication of a richly
illustrated deluxe edition, a novel by a black
woman is accorded treatment as a classic.
"More than just an ordinary reprint ....
A celebration of a long-neglected novel
and author who are finally receiving their
deserved recognition." -
Library Journal
Illus. $24.95
Order toll free 800/545-4703
Unvrst 
of 
Ilios 
Prs
Mary Molloy
Fellowship
IN CHILDREN'S
WORKING FICTION
$4,000
accepting manuscripts for
middle readers, ages 8-12
JUDGES: BROWNDEER PRESS
An Imprint of Hartcourt Brace Children's Books
ENTRY DEADLINE:
DECEMBER 1, 1994
Send S.A.S.E. for guidelines
and application to:
the heekin gioup founibation
Children's Literature Division
P.O. Box 209 * Middlebury, VT 05753
the
heekin
goaup
foundation
Children's
Literature Division
Announces
call for entries for the
* Kirkus Reviews pointer
MARY STOLZ
"Another exquisitely crafted visit with Thomas and his grandfather
[see below]. Thomas receives some memorable birthday gifts ...
[including] an awed interview with Coco Grimes, irascible 90+
veteran of the Negro Baseball Leagues. Stolz's characters ... work
and speak together in an atmosphere of mutual respect freshened
by understated humor.... A rich, wise, and tender story from a
treasured writer." -Kirkus 
Reviews
Ages 8-11. $14.00TR (0-06-024232-9); $13.89LB (0-06-024233-7)
Mary Stolz's earlier books about
Thomas and Grandfather
STORM IN THE NIGHT
Full-color picture by Pat Cummings
1989 Coretta Scott King Honor Book
for Illustration (ALA)
Ages 5-8. $15.00TR (0-06-025912-4)
$14.89LB (0-06-025913-2)
$4.95PB (0-06-443256-4)
GO FISH
Pictures by Pat Cummings
Ages 7-11. $13.00TR (0-06-025820-9)
$12.89LB (0-06-025822-5)
$3.95PB (0-06-440466-8)
STEALING HOME
Ages 8-11. $14.00TR (0-06-021154-7)
$13.89LB (0-06-021157-1)
$3.95PB (0-06-440528-1 
S
A HarperCollins Children'sBooks
2
a
£:
s
i 
School Library Journal star
* Kirkus Reviews pointer
-Publishers 
Weekly star
"Noel dreams of being a star in a 'real' ballet, but alas-
in her class production she's only a tree, while arch-rival
Mia is a gingerbread doll... In the end, a surprise awaits
the ambitious tree, [who] finds herself magnanimously
comforting her adversary. A delightful addition to the
annals of young performers."-Kirkus Reviews
"The McMullans have created a charming story... The
final illustration will elicit a gloriously satisfying 'ahhhh'
from readers."-School Library Journal
"Children will call for encores."-Publishers Weekly
Ages 3 up. $15.00TR (0-06-205039-7); $14.89LB (0-06-205040-0)
MICHAEL DI CAPUA BOOKS * HARPERCOLLINS PUBLISHERS
9
__
r 
--~ 
----
II
May-May and Rose, the "Old West" song and dance team, are
back in five new adventures, this time featuring a bad-luck goat, a
talking rock, and a terrible thunderstorm. "This third book about
the famous sisters is just as funny and original as the other two.
The easy-to-read stories [illustrated with bright watercolors] are
great fun and will involve children, but there is also a feeling of
love between these siblings that permeates [them all]." -
SLJ
Ages 4-8. $14.00TR (0-06-021563-1); $13.89LB (0-06-021564-X)
Earlier Golly sisters I Can Read Book" adventures
THE GOLLY SISTERS GO WEST HOORAY FOR THE GOLLY SISTERS!
Full-color pictures by Sue Truesdell 
Full-color pictures by Sue Truesdell
Ages 4-8. $13.89LB (0-06-020884-8) 
Ages 4-8. $14.00TR (0-06-020898-8)
$3.50PB (0-06444132-6) 
$13.89LB (0-06-020899-6); $3.50PB (0-06-444156-3)
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
lllllllllll1llllllir"II~IIIIIILLlllrl~
AMERICA'S FAVORITE SCIENCE
TEACHER TAKES YOU ON THE
MOST AMAZING FIELD TRIP EVER!
September 0-590-44688-6 
$14.95
Ages6-9 
48 pp. 
9" x 7 / "
*"Fastidiously
researched an
exuberantly
presented!"
-Publishers Weekly,
starred review
The Magic 
School 
Bus is a registered trademark of Schol,
B 
P 
The Magic School Bus is a registered trademark of Schol
©1994 by Joanna Cole. Illustrations ©1994 by Bruce Deg
411SCHOLASTIC
b
"PRFECT FOR
SHARING W
TODDI
Little Robin Redbreast
A Mother Goose Rhyme -zz 
Illustrated by Shari Halpern
"This simple little rhyme...is given a bright new look....The
images are bold, filled with brilliant colors, and enhanced
by the textures of the paper and paint... .This one is perfect
for sharing with toddlers... Lap-sit programs will appreci-
ate the generously sized spreads." School Library Journal*
"Wee ones will enjoy the large print and precise cut-paper
collages...A good choice for spring preschool story hours."
Booklist
Trade: $14.95, ISBN 1-55858-247-9 / Library: $14.88, ISBN 1-55858-248-7
Ages 3-5, Grades Pre-K-K, Full-color art throughout
North-South Books
1123 Broadway, Suite 800
New York, NY 10010
Toll-free 800-282-8257
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RErURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
IA 
A* 
»
Air
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
i 
i 
__ ~
.a
· ·
:~ 
;···s~I
S
ý01
