I LL IN
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
j;
C 
T
- "Nix brings his trilogy to a literally
ht 
h" k:L 
.. - l 
I, 
A-4... 
I• A 
.
eac 
-s a 
ng 
conciUIILUonIUII. 
LUI oI 
tplesllUU 
as 
.
..
Prince Sameth and newly proclaimed Abhorsen-in-Waiting Lirael
[confront the] necromancer Hedge and his plot to unleash the
Destroyer.... Terror, courage, bitterness, love, desperation, and
sacrifice all swirl together in an apocalyptic climax [pitting] Life
and Death against the destruction of everything. Breathtaking,
bittersweet, and utterly unforgettable."
W- "[A] riveting
continuation of the story
begun in Sabriel and
Lirael ... this thought-
provoking fantasy [is]
at once an allegory
regarding war and
peace and a testament
to friendship."
-Starred 
review /
Publishers Weekly
Ages 12 up.
$17.99 Tr (0-06-027825-0)
$18.89 Lb (0-06-027826-9)
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 2003
Vol. 56 No. 9
' V
A LOOK INSIDE
347 THE BIG PICTURE
Mack Made Movies written and illus. by Don Brown
348 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
351 * The Second Summer ofthe Sisterhood by Ann Brashares
357 * King of the Mild Frontier: An Ill-AdvisedAutobiography by Chris
Crutcher
364 * The Merlin Conspiracy by Diana Wynne Jones
374 * Mount Olympus Basketball written and illus. by Kevin O'Malley
377 * Fireflies and Midnight by Marilyn Singer; illus. by Ken Robbins
381 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
382 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JMH)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2003 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Don Brown from Mack Made Movies ©2003. Used by permission of Roaring
Brook Press.
MAY 2003 
* 
347
THE BIG PICTURE
Mack Made Movies
written and illus. by Don Brown
Who could have predicted that the hindmost part of a vaudeville horse would
advance to the foremost rank of Hollywood producers? Yet in Don Brown's pic-
ture-book circle of acquaintances, such strides are commonplace. If straitlaced
Victorian spinster Mary Kingsley can jaunt off to West Africa (Uncommon Trav-
eler, BCCB 7/00) and bookish monk Columcille can ignite a war (Across a Dark
and Wild Sea, BCCB 5/02), why shouldn't a no-name, bit part, showbiz wannabe
become one of the founding fathers of Tinseltown? As Brown's story goes, Mack
Sennett's scrabble from Canadian farm to tower office on a movie lot is natural as
can be.
The self-dubbed "King of Comedy" begins his theatrical career with a
string of disappointments, compressed here into a few pages of wry recap. There's
the infamous horse debut, some musical blundering, and, at last, some modest
stage success with slapstick ("Audiences loved it. Mack did, too"). Then, with
Sennett's gamble on the exciting new film industry, the action takes off. Sennett
schleps scenery, directs corny romances, learns the craft, and ultimately establishes
his own studio, where he makes the "goofy, guffawing, golly-gee movies" he loves.
Kids see the Sennett star in action: Mabel Normand pitching a pie, the Keystone
Kops thrown from their car "like water from a shaking dog," Charlie Chaplin as
The Tramp glancing down from his publicity poster at the throng of theater pa-
trons. And although the text concludes with Sennett at the apex of his career
(because the audience, of course, should leave smiling), an endnote admits to the
studio's eventual bankruptcy and Sennett's lengthy retirement.
Brown has been consistently adept at establishing the powerful relation-
ship between his subjects and their surroundings, and most of his explorer and
adventurer biographies have required him to express visually the vulnerability of
tiny but resilient individuals against overpowering backdrops of mountain, jungle,
desert, and sky. Mack Sennett, though, operates in a mundane human milieu,
with no call for artistic sweeps of landscape. Nonetheless, Brown knows right
where Sennett belongs-tucked in among a crush of moviegoers, buried in a crowd
of stagehands and extras, intimately sharing his own story while perched on an
overturned bucket, and often left out of the picture altogether. What could be
more appropriate? The measure of Sennett's success is in the accomplishment of
his actors and the reaction of his audiences, all gloriously realized in Brown's con-
trolled, spidery lines and monochrome watercolor washes. A most dissatisfied
audience regards Sennett's early dance routine with forehead slaps, downed thumbs,
rude "razzberries," and a gallery of facial expressions ranging from ennui to out-
right disgust. In later, happier times, actors plunge head-first into vats of plaster,
slip in puddles, dangle from flagpoles, tumble off"Kop" cars, and, of course, catch
348 
* THE BULLETIN
pies in the face. Brown clearly understands that Sennett's trademark pandemo-
nium must take center stage and that to capture "people chasing people, people
chasing cars, people chasing dogs, dogs chasing people-anything, as long as it was
funny" is to capture the man himself.
It would be nigh impossible to discuss the early days of filmmaking with-
out examining the principle behind the motion-picture camera and some of the
logistical challenges inherent in the recording process, and Brown deftly reduces
the technicalities to a few neatly integrated observations. After noting Sennett's
decision to switch from stage to screen, Brown takes a brief intermission to explain
just what the young man's getting into. A single page of diagrams displays a hand-
cranked camera aimed at a posing pup, a coil of film displaying the dog as it "moves"
through successive celluloid frames, and a man viewing the dog as it goes through
its paces: "The camera captures the action as a series of still pictures. The still
pictures are displayed quickly one after another to give the impression of move-
ment." Any questions? Then please direct your attention to the pointing finger,
and "Flip the pages to watch the dog dance." A quick riffle of the lower-right
corners does indeed set the pup prancing in an effective and entertaining demon-
stration of persistence of vision. Then it's back to the main feature, as Sennett
learns his craft from the bottom up. Simply cranking the camera is something of
an art: "If they were cranked too slowly, the actors on film appeared to jump
around like kangaroos. If cranked too fast, the picture seemed to crawl in slow
motion." Sets are ramshackle and sunlit, staffed with limited personnel; rain can-
cels a day's schedule, and even the boss must handle the grunt work: "I was tele-
phone operator, bookkeeper, actor, director and film cutter. It took a lot of physical
endurance to get through the work. My hair turned white."
Children who are familiar with the Don Brown canon may wonder at
first how Mack Sennett slipped onto his roster of explorers and adventurers, people
who made their mark on foreign soil and even in thin air. Sennett should feel right
at home, though, since "his breakneck pacing left audiences breathless." And that
is exactly what adventurers do. (Imprint information appears on p. 352.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANDERSON, JANET S. 
The Last Treasure. Dutton, 2003 
257p
ISBN 0-525-46919-2 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 5-9
All his life, Ellsworth's father has told him "We're the Smith family... the two of
us. We're all the family we need." Then out of the blue he receives a letter from
a distant cousin, telling him that the extended family needs his help in unraveling
a family mystery. When he arrives at the Square in Smiths Mills, New York, he
begins to unravel a complex family history-his family history-of love and hurt,
joy and loss. John Matthew Smith, the family patriarch, has hidden three trea-
sures among the houses he built for his family and their future children. Two of
the treasures have already been uncovered, each during a time of family financial
MAY 2003 
* 349
crisis. Now the Smiths are in both financial and emotional disarray, with unre-
solved quarrels threatening to dissolve the family altogether. When Ellsworth meets
Jess, a cousin his own age, they join forces to assemble the clues that will enable
them to find the treasure and, more importantly, to put their family back on track.
A suspenseful and intricately crafted mystery with just a hint of the supernatural,
this story is also a repository of Quaker wisdom and intergenerational family val-
ues of forgiveness and care. Reminiscent of the depth and texture of Lucy Boston's
Green Knowe books, Anderson's story of the Square speaks to the role of place and
history in the durability of families. KC
APPELT, KATHI 
Bubba and Beau Go Night-Night; illus. by Arthur
Howard. 
Harcourt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-15-204593-7 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Baby Bubba and hound dog Beau (of Bubba and Beau, BCCB 4/02) are back for
day of errand-running with Big Bubba ("Yep, going bye-bye was better than but-
ter on toast") that ends with a final stop at the Freezee Deluxe for ice cream ("Sis-
ter, those napkins came in handy"), after which they all arrive home to the arms of
Mama Pearl. Big Bubba and Mama Pearl are ready for bed, but not Bubba and
Beau: "No siree, Bob! Going night-night was not the first order of business."
Well, like many mothers before her, Mama Pearl tries everything she can think of,
but finally Big Bubba comes to the rescue. He takes Bubba and Beau bye-bye in
the family truck, where, after a nighttime tour of town, the two unwilling sleepers
are "plumb tuckered out" and fall fast asleep. Howard's watercolor and pencil
images provide a humorous subtext to Appelt's clever, understated text. The illus-
trations make the most of the clean white pages, using the tension between posi-
tive and negative space to good effect. The cowboy-hatted Big Bubba with baby
Bubba over his shoulder and puppy bloodhound Beau under his arm is a study in
the art of comic contrast. The story is divided into mini-chapters of four to six
pages, giving this the look of a chapter book while keeping a simplicity of format
that will please both transitional readers and younger listeners, even as their adult
caregivers do some rueful remembering. JMD
ARRINGTON, FRANCES 
Prairie Whispers. 
Philomel, 2003 
[192p]
ISBN 0-399-23975-8 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Colleen has delivered her premature sister, but "the baby came
too soon and lived less than an hour"; her mother loses consciousness, her little
brother falls asleep, and her father is not at home. On her way to get help from a
midwife, Colleen passes a covered wagon and finds a dying woman who makes her
promise to take care of the healthy baby she has just delivered, gives her a gold
watch and a box of money, and warns her of the baby's cruel father. IfArrington's
setup sounds contrived, her taut writing renders it completely credible. No word
is wasted as this situation develops into a drama of rising suspense, supported by
vividly selective details of setting and characterization. Step by step, conscientious
Colleen is drawn into a web of lies and theft to honor her promise and ensure her
parents' happiness in thinking the baby she has swapped is theirs. Her growing
alienation from her family in the isolated environment of prairie life during the
1860s is as suspenseful as the climactic events, including a rattlesnake's striking her
brother (who discovers the gold watch and threatens to betray her secret) and a
350 
* THE BULLETIN
raging firestorm. What keeps the plot from becoming melodramatic is an un-
swerving but subtle focus on the protagonist's conflict between loyalty to the rigid
moral code she has been taught and fidelity to an innate sense of ethics that ulti-
mately determines her choices. Also nuanced is the character of the cruel father
who suspects that Colleen has taken his money; although it's true that this threat-
ening figure will sacrifice his baby out of greed, he also surprises-once he has his
own box of money back-by returning the money Colleen has stolen to give him:
"Colleen saw a light in O'Brien's eyes. A shadow of something good. Fleeting as
a lone feather caught on a blade of grass, waiting for a sure wind." This is one of
the few cases of figurative language, and young readers will be swept into some
hard realities of the past through identification with complexities of innocence and
guilt that can stir up dread of retribution in their own lives. BH
ASQUITH, Ros 
Babies; illus. by Sam Williams. 
Simon, 2003 
22p
ISBN 0-689-85501-X 
$12.95 
R 6mos-3yrs
If it's true that babies love to look at other babies, then this is the book for them.
Round-headed, dot-eyed infants parade across glossy, heavy-stock paper in this
listy but rhythmic tribute to small fry of all temperaments: "There are big babies/
and little babies,// do-lots and/ do-little babies,// happy babies,/ cross babies,// and
'I'll show you who's boss' babies." Williams' multiracial cast has the casual charm
of Oxenbury's board-book tots, and the combination of comfy, earthtoned images
and giggly rhymes makes this a bouncy lap book. And there's a nifty payoff-after
lauding babies throughout, in the end the text (and the reader aloud) says, "There
are many different babies,/ but I'll tell you something true.// The baby that I love
the best,/ with all my heart, is ... // YOU!" On the inside cover of the book,
opposite the final text, is a Mylar mirror, so the listening baby can see his or her
face. This isn't much more than cute, but it's very cute indeed, and that goes a
long way with teeny-tinies and their doting grownups. JMD
BAILEY, LINDA 
Stanley's Party; illus. by Bill Slavin. 
Kids Can, 2003 
32p
ISBN 1-55337-382-0 
$14.95 
R 6-9 yrs
Left home alone, with a couch just waiting for a pooch to warm it, Stanley the dog
succumbs to temptation and crawls up on the sofa ("The couch was more comfort-
able than he'd ever dreamed"). Since his people are none the wiser on their return,
Stanley gets progressively more daring on successive nights on his own, bopping to
the sound system and raiding the refrigerator. Inevitably, he finally opens the
house up to a wild dog party ("It was the best dog-gone party a dog ever had!"), and
equally inevitably, that's the night his people come home early ("At first, they
didn't say anything. Then they said together, very loud, 'STANLEY! BAD
DOG!'"). The text is somewhat lengthy, but this is no aimless shaggy dog story-
there's specific humor in Stanley's explorations, in his noncommittal but secretly
telling responses to his people (he greets them with "Burp" after his foray into the
fridge), and in the cumulative invitations to and accumulations at the culminating
wingding. Slavin's acrylics have the thickly mottled textures of plaster, but their
lively and exaggerated line is anything but sculpted-bug-eyed, bulbous-nosed (gen-
erally bulbous, actually) Stanley is an amiable everymutt with the most exuberant
line in doggy dancing since Snoopy. The dog party itself has all the decorum of a
frat-house bash, leading up to a priceless discovery scene where a dozen pups freeze
in mid-merriment, peering up aghast at the returning humans. Kids will revel in
MAY 2003 
* 351
the dog party, and they'll yearn to experience the temptations of parental depar-
ture first-hand. DS
BASKIN, NORA RALEIGH 
Almost Home. 
Little, 2003 
[200p]
ISBN 0-316-09313-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Sixth-grader Leah is steeped in bitterness about her situation: after living in rela-
tive happiness with her mother and beloved younger sister, Anne, she was stunned
when her mother left with her new boyfriend and Anne for the west coast, leaving
Leah to her father and stepmother, where she fiercely resists any attempt to suggest
that this is actually her home. Leah is also completely out in the cold at school,
until she hooks up with fellow outsider Will Hiller. Will's different drummer is a
peaceful one, and Leah is drawn to his easygoing imagination and his interest in
drama, which allow her to begin to explore her own creative expression. Though
Baskin pulls her punches a bit by making Leah's abandoning mother actually a
stepmother, the book is otherwise brutally honest about the ability of adults to
treat a loving child as dispensable and the effects of being discarded on that child.
There's also honesty in the portrait of Leah's father, who's misguidedly trying to
help his daughter by giving her space when she's already drowning in it. Leah
herself is palpably and understandably angry, taking believable pleasure in punish-
ing her father's new wife even if she doesn't really understand why ("I was defi-
nitely winning. But what I didn't know"); in contrast and credible complication,
Leah is also grief-stricken and yearning, desperately missing her little sister (the
book offers a particularly tender acknowledgment of the importance of sibling
bonds) and ready to connect with the accepting Will. This is a respectful and
affecting portrait of a girl discovering family strengths as well as family weaknesses.
DS
BRASHARES, ANN 
The Second Summer ofthe Sisterhood. Delacorte, 2003 
[38 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90852-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72934-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
The Traveling Pants, those miraculous jeans that fit each wearer to a "T" and seem
to conjure life-changing events (The Sisterhood ofthe Traveling Pants, BCCB 12/01),
are off to an unpromising start this summer. Lena's stuck clerking in a clothing
store; Carmen's babysitting and seeing a guy she can't quite seem to focus on;
Tibby's off at film school, courting the attention of a fellow student with
considerable talent and an overload of attitude; and poor Bridget, who's put on so
much depression-induced weight that she can't even zip The Pants up, is sweating
in Alabama, getting to know the grandmother her father will have nothing to do
with. So disappointing are The Pants, in fact, that the girls barely keep them for
the week before shipping them off to the next destination. Ah, there's still some
magic left, though, as Carmen's mother finds out when she borrows them for a
date herself. It's the Motherhood of the Sisterhood, if you will, that becomes the
unifying motif in this outing, as each girl learns that there's more to Mom than she
thought. Tibby's mother really does care for her as much as she does for the
younger siblings; Carmen's mother is still a vibrant babe with a shot at romance;
Lena's mother had a past amour that threatened her marriage; Bridget's deceased
mother was as deeply beloved as she was intensely troubled. This is no Ya Ya
Redux, though; the girls still hold center stage, floundering in romances, wrestling
352 
* THE BULLETIN
with extra-Sisterly friendships, and relying on the unwavering love and support of
the quartet. Last year's Sisterhood fans can start passing around this new installment,
sharing like all good Sisters do. EB
BRENNAN, HERBIE 
Faerie Wars. Bloomsbury, 2003 
[370p]
ISBN 1-58234-810-3 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Prince Pyrgus Malvae has left his father's palace to, in the king's view, go slummin'
among the commoners, pursuing his passion for protecting and rescuing animals.
Political intrigues have left the heir vulnerable to ambush, and a very narrow es-
cape while saving a kitten destined for the glue-factory cauldron convinces the
king it's time to send Pyrgus into hiding until the heat is off. The teen reluctantly
agrees to temporary transportation to a safer Alternate World, but a traitor within
the court has tampered with the portal, and Pyrgus arrives in contemporary Brit-
ain with a dose of slow-acting poison in his body and no obvious way home. Help
is at hand: obliging teenager Henry Atherton has an elderly friend, Mr. Fogarty,
whose past careers as physicist and armed robber recommend him as just the soul
to restore the portal to working order and the prince to his otherworldly realm.
While the plot has little new to offer in the way of twists and turns, Brennan takes
obvious delight in fashioning a cast of villains so melodramatic and dastardly (to
wit, the kitten-killing, demon-conjuring glue-factory owner, his obese, pedophilic
partner, and even the Prince of Darkness himself) that readers are likely to plow
straight ahead just to keep the bad guys within sight. Brennan seems more at
home on terra fey than terra firma, and a subplot involving Henry's mother's infi-
delity is a nonstarter. There's enough menace and mayhem, though, to leave pa-
rental issues in the dust, and older fans of Colfer's Artemis Fowl (BCCB 7/01)
should march right into battle. EB
BROWN, DON 
Mack Made Movies; written and illus. by Don Brown. 
Roaring
Brook, 2003 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2504-2 
$23.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1538-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
See this month's Big Picture, p. 347, for review.
BROWN, Jo 
Pirate Jam; written and illus. byJo Brown. 
Gingham Dog/McGraw-
Hill, 2003 
[2 6p]
ISBN 1-57768-442-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
Fredbeard and Little Jim are rather substandard pirates, who washed out of pirate
school ("Arg! You two be useless pirates!' said their teacher") on account of gen-
erally nonpiratical tendencies ranging from a preference for tea over grog to an
inclination towards seasickness. With their little dog Patch, they keep house on an
island, but it's hard for them to find a nonpiratical niche in the island community.
Some beachfront spoils (washed up, not garnered at swordpoint) provide the an-
swer: Fredbeard makes jam from the shipwrecked sugar and garden strawberries,
Little Jim knits nice woolly sweaters from the serendipitously found yarn, and
both commodities prove popular items in the island market. The story rambles on
somewhat, and the journey is more pleasurable than the destination (their success-
MAY 2003 
* 
353
ful day doesn't really seem a long-term solution to their plight). Brown is gifted,
though, at comic detail (Fredbeard fails as a letter carrier partially because of his
sword's tendency to tear holes in the packages) and turns of phrase ("Instead of
making someone walk the plank, they'd rather walk the dog"), and there are plenty
of giggle-worthy plays on pirate conventions for buccaneering readaloud audi-
ences. The illustrations are cheerfully roguish, with high-pitched candy-bright
colors adding a Caribbean flair to the ex-pirates' island. This doesn't have quite
the swashbuckling flair of some recent comic pirate titles, but this could keep the
Jolly Roger flying for youngsters not quite ready for Cannon's On the Go with
Pirate Pete and Pirate Joe (BCCB 9/02). DS
BUCHANAN, JANE 
The Berry-Picking Man; illus. by Leslie Bowman. 
Farrar,
2003 
87p
ISBN 0-374-40610-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Many a child has been haunted by the presence of a figure like Old Sam, not
homeless exactly, but embarrassingly odd in his behavior, unwashed, and depen-
dent on charitable individuals for his only human contact. Unfortunately, Meggie's
mother is just such a charitable individual, and nine-year-old Meggie has inherited
Mama's empathetic nature while at the same time hating to be anywhere near
Sam. This situation is complicated by her two older sisters, who tend to belittle
both Meggie and the old man. The book is relentless in its spotlight on the prob-
lem and somewhat limited in dramatic action, but it nevertheless clearly delineates
the stages of maturity through which Meggie passes in reconciling her conscience
with her instincts, thereby affecting her sisters' behavior as well. The author is
careful to include a warning against stranger danger via Meggie's mother: "I don't
ever want you to feel you have to hug or touch anyone you don't want to. Your
body is yours. You have the right to decide who can touch you and who can't."
However, when Old Sam is injured in a fall, Meggie insists that her mother invite
him to spend Christmas with the family and manages to express affection despite
his ongoing aberrations. Sometimes the author tells more than she shows, but
Meggie's dilemma, along with a subplot of her wishing for and finally getting a
camera from her photographer-mother, make this brief novel an accessible transi-
tion between easy-to-read books and more complex fiction. Each chapter features
a full-page black and white painting; the images tend towards the stiffly posed and
literal but occasionally offer the spontaneity of snapshots. BH
CABOT, MEG 
Princess in Waiting. HarperCollins, 2003 
225p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009608-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009607-1 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Followers of the adventures of Mia Thermopolis, Princess of Genovia, will know
that just as she has at long last gotten together with Michael Moskowitz, her true
love and her best friend's older brother (at the end of Princess in Love, BCCB
5/02), she's getting whisked off for presentation to the Genovian people. In
Genovia, Mia makes a few gaffes, causes a furor, and scornfully observes a visiting
playboy prince, with whom her grandmother would like to see her paired; mostly,
though, she moons over Michael and fears that her distance is putting him off.
Upon her return to New York, she's even more afraid she's losing him, because of
the competing claims on her attention and her general lack of significance and
talent ("If it weren't for the fact that I am a princess, I would be the most ordinary
354 
* THE BULLETIN
person alive"). Mia's new Michael anxiety is largely a crisis of narrative conve-
nience, so at times she's simply whiny rather than endearingly uncertain. Cabot's
winning formula still delivers, however; Mia's tenure in Genovia is an amusing
travesty (it's her suggestion that Genovia install parking meters that sets the entire
cabinet into factional turmoil), and the encounters with society-page celebrities,
especially the real ones (Prince William makes a heart-throbby appearance) are a
luxurious enhancement. Mia's saga is starting to show a few signs of wear, but
she's still the princess with whom everybody'd like to be best friends. DS
CAZET, DENYS 
Elvis the RoosterAlmost Goes to Heaven; written and illus. by Denys
Cazet. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
[4 8p] 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000501-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000500-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 2-4
Elvis the rooster thrills to his great significance in the world, bringing the sun up
every morning with his crow; it's therefore a devastating blow to him when a
poorly timed bug ingestion keeps him from his crucial task-and the sun rises
anyway ("The sun had risen without him. Elvis fainted"). While a shattered Elvis
waits for his now meaningless life to end, concerned barnyard inhabitants hatch a
plan to restore the stricken chicken. Poultry being a bit paltry in the plotting
department, the plan is more notable for creativity than for smooth execution, but
eventually they restore Elvis to his state of triumphant misbelief. As well as under-
standable and welcome echoes of Cazet's Minnie and Moo easy readers, there's a
Chicken Run flavor to the slapstick proceedings, especially in the trio of clucking
hens, two of which never really grasp the situation, and kids will revel in the comic
melodrama of the obtrusively languishing Elvis. Additional humor comes from
the shady figures of Little Willie, an underworld bird in dark glasses and fedora,
and his taciturn muscle duck, Rocky; there's also a repeated motif of bug inhala-
tion that adds satisfying grossness as well as narrative symmetry. The larger cast
and smaller figures make the illustrations here somewhat more finicky than those
in Minnie and Moo's adventures, but mobile-faced Elvis is a gifted comic star with
some snort-worthy closeups, and Rocky's looming bulk marks him as a duck to
watch. Dumb-cluck chickens are enjoying a peculiar surge of popularity at the
moment, but novice readers will find Elvis standing out from the rest of the flock.
DS
CHAMBERS, ROLAND 
The Rooftop Rocket Party; written and illus. by Roland Cham-
bers. 
Porter/Roaring Brook, 2003 
33p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2744-4 
$23.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1888-7 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
When Finn, an inquiring young boy, meets the famous rocket scientist Dr. Gass,
he's rather disappointed. Dr. Gass doesn't have a single real rocket, and his scien-
tific explanations are a bit much for Finn to take (he "went on explaining until
Finn begged him to stop"); nor does he have any truck with Finn's belief that the
water tanks on the city roofs are really "big red rockets, ready for liftoff!" It turns
out that Finn had the right of it-in a trip that contradicts everything Dr. Gass has
affirmed, a Night Thing escorts the little boy on a rocket journey to the moon,
where there's a celebration for the Man in the Moon's birthday that lasts until
Finn's safe return to Earth and bed. There are definite echoes of Where the Wild
MAY 2003 
* 355
Things Are in the fantasy voyage, nighttime bacchanal, and safe return, and the
implication of scientific paucity of imagination is itself unimaginative as well as
cliched. There's nonetheless a quietly dreamy rhythm to the exchanges between
Finn and the good doctor, and the grave serenity of the tone enhances the magic of
Finn's lunar revelry. Chambers' illustrations match that tone, using thick, scrubby
black lines to anchor the compositions and shimmering washes of color to accen-
tuate the gentle fancy. Spreads deftly tuck in mock-helpful illustrations of Dr.
Gass' detailed explanations, contrasting them with the sweeping scope of Finn's
exploits; the Night Thing and the party games are depicted with creativity but
with a groundedness that avoids flimsy whimsy. This will be just the thing to send
spacey youngsters into orbit at bedtime. DS
CHRISTENSEN, BONNIE, ed. 
In My Grandmother's House: Award-Winning Au-
thors Tell Stories about Their Grandmothers; ed. and illus. by Bonnie
Christensen. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
195p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029110-9 
$19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029109-5 
$18.99 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Twelve short stories, all new, are contributed by women writers who remember
their grandmothers variously as humble, imperious, sensible, troubled, distant,
clever, heroic, warm, or just downright perfect. Nostalgic hymns of praise from Ji-
Li Jiang ("To My Nai Nai") and Alma Flor Ada ("My Abuelita, My Paradise") are
vivid, but they might pall were they not interspersed with glimpses of more emo-
tionally complex relationships such as the one Gail Carson Levine reveals in her
tense "Visit to Grandma's" or the one Beverley Naidoo portrays in "Granny Was
a Gambler," about her mentally ill grandmother. Readers may be especially inter-
ested in some of the famous children's book authors here, including Beverly Cleary,
whose grandmother set her "stitching . . . through life" in "Grandma and Her
Needle," and Jean Craighead George, whose grandmother finally ends her story-
telling with the never-ending narrative "And Then Another Locust Came and
Took Away Another Grain of Corn." Other stories, by Minfong Ho, Pat
Cummings, Bonnie Christensen, and Joan Abelove, offer a spectrum that will
engage anyone hooked into the first story, Cynthia Leitich Smith's "The Naked
Truth" about her indomitable "sexy grandma." Perhaps the most important as-
pect of the book is its point about time: these (and all) elderly women were once
as young as the teenage readers now thinking about their own grandmothers. BH
COLLICOTT, SHARLEEN 
Toestomper and the Bad Butterflies; written and illus. by
Sharleen Collicott. 
Houghton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-14092-1 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Toestomper (a small rodential creature) is still living happily with his caterpillars
(from Toestomper and the Caterpillars), but one day they "completely covered them-
selves with strange blankets, went to sleep, and wouldn't wake up." Eventually, of
course, they do wake up-as butterflies of a particularly flighty temperament.
Anxious caretaker Toestomper tries to teach them the necessary skills and caution
to keep them safe in a dangerous world, but the butterflies merely get cockier and
more annoying until finally they run afoul of Big Tooth, the "biggest giant of all."
This seems at first blush to be a sweet little story with cuddly illustration, but
there's more to Toestomper's adventures than that. Between the scary iguanas, the
problematic flying lessons ("Those are dumb wings," the butterflies accurately in-
356 
* THE BULLETIN
form Toestomper. "They only go down"), and the mischievous butterflies ("'We're
not afraid of Big Tooth!' the butterflies bragged. 'We're going to zoom him"'),
there's a gentle eccentricity to the text and the storyline that'll make youngsters sit
up and take notice. They'll certainly be startled by the climax, wherein Big Tooth
(a resentful hippopotamus) snaps up the butterflies in his mouth, and they'll be as
thrilled as first audiences of the Jonah story with the twist that lets the subjects out
hale and hearty (and, fortunately, somewhat chastened). Sly touches of psychedelia
invigorate the demure, fuzzy-textured gouache: with his fringe jacket and headscarf,
the otherwise trim Toestomper looks a bit of a rodential Deadhead, and the pat-
terned blue butterflies could have been designed by Peter Max. Audiences will
relate to Toestomper's babysitting efforts even as they gleefully support the youth-
ful hubris of the butterflies. DS
COOKE, KAZ 
The Terrible Underpants; written and illus. by Kaz
Cooke. 
Hyperion, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7868-1924-3 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
It's happened to almost everyone: that dreaded day when you have to dig deep
into the back of your drawer to uncover those not-so-savory underpants. When
Wanda-Linda's father has put all of her good underpants on the line to dry, she has
no choice but to fish out her terrible underpants-the ones with the loose elastic
and the scratchy bit and the baggy seat. Even though Wanda-Linda's parents
assure her that no one will notice the terrible underpants, her quotidian tragedy
assumes larger-than-life proportions when the wind blows up her skirt in town,
her friends see her underpants on the playground, and a TV news crew captures
them on film as she does a handstand. What's a girl and her pet wombat to do?
Wanda-Linda's logical solution (she removes the offending garment entirely) may
not meet with universal approbation and it's a bit flat after the fizzy humor of the
proceedings, but it solves her problem. The cartoon-style illustrations tend to rely
on Wanda-Linda's body and her pet wombat for expression of emotion, since our
heroine's lopsided smile seems to stay in place no matter what betides, but there's
still plenty of energy in the uncluttered compositions. Besides, such good cheer
and resourcefulness in the dire circumstance of having to wear unpleasant
underthings is surely a lesson worth learning for the more fastidious (or should I
say anal?) young reader. KC
CRUM, SHUTTA 
The House in theMeadow; illus. by Paige Billin-Frye. 
Whitman,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-3393-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
This reworking of the popular children's rhyme "Down in the Meadow" begins
with ten friends celebrating the marriage of a young couple. These turn out to be
great guests to invite, because all the adult attendees practice trades that the couple
will need to build their first home. When the next spring arrives, Charlie shows up
with his backhoe, Pete with his concrete truck, Kellie with her paint buckets; even
gray-haired Florence is still ready to bend pipe alongside her crew well past the age
that many men would have turned in their wrenches. There's occasional strain in
the rhyming scheme ("'Plumb!' said Florence. 'We plumb,' said the 4./ So they
joined all the pipes going through the new floor") and in reconciling construction
requirements with the countdown concept itself. Either the contractors are lavish
MAY 2003 
* 357
in their hiring policies or are building in an area with exceptionally strong trade
unions, judging from the massive workforce that shows up on the site of the mod-
est house: eight concrete masons, six well drillers, five roofshinglers, and a plumber
with four apprentices. The cut-paper and realia collages are somewhat hackneyed
in style, but they're still lively, with elements generously layered to achieve remark-
able depth as the house fairly blooms. Now, if those painters would please lay a
dropcloth over that hardwood floor... EB
CRUTCHER, 
CHRIS 
King of the Mild Frontier: An 
Ill-Advised
Autobiography. Greenwillow, 2003 
[272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-050250-9 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-050249-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 8-12
How does one grow up to become a banned-book writer? In this insightful and
often hilarious Kunstlerroman, readers meet Chris Crutcher, the meek, gullible,
hopelessly unathletic boy who would grow up to write books that chronicle the
world of the teen misfit. Obsessed with unattainable girls, young Chris dons coon-
skin caps (he believes that his acne-ravaged face will take on a craggy outdoorsy
appeal if he can just manage the wilderness survival training of the Boy Scouts) and
endures unthinkably gross hazing rituals (his high-school athletic club makes cre-
ative use of oysters and olives in their initiation proceedings) in order to attract the
various girls of his dreams. As one might imagine, he meets with little success, but
he ends up with good stories to tell. This is vintage Crutcher; under the humor
there crackles a fierce anger toward the institutions and people who refuse to take
responsibility for the emotional lifeworld they are bequeathing to their children.
Here teens will find the biographical source material for some of the most infa-
mous scenes (remember the penis in the popcorn bag in Running Loose ?) and
heartbreaking characters (the little girl rubbing her skin raw trying to wash the
black off from Whale Talk, the man who had shaken his child to the point of brain
damage in The Crazy Horse Electric Game, among others) in his novels. One can
imagine a number of classroom writing activities that might stem from pairing this
autobiography with the novels, from adapting real people and events into fiction,
to students writing their own lives as creative nonfiction. In addition, the comic
memories of boyhood will give this book an indisputable appeal for adult men,
making it an excellent choice for a reading group of fathers and teens. KC
DE ROSAMEL, GODELEINE 
Drawing with Objects; written and illus. by Godeleine
De Rosamel. 
Gareth Stevens, 2003 
24p 
(Drawing Is Easy)
ISBN 0-8368-3627-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. K-3
Despite the optimistic claim of the series title, drawing is not easy, as the stickman-
challenged will attest. De Rosamel, however, has the perfect palliative for kids
who panic at the sight of paint and pencil-try tracing the outline of common
household objects, and then spiff up the results. Small bottles (vitamin, glue,
juice) are starters for broad-snouted piggies; just add springy tail, dot eye, squat
legs, and a splash of puddle for wallowing. Several varieties of pliers yield a menag-
erie of dinosaurs that only require jagged teeth, stick legs, and whatever epidermal
embellishment the artist desires. Spoons and spatulas morph into mice and moles,
hamsters and ladybugs; tape dispensers make snails and whales. Each double-page
spread is a paragon of simplicity and clarity, with the object traced in four steps on
358 
* 
THE BULLETIN
one page and the finished products in chunky black line filled with crisp matte
color on the facing page. Reading the text, which amounts to little more than
object labels, is purely optional. Now even the art-room washouts can doodle with
confidence and pride. EB
DEARDEN, CARMEN DIANA, comp. 
Little Book ofLatin American Folktales; ad. by
Pilar Almoina de Carrera, Pascuala Corona, Rafael Olivares Figueroa, et al.; tr. by
Susana Wald and Beatriz Zeller; illus. by Maria Fernanda Oliver, Heinz Rose, and
Irene Savino. 
Groundwood, 2003 
[132p]
ISBN 0-88899-543-1 
$8.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Ten traditional Latin American tales with foreign roots ("Spanish American ver-
sions of tales from many parts of the world, passed from generation to generation
and carried over into Latin American and Venezuelan lore") are here retold by
Latin American writers and storytellers. The stories include variations on well-
known western folktales such as "Cinderella," "Hansel and Gretel," "The Devil
with the Three Golden Hairs," and additional tales with familiar motifs. The
introduction mentions the "sparkle that imbues the language of the people who
tell these stories as part of their daily lives," and, while the stories are not the sort to
elicit guffaws, the retellings are gracefully spare, with subtle, clever moments of
humor. For example, in the "Hansel and Gretel" variant "Ocelot, Jaguar and
Lion," the children encourage their widowed father to marry a neighbor because
she gives them sweets, to which the father replies, "My little ones, first the honey,
then the vinegar." Each tale is illustrated with full-page color images and black-
and-white spot art by one of the contributing artists, all of whom run to dreamlike
styles. The small trim size of this pretty piece of bookmaking is sure to lure fairy
and folktale lovers, even while the content helps fill the need for a wide range of
materials on Latin America. There are no specific written sources provided, but
notes on each tale give some context; short biographies of each adapter are in-
cluded, and a brief glossary is appended. JMD
DEFELICE, CYNTHIA 
Under the Same Sky. 
Farrar, 2003 
2 1 5p
ISBN 0-374-38032-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Joe Pedersen overestimates his parents' generosity when he asks for a motor bike
for his fourteenth birthday. Not only does his father fail to buy the other-guys-
have-'em argument, he goes so far as to challenge Joe to earn the money for the
"Thunderbird" by laboring alongside the Mexican migrant workers on the family's
New York produce farm. Joe calculates the days required to accrue the cash at
minimum wage and agrees to show his father what he's made of. It's clear from the
start that he's not made of much, though, and only after weeks of backbreaking toil
does he build the muscles, character, and cultural understanding that readers will
see coming from a mile away. It would take a thick-skinned adolescent indeed to
miss the shrieking message of the value of a buck, and this title's pleasures come
not from the predictable trajectory of the message-driven plot but from those reve-
latory moments in which the spoiled teen weighs the value of his vacuous buddies
against his hard-earned money and the even harder-earned respect he's beginning
to gain among the Mexican workers. Through a related plot involving Joe's love
interest, Luisa, and her forged visa, DeFelice introduces readers to the problematic
rudiments of INS mission and practice, and although she clearly places the Pedersens
MAY 2003 
* 359
on the side of the enlightened angels, she does thoughtfully present pros and cons
to the issue of undocumented workers. EB
DENNIS, YVONNE WAKIM 
Children ofNative America Today; by Yvonne Wakim
Dennis and Arlene Hirschfelder. 
Charlesbridge, 2003 
64p 
illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 1-57091-499-0 
$19.95 
R Gr. 3-6
The foreword by Buffy Sainte-Marie contains an accurate summation of Dennis
and Hirschfelder's crisp overview: "This book is a collection of brief profiles of
Native American tribes and culture groups designed to give school-age children a
snapshot of the wealth of information there is to learn." The selection of tribes
and cultures is broad, and its contemporary focus and geographic organization are
unusual and welcome. Divided into regions (Northeast, Southeast, Central, Plains,
Basin-Plateau, Southwest, California/Washington, Alaska, Hawaii, and Urban
People), the book includes twenty-five Native community profiles, while making
clear that "the nations in this book are just a few of more than 500 Native cul-
tures." Each two-page profile includes very general but not always easily accessed
information: where the community is located, where the children go to school,
what they do for fun, what kind of work their parents do. A "More facts about .. ."
insert gives the location of the community's largest population group, some no-
table members of that particular tribe, and a short list of neighboring peoples.
Glossy color photographs depict the day-to-day life of individuals in each commu-
nity, and while there are some images of children in traditional regalia, most of the
pictures show kids in everyday wear, doing everyday things. The text sometimes
suffers from overgeneralization, but the lingering impression of the communities
presented is one of intense richness and variety. A bibliography (including books,
magazines, organizations, and websites), glossary, and index are included. A large
map of the United States shows the present-day locations of the communities
profiled. JMD
Fox, FRANK G. 
Jean Laffite and the Big 01' Whale; illus. by Scott Cook. 
Farrar,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-374-33669-5 
$16.00 
R 
5-9 yrs
Jean Laffite is popularly known for being a notorious pirate during the War of
1812, but this is a whale of a different color. Aided rather than impeded by the
scarcity of detail about Laffite's early life, Fox spins a fancy tall tale of the legendary
figure's origins and early adventures. Laffite "came from up the river-that's all
anyone knew," and it is plain from the beginning that he is an unusual baby: he
drinks coffee with chicory, swims like a catfish, and knows all there is to know
about the Mississippi River. Good thing, too, because "one hot summer day,
when Jean was a strapping lad of sixteen, something happened: The biggest, deep-
est, widest river in all of the United States went completely dry--overnight." Jean
walks upriver and discovers what is keeping the Mississippi from flowing: "A
whale. A big ol' whale. Even bigger than a blue whale. It was stuck in between the
banks, like a stopper in a sink." Well, Jean sprinkles a little cayenne pepper into
the whale's blowhole, and one huge sneeze later the Mississippi is unblocked and
the whale is free. Jean digs a hole (Lake Pontchartrain) and fills it with water and
fish so the whale can visit. The author has a rip-roaring way with words, and the
telling of this fishy exaggeration has an easy, rhythmic flow. The humor is evident
360 
* THE BULLETIN
not only in the catchy narrative but in Cook's gently boisterous images. The
illustrations are lit up and crackling, from the round and rosy baby Jean to the
smiling figure of the great white whale he befriends. The graceful sweep of the
compositions, the quirkily detailed landscapes, and the golden glow of the palette
suggest an idealized world where yarns like this one are everyday occurrences. The
tall-tale shelf can sometimes look a little sparse; this will be just the title to help fill
in the gaps. JMD
FRIEDMAN, DEBRA 
Picture This: Fun Photography and Crafts; illus. by Jane Kurisu
and with photographs. 
Kids Can, 2003 
40p 
(Kids Can Do It)
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55337-046-5 
$12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55337-047-3 
$5.95 
R 
Gr. 3-8
SCHWARZ, RENIE 
Funky Junk: Cool Stuffto Make with Hardware; illus. and with
photographs by Frank Baldassarra. 
Kids Can, 2003 
40p 
(Kids Can Do It)
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55337-387-1 
$12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55337-388-X 
$5.95 
R 
Gr. 3-8
Kids who speed past the craft books on their way to the 796s may pause for a
second look at this inviting pair of do-it-yourself titles. Picture This focuses (so to
say) on composition and presentation techniques adaptable for 35mm, disposable,
and, to a more limited extent, digital cameras. Novices and enthusiasts will find
hints on capturing shadows and motion, creating montaged panoramas and simple
optical illusions, and adding interest to portraits with before/after, bug's- eye, and
bird's-eye views. Suggestions for cropping, grouping, and sequencing raise the bar
from simple scrapbook-style mounting; a particularly clever mount involves alter-
nating strips from before/after shots and arranging them into an accordion fold
that can be viewed from the left as "before" and from the right as "after." Techni-
cal terms are introduced slowly and logically, and they are recapped in a closing
glossary of "Photographer Talk." FunkyJunk aims at--dare I say it?-boys, and at
any crafters who've had their fill of glitter and ribbon-intensive projects. Kids raid
hardware store and tool bench for requisite nuts, bolts, wire, and assorted connec-
tors to be fashioned into sci-fi-worthy metal aliens suitable for display on zipper
pulls, notebooks, key chains, etc. In most cases, the hardware-store hunt will
prove lengthier than project execution, but for kids who can't yet tell a wing nut
from a ring terminal, items are clearly marked in the introduction and organized
into typical departments at the hardware store. Minimal supervision is required
(although adults may need to assist younger handypersons with craft knives and
quick-setting epoxy as indicated). Projects progress from streamlined crocodilian
mini-monsters that can hang on combination locks, all the way to a complete
gearhead chess set. Pick up the pair for fresh ideas for youth groups and novel
possibilities for homemade gift giving. EB
GALLO, DONALD R., ed. 
Destination Unexpected. Candlewick, 2003 
221p
ISBN 0-7636-1764-4 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Kimberly Willis Holt, Ron Koertge, Richard Peck, and Graham Salisbury are among
the authors whose short stories appear in this collection, which is organized around
the broadly conceived theme of journeys to unexpected destinations. The jour-
neys represented here are diverse, from vacations to bus trips across town to walks
on moonlit golf courses. Each protagonist manages to confront some troubling
MAY 2003 
* 
361
aspect of him or herself or the world and to come to a greater understanding of his
or her place in the scheme of things. At first blush, a few of the stories seem a bit
ethically simplistic, but when one remembers that the audience for these stories
has a fresh eye for hypocrisy, especially in dealings with adults, it is easy to forgive
a bit of "chicken soup for the soul." Moreover, many of the stories are not so
obvious in their moral implications: for instance, in "Keep Smiling," should Sam
tell Ian that she was in the car that killed his cousin, that it was her fault that her
friend was driving drunk because she insisted on being driven home? Wouldn't it
be better to bear her burden of guilt silently than to aggravate Ian's loss? How
much drudgery should Helene have to endure on her "vacation" in "Tourist
Trapped"? Sure, her aunt is having a difficult pregnancy, but did that mean it was
fair to expect Helene to be housekeeper, nanny, and cook all rolled into one? Not
all of the protagonists end up on the side one would expect in a moral dilemma,
which paves the way for follow-up discussion. Each story is followed by an author's
note that tells a bit about its genesis; these notes may also serve as inspiration for
young writers to find stories in their own experiences, newspaper clippings, and
even urban legends. KC
GAY, MARIE-LOUISE 
Good Morning, Sam; written and illus. by Marie-Louise
Gay. 
Groundwood, 2003 
[26p]
ISBN 0-88899-528-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Sam, younger brother of the irrepressible Stella (Stella, Star ofthe Sea, BCCB 5/99,
and others) adamantly refuses his sister's help in getting dressed: "'No,' said Sam.
'I can do it by myself.' 'Are you sure?' 
'Yes,' said Sam." So Sam begins-by
playing with the dog. When he finally gets around to pulling off his nightshirt, he
gets stuck ("'Stella, help!' called Sam. 'My head grew bigger in the night'"); then
he can't find his underpants, or get his shirt on, or locate a matching sock, or
uncover either of his shoes. He finally manages to get all his clothes on, but when
they are leaving the house Sam points out that Stella (who has been busy helping
him dress) has not managed to dress herself: "'Stella?' said Sam. 'What now?'
sighed Stella. 'Didn't you forget something?' giggled Sam." Gay's sturdy and
dependable Stella is a gem, and the fizzily enthusiastic Sam is a chip off the old
block. The story's success lies in its simplicity and in the slice-of-life reactions of
Gay's characters. The sparkling and translucent watercolors make the most of
their homely details, whether it be the general gleeful dishevelment of Sam's room
or the stout, sausagy dog happily assisting in Sam's toilette. Stella and Sam were a
pair to be reckoned with from their first outing; fans will be pleased with the
continuing biblio-melody of this sibling duet. JMD
GOODHART, PIPPA 
Pudgy: A Puppy to Love; illus. by Caroline Jayne
Church. 
Chicken House/Scholastic, 2003 
[26p]
ISBN 0-439-45699-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
Poor Pudgy! No one will play with him, and to make matters worse the naughty
pup snitches food from the table, makes a mess, and runs away to the woods.
Equally lonely Lucy has chosen the same refuge, and when Pudgy discovers her
there the two quickly become friends in this brief, plainspoken tale of girl-meets-
dog. While the storytelling is slight indeed (adults and older children may wonder
362 
* THE BULLETIN
where Pudgy's owners are and why they don't go looking for him after he runs
away), preschoolers who've experienced the sorrow of being playmateless will likely
appreciate the simplicity and directness of Goodhart's narrative ("Nobody will
play with Pudgy ... and nobody will play with Lucy. So they are sad"). Young
beginning readers will find this within their reach as well, thanks to the minimal
text, elementary vocabulary, and large, easy-to-read sans serif font. Church's wide-
eyed, cartoonish Pudgy and Lucy are demure in expression and posture but also
robust, with solid, rounded figures (outlined in smudgy black) and chubby, freck-
led, rosy-cheeked faces. Pudgy's plump little charcoal-gray body is a pleasing con-
trast to the muted greens, golds, reds, and blues of the parchment-patterned,
speckled, and/or rubber-stamped backgrounds, and his protruding brown ears are
perky echoes of Lucy's stylized brunette pigtails. This title may not be the most
memorable pup in the litter of"kid-and-dog" picture books, but it's got heart, and
the loyalty and companionship between Pudgy and Lucy will resonate with little
listeners. JMH
GOODMAN, SUSAN E. 
Nature Did It First!; illus. with photographs by Dorothy
Handelman. 
Millbrook, 2003 
24p
ISBN 0-7613-2413-5 
$21.90 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
In this concept book, young viewers are encouraged to see similarities between the
ways humans and animals adapt to the circumstances of their environments. On
the right side of each spread, there is a photograph of a human solution to a prob-
lem, like a baby carrier or a spill-proof container. Children can guess how "nature
did it first" before turning the page to find the animal counterpart, as in the built-
in baby carrier of the kangaroo or the spill-proof container of an egg, respectively.
As a guessing activity, the book might have worked better if the natural feature
were shown before the human adaptation; it would be a rare elementary student
who would know that the proboscis of a moth or butterfly works like a straw or
that termite nests sometimes sport umbrella-shaped caps, but they could easily
work it out the other way around. However, the concept and the connections
themselves are clever, and they will doubtless act as springboards for youngsters to
make their own connections. KC
HALLIDAY, JOHN 
Shooting Monarchs. McElderry, 2003 
135p
ISBN 0-689-84338-0 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 7-12
After a childhood of being neglected by his alcoholic mother and ridiculed by
authority figures, Macy is now a young man unable to relate to others except
through violence. He's particularly drawn to teenage girls, and after murdering
one and coming threateningly close to another, life's currents send him towards
the little town of Shiloh. A small drama is already playing itself out there, with
outsider Danny Driscoll yearning after popular Leah Henderson, who's dating
brutish jock Chad Peterson. When Macy abducts Leah, it's Danny and not Chad
who comes to the rescue, but at a very high cost. This is a bit of a twist on the usual
crime drama, and there's some raw acknowledgment of the ripple effect of Macy's
kind of deprivation. Halliday's prose has a flatness of affect that may be designed
to evoke Macy's own emotional limitations, but unfortunately it ends up being
largely uninvolving in its own right, with plodding explanation substituting for
intimacy with the characters, who exist largely to fulfill their narrative role. The
understated style also clashes wildly with the purple sentimentality of the climax,
MAY 2003 
* 363
wherein Danny takes a bullet, confesses his love to a rescued Leah, receives a kiss in
return, and dies ("Macy's bullet had pierced his heart"). Readers looking for ex-
plorations of the dark side and its consequences will be better off with Cormier or
Duncan. DS
HEGI, URSULA 
Trudi &e Pia; illus. by Giselle Potter. 
Schwartz/Atheneum,
2003 
34p
ISBN 0-689-84683-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Young Trudi, a dwarf, yearns to be like other children: "Sometimes, during the
day, she'd hang from door frames or tree limbs by her fingers until they were
numb, convinced she could feel her arms and legs getting longer." One day, on a
visit to a traveling circus, Trudi sees Pia, the animal tamer. Pia is a dwarf, too, but
"while people laughed at the clowns and monkeys, they did not laugh at the dwarf
woman. They were awed by her skill and courage." After participating in part of
the show as a willing volunteer, Trudi follows Pia to her trailer; when the per-
former lets the girl in, she blurts, "I have never met anyone like me." Pia assures
her that dwarves are everywhere: 
"I have met one hundred and four, to be exact."
Trudi asks questions and the kind circus performer answers, until in the end, Pia
tells Trudi that her loneliness can only be alleviated when she learns to love herself.
This unusual short story is based on Hegi's adult novel Stones from the River, and
its distillation into a picture book is not entirely successful. Though the incident
has been carefully chosen to show readers and listeners what the world is like from
Trudi's point of view, the viewpoint tends towards the adult and, occasionally,
abstruse. Potter's gouache illustrations are set in a nostalgically nonspecific, Euro-
town environment, with girls in pigtails and skirts and boys in short pants. Facial
expressions are a bit undifferentiated, and the focus of the compositions is not
always obvious (the fantasy sequences are particularly diffused). Although Hegi's
text can be bit opaque, this is still an unusual look at what it means to be an
outsider in an insiders' world, and children may well find their encounter with
Trudi illuminating. JMD
HOBBS, WILL Jackie's Wild Seattle. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051631-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17474-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Shannon and Cody are excited to spend the summer with their athletic, free-spir-
ited uncle in Seattle while their parents, both physicians, answer the call of Doc-
tors without Borders to work in the refugee camps along the borders ofAfghanistan
and Pakistan. When they arrive in Seattle, they are surprised at the physical frailty
of their uncle and by his obsession with his volunteer work at Jackie's Wild Seattle,
a rescue and rehabilitation operation for wildlife in and around the Seattle area.
Cody and Shannon eagerly join him in his work, and their summer turns out to be
even more rewarding than they had hoped as they participate in daring "hot" res-
cues of animals that find themselves in all sorts of predicaments caused by the
encroachment of the human community into their habitats. Hobbs offers a tightly
stitched moral universe, where all of the adults and children busy themselves doing
the Right Thing and every utterance and decision proves to be measured and wise.
The children's ability to perform amazing rescues with very little training or expe-
rience strains credibility; for instance, after Uncle Neal has his thumb nearly sev-
364 
* THE BULLETIN
ered by the free talon of a trapped hawk, Shannon evades a similar fate as she deftly
wields his penknife to cut the net around the bird and get him into a carrier. Later
that same penknife is used by Tyler, a juvenile offender doing his community
service at the center, to perform a C-section on a dead doe. Despite the contrived
sequence of people triumphing over various obstacles-Uncle Neal overcomes
cancer, Tyler an abusive father, Shannon her fear for her parents, and Cody his
survivor guilt after 9/11-there are enough thrilling moments with the animals to
keep the budding wildlife enthusiast on the edge of his or her seat. KC
HOPKINS, 
LEE BENNETT, comp. 
A Pet for Me: Poems; illus. by Jane
Manning. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
48p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029112-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029111-7 
$15.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Twenty short poems about pets make up this easy-reader poetry collection, with
offerings from poets both well known (Karla Kuskin, X. J. Kennedy, Alice Schertle)
and less familiar (Tom Robert Shields, Avis Hartley). Pint-sized pet devotees will
be glad to find that a wide variety of critters are represented, from tarantulas and
tortoises to more ordinary cats and dogs. While a few of the poems border on the
singsong (only one non-rhyming poem is included), the continuous use of rhyme
will be helpful to novice readers. Manning's attractively stylized kids and pets
frolic together or simply veg out, while subtle but articulated patterns give a pleas-
ant texture to the jewel-toned clothing and backgrounds. A few of the featured
pets are rendered rather blandly, and an occasional clunky layout of text makes
some poems a bit difficult to read, but overall the color, content, and composition
of the art are well-matched to the kid-friendly poetry. Since poetry doesn't always
get a lot of play among the easy-reader crowd, it's nice to see a collection that
beginning readers can tackle with confidence; teachers might also find this useful
to spark a pet-themed poetic writing project. JMH
JONES, DIANA WYNNE 
The Merlin Conspiracy. Greenwillow, 2003 
[4 80p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052319-0 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052318-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Roddy and her friend Grundo are members of the royal court of Blest, and they
spend their lives roaming all over the kingdom with their sovereign, whose job it is
to maintain the balance of not only Blest but of all the worlds it touches. Though
of wizardly origins, Nick is the adopted son of a novelist living in modern-day
England; he knows about the magic-filled other worlds but, much as he longs to,
he just can't reach them. When the Merlin of Blest (the court magician) dies
suddenly, Roddy and Grundo discover an insidious conspiracy that may undo the
magical balance of the multiverse. Meanwhile, Nick, attempting to access the
magic that is his birthright, meets powerful sorcerer Romanov, who sets the boy
on a path that enmeshes him in the plot to overthrow Blest. The story alternates
between narrators Roddy and Nick, as their paths intertwine and they arrive at the
final, horrific confrontation between good and evil. Jones' tight, descriptive prose
propels readers through layers of untrustworthy relatives, mythological figures,
complex worlds, and magical hierarchies. The race against time to save the bal-
ance of magic adds an undercurrent of desperation to the already fast pace. The
action is packed, but what makes this complicated story work is the characteriza-
MAY 2003 
* 365
tion, both primary and secondary. The main characters have that instant recogni-
tion factor, those attributes that will make readers care about them up front. Sec-
ondary characters are less developed but still artfully drawn, with specific personality
traits and tics that make them solidly three-dimensional. Holding it all together is
an understated humor that whispers through presentations of political and social
structures both admired and derided. The ending is a bit abrupt, but given the
pell-mell ride that came before, readers won't mind. They'll be too busy looking
for the hopefully inevitable sequel. JMD
JONES, URSULA 
The Witch's Children; illus. by Russell Ayto. 
Holt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-7205-5 
$16.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
When a witch's three children go for a stroll in the park, the squirrels warn the
pigeons that it means trouble; sure enough, trouble arrives. Little Gemma is sail-
ing her boat on the pond when the wind blows it over: "'Oh no!' shouted Gemma.
'Who will save my little boat from sinking?'" The witch's Eldest One helpfully
turns Gemma into a frog, who then swims out and saves her boat, but when she
asks to be turned back into Gemma, the Eldest One says he hasn't learned to do
that yet. The Middle One steps in, turns the trees into a palace, the ice-cream lady
into a princess, and the squirrels and pigeons into soldiers and footmen. The ice-
cream-lady princess kisses Gemma the Frog, who turns into a handsome prince.
Now everyone wants the spells reversed, but the Eldest One and the Middle One
have used all the magic they know. That's when the Little One (who has "laughed
till she split her trousers") steps up with her one piece of magic: "The Little One
opened her mouth wide and yelled ... 'MOMMY!'" Mommy witch comes flying
out of the clouds to set everything right, after which "the witch's children flew
home on their mother's broomstick ... and they all had cake." Ayto's line-and-
watercolor illustrations reflect the breezy nature of the sly, clever tale. Elements-
from feathers to trees to hair to sails-blow around carefully balanced compositions,
the natural and magical combining in a whirlwind of activity. The angular car-
toons feature human characters that are all head and skinny legs, while the pigeons
are puffed up balls of feathers with bright eyes. This lighthearted bit of witchy
whimsy hits the mark and bounces off, giggling. JMD
KHAN, RUKHSANA 
Ruler ofthe Courtyard; illus. by R. Gregory Christie. 
Viking,
2003 
34p
ISBN 0-670-03583-1 
$15.99 
R 
5-7yrs
Saba is afraid of the chickens in the courtyard ("Bony beaks, razor claws, with
GLITTERY eyes that wonder, wonder as they watch me, how easy it would be to
make me scream"), so much so that every visit to the family bathhouse seems
fraught with danger. One day, after a breathless dash to out-race the chickens,
Saba completes her ablutions and sits enjoying the quiet of the empty bathhouse-
that is, until she spies a snake coiled in the corner. After two attempts to trap the
snake with the bath bucket, she succeeds: "But it's too quiet, much too quiet. No
sound's coming from the bucket. No moving or hissing of a trapped and angry
snake." The reason? "It's not a snake at all. It's a drawstring. A nala. I trapped
my Nani's nala. All that fuss to catch the rope that ties up Nani's baggy pants." A
relieved Saba races from the bathhouse to chase the chickens, the "savage little
bullies," proclaiming "I AM MIGHTY SABA! RULER OF THE COURTYARD!"
While listeners may feel a bit deceived by the fake snake denouement, Khan (au-
366 
* THE BULLETIN
thor of Dahling, If You Luv Me, Would You Please, Please Smile, BCCB 12/99)
offers a text that effectively depicts both Saba's fear and her joyful triumph over it.
Christie's art displays a new style here; the forms are softer, less angular, and he
uses masses of color to insinuate identifiable architectural forms. Despite the some-
what anticlimactic conclusion, overall the story has energy and suspense, and audi-
ences may well be inspired to tell their own family tales of misplaced fears. JMD
KUSKIN, KARLA 
Moon, Have You Met My Mother?: The Collected Poems ofKarla
Kuskin; illus. by Sergio Ruzzier. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2003 
322p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027174-4 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027173-6 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Drawn from collections published between 1958 (In the Middle ofthe Trees, BCCB
6/58) and 1992 (Soap Soup, BCCB 6/92), as well as from anthologies, picture
books, and other publications, this compendium of more than 200 poems in-
cludes more than fifty lively new ones as well as many old familiars. Selections
range from light two-liners ("I am watering the plants./ I'm also watering the ants")
to poems that go on and on-"A boy had a mother who bought him a hat" lingers
for nine pages. The quality, too, is somewhat variable. The best poems take a
reader by surprise or offer a satisfying pattern of construction-"I woke up this
morning," a favorite readaloud, does both. A few of the poems seem to exist just
for the sake of end-rhymes ("Isn't it queer/ that an ear/ can hear?"), while others
feature the clever twist that raises them above the level of jingles ("If my eyes/ were
where my nose is/ I would blink/ to smell the roses"). None of the poems have
titles and the index doubles as a table of contents, which can be problematic, espe-
cially as it's prone to error. The print is large, the design spacious, and the pen and
ink line drawings humorous; though they don't quite have Shel Silverstein's wick-
edly inventive edge, there's still amusement, as in the picture of a reptilian creature
lying on its back, legs up and mouth stuffed with what appears to be a new potato,
all on a plate lined with other new potatoes, as a prospective young diner looks on:
"I have a hunch/ I won't like lunch." Kuskin is a veteran at making poetry acces-
sible to children, and this will prove popular in school and public libraries that
haven't already stocked up on her previous books. BH
LANG, AUBREY 
Baby Lion; illus. with photographs by Wayne Lynch. 
Fitzhenry
& Whiteside, 2003 
[36p] 
(Nature Babies)
ISBN 1-55041-711-8 
$11.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Baby Elephant; illus. with photographs by Wayne Lynch. 
Fitzhenry &
Whiteside, 2003 
[36p] 
(Nature Babies)
ISBN 1-55041-715-0 
$11.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
The Nature Babies series by wife-and-husband team Lang and Lynch features sto-
ries about the first year of life of various animals in the wild. The accounts are
factually informative, and they also follow a distinctive narrative line, which makes
them compelling for young readers. Unlike many nature books, these stories refuse
to romanticize the abilities and the seamless adaptation to their environment of
the wild animals but instead point out that, for instance, mother lions get cranky
when their cubs are too playful or when the hunt has been unsuccessful, or that
sometimes baby elephants fall into water holes and get stuck, and that these huge
MAY 2003 
* 367
babies can be frightened by a tiny rabbit unexpectedly flushed from its hole. While
not anthropomorphizing their subjects, the authors nonetheless interpret their ac-
tions and family structures in ways that are meaningful to their audience. Even
when compacted into thumbnails to fit in these titles' petite trim size, Lynch's
crisp color photographs offer narrative movement as well as personal portraiture.
Each volume contains an index as well as a brief "Did You Know?" collection of
facts, making the offerings in this series an appealing introduction to denser scien-
tific treatments of their subjects. KC
LINDGREN, ASTRID 
Mirabelle; illus. by Pija Lindenbaum; tr. from the Swedish by
Elisabeth Kallick Dyssegaard. 
R & S/Farrar, 2003 
26p
ISBN 91-29-65821-7 
$15.00 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
A little girl, living secluded in the country with her financially strapped parents,
longs for a doll. One day, while her parents are in town trying to sell the fruits of
a meager harvest, the girl opens a gate for a strange old man in a horse-drawn
wagon; the man rewards her with a glowing seed that she plants in the garden and
that grows into a pretty blonde doll in a red hat and dress. Already delighted to
have the doll, the girl is even more thrilled when she discovers that the doll, who
calls herself Mirabelle, can walk and talk. In the end, the girl becomes the doll's
happily proprietary mother, and she invites the audience to visit: "Just follow the
narrow lane that leads to our house. I promise I'll be standing at the gate with
Mirabelle." Lindgren offers a tale about a secret close to children's hearts, the
belief that their toys are real. Autocratic, spoiled, and demanding Mirabelle is just
a little too real, however (one wonders just what Mirabelle would do if the narrator
decided to grow up and have a life); the lengthy text is also somewhat stiff and the
passage of time abrupt. Lindenbaum's watercolors effectively evoke the rural, fey
timelessness of Lindgren's setting (which is reinforced by rose-scattered endpapers
and the gnomish-looking little girl), but again Mirabelle is just too weirdly alive,
looking more like a over-ringleted toddler than a doll, however magical. Still, this
is a story that reflects the desire of a lot of wishful thinkers, and Mirabelle may well
be their dream come true. JMD
LOVE, D. ANNE 
The Puppeteer's Apprentice. McElderry, 2003 
186p
ISBN 0-689-84424-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Having fled her life as an orphaned, abused, and neglected kitchen helper, Mouse
has the good fortune to hook up with a group of travelers on their way to York,
whose merry company answers her longing for love and family. Alas, they go their
separate ways when they reach York, and Mouse is left perilously on her own in
this bustling medieval town. When she spies a puppet show in the marketplace,
she is riveted, and her destiny is sealed; she simply must find a way to become a
puppeteer. She stows away on the showman's cart, and her adventures as appren-
tice to this mysterious puppeteer begin. Slowly, she ingratiates herself to her new
master; even more slowly, she learns the dark secrets that will eventually destroy
their difficult but nevertheless fulfilling life on the road. The cast of characters is
predictable for a story set in medieval England; the charming, irresponsible min-
strel, the warm, gossipy goose woman, the beautiful, distressed damsel, the odious
villain, and even the magnanimous duke offer few surprises. The portrayal of
Mouse herself is undeniably derivative and clichd--an orphan, named after ver-
min, breaks gender and class conventions in order to make good in a world that
368 
* THE BULLETIN
does not welcome another mouth to feed, making comparisons to Cushman's The
Midwife's Apprentice (BCCB 5/95) and Matilda Bone (12/00) inevitable. While
Love's story lacks the psychological complexity and social commentary of Cushman's
work, it nonetheless offers a satisfying narrative line with sound period detail and
believably strong female leads. An author's note detailing the history ofpuppeteering
and a bibliography of sources on medieval life are included. KC
LUPTON, HUGH, ad. 
Pirican Pic andPirican Mor; illus. by Yumi Heo. 
Barefoot,
2003 
40p
ISBN 1-84148-070-3 
$16.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Pirican Pic and Pirican Mor, two nut-loving boys, go to gather walnuts, but while
Pirican Mor climbs the tree and throws the nuts down to Pirican Pic, Pirican Pic
"caught the nuts as they came down, and cracked them open with his little ham-
mer. But all the nuts that Pirican Pic cracked, he ate, so that when Pirican Mor
climbed down from the tree there were no walnuts for him at all." Pirican Mor is
irate, and he tells Pirican Pic, "I need a stick both hard and straight/ To whack and
thwack poor Pirican Pic/ Who ate ALL of my WALNUTS!" This is more easily
said than done, as the tree Pirican Mor approaches for the stick wants to be cut
with an axe, the axe wants to be sharpened with a stone, the stone wants to be wet
with water . .. well, you get the drift. British storyteller Lupton's adaptation of
this Scottish folktale (no source note is included, although this is similar in struc-
ture to the tale of "The Old Woman and Her Pig") has a robust rhythm and
language that lends itself easily to reading or telling aloud. That energetic, oral
immediacy is enhanced by Heo's lighthearted oil paintings. Human and animal
characters sporting eccentric physiologies free-float among varying planes and per-
spectives in foreground-focused compositions infused with color and light. Font
changes for varying lines of the refrain make the text as much a part of the overall
design as the images themselves. The conclusion of this humorous tale (Pirican
Mor succeeds in his quest and returns to the tree to exact vengeance, only to find
a pile of already cracked walnuts waiting for him) is unexpectedly satisfying, and
adults will welcome the non-pedantic delivery of so worthy a message. JMD
LYNN, JODI 
Glory. 
Puffin, 2003 
[176p]
Paper over board ed. ISBN 0-14-250038-0 
$9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Thirteeri-year-old Glory Mason is a rebel in her fundamentalist Christian commu-
nity of Dogwood, West Virginia, where the tight-knit families use no electricity,
gasoline vehicles, household appliances, telecommunications, or other "modern
conveniences" in an effort to isolate themselves from "the evils of the outside world."
The women's traditional role as housekeeper is particularly galling to Glory, in
sharp contrast to her best friend Katie, a model child who nevertheless "strays"
with Glory and as a result is drowned in an accident that gets Glory expelled,
midwinter. Shunned by her family and everyone else she knows, Glory stumbles
through snow-covered woods for many days, staving off starvation with berries,
nuts, fish, and game till she finds a far-off barn and makes a friend from the out-
side world. The setup of the cult-like situation initially involves some forced dia-
logue, expository description, and stock secondary characters, but once the story
accelerates toward inevitable disaster, the pace becomes compelling. Similarly, the
details of Glory's mountain journey are barely credible but nevertheless have the
MAY 2003 
* 369
age-old appeal of survival stories. Ultimately, the willful determination of the
protagonist despite her devastating loss and the semi-romantic relationship she
forms with her rescuer will hook an audience of young readers who are beginning
to feel both the pain and excitement of separating from their own home rule. BH
LYNN, TRACY 
Snow. 
Simon Pulse, 2003 
2 5 9p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-85556-7 $5.99 
R Gr. 7-10
Snow (aka Jessica) copes fairly well with her new stepmother, managing to keep
her recently acquired fancy clothes clean while staying out of the new Duchess'
way. All that ends, however, when Snow reaches adolescence and her beauty be-
gins to assert itself. A chance encounter with an overly amorous young count
results in Snow's being blamed for looking "like a slattern" and "behaving like a
commoner," and her movements, heretofore relatively unfettered, become greatly
circumscribed. When Snow's desperate stepmother attempts to regain her youth
and her fertility through an experiment requiring Snow's heart, Alan, a young
musician, helps Snow escape to London. Ill-equipped to fend for herself in the
city, Snow is robbed of her small resources almost upon arrival and then taken in
by an odd gang of thieves, the members of which have certain animal characteris-
tics reflected by their names-Cat, Raven, Mouser, Sparrow-with whom Snow
is surprised to find that she has much in common. This dense, novel-length retell-
ing of Snow White gets off to a rocky start with an unnecessary and overwritten
prologue, but once Lynn gets into the body of the story the imagery exerts an eerie
fascination, and the action builds inexorably to the final betrayal. The isolated
castle of Snow's family and the highly romanticized streets of Victorian London
provide dramatic backdrops for unfolding events. Secondary characters are par-
ticularly well drawn; primary character Snow seems a bit hampered by her tradi-
tional lineage, but Lynn sets her loose in the end in a conclusion that will delight
lovers of happily ever after even while confounding their expectations. JMD
MARTIN, JACQUELINE BRIGGS 
The Water Gift and the Pig ofthe Pig; illus. by Linda
S. Wingerter. 
Houghton, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-07436-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 6-9 yrs
Isabel, the narrator, is very fond of her grandfather: he captained the schooner
Arundel around Cape Horn and left the sea to marry Isabel's grandmother, taking
with him the Pig Who Went Around Cape Horn and bringing to the region his
water gift, his ability to find water (and sometimes other things) with a Y-shaped
stick. Isabel lives happily with her grandparents and the Pig of the Pig, the last pig
from the last litter of her grandfather's pig, until "bad luck rained down like a
three-day storm," Grandfather becomes dispirited, and finally, the Pig of the Pig
disappears. As usual, Martin brings a grave wonderment to her storytelling, enliv-
ening her dreamy tone with details of quietly brilliant originality and infusing her
understated text with sympathetic emotion. The addition of a genuine antagonist,
in the person of crabby neighbor Ben Stinchfield ("mean as his little biter dog"),
raises the tension of the plot without ever overconcretizing Isabel's worries about
Grandfather and the Pig of the Pig. Where Petra Mathers' illustrations for Martin's
Grandmother Bryant's Pocket (BCCB 7/96) had a rustic solidity, Wingerter's acryl-
ics have a similar folk-art flavor but gain a gently worn woodgrainy effect from
their bristly brushstrokes, and there's an unfussy delicacy to the rosy-cheeked faces
370 
* THE BULLETIN
of persons and pigs. The artist is also a dab hand, pardon the pun, at landscapes,
depicting the changing New England seasons in green spring leaves, golden sum-
mer grasses, and russet autumnal vistas under Vs of migrating geese, quietly abet-
ting Martin's atmospheric writing with atmospheric visuals. As story of family, as
story of bad luck surmounted, as a quietly effecting pig tale and more, this is a
nuanced and satisfying production. DS
MARTIN, NORA 
Flight ofthe Fisherbird. 
Bloomsbury, 2003 
150p
ISBN 1-58234-814-6 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Thirteen-year-old Clem Nesbitt has always been vaguely jealous of dainty Sarah
Hersey, the daughter of her Uncle Doran's business partner. Upon her father's
death, Sarah moves in with the Nesbitts and, much to Clem's distress, begins to
undermine the affection and comfortable rapport Clem has always enjoyed with
her uncle. In fact, Uncle Doran has proposed to fifteen-year-old Sarah, and the
prissy teen delights in taunting Clem with her shining prospects: "I don't care that
he is old, and as ugly as everyone else in your family.... He's rich and has prom-
ised to give me every thing I want." Clem's faith in Uncle Doran, already shaken
by this misbegotten engagement, is fatally undermined when she rescues a drown-
ing man, Tong-Ling, who has been tossed off Doran's merchant boat Doran Bull
and left for dead. Doran and his tight-lipped crew member, Ray Chung, have
been smuggling Chinese immigrants into the country when a revenuer raid caught
them by surprise and they dumped their human cargo overboard. With the en-
thusiastic help of her new friend, Jed, Clem must pacify distraught Sarah, outrun
storms in her dory Fisherbird, and outwit the now murderous Doran and Ray
Chung in an effort to bring Tong-Ling to tenuous safety on the Washington main-
land. The plot may be pure melodrama, but it's tightly crafted and fast-moving,
and its running theme of the plight of Chinese immigrants (many of whom were
returning citizens) during the period of Chinese exclusion acts lends historical
plausibility to the depiction of nineteenth-century life. This heart-thumping cat-
and-mouse chase should be just the thing for summer adventure readers. EB
MASINI, BEATRICE 
The Wedding Dress Mess; ad. by Lenny Hort; illus. by Anna
Laura Cantone. Watson-Guptill, 2003 
30p
ISBN 0-8230-1738-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Filomena designs and sews the most beautiful wedding gowns in Italy, all the
while daydreaming of the man next door. When Filippo finally proposes, Filomena's
passion for her art gets the better of her, and she spends more time working on her
dress than pitching woo with her intended. On the day of the wedding, Filomena's
gown is so overwhelming that her frightened groom flees the proceedings. She
chases after him, shedding her finery bit by bit as she goes, until the couple reunite
and wed, Filippo in his "stylish green suit" and Filomena in "her simple white
dress." The physical comedy will elicit giggles, but Filippo's reaction is seriously
overblown, and the humor of the aesthetic dilemma will largely be lost on young
audiences. The dissonance created by the traditional expectations of beauty evoked
by the words and the playfully stylized ugliness of the art (the bulging eyes, the
sparse teeth, and the noses hanging like limp balloons) effectively conveys the theme
that beauty is to be found in simple things while suggesting that there's something
essentially humorous about courtship. In addition, the use of collage art reinforces
how complicated but paper-thin the traditional trappings of weddings can be.
MAY 2003 
* 371
Filomena's pursuit of Filippo takes place on a game board that features spaces
where the bride loses her shoe or advances three spaces for getting a wedding present,
suggesting that marriage depends on a roll of the dice. Such subtle postmodern
play will likely prove elusive for the target audience, but it will certainly stock their
imaginations with images that counter more traditional views of weddings and
happily ever after. KC
MAURER, RICHARD 
The Wright Sister: Katharine Wright and Her Famous
Brothers. Roaring Brook, 2003 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2564-6 $25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1546-2 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
If young aviation enthusiasts are familiar with Katharine Wright, it's probably as
the figure in starchy white in a group photograph, or a signature among the family's
frequently quoted correspondence. Here Maurer attempts to elevate her to a posi-
tion of greater prominence and to connect her supportive efforts directly to the
success of brothers Wilbur and Orville. An extensive bibliography with ample
primary sources seems to indicate Maurer's done his homework, but the effort to
propel Katharine into her own renown never quite takes off. Much of Katharine's
life would be considered commonplace, in fact, among her contemporaries-an
adolescent girl taking on household responsibilities at her mother's death, a school-
teacher passed over for promotion by male administrators, an aging spinster daughter
expected to care for her father until his passing. Even in her more public role as
social manager during her brothers' business trips in Europe and Washington,
DC, Katharine is presented as more charming than indispensable. Maurer doesn't
manage to make Katharine's contribution to publicity and paperwork nearly as
exciting as the brothers' aeronautical exploits (even during the family's momen-
tous dinner meeting with Octave Chanute, Katharine's preoccupied with water-
melon slices), and he fails to fully capitalize on the irony of her position as the best-
educated member of the family or of widespread rumors that she was the math-
ematical "brains" of the operation. Choppy vignettes finally explode into full-
blown love story when Katharine is reunited in middle age with old college friend
Harry Haskell, and Maurer bursts into sentimentality: "Katharine felt the familiar
tug of family ties in one direction and her heart's eager yearning in the other."
True aeronautics fans may welcome this supplement to Wright family history, but
it will take some imaginative reading between lines to appreciate Katharine's role.
Index and black-and-white photos are included. EB
McLEAN, JACQUELINE 
Women ofAdventure. 
Oliver, 2003 
[160p] 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 1-881508-73-0 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Seven nineteenth- and twentieth-century women who pushed their boundaries,
both geographical and social, take the spotlight in this smoothly written yet some-
what tepid collection of brief biographies. The selection of adventurers should
guarantee nonstop thrills, from Mary Kingsley's forays into the heart of West Af-
rica, to Marguerite Baker Harrison's career as a U.S. spy in post-World War I
Berlin and Bolshevik Russia, to Ann Bancroft's treks across the Poles. However,
McLean concentrates more heavily on marking milestones and enumerating sites
372 
* THE BULLETIN
visited than in fleshing out the details of the journeys themselves. Each chapter
stands alone, and no effort is made to cross-reference women who made their
marks on the same projects (both Harrison and Latin American explorer Harriet
Chalmers Adams were founders of the Society of Women Geographers), or to
examine what seem to be recurring themes of strained childhoods, home- or self-
schooling, and unsuccessful marriages. Readers should, nonetheless, come away
with an understanding of the breadth of women's contributions in fields from
ichthyology and anthropology to cartography and government intelligence. Black-
and-white photographs, an index, and a bibliography are included. EB
MIcucci, CHARLES 
The Life and Times of the Ant; written and illus. by Charles
Micucci. 
Houghton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-00559-5 $16.00 
R Gr. 2-5
In the latest entry in his respected Life and Times series, Micucci plumbs the
anthill and explores the insect's development, methods of communication, roles
within the ant community, and place within broad ecological systems. The author
stumbles a bit as he moves between the general and the specific: the "Ant Calen-
dar" that lays out a typical year makes no adjustment for location (would that it
were 50 everywhere in February!) and applies only to underground nesters. Like-
wise, after discussing the wide range of ant sizes, it is difficult to explain the esti-
mate that together "nine hundred of them would weigh less than an ounce."
Nonetheless, the watercolor scenes and diagrams-some literal, others enlivened
with cartoon ant guides-do clearly explicate ant anatomy and habitat. Related
miscellanea, from gold mining ants to invoking the proper saint to halt ant infes-
tation, should please trivia hounds, and a table of contents to the double-page
"chapters" will guide report writers straight to the point. Budding myrmecologists
should find this a browser's paradise, and casual readers may gain enough respect
for these intelligent, complexly organized insects to watch where they step. EB
MITTON, TONY 
Plum; illus. by Mary GrandPrd. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2003 
60p
ISBN 0-439-36409-4 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
British author Mitton provides his first American poetry collection in this compi-
lation of twenty verses, offering entries from lyrics ("Plum") to long humorous
ballads ("Mrs. Bhattacharya's Chapati Zip Machine") to spooky rhymed tales
("Green. Man's Lane") and a few other styles along the way. The longer poems
show definite signs of strain and flagging energy, and there's more determination
than accuracy to much of the scansion; sometimes entries are stronger on whimsy
than on focus. The conceits are often humorous and kid-appealing, however (food-
hurling devices and oversized fleas being good for capturing youthful attention),
and when the poet's at his best-as in his shorter lyrics, such as "Plum" and "Grow-
ing" or the dialogue "What Is Under?"-he catches some of the spirit of Charles
Causley in his quietly folksy inquiries. GrandPre's oversized and mystical pastels
provide some playful drama, but they're ill-suited to the homey merits that are
Mitton's strongest, drowning out the resonance of the subtler pieces and under-
scoring the frantic busyness of the more energetic entries. Overdesign also inter-
feres sometimes with the poems (the scansion of "Flightpath" is sufficiently
ambiguous that it needs proper line breaks rather than visual play for success) and,
more often, with the poems' titles, which end up dwarfing rather than introducing
their subjects. Young readers may still enjoy GrandPr6's fantastic worlds, but
MAY 2003 
* 
373
Mitton's verse might fare better if read aloud or removed to another setting where
its light, and not that of its background, can shine. DS
MYRACLE, LAUREN 
Kissing Kate. Dutton, 2003 
198p
ISBN 0-525-46917-6 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Lissa and Kate have been inseparable friends for four years, but two weeks ago,
everything changed: a drunken Kate kissed Lissa, Lissa kissed Kate back, and now
the two aren't speaking. Lissa's narration gradually reveals the reason for the blow
to their friendship-Lissa admits she really liked it, while Kate refuses to acknowl-
edge that she did as well ("I'm not like you, Lissa. I'm not a fucking dyke, all
right?"). While Lissa struggles to deal with the alteration and perhaps ending of
her most significant relationship, she evolves beyond her usual blindness to other
human connections, becoming friendly with a good-hearted if way-out classmate,
helping her little sister embark on puberty, and supporting her custodial uncle as
he embarks on a romance. Lissa's breach with Kate isn't actually the most interest-
ing part of the novel, especially as Kate, despite Lissa's description of the delights
of their friendship, seems a fairly limited companion with little to offer beyond
superficial attractiveness; Lissa's explorations of lucid dreaming detract from the
story, offering programmatic symbolism of feelings treated with more interesting
subtlety in the chronicling of Lissa's real life. That's where this book offers sub-
stance: Lissa's implicit realization of Kate's deficits as a friend, her explicit realiza-
tion of her own habitual tendency towards standoffishness, and her half-unwilling
succumbing to friendship with hippiesque Ariel provide perceptive insights into
Lissa's viewpoint and growth. Her questioning of her sexuality is tenderly de-
scribed (on reading a lesbian teen's web piece about her lover, she gets "a breath-
catching feeling inside, anxious and full of longing"), but it's just part of many
aspects of her difficult but rewarding horizon-broadening. Ryan's The Empress of
the World (BCCB 9/01) is a better story of troubled first love, but Myracle none-
theless offers a sympathetic portrait of disappointment and growth. DS
NIMMO, JENNY 
Midnight for Charlie Bone. 
Orchard/Scholastic, 2003 
401p
ISBN 0-439-47429-9 
$9.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Charlie is trying to make a birthday card for his friend and next-door neighbor,
Benjamin, when a latent magical gift inherited from his presumed-dead father
manifests itself. Before he can say "I don't want to be a wizard," Charlie finds
himself enrolled in the infamous Bloor's Academy, home of all manner of geniuses
magical and otherwise. Charlie is quickly embroiled in the search for a long-lost
girl, the mystery of his missing father, and the machinations of his own wicked
relatives. Underlying the fast and furious action is the shrouded history of the
legendary Red King and his ten children, five good and five evil, and the epic
battle between them that is slowly coming to the fore. Nimmo's likable hero is a
good kid who plans to stay that way, and he remains steadfast in the face of threats
and blandishments from intimidating, bullying bad guys. The lines between allies
and enemies are drawn from the opening pages, with physical attributes as well as
revelatory names clearly delineating-or at least broadly hinting at-who's who.
Nimmo's characterizations, while not overly complex, have a high comfort level,
and her major players are well-defined and sympathetic. The scene-a brooding
boarding school with numerous halls, dungeons, and ancient ruins situated in a
British city filled with bookshops and cathedrals--provides an appealing back-
374 * THE BULLETIN
drop for the action. Magical and non-magical allies and enemies mix in a fantas-
tical blend that will remind seasoned fantasy readers of Harry's stamping grounds.
While there is an occasional plot glitch (Charlie acquires a critical piece of me-
chanical magic both precipitously and illogically), overall Nimmo's quintet (this
title is the first of five) promises to be an absorbing, well-wrought read. JMD
O'MALLEY, KEVIN 
Mount Olympus Basketball; written and illus. by Kevin
O'Malley. 
Walker, 2003 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8845-9 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8844-0 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
O'Malley (author-illustrator of Velcome, BCCB 11/97, etc.) brings his slick
cartooning and warped sense of humor to this play-by-play picture book about a
basketball game between the Olympian Pantheon and the Greek Heroes. Two-
dimensional as these pages may be, O'Malley manages to communicate the fe-
vered craziness of a hotly contested basketball game in the staccato, sports-announcer
narrative and the larger-than-life cartoon action. The introduction of the players
("He's big. He's strong. He's slippery when wet. He's the brother of Zeus. He's
the god of the sea. It's ... POSEIDON!") sets the tone for the rest of the book.
Game announcers Fred and Chet's commentary is the primary text (most of it in
bordered text boxes on the tops and bottoms of the pages); the players provide an
ongoing, irreverent supplemental patter in dialogue balloons. The halftime show
consists of a quick tour of ancient Greece that mentions the scenery, arts and
culture, and the glory that was Greece ("Ancient Greece is a place of innovation.
New ideas about government, architecture, drama, storytelling, and the fine arts
have revolutionized this mighty empire"). The players have that oiled and wind-
blown look common in old mythology-adventure movies, and the cartoon art has
a florid, slightly over-the-top style that provides an instant jolt of slapstick silliness.
The enthusiasm and craftiness of the oversized heroes aside, the gods are a shoo-in,
but only after Zeus pulls some divine craziness on the court. A page of suggestions
(teachers, books, websites, call numbers) for learning about Greek mythology is
appended. JMD
PALATINI, MARGIE 
The Perfect Pet; illus. by Bruce Whatley. 
HarperCollins,
2003 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000109-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000108-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Elizabeth longs for a pet. Finding her parents' gift of a cactus insufficient to ad-
dress the need ("Elizabeth really, really did like the plant . .
but, she still really,
really, really wanted a pet"), she engages in clever stratagems to angle for a horse,
a dog, a cat, or anything, but all to no avail. Finally she discovers her own very
satisfactory pet: Doug, the remarkable bug. Doug is somewhat overstretched as a
solution, since the reality of the dilemma and Elizabeth's parents' objections are
jettisoned without any warning in the face of the fantastical insect. There's still
lively humor in Elizabeth's plotting and the comic turns of the narrative (each
proposed pet gets a resigned epitaph: "Scratch the horse ... forget Fido ... cross
off Kitty"), underscored by Palatini's pithy section headings. Whatley's
hyperrealistic watercolors mine additional humor from the situation, piling ani-
mal-themed trappings onto the hopeful Elizabeth and ridiculous details into imag-
MAY 2003 
* 375
ined scenes of the chaos various undesirable pets would cause (a helmeted Eliza-
beth whizzes past her stunned parents on a skateboard, pulled by a galloping dog
under a teddy-bear jockey), and easygoing Doug is a laid-back companion, one
pair of his six legs nonchalantly crossed. This doesn't quite have the resonance of
classic pet-acquisition books, such as Graham's "Let's Get a Pup, "Said Kate (BCCB
9/01), but kids will snicker at the humor even as they relate to the protagonist's
yearning. DS
PROIMOS, JAMES Johnny Mutton, He's So Him!; written and illus. by James
Proimos. 
Harcourt, 2003 
42p
ISBN 0-15-216760-9 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
One of the weirder easy-reader heroes, sheep-boy Johnny Mutton (from The Many
Adventures ofJohnny Mutton, BCCB 7/01) returns here in five new enjoyably strange
schoolboy adventures. First he saves the universe from the depredations of the
carnivorous Sweet Baby Doll 5000 (really, it makes sense in context); then he
challenges ace cook Mandy Dinkus to a cook-off, throws a party for his friend
Gloria Crust, expresses his affection for the owner of the local grocery, and learns
about his mother's secret weapon in a heated staring contest. The high-spirited
bizarreness gets extra zing from the touches of reality (Johnny wins the cooking
context because "Mandy Dinkus made something so adult the smell alone turned
the judges green") and earthy humor (Momma Mutton's secret weapon is a con-
centration-shattering fart), and the energetic, colloquial dialogue will quickly re-
ward struggling readers. Proimos' work in television animation shows in the speedy
pace and electric energy of the visuals, which have the unthreatening paneled ap-
pearance of comic strips. This is therefore a highly accessible early reader with
definite appeal for cartoon fans and for anybody who appreciates a protagonist
who's oddball yet heartwarming. DS
RAPP, ADAM 
33 Snowfish; illus. by Timothy Basil Ering. 
Candlewick,
2003 
[192p]
ISBN 0-7636-1874-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Custis is a weedy preteen who's been unwanted and abused, Curl is a teenage
prostitute trying not to slip back into a drug habit, and Boobie, the light of their
lives, is a quiet, magnetic, and disturbed young man, who's on the run after killing
his parents. Together with the nameless baby who's Boobie's younger brother
("Boobie wants to name it, cuz you can't sell no baby that don't got no name") the
three travel aimlessly but desperately to "as close to nowhere as possible." They
end up in the cold Minnesota winter, sheltering in an abandoned van in a small
town; there a sickly Curl weakens and dies, and a grieving Boobie walks off into
the snow-blown landscape. Now on his own with the baby, Custis is taken in by
Seldom, an old man who'd caught him trying to steal a chicken, and who now,
much to Custis' shock, becomes his benefactor. Rapp goes where few other YA
novelists, save perhaps Brock Cole in The Facts Speak for Themselves (BCCB 10/
97), do: the voices of his protagonists (Custis and Curl both provide narration,
while the silent Boobie offers the occasional drawing) admit little external judg-
ment, directly depicting the desolation of the life of these throwaway kids, who
fiercely attach to one another and whose viewpoints are not so much constricted as
scarified. Custis confidently spews the vicious racism he learned from "this fat
376 
* THE BULLETIN
man who used to own me," as he unselfconsciously puts it; Curl longs for even the
small possibilities of the past as the trio becomes increasingly futureless on their
drive into the hinterlands; Boobie's solution to a stressful time at a roadside motel
is to torch the place. This isn't naturalism, however, but more a gritty contempo-
rary parable: as in his previous books, Rapp adds his own heightened, creatively
colloquial language to the flat, profane voices of his characters, and layered mean-
ings abound. That intensification is sometimes mannered, and there's a sentimen-
tality beneath the hard-edged portraits; racist Custis' redemption (or what passes
for one in this world) at the hands of African-American Seldom is, like kindly
Seldom himself, somewhat of a cliche. This is still a book that's rare in its brutally
frank treatment of the unresolved tragedy that is many young people's lives. DS
RICHARDS, JEAN, ad. 
How the Elephant Got Its Trunk; illus. by Norman
Gorbaty. 
Holt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6699-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Richards retells Kipling's "The Elephant's Child" for the very young, turning it
into a simple how-and-why story. A curious little elephant wants to know what
the crocodile eats for dinner; she asks members of her family, Giraffe, and then
Hippo, but they are unforthcoming. The Kolokolo Bird, however, tells her to "go
to the banks of the great, gray-green, greasy Limpopo River, where the crocodile
lives, and find out for yourself." So the little elephant goes to the river, meeting
monkeys and a lion on the way, and finds the crocodile, who gives her the answer
to her question-and, after a tug ofwar-a new nose, too. The text is contempo-
rary conversational ("Once upon a time, in the days before elephants had trunks,
when they had only bumps for noses, there lived a little elephant who was very
curious"), gender-adjusted (Kipling's "'satiable Elephant's Child" is now a female),
and severely abbreviated (for example there is no Bi-Coloured-Python-Rock-Snake,
a key animal helper in the original plot). Much of what gave the Kipling text its
unique appeal is missing here, but Gorbaty's cheery illustrations make a valiant
effort to supplement the missing charm. The technique (printing ink, rollers, and
stencils on black and white paper) results in bright, splashy pictures of jungle ani-
mals large enough to be seen by groups that will be young enough to appreciate
this cheery cumulative tale. But oh, Best Beloved, don't believe that by reading
this you are exposing youngsters to the classic wonder of Kipling, for this isn't, and
you aren't. JMD
Russo, MARISABINA 
The Trouble with Baby; written and illus. by Marisabina
Russo. 
Greenwillow, 2003 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-008925-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-008924-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
Brother and sister Hannah and Sam do everything together, until Hannah gets a
new doll for her birthday. "Baby" soon takes Sam's place as Hannah's favorite
playmate, leaving Sam hurt and jealous, until he turns an old teddy bear into a
playmate of his own. If three's a crowd, then four makes everything right again in
this serene, homey tale of overcoming jealousy. The siblings' hurt feelings are
tempered by the flattened affect of the art; Russo works with untextured blocks of
color to depict recognizable domestic moments. The particularity of the setting
and the situation enable a ready identification for young readers who have been
MAY 2003 
* 377
displaced in the court of someone else's affections; Sam's solution, managed with-
out adult intervention, is an easily transferable one. Neither overwrought nor
oppressively energetic, this book offers a gentle solution for a rift in an otherwise
exemplary sibling relationship. KC
SCHWARZ, RENEE 
Funky Junk: Cool Stuff to Make with Hardware.
See review under Friedman, p. 360.
SINGER, MARILYN 
Fireflies at Midnight; illus. by Ken Robbins. 
Atheneum,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82492-0 
$16.95 
R* 
6-9 yrs
A poet always at her best when writing about the natural world (as in Turtle in July,
BCCB 9/89) here offers fourteen new poems about animals and, in some way or
another, about time. Singer provides quicksilver patterned lyrics for creatures rang-
ing from the robin chirping in the early morning ("Up cheerup I'm up/ Let me be
the first to greet the light") to the red eft considering an afternoon trip to the pond
("And I have four steady legs/ few enemies/ and all the time/ in the world"), from
the frog croaking his status in the night ("baron I'm the baron/ I'm the duke/ I'm
the king") to the mole contemplating underground chronology ("In the beneath/
it is mole time/ the whole time"). Her close-coupled rhythms, employing thrum-
ming repetitions and tumbling rhyme, give her verses all the organic structure of
nature ("Web is the work/ is the home/ is the trap/ is the hub/ is the map"-
"Spider"); the atmospheric sound effects will conjure up each subject's world even
for listeners ensconced in a stuffy classroom. Robbins takes his photographic en-
hancement in a new direction in these illustrations, sometimes abstracting his fig-
ures in a haze of pixels (the grazing horse suggests a Chuck Close portrait from a
distance), sometimes delicately augmenting the chiaroscuro (the tan rabbit freezes
almost invisibly behind golden stalks of grass), and sometimes making the ordi-
nary into the surreal through the vividness of his contrasts (the monarch butterflies
would be at home in one of David Wiesner's picture books). This will be reward-
ing as a readalone, musical as a readaloud, and promising in its provision of cre-
ative choral reads, as well as being a title particularly well suited to sharing outdoors
with the soundtrack of the natural world behind it. DS
SMITH, HOPE ANITA 
The Way a Door Closes; illus. by Shane W. Evans. 
Holt,
2003 
[58p]
ISBN 0-8050-6477-X 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
In this narrative of a father who loves, leaves, and finally returns to his family,
Smith employs various poetic forms to create snapshots of the shifting emotional
landscapes of a boy's heart during this momentous event in his thirteenth year. At
first the family is happy; the father is strongly attached to his children, his wife,
and his mother. Describing a family portrait, young C. J. says, "Back straight and
chest out,/ my daddy is proud./ We are his world./ And he's got the whole world/
in his hands." When his father loses his job and fails to find a new one, he despairs
and, eventually, walks away from this family he loves. As C. J. grieves, his voice
oscillates between bitterness, hope, anger, and sadness. He chides his mother when
she dresses up to go out and asks him how she looks: "You look like you forgot,"
378 * THE BULLETIN
he says, his "winter words" calculated to hurt her. He argues with his friend Preacher,
who tells him that "Dads are light./ They have no roots./ One strong wind and
they're gone," returning only "once in a blue moon." Grandmomma keeps her
faith, though, in blue moons and second chances; that faith is justified as the father
returns: "He can't find enough words/ to say how sorry he is. But he keeps on.
Each word rooting him to us ... " The poems vary in style and form, but Smith
consistently and forcefully uses the final two lines to deliver the full emotional
impact of the moment. Her sustained metaphors over the entire sequence orient
readers, keeping hope alive and providing satisfying closure to the narrative. Evans'
poignant alkyd illustrations close any remaining gaps between the eye and the
heart; the emotional eloquence of his figures seamlessly complements that of the
poetry, weaving together a deeply moving reading experience. KC
WADE, MARY DODSON 
Condoleezza Rice: Being the Best. 
Millbrook,
2003 
47p 
illus. with photographs 
(Gateway Biography)
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2619-7 
$23.90
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7613-1927-1 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
The National Security Advisor is quite a prominent person these days, and this
compact biography provides an overview of Rice's prodigious youth and her con-
siderable achievements on route to her current position. Wade looks at Rice's
childhood in Birmingham, Alabama, where she lived under the restrictions of seg-
regation and witnessed firsthand some of the upheavals of the civil-rights move-
ment (she was, in fact, acquainted with one of the girls who died in the 1963
church bombing), then her meteoric rise to academic importance (after rejecting a
career as a pianist, since she felt she would never reach the standard she wished) as
an expert in Russian affairs and as an administrator, and her work for both the first
and second Bush administrations. The style is often choppy and the account su-
perficial and limited, taking sources at face value rather than offering any indepen-
dent analysis (Brent Scowcroft's praise of "this slip of a girl" suggests a particular
viewpoint in light of the fact that the "girl" was over thirty at the time, but the text
leaves the statement unexamined); the tidbitty sidebars are personal but some-
times oddly placed. The book does admit a bit of the controversy in Rice's Stanford
career, and it diligently surveys her career and personality more thoroughly than
most encyclopedia articles, so kids daunted by more sophisticated assessments or
restricted to print may find this a useful resource. Pictures of Rice's life and family
appear throughout; there are no source notes provided, but a timeline, short list of
material for further reading, and an index are included. DS
WILLEMS, Mo 
Don't Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus!; written and illus. by Mo
Willems. 
Hyperion, 2003 
[34p]
ISBN 0-7868-1988-X 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Willems, writer and animator of Sesame Street fame, makes his picture-book debut
with an irresistible bit of fowl play. Though this enterprising blue pigeon dreams
of driving a city bus, even before the book starts the bus driver has asked the book's
audience not to let the pigeon take the wheel. The pigeon pleads, bargains, and
otherwise attempts to trick and cajole the viewer into granting his humble wish to
drive the bus (after all, his "cousin Herb drives a bus almost every day. True
story"). As a readalone or a readaloud, this increasingly desperate one-sided con-
MAY 2003 
* 379
versation assumes the cooperative interaction of its audience; even the youngest
auditor can join the fun because the answer is always, say it loud, say it often,
"NO!" The frustrated fowl's anguish takes center stage in the streamlined yet
remarkably articulate illustrations; tidy charcoal outlines that reveal the sure hand
of a seasoned animator are set against plain creamy backgrounds of various muted
shades. The simplicity of the illustrations and the pigeon's large, expressive eye fix
the viewer in a compellingly dynamic and focused relationship. By putting the
child in the deliciously empowering position of being the one to say no to the
outrageous request of the pigeon, this avian misadventure begs to be read again
and again. KC
WINTERS, KAY 
Abe Lincoln: The Boy Who Loved Books; illus. by Nancy
Carpenter. 
Simon, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-689-82554-4 $16.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
This picture-book biography traces Lincoln's life from birth to election, stressing
the theme of the future president's early and consistent love of learning. Winters'
selection of anecdotes and details hearken to a past period of children's historiog-
raphy, replete with legends and apocrypha aimed at establishing the inestimable
character traits of an up-and-coming statesman: "Folks liked to tell that once he
overcharged someone six cents, but 'Honest Abe' walked miles to give it back."
Given Lincoln's role as commander-in-chief during the Civil War, there's some
potent irony to Winters' observation that "Abe shot a turkey in the woods. But
not again. He vowed he would not take the breath from living things." The
maelstrom to come, however, is mentioned only in the author's final note, and
young children who are most familiar with Lincoln's later image as the gaunt, war-
weary leader should certainly be drawn to Carpenter's more personable, gently
humorous portrayal of the spindly youngster and the frontier milieu in which he
was raised. Softly smudged, canvas-textured oil paintings make the most of Abe's
lank and length, and if the scenes are somewhat romanticized into a golden haze,
the often lyrical text generally hits the mark: "When politics began to call his
name, Abe aimed his words at wrongs he'd like to right." EB
YOLEN, JANE 
My Brothers'Flying Machine: Wilbur, Orville, and Me; illus. by Jim
Burke. 
Little, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-97159-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Katharine, younger sister of Wilbur and Orville Wright, makes another appear-
ance (see Maurer, above), this time as narrator of her brothers' accomplishments.
The wordy account, cast in ragged-right lines that suggest free verse, marks the
milestones along the path to success but does not convey the painstaking calcula-
tion and experimentation for which the Wright brothers are justly famed, nor does
it note the specific problems that needed to be solved to make heavier-than-air
flight a possibility. Rather, the audience witnesses a fairly smooth progression
from childhood tinkerers, to bicycle mechanics, to inventive glider enthusiasts, to
self-taught aeronautical engineers, and ultimately to history-making fliers. Katharine
ends her narration in 1909 when, after years of watching from the sidelines, she
takes a seat next to brother Will and makes her own first ascent. In a closing note,
Yolen reviews some of her sources and explains that all but one quote have been
documented (although Katharine's claim here that women passengers inspired the
380 
* 
THE BULLETIN
craze for hobbled skirts should probably be taken with a pinch of skepticism).
Burke's oil and colored-pencil scenes are flat and static; only two scenes include
the Flyer in motion, one of which-a reimagined view of the now famous photo-
graph of the 1903 lift-off- indulges in some problematic exaggeration, with staid
Wilbur leaping into the air like a cheerleader. This title will ably introduce the
men at Kitty Hawk, but it won't illuminate the disciplined genius that led them
there. EB
ZEMAN, LUDMIA, ad. 
Sindbad'sSecret; ad. and illus. by Ludmila Zeman. 
Tundra,
2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88776-462-2 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
In this adaptation from The Thousand and One Nights, the legendary Sindbad the
Sailor is telling the story of his most memorable undertaking to his friend, Sindbad
the Porter. In the course of this adventure Sindbad the Sailor finds himself ship-
wrecked on an island, enslaved by pirates, and befriended by an elephant. He
stumbles upon the funeral of a Maharajah, whose favorite dancer, Fatima, is to be
burned on his funeral pyre. Sindbad (and his friend the elephant) saves Fatima
from certain death and flees to safety-and a happy ending. The plot is packed,
and the pace is quick; Zeman also offers an older and wiser hero than in her Sindbad
(BCCB 2/00), a man who has lived long enough to realize what is truly important.
The pencil and watercolor illustrations and text boxes are framed in ornately de-
tailed borders, and each composition, large and small, features magical scenery,
from monster-filled seascape to starry skyscape to tropical landscape. Extensive
detailing of flora, fauna, costumes, and architecture gives each impressive picture
an intricate, coiled clarity. Zeman's combination of breathless storytelling and
color-drenched images successfully establishes this picture book as a wonder tale,
an impression reinforced by the closing image of a smiling Shahrazad, black hair
streaming, riding a starry horse across the night-blue sky. An author's note in-
cludes information on Zeman's sources and adaptation process. JMD
^^_7
MAY 2003 
* 381
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
WHITED, LANA A., ed. 
The Ivory Tower and Harry Potter: Perspectives on a Liter-
ary Phenomenon. 
University of Missouri Press, 2002 
408p
ISBN 0-8262-1443-6 
$34.95
Whited, a professor of English at Ferrum College in Virginia, has brought to-
gether an impressive array of scholarship to address the phenomenon that is Harry
Potter. Sixteen essays grouped into seven themes (Harry's Cousins in the Magical
Realm; Harry's Roots in Epic, Myth, and Folklore; Harry's Other Literary Rela-
tives; Greater Than Gold in Gringott's: Questions of Authority and Values; Gen-
der Issues and Harry Potter; Harry's Language: Taking Issue with Words;
Commodity and Culture in the World of Harry Potter) discuss Rowling's work.
Editor Whited's succinct and well-organized introduction ("Harry Potter: From
Craze to Classic?") not only outlines what is to follow but also traces the arc of
Harry Potter's literary success. From historical literary cousins to socio-political
interpretations of the series' setting, from textual comparisons to fan club commu-
nities, the essays span a wide range of scholarly perspectives. M. Katherine Grimes
looks at protagonist Harry as literary and fantasy hero in "Harry Potter: Fairy Tale
Prince, Real Boy, and Archetypal Hero"; Eliza T. Dresang examines the impact of
being female in Harry's world in "Hermione Granger and the Heritage of Gen-
der"; Nancy K. Jentsch discusses the translation of Rowling's epic into languages
other than English in "Harry Potter and the Tower of Babel: Translating the
Magic" (including a dandy table comparing English terms with the French, Ger-
man, and Spanish translations). Brief biographical information about the con-
tributors is included, as is an extensive bibliography (of books, print journal articles,
and online resources) and index. This is an exciting and substantial contribution
to early scholarship about an important body of literary work. JMD
382 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abandonment-fiction: Baskin;
Rapp
Abandonment-poetry: Smith
Abuse-fiction: Rapp
ADVENTURE: Hobbs; Martin,
N.; McLean
African Americans: Wade
African Americans-fiction: Rapp
African Americans-poetry: Smith
Animals: Lang
Animals-fiction: Hobbs
Animals-poetry: Singer
Animals-stories: Richards
Ants: Micucci
Art: De Rosamel
Aviation: Maurer
Aviation-stories: Yolen
Babies: Asquith
Babies-fiction: Arrington; Rapp
Babies-stories: Appelt
BIOGRAPHIES: Brown, D.;
Crutcher; Maurer; McLean;
Wade; Winters; Yolen
Biology: Goodman
Birds-stories: Willems
Brothers and sisters-stories: Gay
Butterflies-stories: Collicott
Building-stories: Crum
Chickens-fiction: Cazet
Chickens-stories: Khan
Children's literature: Crutcher
Chinese-fiction: Martin, N.
Circuses-fiction: Hegi
Clothing-fiction: Brashares
Clothing-stories: Cooke; Gay;
Masini
Cousins-stories: Anderson; Fried-
man; Schwarz
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Halliday
Cults-fiction: Lynn, J.
Cultural studies: Dennis
Current events: Wade
Disabilities-fiction: Hegi
Dogs-stories: Appelt; Bailey;
Goodhart
Dolls-stories: Lindgren; Russo
Dreams-fiction: Myracle
Elephants-stories: Richards
Ethics and values: Arrington;
Buchanan; Gallo
Families-poetry: Smith
FANTASY: Brennan; Jones, D.;
Lynn, T.; Nimmo
Fathers-fiction: Baskin
Fathers-poetry: Smith
Fears-stories: Khan
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Dearden; Lupton; Lynn, T.;
Richards; Zeman
Food and eating-stories: Lupton
Friends and friendship-fiction:
Brashares; Myracle
Friends and friendship-stories:
Brown, J.; Goodhart; Russo
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Myracle
Grandfathers-stories: Martin, J.
Grandmothers-fiction: Christensen
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Arrington; Love; Martin, N.
History, U.S.: Brown, D.; Winters
Houses-stories: Crum
HUMOR: Bailey; Brown, D.;
Brown, J.; Cazet; Cooke; Fox;
Gay; Jones, U.; Kuskin;
MAY 2003 
* 383
O'Malley; Palatini; Proimos;
Willems
Illness-fiction: Hobbs
Imagination-stories: Chambers
Immigration-fiction: DeFelice;
Martin, N.
Independence-fiction: Lynn, J.
Insects-stories: Collicott; Palatini
Insects: Micucci
Latin America-folklore: Dearden
Latinos-fiction: Dearden; DeFelice
Magic-fiction: Brennan; Nimmo
Medieval life-fiction: Love
Mothers-fiction: Buchanan
Movies: Brown, D.
MYSTERIES: Anderson
Mythology, classical: O'Malley
Native Americans: Dennis
Nature study: Goodman; Lang;
Micucci; Singer
Orphans-fiction: Love
Parties-stories: Bailey; Chambers
Pets-poetry: Hopkins
Pets-stories: Collicott; Palatini
Photography: Friedman
Pigs-stories: Martin, J.
Pioneers-fiction: Arrington
Pirates-stories: Brown, J.; Fox
POETRY: Hopkins; Kuskin;
Mitton; Singer; Smith
Presidents: Winters
Princes-fiction: Brennan
Princesses-fiction: Cabot
Prostitutes-fiction: Rapp
Puppets-fiction: Love
Reading aloud: Kuskin; Mitton;
Singer
Reading, beginning: Appelt;
Goodhart; Goodman
Reading, easy: Brown, J.; Cazet;
Hopkins; Proimos
Reading, reluctant: Cabot; De
Rosamel; Friedman; Proimos;
Schwarz
Relationships-fiction: Myracle
Religion-fiction: Lynn, J.
RHYMING STORIES: Asquith;
Crum
Romance-fiction: Cabot
Schools-fiction: Nimmo
Scotland-folklore: Lupton
Sheep-fiction: Proimos
Ships and sailing-fiction: Zeman
SHORT STORIES: Christensen;
Gallo
Sisters-fiction: Baskin
Social studies: Dennis
Space travel-stories: Chambers
Sports-fiction: O'Malley
Stepmothers-fiction: Baskin; Lynn,
T.
Storytime: Appelt; Bailey; Collicott;
Cooke; Fox; Jones, U.; Martin, J.;
Richards; Russo; Willems
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Anderson
SURVIVAL STORIES: Lynn, J.
SUSPENSE: Halliday
TALL TALES: Fox
Theater-fiction: Love
Time-poetry: Singer
Time travel-fiction: Brennan
TODDLER BOOKS: Asquith
Toys-stories: Lindgren; Russo
Transportation: Maurer
Transportation-stories: Willems;
Yolen
Uncles-fiction: Hobbs
Voyages and travel: McLean
Voyages and travel-fiction: Gallo;
Zeman
Voyages and travel-stories: Cham-
bers
Weddings-stories: Masini
Whales-stories: Fox
Witches-stories: Jones, U.
Wizards-fiction: Jones, D.; Nimmo
Women's studies: Christensen;
Love; Maurer; McLean; Wade;
Yolen
Work-fiction: DeFelice
Writers and writing: Crutcher
Writers and writing-fiction: Cabot
and suspenseful stories offer multiple perspectives of apartheid.
Each of the seven young protagonists featured here comes to
understand the meaning of oppression as they witness or experience
the effects of gross injustice. In Less than 200 pages, Naidoo
manages to chronicle pivotal events in an ongoing battle for
freedom in South Africa and to encapsulate the enduring hope and
unfailing spirit of its people." 
-Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
*• 
"Naidoo honors her country's past, present, and future
with these brave tales." 
-Starred 
review / The Horn Book
Ages 10 up. $16.99 Tr (0-06-050799-3); $17.89 Lb (0-06-050800-0)
Also by Beverley Naidoo
The Other Side of Truth
Carnegie Medal Winner
$16.99 Tr (0-06-029628-3); $17.89 Lb (0-06-029629-1); $5.99 Pb (0-06-441002-1)
t lla-peiColliis(bt'll;-ez'.ýBook
F_ 
Aailale 
fom 
te 
-
ISBN 0-87845-105-6;
Number 39; 143 pages;
paper; $21.95*
STOR: FROM FmnIREPCE 
CESPACE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE,JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINEJENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget
that children are not simply passive receptacles for
whatever treasure or trash the adult world throws at
them but are lively agents who are continually inter-
acting with their environment. Children actively cre-
ate meaning as readers, viewers, and listeners. The
3 9
1h Allerton Park Institute papers emphasize the criti-
cal need to connect children and narrative as a way to
affect their development as listeners, readers, view-
ers, and evaluators of literature-and information in
all forms.
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin Storytelling Review con-
tains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use
ISBN 
0-87845-106-4; 
99
pages; paper; $14.95*
Scl) (I o I IIcrý to:( ýS I I ý P I I b I i (,it io I I, Offilc, Roo I I 1 2-4, 501 F. Dal I iel Strcct, (11,111111ýligj 1, 11
01820. PicP'lyllicrit le(joirc(l; Visa, Nlxqer('ýIld, Alliclic'm Fxpless, Dicmcl .11)(i checks
to dic [,.'nivcrsa,ý ol Illmok) acccpi'A.
Information regarding odwr publications can lic obt.imccl ký writim, to tlik: Ibm e
a(ldress ol 
an tic IýCcsscd it our Web sitc:
'PliLe does N(I I iiicludc diipping. Willim 11), (111t(C'I 
tilt: sluppilig ost I, S3 IIII
tlw fiist bot& ýI I'M Cddl additiorittl 1)"01, Ill 1111' 
01clCl. 011L.Silic oftfic i:im,(i
(lie sliipping , ost iý S5 f'()i dic firs( JL)I)"I,, 
",I'll 
it luok ill III, 
ýirric I, 1 1, r.
hbl.111 RMI.)
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.SA 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2002 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccbl
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and password.
This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit number but
may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
0008-9036(200305)56:9; 1-2
I IIl 
I I 
I
'Ile/ 
.4® 
' 
" 1, 
