I 
L INOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
'>-'- 
" 
^J
.. < ** 
'-,
fLI 
u1/- 
L., J j
"Few illustrators can coax quite so much expression and
animation from a few dashes of fine brushwork and a smear
or two of watercolor fill. Here Cooper's agile shapes spring
and dart among sinuous lines of text as dancers who bring a
show through four weeks of rehearsal to the opening curtain
of a debut. Any reader who would happily trade all the
bedroom furniture for a barre will be on Cloud Nine, and
listeners whose sophistication has just about outrun picture
books will also revel in both the wry humor and the artistry."
-Bulletin 
Blue Ribbons'01, Starred Review/
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
"A sensitive tribute that goes beyond the usual dreams of
pink tutus and toe shoes." 
-ALA Booklist
Ages 4 up.
$15.95 Tr (0-06-029418-3);
$15.89 Lb (0-06-029419-1)
MS Greenwillow 
Books
^^^^^^^^^ 
An iptfiflr~int of arper 
fllnublisherBsgf'
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
February 2002
Vol. 55 No. 6
A LOOK INSIDE
197 THE BIG PICTURE
Frida by Jonah Winter; illus. by Ana Juan
198 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
207 * Owen's Marshmallow Chick written and illus. by Kevin Henkes
208 * Under the Quilt ofNight by Deborah Hopkinson; illus. by James E.
Ransome
212 * The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow;
illus. by Christopher Bing
217 * The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents by Terry Pratchett;
illus. by David Wyatt
226 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
227 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Sabrina Austin
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road,
Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O.
Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edulpubofflbccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2002 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Ana Juan from Frida by Jonah Winter. Published by Arthur Levine Books, an
imprint of Scholastic Press, a division of Scholastic Inc. Illustration © 2002 by Ana Juan. All rights
reserved. Used by permission.
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 
197
THE BIG PICTURE
Frida
by Jonah Winter; illus. by Ana Juan
Our adult impulse to introduce increasingly younger children to historical person-
ages is not always a wise one, since adult achievements are often too abstract to
compress understandably into a thirty-two-page text for an audience that lacks a
good deal of the relevant context. Some books have attempted to evade the con-
text problem by focusing on the subject's childhood and by employing a less liter-
ally biographical approach. Unfortunately, the result too often is a book about
someone who apparently hasn't done anything interesting enough to merit being
a book's subject; it's like reading a biography of the kid across the street.
Fortunately, Jonah Winter's Frida, an imaginative treatment of the life
of Frida Kahlo, avoids these pitfalls. It's clearly not your ordinary biography,
providing names and dates to be quoted in reports: it leaves mention of Kahlo's
marriage and, for that matter, her last name to the author's note at the end. In-
stead this is a quietly lyrical encounter with a particular artistic spirit, emphasizing
not the traditional measures of achievement but the more personal experiences
and impulses that could also drive any reader of the book. Winter (who also
chronicled Diego Rivera's life, in Diego, BCCB 11/91) writes sparely yet evoca-
tively in the present tense, describing Kahlo's youth ("Enter, stage left: Frida's
imaginary friend. Her name is also Frida"), her constant struggle with pain and
disability ("Instead of crying, she paints pictures of herself crying"), and her poi-
gnant, individual art. Kahlo's dramatic life makes the narrative compelling even
to an audience that knows nothing of her artistic significance: the determined
young girl leads a life of suffering that only sharpens her hunger to see and to
paint.
Since painting was Kahlo's real language, the visuals here are all-impor-
tant; fortunately, they rise to the challenge. The text, in delicate, spidery type,
appropriately adapts itself to the illustrations, settling onto the backs of photo-
graphs, fluttering across curtains, tucking itself into a corner behind Frida's
nightstand, hovering through the pages as part design, part information. Juan's
note explains that she was inspired by Mexican folk art as well as Kahlo's work in
creating her acrylic illustrations, and they've got a slightly softened, wide-eyed air
that gives them their own mood rather than being merely imitative of Kahlo. The
child Frida has a round yet austere face, her expression distant and her eyes down-
cast as she focuses on the world of her visions rather than the real world. The
rotundity and modeling give her the solidity of a clay figure while the smudgy
imagined critters possess a matter-of-fact corporeality. The wise-eyed jaguar, portly
demon, and rotund skeleton and their ilk seem like credible and comforting com-
panions on a reality footing equal to the microscope through which Frida looks or
the fruit on her table; but then, the fruit on the table includes a beatifically smiling
198 
* THE BULLETIN
tomato and grinning skull-like grapes. Despite the memento mori and the unreal-
ity, these visions are amiable company, a sharp contrast to the double-spread view
of Frida, post-accident, imprisoned in a barren thicket of thorns with the weeping
moon behind her and bereft of her fantastical friends.
The book will doubtless prompt some young people to go on to more
orthodox appreciations of Frida Kahlo, but it's also a reminder, in both its treat-
ment and its subject matter, of the utility and possibilities of art. Also suitable as a
readaloud for creative youngsters (which is pretty much a redundancy), this will
lure dreamers with its serenely fantastical view and invite them to dream their own
artistry. (Imprint information appears on p. 225.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. 
B. Franklin, Printer. Holiday House, 2001 
126p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1675-5 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Lives of the nation's founders are the reliable staples of the biography shelves, and
all too often they're about as bland as bleached rice. Adler, though, packs enough
kick and punch into his account of the Revolutionary statesman to convince read-
ers that the fellow in the wire rims and fur hat is someone worth knowing. The
standard information is all here: the printing business, the electrical experiments,
the international negotiations, the initially reluctant-then fervent-advocacy for
independence, all the items the history teacher expects a student to know. So,
though, is the information a kid might actually want to know: Franklin the run-
away, Franklin the earthy humorist (sly innuendo concerning melted pants but-
tons should elicit some guffaws), Franklin the gamester (ambitious kids can try to
find the error in the jacket reproduction of his sixteen by sixteen magic square),
Franklin the ladies' man ("One evening they played chess while Madame Brillon
soaked in a covered bathtub"). Chapters are brief and digestible, chapter source
notes are chatty and illuminating, and clear inset reproductions of period newspa-
pers are nothing short of fascinating. Overwrought Frenchmen may have dubbed
Franklin "Apostle of Liberty," but Adler might just convince hard-sell middle-
schoolers to call him a pretty cool guy. EB
ATTENBOROUGH, LIZ, comp. 
Poetry by Heart: A Child's Book ofPoems to Remem-
ber; illus. by Ian Andrew, Peter Bailey, Robin Bell Corfield, et al. 
Chicken House/
Scholastic, 2001 
124p 
illus.
ISBN 0-439-29657-9 
$17.95 
R Gr. 3-7
First published in Britain, this collection of over 100 poems features art by nine
different illustrators, each handling a different thematic section. Though included
poets come from various places, there's a definite British slant to the anthology,
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 
199
with contributions from contemporary writers such as Philip Larkin and Wendy
Cope, poets past such as John Clare and John Dryden, and stalwarts such as Ed-
ward Lear and Robert Louis Stevenson; even Anonymous has an Anglo-Saxon
flavor here. While some terms will seem arcane to U.S. readers (and "Chinese
Counting" for a nonsense rhyme will raise a few eyebrows), they'll relish the pleas-
ing exoticism thereby lent to the most domestic of scenes. Difficulty levels of the
poems range widely, making this useful for employment with a group varied in
age, and there's plenty of opportunity for readalouds. On the whole, the poems
are more sophisticated than the art, a discrepancy that may need to be tactfully
handled (readers skilled enough for Siegfried Sassoon may find the picture-book
appearance rather babyish). The illustrations vary in quality and suitability as well
as style: Polly Dunbar's sharp, squiggly-lined watercolors are energetically appro-
priate for the "Stuff and Nonsense" section, for instance, but Ian Andrew's blurry
colored-pencil work lends an unfortunate stodginess to "Uplifting and Brave."
Nonetheless, this is an intriguing gallery of poetic possibilities that will be new to
many readers. Indices of titles, authors, and first lines are included. DS
BATEMAN, TERESA 
Red, White, Blue, and Uncle Who?: The Stories Behind Some of
America's Patriotic Symbols; illus. by John O'Brien. 
Holiday House, 2001 
6 4p
ISBN 0-8234-1285-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
While this title shares the same mission as Delno West's Uncle Sam and Old Glory
(BCCB 1/00), overlapping on such obvious choices as the Liberty Bell and the
American flag, Bateman bypasses some ofWest's topics (Smoky the Bear, the peace
pipe) and dishes up her own favorites (the Vietnam Veterans and Korean War
Memorials, the White House, the Capitol). Each symbol is explained in a brief
chapter rather than a single spread; the format is somewhat stodgy, but the line-
drawn cartoons, though less refined than Manson's striking woodcuts for Uncle
Sam, add a gentle lunacy to the proceedings that kids will appreciate. Historical
notables in O'Brien's signature raccoon-eyed style merengue across the jacket, set-
ting a decidedly light-hearted tone, but the inner illustrations are as instructive as
they are entertaining. Early patriots holding boxes of precut stars and stripes sol-
emnly watch their companion hoist additional cloth strips up the flagpole, comi-
cally demonstrating the original practice of adding a bar for each new state; Pierre
L'Enfant sprawls on the carpet with his construction set from a Tinker-Toy-styled
canister labeled "Capitol." Report writers who want to get serious can consult an
index to access specifics, but it's the browse-and-skim set who will enjoy thumbing
through the Red, White, and Blue. EB
BIBLE 
Easter; ad. and illus. by Fiona French. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-06-623929-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-lOyrs
In the ornate language of the King James translation of the Bible, this narrative
recounts the last days of Jesus from his triumphal entry into Jerusalem; through
the last supper, trial, crucifixion, and empty tomb; and on to his final appearance
at Bethany, where "he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into
heaven." No specific Scripture citations are offered, and any child even superfi-
cially acquainted with the Passion tale will recognize drastic, and often choppy,
abridgment. No mention is made of Jesus' last meal with the apostles' being a
Passover celebration, no segue connects Jesus' stoic responses to Pilate and his
200 
* THE BULLETIN
condemnation, no criminals are executed at Jesus' side. Intricate illustrations em-
ploy thick black lines and panels of paint to evoke English cathedral windows, but
they lack the rich luminosity of the translucent medium that inspires them; more-
over, the minute detail of glass and leading that blends at a distance is oppressively
busy when viewed at arm's length in a picture book. Still, French achieves a rever-
ent mood that has its place in Holy Week observances, and librarians developing
the Christian literature collection are likely to recognize this rendition has consid-
erable appeal to patrons looking for a seasonal readaloud. EB
BILDNER, PHIL 
Shoeless Joe & Black Betsy; illus. by C. F. Payne. 
Simon,
2002 
40p
ISBN 0-689-82913-2 
$17.00 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Plummeting from star slugger to an outcast besmirched by scandal, Shoeless Joe
Jackson is the eponym for baseball drama, but this tall-tale rendering of his early
career zeroes in on the relatively tepid theme of Jackson's persnickety quest for the
perfect bat, realized at last in the form of his fabled Black Betsy. Blaming each
batting slump and subsequent fall from major-league grace on inadequate equip-
ment, Joe continually consults 01' Charlie, the consummate craftsman who not
only fashions his forty-eight-ounce bats but also instructs him in their care and
feeding: "When you get up north to Cleveland, you make sure you wrap her in
cotton cloth every night. The South is the land of cotton, Shoeless Joe, and a good
Southerner must always be true to his roots." Folksy idiom and repetition brush a
folkloric patina over the proceedings, but the slim plotting cannot justify the ram-
bling text; Payne's mixed-media illustrations capture flap-eared, ham-handed Joe
at some startling and original angles, but they awkwardly cast the semi-tragic figure
in a comic light. Four pages of concluding notes comment on the 1919 World
Series debacle that saw Jackson tossed from the pros, and it's here that aficionados
will find the satisfying intrigue. Readers sufficiently outraged by Shoeless Joe's
banishment can pursue the closing reference (that seems to pass as a wildly biased
source note) to his booster club at www.blackbetsy.com and nutz the Baseball
Commissioner for Jackson's posthumous reinstatement. EB
BLEDSOE, Lucy JANE 
Cougar Canyon. 
Holiday House, 2001 
130p
ISBN 0-8234-1599-6 $16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Thirteen-year-old Isabel-Izzie-Ramirez is bored by the prospect of an unevent-
ful summer hanging around the mall, so she starts a one-girl business doing yard
work. Working for Mrs. Gray, she gets to know Mrs. Gray's teenage son, Charles,
and his friend Sam, who've been intrigued by rumors of a cougar in their Bay Area
neighborhood. Despite the skepticism of the wildlife service, Izzie and the boys
become increasingly convinced that there is a big cat around, and they're deter-
mined to find it-but the boys want to kill it while Izzie wants to save it. The main
cougar plot lacks both clarity and drama, since secondary material about Izzie's
family, her career ambitions, and her interest in the Gray family often interferes
with it, and it's hard to sort out some of the different threads. Bledsoe has created
an inviting world, however, with Izzie a member of a warm extended family where
cousins are best friends and reliable allies. Izzie herself is an easygoing narrator
who realistically combines adolescent gawkiness with good business sense and an
appetite for hard work, making her a strong and appealing character. Reminiscent
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 
201
of Booth's Panther (BCCB 3/01), this will draw wildlife-loving youngsters hoping
for a wild-animal encounter of their own. DS
CLEMENTS, 
ANDREW 
Jake Drake: Know-It-All; illus. 
by Dolores
Avendafio. 
Simon, 2001 
88p
ISBN 0-689-83918-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Looking back on his quest to win last year's third-grade science fair-and a top-of-
the-line Hyper-Cross-Functional Bluntium Twelve computer system-computer-
crazy Jack shares his retrospective wisdom: "Like I said before, I'm ten now, so
I've had some time to figure out some stuff. And one thing I know for sure is this:
There's nothing worse than a know-it-all." Most remarkable for its single-minded
focus and crystal clarity, this highly purposive tale is told by the kind of articulate
kid grownups too often invent as their spokesperson, and his milieu suffers from
generic blandness. Educational content relating to the scientific method is laid
out systematically, and the message-focusing on winning takes the fun out of
science-comes through loud and clear. Readers will appreciate the tight focus,
easy style, and straightforward approach, however, as well as the touches of realis-
tic detail (the impressive list of stuff in Jake's junk drawer, for example) and per-
ceptive insight about school or family life (some teachers do treat the process of
asking and answering questions as if school were a game show and students poten-
tial winners and losers). Science teachers looking for an accessible conversation-
starter may appreciate Clements' well-developed exploration of science-project
mania and the model he provides for addressing the problem; kids may just enjoy
a quick Clements read. Avendafio's inky illustrations have a pleasing robustness
unusual in chapter-book art. FK
COHN, AMY L. Abraham Lincoln; by Amy L. Cohn and Suzy Schmidt; illus. by
David A. Johnson. 
Scholastic, 2002 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-93566-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
This latest title in the canon of Lincoln lit strikes an admirable balance between a
comprehensive view of the president's life and the informality likely to engage
quite young listeners. Cohn and Schmidt assume an intimate narrative voice,
directly encouraging audience response: "See that tall, tall man in that tall black
hat? Know who he is? That's right, he's the man on the penny." The chatty tone,
which occasionally strays into forced folksiness, helps bring the tragic aspects of
Lincoln's career into child-manageable terms: "People died, too many to count.
President Lincoln grieved each one. 'Sometimes I think I'm the tiredest man on
earth,' Mr. Lincoln said. And he probably was." There are some oddities in the
account-audiences will not hear of the death of Lincoln's sons Eddie and Willie,
the troubled mental condition of his wife, or the name of his assassin, and they will
hear (yet again) the misleading claim that his Emancipation Proclamation declared
"all slaves free"-but this nonetheless brings Lincoln's character and early days to
fresh and vivid life. Relentless use of soft earth tones for pictures and ecru back-
ground for text results in a washed-out effect that's occasionally tedious, but
Johnson's delicate line and softly stippled watercolor washes, set within a vertically
oversized format, accentuate Lincoln's lanky angularity as his limbs regularly over-
reach the subtly outlined confines of the spreads. The overall presentation is sen-
sitive enough to move children beyond admiration and toward compassion:
202 
* THE BULLETIN
"Imagine. All his life he was so busy he barely had time to take a haircut. Now he
rests." EB
CROSSLEY-HOLLAND, KEVIN 
Arthur: The Seeing Stone. 
Levine/Scholastic,
2001 
342p
ISBN 0-439-26326-3 
$17.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Arthur de Caldicot, younger son of Sir John de Caldicot, is determined to become
a squire and then a knight. His account of daily life at Caldicot Manor, on the
border between Wales and England, is rife with references to the coming new
century (the year is 1199), the Crusades, the passing of Richard the Lion-Hearted,
the social stratification of the manor's inhabitants, and the harshness of life with-
out basic hygiene and antibiotics. Merlin, the local mystery man, gives Arthur a
magical piece of obsidian that shows the boy images and events in the life of leg-
endary King Arthur that seem to parallel his own life: an illegitimate conception,
the death of a brother, an almost fatal sword fight, etc. Arthur's narration has an
earthy immediacy, and the revelations that Arthur is not his father's son, that mys-
tery man Merlin is the wizard he sees in the stone, and that his future is not neces-
sarily his for the deciding unfold slowly but effectively in this first title in a planned
trilogy. The narrative's separation into one hundred brief chapters somewhat chops
up the story; the continuity is further broken up by the side trips into fifth-century
Arthurian legend and lore and further complicated because the characters in the
obsidian stone's images of legend physically resemble people Arthur de Caldicot
knows in real life. Despite the Arthurian echoes, the book's real strength lies in its
portrait of the twelfth-century knight wannabe and the world that surrounds him,
and many readers will be intrigued by this offbeat exploration of the medieval
world. JMD
ENGLISH, KAREN 
Strawberry Moon. 
Farrar, 2001 
116 p
ISBN 0-374-47122-3 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-8
On the long car trip from northern California to Los Angeles, Imani's mother,
June, tells stories about the year she spent in L.A. with her Auntie Dot. These
richly detailed stories always strike Imani as "bizarre and entertaining," but now
they are more significant: June lived with her father and brother at Auntie Dot's
house when her parents separated, and now Imani is going with her mother and
younger brother to stay with her great aunt while her parents "see how it goes."
The distanced tone of June's storytelling voice reverberates in the close quarters of
the car, creating an intimate setting for Imani's responses to her mother's revela-
tions and reflections. Southern California-from the perspective of Chicago-born
June-was an exotic locale, and her 1960s childhood is similarly strange to her
daughter. Both time and place are subtly evoked by the era-bound minutiae asso-
ciated with universal childhood anxieties and yearnings: kids may not buy grape-
flavored "winner suckers" for five cents any more, but they know what it feels like
when friends do-or do not-share their wealth. June also provides thoughtful
explanations of social phenomena, like the extra emphasis on honesty and respect-
ability understood to be part of the "responsibility of being a Negro." If one can
usefully share an adult perspective on childhood with someone whose childhood is
still in progress, this sort of uncompromisingly honest retrospection just might be
the way to do it. FK
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 203
FELDMAN, RUTH TENZER 
Don't Whistle in School: The History ofAmerica's Public
Schools. 
Lerner, 2001 
88p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-1745-0 
$25.26 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
"What am I doing here?" undoubtedly crosses a lot of students' (and even a few
teachers') minds in the course of a school day, and Feldman's title hints that it
might hold the answer. Beginning with the Latin and dame schools of the colonial
period, traversing the ever-expanding opportunities for a lengthened school ca-
reer, and arriving at our present twenty-first-century configuration, the text is an
overstuffed backpack of issues such as minority education, progressive curricula,
classroom technology, and student rights. The whys behind each issue are barely
addressed, however, and the half dozen chapters that form the bulk of the presen-
tation amount to little more than chronologically arranged miscellany. Readers
never learn why a newborn Congress concerned with the education of its citizenry
failed to provide for mandatory national education; nor can they delve into the
implications of intelligence testing, the growing need for school meal programs,
the pros and cons of out-of-district busing, or why, for that matter, the U.S. edu-
cational system differs significantly from its European and Asian counterparts.
There's a fair amount of amusing, unsourced trivia, though, and enough geeky-
looking sepia-toned photographs (that make even recent history seem far away) to
convince students they're probably better off in the here-and-now. End materials
include a selected bibliography and an index. EB
FRIEDLANDER, MARK P., JR. 
When Objects Talk: Solving a Crime with Science; by
Mark P. Friedlander Jr. and Terry M. Phillips. 
Lerner, 2001 
120p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-8225-0649-1 
$26.60 
R 
Gr. 5-10
YEATTS, TABATHA 
Forensics: Solving the Crime. Oliver, 2001 
[144p] 
illus.
with photographs 
(Innovators)
ISBN 1-881508-75-7 
$21.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-10
The old fascination with crime-solving and new advances in science combine to
make forensic detection an intriguing subject. Friedlander and Phillips focus on
various contemporary procedures such as bloodstain analysis, document examina-
tion, ballistics, and DNA testing, offering concise and lucid explanations not only
of the science but also of the relevant legal concepts. The interwoven narrative of
a fictional murder case is cheesily written, providing less interest than the nonfic-
tion text, but it does give readers a chance to see some theoretical employment of
the described methods. Working in the format of the Innovators series (see Aaseng's
Construction: Building the Tools of War, BCCB 4/00), Yeatts focuses more on the
people behind forensic science and the history of its methods, offering intriguing
chronicles of the underappreciated Henry Faulds, champion of fingerprint theory;
Mildred Trotter, the original "bone detective"; Alec Jeffreys, the pioneer of DNA
fingerprinting; and others. There's plenty of juice and scandal as well as interest-
ing technical details in the accounts, so this is no dry and mechanical collective
biography. The two books are complementary rather than competitive, with Yeatts'
material providing a useful background for the contemporary techniques Fried-
lander and Phillips discuss. When Objects Talk benefits visually from glossy pages
204 
* THE BULLETIN
and color photographs, while the black-and-white images in Forensics are often
rather washed out; each book has a glossary, bibliography, and index. DS
GAVIN, JAMILA 
Coram Boy. 
Farrar, 2001 
328p
ISBN 0-374-31544-2 
$19.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
In eighteenth-century England, a scoundrel named Otis Gardiner and his simple-
minded son, Meshak, spirit away the scandalous results of women's folly for a fee:
instead of honoring their promise to place the illegitimate babies in the Coram
Orphanage, however, they instead bury the infants in unmarked graves. A delu-
sional Meshak saves the infant born of Melissa, a governess' daughter, and aristo-
crat Alexander Ashbrook, taking the boy to London and turning his care over to
the Coram, where he is named Aaron by the staff. Dickensian turns of fate and
plot abound: due to the machinations of her mother, Melissa believes her baby
was stillborn and that the secret of his birth and her ruin is safe; not even Alexander
knows he has a son. Fate, however, brings the main players perilously close and
the secrets of the past ever closer to being revealed with every twist and turn. Gavin
has put together a raging cauldron of scandal, secrets, and sin, along with a healthy
dose of redemption, justice, and fairy-tale endings, and the result is a densely writ-
ten but immensely involving piece of historical fiction. Readers who appreciate
Leon Garfield's historical adventures or Pullman's Ruby in the Smoke (BCCB 5/
87) will be caught up in the machinations of Gavin's villains, the unswerving loy-
alty of her heroes, and the serpentine twists of her plot. JMD
GLIORI, DEBI 
Pure Dead Magic; written and illus. by Debi Gliori. 
Knopf,
2001 
182p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91410-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81410-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Clan Strega-Borgia consists of three children (Titus, Pandora, and Damp), two
parents (Luciano and Baci), and one great-great-great etc. grandmother (Strega-
Nonna), who has been cryogenically preserved. They live in the castle StregaSchloss
(described in Great Scottish Houses You Can'tAfford), complete with turrets, dun-
geons, moat, and beasties (dragon, gargoyle, yeti, and crocodile) who defend and
protect them. Nanny Flora MacLachlan is a witch in hiding, Signora Baci Strega-
Borgia is a witch in training, and Don Lucifer Di S'Embowelli Borgia (half-brother
to Signor Luciano Strega-Borgia) is a gangster. The plot is overcrowded, and the
novel itself lacks tonal variety; the Mafia and Italian-ancestry jokes wear more than
a little thin. Readers will nonetheless relish the breakneck pacing and fizzy blend
of ingredients, including some cyber-shenanigans, apparently random magic, a
kidnapping, an attempted assassination, and a hyper-intelligent spider who knows
how to negotiate the world wide web. Though the wit sparkles only inconsis-
tently, this may satisfy youngsters who like their supernaturalia silly. JMD
GOODALL, JANE 
The Chimpanzees ILove: Saving Their Worldand Ours. 
Preiss/
Scholastic, 2001 
80p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-21310-X 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
The oft-biographized Goodall writes in her own words about the primates to whom
she's devoted her life. Starting with a brief overview of her childhood on her start
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 205
down her unusual professional path, Goodall then focuses on chimpanzees, de-
scribing their interactions and sharing anecdotes about some of her favorites in
Tanzania's Gombe National Park; she also discusses the plight of chimpanzees in
the face of human needs and misuses, concluding with suggestions of ways young
people can assist in the protection of chimpanzees and the preservation of vital
natural resources. While much of this material is available elsewhere, Goodall's
commitment and devotion infuse the volume with energy, and there's an intimacy
to her observations that will make readers feel a part of the action. Photographs
are somewhat inconsistent in quality (not surprising, considering the number of
photographers and the range of time involved), but most are sharp and well com-
posed, set attractively in a clean and inviting layout accented with spring greens
that echo the greenery of the chimps' environment. This is more a personal explo-
ration than a hard-science text, but it may be the more appealing for that; browsers
may find themselves getting sucked in for a full read and even additional research.
End matter includes a diagram of primate classification, a map of the chimpanzee
range, information about the Jane Goodall Institute, and a bibliography of Goodall's
book and other media material. KM
GREEN, JEN 
You Wouldn't Want to Be a Polar Explorer!: An Expedition You 'd
Rather Not Go On; illus. by David Antram. 
Watts, 2001 
32p 
(You Wouldn't
Want to ... Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-14601-4 
$25.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-531-16207-9 
$9.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
ROOP, CONNIE 
Escape from the Ice: Shackleton and the Endurance; by Connie
and Peter Roop; illus. by Bob Doucet and with photographs. 
Cartwheel/Scho-
lastic, 2001 
48p 
(Hello Reader!)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-439-20640-5 
$3.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Two very different books chronicle Shackleton's 1914-1916 Endurance expedi-
tion to the Antarctic, recently a popular topic in books for young people
(Armstrong's Shipwrecked at the Bottom of the World, BCCB 2/99, etc.). Green's
entry catches the spirit of the irreverent "You Wouldn't Want To ... 
" series
perfectly, with a surprisingly immediate account emphasizing the personal dis-
comforts of the experience ("You try to sleep under the deck, lying on the rocks in
a rotting reindeer-skin bag. It is so cramped that you feel like you are being buried
alive!"). Her breezy second-person narration puts the reader into the shoes of
Captain Frank Worsley, Shackleton's "skipper," who steered one of the small open
boats to Elephant Island after the crushing of the Endurance and then helmed the
boat that left Elephant Island in search of assistance from the whaling station at
South Georgia Island. The illustrations are sympathetic to their bug-eyed carica-
ture sailors, investing them with life and allowing them to blow off steam in pithy
speech-balloon comments. The Roops' book is more orthodox, but it's harder
going (it's unlikely that it's going to be accessible to many of the second-graders
that form part of its ostensible audience) and less cohesive; it's also occasionally
plagued by flaws (Sir Ernest is referred to erroneously as "Sir Shackleton" through-
out, and one of the illustrations depicts the crew within a snug interior room long
after any such interiors were available for their use). There's plenty of detail, how-
ever, and the text has a flair for the dramatic chapter-ending that will entice readers
to keep sledging onward; the inclusion of on-the-scene photographs help provide
206 
* THE BULLETIN
energy lacking from the stiffly drawn contemporary illustrations. Both books have
their place, but it's Green's expedition that youngsters really will wish to go on.
Maps appear in both titles; Green's also includes an index. DS
HARRIS, PETER 
Ordinary Audrey; illus. by David Runert. 
Tiger Tales,
2001 
32p
ISBN 1-58925-014-1 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
There's nobody tougher in Deadwood than Deadwood Deb, five-year-old terror
of the West, so when outlaws are expected in town she's the likeliest candidate for
sheriff. Unfortunately, Deb's out of town on an alligator-wrestling holiday, so her
twin sister, Ordinary Audrey, agrees to step into the breach and make like Deb.
The outlaws initially best her, since they see through her ruse, but Audrey manages
to outsmart the varmints and send them high-tailing it out of town. While it
seems unfair that our heroine's victory depends solely on being mistaken for her
sister, it's impossible not to warm to worried little Audrey, whose only previous
triumph had been "to out-sick the other kids after eating too much cake at par-
ties," and who's finally galvanized into action when those nasty outlaws wreck her
sparkly silver star. The measured highlighting and undifferentiated tones and faces
of the computer-generated art unfortunately make Deadwood downright bland to
look at, but Runert at least adds some lively ingredients, such as the outlaws' mal-
feasances (they're rolling the townsfolk in barrels, maltreating a teddy bear, and
defacing posters of Deadwood Deb), to the spreads, and the sweeps of scarlet and
orange make the pages glow like a western sunset. Like Stanley's Saving Sweetness
(BCCB 11/96) and Lowell's Little Red Cowboy Hat (6/97), this has a touch of
ornery charm that will tickle many ordinary and extraordinary kids. DS
HARRISON, MICHAEL, comp. 
The Young Oxford Book of Christmas Poems; comp.
by Michael Harrison and Christopher Stuart-Clark. 
Oxford, 2001 
160p 
illus.
Trade ed. ISBN 0-19-276247-8 
$19.95 
R* 
Gr. 7 up
Verse-wise, we tend to associate Christmas with jingly-bell songs and jingly rhymes,
but Harrison and Stuart-Clark's collection of well over 100 poems, almost all likely
to be brand new to youngsters, reminds us that plenty of writers have given the
holiday a richer poetic treatment. Themes drift easily from wintertime (Theodore
Roethke's "The Coming of the Cold") to the secular side of festivities (Brian Moses'
"Christmas Day"), from the beasts in the stable ("Made you think well of the
human race;/ and that doesn't happen every day"-Elma Mitchell's "The Ox-and-
the-Ass's Story") to the beasts on the table ("Every turkey has a Mum"-Benjamin
Zephaniah's "Talking Turkeys!!"), from the flight into Egypt (Anthony Stuart's
"Whatever Next?") to Santa Claus (John Hegley's "Christmas in the Doghouse")
to the new year (Ted Hughes' "New Year Song"). Poets are varied but predomi-
nantly British, with names of yore (ohn Donne, Thomas Crashaw) mixing ami-
ably with names of now (Wendy Cope, Adrian Mitchell-who specifically requests
that his poems not be used for exams); mood is also satisfyingly varied, with some
entries reverent, some funny, and some even spooky. While overall the collection
is a fairly sophisticated read (in general, this is accessible adult-geared poetry),
individually there are a multitude of audience possibilities and several Advents'-
worth ofreadaloud opportunities. The sixteen illustrators have differing gifts, but
the design is thoughtful and attractive throughout, with poems often imagina-
tively placed against full-bleed double-page scenes (and, with Eliot's "Journey of
the Magi," dramatically shining white amid complete blackness). Stock up on this
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 207
one now-there are only three-hundred-and-some shopping days until Christ-
mas. An index of titles and first lines is included. DS
HARVEY, AMANDA 
Dog Eared; written and illus. by Amanda Harvey. 
Doubleday,
2002 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90845-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72911-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-7 yrs
Otis the dog is walking home from the park when a big bully dog rudely insults
him ("Out of my way, Big Ears!"), sending Otis into a tailspin of self-doubt about
his physical appearance: "My ears were quite large. HUGE, in fact. How had I
never noticed?" Poor Otis becomes despondent, refusing to eat his treats or chase
the neighborhood cat, and he hurries home to try out a variety of new "ear styles"
("Should I gel them up?"); nothing seems right, however, and, inconsolable, he
retreats downstairs to his bed. Nightmares about enormous ears then disturb Otis's
rest until his young owner, Lucy, crawls into his basket to sleep with him and
contentedly praises his ears (they are silky and "fabulous," and they keep her warm).
The next morning, Otis bounds out of bed with a new leash on life, and when the
same bully dog calls Otis "Fat Face," he is able to respond, "I don't think so!"
Despite the slightly flat ending, this is a droll, offbeat story that sits up and begs to
be read aloud. Otis's humanlike self-awareness and sensitivity about his appear-
ance are gently humorous, and kids will easily relate to both the name-calling and
the anxiety over one's looks. Harvey's casual, muted watercolors are occasionally a
bit awkward (there are some strange-looking dog feet, for example) but long-eared,
brown-and-white Otis is a very sympathetic and personable (doggonable?) figure
as he leans sadly against Lucy, poses uncertainly before her mirror, and confidently
prances down the park path. Kids will gladly lend an ear to this one at storytime.
JMH
HENKES, KEVIN 
Owen's Marshmallow Chick; written and illus. by Kevin
Henkes. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
24p
ISBN 0-06-001012-6 
$6.95 
R 
2-4 yrs
Though infatuation with Easter candy has actually been touched on before in
children's literature (see Wells' Max's Chocolate Chicken, BCCB 3/89), here that
love takes a slightly different turn as young mouse Owen becomes so taken with
his yellow marshmallow chick that he decides to save it as a toy rather than eat it.
Those who remember tender Owen's tenacious attachment to his blanket, Fuzzy,
from Owen (BCCB 10/93) will find his decision completely in character (and in
fact, it is the chick's resemblance to the yellow Fuzzy that prompts Owen to keep
it). Henkes's minimal text follows a consistent pattern as Owen inspects each
goodie in his basket, declares it "his favorite," and eats it up, until he gets to the
beloved chick. Sunny spreads feature pastel-tinted pages (upon which the text is
centered) faced with similarly hued images of Owen, his basket, and a few toys
against a lily-white background. As usual, Henkes' jaunty illustrations imbue his
mouse characters with distinctive personality, clearly seen here in scenes of Owen
joyfully bouncing at the sight of his full Easter basket and gently playing with the
marshmallow chick. This little board book is just the right size to tuck into Easter
baskets-but parents should be prepared when, after reading, children want to
keep their Marshmallow PeepsrM as playthings. JMH
208 
* THE BULLETIN
HETTINGA, DONALD R. 
The Brothers Grimm: Two Lives, One Legacy. 
Clarion,
2001 
[192p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-05599-1 
$22.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Children's-literature scholar Hettinga here turns to a younger audience, penning a
chronicle of the two famous brothers that emphasizes their lives' similarity to the
journeys of folkloric heroes. From school to work to scholarship, the brothers
encountered tragedy (the deaths of their parents), helpful old women (their aunt,
Tante Zimmer), hard work (long labor in the libraries and offices of the Hessian
government), and reward (recognition as scholars by the international intellectual
community). Hettinga not only provides useful information about the Grimm
brothers, he also conveys the complexity of the social structure that ruled the for-
mative folklorists' lives and the impact of political upheaval that changed Euro-
pean history. Each chapter opens with a quote from one of the collected folktales;
all chapters are densely illustrated with reproductions of paintings, engravings, and
drawings. A brief afterword, an annotated bibliography, lists of the Grimms' pub-
lications and a list of the Grimm tales, a timeline, and careful source notes are
included; the bound book will contain an index. JMD
HILL, PAMELA SMITH 
The Last GrailKeeper. Holiday House, 2001 
227p
ISBN 0-8234-1574-0 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Fifteen-year-old Felicity is accompanying her mother, a professor of Arthurian
literature, to an archaeological dig in Glastonbury, England. The discovery of the
Grail precipitates Felicity's meeting with the time-traveling Morgan le Fey, subse-
quent involvement in a plot to rescue the Grail from money-grubbing advertisers
led by time-traveling Mordred, and the revelation that Felicity herself is one of the
legendary maidens of the Grail, or Grail Keepers. Hill's heroine has a conversa-
tional voice that younger readers will be able to follow easily and that older readers
will find comfortably casual. The pace is quick, revelations are nicely timed, and
characterizations are pithy but solid; subtle (and not so subtle) references to
Arthuriana are sprinkled enjoyably throughout. Unfortunately, the novel's logic
regarding time travel leaves much to be desired (if the Grail is destroyed in the
present, why will that change the recent past? If Mordred is injured in the distant
past, before his betrayal of Arthur, does that mean that Camelot doesn't fall?), and
the conclusion, though satisfying, is more wish fulfillment than well-developed
fantasy. Still, this title is an easy booktalk and an easy entree to the Round Table.
JMD
HOPKINSON, DEBORAH 
Under the Quilt of Night; illus. by James E.
Ransome. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2001 
34p
ISBN 0-689-82227-8 
$16.00 
R 
7-10 yrs
The creative team from Sweet Clara and the Freedom Quilt (BCCB 7/93) turns
here to the story of a young girl who escapes from slavery via the Underground
Railroad. The narrator describes her experiences in a series of free-verse poems:
"Running" ("I'm young/ but my legs are strong./ I can run"); "Waiting" ("All I can
do is wait/ for the cover of darkness"); "Watching" ("The others rest,/ while I keep
watch for a sign/ from the Underground Railroad-/ and friends who will help us
get free"); "Hiding" ("I lie awake wondering/ about others who have hidden here./
I won't ever know their names"); "Traveling" ("Fear is so real, it lies here beside
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 209
me"); and "Singing" ("Freedom!/ I take a deep breath/ and when I let go/ my voice
flies up in a song"). The poems are somewhat prosy, but there's a precision and
breathlessness in the short lines that adds tension to the already intense situation.
Ransome's oil paintings handle light and shadow with dramatic effect, moving
from the hushed darkness of escape to the bright light of freedom. His composi-
tions also skillfully steer the pace, as in the powerful opening spread: three frames
bring the small group of runaways increasingly closer to the foreground, the narra-
tor moving forward until, in the final frame, she is the lead runner, looking out at
the viewer. Hopkinson's concluding note provides some historical context for the
Underground Railroad and the quilts that were used to guide escapees on their
journey. JMD
HOWARD, GINGER 
A Basket of Bangles: How a Business Begins; illus. by Cheryl
Kirk Noll. 
Millbrook, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-7613-1902-6 
$21.90 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Sufiya's life is changed when a villager encourages her to borrow money from the
Grameen Bank; after finding the requisite four friends to share the loan and learn-
ing the rules of the bank, she's ready to go. Sufiya changes from a beggar to a
successful bangle-seller, and at the end of her year term of loan, she and her co-
borrowers decide to borrow again and expand their businesses. The legendary and
innovative Grameen Bank is well worth literary explanation, and the book does a
good job of simply and clearly explaining the terms of Sufiya's loan and the ben-
efits the loans confer on these women's lives. The fictional narrative is stilted and
oversimplified, however: there's no exploration of the unusualness of the Grameen's
approach or even of the lifestyle rules the women learn to get their loan, and the
women's poverty is never effectively conveyed. Howard also avoids mentioning
any of the pitfalls of borrowing and lending, making credit seem so safe, simple,
and easy that readers will wonder what took Sufiya so long and why other banks
aren't riding this gravy train. The watercolor illustrations are prettified and some-
times awkward (especially with faces and animals), but they're evocative of daily
life in the women's Bangladeshi village. Ultimately, the subject deserves better
than this well-meaning but overdiluted effort, which misses the young audience its
formatting suggests by miles while providing insufficient explanation for older
ones. A two-page factual Q&A about the story and the Grameen is appended. DS
HOWARD, REGINALD. 
The Big, Big Wall; illus. by Ariane Dewey and Jose
Aruego. 
Harcourt, 2001 
20p 
(Green Light Readers)
Library ed. ISBN 0-15-216504-5 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-216522-3 
$3.95 
Ad 
Gr. K-1
In this revision of "Humpty Dumpty," the ovoid protagonist "did not want to
have a big fall." Though "one friend came to the big, big wall" assuring him that
"I will help you. You will not fall," the giant egg isn't comforted: the mouse looks
"too small." He feels comfortable enough to jump down to his friends only after a
third, more substantial, helper shows up. The plot will unfortunately confuse
some youngsters, since Humpty seems to plummet even as he protests, and readers
may not be as convinced as Humpty about his friends' ability to break his fall.
Beginning readers will, however, appreciate the repetition and variation within the
concise rhymed text. The illustrations emphasize repetition as well, which makes
them reassuring if bland: the flower-bordered big, big wall is the solid centerpiece
210 
* THE BULLETIN
of each spread, while some expression and movement are provided by the ever-
changing watercolor sky and the quirky ink outlines of Humpty's animal pals,
which include a purple rabbit and a more conventional pink pig, as well as the
mouse. This carefully balanced challenge may be just right for newly independent
readers looking for a comfortable jumping-off point. FK
JACOBSEN, RUTH 
Rescued Images; written and illus. by Ruth Jacobsen. 
Mikaya,
2001 
92p
ISBN 1-931414-00-9 
$19.95 
R* 
Gr. 6 up
During World War II, Jacobsen spent a beleaguered childhood in hiding; after
being separated from her parents, she was moved from family to family, posing as
a distant relative in one household after another. Her memoir is presented in a
series of vignettes, highlighting bits and pieces of remembered childhood within a
sea of pain and loss. Her occasional reunion with her parents brought her little
comfort ("I felt my only option was to hate my parents. That way I wouldn't have
to think about their helplessness or worry about them"), and after the war, the
family remained broken; although her parents survived, their relationship did not,
and eventually they each committed suicide ("The Nazis had killed them as sure as
if they had died in a camp"). The book's elegant presentation dramatizes without
prettifying; mixed-media collages, incorporating family photographs and letters
along with images of wartime Europe, accompany the text. Jacobsen layers these
images with thick paint strokes to create rough surfaces, rife with visual interruptions
and a sense of fragmentation that echoes the metaphorical fragmentation of
Jacobsen's childhood. Although there are many Holocaust memoirs available for
young adult audiences, this one stands out for its moving marriage of art and text
and as a chilling reminder that the effects of the Nazi regime extend far beyond the
barbed-wire fences of concentration camps and gnaw at the lives of so-called
survivors. KM
LASTER, ERIC 
The Adventures of Erasmus Twiddle: Grmkville's Famous & Tal-
entedNot-Detective; illus. by Amy Abshier. 
Simon, 2001 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-84245-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Erasmus Twiddle-the "Famous and Talented Not-Detective"-is Encyclopedia
Brown scripted by Monty Python. Though he solves mysteries for the folks and
fantastic creatures (readers who need help imagining what a rabbit-hippo looks
like can refer to the appropriate line drawing) living in and around Grmkville, he
eschews the title of detective: "Anyone can be a detective. All they have to do is
send four bottle caps, three proof of purchase seals from their favorite cereal, two
AA batteries and one rattlesnake skin to P.O. Box 12345." Frame-breaking but
not ground-breaking, most of the humor in these mildly postmodern stories seems
forced or familiar, and the running gags (like the sidekick who emotes "Verily and
forsooth" in a pseudo-Shakespearean style) run out of steam long before they reach
the station. The Not-Detective's adventures nevertheless contain some original
moments: in the course of one oft-interrupted case, the narrator introduces the
reader to a page containing two columns with simultaneous plot lines by explain-
ing that although the characters are going their separate ways, we "are special and
can follow them both at the same time." "The Case of the Rubber Chicken"
teaches a more important lesson: "A rubber chicken cannot do anything but flop
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 
211
around. And even this it cannot do on its own. ... It looks funny when it flops
and it might make you laugh, but remember, you are making yourself laugh."
Despite the book's flaws, moments like these may well capture the fancy of preco-
ciously sophomoric readers who like to giggle at humorous names and agree that
"sometimes poop is really, really funny." FK
LEVINSON, NANCY SMILER 
Magellan and the First Voyage around the
World. Clarion, 2001 
132p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-98773-3 
$19.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Few commanders, save perhaps Odysseus, conducted their fleets through more
mysterious waters, toward a more coveted goal, and with a more tragic and trium-
phant outcome than Portuguese explorer Magellan. This biography traces his life
through his rise in the Portuguese navy, through his disfavor at court, to his repa-
triation in Spain and the famed mission that forever changed the worldview and
economic aspirations of sixteenth-century European superpowers. The tale is awash
in drama that should be hard for a middle-schooler to resist-political treachery,
mutiny, piracy and warfare, religious fanaticism, storms, diseases, and ultimately
Magellan's own death in battle. Levinson notes the strengths and limits of various
extant accounts of the voyage and offers intriguing evidence that it was probably
Magellan's slave Enrique (not the mutinous Elcano, who brought the last battered
ship limping into port) who was the first person to circumnavigate the globe. Jus-
tifiable admiration for Magellan's accomplishments, however, is too frequently
couched in melodramatic language and sporadic outbursts of adulation: "Magellan
was said to be 'at one with his men,' since he endured the hardships alongside
them and never complained. True, he was a harsh and ruthless commander, ...
but he was also a man of his time and, in the end, a hero of his age." Nonetheless,
most readers will skim easily past any overblown rhetoric and simply enjoy the
adventure. Source notes, chronology, bibliography, index, and black-and-white
illustrations are included. EB
LOCKER, THOMAS 
Mountain Dance; written and illus. by Thomas Locker. 
Sil-
ver Whistle/Harcourt, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202622-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
Another in Locker's series of lyrical tributes to the wonders of nature, this entry
salutes the beauty of mountains and the geologic processes that create them. Al-
though not always scientifically exact, the text is filled with appealing literary im-
ages of mountain creation ("Shy dome mountains bubble up/ underneath older
mountains"), and the spare but lilting poetic prose will lend itself easily to being
read aloud. Unfortunately, this is often pretty rather than substantial, with the
poetic license leading to confusion as well as creativity; the book doesn't quite
manage to synthesize its aesthetic and scientific impulses. Locker's illustrations
offer fairly traditional and sometimes clich6d depictions of rocky vistas lit by crim-
son sunsets or pale morning and enveloped in soft haze, befitting the majesty of
the subject matter. At the end of the book, each illustration is reproduced in
miniature along with a more comprehensive textual explanation of the mountain
type shown. This might be a useful entry in a story hour, but it will more likely
play a role in the elementary science classroom, where its aesthetically engaging
approach may serve as a welcome complement to other materials on geology. KM
212 
* THE BULLETIN
LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH 
The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere; illus. by
Christopher Bing. 
Handprint, 2001 
34p
ISBN 1-929766-13-0 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Following the critical success of his Caldecott honor illustrations for Casey at the
Bat (BCCB 1/01), Bing takes on another venerable American ballad. Although
fashioned with the same obsessive care as Casey, this title is less inventive in ap-
proach. A "fancifully recreated" letter from British General Gage to his captain
folds out from the front endpapers and a map of the proposed advance on Con-
cord precedes the title page, setting the stage for the action to follow. Sections of
Longfellow's poem then appear in period type along the edge of each double spread,
while luminous ink and watercolor "engravings" depict Revere and his fellow Pa-
triots pursuing their reconnaissance and alarm mission. Although Bing presents
the whole as a leather-embellished, age-spotted scrapbook, with torn and yellowed
shreds of documents and artifacts pressed within its pages, he makes no effort to
conceal his own role in the scrapbook's crafting. Fully two pages of "miscellany"
comment on the historical veracity (and lack thereof) of Longfellow's spin on Re-
vere. Another double spread contains notes on illustration techniques, a heavy-
handed tribute to his mother's career as a social-studies teacher ("She often feels
the need to wrest the lies that are legacy and power of arts' interpretation of history
out of deeply-rooted places in her students' minds"), and a copious list of thanks
and acknowledgments worthy of the Academy Awards. A second map of the route
taken by Revere and his fellow riders and a foldout "corrected draft" of Revere's
deposition to the Provincial Congress on the back endpapers attempt to reestab-
lish authenticity, but by then the game is up. Bing has chosen to play the myth-
debunker, and this undeniably attractive effort therefore seems more at home in
the 970s than the 811 s. EB
MANNS, NICK 
Operating Codes. Little, 2001 
182p
ISBN 0-316-60465-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
A house shrouded in fog, mysterious footsteps in the night, a small child's inexpli-
cable fears-ah, it's good to be back in ghost-story country. Or at least it's good if
you're the reader, but for fifteen-year-old Graham, who's trying to puzzle out the
reasons for the strange phenomena in his family's new home and the abandoned
army camp nearby, it's unsettling indeed. His parents don't see the ghosts, his
mother being a sound sleeper and his father obsessed with the software engineer-
ing for a new military airplane, which has got various countries' defense contrac-
tors drooling in anticipation. It's therefore just Graham and his five-year-old sister,
Matty, who begin to put together glimpses of a past tragedy: in World War I, the
house was the center for military experimentation of deadly gas on prisoners, and
when a young orderly felt honor-bound to reveal those tests to the nation, he was
court-martialed and summarily executed. When Graham's father's defense soft-
ware appears on the Internet "in the interests of world peace" and he finds himself
on trial for breaching Britain's Official Secrets Act, Graham fears that history will
repeat itself. The documentation for Matty's interview with a psychologist is ex-
traneous and the conclusion doesn't really tie up the ghost story as well as the
contemporary drama, but Manns knows his ghostly stuff. The book offers both a
credible reason for the haunting and a nice line in spooky details, often enticingly
placed as chapter endings ("For outside, down below, in the empty courtyard was
the sound of marching men stamping their feet in unison over the gravel"), and
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 
213
the ethical issues raised are genuine and provocative without being overempha-
sized or overpolarized. This is a satisfying tale with old-fashioned style and a con-
temporary edge. DS
MARSDEN, JOHN 
The Night Is for Hunting. Houghton, 2001 
24 6p
ISBN 0-618-07026-5 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-10
It's been a fictional year (and a half dozen novels) since narrator Ellie and her high-
school mates were transformed in a heartbeat from outback campers to Aussie
freedom fighters. The latest title in the Tomorrow, When the War Began series
(BCCB 4/95, et al.) finds the five survivors caring for a band of"ferals" they plucked
from an enemy raid and spirited back to their bush outpost in Hell. The children's
leader, a resourceful, charismatic deaf boy named Gavin, is initially loathe to share
his power with the teenage strangers, but after leading his own group astray in the
bush with tragic results, he comes to tenuous terms with Ellie's crew and even
helps save their lives when a food raid goes terribly wrong. This isn't quite as fast-
moving as Marsden's earlier works, as the teens are held back a bit-both literally
and figuratively-by the younger kids, and Ellie engages in more than her custom-
ary share of introspection. Readers who rely on Marsden to deliver screenworthy
action scenes won't be disappointed, however, and the sure setup for the next
novel ("'All right,' Colonel Finley said. 'We're heading into a critical time. I want
to ask for your help again.. .' 'You've got it,' Homer said") should have 'em lining
up at the reserve desk. EB
MARTIN, ANN M. 
Belle Teal. 
Scholastic, 2001 
21 4 p
ISBN 0-439-09823-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
It is the fall of 1962, and Belle Teal Harper and her friend Clarice are thrilled to be
in popular Miss Casey's fifth-grade class. On the bus ride to school it appears that
their biggest problem will be stuck-up new girl Vanessa Mathers, who looks down
on Belle Teal because she's poor. The children are in for a surprise, however:
parents are blocking the school entrance to protest the three "colored" children
who will be attending the previously all-white school. When African-American
Darryl Craig arrives in her class, Belle Teal gets a first-hand view of just how nas-
tily insidious racism can be; when her friend Little Boss' abusive father starts a one-
man crusade to drive out the new students, the situation turns downright dangerous.
Martin writes with her usual accessibility, and the book effectively combined the
ordinary details of everyday life with the larger issue of racism. Unfortunately, the
plot is predictable (Belle Teal makes friends with Darryl; Vanessa reveals herself to
be pretty on the outside and ugly on the inside) and messagey, sacrificing reality
(Belle's mother is the epitome of enlightened poverty, and Belle Teal herself is
more than a little too good to be true) to its purpose. Still, this is an approachable
piece of historical fiction that, despite its tendency toward wishful thinking, looks
at the ugliness of racism without flinching. JMD
McCULLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
The Orphan Singer; written and illus. by Emily Arnold
McCully. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-439-19274-9 
$16.95 
R 
7-10yrs
It's the early eighteenth century in Venice, and the poor but musically talented
Dolcis (Mama and Papa Dolci and son Antonio) sadly decide that they should
give up baby Nina to the ospedalo, a welfare institution in which foundling girls
214 
* 
THE BULLETIN
receive "the best musical training in Europe." Raised by the older girls at the
ospedalo and visited frequently by the Dolcis (who don't reveal their true identity),
Nina (now dubbed Catarina) quickly rises through the ranks of young singers.
When Antonio becomes gravely ill, Catarina risks expulsion by leaving the grounds
to visit him (she is later commended for her kindness rather than cast out); a happy
ending finds Antonio recovered and the elder Dolcis well provided for thanks to
the earnings of opera star Catarina, who finally guesses the truth about their rela-
tionship to her. The plot is predictable and the writing a bit bland, but Catarina's
orphan-like status and the rags-to-riches plot may still please readers with a taste
for orphan stories and fairy tales. The exotic setting has appeal as well: McCully's
watercolor and tempera illustrations depict the ospedalo as a secluded place bus-
tling with warmth and activity as the scarlet-robed girls go about their regulated
day; the shadowy nighttime scenes of lamp-lit streets and canals are romantic and
alluring. An author's note provides additional information about the ospedali of
Venice. JMH
MEISTER, 
CARI 
J. 
K. 
Rowling. 
ABDO, 
2001 
2 4 p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Children's Authors)
ISBN 1-57765-482-X 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
R. L. Stine. ABDO, 2001 
24p 
illus. with photographs 
(Children's
Authors)
ISBN 1-57765-484-6 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
With Goosebumps continuing its steady roll off the library shelves and Hollywood
fanning the flames of Pottermania, there's no question that primary-grade
biography-report writers (and perhaps some recreational readers as well) will grab
these titles as first choices. While they do package a creditable amount of
information into an unintimidating format, their overall appeal is limited by
Meister's choppy writing and propensity toward odd non sequiturs: "One day in
1990, the train [Rowling] was riding broke down. As she waited, Joanne stared
out the window at some cows. Suddenly she had an idea for a new story. She
would write about a young wizard"; "Then Bob [Stine] created another humor
magazine for Scholastic called Maniac. And in 1980, his son Matthew was born.
But five years later, Scholastic couldn't afford to make Maniac any more." Both
titles are already dated, mentioning the Harry Potter movie as still in the planning
and citing Goosebumps'status as the world's top-selling children's book series from
Guinness World Records 2000. True fans probably won't care, though-color
portraits are inviting (Stine's poses with his monster realia are winners), challenging
vocabulary defined in a glossary, and official websites are listed. Twenty quick
pages later, kids can get back to the novels. EB
MELTZER, MILTON 
Case Closed: The Real Scoop on Detective Work. 
Orchard,
2001 
88p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-29315-4 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
While Meltzer does provide a section on forensic science, this title differs from
Friedlander's and Yeatts' books, reviewed above, in its focus on detective work in
general, both public and private. The book begins by discussing the nature of
investigation (and the importance of luck), then goes on to discuss details of detec-
tion, types of crime, different types of detection (including the Pinkertons, corpo-
rate espionage, and investigative reporting), and the results (some now questioned)
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 215
in court. The book covers a surprisingly wide variety of material, and it's refresh-
ing to see open acknowledgment of the political aspects of these matters (there's
mention both of Pinkerton's radical roots and the agency's famous union-busting,
for instance); readers will particularly appreciate the lively and colorful quotes from
detectives about the realities of the work. The material isn't well synthesized,
however, with sections and even sentences often choppy and disjointed; the politi-
cal assessments sometimes seem more interjections than components of a focused
approach. The tasty frontline tidbits and browsably brief chapters will nonetheless
lure kids interested in crime-solving, however, and they may be sufficiently in-
trigued to proceed to Friedlander's and Yeatts' more specialized titles. Black-and-
white photographs and gray-boxed sidebars are visually stodgy, but they provide
additional insight and information; an extensive bibliography and an index are
included. DS
NORWICH, WILLIAM 
Molly and the Magic Dress; illus. by M. Scott
Miller. 
Doubleday, 2002 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90844-X 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32745-5 
$16.95 
M 
6-9 yrs
Molly lives with her wealthy mother, her cat, Slim Enid, and housekeeper, Eunice.
Lucky Molly has a ratty old dress she considers magic; when she says the words
"Perfect dress in a perfect world, take me into another whirl" she can be anyone
she wants, including a mayoral candidate. Attending a wedding reception at the
posh Knickerbilt club, she encounters a homeless woman and gives her the magic
dress; the woman jokingly wishes to be the queen of England, and lo and behold,
she is transformed, just in time for the arrival of Molly's mother and other wed-
ding guests. The story of Molly and her upper-class lifestyle is a throwback to
Thompson and Knight's Eloise, but it lacks Eloise's rip-roaring charm and sensible
point of view. The fairy-tale ending breaks all the rules of fantasy: is Molly's dress
really magic? Are the imaginary changes she experiences real all the time, or do
they only become real at the end when the homeless woman gets new clothes? The
book treats the rules of reality rather lightly as well: just add a little magic and
faster than you can say bibbity bobbity boo, the problem of pervasive poverty and
homelessness is solved. Miller's watercolors feature fashionably elongated figures,
but the illustrations are nonetheless surprisingly unstylish, with flatly cartoonish
tendencies and little interplay with the text. For a more involving picture book
dealing with homelessness and privilege, turn instead to Eve Bunting's December
(BCCB 12/97). JMD
O'BRIEN, PATRICK 
The Great Ships; written and illus. by Patrick
O'Brien. 
Walker, 2001 
4 0p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8774-6 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8775-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
O'Brien close-hauls through centuries of seafaring, featuring twenty ships that
made maritime history. Each famous craft receives a double-page spread-the
right-hand page comprises a slim account of the ship's significance, a small sketch
of the ship in profile (the better to appreciate its rigging), and an inset picture
displaying a bit of ship miscellanea; the facing page offers a splendidly rendered
painting of the ship in action. Endpapers are used to advantage; side-by-side ships
drawn to scale sharply contrast the diminutive Golden Hind with the far grander
216 
* THE BULLETIN
Victory; Cheng Ho's massive fifteenth-century treasure ship with its poorer cous-
ins from the same century, Columbus's tiny caravels; the nuclear-powered aircraft
carrier Enterprise with the submarine Nautilus. True salts will probably wish for
more technical detail, and history buffs may already know more tidbits about their
favorite vessels than O'Brien serves up here. This nonetheless puts "faces" to some
famous nautical names, and mighty handsome portraits they are. "Where Are
They Now?" data is also included. EB
PETERSEN, P. J. 
Rising Water. Simon, 2002 
[128p]
ISBN 0-689-84148-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Tracy was initially optimistic about working alongside Kevin, a cute guy in her
freshman class at the science center; Kevin's there on community service after stealing
a car, however, and he proves neither a cordial companion nor a reliable worker.
Kevin's point of view, on the other hand, reveals that he's despairing of his remark-
able tendency to screw things up, especially in front of Tracy, whom he'd like to
impress. When rising waters drive many of the town's residents from their homes,
Kevin and Tracy join Tracy's older brother, Luke, in a powerboat run to help out
a few flood victims, but their errand of mercy turns dangerous when the three kids
encounter opportunistic and armed burglars looting the abandoned houses. Petersen
(author of I Hate Weddings, BCCB 3/00) doesn't write here with the verve he
displays in his books for younger readers: the plot is pure Trixie Belden, the char-
acter growth is predictable, and the shifting third-person viewpoints between Tracy
and Kevin are sometimes confusing. Trixie's exploits were popular for a reason,
however, and the book plays satisfactorily on the kids vs. crooks drama, making
the most of the watery atmosphere and the exclusion of adults from the scene.
Ultimately, this has more realism than and the same appeal as Willo Davis Rob-
erts' tales of kids fighting crime, so Rising Water should make a splash with her
many fans. DS
PLATT, RICHARD 
Pirate Diary: The Journal of ake Carpenter; illus. by Chris
Riddell. 
Candlewick, 2001 
64 p
ISBN 0-7636-0848-3 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Nine-year-old Jake and his Uncle Will sail with the Greyhound, a smuggling vessel
out of colonial North Carolina, and it soon becomes evident that Jake must struggle
not only to learn the ropes of seamanship but simply to survive the captain's brutal
treatment. When the Greyhound is boarded by pirates, the crew is so relieved with
the prospective change in command that they collude in the seizure and, following
pirate custom, soon elevate their own first mate to rank of captain. From there on,
Jake's maiden voyage is relatively smooth sailing; the rookie pirates line their pock-
ets with Spanish gold with remarkably little bloodshed, they conclude their pirati-
cal adventures amicably by taking a well-timed King's pardon, and Jake joyously
reunites with Will (who was rescued after being marooned in a rowboat by the
Greyhound's original captain). Sure, given the bloodthirsty nature of piracy, it's all
a little too good to be true, but Jake's narrative voice is so credible and likable and
his observations so thoroughly engrossing that readers will give contrivance the
wink. Oodles of information on everything from articles of piracy to navigation
by dead reckoning is effortlessly incorporated, and Riddell's ink and watercolor
pictures are both convincingly detailed and deliciously overdrawn. Readers who
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 
217
are 'pressed aboard as report writers will find notes on the history of piracy, a
glossary/index, and a bibliography useful; most kids, though, will simply sign on
for the adventure. EB
PRATCHETT, TERRY 
The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents; illus. by
David Wyatt. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
241p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-001234-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-001233-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Maurice, a voluble cat, Keith, a talented piper, and a band of highly intelligent
talking rats arrive in Oberwald to work their latest (and last) Pied Piper-esque con
and instead become embroiled in local politics, thanks to the interference of the
mayor's highly imaginative daughter, Malicia. The discovery that the town rat-
catchers have been stealing money, hoarding food, and breeding rats results in an
underground battle of epic proportions, ending in the overthrow of the malevo-
lent, mind-controlling Rat King, who planned to slaughter the townsfolk and take
over the town. Pratchett, well known to adults for his Discworld series, leaves
none of his wit behind in this exploration of Discworld for younger readers. He
draws loosely from the legend of the Pied Piper but inevitably adds his own origi-
nal spin, examining the ethical dilemmas of the sentient cat and rats as they join
with the humans to physically battle forces of evil (both human and rodent), un-
dergo painful emotional changes, and confront the concepts of the individual self,
the soul, mortality, God, and the afterlife. Fantasy readers familiar with Discworld
will happily re-enter it here; those unfamiliar will find this novel an easy access
point. JMD
ROBERTS, KATHERINE 
Spellfall. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2001 
250p
ISBN 0-439-29653-6 $15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
While dumping her alcoholic dad's beer bottles into the recycling bin, Natalie is
approached by a strange man who claims that she has magical powers, that the
shiny wrapper she picked up is really a recycled spell, and that she is just who he
needs to complete his Spellclave (a sort of magicians' coven). Being a bright girl,
she flees, but when she sneaks out of her house for an early morning walk she
meets that same man again, and he kidnaps her. After being drugged and impris-
oned, Natalie escapes by pretending to go along with the plans of her captor, Lord
Hawk, a Spellmage who needs her help to attack the magical, parallel world of
Earthaven. The battle between Hawk's Spellclave and Earthaven's mages spans
both the human and mage worlds and involves Natalie's stepbrother, her best
friend, the magical spirit of her dead mother, and her new familiar, T'Anaquin, a
magehound. Despite a promising opening, the plot quickly becomes overcrowded
and the momentum lags. Both individual characters and parallel world are shal-
lowly constructed, and the internal logic of the conflict never asserts itself. Still,
the book is replete with popular fantasy elements (unicorns, kid magicians, etc.),
and younger readers may find that a sojourn in the woodsy realm of Earthaven is
an easy detour from less accessible fantasy. JMD
Roop, CONNIE 
Escapefrom the Ice: Shackleton and the Endurance.
See Green, p. 205, for review.
218 
* THE BULLETIN
SCHAEFER, CAROLE LEXA 
The Little French Whistle; illus. by Emilie
Chollat. 
Knopf, 2002 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91569-9 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81569-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4 -7 yrs
When Louie comes to visit his cousin Josette, he brings along a "little French
whistle . . . Grand-pere bought for him in Paris, across the sea." Predictably,
spoiled Louie refuses to share with Josette, instead blasting his whistle at birds,
Fon-Fon the dog, Grand-pere, baby Roland, and Sheba the cat, who makes her
displeasure known with a feline hissy fit. Louie's mother takes her beast of a boy
home in a taxi; Josette retrieves the dropped whistle and she takes a turn, blowing
softly and sweetly. When Grand-pere needs a taxi, however, Josette blows the
whistle "like Louie-important, snappy, and grand." Schaefer delivers a snappy
little story, sprinkling Josette's narration with French words that add to her dry
and slightly Gallic delivery. Chollat's polished illustrations feature chunky, new-
wavy figures with subtleties in light and shadow that add depth to the images.
Audiences will appreciate the momentum of the text and the airy feeling of the
pictures, and if a whistle finds its way into storytime, well, blow softly and sweetly,
like the story says. JMD
SCHANZER, ROSALYN 
Davy Crockett Saves the World; written and illus. by Rosalyn
Schanzer. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16992-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16991-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-7 yrs
This original tall tale features coonskin-capped Davy in an epic battle against the
menace of Halley's Comet, which appears to be hurtling directly towards earth.
Panic among the populace grows (illustrations depict an appalled multi-ethnic
cast of Americans in historical dress, looking at the sky in horror as the comet
approaches); meanwhile, the president places want ads in papers across the coun-
try, seeking Crockett's help. Unfortunately, the battle is slow to ensue, and an
intervening three-page digression of Crockett's preparation for courting Miss Sally
Sugartree stalls the story rather than adding suspense. However, once the larger-
than-life hero meets the menacing ball of icy fire, the plot streaks to its triumphant
conclusion. Schanzer caps her tale off with a pourquoi ending explaining why
Davy always wears his coonskin headgear. The illustrations combine elements of
folk art with cartoonish exaggeration, both of which fit well with the pseudo-
historical setting. Bold, flat panels of color contrast with the figure of muscular
hide-wearing Davy as he wrestles the comet into submission. Tall-tale aficionados
will be more than ready to face danger with Davy. KM
SCHMIDT, GARY 
Mara's Stories: Glimmers in the Darkness. 
Holt, 2001 
14 9p
ISBN 0-8050-6794-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
The setting for this collection of reimagined traditional tales is a Nazi concentra-
tion camp barracks where Mara, the storyteller, gives the female prisoners some
respite from horror with her stories. Though the frame is weak and unnecessary,
Schmidt's retellings are succinct and dramatic; stories of miraculous endurance,
impossible escapes, and final redemption are presented with a brevity that never
undercuts their power. Themes of hope and horror and a strong sense of mysti-
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 219
cism predominate, not surprising given the Hasidic origins of many of the tales.
Notes are extensive, with the author citing the sources that inspired him and also
often explaining the changes he made to the stories. The stories all have the punch
of longer, less accessible material dealing with the Holocaust; the impact may send
readers on a search for Schmidt's sources, as well as a search for the commitment to
faith the author so capably evokes. JMD
SEIDLER, TOR 
The Revenge ofRandal Reese-Rat; illus. by Brett Helquist. 
Farrar,
2001 
233p
ISBN 0-374-36257-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
World traveler Elizabeth Mad-Rat voyages from New York City to Africa to re-
unite with her musically talented daughter, Maggie, convincing Maggie to return
to New York City for the wedding of her cousin Montague Mad-Rat (hero of A
Rat's Tale, BCCB 2/87) to Isabel Moberly-Rat. The story's action really starts on
the day of the wedding, when Randal Reese-Rat, formerly affianced to Isabel, re-
covers enough from poisoning to realize that his beloved is marrying a (shudder)
Mad-Rat. A mysterious fire nearly does in the newlyweds; Randal is mistakenly
suspected, and a bounty is offered for his capture. Disguised as Gregory Sad-Rat,
Randal meets musical Maggie, discovers their mutual love of all things African,
and falls for her charms. Readers may need to read the first book in order to fully
appreciate the complexity of Seidler's rodent-world, and the eccentric character-
izations aren't always enough to carry the unhurried, somewhat meandering plot.
It's still an intriguingly realized milieu, however, and the gothic elements add zest
to the fantasy. Helquist's black-and-white illustrations, scattered throughout, pro-
vide an evocative setting for the action and a suitable backdrop for the playing out
of the characters' destinies. Fans of the first book may want to revisit Seidler's
rodent-ridden Big Apple. JMD
SHEPPARD, MARY C. 
Seven for a Secret. 
Groundwood, 2001 
189p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88899-437-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Trouble looms when a stranger comes to town and offers fifteen-year-old Rebecca
an opportunity to leave her tiny Newfoundland village (where the residents are-
in 1960-still living without electricity) and take art lessons in Boston. Actually,
the trouble started years ago, when Rebecca's mother, Grace, went off to Boston to
do war work and fell in love with a painter: nobody-not even Grace's husband-
knows that Rebecca is really the painter's daughter, until the truth is discovered by
Rebecca's sixteen-year-old cousin Melinda. Without melodrama, Melinda's
narration effectively illuminates the social, familial, and sexual tensions that entangle
Rebecca and Melinda and even their city-dwelling cousin Kate, torn between
marriage and education. In the end, Melinda's choices narrow when a condom
fails and she gets pregnant after a one-time fling with her true love; at the same
time, in gratitude for sacrifices Aunt Grace made for her and her family, Melinda
agrees to help keep Aunt Grace's secret by discouraging Rebecca from leaving
Newfoundland-at the price of Rebecca's happiness. These frustratingly realistic
pre-feminist choices will fascinate readers drawn into the novel by the mild exoticism
of the isolated setting, where times change slowly and the locals still relax with a
"mugs up" after a hard day's fishing or working at the cannery, and their teenaged
daughters-for whom change came too late-price mail-order wedding dresses.
FK
220 
* THE BULLETIN
SHIELDS, 
CAROL DIGGORY 
Animagicals: 
Homes; illus. by Svjetlan
Junakovic. 
Handprint, 2001 
26p
ISBN 1-929766-27-0 
$9.95 
R 
5-7yrs
Animagicals: Sports; illus. by Svjetlan Junakovic. 
Handprint, 2001 
26 p
ISBN 1-929766-28-9 
$9.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Dished up in an appealing format (a tall, skinny trim and a reliance on foldout
illustrations), these collections of brief verse give various animals a chance to dis-
cuss aspects of their lives. Homes roots its poems in fact, featuring hive-dwelling
bees, a koala perched in a gum tree, a mole with a happy underground existence,
and so on. Sports is more fanciful, featuring a basketball-playing giraffe, a soccer-
goalie hippo, a snow-skiing duck, and others. The tetrameter couplets offer some
entertaining ideas and pithy rhymes, but they're often uneven, lacking the control
that Florian musters over his zoological poetry (Lizards, Frogs, andPolliwogs, BCCB
4/01, etc.). The Sports poems also lose relevance by leaving reality behind, but
they never make the imaginary athletics a sufficient substitute, since they seem
either randomly or conveniently chosen. The foldouts on each recto have a touch
of guessing-game appeal, since each poem's speaker remains concealed until the
last line of his or her verse, and Junakovic has conceived the spreads so that they're
coherent both with the flap closed (when, say, the archery target appears merely to
sport feathered arrows) and open (when it reveals a swordfish stuck into its bullseye).
Generally, though, there's little mistaken-identity cleverness with artistic elements;
the illustrations' impact comes instead from a welter of textural effects (ranging
from rough paper grain to the hatchwork of clear brushstrokes), with the saturated
colors in brown floor, green playing field, and other components anchoring the
compositions; the personified animals are comic without becoming toylike, their
expressive eyes peering out at the viewer. While there's better animal poetry (and
Kees Moerbeek's New at the Zoo, BCCB 11//89, offers a more piquant paper-
engineering approach to zoology), the open-the-flap appeal and unusual visual
style will draw poetry-shy youngsters. DS
SKURZYNSKI, GLORIA 
Rockbuster. Atheneum, 2001 
[272p]
ISBN 0-689-83991-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
Tommy's life has been connected with unions as far back as he can remember,
beginning with the murder of his labor-organizer uncle when Tommy was only
ten. He inherited his uncle's guitar and grew to be a proficient guitar player and
singer; however, he himself narrowly dodged a literal bullet after his first real gig,
when a brawl broke out over support of a miners' strike. Since musicians don't
make money, Tommy must, despite his mother's objections, go down to work in
the coal mine where his own father died; there he takes the dangerous step of
embarking on a clandestine romance with the mine-owner's daughter. Although
the setting (Utah in the early 1900s) is convincingly evoked, the plot suffers from
a few too many elements, and commentary between the chapters (written in hind-
sight from Tommy's perspective at the end of the novel) further jolts the pacing.
Some readers may give up before Tommy meets the legendary Joe Hill and re-
ceives an invitation to take his place as musician to the people. However, those
who stick with the many threads will be rewarded by an unusual account of the
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 221
labor movement, and they'll applaud Tommy's final decision to bypass music and
focus instead on law, the more directly to advance the cause ofjustice. The history
of labor movements often seems abstract to young people; here's a concrete evoca-
tion with an appealing hero that may engage some social consciences. KM
SPRINGER, NANCY 
Separate Sisters. 
Holiday House, 2001 
[84p]
ISBN 0-8234-1544-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Sisters Trisha and Donni are only ten months apart, but the distance between
them grows daily. The older Trisha, a gifted student, excels in eighth grade; Donni,
artistically gifted but less mature, was held back, and she now struggles in sixth
grade. When their parents divorce, both girls suffer: Trisha lives with her mother,
misses Donni, and frets about being the "perfect" child; Donni lives with her fa-
ther, acts out in school in an effort to get her parents to talk to one another, and
separates from Trisha as well as their mother. Donni's acting out reveals her deep-
seated emotional and psychological trauma about the divorce, and it is only through
the intercession of her practical mother that Donni realizes she's not crazy, but
suffering. Meanwhile Trisha, whose acting out is a lot less conspicuous, slips into
a passive depression that threatens her well-being. This is more a slice of life than
a well-developed novel; the girls do a lot of telling (the sisters take turns narrating
their own stories) and not so much showing of their lives, but their voices-espe-
cially the more developed Donni's-suffice to carry the slight plot. Springer is
particularly good at getting inside the head of the troublemaker who doesn't plan
for disaster but somehow always causes one (the opening scene where Donni paints
on the girl in front of her is a case in point). Adler's Split Sisters (BCCB 4/86) is a
better exploration of the theme, but this is a serviceable drama about two young-
sters suffering from anxiety in a world they didn't make. JMD
STAVANS, ILAN, comp. 
Wdchale!: Poetry and Prose about Growing Up Latino in
America. Marcato/Cricket, 2001 
146p
ISBN 0-8126-4750-5 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
In the introduction, Stavans states his purpose-to give Latino youth a means to
discover themselves through literature-and promises that in ten years he'll com-
pile another anthology, this time of pieces penned by the readers of this book. The
collection in this go-round includes poetry by Gary Soto ("Mexicans Begin Jog-
ging"), Luis Pales Matos ("Black Dance"), Ruth Behar ("The Jewish Cemetery in
Guanabacoa"), and Achy Obejas ("Sugarcane"), among others; each poem appears
in both English and Spanish. Prose selections, all in English, include an essay
about body image by Carolina Hospital ("My Cuban Body"), an explanation of
quinceanera ceremonies by Rolando Hinojosa-Smith ("Sweet Fifteen"), and an
offering about a young boy's first romantic kiss by Willie Perdomo ("Harlem River
Kiss"). The varied entries are an exhilarating mix of styles and subjects: folktales
masquerade as stories of illegal immigrants, traditional Christmas poems get new
life, and corridas (folk songs) take on modern subject matter. This collection has
an adult feel to it in that the material is sometimes nostalgic, but overall this is a
substantial sampling for browsers and dedicated readers. A glossary and an anno-
tated list of suggested further reading is included. JMD
222 
* THE BULLETIN
STEWART, SHARON 
City ofthe Dead. Red Deer, 2001 
231p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-88995-229-9 
$7.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Ten stories of the supernatural with the occasional technological twist make up
this pleasurably creepy collection. Stewart's young protagonists have typical ado-
lescent concerns-popularity, computers, money, love-until confronted with
impossible, inescapable supernatural anomalies. The commonplace settings (bed-
rooms, hiking trails, city streets, etc.) make the inexplicable stand out with fright-
ening clarity, as the seemingly innocent and mundane becomes the stuff of
nightmare and miracle: a computer virus imbues electrical appliances with mur-
derous intent ("Trojan Horse"); a phone call from beyond the grave brings a mes-
sage of hope and forgiveness to a grief-stricken little girl ("Call Me"); a young
fisherman finds himself on the wrong end of obsession ("Hooked"); and a ubiqui-
tous screensaver has hypnotic effects ("Flying Toasters"). The style is easygoing
vernacular informed by classical myth, and while there is the occasional instance of
overexplanation, the stories are consistently intriguing. Park this one where your
younger young adults can reach it. JMD
THOMPSON, KATE 
The Beguilers. 
Dutton, 2001 
183p
ISBN 0-525-46806-4 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Rilka has always been the odd one in her family and in her village. She is allergic
to the villagers' beloved chuffies (empathetic doglike creatures that salve psychic
pain) for one thing, and for another she alone chafes at the constraints put upon
the villagers by the ruling priests and priestesses. When she becomes fascinated
with the beguilers (the strange light-beings that haunt the village nights and drive
the unwary insane) and decides to leave her protective village to capture one, she is
cast out without support or recourse. Only old Hemmy publicly states that she
will assist Rilka; armed with bits of village lore and history supplied by the old
woman, the girl sets out on what is believed to be an impossible quest. Quests for
elusive mythical creatures are always engaging, and the beguilers are, in fact, pretty
darn beguiling; Rilka, the stubborn loner, is a sympathetic quester . The narrative
unfortunately disintegrates towards the end: the link between beguilers and chuffles
is strongly implied but not clearly explained, Rilka's sudden but certain passion for
the blind mountaineer who assists her is ungrounded, and her return to the village
(and her subsequent acceptance by her father and the other villagers) has no logical
foreshadowing of any kind. Rilka's journey retains appeal, though, and fans of
Thompson's Switchers (BCCB 9/98) may wish to follow along. JMD
WEBSTER, M. L., ad. 
On the Trail Made of Dawn: Native American Creation
Stories Linnet, 2001 
70p
ISBN 0-208-02497-2 
$19.50 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Webster includes thirteen creation myths from as many American Indian cultures
in this slim volume, retelling tales from the Tlingit, Aztec, Hopi, and Cherokee,
among others; following each brief tale is a description of that tribe's culture and
practices. The overall tone of the included background information, which takes
up nearly as much text as the stories, is reverent and somewhat stiff and the over-
views somewhat touristy. That being said, the stories themselves are tightly retold,
with few wasted words, and this economy of language results in an appealing taut-
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 
223
ness and useful accessibility; this will therefore be useful for reading aloud and
curricular employment as well as for individual reading. Each chapter opens with
a short poem introducing the story; sources for cultural information, poems, and
stories are given at the book's conclusion. JMD
WEILL, SABRINA SOLIN 
We're Not Monsters: Teens Speak Out about Teens in
Trouble. HarperTempest, 2001 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029543-0 
$15.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-380-80703-3 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7 up
When Weill says trouble, she means trouble: her book examines teen murder,
suicide, infanticide, sexual offenses, and deliberate self-injury. Each chapter is
filled with quotes from teens, advice from experts, relevant statistics, and accounts
of kids sadder but wiser or beyond saving, plus tips to help yourself or your friends
if it looks like trouble is looming on a personal level. There's some good informa-
tion here, and the voices of the teens are poignant and articulate. Unfortunately,
the author does a poor job of sorting, analyzing, and synthesizing the material: she
never deals with the contradictions or gaps in her quotes and statistics or with her
own unacknowledged assumptions, she tends to force anecdotes and examples to
fit her theories (Soon-Yi Previn and Woody Allen are hardly proof that "girls hooking
up with older guys is a trend that's surprisingly accepted in America"), and her
information is sometimes misleadingly phrased to the point of inaccuracy. As a
research resource, this is therefore burdened with hefty flaws, but there's definitely
some sensationalistic reading appeal in the tragic stories that may keep young people
reading long enough for the bolstering advice. A list of helpful agencies is in-
cluded, as is a reading list oddly devoid of publication information. DS
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
The House in the Mail; by Rosemary and Tom Wells; illus. by
Dan Andreasen. 
Viking, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-670-03545-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
Just as Emily's expanding family is about to outgrow their ol' Kentucky home, Pa
announces that they are ordering a new house from Sears, Roebuck, a $2500 won-
der that will include all the modern conveniences of a trendy 1927 home-indoor
plumbing, electrical lighting and refrigeration, gas for cooking. The fictional story
line is little more than an excuse to follow the house's construction, from the time
it arrives in pieces via railroad, through foundation and framing and roofing work,
to utility hookups and plastering and even the addition of a hidden treasure cache
in the floor of Emily's closet. Readers will easily appreciate the enormous effort
required to get a prefab up and running, but those who follow the stages closely
will certainly pose some questions: How is Emily's family able to muster the funds
to become the envy of their neighbors? How do they connect with gas and electri-
cal and water supply lines in this developing area? What on earth is a Hoosier
cabinet? Scrapbook-style vignettes exude cozy warmth, but they supply more vi-
sual information about Emily's various enthusiasms than about the house in
progress. Still, this is an offbeat view of America in transition from a primarily
rural to urban way of life, and the birth of Emily's newest brother in a Lexington
hospital ("the first member of the family ever born away from home") underscores
the irrevocable passing of simpler times. EB
224 
* THE BULLETIN
WHYBROW, IAN 
Wish, Change, Friend; illus. by Tiphanie Beeke. 
McElderry,
2002 
[2 6 p]
ISBN 0-689-84930-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Little Pig leads a quiet, solitary life enjoying his favorite pastime ("Not many small
pigs like reading, but Little Pig did"), until one day he finds three new words in a
book: "wish," "change," and "friend." After obligingly wishing for a change and
a friend, Pig gets both-the weather changes to pretty snow, and he builds himself
a snowman friend. When the two friends go tramping through the snow, they
find a penguin, also struggling with unfamiliar words: "pig" and "together." The
three of them (well, mostly the pig and the penguin) contemplate the words and
decide that they're all good but "together" is their favorite, so together they stay.
Whybrow (author of Sammy and the Dinosaurs, BCCB 9/99) effectively estab-
lishes a wondering, thoughtful mood that's not too abstract for his young audi-
ence, and the text's tender simplicity makes it suitable for naptimes and other
quiet moments. The story loses what gentle momentum it has, however, and
instead becomes a confused ramble towards the end: why are we suddenly talking
in boldface about "book" and "penguin" when those words weren't in anybody's
reading, why is opening a shop the culmination of this beginning friendship, and
where exactly does the snow friend fit into all of this? Beeke balances soft, translu-
cent tones for her landscape with a sturdily painted little pig, whose naive energy
and fuzzy edges suggest torn paper. Her inverted books may baffle young viewers
just beginning to get a clue about this reading thing, but the luminous snow-
touched landscapes make a suitably cozy fantasy world. There are more tightly
written tales of young friendship, but the aura of winter magic here may be enough
to enchant some youngsters. DS
WILSON, JACQUELINE 
Girls in Love. 
Delacorte, 2002 
18 1 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90040-6 
$11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-7294-X 
$9.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
The girls of the title are Ellie, the thirteen-year-old narrator, and her two best
friends, Magda and Nadine, but the "in love" description is arguable. Nadine is at
least thoroughly besotted with an older boy, Liam, despite her friends' concern
that he's merely using her, but Magda is merely marking time with passable but
slow-on-the-uptake Greg; Ellie yearns so much for a boyfriend that she makes one
up, turning the determined twelve-year-old who writes her letters into a dreamboat
with whom she had a holiday romance. There are overtones of Rennison's Angus,
Thongs, andFull-FrontalSnogging (BCCB 5/99) in Ellie's fervid present-tense nar-
ration, but there's a touch more depth as well, since Wilson treats Ellie's despera-
tion with respect and sympathy as well as humor. Serious subjects inform the
narrative: though some aren't successfully addressed (there's a juiceless subplot
about strains in Ellie's father and stepmother's marriage), others acknowledge the
complexity of a contemporary young girl's life (Liam is indeed using Nadine, fas-
tening on her because "if you go with virgins you don't have to bother about safe
sex"). The easygoing style, complete with plenty of intact Britishisms, makes read-
ing a breeze, and there's enough characterization, especially of anxious Ellie and
worldly-wise Magda, to keep the girls from being merely ciphers. This amiable
page-turner has more oomph than most, and readers will likely be gratified to
discover that there are two more volumes planned about Ellie and her friends. DS
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 225
WINTER, JONAH 
Frida; illus. by Ana Juan. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-20320-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-9
See this month's Big Picture, p. 197.
YEATTS, TABATHA 
Forensics: Solving the Crime.
See Friedlander, p. 203, for review.
YEP, 
LAURENCE 
When the Circus Came to Town, illus. by Suling
Wang. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
115p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029326-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029325-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Nine-year-old Ursula's parents run the stagecoach station and restaurant in Whistle,
Montana (or, as her father calls it, "the Back of Beyond"), at the beginning of the
twentieth century. A bout with smallpox leaves Ursula with a badly scarred face,
and she secludes herself in her bedroom, refusing to see anyone until Ah Sam, her
parents' Chinese cook, coaxes her back into the world with intricate cut-paper
designs and cooking lessons. When Ah Sam's relatives, members of a traditional
Chinese circus, visit, the resulting performance draws the whole town as audience
and gets Ursula out of the house and into the public eye (she provides the music
with her harmonica). An unexpected blizzard then traps the guests, and it appears
they will miss the Chinese New Year celebration-until Ursula comes to the res-
cue. Yep based his culturally inclusive historical tale on a real incident that oc-
curred in Trembles, Montana. The story is prescriptive and the lesson obvious,
but Ursula's energy will resonate with young readers, who will be pleased to see her
triumph over adversity. An afterword includes a note on Yep's sources and sheet
music for "Sweet and Low," Ah Sam's favorite song, as played by the fictional
Ursula. Wang's black-and-white illustrations, scattered throughout, are soft-tex-
tured and quietly expressive. JMD
YOLEN, JANE 
Welcome to the River of Grass; illus. by Laura Regan. 
Putnam,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23221-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
Yolen's poetic paean to the Florida Everglades presents the natural beauty of this
endangered ecosystem in some telling images: "Tree islands hump up/ over the
grass,/ clump up/ into hummocky hammocks/ covered with vines"; "Overhead/ a
great blue heron/ flies,/ while mostly under fresh water/ lies/ a hungry alligator in
wait/ its shroudlike eyes/ implacable as fate." The occasional bobble in scansion
and punctuation may cause readers aloud to stumble, but overall the text flows
well. Unfortunately, the gouache illustrations have the artificiality of a museum
diorama. While the landscapes are fairly impressive, the compositions are some-
times oddly balanced, and the indigenous fauna have a disconcerting stuffed qual-
ity. A note about the threats to the Everglades is appended. JMD
226 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Watson, Victor, ed. The Cambridge Guide to Children's Books in English. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2001. ISBN 0-521-55064-5; $50.00. 826p. illus. with
photographs
The stated mission of this reference work is "to include authors, or illustrators, or
works published in English, believed by the editors to have made a significant
impact on young readers anywhere in the world, or to have in some way influ-
enced the production of children's books." Great Britain and the United States
are represented by a substantial number of entries; a lesser but still significant
number of entries represent Canada, Australia, New Zealand, West and East Af-
rica, Ireland, India, and South Africa. The entries are arranged in alphabetical
order and there are four types: author entries, title entries, topic entries (fantasy,
ballet stories, storytelling, etc.), and technical terms (lithography, process engrav-
ing, etc.). Cross-references abound, and the entries themselves, especially those
dealing with genres or literary movements, evince enthusiasm and respect for their
subjects. Black-and-white illustrations break up the double columns of text on
each page and help give a sense of a particular artistic style, although the absence of
color does limit their impact. A useful appendix of selected literary prizes includes
international awards not always publicized in the United States. JMD
ALSO RECENTLY RECEIVED:
Keith, Lois. 
Take Up Thy Bed 6- Walk: Death, Disability and Cure in Classic
Fictionfor Girls. Routledge, 2001. Library ed. ISBN 0-415-93739-6; $75.00.
Paper ed. ISBN 0-415-93740-X; $19.95. 27 4 p.
Focusing on tides such as Little Women, What Katy Did, Heidi, and Seven Little
Australians, Keith examines representations and implications of disability and re-
covery.
Litowinsky, Olga. It's a Bunny-Eat-Bunny World: A Writer's Guide to Surviving
and Thriving in Today's Competitive Children's Book Market. Walker, 2001. Trade
ed. ISBN 0-8027-8637-5; $22.95. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8027-7523-3; $14.95. 228p.
In this updated and expanded edition of her Writing and PublishingBooks for Chil-
dren in the 1990s, Litowinsky provides guidance to hopeful authors.
FEBRUARY 2002 
* 227
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE: Green; Petersen;
Roop
African Americans-fiction: English
African Americans-poetry:
Hopkinson
American Indians-folklore: Webster
Animals-fiction: Bledsoe; Pratchett;
Seidler
Animals-poetry: Shields
Art and artists: Winter
ARTHURIAN LEGEND:
Crossley-Holland; Hill
Bangladesh-fiction: Howard, G.
Baseball: Bildner
BIBLE STORIES: Bible
BIOGRAPHIES: Adler; Bildner;
Cohn; Goodall; Hettinga;
Jacobsen; Levinson; Meister;
Winter; Yeatts
BOARD BOOKS: Henkes
Books and reading-stories:
Whybrow
Business-fiction: Howard, G.
Chimpanzees: Goodall
Chinese Americans-fiction: Yep
Christmas: Harrison
Circuses-fiction: Yep
Civil rights-fiction: Martin
Clothing-stories: Norwich
Commerce: Howard, G.
Computers-fiction: Clements
Construction-fiction: Wells
Cousins-fiction: Sheppard
Cousins-stories: Schaefer
Crime and criminals: Friedlander;
Meltzer; Weill; Yeatts
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Petersen
Dating-fiction: Wilson
Detectives: Meltzer
Diaries-fiction: Platt
Disabilities: Winter
Divorce-fiction: Springer
Dogs-stories: Harvey
Easter: Bible
Easter-stories: Henkes
Ecology: Goodall; Yolen
ESSAYS: Stavans
Ethics and values: Manns
Explorers and exploring: Green;
Levinson; Roop
FANTASY: Gliori; Hill; Laster;
Norwich; Pratchett; Roberts;
Seidler; Thompson
Floods-fiction: Petersen
Folktales and fairy tales: Hettinga
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Schanzer
Food and eating-stories: Henkes
Friendship-stories: Whybrow
FUNNY STORIES: Laster
Geology: Locker
GHOST STORIES: Manns
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Crossley-Holland; English;
Gavin; Martin; McCully; Platt;
Sheppard; Skurzynski; Wells; Yep
History, European: Green;
Hettinga; Jacobsen; Roop
History, U.S.: Adler; Bateman;
Cohn; Feldman; Hopkinson
228 
* THE BULLETIN
History, world: Levinson; O'Brien
Holocaust, the: Jacobsen
Holocaust, the-fiction: Schmidt
Homelessness-fiction: Norwich
Houses-fiction: Wells
Italy-fiction: McCully
Jews: Jacobsen
Jews-fiction: Schmidt
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Crossley-Holland; Hill
Latinos: Stavans; Winter
Latinos-fiction: Bledsoe
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Crossley-Holland; Gliori; Roberts
Magic and magicians-stories:
Norwich
Mice-stories: Henkes
Miners and mining-fiction:
Skurzynski
Mothers-fiction: English
Mountains: Locker
Music and musicians-fiction:
McCully; Skurzynski
MYSTERIES: Laster; Manns
MYTHOLOGY: Webster
Nature study: Yolen
Nursery rhymes-stories: Howard,
R.
Pigs-stories: Whybrow
Pirates-fiction: Platt
POETRY: Attenborough; Harrison;
Hopkinson; Longfellow; Shields;
Stavans; Yolen
Pregnancy-fiction: Sheppard
Presidents: Cohn
Quests-fiction: Thompson
Racism-fiction: Martin
Rats-fiction: Pratchett; Seidler
Reading aloud: Attenborough;
Harrison; Webster; Winter
Reading, beginning: Howard, R.
Reading, reluctant: Green; Meister;
Platt; Weill; Wilson
Relationships-fiction: Wilson
School: Feldman
School-fiction: Clements
Science: Friedlander; Locker; Yeatts
Science projects-fiction: Clements
Ships and sailing: Levinson; O'Brien
Ships and sailing-fiction: Platt
SHORT STORIES: Stavans; Stewart
Sisters-fiction: Springer
Sisters-stories: Harris
Slavery-poetry: Hopkinson
Social studies: Bateman
South, the-fiction: Martin
Sports: Bildner; Shields
Storytelling: Webster
Storytelling-fiction: Schmidt
Storytime: Harvey; Locker
Summer-fiction: Bledsoe
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Stewart
SURVIVAL STORIES: Marsden
SUSPENSE: Gavin; Manns
TALL TALES: Schanzer
Time travel-fiction: Hill
Twins-stories: Harris
Voyages and travel: Green; Levinson;
Roop
War-fiction: Manns; Marsden
West, the-stories: Harris
World War II: Jacobsen
World War II-fiction: Schmidt
Writers and writing: Hall; Meister
ji~ ~®
^' 
4&kr~
-r  
"As a Quaker during WW II,
teenager Jubal Shoemaker is
a pacifist [who,] when it's
time for him to be conscripted,
intends to follow his older
brother as a conscientious
objector. But it's hard to be
against the war when patriotism
is fervent .... The ideas are
gripping, not only because
Kerr is fair to all sides but also
because the characters are
complicated."
-Starred 
review /ALA Booklist
"This morally challenging
novel is as memorable as any
of Kerr's work."
-Publishers Weekly
Ages 12 up.
$15.95 Tr (0-06-029481-7);
$15.89 Lb (0-06-029482-5)
III
141I
L COMING THIS SPRING...
THE BOOKS OF NINE LIVES
Pleasant DeSpain
Illustrated by Don Bell
All Original Hardbacks priced at $14.95
Each volume is 80 pages, 51/4" x 71/2"
S Readers for Grades 2-4
FIRST-TIME IN 
HARDBACK...
TALES OF TRICKSTERS
Volume 1
ISBN 0-87483-669-7
TALES OF NONSENSE
& TOMFOOLERY
Volume 2
ISBN 0-87483-670-0
TALES OF WISDOM 
AUGUST
& JUSTICE
Volume 3 
H*USE
ISBN 0-87483-671-9
www.augusthouse.com
August House / P.O. 
Box 3223 / Little Rock, AR 72203 / 201 East Markham 72201 / 501-372-5450 / FAX 
501-372-5579
"A 
tantalizing
taste of the
pleasures
of picture :
books to
come~v *
'~- 
This deliciously paced and plotted board book,
featuring the mouse sisters from Sheila Rae, the Brave,
explores the relationship between a bossy older child and a
timid, yet tenacious, young one. Here, Sheila Rae and her
liffle sister, Louise, play out a bite-sized drama for the toddler
crowd [when] Louise wants Sheila Rae's peppermint stick...
Henkes's expressive illustrations work perfectly with the
short-and-sweet text." 
--Starred review / The Horn Book"
Ages 2-4. $6.95 Tr (0-06-029451 5)
AMONG KEVIN HENKES'S PICTURE BOOKS
Sheila Rae, The Brave
$15.95 Tr (0 688 07155-4); $15.89 Lb (0-688-07156 2);
$5.95 Pb (0 688 14738-0)
!~ Greenwillow Books An imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
www. harperchildrens. corn
xxx 
xxxxxxxxxxxxx\\\\\\ 
x\\ XX\\\XXW
i A
uy 
Dyo vi DUIIVII
-~"- 
With just a few words per page, Barton conveys
simple car facts as he follows Sam at the wheel. The
chunky blocks of color and minimalist text will withstand
countless readings."
-Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly Best Children's Books 2001
~-" "Big, bold type accompanies big, bold pictures ...
[in Barton's] child-friendly book, ideal for group read-
alouds. Vehicle-obsessed toddlers will line up for a ride."
-Starred 
review/ The Horn Book
~ "For young children intrigued by cars, this book is
simply wonderful." 
-Starred 
review /ALA Booklist
r
' Starred in Booklist and
School Library Journal 
I
Afte theHoloc
lnowara treenJela
S 
"Eight Jewish survivors share their personal experience of
what happened after the defeat of Hitler. All of these different
and very affecting stories [are supported by] extensive amounts of
historical information [and] archival photos are found throughout.
What the future held [for them] is neatly wrapped up in the
afterword, completing this important and relevant piece of history."
-Starred 
review / School Library Journal
-
"The truth of the individual voices [of these young Holocaust
survivors] gives the history immediacy.... There is no better book
to answer the Holocaust deniers. As Greenfeld writes, the post-
Holocaust experiences are actually a continuation of the Holocaust
itself, not a postscript." 
-Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
An-o 
19 
, 
Q1n a Cl Tr (f0-ASR-177r,9-91. t1 
RlQ I k 
h(nLf-Lrln9oQ/i9n
1350 Avenue ot the Americas, New York, NY 10019 www.harperchildrens.com *
L 
-ma
I-C 
·
k
"After
her parents
are abducted,
Molly must rescue
them and save herself by outwitting
an evil stranger who claims to be her
uncle. A taut page-turner in which
menacing events, evocative writing, and
mystical elements are part of the mix."
-School 
Library Journal Best Books 2001,
Starred review / School Library Journal
"Bruchac sets this short nail-biter, based on a
Mohawk legend-about a man with an appetite
so insatiable that he eats himself down to bones-
in modern New York state. [His story about] a
resourceful young heroine who draws on courage
and cultural tradition to come out on top... [is] a
natural for under-the-blanket reading." -Kirkus Reviews
f. 
Ages 10-14. $15.95 Tr (0-06-029075-7);
Lb $15.89 (0-06-029076-5)
*r "This powerful historicil novel, a prequel to Roll of Thunder,
refuses to 'whitewash' history, Drawing directly on her family
histoy [Talor goesbac to the time 
of eostuto to tel a
seain stoy f rul 
r 
l-acim 
n beryl 
radr wil arb this
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2001 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccbl
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books and view a sample of The Bulletin Online at our homepage:
http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
0008-9036(200202)55:6; 1 -I
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
·5g;a
----
~
1
,~P'i"~
;·-
-;-i;-·4 :-1 
a
·i
