H
SI 
I NOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana- Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
4:-'" __
~~b~~ B
:·
icrE~'"~
i
I-~·" 
I~ B
"W "A warm kitchen filled with inviting aromas sets the
scene for this heartfelt novel celebrating friendship and family ties.
Here 12-year-old Rosie and her Italian grandmother whip up
extraordinary dishes and exchange confidences.... Creech once
1 
1 
1_ 1l .l .
.. . ±- I -- 
_ 
-
_ 
1 
- .... 
„ 
L 
.... ..
,- 
-- -
... . ... . .
their emotions through very few, carefully chosen words."
-
Starred review / Publishers Weekly 
-*
S"A tasty treat. As 12-year-old Rosie makes zuppa with her 
O
grandmother, she struggles with her feelings about her best friend,
Bailey.... This gets high marks for its unique voice."
-
Starred review / ALA Booklist
"The integration of the Italian kitchen and Granny's favorite stories 
I
from the old country add flavor just like the ingredients in her recipes.
This is a meal that should not be missed."- School Library Joural
Ruby Holler
Tr (0-06-027732-7) $16.99 * Lb (0-06-027733-5) $16.89
Au (0-06-008786-2) $24.00
k
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 2003
Vol. 57 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
91 
THE BIG PICTURE
Creation written and illus. by Gerald McDermott
92 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
102 * The Animal Hedge by Paul Fleischman; illus. by Bagram Ibatoulline
107 * The Stone Lamp: Eight Stories ofHanukkah through History by Karen
Hesse; illus. by Brian Pinkney
112 * Jake, Reinvented by Gordon Korman
119 * The River between Us by Richard Peck
121 
* The She by Carol Plum-Ucci
132 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
133 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (MD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Molly Dolan
Krista Hutley
Hope Morrison
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $70.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edulpuboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2003 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Gerald McDermott from Creation ©2003. Used by permission of Dutton
Children's Books.
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
91
THE BIG PICTURE
Creation
written and illus. by Gerald McDermott
Recreating creation has been a particularly fruitful literary enterprise of late. Phyllis
Root and Helen Oxenbury envisioned in Big Momma Makes the World (BCCB
2/03) a zaftig goddess who fashions the cosmos with her pudgy baby at her side,
folksy benediction on her lips, and an indulgent but slightly stern love for her
humans in her heart. Julius Lester and Joe Cepeda injected a broad measure of
humor into the undertaking, with the god of What a Truly Cool World (BCCB
2/99) putting the finishing touches on his work while a host of opinionated min-
ions put their two cents in. Now McDermott rides the pendulum back from
playful imagination to the sacred mythology that shaped the image of creation in
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. God is once again a potent, incorporeal force,
and the genesis of life an impalpable mystery.
The creative trajectory of Genesis is honored here, but the narrator is the
Creator himself, and he makes his pride and power manifest: "I was before time.
I was everywhere. There was nothing. I was there. My spirit moved over the
deep. I floated in the darkness." What better than a disembodied voice to evoke
the wonder of bringing being into being by breath alone? When he says, "Then I
breathed light into the dark. The light became day. The darkness became night,"
there's no need to point out that "it was good." What else could it be? There's also
no need to define the order of human emergence-no purloined ribs, no hint of
woman as an afterthought: "Out of myself I brought man and woman. I gave my
gifts to them." Of course, there's a paradox to this unnamed Eden: all creation
may be a gift, but it's also a mission, and humans are designated stewards with a
heavy onus of responsibility: "Creatures that swim. Creatures that crawl. Crea-
tures that fly ... with woman and man to care for them." Abrogation of respon-
sibility and the thumping fall from grace are, happily, still in the future, and
McDermott leaves his burgeoning world rife with innocent possibility.
An audience familiar with McDermott's An Arrow to the Sun (BCCB
11/74) or Raven (6/93) will recognize his skillful signature deployment of obsidian
black. Darkness here, however, is more than effective artistic contrast or a device
to catch and direct the eye. Black is a fundamental element in a nascent universe,
and McDermott spreads broad spaces of slick emptiness against which a hazy gray
swirl of "spirit" can bloom in the next double bleed into a field of nearly incandes-
cent white as "the light became day." Black isn't banished with the appearance of
light; it forms the boundaries between "sweet and salt" waters above and below
heaven. It's the void that swooping birds and leaping fish and stampeding land
animals race to fill at every turn of the page. Against the black, colors intensify as
92 
* THE BULLETIN
the cosmos grows, from the muddy brown and steely grays of the primal mists to
the riot of jewel-toned entities-amethyst birds, emerald seas, topaz stars, sapphire
humans, all mottled and stippled in dense brushwork that fairly crackles with life.
The closing spread returns to serene blackness, but now a fiery red spark
encasing an embryonic shape floats above the text: "I am all this. All this I AM."
This, of course, explains nothing. Or perhaps it explains everything. Could be a
profound theological insight. Could be a teasing, artistic conceit. But then, hasn't
this always been the ultimate mystery story? (Imprint information appears on p.
115.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALDA, ARLENE 
Morning Glory Monday; illus. by Maryann Kovalski. 
Tundra,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-88776-620-X 
$17.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
A 1930s New York tenement is the setting for this story of a small immigrant
family and their neighbors whose lives are transformed one magical summer. The
young daughter narrates as she and Papa do everything they can think of to cheer
up Mama, who misses Italy. When the narrator wins seeds at Coney Island, she's
sure that growing flowers will make Mama smile again. The flowers start on the
fire escape, but eventually blue morning glories cover all of the buildings, "as far as
you could see." The miracle affects not only Mama but the neighborhood: the
final illustration shows all of the frowns turned upside-down as grumpy Mrs.
Grimaldi smiles at everyone, and Mr. Shapiro turns from selling pickles to playing
the trumpet. Alda convincingly portrays tenement life and its hardships in small
details: the narrator's friend Jackie "slept with his five brothers, all on the very
same bed," and Mama "smiled a little, but mostly she ironed and sewed and mopped
the floor and took naps." Kovalski's charcoal and watercolor illustrations are equally
authentic, especially in neighborhood scenes: the book opens with a double-page
spread of quick lines, muted yellows, and bright whites that show the overcrowd-
ing, poverty, and unhappiness of the occupants, and later scenes convey not only
the visual grimness but also the summer heat, street noise, and garbage smell. This
doesn't quite have the personality of Stewart's The Gardener (BCCB 10/97), and
the story that started out as an engaging depiction of the search for happiness turns
a little too charming as the narrative switches to rhyming couplets, but this weak-
ness is balanced by the strength of the illustrations. Young readers will be satisfied
that the ending is a happy one, and the point-that happiness can come from a
change of attitude rahrther than a change of circumstance-is carried through in
both picture and story. KH
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 93
BARNARD, BRYN 
Dangerous Planet: Natural Disasters that Changed History; writ-
ten and illus. by Bryn Barnard. 
Crown, 2003 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92249-0 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82249-6 
$17.95 
Ad Gr. 6-10
Natural disasters make absorbing reading in their own right, but Barnard has taken
a slightly different view, examining nine crucial historical redirections caused or
strongly influenced by natural disasters. Following an introductory overview, the
book starts with the impact that likely led to the extinction of the dinosaurs, swiftly
moves onto human history with the volcanic explosion and subsequent tsunami
that spelled the end of the enduring Minoan culture, and weathers various climatic
catastrophes up through the Japanese earthquake of 1923. Each entry provides a
map of the affected region (with the weather effects and relevant political locations
indicated), three pages of double-columned text that discusses the historical con-
text for the situation, the scientific background of the relevant natural phenom-
enon, and the effects of the intersection of disaster and situation. The book's
short of explanation on how we know about all this, and the information is so
densely packed that some additional clarification would sometimes be welcome
(how exactly did the unrest in Japan lead to ikebana flower arranging?), but this is
a dramatic and provocative approach to history and environmental issues. There's
a good mix of locations and of types of event, ranging from military defeat to
agricultural failure, which adds to the inherent interest of nature running amuck.
The art, one full-page and a few subsidiary images per section, runs toward garish
colors and cheesy unsubtlety, but in an enjoyably disastrous way. A conclusion
offers some extrapolation and food for further thought; though there is oddly nei-
ther table of contents nor index, a bibliography and glossary are included. DS
BLOCK, FRANCESCA LIA 
Wasteland. Cotler/HarperCollins, 2003 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028645-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028644-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
No one does love among the ruins of the Valley like Francesca Lia Block, especially
when that love strains the boundaries of convention and produces more bitter
than sweet, more pain than pleasure. Lex has loved Marina since she was a baby-
his baby sister, in fact-and his love for her grows as Marina becomes the achingly
beautiful blond waif so common in Block stories. Though consummation of their
mutual affection is never actually confirmed, lines are definitely crossed, and Lex,
unable to face life with or without his sister/lover, commits suicide. Much of the
narrative is given over to an exploration of Lex and Marina's developing devotion
for each other, shifting perspectives from one to the other, with Lex being more
aware of the transgressive nature of his feelings than Marina. As usual, the adults
are self-absorbed to the point of toxicity, and the secondary characters are little
more than colorful stereotypes of '80s punk culture. Uncharacteristically, Block
backs down from the full impact of her subject by revealing that Lex was in fact
adopted, a revelation that justifies the title. Though there is a happy ending of
sorts, with Marina finding love, forgiveness, and healing in the arms of another
boy, readers who get their tears from teen Shakespearean remakes like Baz
Luhrmann's Romeo and Juliet and Tim Blake Nelson's O will find their tragic
sense of love's sublime agonies affirmed here. KC
94 
* THE BULLETIN
BORDEN, LOUISE 
Touching the Sky: The Flying Adventures of Wilbur and Orville
Wright; by Louise Borden and Trish Marx; illus. by Peter Fiore. 
McElderry,
2003 
6 4p
ISBN 0-689-84876-5 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Although this year's centennial attention is currently focused on the first flight in
North Carolina, the Wright brothers had plenty of achievements following that
event, as Borden and Marx reveal in this account. The action here is largely cen-
tered in 1909, when Wilbur crowned New York's tricentennial festivities with
lengthy, controlled flights around the Statue of Liberty and up the Hudson River
and Orville dazzled Europeans with record-setting feats of airmanship. Readers
familiar with Borden's tribute to aviatrix Bessie Coleman, Fly High! (BCCB 2/01),
will recognize the format: blocks of verse-like, left-justified text interlaced with
watercolor double-page spread backdrops and spot art. There's not much here on
the fliers' technical improvements since the 1903 flight, the struggle to defend
patent rights, or even the brothers' quest to land a buyer for their invention. What
Borden does deliver-in spades-is a sense of excitement and pure astonishment
that swept through the crowds of spectators as they caught their first glimpse of
manned flight. While this title won't qualify for one-stop Wright Brothers read-
ers, centennial enthusiasts may want to muse awhile on life after Kitty Hawk. An
aviation timeline and maps are included. EB
BREDESON, CARMEN 
After the Last Dog Died: The True-Life, Hair-Raising Adven-
ture ofDouglas Mawson and His 1911-1914 Antarctic Expedition. 
National Geo-
graphic, 2003 
64p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-6140-2 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
The burst of recent Antarctic literature for youth has largely been focused on Ernest
Shackleton; the work of Australian Douglas Mawson, especially his Australasian
Expedition of 1911-14, has been largely overshadowed by the drama of Shackleton's
and Scott's contemporaneous journeys. Bredeson's biography puts Mawson front
and center, briefly surveying his youth and his burgeoning career in geology before
turning to his Antarctic explorations. Though he first proved himself on
Shackleton's 1908-09 expedition, where he and two colleagues were the first people
to stand at the magnetic south pole, the main subject here is his own expedition.
On that expedition four parties set out to cover and map an extraordinary amount
of uncharted territory; Mawson's journey turned into an ordeal of survival after his
two companions died and he, ill and deprived of food, had to make his way back to
the expedition's main camp on his own. The writing lacks the smoothness and
focus of the publisher's similarly formatted biography of Shackleton (Kostyal's
Trial by Ice, BCCB 12/99), and there's little critical assessment of Mawson's achieve-
ments; some of the photographs seem to be not of his actual expedition or traveled
region (captions suggest that he traversed landscape "similar to this one"), but their
actual subject is never stated. It's nice to see some primary research, however (the
author spoke to several of Mawson's relatives), and this is an account of an eventful
and dramatic life invitingly condensed for easy access; the elegant format, blending
an emphasis on photographs with catchy pull quotes and generous white space,
will draw readers not ready for Mawson's own autobiography. End matter in-
cludes a list of expedition members, a chronology, a list of sources and resources
(electronic as well as print), and an index; the copyright page includes specific page
notes for quotations. DS
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
95
BUNTING, EVE 
The Presence: A Ghost Story. 
Clarion, 2003 
[208p]
ISBN 0-618-26919-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
A Christmas with her grandmother in California seems like a good idea for
seventeen-year-old Catherine, who's trying to pull herself back together after a
tragic car accident that injured her and killed her best friend. Once there, she finds
her usual rapport with her beloved grandmother and there's even a possible boyfriend
(Collin, the son of her grandmother's pastor), but she's also beginning to wonder
if she's losing her mind: she's hearing voices that no one else hears and seeing
things that no one else detects. Interpolated narrative reveals that her grandmother's
church houses a murderous ghost, who's been waiting to add Catherine to his
gallery of doomed young women; Catherine, however, is drawn by his promise to
assuage her guilt over her friend's death. There are some classic elements here-a
secret guilt, a lonely ghost, a gothically romantic flavor-as well as additional
pleasures in the budding relationship between Collin and Catherine and her
easygoing rapport with her energetic grandmother. The components are sometimes
rather cursorily unfolded, however, so the book doesn't always manage to attain
the necessary atmosphere; detailed accounts of the ghost's existence and formative
influences make the mystery overly earthbound in places while leaving his actual
actions somewhat unclear. This therefore isn't up to Hahn's Look for Me by
Moonlight (BCCB 4/95) or other tales of romance foundering on supernatural
rocks, but readers will still find pleasure in the traditional ghost-story ingredients
as Bunting puts them through their satisfying paces. DS
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
Ship ofFire. Viking, 2003 
197p
ISBN 0-670-89907-0 
$16.99 
R Gr. 5-9
Doctor William Perrivale and his apprentice, Thomas Spyre, are down to their last
coin, and they leap at the chance to sign on as ship's surgeon and assistant on the
Elizabeth Bonaventure, Sir Francis Drake's flagship leading the fleet to wreak havoc
among Spanish ships at Cadiz. The two have been hired by the Lord Admiral not
only to tend the sick and injured, but also to keep watch over Drake himself, who
is suspected of having his hand in the till rather than on the tiller, so to speak.
Perrivale is promptly carried off by an explosion during gunnery practice, and
Thomas, at age seventeen, is left in charge of all shipboard medical concerns. There's
plenty to keep him busy, from leeching to amputation, and he hones his already
considerable skills on captive patients who quickly reward him with cautious friend-
ship and respect. Drake himself keeps an eye on Tom, who happens to hail from
a town near his own birthplace, and Thomas always seems to have an ear to strat-
egy and plans. Except for the battle at Cidiz, which seems to be based on actual
events (although no historic note is provided), this could be any maritime adven-
ture tale, with a medical twist. A rousing yarn it is nonetheless, and as soon as
readers cease questioning whom narrator Thomas is addressing (he seems to speak
across the centuries, explaining social and nautical terms for twenty-first century
middle-school landlubbers), they can settle in for a boatload of action. Much of
the novel's satisfaction, however, rests ultimately on whether a sequel waits in the
wings. We leave Cadiz harbor ablaze, but the Lord Admiral's commission-and
even a romance for Tom-are becalmed. Readers can keep their fingers crossed.
EB
96 
* THE BULLETIN
CAVE, KATHRYN 
You've Got Dragons; illus. by Nick Maland. 
Peachtree,
2003 
32p
ISBN 1-56145-284-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
One day, while walking home through the park, Ben turns around to find that he
is being pursued by an absolutely huge dragon who is soon accompanied by oth-
ers. It soon becomes clear that the "dragons" in this self-consciously bibliothera-
peutic offering refer to both specific and generalized worries and anxieties, and
after delineating the symptoms and dismissing non-helpful responses to dragons,
the book reassures the reader that everyone has them at some time or another. It
goes on to offer Ben's suggestions for dealing with dragons through an advice
column in which he answers letters from other children and his own father and
through a list of "Ben's Top Tips for What to Do When You've Got Dragons,"
which include befriending your dragon, drawing pictures of it, making it laugh,
and talking to others. Some of the advice seems contradictory; for instance, earlier
in the book, talking about your dragons is presented as a risky enterprise: either
people want you to talk about dragons when you don't want to talk, or they re-
spond with their own dragon stories rather than listening to yours. In addition,
the nature of the dragons themselves is rather muddled-in one scene the math-
test dragon is threatening to overwhelm the child, in another he is eating the teacher.
However, the emotional oscillation and confusion caused by the presence of drag-
ons is rendered perceptively through the use of varying fonts that alternate be-
tween straight and curved orientations, and the final reassurance that "No dragon is
morepoweful than YOU" is reinforced by the soft pastels and crosshatching that
ground and contain the illustrations against the white backgrounds. The purpo-
sive metaphor will appeal to adults and may, if properly understood (and this may
require some prompting), prove helpful to youngsters a bit too old to be soothed
by simpler approaches such as Henkes' Wemberly Worried (BCCB 9/00) or Wells'
Felix and the Worrier (reviewed below). KC
CHILD, LAUREN 
Utterly Me, Clarice Bean. 
Candlewick, 2003 
190p
ISBN 0-7636-2186-2 
$15.99 
R Gr. 3-5
Clarice Bean, heroine of picture books such as Clarice Bean, Guess Who's Babysit-
ting? (BCCB 4/01), appears here in her first chapter book. Clarice tells her own
story in a breakneck narrative (packaged, if not couched, as a diary) that speeds
from one chapter to the next in a breathless style reminiscent of Kay Thompson's
legendary Eloise of the Plaza. Clarice opens with an introduction to her family
and segues almost immediately into the major preoccupations of her life: archen-
emy Grace Grapello ("what a showoff'); teacher Mrs. Wilberton ("not my favorite
person on the planet of Earth"); classmate Betty Moody ("we are utterly best
friends"); and her literary passion, The Ruby Redfort Collection ("Betty Moody and
me utterly love them"), excerpts from which punctuate Clarice's commentary. A
class project, the naughtiest boy in school, and a misunderstanding between friends
make up the main threads of this feather-light tale. Plotting and characterizations
may be a bit facile, but despite the predictable nature of the action, Clarice's voice
is attention-grabbing enough to catch-and hold-readers. Black-and-white il-
lustrations interspersed throughout the text give a wild-eyed (sometimes literally)
view of the protagonist and her environs. Clarice is a bubbly and inviting narrator
who will make firm friends of those seeking to master chapter books. JMD
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
97
CHRISTENSEN, BONNIE 
The Daring Nellie Bly: America's Star Reporter; written
and illus. by Bonnie Christensen. 
Knopf, 2003 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91568-0 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81568-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
In a time when working women were confined mainly to schools, factories, and
sweatshops, Nellie Bly became a renowned investigative reporter, tirelessly
campaigning to expose injustice and corruption. In 1889, she traveled around the
world in seventy-two days with only one handbag for essentials and a monkey
named McGinty for company. Christensen succinctly summarizes Bly's
unconventional life, using her record-breaking trip around the world as the prime
example of Bly's motto, "Energy rightly applied and directed will accomplish
anything." Young readers will be able to get into the travel spirit with descriptions
of the frustrating delays, fearsome storms, and determined competitors that Bly
faced; they'll also enjoy charting Bly's progress on detailed maps, which sport mock
memorabilia such as reproductions of travel tickets and representative pictures of
the different countries and cultures Bly experienced. Christensen's line-and-
watercolor illustrations of Pittsburgh and New York highlight the cities' industrial
nature with muted grays and browns and smoke-clogged skies, and her
representation of clothing and buildings gives the book much of its turn-of-the-
century feel. The straightforward text lacks some of the verve of its subject, but
this is balanced with quotations from Bly and her contemporaries that show her
willful spirit. With the book's addition of a chronology, bibliography, and
videography, readers who are left curious about the woman who bullied and coaxed
her way into changing the world will know where to go. KH
DATLOW, ELLEN, ed. 
Swan Sister: Fairy Tales Retold; ed. by Ellen Datlow and
Terri Windling. 
Simon, 2003 
165p
ISBN 0-689-84613-4 $16.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Datlow and Windling follow up their recent foray into fairy-tale retellings for
young adults (A Wolfat the Door, BCCB 7/00) with this new anthology, featuring
thirteen stories that take their themes from the plots and motifs of well-known
fairy tales and lesser-known fairy lore. Jane Yolen offers "Greenkid," about a vora-
cious nature spirit who nearly succeeds in taking over a young man's fancy; Pat
York's "The Fish's Story" looks at "The Fisherman and His Wife" from a new
perspective; Gregory Frost takes the bones of an old ballad and clothes them in
chilling prose in "The Harp That Sang." While the quality of the entries is not
completely consistent, most of the tales approach the familiar truths of fairy tales
and tell them slant, providing readers with a different angle that relieves the tales of
their burden of domesticated familiarity. The entries are arranged with a tonal rise
and fall, from the romantic lyricism ofMidori Snyder's quest tale "Golden Fur" to
the rising terror ofNina Kiriki Hoffman's "Bluebeard" retelling "Chambers of the
Heart"; from the antic humor of Bruce Coville's "Tom Thumb: A Life in Minia-
ture" to the internal surprise of Kathe Koja's red-cloaked "Lupe." Here's an op-
portunity to introduce younger readers not ready for fantasy epics to the tropes
and delights of the genre in an abbreviated but still involving format. JMD
98 
* THE BULLETIN
DEFELICE, CYNTHIA 
Old Granny and the Bean Thief; illus. by Cat Bowman
Smith. 
Farrar, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-374-35614-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
An old lady with a penchant for beans is perturbed when a sneak thief robs her of
her favorite food three nights in a row. On her way to town to inform the sheriff
she meets a talking water snake, a pecan, a cow patty, a cactus, and an alligator, all
of whom tell her "Old Granny ... on your way home, pick me up and put me in
your sack. You'll be glad you did." The sheriffhas, unfortunately, gone fishing, so
Old Granny walks home, "feeling plumb discouraged and lonelier than ever." On
her way she is so happy to see the cheerful alligator, chatty cactus, etc. that she
picks up each and every one and takes them home, where they scare off the bean
thief (a mischievous raccoon) in a scene that echoes the rousting of the thieves in
"The Bremen Town Musicians." Despite structural echoes of traditional folktales,
the text is overly wordy and the pace bogs down in the excessive accumulation of
jolly helpers and undifferentiated repetitive language. Smith's loose-lined infor-
mal watercolors suit the humor of the plot, but the palette is washed out and the
compositions lack impact. Still, there is something irresistible about a talking cow
patty, and in the hands of a storyteller with an editorial bent, this will make a
successful silly tale for telling. JMD
DEMI 
The Legend of Saint Nicholas; written and illus. by Demi. 
McElderry,
2003 
40p
ISBN 0-689-84681-9 
$19.95 
M 
Gr. 3-7
If not the outright winner, St. Nicholas must be at least a contender for the Most
Colorful but Unverifiable Legends award, and here Demi rounds up every avail-
able story and delivers them all in a solemn but less than satisfying account. With
nary a source or reference, each suspect miracle and hazy date is presented as widely
accepted fact, from his birth and death years to his improbable resuscitation of
three dead children pickled in a tub of brine. Readers who accept the legends at
face value may still find themselves confused about how young Nicholas became a
bishop when no mention is made of his having been a clergyman, or why he was
"tormented for his beliefs and put on trial during the first ecumenical Council of
Nicaea." And how in the world had his "body passed into Heaven" when, accord-
ing to previous text, his remains were securely buried in Bari, Italy? Icon-styled
scenes, liberally accented in metallic gold, are at once gravely formal and naively
doll-like. Pictures that accompany the textual explanation of Nicholas's popular
transition from Saint to Santa, as well as end paper renderings of various "ethnic"
Santas, break faith with the overall attempt to fashion a sacred biography. The
content is diverting, but it must be taken with a heaping tablespoon of salt; readers
seeking the broadest coverage of the popular saint may want to turn to Tompert's
Saint Nicholas (BCCB 10/00). EB
DENT, GRACE 
LBD: It's a Girl Thing. Putnam, 2003 
275p
ISBN 0-399-24187-6 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
It seems that teen angst isn't so angsty these days, especially when you've got fabu-
lous mates and a plan for greatness. The mates are the LBD, short for Les Bambinos
Dangereuses, or Ronnie, Claude, and Fleur, three inseparable fourteen-year-old
girls whose parents unreasonably refuse to let them spend the night at the Astlebury
Snogging, er, Music Festival. The plan is to stage their own music festival featur-
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
99
ing local bands, a move that promises to make them the most popular girls in
Blackwell School. Meanwhile, it seems as though Ronnie's parents are splitting
up, which is really too inconvenient when she's got a festival to plan. Not to
worry: the festival comes off far better than expected, and the trouble with Ronnie's
parents, an unexpected pregnancy which is obvious to everyone except Ronnie, is
resolved when they come to terms with their little surprise. Following in the tradi-
tion of Louise Rennison (Angus, Thongs, and Full-Frontal Snogging, BCCB 5/00),
Dent plays the trials and tribulations of being fourteen-inscrutable parents, equally
inscrutable lads, and breasts, buns, and noses that are either too small or too large-
for laughs and doesn't try to cram any life lessons in amongst the drollery. The
book drags in the middle as Dent indulges herself in a bit too much atmosphere
and not enough plot, but the pace picks up toward the end. As a regular contribu-
tor to British teen magazines, Dent has a keen ear for British teen slang and a
knack for quotable quips that will make the book worth the price of admission for
Anglophile readers. KC
DICAMILLO, KATE 
The Tale ofDespereaux: Being the Story ofa Mouse, a Princess,
Some Soup, and a Spool of Thread; illus. by Timothy Basil Ering. 
Candlewick,
2003 
272p
ISBN 0-7636-1722-9 
$17.99 
R Gr. 3-5
The young mouse Despereaux Tilling simply does not fit in (he can read, and he
has an innate appreciation for music), either with his family or his community,
and, as the author states, "you must know that an interesting fate (sometimes
involving rats, sometimes not) awaits almost everyone, mouse or man, who does
not conform." When Despereaux makes the unforgivable mistake of speaking to a
human, the Princess Pea, he loses both his heart and his place in the mouse com-
munity, and the adventure is off. On its way, the novel tells the story not only of
Despereaux, the chivalric mouse who risks all for his ladylove, but also Chiar-
oscuro (a.k.a. Roscuro), the outlawed rat who craves the light, and Miggery Sow,
the servant girl who squanders hope on an impossible wish. DiCamillo speaks
directly to the reader throughout this deliberately though gently mannered book,
and she states the point of her lessons clearly. There's an intimacy to the authorial
tone that makes the artfully crafted prose and precisely contrived exposition acces-
sible as well as gratifying. Ering's full-page pencil drawings contribute to the ro-
mantic feel, the meticulous drafting softened by the dusty, almost pastel-like
treatment of dark and light; the physical design of the book hearkens back to
leather-bound volumes with gold imprints and other detailing. There is a classic
charm to this picaresque tale of an idealistic mouse suffering unrequited love for a
princess; that and a pace that lends itself to reading aloud will make this novel a
favorite among those ready for some gentle questing. JMD
DRUMMOND, ALLAN 
The Flyers; written and illus. by Allan Drummond. 
Foster/
Farrar, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-374-32410-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
GLASS, ANDREW 
The Wondrous Whirligig: The Wright Brothers' First Flying Ma-
chine; written and illus. by Andrew Glass. 
Holiday House, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1717-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Lest the story-hour crowd feel left out of the Wright Brothers hoopla, Drummond
and Glass step in with kiddie spins on the aviators' career. Flyers views the events
100 
* THE BULLETIN
at Kitty Hawk through the eyes of some fictional local children who hang around
the beach watching the brothers and daydreaming about the airships they will in-
vent. Details of the first flight itself are neatly adapted for lap- and floor-sitters and
elegantly realized in Drummond's buoyant, airy watercolors. The children's imag-
inings, though amusing in their spot-on predictions for the future of manned flight
("He's going to make aflying war machine and fly it right over the Macy gang's
hideout and drop rocks and water bombs on the roof"), may prove annoyingly
intrusive to listeners who want just the facts, ma'am. Whirligig takes a quite differ-
ent tack, offering a rambunctious tall tale based on reports of the Wright boys'
flying toy and their early efforts at tinkering. There's plenty of enthusiasm and
pratfall humor in the bouncy text and feverishly active watercolors, as well as a
strong (and probably quite accurate) sense of the family support the young inven-
tors enjoyed. However, there's no clear connection between the boys' puttering
and the men's accomplishment, and listeners lacking prior background won't be
much enlightened as to the Wright Brothers' significance. Still, each of the above
titles is visually enticing and could supplement a more solid presentation in class-
room or story hour. EB
DUNREA, OLIVIER 
Ollie; written and illus. by Olivier Dunrea. 
Houghton,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-33928-0 
$9.95 
R 
2-4 yrs
Ollie the Stomper; written and illus. by Olivier Dunrea. 
Houghton,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-33930-2 
$9.95 
R 
2-4 yrs
This picture-book duet introduces Ollie the gosling, sidekick of slightly older gos-
lings Gossie and Gertie, who appeared previously in Gossie and Gossie and Gertie
(BCCB 12/02). In Ollie, Gossie and Gertie impatiently await Ollie's arrival, but
Ollie has other ideas. Happily ensconced inside his egg, Ollie announces, "I won't
come out," and despite some preliminary rolls to the left and right, he doesn't-
until Gossie and Gertie feign disinterest, at which point the contrary gosling cracks
his way into the world. Ollie the Stomper finds the diminutive hero in a temper:
Gossie and Gertie have boots (red and blue, respectively) and Ollie wants some,
too. The two older goslings exasperatedly give in to the demands of the younger,
each donating a boot to the cause, but Ollie finds getting what he wants is not
necessarily satisfying (" 'These boots are too hot!'Ollie shouts") and the three kick off
their boots and go swimming. Dunrea's text may be simple but it is packed with
toddler-sized drama, and Gossie and Gertie easily assume the roles of older sisters
dealing with a pesky but beloved younger brother. The text includes repetitive
language and action verbs (Ollie the Stomper "hops," "stomps," "kicks," and "stares")
with solid consonants that lend themselves to creative reading aloud. Spare line-
and-watercolor illustrations are streamlined but effective, and their reliance on
visual repetition (the goslings are always seen in readily identifiable profile) makes
them easy to "read." Move over, Gossie and Gertie, here comes Ollie; shelves of
toddler titles will be all the better for his presence. JMD
ERDRICH, LISE 
Sacagawea; illus. byJulie Buffalohead. 
Carolrhoda, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-87614-646-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Erdrich combines known historical fact with accessible storytelling in this picture-
book biography of Sacagawea, Shoshone guide and interpreter for Lewis and Clark's
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
101
1804 Corps of Discovery expedition. The story opens with Sacagawea's capture
by Hidatsa warriors, then segues into her time with the Hidatsa and her marriage
to French trapper Charbonneau. When Charbonneau is hired to guide Lewis and
Clark, Sacagawea and her newborn infant accompany them. The author clearly
explains what is known and what is surmised, differentiating between legend and
documented history. The narrative is interspersed with small but telling details
that give concrete insight into the trials and triumphs of everyday life, as well as an
unintrusive sense of historical context. Buffalohead's full-page color illustrations
are notable for their tangible textures; though articulation of figures and features is
sometimes stiff, there's drama in the rich palette and expressionistic style. Erdrich
ends with the departure of the Corps of Discovery and Sacagawea's return to the
Knife River villages of the Hidatsa; an afterword explains the difficulty of follow-
ing Sacagawea's story and outlines various speculations about her fate. An intro-
ductory author's note explains the spelling and pronunciation of Sacagawea's name;
a timeline, historical maps, and a select bibliography are included. JMD
FALCONE, L. M. 
The Mysterious Mummer. Kids Can, 2003 
192p
ISBN 1-55337-376-6 $16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Despite Joey's protests, he is off to spend Christmas with his bereaved aunt, Corinne,
in her lonely house on the coast of Newfoundland. What he finds there is more
than simple grief over the loss of her husband; his aunt seems to have gone off the
beam-not eating, not sleeping, not paying any attention to her young houseguest
except to yell at him. Shades of Miss Havisham emerge when Joey finally goes into
Corinne's bedroom and finds a shrine erected to her late husband, complete with
candles, black roses, and her wedding dress mounted on a dressmaker's dummy.
Circumstances go further awry when Corinne attends a stance and an uninvited
spirit shows up with a dire warning. Things appear to be looking up when Joey
befriends an abnormally pale boy his own age (of course, Joey is oblivious to the
fact that his new friend is a ghost, but no reader will be) and Corinne's chipper
mother-in-law shows up bearing gifts for Christmas, but Joey and his aunt should
beware perky strangers, as these two are apparently determined to reunite Corinne
with her dead husband, no matter how many other holiday revelers they have to
take with them. The plot moves along at a fast clip, and the climax is sufficiently
ghoulish, but the motivations of the characters are altogether unclear. Corinne's
response seems a bit excessive, for instance, seeing how she and Stephen were mar-
ried less than a year, and that after a scant three-month courtship. Further, how
could such an endearing fellow as Uncle Stephen become such a foul spirit as to
lure a roomful of holiday guests to their deaths just so he can be with his wife?
These and other unanswered questions will frustrate the attentive reader, but kids
who just want a titillating encounter with the unvarnished occult will find some
shivers here. KC
FENNER, CAROL 
Snowed In with Grandmother Silk; illus. by Amanda
Harvey. 
Dial, 2003 
80p
ISBN 0-8037-2857-3 
$14.95 
R* Gr. 2-4
Grandmother Silk is Ruddy's father's mother, a very proper individual who favors
high heels, carefully styled hair, and a well-ordered existence, and Ruddy is not
looking forward to staying with her over Halloween when his parents are away.
Things go from bad to worse when a freak early snowstorm blankets the area and
102 
* THE BULLETIN
cuts off their power, water, telephone, and access to the rest of the world; this
means that Ruddy will have to miss the Halloween party at the zoo, where he was
going to sport his new gorilla costume, and endure sheer, unadulterated together-
ness with Grandmother Silk. The book is understated yet tender in its treatment
of Ruddy and Grandmother Silk's unfolding relationship in the face of their pre-
dicament; as the world freezes, Grandmother Silk thaws, finding pleasure in learn-
ing chess with her grandson and sharing her memories of Ruddy's grandfather, and
Ruddy finds himself enjoying his grandmother's company. The modest survival
story, with Ruddy and his grandmother cooking on the stovetop (her household
help can't make it to the house) and hauling water from the lake, is precisely ob-
served (Ruddy keeps warm in his gorilla suit as Grandmother swathes herself in her
minks) and satisfying in its own right, and it's also subtly demonstrated that the
situation levels the playing field, with Grandmother Silk's control lessened and
Ruddy's talents (he's learned how to lay a fire, for instance) properly appreciated.
This would make a snug little readaloud as well as an enjoyable readalone that'll
make youngsters yearn for a chance to rough it for a few days with a special grownup.
Harvey's line-and-watercolor inserts evince a quiet and personable benignity well
matched to the story's tone. DS
FISHER, LEONARD EVERETT 
The Gods and Goddesses ofAncient China; written and
illus. by Leonard Everett Fisher. 
Holiday House, 2003 
34p
ISBN 0-8234-1694-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Fisher adds to his picture book pantheons of gods and goddesses from ancient
cultures with this abbreviated gallery highlighting the deities of ancient China. A
one-page introduction (heavy-handedly beginning "China-its very name evokes
mystery to the Western world") provides a thimbleful of Chinese history and ex-
plains that this title is intended to serves a "brief introduction to seventeen of the
most popular of these gods and goddesses." Each spread that follows features a
full-page color portrait of a particular deity or deities on the verso, with explana-
tory information on the recto. Deities presented include Yu Huang Da Di, The
Jade Emperor; Sun Wukong, God of Mischief; Guan Gong, God of War; and Cai
Shen, God of Wealth, among others. The information provided is limited, and
curious readers will find their appetites whetted but not sated; still, this is often-
sought, curriculum-related information in an accessible, unthreatening format.
While the deified figures themselves are roughly defined and the faces disappoint-
ingly undifferentiated, Fisher's illustrations achieve power through opaque colors
and intense hues; a band of color contrasts with the background color on each
spread and unifies the compositions with a frame-like effect. A short bibliography
and a pronunciation guide is appended; the endpapers feature a map of ancient
China. JMD
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
TheAnimalHedge; illus. by Bagram Ibatoulline. 
Candlewick,
2003 
38p
ISBN 0-7636-1606-0 
$16.99 
R 6-10 yrs
A farmer "whose heart glowed like a hot wood stove with the love of animals" lives
with his three sons on the family farm until the farm falls on hard times, the ani-
mals are sold, and the family moves to "a tiny cottage with a hedge around it." The
farmer misses his animals, and one day, he is struck by a familiar form in the hedge;
some careful snips with his shears and the shape of a cow emerges, then a rooster,
then a duster of sheep, until finally the farmer has a topiary barnyard. When his
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
103
sons are pondering going out into the world and finding a trade, the father cuts
down the hedge and tells each son to watch the shrubbery for an answer; sure
enough, each son sees his future in a shape offered by the growing hedge. After
successful years as coachman, sailor, and fiddler, the men return to their father's
house and restore to him the real barnyard animals he so long missed: "The farmer's
heart glowed like a hot wood stove. And he made up his mind to let the hedge
grow back just as it pleased." The deliberate formality of Fleischman's language
and the tale's folklike structure keep the plot clear despite its complexity.
Ibatoulline's watercolor and gouache illustrations, based on nineteenth-century
American folk art but evincing more fluid draftsmanship, have a pastoral naivete
that suits the somewhat nostalgic sensibility of this story. Thematically attuned
design features in the varied spreads include pictures with embroidery-like bor-
ders, text blocks framed in ornamental curlicues, and paint-on-wood endpapers
that echo the motifs of the compositions. The loving relationship between the
farmer and his sons and the genuine affection the farmer feels for a lost way of life
add an emotional subtext that enriches the coming-of-age theme. JMD
FLOYD, MADELEINE 
Captain's Purr; written and illus. by Madeleine
Floyd. 
Harcourt, 2003 
24p
ISBN 0-15-204939-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Captain is an elegant black and white tomcat, who enjoys the traditional cat plea-
sures ("Captain likes to sleep. . . .
When he is not sleeping, Captain likes to
wash. ... When he is not sleeping or washing, Captain likes to eat"). On a more
unusual note, he also enjoys courting his sweetheart in a most romantic way, row-
ing a boat down the river to her house and holding paws with her under the stars.
There's a felicitous specificity to the description of Captain's everyday pastimes, so
cat-owning kids will immediately recognize the feline habits and perhaps chime in
with their own kitties' activities. This realistic particularity makes the shift to
fantasy all the more jarring, however, and youngsters with a bit more insight about
cats' nocturnal prowling may find it a rather coy obscuring of the earthy truth;
there's also not much plot beyond the description of the day. The illustrations are
a major highlight: Scott's brushy watercolors recall Victor G. Ambrus in their
splotchy textures and charismatic animal portraiture, and there's also a nice line in
shimmering nocturnal landscape. This doesn't have the payoff or credibility of
Martin's Leo the Magnificat (BCCB 11/96), but cat lovers may still relish this
creative demonstration that every cat has his day. DS
FRENCH, JACKIE 
Diary of a Wombat; illus. by Bruce Whatley. 
Clarion,
2003 
[3 0p]
ISBN 0-618-38136-8 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
A rotund little wombat dutifully records her daily life, which starts out with basic
wombatty highlights ("Morning: Slept. Afternoon: Slept. Evening: Ate grass")
but then gets more interesting when she acquires new human neighbors. Now
she's discovered a wonderful location for her holes (the garden bed), a splendid
new scratching post (the patio table), and, best of all, a source of delicious new
treats (carrots). It's always funny to see your own world though the viewpoint of
an outsider (or downunderer), and the sweet yet deadpan humor of the wombat's
amiable tenacity ("Banged on large metal object till carrots appeared") will tickle
104 
* THE BULLETIN
youngsters even as they realize the accuracy of the wombat's conclusion: "Have
decided that humans are easily trained and make quite good pets." Whatley's
acrylics make the wombat an adorably shmoo-like character, legs sticking up stiffly
as she snoozes; the layout favors vignettes on white space, which puts the protago-
nist in the spotlight (the people are appropriately peripheral). This is amusing in
its own right, and it gets an extra piquancy from the exotic air wombats acquire
from a northern perspective; use this in combination with Fleming's Muncha!
Muncha!Muncha! (BCCB 3/02) for a global look at clever (and awfully cute) gar-
den infiltrators. DS
FRITZ, APRIL YOUNG 
Praying at the Sweetwater Motel. Hyperion, 2003 
26 6p
ISBN 0-7868-1864-6 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Sarah Jane, her mother, and her four-year-old sister, Alice, slip away quietly in the
middle of the night, leaving Sarah Jane's beloved Georgia home behind to escape
her abusive alcoholic father. They land in Dublin, Ohio, where, to Sarah Jane's
horror, they take up residence at the Sweetwater Motel. The owner, Mrs.
Sweetwater, and the motel's other permanent resident, Henry, are kind and pro-
tective, but that doesn't mitigate the stigma of living in a motel, especially when
the snobby girls at Sarah Jane's new school find out. Fortunately, she has been
befriended by two other misfits-a brazen, diminutive girl named Fred and the
gallant but gawky and carbuncular Arthur. Together they hatch a plan for Sarah
Jane to go home-after all, her father has assured her that he has stopped drinking
and that he would never lay a violent hand on her or her mother again. When she
calls him from the bus station in Macon only to hear the telltale "psshhhh" of a
beer can opening, however, she realizes that she has made a mistake. The plot
offers no real surprises, but Sarah Jane's voice, both in the narration and the inter-
stitial prayers between each chapter, is credible and recognizable in its hopes and
its hurts. By having Sarah Jane pray for her father to stop drinking, Fritz risks
painting herself into a corner, but instead she uses the prayers to chart Sarah Jane's
maturing understanding of the complexities of loving both herself and her father,
and of learning what it means to have a real home. KC
GAALDA, ANNA 
95 Pounds ofHope. Viking, 2003 
[112p]
ISBN 0-670-03672-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Poor old Gregory: he's thirteen and in sixth grade, and no matter how hard he
tries, school is one massive collection of failures for him; he's just trying to hold on
until he's sixteen and can finally drop out. His great skill is his ability to work with
his hands (his kindergarten teacher, the last to understand him, said he had "a
head like a sieve, magic fingers, and a heart of gold"), and his main consolation is
his easygoing relationship with his beloved Grandpa Leon, also a gifted craftsman.
When Gregory's current school despairs of him and his parents decide to send him
to boarding school, he sees a ray of hope in a technical school that emphasizes the
things he's actually good at-but will his terrible record ruin his chances of entry?
Gregory's narration in this French import is plaintive yet plainspoken and ruefully
humorous ("Then comes the torture of homework. If my mother helps me, she
always ends up crying. If it's my father, I always end up crying"), realistic as the
voice of a kid who knows that he's never going to succeed in what's currently the
main arena of his life. The imaginary--or spiritual-intervention of his grandfa-
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
105
ther at a crucial moment and his grandfather's sudden recovery from a coma lack
the grounded credibility of the rest of the novel, but it's Gregory's travails that
dominate. It's refreshing to see a book that acknowledges that working harder
doesn't always get you there, that some struggling kids never succeed at school,
and that they may find ways to succeed at life nonetheless. The book's brevity and
easygoing text makes it a promising readaloud or sympathetic, uncondescending
novel for reluctant readers, but any kid who knows what it's like to fail when
adults want you to succeed will empathize with Gregory. DS
GLASS, ANDREW 
The Wondrous Whirligig: The Wright Brothers'First Flying Ma-
chine.
See review under Drummond, p. 99.
HABER, MELISSA GLENN 
The HeroicAdventures ofHerculesAmsterdam. Dutton,
2003 
213p
ISBN 0-525-47119-7 
$16.99 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Hercules is a miniature hero-three inches tall, he lives in a Victorian dollhouse
that used to belong to his normal-sized mother. Determined to avoid being
mainstreamed into a regular classroom, Hercules slips through a hole in the base-
board and into a civilization of mice, complete with town, library, festivals, and
history-a civilization that is just Hercules' size. In short order, the boy becomes
an integral part of this concealed world, so much so that he is appointed Little
Steward of the Chronicle, keeper of the history of the mice, a position of great
honor in the community. When a marauding band of rats endangers the mice,
only Hercules can save them, but he'll have to grow to normal size to do it. The
construction of Hercules' world is painstaking and precise; unfortunately neither
plot nor characters have enough electricity to spark this world to life. The writing
is dense and formal, and the result is a thick prose that suffers from a consistently
slow pace. That all magical assistance requires payment in order for balance to be
maintained is a point clumsily driven home in a conclusion that lacks finesse.
Characterizations lack the energy necessary to enliven the action; only Hercules'
friend Juna has enough quirky personality to make her fate matter to the reader,
but in the end, even she is not enough to carry the tale. JMD
HADDIX, MARGARET PETERSON 
Escape from Memory. 
Simon, 2003 
220p
ISBN 0-689-85421-8 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
The entertainment at the weekly sleepover is hypnotism, and fifteen-year-old Kira
babbles a sketchy tale of war, intrigue, and midnight escape that seems related to
her own past. Kira confronts Mom (who really isn't her mother) with her ques-
tions and suspicions, but Mom isn't talking. Sophia (Mom who really isn't Mom)
disappears, and Aunt Memory (who really isn't Aunt Memory) shows up with a
wild tale of Sophia's abduction and Kira's duty to save her from her captors in
Crythe, a Roman colony (well, maybe a Roman colony) established in California,
by way of Eastern Europe. Kira's friend Lynne stows away in Kira's suitcase (yes,
in a zippered suitcase), a flurry of political maneuvering ensues, Kira and Lynne
are imprisoned with Sophia, Aunt Memory (now revealed as villainess Rona) wants
computer secrets that are hidden somewhere in Sophia and Kira's keeping, deals
are struck, and now the story gets complicated. Sophia, who isn't Kira's mother,
really is Kira's mother, or at least she's Kira's mother Toria with Sophia's memo-
106 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ries as well as her own (and Kira's father's, too, while we're at it). And you know
that means trouble. Fortunately, the police kill the bad guys, Kira builds a laptop
computer that will get everyone's memories into the proper place, and she has
"friends who care about me, not just the convoluted secrets in my mind." Plot
twists and switchbacks occur with such regularity that they fail to surprise, and the
rapidly accrued improbabilities are less likely to elicit "Oh, nooooo!" than "Puh-
leeeeze!" Dyed-in-the-wool Haddix fans might want to give this a go, but new-
comers can, well, forget it. EB
HAu, SHANNON 
The Goose Girl. Bloomsbury, 2003 
388p
ISBN 1-58234-843-X 
$17.95 
R Gr. 6-10
The Grimms' tale of the princess deceived by a maidservant and relegated to the
role of goose girl is here thoughtfully and originally retold in this first novel. The
opening line sets the tone for the densely magical tale that follows: "She was born
Anidori-Kiladra Talianna Isilee, Crown Princess of Kildenree, and she did not
open her eyes for three days." Ani is a princess, it is true, but she feels out of place
in the palace of her royal mother and spends more time riding her horse, Falada,
than in princessly pursuits. Betrothed at seventeen to the son of a neighboring
king, Ani sets out with a retinue of guards and her lady-in-waiting, nineteen-year-
old Selia, for her new wedded life. The princess' misgivings about her marital
future become irrelevant when a Selia-led coup leaves Ani bereft in the unknown
land of Bayern, while Selia assumes the role of that land's future queen. Cast upon
the mercy of strangers, Ani finds herself, literally and figuratively, when she is
hired to be goose girl to the king's geese. Hale weaves a complex pattern of magic
and romance in this intense coming-of-age tale. Lyrical language supplies a sen-
sual energy that subtly infuses the text. Characterizations are multilayered and
solid, each player having a believable emotional connection to the action. Ani
becomes herself in the course of the story, and her personal and physical growth,
combined with the intrigue and adventure of her dilemma, makes this novel a
journey worth taking. JMD
HARLOW, JOAN HIAT 
Shadows on the Sea. 
McElderry, 2003 
244p
ISBN 0-689-84926-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Harlow conflates two historical episodes from World War II-U-boat espionage
off the Maine coast and the sinking of the ferry Caribou-to serve as backdrop for
the fictional story ofJill Winters, a fourteen-year-old who's sent to stay with Nana
while Mom is in Canada and Daddy, a popular singer, is on the road. Jill is
squarely in the middle of every intrigue going, from small-town adolescent squabbles
surrounding membership in the snooty Crystals club to a wartime crisis involving
townsfolk who pass information to the German "wolf pack" via carrier pigeon.
Roiling beneath these problems is Jill's constant anxiety for the safe return of her
mother on the Caribou, which traverses U-boat infested waters, and her father on
a domestic transportation system that is vulnerable to sabotage. Fortunately, Jill
still has a little time left for a clambake date with love interest Quarry MacDonald
and some mild obsession over the latest cunning fashions. There's more than a bit
of Nancy Drew in both plot and presentation, from the brief but genuine menace
when a German collaborator traps our heroine on Nana's widow's walk, to the
demure romance between the girl crime-solver and her loyal but ever so slightly
dim boyfriend. Even the dialogue smacks of literary style gone by: "Everything
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
107
will be all right in the big picture of things, Jill. Meanwhile, keep your thoughts in
the sunlight where it's bright and promising." Still, the combination of mystery
and teen tale that keeps Nancy alive and kicking should work its magic here as
well. EB
HESSE, KAREN 
The Stone Lamp: Eight Stories ofHanukkah through History; illus.
by Brian Pinkney. 
Hyperion, 2003 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2531-6 
$19.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0619-2 
$18.99 
R Gr. 4-8
Through eight poetic imagined testimonies, Hesse revisits several of the darkest
moments in Jewish history, from the twelfth century to the twentieth, against
which the Hanukkah candles shine their brightest light. Each free-verse poem is
introduced by a page of historical background, bordered with a Scriptural passage,
and illuminated by a stylized vignette above the entry's title and a more literal full-
page illustration. Readers hear the voices of children who have survived persecu-
tion or intrareligious conflict. Reyna and her family hide their Hanukkah celebration
in Inquisition-era Venice ("Mother makes ready the lamp,/ though she dares not
place it in the tall window"). Anichka mourns the loss of her father in a Russian
pogrom ("Papa will not plant beets again,/ nor light the wicks in the ancient lamp,/
the stone lamp given his papa in trade for beets"). Ori, who witnessed the assassi-
nation ofYitzak Rabin, ponders his politically divided people ("The boy who shot
Rabin-/ he thought he could stop something./ He was wrong./ I look at this
ancient lamp and know/ some things cannot be stopped./ One of those things/ is
the Light"). The steady, confident voice of each narrator is ably matched by the
bold solidity of Pinkney's artwork-thick outlines, strong colors, and expressions
of cautious hopefulness of the children pictured commemorating the holy day.
EB
HILLS, TAD, illus. 
The 12 Days of Christmas; illus. by Tad Hills. 
Little Simon,
2003 
[26p]
ISBN 0-689-84976-1 
$9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
This cozy dramatization of the familiar carol features a fond piggy pair in the
traditional gift provision. Each day and each spread, he lugs another huge, gaily
wrapped package through the snow to the little white house where his ladylove
waits; opening the page flap on the recto reveals him revealing the day's bounty to
her. Hills' imaginative exploration is amusingly poker-faced as well as porker-
faced: the mild-mannered and respectable piggies are only taken moderately aback
by the excesses of the expanding population and the increasing crowd in the tidy
house, and the soft realism of the draftsmanship contrasts with the absurdity to
add to the humor of the situation. Seasonal giggles abound in the interpretation of
the gifts (many of whom assist in the holiday decorating of the house); not only do
the French hens wear modish berets and the calling birds monopolize the tele-
phone, the maids a-milking are plucky little mice reaching up to the pendulous
udder of a single cow, the drummers drumming are a crisp corps of penguins, and
the lords a-leaping are regally crowned and extremely bouncy bunnies. The final
scene borrows the terminal couplet from "'Twas the Night before Christmas" in
order to gather the swain and his gifts together in a serenade for his patient porcine
princess (now resting with her feet up on the partridge's cage after all the exer-
108 
* THE BULLETIN
tions). The combination of cacophonous silliness, seasonal gaiety, and snug acces-
sibility makes this a dozen days that'll be a welcome present for many audiences.
DS
JENNINGS, RICHARD W. 
Mystery inMt. Mole. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2003 
14 4 p
ISBN 0-618-28478-8 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Andy Forrest is nearly thirteen years old, and he's lived in Mt. Mole, his village, all
his life. He and the rest of the village are stunned when the small-town peace is
disrupted by the inexplicable disappearance of Mr. Farley, the unpopular vice-
principal; since Andy's one of the few people who didn't loathe Mr. Farley, and
since the chief of police tends to do his work by napping and hoping for psychic
visions, Andy decides he's the one to solve the mystery. Joining up with his class-
mate, the glamorous (and disaffected) Georgia Wayne, and traveling Mt. Mole
aboard his trusty electric scooter, Pegasus, Andy attempts to assemble clues rang-
ing from Mr. Farley's interest in popcorn and volcanoes to the strange environ-
mental afflictions the town is suffering to the influential Knott family's desire to
declare Mr. Farley dead, but little does he know what other town secrets are lying
in wait for him. This doesn't have the cohesion of the author's Orwell's Luck
(BCCB 10/00), nor does it quite muster the energetic silliness of a screwball com-
edy. The absurdities nonetheless fly fast and entertaining, with funny names,
outrageous events, and comic-book-type characters, and the weird alternative-world
flavor ofMt. Mole is pleasurable in its own right, like a benign Twin Peaks. Andy
is a terrible sleuth ("Is there a psychological condition in which a person feels he's
always the last to know?"), but that-and his affection for his strange, unprepos-
sessing little town-is what makes him endearing. The explanation of the enigma
itself is absurd enough to recall Daniel Pinkwater, but readers aren't likely to care;
in fact, they may appreciate the relief of a mystery where the solution really doesn't
matter. DS
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
IDream of Trains; illus. by Loren Long. 
Simon, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82609-5 
$16.95 
R 6-10 yrs
A young African-American boy picks cotton and dreams of traveling on passing
trains to places beyond the hot Mississippi field. After work, the boy wanders:
"When the cotton's all gone, I'm still dreaming/ I walk along the tracks, and soon
it's just us./ Me, Casey Jones, and his fireman, Sim Webb." The passage of time
and seasons is clear in the succinct language: "Short days, cold days,/ turn back
into long, warm planting days,/ and we are where we were and who we are." As
the days and seasons pass, the boy narrates the events and thoughts of his own life
as he tells the legend of Casey Jones and his last fateful ride. Johnson's contempla-
tive tale has a focused energy that infuses the text and underscores the boy's final
determination to leave his hard life behind: "But when my time comes for leav-
ing,/ I will take a train and/ remember as I roll away/ what Papa said about Casey/
and his soul-speaking whistles/ and my place in the big wide world." Long's acrylic
paintings are sometimes reminiscent of Thomas Hart Benton's WPA murals, the
images varying between monumental figures dwarfing their locations and smaller
figures lonely against the sweeping landscape. This multilayered text distills com-
plex history into an accessible narrative complemented by powerful images. A
note gives some historical context for black sharecroppers in the turn of the twen-
tieth-century American South and their connection to the legend of Jones and
Webb. JMD
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
109
JOHNSON, KATHLEEN JEFFRIE 
Target. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2003 
[17 6 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2790-8 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1932-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Grady was a happy junior with good friends at his old high school, but that was
before what he thinks of as the Night of, the night two men abducted him and
raped him, leaving him destroyed and shamed, afraid of human contact, unable to
eat, and loathing his own body for its betrayal. Refusing all contact with his former
friends, he's now starting again at a new school, where he hopes to survive by
skulking unnoticed through his days, a plan that's undermined when Jess, a funny,
temperamental, loquacious classmate, takes an interest in Grady, sitting next to
him in art class. Jess has his own issues-he's trying to balance his African-Ameri-
can identity within his white stepfamily, and he's often merciless in needling his
classmates-but Grady begins to finds the familiar routine ofJess' rapid-fire com-
mentary a reassuring constant in the turmoil of his days. Always in the back of his
head, however, is the fear that someone will discover his secret. This is a challeng-
ing subject, and Johnson tackles it with strength as well as sympathy. Grady's
complete alienation from his own body is compellingly depicted, extending far
beyond the sexual, but the significance of that dislocation is given its due in a
seventeen-year-old kid just developing his sexuality (even masturbation becomes a
reminder of the event). The book is also perceptive in its exploration of Grady's
guilt and self-questioning: was there something about him that brought this on?
does the fact that they brought him to orgasm prove that? does it mean he's gay?
The secondary characters are a bit oversimplified (both old and new friends rally
staunchly around him when he reveals his secret and a nasty classmate threatens to
publicize it), but this is an unusually compelling and articulate portrait of a young
man in torment. DS
JOHNSTON, TONY A Kenya Christmas; illus. by Leonard Jenkins. 
Holiday House,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1623-2 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Juma, the narrator, obliges his importuning grandchildren with a story, the tale of
a December when he was ten. That December his rich aunt leaves Nairobi to visit
Juma's family in their Kenyan village, promising to grant Juma's wish that he see
Father Christmas. They develop a secret plan to provide a Christmas surprise of a
Father Christmas visitation for the village, arranging for the chicken man to dress
up as Santa, ordering an elephant for Father Christmas to ride ("Sleighs do not
grow here like bananas on trees"), and readying chicken feathers for a snow effect.
The performance is all they could have wished, with a splendid elephant-mounted
St. Nick delighting the village and passing out presents galore. Only after the visit,
when the sorrowful chicken man apologizes for being unable to ride the elephant
and perform his role, do they realize that their plan worked out in a very different
way than they had expected. The folkloric nature of the story gives it an involving
shape, while the unusual setting makes it fresh and original (if a tad unlikely);
Johnston's unaffected style and taste for evocative particulars give the text addi-
tional luster. Jenkins' mixed-media illustrations combine the chalky opacity of
pastels with the textured brushstrokes of paints; strong hot colors, such as hot
oranges and pinks, are balanced with cooler tones, such as blues, greens, and browns,
for an intense palette that nonetheless works cohesively, giving the landscape a
110 
* THE BULLETIN
vivid if nontraditional festivity. This will make a joyful contrast to snowy Ameri-
can Yuletide tales, and youngsters will relish the magical Christmas twist. Though
unfortunately no background note is provided, there is a brief glossary of unfamil-
iar/non-English terms. DS
KELLER, HOLLY 
What a Hat!; written and illus. by Holly Keller. 
Greenwillow,
2003 
[24p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051480-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051479-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
Bunny siblings Henry and Wizzie are anxious for their cousin Newton to arrive,
but when he does, Henry is nonplussed by the fact that Newton will not give up
his hat, wearing his orange headgear at the dinner table, in the bath, and in the
bed. Henry goes from nonplussed to irritated, so much so that he snatches Newton's
hat and runs away with it, causing Newton to shriek "NO HAT!" and give chase
after Henry. Wizzie retrieves the hat and returns it to Newton, and from then on
Newton and Wizzie are fast friends. When a big boy bunny knocks down their
cooperatively built sandcastle, Wizzie cries; Newton, in an effort to cheer her,
gives up his prize possession: "Newton wanted to help. He wanted it more than
anything. So he took off his hat and put it on Wizzie's head. And she stopped
crying." The tale of this family visit is simple and heartfelt. Readers and listeners
will recognize the dynamics among the cousins as the bigger ones tease the younger
ones, the younger ones exasperate the older ones, and they stick up for one another
in a pinch. The watercolors are cleanly lined yet emotive, with the moving-portrait
eyes of the characters cunningly evocative and the geometric forms of figures and
clothing enriched by subtle textures and patterns. Keller's understanding of the
way kids tick is expressed with an understated humor that makes this a winning
slice-of-preschool life. JMD
KERR, M. E. 
Snakes Don't Miss Their Mothers. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052625-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052624-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M Gr. 4-6
Critters is an animal shelter in the Hamptons, home to an array of animals hoping,
with various degrees of optimism, to find a home one day. Just before Christmas,
there's a flurry of activity: Placido the ill-tempered Siamese embarks on yet an-
other placement; Rex, a yellow Lab who's separated from his owners, arrives;
Catherine the greyhound enjoys a Christmas visit at the home of the Star-Tintrees.
There are human dramas as well: Jimmie Twilight, child star, is beginning to
wonder if her career is really worth the trouble; Walter Splinter, grandson of the
shelter's director, wishes very much he could see more of his busy parents; Percival
Uttergore, the legendary evil dogcatcher, trawls the streets for any animal he can
ransom to its owners or sell to the unscrupulous. From Kerr, you'd expect this to
be a quick-moving and witty pastiche, but unfortunately the flashes of wit are
largely occasional, overshadowed by TV-movie coyness, especially in the dialogue
of the animals; the occasional messages about animal welfare lose credibility in the
context of a shelter more notable for eccentricity than diligence. Neither human
nor animal characters are sufficiently sharply delineated to make individual impact
amid the crowd; the plot strands fare a little better, since it's good to see the ani-
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
111
mals find (or rediscover) homes, but the book never generates much interest in the
fate of the humans. Kids looking for a funny and tender story of an animal's
search for a home should look instead to Kimmel's Orville, reviewed below. DS
KIMMEL, HAVEN 
Orville: A Dog Story; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. 
Clarion,
2003 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-618-15955-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 3-7
Orville's been a hard-luck dog ("Everywhere he had ever lived involved a chain,
and he had broken every one"), but that doesn't stop him from enthusiastically
embarking on a new life with a farmer and his wife. His enthusiasm is unfortunately
not matched by the couple ("Maybelle and Herbert realized he was uglier than
they'd thought when he was dirty"), and he ends up on a chain again, barking and
barking. His world changes, however, when a young woman moves in across the
road ("She was as alone as a person can figure out how to be"), and he begins to
run away to her house, convinced that's where he belongs. Just in time, the young
woman, helped by the words of a nice young fireman (called three times now to
help get the dog back to his official home), realizes that he's right and their lives
would be better together. Kimmel's tone has some of the quirky gravity ofJacqueline
Briggs Martin's writing; her taste for well-grounded detail and compact description
combines with a gentleness about people (and dogs) and their inner lives, making
this a poetic but solidly vivid tale. It's particularly appealing that there are no real
villains here, just people (and dogs) whose lives aren't quite what they hope for,
and that's tension enough for a story; it's all the more gratifying that the story
manages, without sentimentality, to get all of them a bit closer to what they want
by the end. Parker's watercolors offer a surprising variety of texture, from blotchy
shadows to liquid skyscapes, all set off by his scrubby, determined lines. The
unusual layout is fresh and effective: lacking a picture book's traditional height,
the pages are instead long and landscape-oriented, with the ragged-right text always
sharing vertically rather than horizontally; the result is a closer relationship between
pictures and words, because each line returns readers to the image rather than
taking them farther away. Suitable for reading by a variety of age groups and
reading levels, from advanced primary-grades readers to dog-loving middle-
schoolers, this would also make a heartening but gratifyingly unsappy readaloud
for kids who know their Orville is out there somewhere. DS
KING-SMITH, 
DICK 
The Nine Lives of Aristotle; illus. 
by Bob
Graham. 
Candlewick, 2003 
80p
ISBN 0-7636-2260-5 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
Aristotle is a bold little kitten owned by the witch Bella Donna, who thinks a white
kitten will be a "nice change" from the traditional black cats. That's only ifAristode
manages to lives long enough, though, since the kitten has an unhealthy habit of
indulging his curiosity in adventures that use up one after another of his nine lives.
Each chapter relies on the same structure: the kitten finds himself in mortal dan-
ger, after which Bella Donna retrieves him, reproves him, and reminds him how
many more lives he has left to go. The insertion of a subplot involving Bella
Donna's befriending of a dog who chases Aristotle does little to mitigate the re-
petitiveness; the humorous text, however, has a lighthearted tone that offsets the
somewhat creepy predictability of the repeated scenes of the hazards of Aristotle.
112 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Graham goes for the homely rather than the macabre in his line and watercolor
art; witch, cat, and even situations hazardous to felines derive a comfy air from the
casually sketched lines and muted autumnal shades. Despite the repetitive struc-
ture, young readers will appreciate the loving relationship between Bella Donna
and Aristotle and the gently suspenseful cat-in-peril plot. JMD
KORMAN, GORDON 
Jake, Reinvented. Hyperion, 2003 
[208p]
ISBN 0-7868-1957-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Jake Garrett comes out of nowhere to become the coolest individual at F. Scott
Fitzgerald High, throwing parties that quickly become legendary, making himself
invaluable as an unerring long-snapper on the football team, and evincing a casual
magnetism that draws the admiration of guys and the yearning of girls ("The guy
is like a walking zone of happening, and everybody wants to breathe the rare air").
The narrator, Rick, soon realizes that Jake is on a mission: he's trying to win Didi,
the glamorous girl of his dreams whom he knew several years ago, and who's now
the firmly installed girlfriend of the possessive (if not entirely faithful) quarter-
back, Todd. If this reminds you of something, there's a good reason: it's a con-
temporary reinterpretation of The Great Gatsby, and a rather good one to boot.
The explanation of Jake's shadowed history is kind of lame (he's a former math
geek), and there's more moral vindication and redemption than moral ambiguity
and entropy, but otherwise Korman deftly translates the drama into a high-school
setting. The notions of the importance of image and the contagion of both popu-
larity and stigma convert readily, and the book excels at describing the phenom-
enon ofJake's weekly parties, where exhilaratingly wild behavior becomes the norm
and where cars restlessly circle the block in hope of being lucky enough to get a
parking place that will allow them to get to the house. The real triumph is the
atmosphere, which conveys both the heady excitement of the possibilities offered
by the world Jake creates and the inevitability of its destruction. This is a natural
pairing with Gatsby in a curriculum, but it's also an involving read in its own right,
a legitimate and compelling investigation of the transience of charisma and the
flimsy underpinnings of popularity. DS
KRUL, KATHLEEN 
Mls forMusic; illus. by Stacy Innerst. 
Harcourt, 2003 
56p
ISBN 0-15-201438-1 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-4
As the title suggests, this is a musical alphabet, with each page or spread offering
various terms beginning with the relevant letter: "A a is for anthem and accordion
... E e is for Elvis, energy, and encore ... Y y is for yodeling 'Yankee Doodle.'"
The alphabetical format makes the text fairly sketchy, but there's a broad gallery of
musical material included (and it is one of the few books where "xylophone" is an
uncontrived entry for X). The visuals are what really sing here: Innerst's thickly
textured oils and acrylics have a luminous sheen and earthtoned solidity that re-
calls the art of Gregory Christie, but they've got a three-dimensionality and ami-
able strangeness all their own, with generous evocations of surrealism, cubism, and
other styles. Recognizable portraits (Louis Armstrong, all four Beatles) mingle
freely with humorous vignettes (a Wagnerian soprano uses the Vibration of her
Voice to shatter a glass) and imaginative interpretations (Elvis' microphone is ac-
tually an ear; each member of a quartet plays an instrument in the shape of a
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
113
numeral four). Playful jottings provide additional musical terms for each of the
letters, while even the fonts of the sample letters incline towards the appropriate
musical spirit (the Beatles' B is a swirly psychedelic style, while folk's F is rustically
hand-hewn). While this will find a place in musical curricula, it'd work even
better as genuine inspiration in art-or perhaps stage design for the next concert.
A "Musical Notes" section concludes by explaining the textual references. DS
KURTZ, JANE 
Bicycle Madness; illus. by Beth Peck. 
Holt, 2003 
122p
ISBN 0-8050-6981-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Lillie's father considers their neighbor, Miss Frances Willard, to be a menace to
stable society and a dangerous influence on his daughter, but the motherless little
girl is attracted to the woman's plainspoken friendliness and her courageous deter-
mination to master the newfangled safety bicycle that she's dubbed "Gladys." Al-
though Lillie tries to honor her father's demand that she not visit the famed
nineteenth-century suffragist, she can't help regarding Miss Frances as a role model,
and she musters her own determination to conquer the challenge of the upcoming
school spelling bee, despite her previous dismal performances in that arena. There's
precious little drama built into the plot, and most of Lillie's anxieties involve her
'fessing up to a tear in her dress or her agreement to feed Miss Frances's dog.
Willard's attitudes and activities have been so carefully modeled on her autobio-
graphical writings that her neighborly conversation is unremittingly stiff and forced:
"But some people give off the light of a firefly. Others give off the light of a star. I
believe that, as more of us choose to shine brightly, change will happen-a little at
a time." Although this is a quick, undemanding read for historical fiction buffs,
readers with an interest in women's-rights advocates will do better with Harness's
breezier Rabble Rousers (BCCB 2/03). EB
LANDRY, LEO 
The Snow Ghosts; written and illus. by Leo Landry. 
Houghton,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-19655-2 
$9.95 
R 3-6 yrs
Snow ghosts "live in the far, far north where snow is always falling," which ac-
counts for snow-themed pleasures such as snowball fights ("When snow ghosts
throw snowballs, no one gets hit"), downhill sledding ("on their smooth ghost
bellies"), and snowman day ("Prizes are awarded"); other diversions include calis-
thenics and, for the talented, turning colors. It's a quirky yet idyllic existence, and
it makes for a quirky yet idyllic little book. The text is soft-spoken and specific
with a touch of poetry underneath ("the snow ghosts lay their ghostly heads on
their icy beds"), and once the desire for logical inquiry is quelled (audiences will
just need to accept that snow ghosts who can't be hit by snowballs can still throw
them), the experience is comfy and inviting. The small square pages make a tidy
background for the even smaller rounded rectangles of illustration, wherein trim
lines divide white snow ghosts from blue watercolor skies and the occasional ac-
cent color in a yellow moon or brown bear cub. The snow ghosts themselves are
soft, smiling biomorphs, with a plasticity and sweetness of aspect that suggest marsh-
mallow as much as snow; occasional speech balloons give them voice, and their
playful tendencies keep them from being static. With its alluring vision of a happy
snow existence, this would make a cozy winter readaloud, and its touch of dreamy
lyricism invites a bedtime reading when the frost is thick on the windowpane. DS
114 
* THEBULLETIN
LEE, JEFFREY 
True Blue. 
Delacorte, 2003 
[96 p]
ISBN 0-385-73093-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Molly isn't happy about changing middle schools, but she hasn't been happy about
much since the auto accident that left her legs scarred, her father brain-damaged,
and her mother struggling to keep the family together. The new school is pretty
horrible, so Molly finds a lunch companion in a strange solitary boy, Chrys Lepida.
As the two work on a science project together, Molly becomes more impressed
with Chrys' meticulousness and more appreciative of his company, until finally
she discovers his secret: he's somehow part butterfly, and he's got the wings to
prove it. This is an unusual premise, and Lee effectively grafts the fantasy element
onto the domestic realism; Molly's unfazed responses to Chrys' abilities and habits
are plausibly expressed ("'Of course it's weird,' I said. 'But it's still cool'"), making
their relationship believable as well as effective. Other elements are unfortunately
less successful: characterization of the other players is trite and cursory, and the
plot strand of Molly's father's frustrated rehabilitation and Molly's own guilt about
possibly causing the accident offers hackneyed resolution rather than following
through on the initial promise of thoughtful exploration. Still, this is an unintimi-
dating read with some unusual plot points, and kids usually skittish about fantasy
may wish to explore this imaginative possibility. DS
LEKUTON, JOSEPH LEMASOL 
Facing the Lion: Growing Up Maasai on the African
Savanna; by Joseph Lemasolai Lekuton with Herman Viola. 
National Geographic,
2003 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-5125-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Joseph Lemasolai Lekuton, a teacher at the Langley School in Virginia, tells the
story of his childhood in Kenya, where he lived between two cultures-the culture
of his nomadic village, and the school culture that eventually led him to America.
From the first episode he narrates, when he panics in the face of a lion's attack on
his village's cattle, to the final one, where donations from a group of parents and
students whom he guided on a trip to Kenya enable him to buy his mother some
good breeding cows, Lekuton emerges as a delightfully honest, open-hearted per-
son. Through his stories, he becomes an ambassador between cultures; he clearly
understands the kinds of things that will interest and entertain a young audience
(tales of discipline, friendship, embarrassment at school, and triumph in sports) as
well as educate them (foodways, the work of cattle herding, initiation rites).
Lekuton's prose style reflects his immersion in a primarily oral culture; words,
phrases, and themes are unobtrusively repeated in each paragraph to keep the reader
grounded in his stories, making this a good choice for readers still developing their
literacy skills. An afterword by one of Lekuton's friends explains more about
Lekuton's people and culture and fills in some details about Lekuton's life and
accomplishments, opening the possibility for discussion on multiple levels about
immigration, cultural similarities and diversity, the value of education, and the
difficulties and pleasures of living between two cultures. KC
MACK,TRACY 
Birdland. Scholastic, 2003 
[208p]
ISBN 0-439-53590-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Inspired by Pam Conrad's novel Our House, Jed's teacher instructs his students to
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
115
come up with a creative project that captures their neighborhood as they see it,
saying that "true healing ... begins with imagination." The healing to which he
refers is the healing of New York City after September 11th, but Jed's healing
journey is a bit closer to home, since his brother, Zeke, has recently died. Jed
decides to capture his neighborhood on film, guided by a notebook full of Zeke's
poetry that he found under Zeke's mattress. In his wandering through the neigh-
borhood, he sees beauty and pain in the energy of a subway performer, in the grief
of his father, and especially in the haunting eyes of a homeless girl named Kiki.
When he offers Kiki asylum in Zeke's hideout on the roof, he learns about the
interconnection of lives and the responsibility that entails. The relationships be-
tween Jed and his friend Flyer, who has suffered a loss of his own, and between Jed
and his family members are carefully individualized and poignantly drawn. Each
chapter takes its name from a Charlie "Bird" Parker song, and each scene riffs off
the others like so many notes of pain, but the narrative as a whole follows an
improvisational logic; you don't know how it's all connected until you're finished.
Jed produces a "walk-u-mentary" featuring his video and Zeke's poetry, and so
begins to effect his imaginative journey toward healing. By articulating an artistic
response to loss and grief on the road to growing up, this novel may inspire stu-
dents to take up their cameras and walk their own neighborhoods, looking for the
stories they want to tell. KC
MASTRO, JIM Antarctic Ice; by Jim Mastro and Norbert Wu; illus. with photo-
graphs by Norbert Wu. 
Holt, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8050-6517-2 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Like Mary Cerullo's Life under Ice (BCCB 9/03), this is a photoessay about life on
the southernmost continent. The text here is somewhat simpler, making this a
good readaloud candidate and introductory piece for younger readers, and it's
shaped by the changing seasons, starting in winter (when the animals either leave
the area or wait the season out under the ice) and going through the summer
(when they give birth and tend their babies). Concepts are sometimes oversimpli-
fied (it's not strictly true that "the sun does not shine in Antarctica during the
winter," since there are locations that never experience a single sunless day, let
alone a sunless season), but the streamlined prose ably supports the visuals. Wu's
photographs are stellar, with brilliant shots of penguins shooting like depth charges
through the ocean, rows of fuzzy Emperor penguin chicks standing like cuddly
bowling pins, an underwater Weddell seal, its mouth open in what's presumably
mid-comment, glaring in annoyance at the viewer. Layout emphasizes the theatri-
cality of the photographs by placing them in slender bright frames on glossy black
pages; white text stands out against the darkness, while ghostly gray images of the
featured animals add texture (and a bit of overbusyness) to the background. This
isn't exactly untrodden ground these days, but it's still an inviting and highly vi-
sual entree to marine life at the end of the world. DS
MCDERMOTT, 
GERALD 
Creation; written 
and 
illus. 
by Gerald
McDermott. 
Dutton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46905-2 
$16.99 
R 
5-10 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 91, for review.
116 
* THE BULLETIN
McDNALD, MEGAN 
Baya, Baya, Lulla-by-a; illus. by Vera Rosenberry. 
Jackson/
Atheneum, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84932-X 
$16.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
A mother weaves her baby girl a "safekeeping blanket" while in a tree a yellow and
black baya bird weaves flowers into "its vining, twining nest-/ acacia petals laced/
in a golden crown." This rhythmic and lyrical story-song has both melody and
harmony: the main story is that of the mother weaving, dying, and sewing the
cloth for the baby's blanket; the concurrent tale is that of the baya bird's building
of its nest. Melody and harmony combine when "Baya Bird calls a warning,/
mother to mother," to warn the woman that a cobra endangers her sleeping child:
"Mata swoops you up,/ holds you tight,/ rocks you in her arms./ Rock-a-bye,
hush-a-bye,/ choti ladki, little one./ She carries you home,/ heartbeat to heart-
beat,/ through the pale green/ haze of desert." The day-to-day life of the baby and
its mother parallels the natural changes to the baya bird's nest, as the nest goes
from holding the bird to a succession of subsequent tenants following the hatchlings'
departure: a tree mouse, a mason wasp, a spider. This combination of natural
science and lullaby is illustrated in luminescent watercolors, the inviting composi-
tions framed in earthy lines that set off bucolic country and spare interior scenes.
Carmine reds and saffron golds glow amid cooler colors, giving the figures, orna-
ments, and setting an immediate appeal. A list of included Hindi words is ap-
pended, as is a note describing the many uses of the baya bird's nest and explaining
the source of the lullaby. JMD
McNAEE, GRAHAM 
Acceleration. 
Lamb, 2003 
[176p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90144-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73119-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Duncan is sweating his way through a sweltering Toronto summer, trapped dur-
ing working hours in the subterranean world of the subway lost-and-found office.
Desperate for some reading material to pass the time, he happens upon a small
leather-bound journal ("with a cover that feels like skin") that turns out to be the
chronicle of a demented individual involved in the ghastly process of what police
and FBI profilers call "acceleration," or the "escalation of increasingly destructive
aberrant behavior." The diary includes graphs of how long it takes mice to drown
in various fluids, newspaper articles of neighborhood pet dismemberments, plans
for burning down buildings with newspaper clippings that confirm their success,
and worst of all, detailed profiles of three women whom the creep is considering
for his first actual human victim. At first, Duncan decides to ignore his find, but
then he wonders whether it might offer him a chance for redemption. Earlier in
the year he had failed to save a girl from drowning; haunted by her memory, he
muses that saving the killer's intended victims might atone for his inability to save
her. Duncan's first-person narration is wry and understated, and his motivation is
clearly situated in that oft-explored yet seldom mapped territory of guy country.
As his father explains, "it doesn't go away-that thing, the belief or whatever, that
one day you're going to be a hero. All guys think that." Though the atonement
angle is a tad contrived and the acceleration detailed in the diary is a bit too text-
book to be entirely plausible, the action of the book will make the acceleration of
the reader's heartbeat all too real. It's a fast-paced read with a satisfying payoff,
especially gratifying for reluctant readers with a taste for suspense. KC
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
117
MCPHAIL, DAVID 
Henry Bear's Christmas; illus. by David McPhail and John
O'Connor. 
Atheneum, 2003 
4 0p
ISBN 0-689-82198-0 
$16.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
Henry and his raccoon buddy, Stanley, don't want to get caught treeless on Christ-
mas Eve, so they start their evergreen shopping early. Although Stanley is quite
happy with a scrawny little number at the school fundraiser, no tree meets Henry's
exacting standards until he spies the perfect fir at a church raffle. He invests his
entire tree fund in tickets but then misses the drawing during an ill-advised trip to
the doughnut shop. He won, but his no-show at the drawing means no tree, and
his attempt to wheedle money from Stanley founders on Stanley's own friendly
impulses: "I knew how much that tree meant to you, so I took the grocery money
and bought some more tickets." No tree, and now no dinner. But it's not Christ-
mas without neighborly kindness, and the two friends get their raggedy tree as a
freebie from the school sale, and Momma Bear shows up with a Christmas feast.
McPhail supplies an inviting visual setting, rich with hatched and stippled earthy
greens and brown, and populated by expressive animals who mingle freely among
the Sendak-ian humans of their village. The tale may be overly tidy, but the mood
is just right for a Yuletide story-and-snuggle. EB
NIXON, JOAN LOWERY 
Nightmare. 
Delacorte, 2003 
16 6p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90151-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73026-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Getting average grades, avoiding close friendships, and hiding behind her hair,
sixteen-year-old Emily Wood has been making herself invisible ever since the night-
mare about the dead body began. Then her parents send her to an experimental
summer program for underachievers at the Foxworth-Isaacson Educational Cen-
ter, where Emily is sure she's been before. When she sees a familiar face in a
portrait, she knows why: the dead body in her nightmare is Dr. Amelia Foxworth,
one of the Center's founders. Emily realizes her nightmare is a repressed child-
hood memory, and the more she remembers, the more she's in danger. Nixon's
obvious foreshadowing and predictable ending may disappoint some young read-
ers, and the murderer's point of view, presented alternately with Emily's, isn't
particularly well developed or distinguished. This is still an enjoyable mystery,
however: Nixon provides effective red herrings in the staff members of the Center,
and there's a nice touch of dread imparted by the murderer's-eye view. Emily's
three friends provide the humor and companionship necessary to overcome Emily's
secretive nature and make her more likable as a character, and since the mystery
depends on searching for answers within, her transformation from a secretive loner
to a confident girl who's not "afraid to be Emily" is a satisfying result. Nightmare
is a good choice for readers already loyal to the Nixon canon or those looking for
an undemanding, entertaining mystery. KH
OATES, JOYCE CAROL 
Freaky Green Eyes. 
HarperTempest, 2003 
34 1p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623757-2 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623759-9 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
After an attempted rape at a party, Franky finds a secret, strong, uncowed side to
herself, which she calls "Freaky Green Eyes." She's going to need it: her parents'
marriage is showing increasing signs of strain as her mother tries to find a life out
from under the shadow of her high-profile sportscaster husband. Despite denials
118 
* 
THE BULLETIN
from both her parents, it becomes clear that they're actually undergoing a separa-
tion, as Franky's mother retreats to her family cabin on Puget Sound while Franky's
father keeps a firm and controlling-sometimes dangerously controlling-hand
on Franky and her younger sister, Samantha, at their upscale home in Seattle.
Garden-variety strain turns into something else when Franky's mother disappears;
while initially allowing herself to accept her father's version of the situation-that
his wife betrayed the family and that she's run off in order to hurt them further-
she begins to find the strength to remove herself from her father's power and face
the truth of his involvement in her mother's disappearance. While this doesn't
have quite the sharp originality of Deb Caletti's The Queen ofEverything (BCCB
1/03), this is a compelling psychological portrait of a family destroyed by one of its
own. Oates is particularly gifted at depicting the way Franky's natural teenaged
distance from her mother sets her up perfectly for the complete rejection her father
encourages, and the way she unknowingly echoes her father's tendencies; there's
also a subtle suggestion that she dangerously echoes her mother's tendencies as
well, in her inclination to keep silent in the face of threat. There's enough tension
and pulse-pounding to appeal to thriller aficionados as well as those reading for the
human dynamics, and young people just beginning to cast a sharp eye at their
parents' human frailties will find perspective (or perhaps bitter satisfaction) in the
notion of a father with feet of truly dangerous clay. DS
ORENSTEIN, DENISE GOSLINER 
Unseen Companion. Tegen/HarperCollins,
2003 
[3 6 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052057-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052056-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9 up
A mysterious boy of an enigmatic background in 1969 Alaska, Dove Alexie hits a
teacher, goes to jail, and disappears; these events affect various people around him,
four of whom tell their stories here. The first is Lorraine Hobbs, a fourteen-year-
old Gussak (white) girl who cooks for the prisoners at the local jail and begins to
fear for Dove Alexie after seeing him bruised and bloody in a cell. The second is
eighteen-year-old Annette Weinland, another Gussak, who lives under the thumb
of her stern minister father and who does volunteer clerical work at the prison,
where she's intimidated by the sleazy deputy and disturbed by discrepancies in the
official records. Briefer accounts come from Thelma Cooke, a Yup'ik girl at school
with Dove Alexie, and from Edgar Kwagley, a Yup'ik boy from the same school.
The Dove Alexie thread is a fairly tenuous one plotwise as well as interpersonally,
and the dense and unhurried accretion of layers and the open-ended finish make
this a sophisticated read. This is, however, an impressively subtle and penetrating
portrait of a complicated world, where Yup'ik, Aleut, and various Indian peoples
coexist, sometimes uneasily, while often being treated as homogeneous by Gussaks
in authority and while undergoing a series of degradations large and small. It's also
where the Sleep-Off Center is a crucial part of town, where the Children's Receiv-
ing Home deals with floods of kids ranging from babies to teens old enough to
divide their time between there and the Sleep-Off, and where man's first step on
the moon contrasts sharply with the local version of progress-an actual service to
remove the buckets people use for their sanitary arrangements. Though character
is overshadowed by the milieu, it's gratifying to see Annette grow beyond her
restrictions and feisty, imaginative Lorraine begin to embrace the world she's really
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
119
in. Older readers who want to further explore the realm ofJean Craighead George's
Julie will find this an eye-opening journey. DS
PALATINI, MARGIE 
Bad Boys; illus. by Henry Cole. 
Tegen/HarperCollins,
2003 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000103-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000102-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Where can a couple of big bad wolves go to lay low until the heat's off? Willy and
Wally Wolf, of "Little Red Riding Hood" and "Three Little Pigs" fame respec-
tively, hatch a perfect plan: they will don sheep's clothing and go live among the
ewes whom they hope will someday be their lunch. Completely convinced of their
own cleverness and in love with their roguish personae ("Oh yeah, we're bad.
We're bad. We're really, really bad"), the hapless wolves, posing as the missing Bo
Peep Sheep, find themselves outsmarted by a group of old ewes and shorn of their
disguises, and they're left to their humiliation until their really bad haircuts grow
back in. The wordplay flies fast and thick throughout this text and it's dead-on for
a young audience (when Meryl Sheep comments on how big the wolves' ears are,
they respond, "the better to hear ewes with"). Visual humor abounds as well; and
the figures are comically and energetically rendered with hyperbolic snouts and
overblown facial expressions and body postures. Add in detailed illustrations of
the wolves' cross-dressing preparations, and you've got the potential for serious
guffaws. KC
PECK, RICHARD 
The River between Us. 
Dial, 2003 
165p
ISBN 0-8037-2735-6 
$16.99 
R* 
Gr. 5-9
During the opening days of the Civil War, the two most exotic, sophisticated
young women ever to set foot in Grand Tower, Illinois alight from a steamboat.
Clearly what passes for the town's hotel is woefully inadequate for Delphine Duvall
and her dark, silent companion, Calista, so the Pruitt family takes them in, and
soon the sheltered, reclusive household finds itself transformed by the strangers.
Son Noah is smitten with Delphine; daughter Cass, who suffers from prescient
visions of war and death, discovers new interests in cooking and herbalism at Calista's
side; even Mama holds her head up higher among her neighbors. Tilly Pruitt, who
turns sixteen during this pivotal year (and serves as retrospective adult narrator
through most of the story), begins to take an interest in the outside world and her
own potential. When Tilly and Delphine make an emergency trip to a Union
camp hospital to nurse Noah, their landlady recognizes and exposes Delphine's
origins-she's a quadroon who's been sent North by her mother for protection in
the event the South should lose the war and the New Orleans gens de couleur
should be associated with freed slaves. Peck approaches the plafage system (rich
white men openly take free black women as mistresses) with laudable sensitivity;
Delphine's parentage is both a source of social entrapment and fierce, dignified
pride. The Pruitt story is encased in a second narrative, in the voice of Howard
Leland Hutchings, who learns his family history from his "Grandma" Tilly. This
slim but potent storyline delivers a final punch that knocks family relationships on
their ear and challenges Howard-and readers-to ponder how a seemingly quaint
and antiquated system of racism can reach across generations. Historical fiction
fans should enter this at the top of the must-read list. EB
120 
* THE BULLETIN
PFEFFER, WENDY 
The Shortest Day: Celebrating the Winter Solstice; illus. by Jesse
Reisch. 
Dutton, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-525-46968-0 
$16.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Following several introductory spreads on the transition from autumn into winter,
Pfeffer surveys, at thousand-year intervals, how ancient cultures perceived and ritu-
alized the apparent movement of the sun. In an approach similar to that of Ellen
Jackson in The Winter Solstice, Pfeffer notes how the Egyptians observed and marked
the "shortest" day through a stacked stone keyhole, how Romans decorated their
homes with evergreen foliage, how the Incas used a reflective glass to kindle a fire
that would burn all year long. This title is far hazier, though, on the relationship
between contemporary religious wintertime celebrations and their ritual roots in
millennia past. Stockings hang by the fireplace and lighted shrubbery peeks through
the window as package laden guests arrive, but the text merely notes, "Today people
still celebrate at the beginning of winter by decorating their houses, lighting the
darkness, gathering together, and exchanging gifts." A double-page spread of"Sol-
stice Facts" and a half dozen activities round out the presentation, encouraging
listeners to keep detailed sunrise charts and make shadow measurement, or, for the
decidedly less ambitious, to decorate cupcakes with a birthday candle and candy
corn (sunlight and rays, if you didn't quite catch it) and sing "We wish you a
happy solstice/ And a happy winter." Luridly hued scenes, in which each pudgy-
cheeked celebrant seems suspiciously Euro-Caucasian, should set multiculturalism
back a decade or two. EB
PIERCE, TAMORA 
Trickster's Choice. Random House, 2003 
422p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91466-8 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81466-3 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Aly, sixteen-year-old daughter of Alanna the Lioness, the King's Champion, has a
lot to live up to, and she plans on doing so, despite the efforts of her parents to
keep her safely at home. Determined to avoid an inevitable confrontation with
her mother, Aly takes her small boat to visit nearby friends; she is captured by
marauding pirates and winds up as a slave in the house of Duke Mequen Balitang
of the Copper Isles. This is just the beginning of Aly's adventures: a bet with a
trickster god, the delusions of a mad king, and the growing revolution centered
around the daughters of the Balitang household involve the capable Aly in a mael-
strom of racial politics. Her plan to escape quickly disintegrates in the face of her
growing involvement with and affection for the individuals and peoples of a coun-
try long at odds with her own. The ethics of patriotism and loyalty bend around
assassinations and assignations, and Aly finds herself reexamining her own actions
in light of the actions of others. In what one hopes is the first of a new series,
Pierce has set the stage for a complex adventure. Aly is a promising character with
depth and humor, and her wit and daring make her a natural leader readers will be
eager to follow. There is intelligence to the complex plotting that supports the
unfolding events, and believable relationships add the necessary emotional note to
the rising crescendo of action. Secondary characters have nuance that makes them
intriguing, and even the villains are multidimensional; good does not always tri-
umph, and loss is an accepted part of battle. The threads of the emerging plot
Sweave a compelling tapestry that will leave old fans impatiently waiting for the
next installment and new fans searching for other Pierce titles. JMD
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
121
PLUM-UCCI, CAROL 
The She. 
Harcourt, 2003 
[288p]
ISBN 0-15-216819-2 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Evan is now in his senior year, and he's been doing pretty well since the death of
his parents at sea years ago; he no longer seems to hear the otherworldly shrieking
that plagued him as a boy and that horrifyingly preceded his parents' drowning,
which he had "witnessed" over ship-to-shore radio. Now, however, a troubled
schoolmate, Grey Shailey, is in a mental hospital following her involvement in the
death of a girl in a sailing accident, and she has specifically asked for Evan's help,
knowing that he heard the same shrieking that she did when her sailboat passenger
was swept out to sea. As they pursue the local fishermen's legend of the She, a sea
monster who consumes sailors, Evan's older brother, Emmett, begins to fill Evan
in on details surrounding their parents' death that strongly indicate they were
involved in drug running. As Plum-Ucci cleverly metes out the clues, readers are
not only drawn deeply into a first-rate mystery and a compelling drama concern-
ing Grey's fractured family but also into provocative discussion on the nature of
"objective" evidence, as the brothers respectively cling to supernatural and scien-
tific explanations for their parents' disappearance. The She exerts her terrifying
presence throughout, as Plum-Ucci skillfully keeps folkloric explanations in play
right alongside government reports and cold, imperfect logic. This is a thinking
teen's horror story, and it's difficult to say whether the monster's screams or the
problem of Truth will keep readers awake longer into the night. EB
POLACCO, PATRICIA 
The Graves Family; written and illus. by Patricia
Polacco. 
Philomel, 2003 
48p
ISBN 0-399-24034-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
When Doug and Shalleaux Graves move their family into the old house on Park
Street the first thing they do is paint the place "bloodred": "No one in the village
even considered visiting them after that. Even the postman left their mail at the
curb." Enter Seth and Sara Miller, the children who live across the street. The two
meet Ronnie (Hieronymus) Graves, "a boy about their age," and the three become
fast friends; after some time, the Miller siblings are invited inside the Graves' mys-
terious house. It is worth the wait: the house is filled with exotic spiders, Venus
flytraps, and a laboratory housing strange experiments (including one made from
an enzyme in cat follicles that will grow hair on anything). Ronnie's jolly if weird
parents welcome Seth and Sara, who in turn smooth the way for Dr. and Mrs.
Graves's entree into local society-which doesn't go quite as they had hoped.
Polacco's chirpy tale is closer to the Munsters than to the Addamses; the text is
overlong and the eventual focus on the adults is disappointing. There's still plenty
of amusement, though, in the sweetly monstrous outsiders and their efforts to be
accepted. The illustrations add some energy, splashing across the spreads in swoops
of color and activity, and the characterizations of the small-town movers and shak-
ers are right on the money, from the tasteful strings of pearls to the gentlemen's
bouffant hairdos (newly restored by Dr. Graves' potion). Kids with a penchant for
haunted houses will be attracted by the cover art (which features a spooky front
door with a malevolent-looking door knocker) and will likely stay for the party.
JMD
122 
* THE BULLETIN
PRUE, SALLY 
Cold Tom. 
Scholastic, 2003 
187p
ISBN 0-439-48268-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Tom is the weak link in the Tribe of fair folk, and Sia and Larn, the strongest of
the Tribe, want that weakness excised. With nowhere to turn, Tom takes shelter
in the city of "demons" (humans), where he is discovered by Anna and her half-
brother, Joe. Anna wants to help Tom and Joe wishes to exploit him, but it is their
reclusive neighbor, Edie Mackintosh, who finally provides the key to just who and
what Tom really is. Prue effectively creates a fairy world existing within the midst
of modern society while operating very differently. Among the fair folk, emo-
tional and physical ties are seen as bondage (Tom dislikes the "heavy, hot, gross"
humans and the way they touch each other, "casting slave-shadows into each other's
minds"), and Tom fights against connecting with his human rescuers with all his
strength, despite the fact that they are all that stands between him and his doom at
the end of Larn's spear. The chase is suspenseful, and the mystery of Tom's fate
will keep the pages turning. On the other hand, the pacing is uneven, and the
psychological dissonance caused by Tom's emotional conflict between his adora-
tion for the beautiful fair folk and his revulsion at his human companions is never
really resolved. In the end, Tom surrenders to life among the demons, but neither
Tom nor the reader has to like it. Still, the elements of adventure and the tension
between fair and human folk may hold readers. JMD
RAY, DELIA 
Ghost Girl: A Blue Ridge Mountain Story. 
Clarion, 2003 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-618-33377-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Using letters, newspaper accounts, and personal narratives as her source material,
Ray sensitively captures the atmospheric flavor of the Blue Ridge Mountains in the
early 1930s. Here, the Hoovers, moved by the intense poverty of the people living
around their summer home, build a school and hire Christine Vest to teach the
mountain children, whose hearts she wins. Particularly drawn to Miss Vest is
April Sloane, whose family is still shattered from the death by fire ofApril's brother,
Riley. When April finally ventures to confess to Miss Vest her role in Riley's death
(left in charge of him, she failed to note the flames in time), April's mother over-
hears her and ejects her from the family home. The author may wax a bit adula-
tory about the intentions and actions of the Hoovers, but this too is realistic in that
they are seen primarily through the eyes of Miss Vest, their friend and employee,
and the starry-eyed April, who attributes to them her opportunity to learn to read.
Ray's sympathy for the Hoovers is also in keeping with her practice of treating her
characters as real, complex people who err in judgment rather than predictable
stereotypes. A warm but not sentimental coming-of-age story, this work of his-
torical fiction could be used with Hesse's Out ofthe Dust (BCCB 12/97) and Bud,
Not Buddy (11/99) to emphasize the variety of experiences of young people during
the '30s. KC
REES, DOUGLAS 
Vampire High. Delacorte, 2003 
226p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90143-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73117-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Cody Elliot and his parents have just moved from California to New Sodom,
Massachusetts so his father can take a job with the law firm of Leach, Swindol, and
Twist. After enrolling in Vlad Dracul Magnet School, Cody discovers he isn't
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
123
expected to do anything except play on the school water polo team in matches
required by the state; if he plays, he gets straight As and guaranteed admission to a
prestigious university. The contrary hero finds he isn't as willing to get something
for nothing as he thought; that, and the clues about his fellow students (brilliant,
sunglassed, and pale) add up to a mess of trouble for Cody, one of the few humans
in a school full ofvampires. Cody makes friends with nerd vampire Justin Warrener
and future vampire queen Ileana Antonescu; the three form an unusual triad that
threatens the historical tenets upon which Vlad Dracul-and the town of New
Sodom-are based. Cody stubbornly refuses to bend, and he doggedly defends
his own worth by refusing to take the easy way out: he defies the norm, saves the
school, wins the vamp of his heart, and, in the end, meets Dracula himself (a rather
benevolent old monster with a seventeen-meter wingspan). The author plays fast
and loose with vampire lore but puts together an absorbing look at the familiar
social dynamics of high school: who's in, who's out, what loyalty means, and what
it is, exactly, that makes one heroic. Rees gives his hero such a believable voice that
even the most unlikely vampiric events are plausible; readers will suspend disbelief
just to see how it all works out. Cody is true blue, and his character is admirable
enough to carry the day... night ... whatever. JMD
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D., ad. 
Little Pierre: A Cajun Story from Louisiana; illus. by
David Catrow. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202482-4 
$16.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
Little Pierre "had more brains than all of his brothers put together," and he puts
them to good use when Marie-Louise, "daughter of the richest man around," is
kidnapped by an ogre from the cypress swamp. Although each of Little Pierre's
older brothers (Big Pierre, Foolish Pierre, Wise Pierre, and Fat Pierre) thinks he'll
be the one to rescue and marry her, it is Little Pierre who saves the day. Elements
are folklorically familiar: Little Pierre uses his maman's colorful buttons to leave a
trail so he can find his way home, he saves his brothers from certain death by
engineering a clever switch, and (with echoes of "Three Billy Goats Gruff') he
maneuvers the ogre into being a giant catfish's dinner, all the while maintaining
his excellent manners and his ability to think fast in a crisis. San Souci's retelling
has a rhythmic, rocking flair, and the fast-flowing text will work for storytelling as
well as reading aloud. Catrow packs his busy bayou with personality, hiding faces
and forms in the trunks of trees and leafy foliage. The ogre seems overgrown with
fungus and moss (which might explain his smell, oft mentioned in the text), the
trail of buttons looks like sugar candy glowing on the woodsy path, and there are
any number of visual surprises for alert readers. Catrow's acid-green palette is
offset here by some midnight blues and mushrooms browns, but the sweep of
these watercolor illustrations exhibits continued mastery of diverse perspectives
and balanced compositions. An extensive author's note provides a variety of writ-
ten sources for this spicy retelling. JMD
SCOTT, KIERAN 
Jingle Boy. 
Delacorte, 2003 
230p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90138-0 
$11.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73113-2 
$9.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Following a typical YA formula, this tale of yuletide bliss turned to woe turned
back to bliss begins with a protagonist, Paul Nicholas, who has it all and then loses
everything within the first fifty pages. The twist is that Paul has an obsessive-
124 
* 
THE BULLETIN
compulsive relationship with Christmas holiday traditions, so when his girlfriend
is caught kissing the wrong Santa, his father is electrocuted hanging up their out-
rageous annual lights display, their house-in particular, his room-is partially
burned down in the resulting fire, and his mother loses her mall job trying to
return the girlfriend's very expensive Christmas gift without a receipt, he blames
Santa himself. In fact, the only carol he has left to sing is "Santa must die!" The
particular Santa he has in mind is his girlfriend's new interest (a sleazy mall Santa
named Scooby), but all his plans for revenge, carried out with the help of a group
of juvenile delinquents who call themselves the Anti-Christmas Underground, blow
up, rather comically, in his face. Undaunted, he digs himself in deeper and deeper,
until the plot tips over into magical realism with a visit from the big elf himself,
who reveals that it is Paul's duty to atone for his anti-Christmas shenanigans and,
you guessed it, save Christmas. Animated more by the spirit of kitsch than the
spirit of Christmas, the book features humorous prose and enough hip, up-to-the-
minute cultural references to successfully evoke a Jersey Mall Teen ethos. The tide
turns too far, however, when our Grinch wannabe turns every problem into a
genuine Christmas miracle. At that point, the book loses its darkly comic edge
and moves into schmaltzy, made-for-TV holiday movie territory, and it's a won-
derful life all over again. KC
SEEGER, LAURA VACCARO 
The Hidden Alphabet; written and illus. by Laura Vaccaro
Seeger. 
Porter/Roaring Brook, 2003 
28p
ISBN 0-7613-1941-7 
$17.95 
R 4-7 yrs
There's no shortage of graphically intriguing alphabet books (Stephen T. Johnson's
Alphabet City, BCCB 11/95, and David Pelletier's The Graphic Alphabet, 12/96,
being probably the best known of the lot), but here's one with a slightly different
approach. Each page offers an illustration of an item beginning with the relevant
letter of the alphabet (A is "arrowhead," B is "balloons," C is "cloud"), framed by
a glossy black flap whose die-cut hole allows the relevant image to peek out. When
the flap is lifted, however, it reveals a depiction of the letter in question, cunningly
expanded from the detail that delineates the item: the stony arrowhead forms the
hole in the capital A, the yellow and red balloons the holes in the B, the fluffy
white cloud a peninsula into the sky-blue C. The idea doesn't really vary much
from letter to letter, but each page is executed with polish and panache: Seeger's
adroit employment of paint effects confers gleaming luster, soft mottling, and liq-
uid ripples on various backgrounds while contrasting them sharply with the crisp
edges on the featured elements. This is begging for use in art class, and the gentle
hide-and-seek aspect adds appeal as well as a certain flair that will make this enter-
taining to kids who have only recently mastered the reading of the alphabet itself.
DS
SMITH, ANNE WARREN 
Turkey Monster Thanksgiving. Whitman, 2003 
103p
ISBN 0-8075-8125-9 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Katie's reasonably contented with her haphazard life with her father and little
brother, until classmate Claire Plummer starts bragging about the perfect Thanks-
giving she and her father are planning and lecturing Katie on the importance of
standards in motherless homes: "Kids like you and me-without mothers at
home.. 
have to do things perfectly." Now Katie's in a turkey-day tizzy, hoping
to pull off a gorgeous decorator Thanksgiving despite her overworked father's in-
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
125
structions to the contrary, especially since she's accidentally invited her teacher,
Ms. Morgan. While it's not hugely surprising that Thanksgiving ends up as the
pizza party Katie's family originally had planned, much to the pleasure of Ms.
Morgan (and Dad's boss, a last-minute guest), this is a perceptive as well as a
sympathetic account of a kid's first awareness of different family approaches. It's a
nice touch that Smith doesn't give the Plummers feet of clay but rather allows
them to be the kind of family that revels in foil-wrapping chocolate truffles for
treasure hunts (and has an extra copy of BeautifulLiving magazine) while Katie's is
the kind of family that slurps up soupy cranberry sauce; instead, the book empha-
sizes that they're both things real families do ("They aren't any more real than we
are," Katie's father reassures his daughter). Vivid touches of character (Katie shares
with Claire an appreciation for lists and enjoys playing with her little brother's
toys) and authentic dialogue ("My father says that when you don't have a mother,
people notice socks," pontificates the all-knowing Claire) add liveliness. This is a
likable and accessible story, suitable as a readaloud or an easygoing readalone when
holiday frenzy strikes. DS
SPINELLI, EILEEN 
The Perfect Thanksgiving; illus. by JoAnn Adinolfi. 
Holt,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6531-8 
$15.95 
R 
4-8 yrs
Let's face it, most of our holiday feasts resemble a Norman Rockwell painting
about as much as a real turkey resembles one drawn around a kindergartner's hand-
print. This is precisely the visual joke that runs through Spinelli's quatrains high-
lighting the differences between Abigail Archer's family holiday and the narrator's.
Thanksgiving at the Archers' is perfect: "Their turkey is plump and golden./ Their
napkins are made of lace." Not so the narrator's: "Our smoke alarm is wailing./
Our turkey, burnt as toast." Of course, the comparisons become comically hyper-
bolic; one doubts even the perfect Archers live up to such press as "Abigail's older
cousins/ read books in velvet chairs./ The younger ones bring favorite toys,/ and
everybody shares." Nonetheless, the contrasts are funny and recognizable enough
even for small children, even though they may miss some of the irony. The jaunty
rhymes beg to be read aloud, and the energetic collage illustrations add to the
chaos and situate the story on the narrator's end of things rather than the Archer's.
Rich fall colors predominate, and the paper turkey and the real turkey turn up at
odd moments, showing a kind of solidarity despite differences. Indeed, the narra-
tor predictably but wisely points out that families can be "ultra-perfect" in the love
department, even if their whipped cream is not perfectly swirled or they call their
peas legumes. Thematically similar to Smith's Turkey Monster Thanksgiving, re-
viewed above, but for a younger audience, this is a fine holiday treat for kids of
messies and Marthas alike. KC
SPINELLI, JERRY 
Milkweed. Knopf, 2003 
[224 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91374-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81374-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Spinelli's main character here shares with Maniac Magee his dislocation and long-
ing for family, his quirky naivete, and his refusal to accept or even at times ac-
knowledge the derogatory uses of identities that he would wear proudly, like "stupid"
or "Jew." In this case, however, the protagonist (who adopts the name Misha) is
126 
* THE BULLETIN
attempting to survive in occupied Warsaw, and this is a plausible portrayal of an
orphaned gypsy child wandering the devastated streets, surviving by virtue of his
anonymity and ignorance of the enormity of his circumstances. Uri, a streetwise
orphan, takes Misha under his wing and tries to teach him to how to be invisible;
Misha's talent for thieving enables the survival of those he adopts, but his love for
a particular family almost destroys him as he attempts to follow them onto the
trains. Fortunately, Uri, who as a red-haired Jew is passing for a Nazi, pulls him
out of line, forcing him to wander along the tracks until he is picked up by a
farmer, who holds the strange child hostage until the end of the war. Spinelli
spares no details of the horrors of the Ghetto, where death is everywhere: "Angels
and crows passed each other; one leaving, the other coming." That's an appropri-
ately grim image for a desperately grim time, but Spinelli shows through Misha
that the crows didn't always have the last word. KC
STANLEY, DIANE, ad. 
Goldie and the Three Bears; ad. and illus. by Diane
Stanley. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000009-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000008-2 
$15.99 
R 
4-6 yrs
Goldie is a kid who knows exactly what she wants, such as her favorite snack
(chunky peanut butter sandwiches, no jelly), her favorite book, and naps in her
"just-right" bed. Goldie's parents would like her to have a friend, but "Jenny was
too boring, Penny was too rough, Alicia was too snobby, and Sylvia wouldn't
come." One day Goldie gets off the school bus at the wrong stop; looking for a
place to call her mother, she rings the bell at "a cute little house." No one answers,
but the door is unlocked, so Goldie goes inside. She finds a just-right sandwich, a
just-right comfy chair, and a just-right bed to nap in, and when the three bears
come home, she finds a just-right friend in blue-pinafored Baby Bear. The prose is
folktale-simple, with some repetition and an ease of language that makes it suitable
for reading aloud (or even alone for those early readers looking for some non-rote
practice), and the retrimming of the traditional story will tickle those familiar with
the classic version. Stanley's illustrations have an old-fashioned air that will reas-
sure viewers concerned about Goldie's friendless plight: Goldie is a suitably tressed,
neatly turned out child, and Baby Bear is just as neatly coiffed and clothed. Per-
snickety youngsters may see themselves in Goldie's small attempts to make her life
just so, and they will appreciate Stanley's ability to take a well-known personality
and put her through reassuring and slightly untraditional paces. JMD
STAPLES, SUZANNE FISHER 
The Green Dog: A Mostly True Story. 
Foster/Farrar,
2003 
128p
ISBN 0-374-32779-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Suzanne's a daydreamer who's happiest on her own, especially on her own outside
either fishing or walking through the woods. Though her parents think she should
develop some friends, she's determined that all she really needs is a dog; when a
stray lost on the highway turns up at their door, it seems like Providence has granted
Suzanne's wish. Jeff, as Suzanne names him, is the dog she's dreamed of, provid-
ing her with unconditional love and eternal satisfaction, but he also threatens her
parents' provisional acceptance by destroying the neighbors' property, threatening
the mailman, and escaping at will. According to flap copy, this is an autobio-
graphically based story, which may account for the somewhat retrospective, epi-
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
127
sodic nature of the narrative and also for the literarily unsatisfying ending (Jeff is
sent away to the proverbial farm, and Suzanne is reconciled to the fact after a visit
with a sympathetic doctor); the emphasis on description also makes the pace quite
leisurely. Staples is articulate about a young person's yearning for and bond with
a canine companion, however, and readers will share her sharp anxiety about Jeffs
fate. It's also an evocative picture of a kid genuinely absorbed by the outdoors and
the events in her own mind in preference to other people, a priority that many
readers may share. This doesn't have the classic dog-story arc of Naylor's Shiloh
(BCCB 10/91), but it might suit readers ready for a canine story with a more
contemplative tone. DS
THESMAN, JEAN 
Rising Tide. 
Viking, 2003 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-670-036560 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
In this sequel to A Sea So Far (BCCB 11/01), Kate has returned to 1908 San
Francisco from her sojourn in Ireland as companion to the now-deceased Jolie
Logan. As promised, Jolie's father has made Kate a generous monetary gift, and
Kate and her friend Ellen establish a small shop in which they will sell Irish linen
lingerie and dry goods. Ellen has a hard time keeping up her end of the partner-
ship, since she has squandered much of her investment stake on fancy clothing to
catch the eye of her boss's son. Catch it she does, and he lures her off on a private
picnic where he tries to seduce her. Meanwhile, Kate captures the attention of
their landlord, a terse but polite young businessman whose diary has accidentally
come into Kate's possession. In this progressing series, as in that of The Ornament
Tree (BCCB 3/96), romance hovers in the wings but never makes it to center
stage, and tenderhearted readers may reasonably wonder ifThesman will ever cut
to the chase and get these gals some guys. Those willing to take the longer view,
however, may find themselves quite happily wrapped up in such period detail as
department-store fashion modeling, the classism surrounding selection of under-
garments, and even the perils of the import market, issues that the book handles
with knowledge and relish. It's hard to believe the author will leave her characters
stranded in their current love limbo, so watch for another installment. EB
TROPE, ZOE 
Please Don't Kill the Freshman: A Memoir. 
HarperTempest,
2003 
[30 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052937-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052936-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
The pseudonymous Zoe Trope is the freshman in question, with the first section
of this book (previously published by a small press) a journal of her innermost
thoughts during her freshman year at school in Portland, Oregon; the next, much
larger section follows the subsequent summer and her sophomore year. The author's
experiences are, at least initially, fairly traditional for a teen with a desire for un-
conventionality and a literary bent: she plays in marching band, passionately loves
her gay friend, despises some schoolmates and teachers while yearning to connect
with others, and embarks on her first real love affair as a lesbian (which takes a
confusing turn when her girlfriend reifies herself as a boy). Most such teens don't
end up published, however, and the second part includes her reaction to becoming
a teenage author, speaking at bookstores and negotiating with major publishers for
128 
* THE BULLETIN
the purchase of this very book. As with many journals, this one doesn't translate
that well into a book: other people (all identified with vivid epithets rather than
names) float about the speaker like a constellation of reflective objets d'art mirror-
ing bits of the author rather than appearing fully human. The tendency of inner-
most thoughts to be repetitive and contradictory is fully evident here, and the
more mannered style of the first section, with its shards of terse sentences, inter-
feres with the substance more often than conveying it. There is an authenticity to
all of this that will strike a chord with many readers, however: Trope is not only
intense but she's intense about being intense. Her love of icons ranging from
Margaret Cho to Charles Bukowski to Mother Jones makes itself felt in her bitter,
hard-edged prose, and many teens will relate to her determination to create herself
through difference and her derision of much of what's around her. This will also
doubtless encourage other budding writers to turn their journals into more than
casual productions; they won't all muster Trope's impressive perseverance, but
they may still be encouraged to explore and value their own voices. DS
UHLBERG, MYRON 
The Printer; illus. by Henri Sorensen. 
Peachtree, 2003 
32p
ISBN 1-56145-221-1 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
In this historical picture book, a young boy tells the story of his father's work as a
newspaper printer. Like many of the other workers in the plant, his father is deaf,
and when a fire breaks out, his father signals to the other deaf workers using sign
language, which, because of the noise of the machines, is the only effective way of
communicating the danger. The plant is destroyed, but all of the printers escape
without harm. After the plant reopens and the printers return to work, the hear-
ing printers use sign language to express their thanks to the man who saved their
lives. An afterword explains how deaf people in the early 1900s, like the author's
father, were taught trades, with printing being a very common choice because of
the loud machinery involved. Also included are insets describing how to make the
sign for fire in ASL, and directions for making a newspaper hat like those of print-
ers of the day. The painterly illustrations reinforce a sense of nostalgia, and the
arrested motion of the figures evokes the quiet world of the printer in the midst of
an obviously noisy industrial setting. Told from the viewpoint of an adoring son,
this story of unassuming heroism subtly impresses its message that "dis"-ability has
its compensations; in its various emphases on vocation, history, and language, it
also invites cross-curricular applications. KC
WADE, JOHN FRANCIS 
0 Come, All Ye Faithful: Performed by Ye Bethlehem All-
Stars; illus. by David Christiana. 
Simon, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-85967-8 
$16.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
"Ye Bethlehem All-Stars," a theatrical group that comprises a determined stage
manager, many enthusiastic angels, and a host of animals of various cooperative or
recalcitrant dispositions, performs the classic Christmas hymn in tableaux. The
first line goes pretty well, with an adorable pair of sheep and an exultant angel
successfully dragged on stage in a tiny gray cart. It all gets a little ragged from
there, though; the top-hatted pigs tap dance their "Glory to God" without a slip,
but it takes the whole heavenly host to tug a stubborn donkey into the act, while
the animals waiting in the wings have to be uncrated, soothed, and petted until
their big moment arrives. At the invitation "O come, let us adore Him, Christ the
Lord" the animals are sufficiently awed by the peacefully snoozing Babe and the
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
129
dove cradled at his feet that the final scene is as devout as barnyard thespians can
make it. There's no real plot here, just an extended visual joke that gently parodies
the mishap-prone Nativity plays in churches and Sunday schools throughout the
season. Christiana's softly tinted watercolor cast ofmassive-schnozzled, big-footed
angels, and sweet-faced but slightly dopey critters may be as histrionically chal-
lenged as most primary grade players, but they, too, manage to turn their bum-
bling endeavor into a labor of love. Melody and lyrics are included. EB
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Felix and the Worrier; written and illus. by Rosemary
Wells. 
Candlewick, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-1405-X 
$12.99 
R 
3-5 yrs
Felix (from Felix Feels Better, BCCB 6/01) has a little problem: every night, just as
he is about to fall asleep, he gets a visit from the Worrier. A yellow, imp-like
creature with the face of a paper cut-out, the Worrier bounces onto Felix's bed and
gives him stuff to worry about until dawn such as a black spot on his tooth, bullies
at the park-why, the Worrier even tries to make Felix's birthday more of a prob-
lem than a pleasure. Felix is in the midst of listening to the Worrier describe what
can go wrong ("Supposing nobody comes to your birthday party?") when they
hear a noise: "Wow! Wow! Wow!" While the Worrier worries, Felix goes to
investigate. The noise is coming from "a mysterious birthday box" in the kitchen,
and when Felix opens it up, out pops puppy Rufus: "'Oh, no!' said the Worrier.
'Dogs worry me more than anything in the world!' The Worrier jumped into the
night sky and went to worry somebody else. Felix and Rufus slept on clouds of
birthday happiness together." This is a loving and comforting story of youthful
anxiety, and young listeners will identify with Felix's story. While the banishment
of the Worrier by a birthday puppy is a bit convenient, Felix is still an active
participant in his own salvation, ignoring the Worrier to seek the source of the
nighttime noise. Mixed-media (predominantly line and watercolor) illustrations
offer child-safe characters with a rounded softness and cuddly compositions that
adds to the overall and satisfying sense of safety; illustrations and text boxes are
framed with a wide ribbon of color that add a colorful intensity to each spread;
Wells offers preschoolers yet another accessible assurance that they are not alone in
their concerns, and that in itself makes this a worthy purchase. JMD
WHYTOCK, CHERRY 
My Cup Runneth Over: The Life ofAngelica Cookson Potts;
written and illus. by Cherry Whytock. 
Simon, 2003 
163p
ISBN 0-689-86546-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Lighthearted British imports featuring girls telling their most intimate hopes and
dreams in quirky teenspeak are becoming more prevalent (see Dent, reviewed above).
In this example of the genre, Angel Potts is a fourteen-year-old who loves food,
and as a result she is plagued with "wobbly bits," including unfashionably large
breasts that keep escaping her best efforts to keep them under control. She is
surrounded by beautiful, thin friends who assure her that she isn't nearly as wob-
bly as she thinks, but her mother, a former model, makes her feel huge. Unfortu-
nately, this book doesn't work nearly as well as other books of the same type; the
humor falls rather flat, and the secondary characters are built on overblown cli-
ch6s, from her dotty father who writes and distributes pamphlets on arcane sub-
jects, to Flossie, the plump cook, who is always ready with sweets or tonics to
soothe Angel's and her friend's anxieties. Throughout the book, readers are given
130 
* THE BULLETIN
details (complete with recipes and captioned ink drawings) of Angel's obsessions
with food, the Naked Chef, her body, and a rather thuggish boy named Adam, in
painfully redundant language. In a predictable but nonetheless unmotivated con-
clusion, she is somehow rendered the most beautiful model at a school fashion
show and the unwitting object of at least two boys' affections. Besides a conclu-
sion that undermines the entire premise of the book (either Angel is not as big as
she lets on, or designer dresses come in one size fits all), Whytock doesn't quite
capture the fourteen-year-old voice or audience, with Angel's voice rather forced.
Readers who fancy a bit of Bridget Jones for teens will do better to stick with
Louise Rennison. KC
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
The Blizzard; illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Holiday House,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1656-9 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Billy bemoans his December birthday; his relatives have once again been snowed
out of attending festivities in his honor. Throughout the school day the storm
gains in intensity, and when the first parent shows up at the one-room school-
house to claim his offspring, he breaks the news that the roads are now impassable.
Miss Bailey bundles up the whole crew and the adults lead the children to Billy's
house, the nearest place of refuge. The family is delighted to take everyone in, and
with a whole school of kids to help with the chores and join in the celebration,
Billy has a better birthday than he ever could have expected. There's just enough
menace in the thought of spending a night in a cold school building to set listeners
shivering, but the real point is the warmth and hospitality of Billy's household and
the joy of a big ol' impromptu sleepover, with kids crammed crosswise into beds
and everyone well fed, safe, and sound. The gemiitlichkeit extends to Himler's
watercolor and pencil pictures, in which gray-white swirls of snow soften the land-
scape and a strong air of coziness gradually softens the anxiety on the children's
faces. Youngsters who regard snow with a twinge of mistrust will find Billy's grand
day most reassuring. EB
YEE, LISA 
MillicentMin, Girl Genius. Levine/Scholastic, 2003 
[256p]
ISBN 0-439-42519-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
"I have been accused of being anal retentive, an overachiever, and a compulsive
perfectionist," says Millicent, "like those are bad things." To her, correctness,
achievement, and perfection are the joys of life, and since she's already out of step
with her peers as an eleven-year-old finishing her junior year, those characteristics
are pretty much the nails in her social coffin. Her parents are determined that she
develop some friends of her own age, so to this end they sign her up for summer
volleyball; there she's surprised to find herself embarked on a genuine friendship
with garrulous and inclusive Emily, but she's unwilling to reveal the truth about
her academic achievements to her new friend. While the book deals head-on with
the cliche of the Asian-American genius (Millicent resentfully tutors a Chinese-
American age-mate who feels her perpetuation of the stereotype only makes his life
harder), there are quite a few other cliches in untrammeled operation: Millicent
has the ulcers of many fictional accelerated kids, she understands just about every-
thing except for the responses she engenders, she misconstrues her mother's physi-
cal change as illness when it's really pregnancy. The portrayal of Millicent and
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
131
Emily's growing friendship is cheerful and plausible, however; less cheerful but
also believable is Millicent's bewilderment when finally facing something-volley-
ball-that she has to work to master and her unhappy discovery that college (she's
taking a summer class) isn't the shortcut to easy human interaction she'd hoped
("It is a cruel joke on me then that college is just like high school, only bigger").
The depictions of Millicent's affectionate parents and her loving and eccentric
grandmother refreshingly reject stereotypes of both Asian-American families and
showboating relatives of gifted children. The "genius" notion may hook readers,
but it's the sympathetic depiction of universal trials that will keep them reading.
DS
132 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
CODELL, ESMI RAJI 
How to Get Your Child to Love Reading; illus. by Cyd
Moore. 
Algonquin, 2003 
532p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-56512-308-5 
$18.95
Codell has put some of her apparently inexhaustible energy into a compilation of
recommended books and book-related crafts, recipes, activities, and projects aimed
at inspiring children from birth to age thirteen. The compendium is divided into
nine areas within which there are further divisions by various subjects, genres,
ages, and themes; the selections are solid and the recommendations effusive. The
design of the book reflects the content: it is packed and plentiful, with sidebars,
"potato picks" (annotations of outstanding single titles), "creative cues" (things to
do before and after books), personal anecdotes, book covers, changing fonts, lists,
and websites. Asides about a plethora of kid- and reading-related stuff are scat-
tered throughout. Each chapter opens with an introduction to the type of reading
matter addressed, with suggestions for accessing the material as well as additional
background information. Appendices include lists of award-winning books and
instructions for group activities built around birthdays, author studies, and book
parades; author, title, and subject indices are included. Codell's writing style is
literate, funny, cajoling, and convincing. While motivated parents will drool over
this tide, librarians will find useful thematic lists and offbeat programming ideas
that will stand them in good stead. JMD
JONES, PATRICK A Core Collection for YoungAdults; by Patrick Jones with Patricia
Taylor and Kirsten Edwards. 
Neal-Schuman, 2003 
405p 
(teens@thelibrary)
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-458-1 
$65.00
Jones, Taylor, and Edwards have brought their considerable collective expertise to
bear on the task of compiling a collection of more than 1200 fiction, nonfiction,
and graphic format items for young adults. The result is an ambitious volume
containing a motherlode of useful information about young adult materials and
preferences. The authors make a clear distinction in the preface: "This is a core
collection foryoung adults, not a core collection ofyoung adult books.... A large part
of the selection criteria arose from this totally unscientific test: was the title a book
we could visualize a teen holding in her hands and describing as cool?" Each entry
includes complete bibliographic information, a succinct (and signed) annotation,
recommended grade levels, and (for many titles) citations for reviews. A section
on "Sources and Tips" includes web and print sources for "best" lists, tips on
maintaining the YA core collection, title recommendations from YA librarians and
authors, and brief essays by the authors on selection within genres; author and title
indexes are appended. An included CD-ROM contains the basic bibliographic
information for each entry in a variety of database and text formats. The authors
would be the first to say that this book is neither a complete nor exhaustive list of
possible tides for a young adult collection, but it is certainly a solid foundation
from which to begin a new collection or to evaluate an existing one. JMD
NOVEMBER 2003 
* 
133
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE: Cadnum;
Christensen; DiCamillo; Pierce
Africa: Lekuton
African Americans-fiction: Johnson,
A.; Peck
Alcoholism-fiction: Fritz
ALPHABET BOOKS: Krull; Seeger
Animals: Mastro
Animals-fiction: Kerr
Animals-stories: French
Antarctica: Bredeson
Art: Krull; Seeger
Art and artists-fiction: Mack
Asian Americans-fiction: Yee
Aunts-fiction: Falcone
Aunts-stories: Johnston
Aviation: Borden
Aviation-stories: Drummond; Glass
BIOGRAPHIES: Borden;
Bredeson; Christensen; Demi;
Erdrich; Lekuton; Trope
Birds-stories: Dunrea; McDonald
Birthdays-stories: Wright
Books and reading-fiction: Child
Brothers-fiction: Mack
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Block
Business-fiction: Thesman
Cats-fiction: King-Smith
Cats-stories: Floyd
China: Fisher
Christmas: Demi; Hills; McPhail;
Wade
Christmas-fiction: Scott
Christmas-stories: Johnston
City life-stories: Alda
Civil War-fiction: Peck
Clothing-fiction: Thesman
Clothing-stories: Keller
Computers-fiction: Haddix
Cousins-stories: Keller
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Haddix; Johnson, K.; McNamee;
Nixon; Oates
Crime and criniinals-stories:
DeFelice
Cultural studies: Lekuton
Dating-fiction: Harlow
Deafness-stories: Uhlberg
Death and dying-fiction: Bunting;
Mack; Plum-Ucci; Ray
Depression, the-fiction: Ray
Depression, the-stories: Alda
Disabilities-stories: Uhlberg
Disasters: Barnard
Disasters-fiction: Jennings; Plum-
Ucci
Doctors-fiction: Cadnum
Dogs-fiction: Kimmel; Staples
Dragons-stories: Cave
Emotions-stories: Cave; Wells
Ethics and values: Korman;
McPhail; Oates; Orenstein;
Pierce; Spinelli, J.
Explorers and exploring: Bredeson
Fairies-fiction: Prue
FANTASY: DiCamillo; Haber;
Hale; Lee; Pierce; Prue; Rees
Fathers-fiction: Fritz; Lee; Oates;
Smith
Fears-stories: Cave; Wells
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Datlow; DeFelice; Fleischman;
Hale; Palatini; San Souci; Stanley
Friends and friendship-fiction:
Dent; Fritz; Johnson, K.; Stanley;
Whytock; Yee
134 
* THE BULLETIN
Gardeners and gardens-stories:
Fleischman
Gays and lesbians: Trope
Geography: Barnard
GHOST STORIES: Bunting;
Falcone
Ghosts-stories: Landry
Gifted children-fiction: Yee
Gods and goddesses: Fisher
Grandfathers-fiction: Gavalda
Grandmothers-fiction: Bunting;
Fenner
Grief-fiction: Mack
Guilt-fiction: Bunting; Johnson, K.;
McNamee
Gypsies-fiction: Spinelli, J.
Halloween: Polacco
Hanukkah-poetry: Hesse
HISTORICAL FICTION: Alda;
Cadnum;
History, U.S.: Borden; Erdrich
History, world: Barnard; Pfeffer
Holidays: Pfeffer
Holocaust-fiction: Spinelli, J.
HUMOR: Child; Dent; Dunrea;
French; Hills; Jennings; Kerr;
Palatini; Polacco; Rees; Scott;
Spinelli, E.; Wade; Whytock
Immigrants: Lekuton
Incest-fiction: Block
Inuit-fiction: Orenstein
JOURNALS: Trope
Kenya-stories: Johnston
Magic-fiction: Hale; Prue
Marine biology: Mastro
Mice-fiction: DiCamillo; Haber
Monsters-fiction: Plum-Ucci
Mothers-fiction: Haddix
Mothers-stories: McDonald
Murder-fiction: Oates
Music: Krull
MYSTERIES: Jennings; Nixon
Native Americans: Erdrich
Native Americans-fiction: Orenstein
Nature study: McDonald
Pigs-stories: Hills
POETRY: Hesse
Poverty-fiction: Ray
Princesses-fiction: DiCamillo; Hale
Racism-fiction: Peck
Rape-fiction: Johnson, K.
Reading aloud: Fenner; Gavalda;
Haber; Hesse; Kimmel; King-
Smith; Lekuton; Palatini; Smith
Reading, advanced: Kimmel
Reading, easy: Child; Fenner;
Fleischman; King-Smith;
McPhail; Smith
Reading, reluctant: Gavalda;
Lekuton; Mastro; McNamee
Relationships-fiction: Block;
Korman
Religious instruction: Demi; Fisher;
Hesse; McDermott; Pfeffer
RHYMING STORIES: Spinelli, E.
Saints: Demi
School: Trope
School-fiction: Gavalda; Korman;
Rees
SCIENCE FICTION: Haddix
Secrets-fiction: Lee
Self-image-fiction: Whytock
Ships and sailing-fiction: Cadnum;
Plum-Ucci
SHORT STORIES: Datlow; Hesse
Snow-fiction: Fenner
Snow-stories: Landry
SONGS: Hills; Wade
Storytelling: Hesse; San Souci
Storytime: Drummond; Dunrea;
Floyd; French; Glass; Keller;
Landry; McDermott; San Souci;
Spinelli, E.; Wells
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Plum-Ucci
SURVIVAL STORIES: Fenner
SUSPENSE: Harlow; McNamee
Teachers-fiction: Jennings
Thanksgiving-fiction: Smith
Thanksgiving-stories: Spinelli, E.
Trains-fiction: Johnson, A.
Vampires-fiction: Rees
Voyages and travel: Borden;
Christensen
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Cadnum
Weather-stories: Wright
Witches-fiction: King-Smith
Wolves-fiction: Palatini
Women's studies: Christensen;
Erdrich; Kurtz
World War II-fiction: Harlow;
Spinelli, J.
Five starred
reviews for
OLIVE'S
OCEAN
by KEVIN
HENKES
:*^ 
"Martha Boyle
is one of the
memorable 12-year-
old girls of fiction ...
The book is divided
into chapters of
various lengths that
are frequently like
prose poems . .. each
with the sort of title
one might expect
in a book of poetry."
-Starred 
review /Kliatt
-"• 
"With his usual sensitivity and insight, Henkes explores key
issues of adolescence, through the observations of an aspiring writer,
12-year-old Martha Boyle." 
-Starred review / Publishers Weekly
~ "This lovely, character-driven novel explores, with rare
subtlety and sensibility, the changes and perplexities that haunt
every child's growing up process." -Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
W "Well-plotted, the working out of [12-year-old] Martha's
feelings ... 
are effected with originality and grace. Few girls will fail
to recognize themselves in Martha."-Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
W "[Henkes's] language is carefully formed, sometimes staccato,
sometimes eloquent, and always evocative to create an almost
breathtaking pace." 
-Starred 
review / School Library Journal
Ages 10 up. $15.99 Tr (0-06-053543-1); $16.89 Lb (0-06-053544-X)
Stoiy by ELIZABETH PARTRIDGE
Quits by ANNA GROSSNICKLE HINES
~-* 
"Jake's Daddy wakes him just before dawn, as he's curled up in
his sleeping bag next to the campfire. Jake is not sure he's ready,
but Daddy thinks he is. He tries once (too hard) and once more
(too soft) but then Jake is whistling softly.... Daddy joins Jake
in whistling, as the sun comes up. 'We whistled up the sun.'
This tender story of a family ritual unfolds to the full-page
images from Hines, who makes her pictures in quilts.
Every single piece of fabric is perfect.... Children wili
be entranced." 
- Starred review / Ifirkus R~evkws
"[A] beautifully illustrated picture book....
Young children will enjoy the story; adults
will find the unusual and distinctive
illustrations fascinating."
~~I- FALA. 
Book/l~F
-
Starred review / School Library journal
Wi-- 'A gently heightened view of homesteading life
serves as the backdrop for some hilarious characters and
their efforts to make the train stop in their town. What
finally works makes for a spellbinding denouement."
-
Starred review / ALA Booklist
W-- 'A narrative that feels like the literary equivalent of
a grand old western movie..... Completely enjoyable."
-
Starred review / Publishers Weekly
Also by Geraldine
McCaughrean
THE KITE RIDER
$15.95 Tr
(0-06-623874-9)
$16.89 Lb
(0-06-623875-7)
$ 6.99 Pb
(0-06-441091-9)
:9 
ai-prmnlni(.iliieisRok
L /Y- h4-d
:I'- "[A] satirical, laugh-out-loud debut about a wacky
home-schooled teenager who decides to try public high
school.... Narrating in a diary format, the now 15-year-old
Alice relates her sidesplitting struggles with her clueless parents,
social acquaintances, and the various members of the helping
professions. Juby wields a sharp pen and has a marvelous time
skewering everything from makeup to multiple chemical
sensitivity disorder.... Hilarious."- Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
-" "Alice has caused the nervous breakdown of her counselor ...
and feels obliged to do better by her counselor's replacement....
Along the way, she tries out 'alternative' clothing and gets the
worst haircut ever, attracts boys even less together than herself,
gets pummeled by the local bully-and utters acerbic apercus
that will have readers roaring.... Dark wit glitters on every
page." 
-
Starred review / Publishers Weekly g
Teen fiction. $15.99 Tr (0-06-0051543-0)
$16.89 Lb (0-06-051544-9); $24.00 Au (0-06-054340-X)
I
rýýý HarperTempest 
-Iýiiitil)ý-iiilol'llai-pei-CollitisPitblislei-.ý;
13K. AN CI ILI 
C oft I ic A mcricas. NcNN York, NY IC-019 - NvNvNN.h a rywo-chi I(] rells.colli
F THE MIHEL L RINTZ
OF THE MICHAEL L. PRINTZ AWA
"Growing up in Harlem, 12-year-old David copes with
his father, who is sometimes violent, and his older brother,
who is hanging out with a dangerous crowd. After befriending
Mr. Moses, an old man who speaks of himself as a dream bearer,
David begins to hear stories that reflect the African American
experience over the centuries... [and which] help him understand
those around him. This well-crafted novel offers some original
characters and insights as well as a good story." 
-ALA 
Booklist
'* 
"Myers retains his usual gentle, plainspoken accessibility,
making this a thoughtful book that will reach many young
readers." 
-
Starred review / The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
W- "This quiet, subtle story works on a number of layers
with several themes- 
dreams, visions, home, community,
and manhood." 
-Starred 
review / Kirkus Reviews
Ages 10 up. $15.99 Tr (0-06-029521-X); $16.89 Lb (0-06-029522-8)
' Ha 
- ici 
rom the
ing author
ting Esm6
ARA
Rail Codell
rkable and
le cast of
. An
ovely debut
from the
Esm6."
kus Reviews,
arred review
Vn" 
-
T
--- -1 
1-
*"Presenting 
memorable characters in spirited scenes, this novel will
surely be empowering for reluctant learners-and thought-provoking
and gratifying for everyone." 
-Publishers 
Weekly, starred review
"Miss Pointy joins the constellation of fictional inspirational teachers
who serve as models for students and teachers alike. Give Codell a
shiny sticker from Miss Pointy's Happy Box." 
-The 
Horn Book
"Codell has a plainspoken yet vivid creativity of expression that gives
the story an effervescent enjoyability ...
-The Bulletin for the Center of Children's Books
Teacher's Guide available at
www.hyperionbooksorchildren.com
HYPERION BOOKS FOR CHILDREN
___
i
I*ntel----ft7
61.ýu^^^^^^^^H
Meet Matt the Rat!
A bilinqual series for pre-school through grade 4
Meet Matt the Rat
and be swept
away with his
adventures told
in English
and Spanish.
For orders and inquiries: 
a
Harvest Sun Press * PO Box 826 * Fairacres, NM 88033 
Harvest Sun
Phone: 479-283-4000* Fax: 505-526-6930 
P R ESS
Website: www.harvestsunpress.com 
E-mail: info@harvestsunpress.com 
P 
E
Illustrated. Cloth, $49.95; Paper, $24.95
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS PRESS
Lincoln Park Zoo:
-is one of last remaining 'free' zoos
-began with swans bought to beautify the park
-is, at 135 years, the second oldest zoo in the
U.S (only the Central Park Zoo is older)
With a foreword by Jack Hanna, this book
combines photographs, oral histories and
other resources to chronicle Lincoln Park
Zoo's development and chart the unique role
it continues to play in the growth of Chicago
and in the establishment of zoos and preser-
vation activities in cities across America.
Read about Mike the polar bear and how
he ripped off a man's (already artifical) arm.
Other stories introduce Rocky the parachut-
ing bear; Bushman, a lowland gorilla with
an outgoing personality; and Princess
Spearmint, a Nile hippopatamus donated by
William Wrigley, Jr.
Available at booksellers, call 800-537-5487,
or visit www. press. u illinois.edu
Pp-'lcan hardly wait to t. 7
grandchildren in and share
,heýrn 
the bilingual spiritual
dventures of Matt the Rat,"
h6_ 
Ma^rk.eoff utho
h^Biud 
fo wiBiplflGf
SI 
Avalablel fmLBLr &l' a[]llor.o.lthe diibutors,!an. dU
'c
j'
('God Bought a
Couch,' 'God G(
in a Boat,' 'God
Got Arrested') ..
the poems wind
providing some
serious food for
thought ... 
In tf
compelling poen
Rylant puts to
exceptionally go<
use her folksy
storytelling skills,
her spare and
direct writing sty]
and her ability to
sincerely extol life
everyaay pleasures ana pantul losses.
-
Starred review / The Horn Book
0
M "Kids who feel down home with God are going to love
this book. Rylant has loosened up with the Lord and shares
some of His everyday activities in twenty-two page-and-a-half
poems, plus one more complex ten-pager.... An appealing 
4
poetry book for teenagers." 
-
Starred review /
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books 
_
"Rylant takes two tropes-God as one of us and God's presence
in everything-and turns them into wry and radiant poetry....
Thoughtful young readers will be beguiled." 
-
Kirkus Reviews
Teen fiction. $14.99 Tr (0-06-009433-8): $15.89 Lb (0-06-009434-6)
7ý H a p e 
e m e s 
n ni wi t of I-a -p i- 'o lii ~ ib is eý.
SPANISH NURSERY RHY1MES
Selected by Alma Flor Ada &r F Isabel Campoy
English Adaptations by Alice Schertle
mlustrated by ViVi Escriv~
'*~ "This [is a] wonderful collection of nursery
Srhymes mn both English and Spanish selected
from the rich oral tradition of Latin America and
the American Southwest. Schertle's English adaptations
are poetic re-creations as memorable in English as they
are in Spanish. Escriv~'s bright and detailed illustrations
hold tremendous child appeal. This title will be read
and reread for years to come." -
Starred review / Criticas
~i-"Certain to become a staple for preschool and early
elementary programs, this is also a wonderful, reassuring
lap book. A must purchase for libraries."
- Starred review / School Library Journal
"A substantive, useful collection that will
* 
enrich nursery rhyme, read aloud, and
biling~ual shelves." 
- The Bulletin of the
Center for Children's Books
Ages 1-6. $14.99 Tr (0-688-16019-0)
$16.89 Lb (0-688-16020-4)
1 wiunn 
debtf -MBoOM
st
*"Preschoolers will
howl." 
-Booklist,
starred review
Byperion Books for Chldren
hyperionbooksforchildren. corn
debut
r 
Avilab-fro 
th
ISBN 0-87845-105-6;
Number 39; 143 pages;
paper; $21.95*
STORY: FROM FIREPLACE TO CYBESPACE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 3 9
h Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their development
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
ture-and information in all forms.
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin StorytellingReview contains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
st'lld ()rdcrý, 1(): (;ý,Hs IluHication", ()fl ic(% 1ý()(Inl 2 1, ý01 1ý. D"mid 1ýtrco, Clutllpýlign. 11,
01820,
Indkid" 'Ilippilw" \\ ;[11111 
111,, 1 nited 
III" sllipjmlý11, 
i, 13 1'()l 111c In't
ord(-1-.(.)11tidcott11( 
stýlw', III,,
(t ,,I I, "'ý) 1''I II)c ti:,I 1)()()I" " 1,ýf) lot- k,,Id1;0di1ion:1I 
III 01c 
)Idkýl
u~i
1325 So
Champs
U.S.A.
ADDRESS
Books make great gifts, but picking the
perfect books for your favorite youngsters
can be daunting.Just in time for the holidays,
the expert staff of The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books have created a guide to help
you navigate the bookstore wilderness full of sh
children's books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edition, t
to Gift Books contains annotations for over 225 o
books for giving (and receiving), the Guide Book i
available for only $3.50 as a downloadable PDF
can print out and use for every holiday, birthday,
giving occasion on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in full
reviews from the last three years and are verifie
in print. Entries are divided into age groups and i
title, publisher, and the current list price.
To purchase, go to
www.lis.uiuc.edulgiftbook!
~T -:·
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street 
PERIODICAL
Champaign, IL 61820 
POSTAGE
PAID
U.S.A. 
PA ID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
,"u
:;sli
· 5~i~-·1
Ls
NIL
a
a
~
r
ii
I
I
s
·A
1
i;
I
;B
I
ii
·d
r
i::
; 
~E~i~3
I
Rnnk~ 
m4~p 
crrPlt 
criftr 
hilt 
nir~ina 
the
I
~T 
-:·
ok
is
ly
31;
R
R
~
r
ii
I
I
s
·A
1
i;
I
;B
I
ii
·d
r
~- 
3
0008-9036(200311)57:3; 1-1
you navigate the bookstore wilderness full of shiny new
children's books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edition, the Guide Book
to Gift Books contains annotations for over 225 of the best
books for giving (and receiving), the Guide Book to Gift Books is
available for only $3.50 as a downloadable PDF file that you
can print out and use for every holiday, birthday, or other gift-
giving occasion on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in full Bulletin
reviews from the last three years and are verified as currently
in print. Entries are divided into age groups and include author,
title, publisher, and the current list price.
To purchase, go to
www.lis.uiuc.edulgiftbooks/
a
a
~
r
i
I
r
s
·A
1
i;
0008-9036(200311)5-/:3;1-1
