T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
March 2013
Vol. 66   No. 7
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
essential.
Deborah stevenson, Editor
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 66 (2013). 
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $58.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$98.00 (print); $105.00 (online); 
$137.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
March 2013
Vol. 66 No. 7
323  the BIg PICture
 
 Orleans  by Sherri L. Smith
324  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
327  •  Look Up!: Bird-Watching in Your Own Backyard  written and illus.  
by Annette LeBlanc Cate
329  •  Deadly!: The Truth about the Most Dangerous Creatures on Earth  by 
Nicola Davies; illus. by Neal Layton
341  • Pieces   by Chris Lynch
355  • Navigating Early  by Clare Vanderpool
358  • Pug and Other Animal Poems  by Valerie Worth; illus. by Steve Jenkins
359  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
360  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $98.00; combined print & electronic $137.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2013 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Orleans ©2013 by Michael Heath and used by permission of G. P. Putnam’s Sons.
March 2013 • 323
the BIg PICture
Orleans
by Sherri L. Smith
Katrina. Rita. Sandy. Say the names and listeners are likely to conjure up images 
of the devastation left behind by these superstorms, the overwhelming desperation 
and loss in the wake of an unstoppable force. In her first foray into the world of 
dystopia, Smith (author of Flygirl, BCCB 2/09) would have readers believe that 
these storms were just the beginning: a series of six hurricanes hits the U.S. over 
five years, culminating in 2019 in category 6 hurricane Jesus, a storm so powerful 
it requires a revised hurricane scale and leaves the Gulf Coast so destroyed that 
the powers-that-be quarantine it off and essentially leave its residents to their own 
devices. 
The book speedily fast-forwards through fifty years of poverty, rape, 
murder, and Delta Fever and then introduces readers to Fen de la Guerre, a fifteen-
year-old girl apprenticed to the pregnant leader of the O-tribe. The Fever that has 
devastated most of the Gulf’s remaining population is more easily spread between 
people of different blood types, so tribes have organized along bloodlines, stak-
ing out territories around and within Orleans (the “New” having been forsaken 
long ago). Fen’s mentor, Lydia, is seeking to establish a tentative peace among the 
tribes, but her efforts are shattered when Fen and Lydia are ambushed and Lydia 
goes into labor, delivering the child but dying in the process. Now Fen is left with 
a helpless infant and seven days to fulfill her promise to Lydia: to get the child 
over the Wall that separates the Delta from the rest of the country before the baby 
develops the Fever. 
Meanwhile, across the Wall, in the Outer States of America, a young 
scientist named Daniel is certain he has almost discovered a cure for the Fever, 
but he needs access to carriers and such people only exist within Orleans. Daniel 
illegally crosses the Wall, but he is totally unprepared to make his way through the 
wilderness or past the violent blood hunters that populate it. Fortunately, he soon 
encounters Fen, and the two join forces to get both Daniel and the baby (dubbed 
Enola—East New Orleans—by Fen) to safety. 
Smith offers a vivid and realistic portrayal of a world ravaged first by 
Mother Nature and then by human nature as cruelty, prejudice, and despair 
become the dominating forces within the Delta. The facts regarding the storms, 
the quarantine, and the Fever are laid out in a brief five-page introduction, giving 
readers a cold and distanced look at the desolation. We are then almost immediately 
immersed in a world of tribes, blood, and desperation as Fen’s folksy, dialect-heavy 
narration sets the scene, and the effects of the hurricanes and the policies that fol-
324 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
lowed them are suddenly made deeply personal. The book occasionally deviates from 
Fen’s narration with chapters narrated in the third person and focalized through 
Daniel, a strategy that hearkens back to the dispassionate tone of the introduction 
and initially aligns the young scientist with those who view Orleans as a lost cause. 
However, as Daniel becomes more entrenched inside the Wall and attached to Fen 
and Enola, Fen’s voice takes over and Daniel, like the reader, becomes fully invested 
in the fate of Orleans.
Orleans itself is a compelling intersection of environmental chaos and 
human politics. Smith repeatedly reminds readers that this was once a vibrant, 
stunningly alive place that suffered the ill effects of global warming and yet has 
still managed to eke out a kind of survival, as grim and unappealing as that survival 
looks. This version of NOLA reads like a twisted love letter to the original as Smith 
mines its famous landmarks and traditions for a dark revision: the Superdome is now 
a mass grave with bones piled atop seats; the Garden District has gone to seed; the 
famous dancing second line in the brass band parades is now a solemn procession 
of nuns; and Mardi Gras is simply an opportunity to be grateful to be alive. Both 
a necropolis and a potential fresh start, Orleans is reflected in Fen’s condition as 
a carrier of the Fever: she is poisoned and toxic, but she’s still fighting for a better 
life. The book’s closing scene is a moment of sacrifice and redemption maintaining 
the story’s careful balance of despair and hope to the very end. 
YA lit seems to have no end to the ways in which the world will meet its 
end, be it plagues, overpopulation, nuclear war, or the ever-popular zombie apoca-
lypse. Smith’s vision of the future is terrifying because it scarily matches reality in 
a world where the Doomsday clock moves closer and closer to midnight. Readers 
may find themselves watching this year’s hurricane season with a deep sense of dread 
as they ponder the fate of little Enola. (See p. 352 for publication information.)
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor
Bennett, Sophia The Look. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2013 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46438-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-52063-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
British fifteen-year-old Ted has never thought of herself as pretty, so both she and 
her beautiful older sister Ava are surprised when a scout from a modeling agency 
gives Ted his card; apparently, what she and the creeps at school view as gangly 
and awkward the agency sees as appealingly coltish. When Ava is diagnosed with 
Hodgkin’s lymphoma. she finds launching Ted’s modeling career an excellent 
March 2013 • 325
distraction from the rounds of chemo and radiation ahead of her and pushes Ted 
to pursue the opportunity. Ted soon finds herself in the bewildering and often 
humiliating world of go-sees and castings, but it isn’t until she shaves her head in 
solidarity with her sister that things really begin to take off for her in the world 
of high-fashion modeling. Meanwhile, Ava appears to be bearing up well under 
her treatments, until she breaks up with her boyfriend and Ted realizes what’s re-
ally behind Ava’s insistence that Ted expand her horizons. Bennett manages voice 
perfectly here, effectively capturing Ted’s naïveté and her wide-eyed adoration of 
her sister, and punctuating her narration with a mild, defensive sarcasm borne of 
the abject fear of losing Ava. Ava’s cancer strengthens the bond between the sisters, 
a bond that had grown thin as Ava left Ted behind for the world of boyfriends and 
beach vacations, but Ava’s illness also leaves the whole family more vulnerable to 
the manipulations of a savvy agent. Ted remains remarkably grounded as she is 
compelled to test her limits, and even her missteps are guided by a desire to give 
her sister what she needs when she most needs it, lending this appealing tale of two 
sisters surprising depth and grace.  KC
BiggS, Brian Stop! Go!: A Book of Opposites; written and illus. by Brian 
Biggs. Balzer + Bray, 2013 24p (Everything Goes)
ISBN 978-0-06-195813-7 $7.99   
R 1-3 yrs
     1 2 3 Beep Beep Beep!: A Counting Book; written and illus. by Brian Biggs.  
Balzer + Bray, 2013 24p (Everything Goes)
ISBN 978-0-06-195812-0 $7.99   
R 1-3 yrs 
Biggs brings his Everything Goes picture book series to an even younger audi-
ence with this pair of concept board books. 1 2 3 organizes types of vehicles as it 
counts from one to ten: one bus, two RVs, five taxis, etc. Stop! Go! uses vehicles 
to demonstrate contrasts: Quick Rick’s race car zooms past the man on a bicycle, 
illustrating fast and slow; the rag roof on a convertible is off in the sunshine and 
on when the rain moves in; the loud ice cream truck is shushed by a mom who 
wants some quiet for her baby in a buggy. Set against solid backgrounds of candy 
apple reds, lime greens, and light oranges, Biggs’ signature bubbly, balloon-like il-
lustrations are not quite as busy as in his other books but still pack plenty of visual 
detail. Clowns cram into a compact car; dogs and pigs ride shotgun in cars and 
trucks; granny’s on a motorcycle; a cat is the sole passenger in a taxi. In a clever 
bonus few board books deliver, each title’s plot comes around full circle at the end: 
the fedora-wearing bird depicted on the advertising of “1 bus” ends up causing an 
actual traffic jam as he strolls across an intersection in 1 2 3, and the low rider that 
blows a stop sign on the cover of Stop! Go! catches the attention of a policeman in 
a patrol car on the final spread. Don’t be surprised if older siblings volunteer for 
readaloud duty with this set on hand.  EB
Blake, Stephanie J. The Marble Queen. Amazon Children’s, 2013 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6227-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6228-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Rising fifth-grader Freedom Jane McKenzie can’t wait to finally enter the town’s 
marbles tournament this fall, but nobody else seems to think a girl should be shoot-
326 • The BulleTin
ing marbles with a bunch of boys in 1959. Her mother certainly objects even if her 
father doesn’t, but he doesn’t get much say since he’s been spending most nights out 
drinking. Freedom struggles with remaining true to herself while trying to keep on 
the good side of the adults around her, but the defection of her best friend, Daniel, 
the pestering from her annoying little brother, and her father’s increasing drinking 
make things tougher. She finds some unexpected support from a cantankerous 
neighbor lady, though, and her family life gradually begins to improve as well. 
Blake skillfully and convincingly reconstructs a late 1950s milieu, and kids with an 
interest in retro pop culture will be particularly intrigued by the details of Freedom’s 
life. The characters, including the adults, are honestly and distinctively drawn, and 
Freedom is undeniably sympathetic; her family situation and her struggles with 
friendship and teasing will ring true for plenty of young readers. Presented as a 
classroom or family readaloud, this could provoke thoughtful discussion about 
history, families, and friends; presented with a bag of marbles and some links to 
instructional YouTube videos, it might kindle interest in a old-school game.  JH
Blythe, Daniel Shadow Breakers. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2013 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-47979-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-52064-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Following the tragic death of her father, twelve-year-old Miranda May and her fam-
ily relocate from London to the seaside village of Firecroft. Soon after they arrive, 
however, Miranda notices that strange things are happening: a school bus turns to 
ice on a balmy spring day, computers in the school’s lab suddenly explode. More 
frightening still, the Shape that has been plaguing her dreams begins to appear 
during the day. Hoping to find answers, Miranda allows herself to be recruited by 
a group of strange but gifted kids from her school who use a combination of sci-
ence and magic to unlock the secrets behind Firecroft’s mysterious goings-on. The 
group finds that an animus, a powerful manifestation of an angry spirit, is both the 
culprit and Miranda’s Shape, which may be connected to someone in Miranda’s life. 
As the group attempts to defeat the enemy, Miranda must face down her personal 
demons in order to save her friends and herself. A fast-paced and entertaining read, 
this middle-school fantasy offers plenty of action, chills, fascinating ideas, and even 
some entertaining British slang. Miranda and her friends are a curious and appeal-
ing group, with each member contributing a unique talent to their endeavors. The 
novel’s interweaving of magic and scientific elements is likely to please fans of both 
science fiction and fantasy, the team’s efforts to uncover the village’s secret past and 
the identity of the Shape will appeal to readers who love a good mystery, and the 
final battle scene will leave readers hungry for possible sequels.  AM
Brian, kate Shadowlands. Hyperion, 2013 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-6483-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-7914-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
While taking a shortcut through the woods on her way home from school, Rory is 
attacked and nearly killed by her math teacher. It turns out that her mild-mannered 
teacher is in fact a notorious serial killer with a knack for escaping the police, even 
though they know that he has killed fourteen girls in ten states. They also know 
March 2013 • 327
that an unfinished job means that he will attempt to kill a girl’s entire family, so 
the police ship Rory, her sister, and her father off to the secluded island of Juniper 
Landing as part of a witness-protection program. On the way there, Rory has a 
horrifically violent and unsettling dream that the killer has caught up with them, 
and when they arrive at the island, she senses his presence everywhere. Her sister is 
bitter about the disruption of her life, and she is determined to have a good time 
partying with the locals, who include a bevy of wealthy, good-looking young people. 
These teens aren’t what they seem, however, and the reveal at the end is sketchy 
at best, requiring readers to do a lot of extrapolation and speculation about what’s 
really going on on Juniper Island. By the end Brian has built up so many tantaliz-
ing possibilities that her ultimate choice seems an easy, almost amateurish way 
out. Along the way, though, there’s lots of the kind of suspense and excitation that 
attends the serial killer/horror genre, with chapters told from the creepy perspective 
of the killer peppering the narrative and confirming the suspicions that Rory is 
trying to keep at bay. Readers who enjoy a tense windup with an unexpected shock 
at the end may therefore still enjoy this flawed but engaging murder mystery.  KC 
Cate, annette leBlanC Look Up!: Bird-Watching in Your Own Backyard; written 
and illus. by Annette LeBlanc Cate. Candlewick, 2013 [64p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4561-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-7
Let’s be honest: many kids will respond to the idea of bird-watching with a sardonic 
“You gotta be kidding.” And these are the very kids who stand to be pleasantly 
surprised by Cate’s humorous, informative invitation to the hobby and her low-
pressure, common-sense approach. She begins with a bit of excellent advice: leave the 
electronic devices at home, grab some snacks, sunscreen, and a sketchpad (perhaps 
later the more ambitious addition of a field guide and binoculars), and start to look, 
really look. Cate then explains what exactly to look for in terms of bird behavior, 
size, shape, color, markings, etc. Each suggestion amounts to a baby step toward 
getting accustomed to observing these creatures. Only when the bird-watcher has 
gotten comfortable with the birds does the whole issue of identification—which 
is too often the frustrating lead-off activity in hobbyist books—get underway. The 
beauty of this approach is that kids can stop at almost any point along this journey 
and still derive considerable pleasure from the enterprise. Cate supplements her 
instructive and encouraging remarks with cartoon-style illustrations that include 
plenty of additional speech-balloon commentary from the birds themselves. Not 
everyone can pull off the kibitzing-animal shtick, but the avian chorus is genuinely 
funny, and their banter goes a long way toward driving the lessons home. Spring’s 
around the corner, and kids could do worse than park themselves on a fallen log—or 
even atop a gravestone—and see what they can see.  EB
Cook, eileen The Almost Truth. Simon Pulse, 2012 246p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4019-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4021-0 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Escape is Sadie’s main goal: she’s carefully amassed a college fund, mostly from 
small frauds and cons, to get to Berkeley and away from her life as a trailer-dwelling 
daughter of a hotel maid and a felon. When her mother takes Sadie’s money to fund 
lawyers for Sadie’s dad, Sadie realizes she needs a quick influx of cash if she’s to leave 
328 • The BulleTin
as planned. Spurred by Brendan (longtime friend, colleague in cons, and awkward 
one-time sex partner), she gets interested in the story of rich girl Ava McKenna, 
who disappeared from the island’s single swanky hotel when she was three and 
whose age-projected image looks very much like Sadie does now; Sadie’s intention 
is to use that resemblance to her financial advantage one way or another. As she 
and Brendan learn more about Ava, Sadie begins to wonder about the mysteries in 
her own past and her similarities to Ava—has she actually conned her way into the 
truth? Cook writes as usual with a smooth intelligence that invigorates her plot, 
and Sadie’s a diverting character. Brendan makes plausible the romantic trope of the 
ladykiller whose heart really only belongs to one woman, while Sadie’s unwillingness 
to get entangled with somebody who’s rooted in the place she’s looking to escape 
is also credible. The actual secret turns out to be a seriously preposterous string of 
events, though, and Sadie’s sudden embrace of the parents she’s now leaving behind 
doesn’t ring true. The end therefore makes this less satisfying than Jaffe’s similarly 
themed Ghost Flower (BCCB 5/12), but the tantalizing is-she-or-isn’t-she drama 
may involve readers in the meantime.  DS
Coy, John Hoop Genius: How a Desperate Teacher and a Rowdy Gym Class Invented 
Basketball; illus. by Joe Morse. Carolrhoda, 2013 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-6617-1 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-8723-7 $12.95   
R 6-9 yrs
This spirited picture-book retelling of the now-legendary invention of basketball 
emphasizes how a peculiar set of conditions shaped the rules of the game that 
James Naismith would offer to his class of college physical-education students in 
1891. It had to be an indoor game, it couldn’t be too rough, and it had to make 
a class of energetic but bored young men feel it was worth learning and playing. 
Thirteen typewritten rules, one soccer ball, and two peach baskets later, the men 
were off and running (but not while holding the ball—no traveling even then). 
The fun here is in the contrast between Coy’s straightforward narration and the 
stylized mayhem of Morse’s cast of maroon-shirted, all-American-looking college 
guys. Although not a word is printed about the roughness of their previous indoor 
amusements, Morse’s pictures depict the steady accrual of bandages, slings, and 
casts as games shift from indoor football to indoor soccer, to—holy smoke!—indoor 
lacrosse. More details (like the name of the school) would have been helpful, but 
readers will readily forgive the omission in light of the informative author’s note, 
the appended photograph of Naismith and his team, and the endpaper reproduc-
tion of the historic rules originally posted on the gym bulletin board. A selected 
bibliography of adult sources is also included.  EB
Daley, MiChael J. Pinch and Dash and the Terrible Couch; illus. by Thomas F. 
Yezerski. Charlesbridge, 2013 48p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-379-4 $12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-380-0 $5.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-592-3 $6.99   
R Gr. 1-2
Pinch’s quiet afternoon is rudely interrupted when two movers (aptly named Push 
and Shove) show up with a couch to deliver and proceed to steadfastly ignore 
Pinch’s protests that he doesn’t want the couch, instead shoving furniture around 
until they’ve stuffed the thing willy-nilly into Pinch’s small living room. The couch 
March 2013 • 329
is in fact the property of Pinch’s flighty aunt, who is between houses and needs to 
store it somewhere. Poor Pinch is despondent (“‘She will forget about this couch,’ 
Pinch said. ‘I will never sit in my snug chair again’”), but his pal Dash shows up 
and cheerily swings into interior-design action, trying to rearrange the furniture 
to fit the supersized sofa. All that work tires Dash out and he ends up snoozing 
on the sofa. It is then that Pinch sees a solution: move the couch to Dash’s house, 
which Push and Shove ably do, with a sleeping Dash still atop it. This second 
installment in the Pinch and Dash series further solidifies the pair’s humorously 
complementary characters. As in the first volume, simple vocabulary, short sentences, 
and repeated words and phrases all work harmoniously to support novice readers. 
Pinch and Dash are likable fellows, in much the same vein as Frog and Toad and 
other classic friendship duos—even if we’re not entirely sure what kind of animals 
they are. Yezerski’s loose lines, filled in with skillfully applied watercolor, give this 
a casual, approachable feel, and the garish red-orange print of the couch contrasts 
amusingly with the more sedate colors of Pinch’s décor. The couch may be terrible, 
but the book is a charmer.  JH
DavieS, niCola Deadly!: The Truth about the Most Dangerous Creatures on Earth; 
illus. by Neal Layton. Candlewick, 2013 61p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6231-8 $14.99   
R Gr. 3-5
“Stabbing and strangling, poisoning and crowning, electrocuting, exploding, dive-
bombing, and even death by gluing!” Thus does biologist and author Davies open 
this irresistible and informative chronicle of the ways in which animals mow one 
another—and us—down. She writes with mischievous relish of chomping predators 
such as big cats (“Big cats have a mouth full of butchery tools to deal with their 
unlucky dinner”), canids (“If you want a really efficient killer, you need a dog”), 
sharks, and crocodiles, and then dives into a variety of critters and a variety of 
killing mechanisms in land, sea, and air. Yet she remains balanced about the value 
of these species, the normality of their behavior, and humankind’s depredations 
and contributions to our own downfall (“Sometimes we get hurt, not because we 
meant to threaten an animal, but because we were just plain stupid”). The book’s 
lavish enjoyment of carnage will draw readers whose idea of biology is Shark Week, 
and there’s plenty of genuine and interesting information amid the casualties. 
Layton’s always irreverent scribbly digital illustrations rise to their most comedic 
here, with hunting scenes goofily diagrammed and humorous speech balloons 
coming from animals as they chase and/or succumb (“You could’ve waited till I 
was dead!” complains an antelope being savaged by wild dogs in a panel sequence). 
Reluctant readers in particular will have a field day with this, and you can easily 
bring a booktalk crowd to rapt silence by sharing a juicy snippet. An index and a 
glossary are included.  DS
elliSon, kate Notes from Ghost Town. Egmont, 2013 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-264-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-407-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Sixteen-year-old Olivia is an artist, so she is devastated when suddenly, without 
explanation, she is unable to see color. Losing her colors, though, is nothing to 
losing Stern, her long-time best friend (with whom she’d also been in love), when 
330 • The BulleTin
he is murdered and her schizophrenic mother is accused of the crime. Now, ten 
months later, her father is trying to draw her into his happiness over his pending 
remarriage and a lucrative building contract, but she is resisting: how can he just 
go on with his life, and how can she? Things get even more complicated when the 
son of her father’s colleague begins to show an interest in her, and she starts being 
visited by Stern’s ghost. Though Stern has no memory of his death, he shares Olivia’s 
conviction that her mother is no killer. As her mother’s trial approaches, Olivia tries 
to figure out who really killed Stern, why she’s seeing his ghost, and whether or not 
she actually has feelings for the new boy, who seems oddly determined to be in her 
messed-up life. Ellison’s strongly imagistic prose provides the perfect accessory to 
this taut mystery. She configures a strong sense of place as she uses the ocean to 
suggest the turbulent emotions of the characters that conflict with their desire for 
normality and emotional peace. The mystery is satisfying and well paced, with a 
sound balance between clues that lead nowhere and behavioral hints of who the 
real killer may be; similarly, Olivia’s fears that she might have inherited her mother’s 
mental illness are complemented by her compassion for the woman who is strug-
gling to hang on to herself. Give this to readers who like their murder mysteries 
embedded in evocative character study, with a little paranormal wistfulness, if not 
full-blown romance, thrown in.  KC
ForMan, gayle Just One Day. Dutton, 2013 369p
ISBN 978-0-525-42591-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 8-12
Allyson is the only child of a mother who compensates for her own disappoint-
ments by over-scheduling and micromanaging every aspect of Allyson’s life. Even 
Allyson’s post-graduation trip to Europe is a crushing disappointment until her 
longtime best friend encourages her to go off the tour, whereupon Allyson meets 
Willem, an enigmatic Dutch Shakespearean actor. On a whim, she and Willem 
go to Paris for one perfect day, during which she discovers another side to herself 
and falls in love. Sadly, after amazing sex with Willem in an empty art squat, she 
awakens to find him gone and scurries back to her role as passive good girl. Her 
glimpse of what she could be has left her seriously depressed, however, and after a 
disastrous first semester in college, she decides that she has to make some changes, 
which include going back to Paris to try to track Willem down and find out what 
happened. Armchair travelers and romance fans suffering under the oppressive 
regimes of helicopter parents, or those merely plagued by existential boredom, 
will definitely relate to Allyson’s quest as she struggles to replace Hamlet’s question 
of “to be or not to be” with her more urgent one of “how to be.” Supported by 
a theatrical friend whom she meets in a Shakespeare class, she contemplates how 
the various roles we play relate to who we ultimately become. Eventually, she real-
izes that her return to Paris is not a search for Willem so much as it is a search for 
herself, and therein lies the real romance. Willem, though, has a lot of explaining 
to do, and the unanswered questions will whet readers’ appetites for the promised 
companion novel.  KC
Fry, MiChael The Odd Squad: Bully Bait; written and illus. by Michael Fry. Dis-
ney Hyperion, 2013 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-6924-6 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Seventh-grader Nick is perfectly fine with his loser existence (even with the occa-
March 2013 • 331
sional times he gets stuffed into his locker) until his well-intentioned but ultimately 
misguided guidance counselor forces him to join a club with two other similarly odd 
outcasts, gangly Molly and portly Karl. The club not only raises Nick’s conscious-
ness, it immediately goes rogue and decides to seek vengeance upon Roy, the school 
bully making their lives miserable. Complications arise for Nick when Becky, the 
love of his life, is spotted in Roy’s company; with the help of a proverb-spouting 
janitor, a stuffed pig, and the apparent ghost of Emily Dickinson, Nick manages 
to make his peace with Roy and snag Becky’s attention. The bully story follows a 
stereotypical arc, first presenting Roy as an unintelligent jerk and then revealing a 
family history that makes him sympathetic and deserving of compassion. While 
Fry manages some restraint by having the two boys merely agree to a truce rather 
than become sudden besties, the ultimate outcome is nonetheless predictable. The 
oddball humor is the book’s biggest appeal, with plenty of age-appropriate jokes 
that dabble in both witticisms and more scatological content. Fry (author of the 
Over the Hedge comic strip) provides grayscale spot illustrations throughout that are 
essential to the story, often delivering a joke’s final punchline or a zingy one-liner. 
With their bulging eyes and large heads, figures are just slightly misproportioned, 
adding to the book’s playful tone. There’s not much new here in the way of middle- 
school territory but it’s still plenty of fun—after all, who doesn’t love a bunch of 
farting dog jokes?  KQG 
gale, eriC kahn The Bully Book. Harper/HarperCollins, 2013 230p
ISBN 978-0-06-212511-8 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Sixth-grader Eric Haskins is having the worst year ever. Abandoned by his best 
friend, teased by his classmates, and victimized daily by bullies, he struggles to 
understand his inexplicable social decline, until he learns about The Bully Book. 
The Bully Book, a secret manual passed down to a chosen few each year, explains 
how to manipulate fellow students for social control and popularity, and Eric has 
been assigned its key role, the sacrificial Grunt. With the help of Grunts from other 
grades, he hunts down the Book, and as he uncovers its history, he observes the 
long-term suffering that being the Grunt can bring and learns the importance of 
defending himself. Part mystery, part journal, part how-to guide for bullies, this 
dark read explores the impact of bullying in painful, emotionally wrenching detail, 
tempered with moments of friendship and even humor. Eric is a worthy hero, and 
readers will revel in watching him fight his outsider status, even as they suffer with 
him through a series of humiliations at the hands of his tormentors. The book is 
nakedly didactic, though, and the bullying manual itself, interspersed with Eric’s 
journal, is less authentically realized than Eric’s own narration; since the manual’s 
voice is adult in its inflections, never really sounding like a middle-grader, it’s both 
implausible and considerably more disturbing. Still, the idea that popularity and 
bullying are part of a vast but alterable conspiracy is an attractive one, likely to 
appeal to many readers, and the book works well as a conversation-starter about 
bullying and the value of standing up for yourself.  AM
galloway, gregory The 39 Deaths of Adam Strand. Dutton, 2013 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42565-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Desperate to escape the monotony of life, sixteen-year-old Adam Strand kills him-
self; when it doesn’t seem to take, he tries over and over again, thirty-nine times 
332 • The BulleTin
in total. Hanging, poisoning, falling from great heights (his personal preference), 
Adam has tried everything to feed his compulsion to commit suicide, only to wake 
up the next day without a scratch. He is eventually dismissed by his small Iowa 
community as nothing more than a self-absorbed freak, and soon only a friendly 
local dispatcher persists in trying to shake him from his self-destructive focus. When 
a video of one of his jumps goes viral and a young friend contracts a mysterious 
disease, though, Adam is forced to confront the impact that his actions have on 
other people and face the idea that life may have more meaning than he realized. 
Told in stark but lyrical prose, this introspective story of one young man’s journey 
toward self-realization provides an absorbing read with elements of magical realism. 
The narration is deeply emotional despite Adam’s disaffection, and his detailed, 
insightful observations about the natural world and the people around him serve 
to highlight his utter blindness to the effect his actions have on his family, friends, 
and community. The action is purposefully limited, focused on killing time in the 
same few hangout spots, getting drunk, and playing video games, reinforcing the 
sense of persistent meaninglessness that dominates Adam’s existence. Seen entirely 
through Adam’s apathetic lens, his friends and family similarly appear aimless and 
ineffectual, and only those who pierce the armor of his discontent appear as truly 
likable. While Adam’s attitude is at times alienating, readers willing to stick with 
him will be rewarded with a compelling, sophisticated novel that explores the 
relationship between death and the meaning of life.  AM
garDner, Sally Maggot Moon; illus. by Julian Crouch. 
Candlewick, 
2013 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6553-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
As a lifelong resident of Zone Seven, fifteen-year-old Standish Treadwell is ac-
customed to a brutal existence of poverty, hunger, and abuse. He lost his parents 
to the tyrannical regime of the Motherland, and now it appears that he has also 
lost his best friend, Hector, who has mysteriously vanished in the night. Standish 
knows that it’s only a matter of time until those who took Hector come for Standish 
and his grandfather, both of whom are privy to the secret Hector discovered: the 
impending moon landing, the event that will make all other countries cower under 
the Motherland’s thumb, is fake, and there is evidence to prove it. Don’t be deceived 
by the short length or the presence of illustrations: this is a hellish vision of a dys-
topian world where food is a rare commodity and trust even more so. In brief but 
emotionally charged chapters, Standish offers a bleak picture of neighbors reporting 
on neighbors, teachers brutally beating students to death, and a despotic regime 
that looks eerily like Nazi Germany had the Axis powers succeeded. Standish’s tone 
switches with lightning speed from recklessly hopeful to violently despondent to 
casually aloof as he attempts to reclaim just a portion of what has been taken from 
him, and readers will be haunted by the sacrifice he ultimately makes long after they 
finish this quick read. The black and white illustrations of rats, flies, and maggots 
that populate the margins play out in a flip-book technique to reveal a horrific but 
powerful visual analogy to Standish’s plight. Ideal for spurring discussion in both 
book clubs and English classes, this could also easily be used in a history curriculum 
to imagine the “what if” scenarios of the past.  KQG 
March 2013 • 333
gray, ClauDia Spellcaster. HarperTeen, 2013 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-196120-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220130-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Descended from witches, seventeen-year-old Nadia has magic in her blood, but 
it’s not going to do her any good now that her mother, Nadia’s guide to witchcraft, 
has taken off. Left to care for her despondent father and little brother, Nadia and 
her family move to Captive’s Sound in the hopes of a new life. Nadia, however, 
immediately senses a deep, dark magic threatening the tiny town, and she is acutely 
aware that her unformed skills are no match for whatever baddie is casting its spell 
on Captive’s Sound. Meanwhile, fellow high school senior Mateo, a lifelong resident 
and heir to both his family’s fortune and its curse of insanity, has started having 
visions of a terrible future that casts the town and Nadia in flames. The two meet 
up to combine their powers and face down a local witch and her dealings with the 
“One Beneath.” Flimsy characterizations weaken the story; while at times sympa-
thetic, Nadia and her supporting cast members are too often defined by a single 
trait, and their dialogue tends to be stiff and unmotivated. Otherwise, though, this 
is a compelling plot that mines the lore and history surrounding witchcraft to pit 
good against evil in a literally earth-shaking battle. The sweet and sultry relationship 
that blooms between Nadia and Mateo will likely please romance fans in general 
and especially readers of Gray’s previous works (Fateful, BCCB 10/11, Evernight, 
BCCB 7/08). A final scene reveals that the villain’s defeat is only temporary, ensur-
ing future installments.  KQG 
gray, laurie Maybe I Will. Luminis, 2013 [212p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-935462-71-2 $26.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-935462-70-5 $14.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-935462-72-9 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Sandy, of deliberately unidentified gender, has a sweet life: two longtime best 
friends, the lead in the school play, loving parents, and a fairly good shot at Juil-
liard. All that goes into suspension, however, when Aaron, one of Sandy’s best 
friends, assaults Sandy. Aaron’s girlfriend Cassie doesn’t believe Sandy, and Troy, 
the other member of the trio, sides with Cassie, leaving Sandy alone to deal with 
the trauma. Sandy begins to drink to dull the pain and steal to get the booze. 
Eventually, Sandy does confide in a co-star, Shanika, who encourages Sandy to 
join her in martial arts classes; between this physical outlet and the caring concern 
of adults, which eventually guides Sandy to therapy, things start to look up. Then 
Sandy discovers that Shanika, too, has been assaulted by Aaron, but it’s clear that 
without any evidence the police can’t proceed. While this plot point is unfortunately 
realistic, it’s narratively unsatisfying, particularly as the otherwise proactive adults 
do absolutely nothing to deal with him, which seems a contrived response (or lack 
thereof) in order to make a point. Instead, the focus is on Sandy and the good and 
bad choices Sandy makes in the aftermath of the assault. Though comparisons with 
Laurie Halse Anderson’s Speak (BCCB 10/99) are inevitable, this lacks that novel’s 
artistry. Sandy’s ambiguous gender and the fact that Aaron has attacked both boys 
and girls does, however, highlight the fact that sexual assault has nothing to do 
334 • The BulleTin
with sex; readers can make up their own minds about Sandy’s gender, or not, since 
the plot and Sandy’s relationships work either way.  KC
griFFin, n. The Whole Stupid Way We Are. Atheneum, 2013 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3155-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3158-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Dinah knows that her best friend, Skint, is worried about his 
father, who has early-onset Alzheimer’s, but she doesn’t want to delve into the up-
setting details. Instead, she tries her best to distract Skint, to make him laugh or to 
construct fantasies where they help people, confront injustice, and never grow old 
themselves. Skint thinks Dinah is endearing and kind, but as he goes home each day 
to a scene where his father is becoming more and more debilitated and his mother 
sarcastic and abusive as she watches her husband slip away, he also begins to find 
Dinah’s relentless positivity annoying. Indeed, Dinah does initially come across as 
twee to the reader as well, until her character is developed enough to make it clear 
that her cheerfulness is a defense mechanism. Underneath, she’s a highly sensitive, 
well-loved and protected girl just beginning to understand that life isn’t always 
going to be a carefree space, and it makes her feel both cruel and ineffectual as her 
efforts to help people seem so small. As a consequence, she is a character that many 
readers will relate to, and they’ll therefore find her ultimate inability to save Skint 
from his own anger all the more tragic. The theme of missed opportunities for real 
connection is reminiscent of Perkins’ Criss Cross (BCCB 9/05), so steer readers who 
loved that book to this one. This title, however, offers more action, action that is 
sometimes funny, sometimes frustrating, and sometimes painful as readers realize 
along with Dinah and Skint that not everything in life is fixable, and that we must 
make room for sadness and loss.  KC
guiBorD, MauriSSa Revel. Delacorte, 2013 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74187-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98734-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
After getting kicked out of yet another foster home, seventeen-year-old Delia decides 
to make her way to the tiny East Coast island of Trespass, the childhood home of 
her late mother. Disconnected from the modern world, Trespass is a place of history 
and tradition, and its people don’t take kindly to strangers, a fact that Delia discov-
ers upon her arival. Seeking to learn more about the place her mother spoke about 
only in whispers, she stumbles on the town’s connection to a race of mythical sea 
creatures and the shocking price the residents of Trespass are forced to pay to keep 
their island safe. Narrator Delia is an appealingly odd mix of grief-stricken orphan 
and smart-aleck teen. Her desperation to find a link to her mother makes her ac-
ceptance of the monsters—both supernatural and human—that inhabit Trespass 
completely understandable; her feisty nature keeps her from accepting the status 
quo, though, and her wisecracking attitude in the face of authority will endear her 
to plenty of teens. Guibord immerses the reader in the mist-shrouded world of 
Trespass so thoroughly that monsters seem like logical residents, and the creatures 
themselves—the haughty but vulnerable demigods, the terrifying, crablike Glaucos, 
the octopus-like oracle, and the soul-sucking demon Icers—give the book a frisson 
March 2013 • 335
of true horror. The love triangle between Delia, a handsome Trespass resident, and 
a sea demigod is a bit predictable, but it also emphasizes the terrible burden that 
has been put upon the youth of Trespass and underlines the town’s sacrifice for 
security. Readers will be left wondering exactly who the real monsters of Trespass 
are long after they’ve left its salty, windswept shores.  KQG 
halBrook, kriStin Nobody but Us. HarperTeen, 2013 [304p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212126-4 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212127-1 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Zoe falls for Will because he doesn’t look away from the bruises her father gives 
her, bruises that everyone else in her small town has been ignoring for fifteen years. 
Having been reared in foster care his whole life, Will has his own violent past, and 
when he ages out of the system, he decides to leave North Dakota for Vegas and 
take Zoe with him. Their flight is marred, however, by one last fight with Zoe’s 
father and by Will’s theft of a thousand dollars from the leader of his group home. 
Likely warrants for his arrest for assault and robbery and the fact that Zoe is under-
age keep Will looking behind him, even while he assures Zoe that they are finally 
free to do whatever they want. Though Zoe is naïve, she does eventually realize 
that she is trading one violent man for another in her quest for someone to take 
care of her and that it’s time for her to think about taking care of herself. Still, she 
loves Will, and she struggles to get him to open up to her, which he does as a test 
to see how much knowledge about his past she can bear and still love him. Will’s 
and Zoe’s stories are broadly melodramatic and clichéd, and their inexorable march 
to the point of no return is largely predictable. The language is quite beautiful, 
however, with chapters alternating between Zoe’s intelligent, wistful longing and 
Will’s blunt and hard-edged but equally poignant need. Readers in difficult situa-
tions will definitely get the message that escape isn’t always the best alternative, and 
that true love, the kind that bears all things, isn’t enough to outweigh bad choices. 
The sad fate of Will and Zoe, however, may ultimately inspire readers to choose 
better for themselves.  KC
halliDay, ayun Peanut; illus. by Paul Hoppe. Schwartz & Wade, 2013 207p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96590-6 $18.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86590-9 $15.99   
R Gr. 6-10
Anxious about fitting in at a new school, sophomore Sadie Wildhack tries to seem 
more interesting by inventing one little lie about herself: a severe peanut allergy. 
Soon she is telling elaborate stories of near-death experiences, vigilantly avoiding 
peanut products, and dodging the school nurse who wants medical forms signed 
by Sadie’s mom. When she starts to make real friends and catches the eye of a cute 
boy who is interested in more than her allergy, Sadie wants to leave the lie behind 
but can’t find a way to come clean. A simple, honest, yet light-hearted story about 
a small misstep becoming a big deal, this graphic novel strikes just the right bal-
ance between charm and seriousness. Sadie and her friends are eminently likable 
and real, and readers will enjoy watching Sadie grow more confident amongst her 
peers, even as she grows increasingly anxious about her lie. Her relationship with 
boyfriend Zoo is sweetly supportive, even in the face of her eventual humiliation, 
and understanding adults help temper the impact when her lie is revealed. The il-
336 • The BulleTin
lustrations keep the focus on Sadie, leaving her the only spot of color (she’s always 
in a bright red top) amid the otherwise black and white scenes. This tale of a lie 
gone very wrong will strike a chord with readers who have fudged the truth to get 
attention.  AM
hart, Caryl The Princess and the Peas; illus. by Sarah Warburton. Nosy Crow/
Candlewick, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6532-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
In this rhyming story, little Lily-Rose May leads an idyllic life in her cottage in the 
wood until “one day, her daddy tried feeding her peas.” Lily’s aversion to the wee 
green monsters is swift and complete (“I’m going to be terribly, horribly sick!”), to 
the point that her father calls in the doctor. The doctor assesses Lily-Rose May as 
being allergic to peas, which means, as he supports with a slightly altered version 
of “The Princess and the Pea,” that she’s a princess. Off to the palace Lily-Rose 
May goes, only to find that royal life is an awful lot of drudgery and that ultimately 
she’d rather be back home with her dad, even if it means she must eat peas. A goofy 
fairy-tale mashup with some modern touches, the story gets away with its logical 
peculiarities because the rollicking anapestical verse is so much fun (“We know 
you’ve been having a terrible time./ Your own dad gave you peas! What a hideous 
crime”). There’s also plenty of humor to be mined from the oversized illustrations, 
a pell-mell combination of sweet digital hues (with an emphasis on pink, of course, 
when Lily finally makes princess) and spindly scrawled lines; the overstuffed scenes 
have a slightly homespun, off-kilter look that adds to amusement, and viewers will 
appreciate details such as the doctor’s splay-legged run and the colony of Disney-
esque critters that surround Lily’s woodland home. Don’t try to figure out the mes-
sage in this one; just prepare for a dramatic readaloud and use it as a springboard 
to talk about dealbreakers for princesshood.  DS
haSSan, MiChael Crash and Burn. Balzer + Bray, 2013 [544p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211290-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211292-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
Steve Crashinsky, known to his friends as Crash, is a hero: he convinced his men-
tally unstable classmate, David Burnett, not to set off the explosives that would 
have destroyed their high school and everyone in it, and he did it with the cameras 
rolling. Now he has a book contract, and, if his ADHD will let him, he’ll tell the 
whole story of his relationship with David, which started in elementary school 
when he tried to befriend David and David tried to kill him. The story Crash 
tells is deeply disturbing in its searingly accurate portrait of boys in contemporary 
society; Crash’s voice is insistently authentic, documenting the life of an upper-
middle-class, medicated teen reared in a world where values are determined by 
media standards of appearance and privilege. His relationship with his father, in 
particular, offers a chilling indictment on the failures of intergenerational com-
munication and masculine values. Though his father continually accuses Crash of 
being a disappointment, Crash is an exact copy of his dad, who, as Crash’s friend 
opines, has everything a man could ever want—a sexy young wife, a great job, and 
all the perks that money can buy, including far better pot than the boys can afford. 
March 2013 • 337
Every mistake Crash makes turns to his advantage, and the only thing he learns is 
that fame forgives all sins and opens doors to sex and money without commitment 
or consequence, as long as he keeps his cool. As cynical as this book ultimately is 
about where we are as a society, it is a must-read for teens and adults alike who 
want to understand the lack of empathy that permeates contemporary culture; it 
offers no answers, but the mirror it does present may be chilling enough to awaken 
readers to the costs of not getting it right.  KC
hopkinSon, DeBorah Knit Your Bit: A World War I Story; illus. by Steven Guar-
naccia. Putnam, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25241-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 7-10 yrs
Mikey’s mom and his sister waste no time whipping out their knitting needles to 
knit socks, hats, and mufflers the soldiers off fighting the Great War in Europe. 
Mikey, though, insists that knitting is for girls, until his pride gets the better of him 
and he accepts a friend’s dare to take on her girls’ knitting group in the Central 
Park Knitting Bee. Mikey enlists his mother to teach him and his pals, Nick and 
Dan, how to knit, and the three work hard—if not all successfully—to master their 
needles and yarn. When the big, three-day Knitting Bee arrives, the boys give it 
their best shot but come up short. Encouraged by a wounded soldier to “keep on 
knitting, kid,” Mikey continues working on his craft and ends up sending a pair 
of Mikey-made socks to his dad, who is serving overseas and who proudly wears 
them when he finally comes home. Hopkinson’s text is snappy and engaging and 
her dialogue has just enough period flavor to be authentic while still resonating 
with modern kids. Middle-graders will readily respond to the girls against boys plot 
point as well as to Mikey’s desire to help his dad and other servicemen. Guarnaccia’s 
pen-and-ink and watercolor illustrations use muted tones and Lois Lenski-esque 
figures to successfully conjure a period look, and blond Mikey is a ruddy-cheeked, 
knickerbockered all-American boy of the nineteen-teens. An author’s note at the 
book’s end explains that while the story is fiction, it was based upon real events, 
including an actual three-day Knit-In in Central Park, and concludes with informa-
tion about knitting for modern-day soldiers.  JH 
howarD, a. g.  Splintered. Amulet/Abrams, 2013 371p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0428-4 $17.95   
R* Gr. 10-12
As Alice traveled through Wonderland, she left chaos in her wake, and genera-
tions of her female descendants have been cursed with madness until the damage 
is repaired. Desperate to save her mother and eventually herself from the asylum, 
sixteen-year-old Alyssa Gardner takes up the family quest, returning to Wonder-
land to clean up Alice’s mess. Along for the ride is her long-time crush Jeb, who 
gamely takes up the role of knight-defender as he fights to get Alyssa home safely. 
Complicating everything from her mission to her feelings, though, is Morpheus, 
a gorgeous moth-winged netherling from Alyssa’s childhood dreams, who acts as 
a guide but whose ulterior motives and deceitful nature undermine her efforts. As 
Alyssa journeys through Wonderland, encountering creatures both terrifying and 
familiar, she takes on the tasks that will repair Wonderland, including saving clams 
from a hideous walrus-like monster and rescuing the Cheshire Cat’s headless body 
from the belly of the Bandersnatch. At the same time, she unlocks the secrets of 
338 • The BulleTin
her own past and discovers that the curse, her quest, and even the story of Alice 
might mask a far more dangerous truth. Wonderfully dark, weird, and twisted, this 
richly drawn refashioning of Carroll’s classic fantasy provides readers with more than 
just an alternative vision of Wonderland. The book is equal parts thrilling fantasy 
adventure, poignant family drama, and journey of self-discovery, offering a distinc-
tive and original story that remains faithful to the spirit of its source. Strong-willed 
but emotionally fragile, Alyssa is an engaging heroine who fears looming madness 
but learns to revel in her gradually emerging magical powers. Jeb and Morpheus 
are both intriguing matches for Alyssa, attractive in opposite ways that are sure 
to have readers taking sides as the young men fight for her affection. Fans of dark 
fantasy, as well as of Carroll’s Alice in all her revisionings (especially Tim Burton’s), 
will find a lot to love in this compelling and imaginative novel.  AM
JakuBowSki, MiChele Sidney & Sydney: Third Grade Mix-Up; illus. by Luisa 
Montalto. Picture Window/Capstone, 2013 [128p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4048-8001-6 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4048-8104-4 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Can a third-grade boy and a third-grade girl really be friends? Sidney, the new boy 
in town, and Sydney, an art-loving girl, make a go of it after an uncertain start: 
Sydney mistakes Sidney’s classroom name tag for her own and both get embarrassed 
by the teasing that results from the mix-up. The two then discover, however, that 
they share more than just a similar-sounding name, including an interest in pho-
tography, Paris, and the game Galaxy Conquest. When both of their best friends 
are bummed about Halloween—one is diabetic and the other’s health-conscious 
mother has forbidden all sweets—Sidney and Sydney formulate a plan that will allow 
their pals (and themselves) to still have fun on Halloween without all the candy. 
This observant and humorous story is the first book in a series that refreshingly 
promises to appeal to both boys and girls. Sydney and Sidney alternately narrate 
(each chapter’s narrator is identified by an illustrative headpiece) and each of their 
perspectives is credible on both age and gender levels. The text moves quickly and 
effortlessly, and the kid-centered scenarios will resonate with middle-graders. The 
frequent full-color illustrations are stylish and attractive, and Sidney and Sydney 
have a wide-eyed, loose-limbed appeal slightly reminiscent of an older Charlie 
and Lola from Child’s series. Consider this for a refreshing classroom readaloud, 
for mixed-gender book groups, or for encouraging more friendships that cross the 
middle-grade gender divide.  JH
katz, karen How Does Baby Feel?; written and illus. by Karen Katz. Little 
Simon/Simon, 2013 12p (A Karen Katz Lift-the Flap Book)
ISBN 978-1-4424-5204-6 $6.99  
R 6-24 mos.
“Baby wants milk and crackers. How does baby feel?” Lift the picture of a toddler 
stretching for the goodies on the counter top of the facing page. Now she’s in her 
high chair enjoying her repast under the word “Hungry.” “Baby is yawning. How 
does baby feel?” The little boy in the stroller is clearly “Sleepy,” as evidenced by his 
contented snore as he snoozes beneath the picture flap. Babies are variously happy 
over a tummy tickle, sad because of a broken toy, silly in a goofy frog hat, and most 
importantly, loved when covered in the family’s kisses. Katz’s multicultural cast of 
March 2013 • 339
round headed, expressive tykes make each emotional state crystal clear, and the 
scalloped edges on the flap bottoms make it easy for little fingers to participate in 
the lifting and turning. New parents who score this title in the baby shower loot will 
probably find it’s one of the very first books they call into service for a cozy read.  EB
laFeverS, roBin Dark Triumph. Houghton, 2013 [400p] (His Fair As-
sassins)
ISBN 978-0-547-62838-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Grave Mercy (BCCB 4/12) introduced readers to the strange convent of St. Mortain 
and to Ismae, an apprentice to nun assassins, servant of Death, and tireless worker 
for the sovereignty of fifteenth-century Brittany. Here LaFevers shifts the focus to 
Sybella, a fellow daughter of Death, trained by the sisters in the arts of murder and 
seduction ever since she appeared at the convent as a child. Now Sybella has been 
sent on her first assignment, to perform reconnaissance work at the household of 
her lecherous father, Count d’Albret, who plans military action to take control from 
Brittany’s young duchess, Anne, unless Anne agrees to marry him. Sybella has a lot 
to handle: she must fend off the advances of her amorous brother, feed informa-
tion back to Anne’s other supporters, and come to terms with the horrific secret of 
her past, all while attempting to free one of Anne’s most fearsome warriors from 
d’Albret’s dungeons. Personal where Grave Mercy was political and comprehensive, 
this story focuses tightly on Sybella as she seeks vengeance upon the many men 
who have wronged her. Interestingly, this raises the stakes of the larger conflict even 
higher: in the previous book d’Albret was merely an unscrupulous lech, but here 
the true extent of his cruelty is revealed; as only one of the many girls who have 
suffered at his hands, Sybella personalizes the fate of her nation. Her combination 
of anger and vulnerability makes her sympathetic, and she’s admirable in her fight 
to put aside her own emotions to work for a greater cause. Her romantic relation-
ship with the imprisoned warrior unfolds with a sweet tenderness that romance 
fans will relish. This title takes a closer look at troubling themes just hinted at in 
its predecessor, but the darkness Sybella must endure makes the story’s ultimately 
happy resolution all the more rewarding.  KQG 
larSon, kirBy Hattie Ever After. Delacorte, 2013 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90668-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73746-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97968-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
In this sequel to Hattie Big Sky (BCCB 3/07), it’s 1919 and seventeen-year-old 
orphan Hattie Brooks is off to San Francisco on a dual mission—to accrue the 
experiences and opportunities that will turn her into a professional writer, and 
to trace the mystery of the love token that arrived in the mail, addressed to her 
deceased uncle. She secures a job cleaning offices at the San Francisco Chronicle, 
gaining access to the newspaper archives, where she tries to find some hints about 
her uncle’s life in the big city. She also befriends Rose Danvers, sender of the token, 
who is reluctant to discuss her relationship with Uncle Chester but eager to spiff 
up Hattie’s dowdy wardrobe and shower her with treats. It looks like Hattie’s star 
is on the rise, with a couple of lucky connections made at the Chronicle and a shot 
340 • The BulleTin
at a bit of low-profile writing, but nothing is ever that easy. Her old flame, Charlie, 
shows up with marriage on his mind, Rose Danvers is suddenly borrowing money 
from Hattie to care for an ailing “daughter” who lives out of town, and the dash-
ing reporter who mentors Hattie on the job steals the series Hattie’s worked hard 
to develop. Hattie’s setbacks here don’t feel quite as crushing as her homesteading 
debacle in Big Sky, and her ultimate acceptance of Charlie’s proposal is never in 
serious doubt. Hattie, however, is the kind of character readers actually wonder 
about after closing the book, and her fans from her first title will be satisfied, and 
even perhaps relieved, to know she finds her footing in the world.  EB
linDner, april Catherine. Poppy/Little, 2013 309p
ISBN 978-0-316-19692-5 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
In this contemporary retelling of Wuthering Heights, sixteen-year-old Chelsea learns 
that her mother, Catherine, who she thought was dead, may in fact be alive and 
living in New York City. Chelsea runs away to find her, her only clue being the 
address from a letter sent fourteen years earlier when Catherine left her husband 
and daughter to return to her unusual childhood home, a nightclub called The 
Underground, in an attempt to reconcile with her first love, Hence. Chelsea finds 
Hence, now the club owner, and although he is gruff and disagreeable, he allows her 
to stay in her mother’s old room; there Chelsea finds an old journal of her mother’s 
that describes how Hence came to the club, endeared himself to her father, alienated 
her brother, and became Catherine’s lover. Chelsea also meets Hence’s protégé, a 
boy named Coop, and enlists his reluctant help in tracking down the clues that help 
them all discover Catherine’s grisly fate. Bringing the haunting, romantic flavor 
of Wuthering Heights to the alternative music scene of contemporary NYC doesn’t 
work nearly as well as Lindner’s earlier literary reappropriation, Jane (BCCB 1/11); 
neither Catherine nor Hence approach the broody, intense appeal of their originals, 
Heathcliff’s compelling revenge plot against Hindley is completely abandoned, and 
the atmospherics of lower Manhattan simply don’t wuther.  However, by its own 
lights this is a readable, emotionally restrained double romance that sifts questions 
of the wisdom of following your heart no matter what the cost, and what you might 
ultimately learn from your parents’ romantic mistakes. An author’s note explains 
her adaptation process.  KC
loSure, Mary Wild Boy: The Real Life of the Savage of Aveyron; illus. by Timothy 
Basil Ering. Candlewick, 2013 [176p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5669-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6369-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-8
The feral boy found in rural France in the late eighteenth century was a phe-
nomenon in his day and remains a mysterious and compelling figure in ours, and 
Losure (author of The Fairy Ring, BCCB 4/12) provides an evocative treatment of 
his life. With her fluid storytelling, she traces the boy from his early sightings and 
provincial capture, through his cold early treatment by scientists, to his eventual 
placement under the care of Dr. Itard at the Parisian Institute for Deaf-Mutes. 
There Victor, as Dr. Itard named him, really settles, bonding with Dr. Itard, who’s 
determined to teach him language, and with his kindly caretaker, Madame Guérin. 
The book draws a vivid picture of Victor’s life, drawing on quotes from Dr. Itard 
March 2013 • 341
and his contemporaries, but it also overtly denotes speculation (“Maybe . . . the wild 
boy watched her, trying to remember his own mother, his own home”) in a quiet 
reminder that much of the boy’s story and perspective is conjecture. Losure is an 
involved chronicler, clearly hostile toward the professor observing Victor at his first 
orphanage home and sympathetic toward the boy who was unable to please society 
and always longing for the forest; she’s also comfortable with leaving the story as 
unshaped as Victor’s life ultimately was, with no specific triumphs or conclusions. 
It’s a fascinating look at an unusual historical figure, a stylish yet accessible read that’s 
a step up from Gerstein’s The Wild Boy (BCCB 12/98). In a closing note, Losure 
describes the theories about Victor’s condition (autism being the most prominent) 
and some of the legacies of his educational attempts; endnotes, a bibliography, and 
an index are also appended. Final illustrations not seen.  DS
lynCh, ChriS Pieces. Simon, 2013 [176p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-2703-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5311-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
After a year of grief over his beloved older brother’s death brings only the pain of 
absence, seventeen-year-old Eric decides to meet the people who received Duane’s 
donated organs in hope of finding some kind of closure or connection. He meets 
three recipients: Phil, a sweet, young-for-his-age teen who’s thrilled to expand his 
world and include Eric; Barry, a crass, loud-talking, dirty-joking young man who 
seems mostly determined to wreck his new liver; and Melissa, a beautiful single 
mother with a four-year-old son who’s quick to hero-worship Eric—who now finds 
himself looking to be Melissa’s hero as well. Longterm Lynch fans will recognize 
Eric as the hockey-playing protagonist from Iceman, but this volume easily stands 
alone as a tribute to a young guy who put his whole world in one person, whom 
he’s now lost. His combination of simmering rage and bafflement is poignantly 
credible, and the book makes it quietly clear how much his relationship with Duane 
colors and structures the way he deals with the various members of the recipient 
trio. Lynch is the great laureate of American guyhood, and he writes with fierce 
compassion about a kid who relishes the angry rush of punching men but abhors 
the thought of a woman he cares for being abused. While the complexity of the 
situation adds an interesting dimension, at its core this is a story of loss and iden-
tity, of a young man finding out who he is through the legacy of the brother who 
taught him who he was.  DS
MaCk, w. C. Athlete vs. Mathlete. Bloomsbury, 2013 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-915-8 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-858-8 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Fraternal twins Owen and Russell have coexisted in a state of general amity, with 
basketball star Owen staking his ground as the family jock and Russell holding 
forth as the acknowledged brainiac. This year, though, the new basketball coach 
throws everything off balance by insisting that all former players try out again for 
the seventh-grade team and recruiting tall, lanky, uncoordinated Russell to try out 
as well. Russell would rather put his energy into the Masters of the Mind team egg-
drop competition, but he’s good-natured enough to comply with the coach, certain 
342 • The BulleTin
a tryout will promptly prove his ineptitude. It turns out Russell’s got some decent 
blocking skill and a natural jump shot—and now a spot with Owen on the team. 
The brothers take turns at narration, with Owen airing first his pride and then his 
outrage over Russell’s theft of the limelight, while Russell frets over his dereliction 
of team leadership duties at MotM, even as he revels in shedding his reputation as 
a nerd.  Mack evokes empathy for each boy, with honest attention to the fact that 
Russell can steal Owen’s thunder as a player, but Owen will never match Russell 
at academics. The middle-school dynamics are too innocent and polished to be 
completely credible, however, and the supporting cast of friends and parents step 
straight out of an afterschool special. This could nonetheless be a good choice for 
younger kids who haven’t personally gnashed on the grit of middle school and still 
have reason to hope that family and school problems can be reconciled in a few 
hundred pages.  EB
MaClaChlan, patriCia Cat Talk; written by Patricia MacLachlan and Emily 
MacLachlan Charest; illus. by Barry Moser. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-06-027978-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Though previously focusing on dogs (in Once I Ate a Pie, BCCB 6/06, etc.), Mac-
Lachlan and Charest now turn their poetic talents to the feline world. Thirteen 
free-verse poems, each featuring a different cat as narrator, address cat behaviors 
from tunneling under the covers (“Under the blankets/ Is the best place”) to prowl-
ing (“You can’t see me when it’s dark. My fur is the color of night”) to lavishing 
affection (“I love everyone./ I fall over onto people I love”). Some poems are a little 
bland, but there’s plenty of enjoyable feline detail and credible character sketches 
(grumpy Sylvie says “I like three things: My food/ My windowsill/ My people./ 
And that’s enough”). The real impact comes from Moser’s vivid cat portraits, wa-
tercolors occasionally touched with subtle pencil in three-quarter to full spreads 
that politely balance the poems. Close-up facial portraits are furrily expressive, and 
poses are authentic in their supple-spined energy or comfortable collapse. These 
are appealing to read aloud and engaging to read alone, and they’ll provide plenty 
of inspiration for kids to write odes to their own kitties.  DS
MaClaChlan, patriCia Nora’s Chicks; illus. by Kathryn Brown. Candlewick, 
2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4753-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
After emigrating with her family from Russia to a prairie farm in the U.S., young 
Nora is lonely. When her father brings home a flock of chicks and two geese, Nora 
stubbornly claims them all as hers and names each one, to her hungry father’s ini-
tial chagrin. Pretty soon Nora is known for her flock, which follows her devotedly 
around the farm and even to church one Sunday. When a chick goes missing, Nora 
searches frantically; when neighbor girl Susannah turns up with little Natasha, and 
the two girls begin a tentative friendship. The warm and soft-edged watercolor il-
lustrations, subtly outlined in gray and delicately detailed, appear to place this story 
in the early 1900s, and Nora’s period clothes, accessories, and hairstyle (looped-up 
braids) will especially appeal to girls with a thirst for all things old-fashioned. Any 
kid who has experienced loneliness will surely relate to Nora’s feelings of heartache, 
March 2013 • 343
and the simple, understated text keeps the action poignant without tipping over 
into sentimental melodrama. This could be a thoughtful addition to a unit on 
immigrants or prairie life or useful as a starting point for discussing what it’s like 
to start over in a new place. The girls who clamor for the historical American Girl 
dolls will particularly flock to this one.  JH
MaFi, tahereh Unravel Me. Harper/HarperCollins, 2013 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208553-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208556-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
It’s only been a few weeks since Juliette (from Shatter Me, BCCB 1/12) escaped the 
asylum that was her prison and found refuge in Omega Point, the rebel headquarters. 
Since then she has begun honing her powers—her ability to torture and kill with 
just a touch—and preparing with the Point’s other similarly supernaturally gifted 
people to go to war with the totalitarian government that would see them dead. 
She is still uncomfortable with both her “gift” and the prospect of war, however, 
and she feels particularly bereft now that Adam, her longtime love and the only 
human that can touch her without consequences, begins to pull away, both emo-
tionally and physically. A raid brings a hostage to Omega Point, and Juliette finds 
herself faced with yet another challenge, this time in the form of Warner, the young 
man responsible for her previous imprisonment and to whom she feels strangely 
attracted. Juliette’s overwrought, sometimes histrionic voice gets wearisome, and 
the problem is only somewhat mitigated by Kenji, the wise-cracking sidekick, who 
directly calls Juliette out on her petulance and selfishness until she finally moves 
on from being a whiny lovebird. It’s here where the plot finally gets moving and 
readers begin to uncover the true extent of Juliette’s powers and the brutality of the 
oppressive government. Warner is a nuanced third point to the love triangle, and 
the moments that pit his love for Juliette in direct conflict with his need for power 
are compelling and bittersweet. The flowery prose that went over the top in the 
first installment is somewhat tempered here, but fortunately the romance is just as 
tempestuous and steamy, so fans will likely be satisfied.  KQG
MarChon, Benoit Good Night!; tr. from the French by HMH; illus. by Soledad 
Bravi. HMH/Houghton, 2013 40p
ISBN 978-0-547-89314-3 $7.99   
R 6-24 mos.
     Spoonful!; tr. from the French by HMH; illus. by Soledad Bravi. HMH/
Houghton, 2013 40p
ISBN 978-0-547-89313-6 $7.99   
R 6-24 mos.
Each title in this pair of board books features a single die-cut shape that extends 
through all the pages to reveal a face from the last page. In Good Night!, the face 
of a baby peeks through each egg-shaped opening, and the surrounding picture 
coordinates with a sweet or whimsical endearment: “Good night, my little fox”; 
“Good night, my shrimp”; “ . . . my sunshine”; “ . . . my dumpling”; “ . . . my 
little bug.” The pictures are the soul of simplicity, a dreamy wisp of a figure afloat 
on a contrasting colored backgrounds of sky blues, ruby reds, and sunny yellows. 
By the final page, the baby (now revealed in a heart-printed sleeper) is still in no 
mood to sleep, calling out “Again!” in a word bubble. But don’t give up there: the 
344 • The BulleTin
back cover says “Good night, my love,” and baby’s finally off to the Land of Nod. 
Spoonful! attempts similar encouragement for mealtime, with the shape of a head in 
profile, mouth wide open for the next bite of food. There’s a spoonful for Mommy, 
for the fish, for the astronaut, for the worm in the dirt, for the superhero, and 
finally for an enthusiastic toddler, who accepts the kudos, “Hooray! You ate it all!” 
The backgrounds here are a bit more detailed, featuring objects toddlers are sure 
to recognize (fire engines, flowers, etc), adding to the visual appeal. The inclusion 
of a spoon in each of the spreads would have made this effort more successful, but 
the sheer number of diners suggested here should nonetheless urge finicky eaters 
on through even a robust meal.  EB
Marr, MeliSSa, ed. Shards & Ashes; ed. by Melissa Marr and Kelley Armstrong.
Harper/HarperCollins, 2013 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209846-7 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209845-0 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209847-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Another anthology, another host of imaginative and terrifying ways in which the 
world will end and fall into a bleak, dystopian version of the future. In this collec-
tion, best-selling authors Marr and Armstrong are joined by seven other popular 
YA authors to offer their post-apocalyptic visions. Although there’s no introduction, 
the title serves to set the general tone of the stories; indeed, these worlds are dark, 
sharp places that lack hope and often redemption, places in which not only has the 
environment gone awry but so has human nature. The stories themselves are vari-
able in quality: Marr’s contribution is shrewdly compelling, casting a flesh-eating 
god and his followers as the harbingers of destruction, and pondering the notion 
of faith when religion has proved itself to be despotic. Rachel Caine’s “Dogsbody” 
is a deeply twisted tale of vengeance, presenting the reader with the unavoidable 
reality that sometimes death is indeed the more pleasant option. Several other 
stories, however, stumble in their pacing while others are simply ham-fistedly 
didactic, with characters spouting lessons in stiff and awkward monologues. The 
collection ends, however, with its crown jewel, a bittersweet love story by Carrie 
Ryan; taking an unflinching look at sacrifice in a time of crisis, it will likely leave 
readers breathless and teary-eyed. Datlow and Windling’s recent dystopian anthol-
ogy, After (BCCB 2/13), offers more breadth and depth to the apocalypse, but since 
readers can’t seem to get enough of the end of the world, this collection is likely 
to be popular as well.  KQG 
MCgrath, BarBara BarBieri The Little Gray Bunny; illus. by Violet 
Kim. Charlesbridge, 2013 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-394-7 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-395-4 $7.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60734-590-9 $6.99   
R 4-7 yrs
In this Easter-themed retelling of “The Little Red Hen,” a little gray bunny is the 
one trying to get his lazy pals—a lamb, a turtle, and a duck—to help out with 
Easter preparations, primarily the collecting, boiling, dyeing, and hiding of a 
multitude of eggs. His requests for help are continuously refused with increasing 
disdain on the part of his friends. When his last-ditch effort fails to goad the trio 
March 2013 • 345
into action, the bunny tries another tactic. After his pals eagerly fill their baskets 
with the colored eggs (which the little gray bunny collected, boiled, dyed, and hid 
by himself) and then demand more treats, the bunny promptly presents them each 
with an egg (which is visibly and portentously cracked). The eggs quickly hatch 
into obstreperous red chicks, which are last seen pestering the life out of the lamb, 
turtle, and duck while the bunny sits in the shade eating his well-earned cupcakes. 
McGrath’s narration is pithy and droll, making this a pleasure to read aloud, and 
the “Little Red Hen” connection makes this particularly useful at storytime or in 
the classroom. Kim’s cartoonish watercolor, pen, and gouache art is a bit on the 
bland side, but the cheerful springtime tones and cute animals keep things visually 
appealing; her little gray bunny, with his inverted-heart-shaped head, long, droopy 
ears, and bright red t-shirt, is an endearingly friendly-looking little guy. Tuck this 
one in the Easter basket, or use it as an amusing readers’ theater piece.  JH
MCMann, liSa Crash. Simon Pulse, 2013 [240p] (Visions)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0391-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0592-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Sophomore Jules Demarco is working to keep her family’s struggling restaurant 
afloat and navigate the minefield of her father’s depression and hoarding habits. 
Worse still, she has realized that she’s in love with her former best friend, the son 
of her father’s bitter rival, who now refuses to speak to her. When visions only she 
can see of a horrible crash, complete with fiery explosions and numerous body 
bags, begin to appear on billboards and television screens, Jules worries that her 
family’s history of mental instability is at work. Closer examination of the images, 
though, reveals that one of the dead is her secret crush Sawyer, so Jules sets out to 
make sure that the visions don’t become a reality, using clues she sees in the details 
as a guide. Unable to convince anyone she isn’t crazy, she eventually has to decide 
just how much she’s willing to sacrifice to save the boy she loves. Building on an 
intriguing premise, this novel is likely to draw readers with its combination of 
forbidden love and psychic melodrama. Jules has an appealing voice, and her often 
ineffective attempts to prevent tragedy mirror the frustration of many young people 
trying to change the world, making her relatable even as her powers are fantastic. 
The romance with popular hottie Sawyer, however, is predictable and uninspired, 
and there’s a superficial genre flavor to the proceedings throughout. Still, readers 
looking for a short, fast, fun read and fans of McMann’s earlier Wake series (Wake 
BCCB 4/08, etc.) may want to pick this title up, and they’ll likely be pleased at 
the loose ends that leave room for the planned sequels.  AM 
MeDina, Meg Yaqui Delgado Wants to Kick Your Ass. Candlewick, 2013 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5859-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6354-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
“Yaqui Delgado wants to kick your ass” is one of the first things anybody says 
to sophomore Piddy Sanchez at her new school. Piddy is a good student with a 
serious future, miles apart from the suspension-happy Latina clique from the bad 
neighborhood—which is probably what gets under the skin of Yaqui, that clique’s 
ringleader (that and the fact that Yaqui’s boyfriend has apparently noticed the curvy 
346 • The BulleTin
new girl). Yaqui’s laser focus on Piddy never seems to waver, and as her stealthy 
but effective bullying escalates, Piddy’s existence spirals down into a desperate and 
flunking misery that hits bottom when Yaqui and her girls give Piddy a substantial 
beatdown, filming it and posting it online. What makes this story so compelling is 
that it’s about Piddy in her entirety, not just about bullying; in fact, the book starts 
with Piddy’s lively narration focusing on her displeasure about the move and the 
ongoing friction with her strict mother. As Yaqui malignantly dominates Piddy’s 
life, she also dominates the book, so readers share Piddy’s experience of swiftly 
descending from normal to nightmare. Medina emphasizes Piddy’s acute sense of 
isolation without overplaying it, and she absolutely respects the totality of Piddy’s 
quandary, knowing that ham-fisted adult involvement will only make things worse. 
Indeed, there’s no great resolution here: Piddy ends up with a safety transfer back 
to her old school and some philosophical perspective on life’s unfairness but no 
illusions about being better for the incident. The message here is that tough and 
unfair stuff is really tough and unfair, but it’s also survivable; that’s a takeaway that 
readers will recognize as both true and valuable.  DS
Monroe, ChriS Cookie the Walker; written and illus. by Chris Monroe. Car-
olrhoda, 2013 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-5617-2 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-0951-4 $12.95   
R Gr. 2-4
Cookie the dog discovers that she can walk on her hind legs, a skill that provides 
her with access to the family’s candy dish, the ice maker on the fridge, and damp 
towels on the bathroom rack. Her newfound talent also puts Cookie on the road to 
stardom—a gig with a local dog show leads to a spot in a circus which leads to her 
own TV show—but she soon finds that fame is just a weary treadmill trot, as each 
performance must outdo the one before. Her pal Kevin is saddened by Cookie’s 
distress and suggests that the solution is as simple as putting all four feet on the 
floor. When Cookie’s Hollywood producer spies her “standing down,” he is horrified 
and fires her on the spot, much to Cookie’s and Kev’s delight—although Cookie 
continues to occasionally make use of her ability to procure candy, “unattended 
bacon,” or “an extra-fluffy towel.” Monroe proves here again that she is a master 
of understated absurdity and quirky humor, and Monkey with a Tool Belt (BCCB 
6/08) fans will be right at home with wide-eyed, perky-eared Cookie. The amus-
ingly goofy text and absurd asides will appeal to a wide age range of kids. Monroe’s 
detailed illustrations, which frequently utilize comics-like panels and word balloons, 
have a squiggly, childlike look that is both endearing and humorous. Gray Cookie, 
with her oversized head, hot pink collar, and penchant for snacks, is a fetching 
leading lady, and one can only hope that we haven’t seen the last of her yet.  JH
Moore, eva Lucky Ducklings; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. Orchard/Scholastic, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-439-44861-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-6 yrs
Mama Duck and her little ducklings are headed off for a walk when an accident 
happens: as the ducklings follow their mother onto a paved street, one by one they 
fall through the openings in a storm drain grate. A witness calls the fire depart-
ment, and Fireman Paul heads down into the drain and rescues each duckling. 
March 2013 • 347
Fireman Joe is about to carry the babies off in a bucket, but Mama Duck makes 
such a fuss that Fireman Dennis stops traffic in order to allow Mama Duck to lead 
her ducklings across the road herself, and a happy ending finds Mama and babies 
safely back in their own pond in the park. Based on a real event that happened in 
Montauk, New York in 2000, Moore’s story is simply but dramatically told, and 
repetition of a few key phrases (“That could have been the end of the story. But it 
wasn’t, because . . .”) will help young listeners focus on the pivotal plot points. The 
satisfying storyline of a mother and babies separated and reunited is one to which 
many young children will easily relate, and the ducks themselves have enormous 
visual appeal. Carpenter’s illustrations, rendered in charcoal and digital media with 
a warm, earth-toned palette, are large and impressive in their artistry; the masterful 
compositions feature creative perspectives, peering up through the grate with the 
ducklings or looking down on their doomed trip across the grate. This makes a 
natural partner for Tafuri’s Have You Seen My Duckling? as well as a fine lead-in to 
the lengthier text of McCloskey’s classic Make Way for Ducklings.  JH
MoSkowitz, hannah Marco Impossible. Roaring Brook, 2013 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-721-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9 
Despite their many differences, Stephen and Marco have been best pals all through 
middle school. In fact, last year they headed up an amateur sleuthing operation, 
which provided harmless fun—until one of their investigations uncovered Stephen’s 
father’s adultery. Now it’s the last day of eighth grade, and Stephen reluctantly 
agrees to get back to business, looking into not one, but two epic mysteries: does 
Benji, the super-hot exchange student and Marco’s longtime crush, return Marco’s 
feelings, and secondly, who is leaving threatening homophobic notes in Marco’s 
locker? It seems like a simple, straightforward premise, but Moskowitz (Zombie 
Tag, BCCB 1/12; Teeth, BCCB 2/13) has a unique way of mapping the emotional 
lives of boys, and here she offers a complex and layered examination of a peculiar 
but deeply entrenched friendship. The boys initially appear to be utter opposites: 
the quiet kid from an oversized family, Stephen is quick to fall into only-child 
Marco’s larger-than-life shadow, and at first glance, Stephen’s narration makes the 
relationship seem terribly one-sided. As the story goes on, however, readers hear 
more from Marco and begin to realize that Stephen’s perceptions are often colored 
by his own insecurities and frustrations. A climactic confrontation between the 
two is honest and raw without being overly dramatic, and Moskowitz lays bare 
the pitfalls of being vulnerable in relationships even as she tacitly applauds it. Sup-
porting characters are delightfully funny, and touches of humor in the plot serve 
to lighten up the book’s more serious elements.  KQG 
nelSon, kaDir Nelson Mandela; written and illus. by Kadir Nelson. Tegen/
HarperCollins, 2013 38p
ISBN 978-0-06-178374-6 $17.99   
R 6-10 yrs
Part biography and part paean to South Africa’s great civil rights activist and leader, 
this picture book provides an introductory review of Mandela’s journey from prom-
ising child educated by tribal elders and in formal schools, to a lawyer and activist 
in the era of apartheid, to underground civil rights agitator and political prisoner, 
and ultimately to South African president. Nelson moves swiftly from milestone to 
348 • The BulleTin
milestone and occasionally runs a bit ahead of his young audience with undefined 
terms (Rolihlahla, Qunu, Madiba, and Xhosa appear within eight short lines) or an 
odd lapse from concrete to figurative language (“The ancestors sent their daughter 
Winnie to stand next to Nelson”). The heroic tone of Nelson’s text is well matched 
by photorealistic portraiture and formal composition. A closing note retells the tale 
in plainspoken prose, which may serve as a welcome assist to children who find 
the more poetic format challenging, and it takes the biography a little farther to 
include Mandela’s Nobel Peace Prize. Complex aspects of Mandela’s life and work 
are unaddressed, but there’s little else available to introduce one of the era’s great 
men to youngsters, and this is a dramatic encounter indeed; a brief appended list 
of print sources can help audiences fill out the picture.  EB 
niCkerSon, Jane Strands of Bronze and Gold. Knopf, 2013 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97118-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97598-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97606-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
With her father’s recent death, seventeen-year-old Sophia and her family have 
fallen on hard times, so she is delighted to find herself invited to her benevolent 
godfather’s luxurious estate in the Mississippi countryside for an extended stay. 
The opulent Wyndriven Abbey is as gorgeous as its proprietor, Monsieur Bernard, 
but Sophia soon learns that much of the beauty serves as a mask for the estate’s 
(and its master’s) shadier secrets. The Monsieur’s wealth is rumored to be derived 
from unscrupulous business dealings, and the plantation’s slaves fear their master’s 
violent temper; even more troubling for Sophia, Monsieur has lost four wives to 
mysterious circumstances, and after he demands an engagement as repayment for 
his generosity, Sophia begins to fear for her own life. Elegant prose and vivid im-
agery give this gothic retelling of Perrault’s “Bluebeard” an exquisite sense of place; 
the descriptions of the lavish rooms of the seemingly endless estate are entrancing, 
while the hints of unease—a name scratched in a bedpost, old paintings found in 
the attic, a decrepit chapel in the estate’s cemetery—keep the tension mounting. 
Unfortunately, though, there’s nothing particularly new or inventive within the 
plot, and the story wanders down too many blind alleys, creating a disjointed arc 
that finally closes with a predictable climax. Still, the Monsieur makes a formidable 
opponent, and Sophia’s narration is believable as she moves from a girl willing to 
be taken in by her godfather’s charms to a woman that will stop his abuses at all 
costs. “Bluebeard” hasn’t been a popular selection for expansion into a novel-length 
work, so the novelty of this treatment may intrigue fans of fairy tales and historical 
fiction.  KQG 
paDian, Maria Out of Nowhere. Knopf, 2013 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96580-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86580-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89610-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
Soccer star Tom Bouchard is a decent enough kid to assist the occasional newcomer 
stranded in his high school’s hallway, but he’s never given much thought to the 
struggles of the Somali immigrants that have recently made their way to his small 
March 2013 • 349
Maine town until he finds himself forced to tutor young immigrants at an over-
crowded community center. Meanwhile, Tom’s new Somali team members—led 
by the awesome Saeed—shift the team’s second-rate play into a higher gear, and 
dangle the tantalizing prospect of finally whomping top-ranked Maquoit. Dismiss 
any notion that this is one of those sports jealousy tales in which a displaced star 
seethes over his new rival. The real focus here is on the dynamics of a small Maine 
community that is, frankly, overwhelmed by the needs of its new residents, and 
on the struggles of the immigrants—many traumatized by war—to carve a life in 
America while remaining true to their religion and customs. Padian has a keen 
eye for the everyday pettiness of high school life that can touch off unexpected 
consequences: a soccer mom gets the halal menu just right for the team supper 
but then neglects to lock up the “unclean” pet dog; an ambitious Maquoit father 
prompts an investigation into the true ages of the Somali players; viral texting by 
a jealous girlfriend causes such shame to a Somali girl that her family must leave 
town. With complex national issues solidly grounded in a thoroughly credible plot, 
this could be an outstanding vehicle for classroom and book club discussions.  EB
paStiS, Stephan Timmy Failure: Mistakes Were Made; written and illus. by Stephan 
Pastis. Candlewick, 2013 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6050-5 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6358-2 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
As the lead (and only, if you don’t count the polar bear) detective at the Total Failure, 
Inc. Detective Agency (“We won’t fail, despite what the name says”), Timmy Failure 
is the go-to guy when his middle-school classmates are the victims of criminal be-
havior. Stolen candy? Timmy’s on it. Dead hamster? Timmy’s on it. Unfortunately, 
Timmy is also a bit of a blockhead, and it’s not likely that the mystery will be solved 
anytime soon. And what about Corinna Corinna, the beautiful dame with a knack 
for solving puzzles who’s Timmy’s biggest competitor—could she also be the culprit 
behind Timmy’s missing Segway and other efforts to “sabotage” Total Failure? If 
the opening scene that has Timmy crashing through a house in a stolen car with a 
1,500-pound polar bear by his side doesn’t cue the reader that this is an exercise in 
absurdity, then they’re likely to be more clueless than Timmy. Pastis, the creator of 
the comic strip Pearls Before Swine, brings a wonderfully droll and playful humor 
to a younger audience, balancing more straightforward gags with bits of irony and 
sarcasm. The wide-eyed figures that populate Pastis’ pen and ink illustrations have 
a delightfully peculiar, coiled energy, and Timmy’s pal, the perpetually hungry 
polar bear, is most certainly a distant relative to the voracious wombat in French’s 
Diary of a Wombat (BCCB 11/03), in both looks and behavior. The plot is mostly 
secondary to the amusement factor (it’s pretty clear these mysteries aren’t getting 
solved), but there’s a nice emotional element to Timmy’s relationship with his 
struggling single mom, and readers will find a few moments of poignancy amidst 
all the laughs.  KQG 
350 • The BulleTin
preSS, J. The Doodles of Sam Dibble; illus. by Michael Kline.  Grosset & Dunlap/
Penguin, 2013 [128p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-448-46107-6 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Third-grader Sam is not an ideal student. He doodles in class instead of doing 
his work, sometimes copies from other kids, and has ongoing battles with class 
tattletale Max (“Wax”) Baxter. Determined to one-up Wax’s last party, Sam prom-
ises that pro wrestler Demo Dan will be at Sam’s upcoming party, but when the 
party comes and Demo Dan is a no-show, things get a bit dicey for Sam. When 
his grandpa’s forgotten cake in the oven catches fire, however, Demo Dan ends 
up at the party after all—in his other job as local fireman. Sam is a character to 
which many a middle-grade boy will readily relate. The writing, punctuated by 
numerous black and white, doodle-like illustrations, is quick-paced and funny in 
ways bound to tickle a middle-grades audience: “When Mr. Baxter [Wax’s dad, 
an undertaker] sees me, he always wants to slap five. But I know he just touched 
a dead person, so I tell him I just pooped in the toilet and didn’t wash my hands.” 
Sam’s third-grade voice is believable, and the loose, casual illustrations (which are 
supposed to be Sam’s) are also credible and humorous, if more skillfully rendered 
than the drawings of most third-graders. Doodle-based diary fiction is a popular 
trend, and kids not quite ready for Kinney’s Wimpy Kid series may find this new 
series bridges that gap.  JH
reviS, Beth Shades of Earth. Razorbill, 2013 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-399-0 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
After nearly five hundred years, it’s finally time for the inhabitants of the dying 
spaceship Godspeed (first encountered in Across the Universe, BCCB 1/11) to land 
on the planet they were supposed to colonize centuries earlier. An onboard rebellion 
has left the colony divided with many opting to stay and die aboard the ship, while 
about 1500 intrepid souls have left on a shuttle with Amy and Elder, the group’s 
leader, to experience life without walls for the first time. Amy is sure that it’s worth 
it, however, especially since she will be able to release her father and mother from 
their cryogenic state. Elder is not so sanguine, and his fears seem justified as the 
arriving colonists are greeted by intelligent and deadly aliens and signs suggest con-
firmation of the cryptic prophecies that he and Amy have been trying to decipher. 
Relationships and character development, so carefully cultivated throughout the 
first two books, take a back seat to plot here, and rightly so, as the secrets kept from 
the colonists are revealed to be dangerous lies about the nature of their mission. 
As the final book in the trilogy, this wraps up questions with elegant surprises and 
fresh moral dilemmas that force Amy to choose between Elder and her parents and 
bring Elder to the fulfillment of his destiny. Revis is a truly original voice in young 
adult science fiction; even the seemingly standard love-triangle plot turns out to 
be anything but as she once again brings ethics and justice to the fore, creating a 
fictional world that draws on real-world histories, possibilities, and conundrums 
to engage readers on both practical and mythical levels.  KC
roth, JuDith l. Serendipity & Me. Viking, 2013 312p
ISBN 978-0-670-01440-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Sixth-grader Sara can’t seem to break through to her dad, who is still desperately 
March 2013 • 351
grieving the loss of Sara’s mother, who died in a car accident three years ago. The 
surprise arrival of a white kitten on their doorstep seems serendipitous (prompt-
ing Sara to name her Serendipity), and Sara begins a campaign to convince her 
father—vehement in his protestations against cat ownership—to let Serendipity 
stay. Her dad’s reaction to Serendipity and a class assignment about family photos 
impel Sara to dig deeper in her family’s past, and she is surprised to learn that her 
creative, poetic mom was also a cat lover, and that her mom was actually on her way 
to pick up a kitten for Sara when she died. Anyone lured in by the adorable kitten 
on the book’s cover will not be disappointed by the happy ending of this thought-
ful free-verse novel. Although Sara’s voice is sometimes mature for a sixth-grader, 
her observations about the cat (“I can pour her/ like pudding/ into any shape of 
container./ She spreads out soft like Jell-O./ She fills up any mold”) and about her 
family’s loss are evocative and frequently poignant. The lyrical text moves quickly, 
and the various plot threads (Sara’s budding crush on a classmate, the kitten, the 
family’s grief) are deftly handled. Sarah’s story will appeal both to cat lovers and to 
kids with their own sad family backstories.  JH
Sauer, taMMi Nugget & Fang; illus. by Michael Slack. Harcourt, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-547-85285-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
Fang the shark and Nugget the minnow are the best of friends—until Nugget starts 
school and learns that minnows are mere appetizers for sharks. Nugget is dismissive 
of his teacher’s and classmates’ claims, until their evidence proves overwhelming: 
“Nugget was shocked. (And apparently delicious.)” Heartbroken when Nugget 
informs him that they can no longer be friends, Fang embarks upon a desperate 
campaign to win Nugget back; unfortunately, Fang’s attempts (including sending a 
note inviting Nugget over for dinner) are all misread or rejected by Nugget. When 
Nugget and his fellow minnows are captured in a fishing boat’s net, Fang saves the 
fish and the day by using his “big sharp teeth” to saw through the net, and min-
nows and shark then happily bond. There are plenty of “odd couple” friendship 
books out there, but this one’s food-chain humor gives it just enough bite to be an 
effective and amusing addition to the genre. Sauer’s repeated textual phrases and 
descriptive exclamations (“Oh, my algae!”) make this especially fun as a readaloud 
selection. Slack’s aquatic art, painted digitally in Photoshop, features an inviting 
range of marine-blue hues accented by the jewel tones of the smaller fish and sea 
life; subtle mottled texturing gives a nuanced, painterly look to the digital illustra-
tions. Big-toothed but eager-to-please Fang is more goofy than scary, and he and 
fuchsia Nugget (with his yellow, plaid-like pattern of scales) make an attractive 
pair. Incorporate this into fish- or shark-themed storytimes or share with “Finding 
Nemo” fans—either way, kids are likely to snap it up hook, line, and sinker. JH
SChroeDer, liSa Falling for You. Simon Pulse, 2013 355p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4399-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4401-0 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-12
Rae is essentially a servant to her demanding stepfather, and when he gets laid off, 
things get worse: he becomes physically abusive and starts demanding her paycheck 
and taking her truck. She doesn’t share any of her pain with her friends, choosing 
instead to fill the pages of her journal with poetry. She also tries hard to focus on 
the good things in her life, like her job at the flower shop, the cherished memories 
352 • The BulleTin
of her beloved grandmother, and her friendship with Leo, a guy who works at the 
nearby coffee shop. When a new boy, Nathan, takes an interest in her, she’s thrilled 
but wary; she doesn’t want to be like her mother and let her need for loving atten-
tion blind her to a guy’s faults. When Nathan almost immediately gets physically 
pushy and emotionally needy to the point of stalking her, she sets clear boundaries, 
something she is unable to do at home as her stepfather demands more and more 
of her money, until a climactic showdown lands her in the ICU. Though Nathan’s 
character is never fully fleshed out, the real interest here is Rae and the way she 
refuses to be undone by difficult circumstances. As things get worse and worse 
for her, she seeks ways to help herself and others that are faithful to her character; 
she’s no Pollyanna, but she is determined that the messes that surround her on all 
sides won’t define her, and she manages to convince herself and others that being 
honest about one’s pain can bring compassion. It’s a heartening message for readers 
in difficult situations, and the poems scattered throughout the text enhance the 
cathartic note of hope in hard times.  KC
Skilton, Sarah Bruised. Amulet/Abrams, 2013 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-0387-4 $16.95
Reviewed form galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Tae Kwon Do has been Imogen’s life, and at sixteen, she’s already obtained her 
black belt. She’s therefore thrown into self-doubt when, instead of disarming the 
gunman during a restaurant hold-up, she hides with another customer until the 
robber is shot and killed by the police. Locked in guilt and rage, she can’t connect 
with friends or family, but when she re-encounters Ricky Alvarez, the senior who 
hid in the diner with her, the two begin to bond over their shared experience. 
Ricky asks Imogen to tutor him in martial arts; as she does, the two embark on a 
romance, but she’s also got a secret agenda in teaching him—she wants to disprove 
her suspicion that she’s a fake by standing up for herself in a real fight, and she 
thinks he’s just the right opponent. This is a fresh and original topic, and Skilton 
is both sympathetic and clear-eyed about her protagonist. Imogen is obviously 
suffering deeply in ways that her distanced parents can’t really grasp, and her des-
peration and uncontrollable emotions are plausible post-traumatic responses. More 
intriguing, however, is Imogen’s grappling with her identity as the girl who could 
take everything on and her shattered illusions of hard-earned invulnerability. Her 
growing relationship with Ricky is tender but also unhackneyed in its dynamics: 
he deeply admires her strength and abilities and she realizes that she could learn a 
lot from his kindness. The subplots about Imogen’s family stresses and friendship 
trials are effectively woven into the main story as elements that both leave her more 
isolated in her plight and reflect her difficulty with forgiving anyone, including 
herself. YA has a plethora of strong girls these days; this is a useful exploration of 
the difference between fantasy-style omnipotence and the complexity of real-life 
human strength.  DS
SMith, Sherri l. Orleans. Putnam, 2013 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25294-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 323, for review.
March 2013 • 353
SnyDer, laurel 
The Longest Night: A Passover Story; illus. by Catia 
Chien. Schwartz & Wade, 2013 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96942-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86942-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
As Snyder points out in an opening note, the story of Exodus usually focuses on 
the big-name stars; in this retelling in verse, she instead looks at the story from the 
viewpoint of a young girl enslaved under the rule of the Pharaoh. The child spends 
the day at labor alongside her agemates, yearning for but not expecting freedom, 
but “then, at once, the world was changed!/ Life unraveled, rearranged” as the 
series of plagues descend upon the land. The girl clings to her family as evils fill 
the realm and torment their masters, until finally the enslaved leave the land; the 
Red Sea parts to let them all pass, and they find joy in their free new lives (“How 
I danced along the shore,/ Never having danced before!”). This is clearly designed 
to be used in conjunction with additional Passover/biblical exploration, since the 
girl’s limited viewpoint means that some elements (such as the slaughter of the 
firstborn) remain authentically cryptic within the text. The characters’ frightened 
confusion gives an urgency and immediacy to the story, with repetition (“Till the 
sea was ripped in two./ Till the sea was ripped in two!” ) employed sparingly and 
effectively to emphasize the miraculous nature of events; the short-lined couplets 
are tightly focused, using language both evocative and accessible. Chen’s acrylic 
paintings combine painterly background textures with solid and homey human 
figures in the foreground. The art generally treats the horrors with suggestion rather 
than directness (save the face-on close-up of the snarling wolf), allowing the pro-
tagonist’s emotions to remain the primary focus. This adds a dramatic dimension 
to the usual explorations of the story, and it will add life to holiday and biblical 
discussions. In addition to the author’s note, a brief glossary opens the book.  DS
SpringStuBB, triCia Phoebe and Digger; illus. by Jeff Newman. Candlewick, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5281-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
“When Mama got a new baby, Phoebe got a new digger,” begins this tale of a girl 
and her beloved toy excavator. As her mother focuses on the baby, Phoebe expresses 
her resentment by focusing on Digger and Digger’s destructive capabilities. A trip 
to the park for all seems initially promising until a bigger girl appropriates Digger 
from Phoebe, cruelly misuses him (“She made Digger go BRR BRR BRR, a sound 
Digger absolutely never made”), and refuses to return him. Fortunately, Phoebe 
isn’t as abandoned by her mother as she feels, and Mama’s intervention gets Digger 
returned and reassures Phoebe of her mother’s love. The overt plot rambles a little, 
but the subtextual story about Phoebe’s anger at her mother’s shift of attention is a 
simmering and effective undercurrent throughout. Springstubb’s text is generously 
sprinkled with playful rhythms (“Waa!’ said the baby. “RMM!’ said Digger”) and 
dry, comradely drollery (“Now the baby began to wail, too. This turned out to be a 
secret baby signal. Soon every baby in the park was crying”). Newman’s mixed-media 
art (watercolor, gouache, ink, and permanent marker) combines brisk horizontality 
with a sturdy retro flair in his figures and palette. He picks up the comic tone of 
the text and runs with it, allowing Digger a touch of anthropomorphization as the 
354 • The BulleTin
excavator marauds around the house expressing Phoebe’s displeasure, while Phoebe, 
a caramel-skinned little warrior with her mother’s wide eyes, moves plausibly from 
aggression to frustration. Girls will appreciate a book that acknowledges their enjoy-
ment of heavy machinery, and kids in general will warm to the joy of sublimating 
their frustration via measured destruction.  DS
Stringer, lauren When Stravinsky Met Nijinsky: Two Artists, Their Ballet, and One 
Extraordinary Riot; written and illus. by Lauren Stringer. Harcourt, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-547-90725-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 7-9 yrs
This picture book account skims the surface of the composer Igor Stravinsky 
and dancer/choreographer Vaslav Nijinsky’s 1913 debut of their ballet, The Rite 
of Spring. The two artists are introduced with an onomatopoetic description of 
Stravinsky’s music (“his piano trilled an orchestra with . . . kettledrums that lightly 
pom-di-di-pommed with the ringling and tingling of cymbals and bells”) and a 
simile-laden glimpse at Nijinsky’s style (“his feet, like a sparrow, tippy-tip-toed, 
while his arms curved and swerved like a snake”). Springer then turns to how they 
mutually influenced each other’s work and proceeded to create an avant-garde 
piece of art that would raise the hackles of its first Parisian audience. All this is 
delivered in a presentation straightforward enough to be grasped by a fairly young 
set of listeners, but such simplification doesn’t quite capture the true extent of 
the artists’ collaboration, apart from its incendiary outcome. The real meat of the 
Stravinsky/Nijinsky story is relegated to a dense, double-page spread endnote that 
not only fills in the history but also guides viewers through the complex content 
of the illustrations, many of which make “reference to many of [Stringer’s] favorite 
paintings from that time.”  While this visuals-only production merely hints at what 
all the fuss was about, potential readers may be delighted at the idea of a fracas 
among starchy music patrons.  EB
SuMa, nova ren 17 & Gone. Dutton, 2013 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42340-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
“17-year-old girls vanish all the time.” Nobody knows that better than Lauren 
Woodman, seventeen herself when she feels a strange and forceful connection with 
Abby Sinclair, a girl who recently went missing. Abby, it seems, is trying to guide 
Lauren to solve her disappearance, haunting her with increasing frequency. It’s not 
just Abby, though: soon Lauren is followed by numerous lost seventeen-year-old 
girls, all of whom have stories to tell, all of whom see Lauren as their only confi-
dante. As Lauren becomes more obsessed with the missing girls, she shuts out her 
boyfriend and her schoolwork, and her behavior becomes strange and disturbing. 
Is she genuinely in touch with the missing girls, or is this simply the compelling 
form her delusions are taking? This is ingeniously crafted: since the supernatural 
narrative is literarily plausible, readers will believe it along with Lauren until the 
evidence of her break with reality becomes incontrovertible. The result is a vivid 
plunge into a world where you don’t know that your version of reality can’t be 
trusted, an empathy-inducing walk in the shoes of somebody whose brain is betray-
ing her. It’s also a book lamenting the painful vulnerability of young women at an 
age where they have just enough agency to head themselves into serious trouble, 
March 2013 • 355
and the emotive prose will make readers grieve alongside Lauren for the lost even 
as they fear she’s among them. Suma adds an additional layer by allowing Lauren’s 
obsession with Abby to actually result in a solution to Abby’s case and leaving open 
the possibility that there was more than delusion involved in their connection. Fans 
of Jessica Warman’s works, especially Beautiful Lies (BCCB 9/12), will appreciate 
this intimate, compelling exploration of a troubled young woman’s life.  DS
vanDerpool, Clare Navigating Early. Delacorte, 2013 306p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99040-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74209-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97412-9 $9.99   
R Gr. 6-9 
With World War II finally over, young Jack Baker is forced to move from Kansas 
to a private boys school in Maine, where he will be closer to the naval base of his 
captain father. Landlubber Jack knows nothing of the sea-oriented culture of his 
new environs, and his first attempts at handling a boat are pitiful indeed. Early 
Auden, the school’s math savant and oddball recluse, takes Jack under his wing. Jack 
isn’t very good at returning the eccentric boy’s friendship, though, and it’s largely 
out of guilt that he agrees to accompany Early on a hike along the Appalachian 
Trail in search of Early’s brother Fish, a past school hero who is presumed to have 
been killed in the war. Early sets their course by constantly referring to an ongoing 
story about a hero’s quest for a great black bear, and by consulting the patterns 
and colors he discerns in the extended digits of pi. As the journey unfolds, their 
adventures and perils seem to mirror the story, and Jack is never certain whether 
metaphysical forces are at play or if Early is so desperate to find his brother that he 
makes up pieces of the story to reflect reality. This story of a poignant friendship of 
two heartbroken boys shifts quickly among genres, beginning with a fairly routine 
problem-novel trajectory and then moving into territory more often claimed by 
high fantasy quests, heroic epics, wilderness adventures, and even mysteries. The 
incorporation of these familiar tropes give the book broad and fascinating appeal, 
and those that trust Early—and Vanderpool—to lead them through the treacher-
ous woods will be pondering and debating the surreal experience for some time 
to come.  EB
vawter, vinCe Paperboy. Delacorte, 2013 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99058-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74244-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97505-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
It is with some trepidation that the eleven-year-old narrator, who withholds his 
name until he completes his story, takes over his best friend’s paper route until 
the other boy returns from vacation. It’s not that pitching papers is too hard; he’s 
known among the local kids for his arm on the diamond. Afflicted with a severe 
stutter, he’s embarrassed and concerned about how he will communicate with 
customers when he makes the collection rounds—a weekly task back in 1959. The 
humble neighborhood route turns into something of a voyage of discovery for the 
boy, who normally keeps to himself. There’s the flirtatious attention of a young 
alcoholic housewife, a glimpse into the mysterious condition of a boy who sits at 
the TV with the sound turned off, a bachelor who lives among stacks of books 
356 • The BulleTin
and has a knack for helping the new paperboy control his stutter, and, in a darker 
turn, a junk collector who attacks and threatens the life of the black housekeeper 
who looks after the paperboy. The protagonist tells his tale in short paragraphs that 
capture the way he imagines his own fluent speech—articulate, economical, and 
completely devoid of commas, since there are already too many pauses in his actual 
speech. Confidence born of his weeks of accomplishment eases his stutter somewhat, 
and readers will offer quiet but heartfelt congratulations when he finally utters his 
own name, which begins with the letter most difficult for him to pronounce.  EB
weitekaMp, Margaret a. Pluto’s Secret: An Icy World’s Tale of Discovery; by Mar-
garet A. Weitekamp with David DeVorkin; illus. by Diane Kidd. Smithsonian 
National Air and Space Museum/Abrams, 2013 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0423-9 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 3-4 
This offering from the staff of the Smithsonian’s Air and Space Museum traces the 
discovery of Pluto—from its prediction by Percival Lowell to its accomplishment 
by Clyde Tombaugh—and its reclassification from planet to dwarf planet in 2006. 
The dust has already pretty much settled on this issue, and middle-grade students 
with up-to-date curricular materials already consider the solar system as a sun, eight 
rocky or gaseous planets and their moons, and asteroid and Kuiper belts featuring 
dwarf planets and other fascinating space debris. Illustrations are jokey cartoons 
in line and watercolor, as informal as the handprinted-style font. The need for 
yet another replay of the downgrade drama—and a cheesily anthropomorphized 
cartoon replay of it, at that—will probably not be obvious, particularly in light 
of excellent materials at hand for student research on the topic. Children who are 
intimidated by more sober, serious looking science books may nonetheless be drawn 
to this light-hearted imagining of a gregarious Pluto who guides the baffled public 
to an understanding of the special traits he shares with his Kuiper belt buddies. A 
glossary, and notes on the planets and the 2006 International Astronomical Union 
decision on Pluto’s status are included.  EB
wellS, roSeMary Ivy Takes Care; illus. by Jim LaMarche. Candlewick, 
2013 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5352-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Fifth-graders Ivy and Annie have been friends for forever, but their lives are actu-
ally quite different, a fact made increasingly apparent as working-class Ivy watches 
Annie become more absorbed in making friends with the popular kids at school 
and with the girls at the exclusive New England camp she attends every summer. 
Ivy is sad to see her friendship with Annie fade, but she finds solace in caring for 
animals, both the injured wild ones she finds near her working ranch home and 
the animals she begins caring for through the pet-sitting business she creates. Set 
in the midcentury Southwest, the book is divided into three sections based on 
three animals Ivy cares for: Chestnut, a pony; Inca, a German Shepherd puppy; 
and Andromeda, a retired thoroughbred who once beat the great Seabiscuit. Wells’ 
narrative voice is as thoughtful and dependable as Ivy herself, and she capably 
evokes the historical and geographical settings, giving just enough detail to make 
the surroundings intriguing without distracting readers from the main threads of 
Ivy’s story. Animal-loving youngsters who dream of becoming vets will be in heaven 
March 2013 • 357
here, and girls with their own friendship troubles may also relate to Ivy’s difficulties 
with Annie. Final art not seen.  JH
weSt, Carly anne The Murmurings. Simon Pulse, 2013 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4179-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4181-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Living under the shadow of her sister Nell’s alleged mental illness and suicide, Sophie 
imagines that everyone is waiting for her to lose her mind as well. The problem is 
that she seems to be doing just that—that is, she hears the same kinds of insistent 
but unclear vocalizations that her sister heard, and she sees glimpses of wavering 
beings in mirrors and darkened windows. She keeps all this to herself, though, 
and tries as best she can to appear normal. That’s harder when Evan, a new boy in 
school, takes an interest and begins asking her out. Oddly, he seems connected to 
the place where her sister’s body was found, and as they learn to trust each other, 
he reveals that he is searching for his cousin, who has been suffering the same 
symptoms as Nell. As they piece together clues about what actually happened to 
her sister, Sophie unwisely decides to make a secret visit the clinic where Nell was 
being treated; there she is captured by the doctor, who is performing experiments 
on patients like Sophie and Nell for his own gruesome purposes. West pulls together 
a lot of familiar genre elements—the heroine’s bad choices, the mad doctor and 
his evil assistant, and the one perfect boy who understands it all—in support of 
an enjoyable outing with some genuine originality in the premise and the details. 
Horror fans, especially those chilled by that age-old literary trope of helpless con-
finement in a mental institution, will find this satisfyingly disturbing. Romance 
fans will appreciate the relationship with good-guy Evan, a hero who values not 
only his girlfriend but also his lost cousin, and mystery lovers will appreciate the 
subtle clues available to alert readers.  KC 
white, kierSten Mind Games. HarperTeen, 2013 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-213531-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-213533-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
Selected for their unusual abilities, sisters Annie and Fia have spent the seven years 
since their parents’ untimely death under the care of the staff at the elite Keane 
School for girls. Annie, capable of seeing the future despite her blindness, has been 
taught to hone her psychic ability and given the latest in assistive technology. Fia, 
on the other hand, has has been groomed as an assassin, tasked with taking out 
Mr. Keane’s enemies under the threat of death to Annie if Fia does not comply. 
Annie knows nothing of this bargain until a hit gone wrong leaves Fia emotion-
ally devastated. The two girls plan to escape the school—a difficult move when 
Keane and his cronies are capable of knowing their thoughts before the sisters can 
even act. Brilliant in both character development and narrative structure, this is 
a psychological thriller that will challenge readers even as it speeds them through 
the pages. Chapters shift among perspectives and time periods, giving a voice to 
both sisters while interspersing flashbacks over the last seven years with the girls’ 
present dilemma. This technique heightens the suspense by leaving readers off bal-
ance, unsure of who they can trust and even when they can trust them. The sisters’ 
358 • The BulleTin
relationship is deeply complex: brash, angry, and violent, Fia uses her feelings and 
words as weapons as much as she utilizes her fists, while sweet but surprisingly cun-
ning Annie manipulates those around her until she finds herself in over her head. 
Their interactions alternate between being heartbreakingly poignant and obviously, 
painfully, toxic. Readers may be unable to relate to the girls’ supernatural gifts, 
but they will surely recognize the emotional warfare in which they engage.  KQG 
worth, valerie Pug and Other Animal Poems; illus. by Steve Jenkins. Ferguson/
Farrar, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-374-35024-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 3-7
Following up on Animal Poems, Jenkins again selects an array of elegant free verse 
by classic twentieth-century poet Valerie Worth, combining each of the eighteen 
verses with a dramatic cut-paper portrait of its animal subject. Worth’s poems are 
precise and gemlike in their glittering compactness; some are gently playful (pugs 
are “what/ Some people/ Might call plug-ugly/ Perhaps because, for/ Dogs, they 
look/ A lot like people”), others reach heights of grandeur (“The bull/ Would not/ 
Melt: but/ Had to be/ Hacked out,/ Rough-hewn,/ From the planet’s/ Hard side”), 
and all display her delight in consonance, assonance, and careful wordsmithing. 
Jenkins ramps up the impact with compositions of tight focus, posing animals mostly 
against contrasting backdrops of solid rich color (the bull’s dark bulk looms across a 
three-quarter spread of flame red; a firefly, lacework wings in stop-motion stillness 
mid-flight, floats in a sea of nocturnal dark blue). His birds especially transcend 
the static genre, with geese bodies contracting and flexing as they soar and pigeons’ 
wing-beats fluttering across a city skyline. The sonorousness of the poems make 
them terrific readalouds, their compactness and engaging subject will appeal to 
reluctant readers, and their craftsmanship will draw established poetry fans.  DS
March 2013 • 359
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
iSaaCS, kathleen t. Picturing the World: Informational Picture Books for Chil-
dren. ALA, 2013 206p
ISBN 978-0-8389-1126-6 $50.00
Defining an informational picture book as one that is intended to convey factual 
information through a marriage of text and illustrations, Isaacs provides a selection 
of 250 nonfiction/informational titles published within the last five years specifi-
cally aimed at children ages three to ten. A brief introductory chapter examines the 
traditional definitions of nonfiction and picture books and how such definitions 
work and sometimes do not work within the world of information books, citing 
particularly tricky categories such as narrative nonfiction and collections of poetry 
dealing with factual subjects. The entries for the selected titles include complete 
bibliographic information, age-level guidance, and notes on any awards won. Use-
ful in both school and public libraries, this is a focused, valuable resource. Title, 
author/illustrator, and subject indices are included.  KQG 
MaCMillan, kathy Multicultural Storytime Magic; by Kathy MacMillan and 
Christine Kirker. ALA, 2012 241p
ISBN 978-0-8389-1142-6 $47.00
MacMillan and Kirker provide a series of storytime activities that emphasize diversity 
in American society, diversity in the world, and diversity in abilities. Focused on 
incorporating multiculturalism into the everyday experience of children, the authors 
arrange book recommendations, fingerplays, flannel boards, and crafts around forty-
four kid-friendly topics, including “ABC Time,” “Family,” and “Food.” Folktales 
and legends are drawn from a wide range of sources, including Native American 
tales and stories from China and Japan, while the fingerplays and crafts incorporate 
elements that can be used with children of varying abilities. The appendix includes 
culture notes and an index of entries by culture.  KQG 
360  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Halbrook; Schroeder
Actors and acting–fiction: Forman
Adventure: Howard; LaFevers; 
vanderpool
Africa: nelson
Animals: davies
Animals–fiction: Wells
Animals–poetry: Worth
Animals–stories: MacLachlan Nora’s; 
McGrath
AntHoLoGieS: Marr
Anthropology: Losure 
Art and artists–fiction: Press
Assassins–fiction: LaFevers; White
Astronomy: Weitekamp
Ballet: Stringer
Basketball: Coy
Basketball-fiction: Mack
BedtiMe StorieS: Marchon
BioGrAPHieS: Losure; nelson; 
Stringer
Biology: davies
Birds: Cate 
BoArd BooKS: Biggs; Katz; 
Marchon
Boarding schools–fiction: vander-
pool
Brothers–fiction: Lynch Pieces; Mack
Brothers and sisters–stories: Spring-
stubb
Bullies–fiction: Fry; Gale; Medina; 
Springstubb 
Cats–fiction: roth
Cats–poetry: MacLachlan Cat 
ConCePt BooKS: Biggs; Katz
CountinG BooKS: Biggs
Creative writing: MacLachlan Cat 
Crime and criminals–fiction: Brian; 
Cook; ellison; Gray, L.; Hassan; 
LaFevers; White
death–fiction: ellison; Galloway
detectives–fiction: Pastis
disabilities–fiction: vawter 
dogs–fiction: 
ducks–stories: Moore
dystopias–fiction: Gardner; Marr
easter–stories: McGrath
emotions: Katz
emotions–stories: Springstubb
eSP–fiction: McMann
Ethics and values: Galloway; Gray, 
L.; Halliday; Hassan; revis
Fame–fiction: Monroe
Families–fiction: Blake; Brian; Grif-
fin; Hassan
FAntASy: Blythe; Gray, C.; Gui-
bord; Howard; McMann
Fathers–fiction: roth 
Fathers–stories: Hart
Feral children: Losure
Firefighters–stories: Moore
Fish–stories: Sauer
FoLKtALeS And FAiry tALeS: 
McGrath; nickerson
Food and eating–stories: Hart; 
Marchon
Friends–fiction: Blythe; daley; Gray, 
L.; Griffin; Jakubowski; Moskow-
itz; vanderpool; Wells
Friends–stories: Sauer
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
March 2013  •  361
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Moskow-
itz
Gender roles–fiction: Blake
Gender roles–stories: Hopkinson
Ghosts–fiction: ellison; Suma
GrAPHiC noveLS: Halliday
Grief–fiction: Lynch Pieces; roth
Halloween–fiction: Jakubowski
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Blake; 
LaFevers; Larson; MacLachlan, 
Nora’s; vanderpool; vawter; Wells
History, world: nelson
Horror: Brian; West
HuMor: daley; Fry; Monroe; 
Pastis; Sauer
identity–fiction: Cook; Skilton
illness–fiction: Bennett
immigrants–fiction: Padian
immigrants–stories: MacLachlan 
Nora’s
islands–fiction: Guibord
Jealousy–stories: Springstubb
Journalism–fiction: Larson
Journals–fiction: Gale; Lindner
Jews–stories: Snyder
Knitting–stories: Hopkinson
Language arts: MacLachlan Cat; 
Worth 
Latinos–fiction: Medina
Lies–fiction: Halliday
Literature, children’s: Howard
Literature, English: Howard; 
Lindner
MAGiCAL reALiSM: Galloway
Martial arts–fiction: Skilton 
Mental illness–fiction: Suma; West
Missing persons–fiction: Cook; 
Suma
Modeling–fiction: Bennett
Monsters–fiction: Guibord; Lindner
Music and musicians: Stringer
MySterieS: Brian; ellison; Mos-
kowitz; nickerson; Pastis
Nature study: Cate; davies; Moore
neighborhoods–fiction: vawter
ornithology: Cate
orphans–fiction: Larson
Parties–fiction: Press
Passover: Snyder
Physical education: Coy 
Planets: Weitekamp
Poetry: MacLachlan Cat; Worth
rabbits–stories: McGrath
rape–fiction: Gray, L.
Reading aloud: Blake; Jakubowski; 
MacLachlan Cat; Worth
Reading, easy: daley
Reading, reluctant: davies; Gale; 
Pastis; Worth
relationships–fiction: Griffin; 
Halbrook; Halliday; Lynch Pieces; 
Schroeder; Skilton
Religious instruction: Snyder
rHyMinG StorieS: Hart; 
Snyder 
romance–fiction: Forman; Gray, 
C.; Guibord; LaFevers; Lindner; 
revis; West
runaways–fiction: Halbrook
Safety–stories: Moore 
School–fiction: Fry; Halliday; Has-
san; Jakubowksi; Medina; Padian; 
Press
Science: Weitekamp
SCienCe FiCtion: Gardner; 
Marr; revis
Secrets–fiction: Gardner; nickerson
SHort StorieS: Marr
Sisters–fiction: Bennett; West; White
Soccer–fiction: Padian
SPortS StorieS: Coy; Mack; 
Padian 
Stepparents–fiction: Schroeder
Storytime: Moore
Suicide–fiction: Galloway
SuPernAturAL StorieS: 
Blythe; Gray, C.; McMann; 
White
SuSPenSe: Suma; White
twins–fiction: Mack
voyages and travel–fiction: Forman; 
Halbrook; revis
Witches–fiction: Gray, C.
World cultures: nelson
World War i–stories: Hopkinson
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
exploring literature 
for children.
David L. russell, Ferris sTaTe UniversiTy; karin e. 
Westman and naomi J. Wood, Kansas sTaTe UniversiTy, 
Editors 
The Lion and the Unicorn, an international theme- and 
genre-centered journal, is committed to a serious, 
ongoing discussion of literature for children. The 
journal’s coverage includes the state of the publishing 
industry, regional authors, comparative studies of 
significant books and genres, new developments 
in theory, the art of illustration, the mass media, 
and popular culture. It is especially noted for its 
interviews with authors, editors, and other important 
contributors to the field, as well as its outstanding 
book review section. 
Published three times a year in January, April, and September. 
Volume 37 (2013). ISSN 0147-2593; E-ISSN 1080-6563.
the lion and the unicorn
a criTical joUrnal oF children’s liTeraTUre
annUal individUal sUbscripTions
$40.00 (print); $45.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbscripTions
$125.00 (print); $135.00 (online); 
$175.00 (print & online)
Disseminate. Innovate. Collaborate.
Charting a vibrant new course to bring the beneﬁ ts 
of discovery to our global academic community of 
authors, readers, and publishing partners.
 JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, 
E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
