T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
April 2015
Vol. 68   No. 8
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 68 (2015).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $62.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$103.00 (print); $115.00 (online);  
$144.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
April 2015
Vol. 68 No. 8
385  the BIg PICture
 
 The Alex Crow  by Andrew Smith
386  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
387 • The Tightrope Walkers  by David Almond
390 • The Penderwicks in Spring  by Jeanne Birdsall
393 •  Whale Trails: Before and Now  by Lesa Cline-Ransome;  
illus. by G. Brian Karas
406 • Blackbird Fly by Erin Estrada Kelly
415 •  Tricky Vic: The Impossibly True Story of the Man Who Sold the Eiffel Tower  
written and illus. by Greg Pizzoli
426  ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2015
430  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2015 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from The Alex Crow copyright ©2015 and used by permission of Dutton Books.
April 2015 • 385
the BIg PICture
The Alex Crow
by Andrew Smith
Here is the story of Ariel, a fourteen-year-old boy who miraculously survives when 
rebel soldiers come through his town, conscripting most of the boys of fighting 
age and killing everyone else. 
Here is the story of a nineteenth-century doctor who miraculously survives 
a doomed Arctic expedition aboard a ship called the Alex Crow and brings home a 
humanoid creature frozen in ice after a shipmate kills nearly everyone else.
Here is the story of Leonard Fountain, who answered an ad to participate 
in a study by the Merrie-Seymour Research Group, which involved the implanta-
tion of a biochip in his brain and ultimately caused him to hallucinate the voice of 
Joseph Stalin and create the largest bomb he’d ever seen as his flesh literally melted 
off his bones. He, too, miraculously survives—until he doesn’t.
Here are three boys, Ariel, his adoptive brother Max, and another boy, 
Cobie, at summer camp, cracking jokes, sharing adventures, smoking pot, rebelling 
against authority, and learning what it means to be friends. 
And here is how these stories fit together. After being rescued from a refu-
gee camp, Ariel is brought to America, where his adoptive father is a brilliant, amoral 
scientist working with the Alex division of the Merrie-Seymour Research Group. 
The Alex division is devoted to bringing extinct species back to life, a process that 
doesn’t always go smoothly but has managed to bring back some specimens—and 
successfully turn them into surveillance drones or even weapons. The Alex division 
took its name from the Alex Crow, because Dr. Merrie, the man who recovered the 
ice man, was one of the research group’s founders, and the ice man itself was one 
of the attempted resurrections. 
Shortly after his arrival in America, Ariel is sent with his adoptive brother, 
Max, to a camp for boys with technology addictions; though neither he nor Max 
suffers from such an addiction, their parents hope that Max will overcome his resent-
ment toward his new brother and the two will bond there. At camp they meet Dr. 
Nussbaum, a rogue member of the Alex division, who is using her research on the 
campers to build a convincing argument for complete male extinction. Meanwhile, 
Leonard is making his way to the camp with his bomb, accompanied by the voices 
in his head, and Ariel is spooling out the story of his past in a war-torn country 
to Max, who does eventually come to embrace Ariel as both brother and friend.
As the threads of plot weave together, so too do the themes: Ariel’s tragic 
stories blend sad exhaustion and dry humor, sometimes rendering sly and unsettling 
his comparison of the civilized world he now inhabits to the war-torn world he left. 
He has been “saved” from a world he never wanted to leave, and he senses that the 
386 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
motivation for his rescue was less altruism than a perverse desire for power. Readers 
will definitely chuckle their way through Max’s endlessly inventive euphemisms 
for masturbation, roll their eyes at the video gamers, breathe through their noses 
at Leonard’s grotesque devolution, and shake their heads in pity at the devastation 
of Ariel’s world. And at the same time, they will find themselves making subtle 
connections between extinct beings reluctantly brought back to life, tragic stories of 
violence and unintended consequences that repeat in human history on an endless 
loop, and boys like Ariel, “who has lived, and lived, and lives again.” 
That concept of de-extinction, that is, the sheer tenacity of clinging to 
life when it no longer makes sense, haunts this novel and delivers its philosophical 
payload. The juxtaposition of stories about war, playful adolescent male bonding, 
video games, domestic terrorism, mental illness, dystopic futures, and horrific 
exploitation in the name of science should be uneasy, or at least far less smooth 
than Smith makes it seem; it’s that very smoothness, though, that allows the ethical 
fissures to stealthily appear and disappear—much like the drones surveilling the 
characters. Behind the humor, horror, and abject strangeness of the lives readers 
encounter here, Smith takes them to a place where humanity is imbued with the 
potential to render people inhuman, turning them into something like gods who 
are not at all godlike, and reminding us that being human, all too human, is far 
better than any conceivable alternative. (See p. 420 for publication information.)
Karen Coats, Reviewer
Abdul-JAbbAr, KAreem Stealing the Game; by Kareen Abdul-Jabbar and Raymond 
Obstfeld. Disney Hyperion, 2015 293p (Streetball Crew)
ISBN 987-1-4231-7871-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-7
This second entry in the Streetball Crew series finds eighth-grader Chris Richards 
shaken by the return of his older brother, Jax, from Stanford. Jax, the family golden 
boy upon whom the ambitions of their high-achieving parents are pinned, is acting 
out of character, and with the help of buddy Theo, Chris intends to find out why. 
First clue is Jax’s strange behavior when watching his younger brother’s pick-up 
game, which ends in harsh words between Jax and an unknown acquaintance and 
some money passing hands. Jax eventually comes clean to Chris, admitting he 
never attended law school at all and now owes serious gambling debts to a slimy 
guy named Rand, who manages a travel team of rich kids. If Chris and his buddies 
can just outmaneuver Rand’s Gold Coasters on the court, Jax will be out of debt 
and out of danger. The mashup of basketball and mystery is skillfully handled, with 
April 2015 • 387
Abdul-Jabbar and Obstfeld keeping the tension high until the big reveal. Much of 
the success is built upon the deftly developed character of Chris, a quiet sort who 
admits he uses “words like each one costs me ten dollars.” He’s sharp as a tack, 
though, and readers will empathize as he struggles with confusion over his older 
brother’s fall from grace and determines to do what he can to keep Jax safe.  EB
Almond, dAvid The Tightrope Walkers. Candlewick, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7310-9 $17.99
E-book ISBN 978-0-7636-7704-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
Dom, Holly, and Vincent show three very different faces of the experience of growing 
up on the shores of the river Tyne in the decades following World War II. Dom’s 
father is a caulker at a Newcastle shipyard, having risen just a few steps up the labor 
hierarchy from his father before him. Holly’s father is an open-hearted office worker 
who tries to reach beyond the class-based resentment of Dom’s dad. Vincent’s father 
is rumored to be in prison, with brutish Vincent on the fast track to follow him. 
The three children negotiate their relationships over the course of Dom’s account 
of their early lives through young adulthood. The character constellation here is 
very similar to that of Kit’s Wilderness (BCCB 1/00): with Holly, Dom excels in 
school and falls in love with tightrope walking after circus performers come to town; 
with Vincent he learns to shoot, steal, and smoke. Here, though, the dreamy writer 
and artistic girl do not pull the dark boy out of his troubled past; instead, Vincent 
nearly destroys both Dom and Holly in a vicious attempted murder and successful 
rape. In prose that reads like richly imagistic poetry, Dom sorts through what it 
means to walk a metaphorical tightrope, caught between social classes, between his 
mother’s dreams and his father’s fears, between his gentler, creative nature and his 
attraction to the rough camaraderie of outlaw boys and working men. The interplay 
between the characters and their environments results in a stunningly human and 
humanizing story. This is by far Almond’s best work to date, and in light of the 
awards he’s already accrued, that’s saying something.  KC 
Appelt, KAthi When Otis Courted Mama; illus. by Jill McElmurray. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-15-216688-5 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Cardell the coyote has has adjusted well to his parents’ split, making the most of 
his visits with his “perfectly good daddy,” stepmama, and stepbrother, and savoring 
having his “perfectly good mama” to himself the rest of the time. He therefore sees 
no need for Otis, the latest in a line of his mother’s suitors. But where she soon 
rejected the other gentleman callers, his mother doesn’t discourage Otis—though 
Cardell certainly tries. Undeterred by the pup’s growl, Otis makes delicious prickly 
pear pudding, shows him how to pounce, and tells the funniest stories, winning 
Cardell over before asking his mama for her paw in marriage. Colloquial turns of 
phrase and Spanish words are peppered throughout, coupled with thoughtfully 
detailed gouache illustrations lustrous in their warm desert palette, and they ef-
fectively evoke the Southwest; days are warm and brown, and nights are big and 
starry. Author and illustrator deliver on both substance and humor, capturing 
childlike emotions and conveying them in witty, comforting prose and in accom-
panying pictures of coyotes in bandanas and ten-gallon hats. This will make for 
388 • The BulleTin
an entertaining readaloud, though the images are detailed enough that individual 
readers will also have plenty of jokes to uncover and enjoy. With a sympathetic 
and charming main character, this story will be particularly relevant for a child 
with a blended family.  AA
bAnAsh, Jennifer Silent Alarm. Putnam, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25789-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
It’s an ordinary school day for Alys until a gunman enters the library and opens fire, 
and she looks up in bewilderment to see her brother, Luke, holding the rifle. With 
a casual “Hey” in her direction, he continues his murderous rampage, killing fifteen 
people before taking his own life and sending hers into a nightmare of confusion 
and grief. Among his victims was her boyfriend’s younger sister, and though Ben 
doesn’t blame Alys, he can’t imagine being with her anymore. Her best friend, too, 
finds being with her too painful, and Alys is left with Riley, Luke’s best friend, as 
the only one who shares her memories of Luke as a good guy. Beyond offhand 
references to Luke’s dark mood of late, neither Riley nor Alys has any clue as to 
Luke’s motives, and Banash offers none; instead, she stays with Alys, painting a 
lyrical portrait of a sister who feels as though she has no right to grieve the loss of 
her brother but does anyway. The prose is baroque with sensory images that slow 
the pace and take readers deep inside Alys’ emotional state as her parents’ marriage 
falls apart, her classmates barrage her with referred hatred, and her own future seems 
anything but secure. The ghosts of Luke and a girl who was with Alys in the library 
help her see what she can and can’t claim responsibility for in her grief; there is 
no major epiphany, just the slow burn of sadness that lessens with time. Readers 
seeking empathy behind the headlines will find it here.  KC   
bAnKs, KAte Max’s Math; illus. by Boris Kulikov. Foster/Farrar, 2015 34p
ISBN 978-0-374-34875-5 $17.99   
M 4-7 yrs
Max showed his older brothers a thing or two about wordsmithery in Banks’ previ-
ous title, Max’s Words, and now the three sibs are on a road trip through Shapeville 
and Count Town to pursue rudimentary math concepts. The adventure starts 
with what looks to be an arithmetic theme, with Max adding two wheels to the 
pair he already has in order to make a car. One big brother keeps a tally as they 
count ten vehicles, and then they pause to pick up an enormous numeral lying on 
the roadside: a six? Or a nine? Arriving in Shapeville, they find the town square 
is missing, and they demonstrate to grateful townsfolk how to combine triangles 
to solve the problem. A kite whisks them through the constellations; they drop 
onto the clothesline of a woman who needs help sorting socks.  Next stop, Count 
Town, where numbers have gone missing, but the boys track them down, happily 
realizing they have the missing six in their car. Then there’s a rocket countdown, a 
cake and ice cream party, and it’s home to bed and counting sheep by 9 p.m. This 
oddball ramble, which touches on but fails to explore several concepts, is illustrated 
with surreal scenes that border on nightmarish, particularly for youngsters who 
balk at the likes of clowns and jack-in-the-boxes. Even children comfortable in 
dreamscapes will be puzzled by how this jibes with the numeracy skills with which 
the work is obviously concerned. There’s no fraternal tension here to resolve, nor 
even product, such as the clippings collection that fuels Max’s writing in Max’s 
April 2015 • 389
Words, to replicate. Consider Arthur Geisert’s pigs as a better choice for counting, 
grouping, and sorting with a dash of whimsy.  EB
bee, WilliAm Worst in Show; illus. by Kate Hindley. Candlewick, 2015 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7318-5 $15.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Young Albert enters his pet monster, Sidney, in the “The Best Pet Monster in the 
World!” contest, and the monstrous competitors are an intimidating bunch. Five 
intense rounds of judging cover the qualities of Hairiest Warts, Highest Hover, 
Most Parasites, Smelliest Farts, and Hottest Breath; in every category Sidney fails 
to rack up any points at all. When the contest’s judges therefore find Sidney “Worst 
in Show,” though, Albert overcomes his embarrassment with the wise recognition 
that more important than winning is having a “big cuddly, lovable . . . best friend.” 
There’s kid-pleasing humor galore here, from the reveling in exaggeration (“Some 
of the pet monsters had so many parasites that the judges had to ask the parasites to 
get off their monsters and line up to be counted”) to the fart humor to the judges’ 
amusing reactions (a judge faints at the end of every round). Repetition and the 
round-by-round contest format provide a sturdy structure that effectively bolsters 
the whimsical plot, and Albert’s reframing of Sidney’s loss into a positive outcome 
provides a useful model to competitive kids. Hindley’s lively art, done in pencil 
and paint and colored digitally, is equally a treat, with the vigorous bustle of kids 
and monsters nicely balanced by the tidy outlines and coloration in hues of gray, 
blue, mustard, avocado, and muted salmon. Frequent piquant details, such as the 
helicopter beanie sported by one monster and the glasses-clad parasite diligently 
working on a Rubik’s cube, add to the levity. Monster-themed storytimes will 
benefit from this wry addition, and kids will certainly declare Sidney a winner, 
sweet-smelling farts and all.  JH
bell, CAthleen dAvitt I Remember You. Knopf, 2015 304p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75456-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75455-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75457-6 $10.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Cautious straight-A student Juliet never thought she’d fall for a careless jock like 
Lucas. Then Lucas shares a strange secret: he has vivid memories of their future 
together. Curious but disbelieving, Juliet finds herself drawn to his intensity, and 
the couple begin dating. As they fall deeply in love, Lucas begins to experience 
debilitating headaches and violent dreams that he swears are memories of his own 
future death as a marine fighting in Iraq. Rather than confront the mystery, though, 
Juliet takes refuge in her continued skepticism and loses herself in their romance, 
until Lucas ends up in the hospital with unexplained symptoms doctors can’t di-
agnose but that seem to mirror the injuries Lucas dreamt about. Now Juliet must 
decide how much faith she has in his claims and how much she is willing to risk 
their current love for a chance at a future together. This passionate romance with 
a heavy dash of time-travel drama succeeds largely due to its intensely rendered 
portrait of first love. Juliet and Lucas are a compelling couple: a classic case of 
opposites attracting with the added level of complexity from their shared secret. 
The underlying premise of memories recovered from a future self is handled with 
a deftness that avoids overcomplicated explanations and relies instead on simple 
suspension of disbelief. Readers will quickly forgive the novel’s slow start as the 
390 • The BulleTin
love story takes center stage and carries the narrative to a heart-wrenching conclu-
sion. This is suitable for readers looking for a love-conquers-all story that leaves 
the mundane world behind.  AM
berger, CArin Finding Spring; written and illus. by Carin Berger. Greenwil-
low, 2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-06-225019-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
It’s time to hibernate, but young bear Maurice is too eager for his first spring to 
sleep. Leaving his slumbering mother in the den, he sets out to find spring; when 
he finds what he thinks is spring (an enormous flurry of snowflakes), he bundles 
up some of the “spring” (snow) in his scarf and heads home to finally go to sleep. 
By the time spring actually arrives, Maurice’s “spring” has of course melted, but 
when he leads his mother and fellow forest dwellers to the hill where he found it, he 
finds true spring in the cascades of flowers that carpet the grass. The plot is a little 
strained, but Berger’s storytelling is carefully streamlined to maximize the drama 
of Maurice’s first sightings of both winter and spring. Her trimly elegant illustra-
tions (cut-paper collages with dimensional elements) in muted, woodsy tones are 
created with care; compositions, such as the swirl of icy-hued snowflakes on a hill 
at night and the final reveal of the rosy-skied, floral-studded landscape, skillfully 
evoke the wonder of nature, and the craft will draw extended study from artistically 
minded youngsters. Pair this with Catherine Walters’ When Will It Be Spring? for a 
duo of beary tales, or perhaps use it to inspire some vernal collage-making during 
a dreary winter day.  JH
birdsAll, JeAnne The Penderwicks in Spring. Knopf, 2015 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97077-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87077-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97459-4 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-7
The focus of the fourth installment in the Penderwick series is on the younger 
siblings: Lydia, the effervescent and multilingual two-year-old; Ben, the only boy 
Penderwick; and most especially ten-year-old Batty. Batty is still grieving the loss of 
Hound, who died six months earlier, but she’s also distressed over the family’s tight 
money situation. When Batty’s singing voice catches the attention of her new music 
teacher, she’s determined to earn her own money to pay for singing lessons, but her 
efforts lead unexpectedly to dog-walking, a task she’s not sure she’s ready for after 
Hound. When she overhears a devastating truth about her birth from her older 
sister Skye, she plunges into a serious depression, and her refusal to leave her bed 
alarms the entire family. Batty’s responses to her troubles are fully understandable 
for a sensitive girl her age who’s caught in the midst of losses she can do nothing 
to recompense, but Birdsall follows the storytelling maxim that you can’t take your 
readers into the darkness without leading them back out again, so all is set right 
in the end. The precocity of the younger siblings calls to mind Hilary McKay’s 
Casson books, but Birdsall departs from her many vaunted readalikes by cranking 
the emotional drama up a notch with her focus on Batty’s depression, the reasons 
for Skye’s coldness toward Batty, and the tension of having a dear friend, neighbor 
Nick, in harm’s way. Despite the sadness at the heart of Batty’s dilemma, Birdsall, 
as always, lightens her serious themes with humor and the background hum of a 
busy household full of likable people.  KC    
April 2015 • 391
bliss, bryAn No Parking at the End Times. Greenwillow, 2015 267p
ISBN 978-0-06-227541-7 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Abigail, sixteen, and her brother Aaron are traveling with their parents in an old 
van. Okay, they’re living in the van, after their father gave everything he owned 
to charismatic Brother John and his church, lost the family home, and headed 
everybody cross-country to Brother John in San Francisco to prepare for the Rap-
ture—which doesn’t come. Convinced a second chance is on the horizon, Abigail’s 
dad keeps the faith, while Abigail starts to take off at nights with her brother, who’s 
finding comradeship and maybe love with a group of San Francisco street kids; 
as her brother becomes determined to leave the family, Abigail’s torn between her 
parents and her twin. Abigail’s narration is smooth and authentic as she negotiates 
the complicated blend of anger and love she feels toward her parents, and the book 
makes it vividly clear just how stranded the cashless teens really are—and why 
Aaron would be driven to earning money any way he can. The book loses energy 
as it goes, though, with the measured pace slowing to a crawl, and the climactic 
events are more confusing than suspenseful; the conclusion, with Aaron’s savage 
beating finally serving to bring his parents to choose their children over the church, 
raises more questions than it answers. Readers may still relate to Abigail’s dilemma, 
however, and even if they wish she’d broken loose earlier, they’ll likely be glad to 
see her on her way home.  DS
breWer, heAther 
The Cemetery Boys. 
HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2015 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-230788-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-230790-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Stephen and his father are dreading moving to his father’s tiny hometown, but 
there’s no choice; his father is broke from paying the bills for Stephen’s mother’s 
institutional care, so they have to move in with Stephen’s grandmother. A sexy, 
enigmatic girl named Cara is an instant perk to the move for Stephen, and her 
twin brother provides Stephen with enough drunken late-night escapades and 
mysterious, slightly dangerous scenarios to keep him uncomfortable yet gratefully 
distracted from his mundane life. The town itself is the memorable character in 
this novel: it’s claustrophobic and vaguely foreboding, with the perfect library 
basement where grim secrets can be uncovered, and a ramshackle graveyard ideal 
for gritty climactic scenes. Unfortunately, there are not really any humans to like, 
as Stephen is wearingly self-centered, and the twins are goth/emo caricatures. Even 
so, there’s no denying the creepiness of this title, so for horror fans who appreciate 
setting and world-building more than character development, this book may offer 
enjoyable creepiness.  AS
buxton, JAmie Temple Boys. Roaring Brook, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-036-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The roads into Jerusalem are packed with visitors arriving for Passover, and a near-
altercation on a crowded bridge is deftly handled by an amiable man with a scruffy 
band of followers. Reputed to be a magician and a healer, the man, Yesh, receives a 
hero’s welcome and soon becomes the week’s entertainment as people pass around 
392 • The BulleTin
gossip and tail him to catch the next miracle. Crowds and performers make easy 
marks for street-urchin thieves in a city already riddled with religious and political 
corruption, and pickpocket Flea, caught red-handed by Judas while trying to lift the 
group’s funds, is swept up into the turmoil that will surround Yesh and followers of 
his movement over the coming days. The story, familiar to Christians as the Passion 
and Resurrection, is vividly reimagined through the eyes of an adolescent with no 
agenda but his own survival. Buxton’s picture of Jerusalem as a roiling cauldron of 
faith, superstition, rumor, and uneasy truce between Temple and Roman authority 
is convincing, and the myriad explanations of the week’s tragedy, as interpreted 
by Yesh’s closest family and acquaintances, credibly range from the holy powers of 
the Chosen One to a cynically staged drama to challenge Temple authority and 
keep the new movement for social change going. Modern dialogue oddly overlays 
the millennia-old story, though, and it’s never entirely clear whether the intended 
effect is contemporary relevance or amusing cheekiness; certainly stray phrases such 
as “the butchers and bakers and candlestick makers” are annoyingly anachronistic. 
Moreover, the belated introduction of a sadistic Roman policeman’s attempt to 
steal Yesh’s “power” is an unnecessary twist in an already labyrinthine plot. There’s 
no question, however, that Jerusalem’s visitors would have had a different take on 
events than redacted New Testament reporting, and Buxton’s fictional account 
invites readers to ponder what they might personally have made of it all.  EB
Child, lAuren The New Small Person; written and illus. by Lauren Child. 
Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7810-4 $17.99   
R* 5-7 yrs
Only child Elmore has it good—no one else around to touch his stuff, change 
the TV channel, or eat his beloved orange jelly beans—until a “new small person” 
comes along. As it grows, it increasingly encroaches on Elmore’s turf, and conflict 
ensues when Elmore must share his room: “Now Elmore couldn’t get away from 
it. It was always there, looking at him.” The cohabiting becomes a perk, however, 
the night that Elmore has a bad dream and the small person comforts him, and 
after that Elmore begins to see the benefits of a younger sib, finally revealed to be 
a brother named Albert in the penultimate spread. Child has a knack for homing 
in on the important truths of kid experiences in entertaining ways, demonstrated 
here in the dynamics between Elmore and Albert and in the precise and pithy 
phrasing of Elmore’s observations. Elmore’s experiences will certainly resonate with 
older siblings, while younger ones may gain a bit of insight into their older sibs’ 
perspective. The illustrations, executed in Child’s familiar collage style, are skillfully 
composed, with Elmore’s viewpoint front and center and adults seen only from the 
torso down; the dark-skinned characters, who could belong to various ethnicities, 
stand out vividly against the airy background of the creamy pages. Pair this Jenkins’ 
That New Animal (BCCB 3/05) for a look at the ways in which younger siblings 
change everything.  JH
ClArKson, stephAnie Sleeping Cinderella and Other Princess Mix-ups; illus. by 
Brigette Barrager. Orchard/Scholastic, 2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-56564-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
Snow White, Cinderella, Sleeping Beauty, and Rapunzel: besides all being famous 
folkloric princesses, they’re each incredibly bored with their circumstances and 
April 2015 • 393
decide to swap places. Cheeky verse meets impish illustrations in this fresh, frac-
tured fairy tale, where Snow White winds up in Rapunzel’s tower, Rapunzel attends 
Cinderella’s ball, Cinderella rests up at Sleeping Beauty’s palace, and Sleeping Beauty 
takes on the care of a certain set of dwarves. Don’t be fooled by their big-eyed, rather 
vacuous digitally rendered expressions—these bright young things take charge of 
their lives, choosing first to leave their homes before opting to improve their situ-
ations through constructive communication and limit-setting (and in Cinderella’s 
case, through college). Humor abounds here, both in Clarkson’s clever lines and 
plot twists—for instance, rather than being evil, Rapunzel’s captor is suffocatingly 
clingy and simply needs boundaries—and in the winking, enjoyably retro-styled 
illustrations in a frothy palette of pink, mint green, and turquoise that charm with 
their sly details. Deceptively simple and utterly enjoyable, this is one for any kiddo 
with a sense of humor and appreciation for pert princesses in charge of their own 
destinies.  AA
Cline-rAnsome, lesA Whale Trails: Before and Now; illus. by G. Brian Karas. Ot-
taviano/Holt, 2015 34p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9642-2 $17.99   
R 5-8 yrs
A little girl joins her father aboard his boat, the Cuffee, which takes tourists out for 
a day of whale-watching. She explains the family business, comparing it to the early 
days of commercial whaling, with full-color pictures on the verso of each spread 
and sepia illustrations on the recto (“The pier where our boat is docked is lined 
with booths that sell souvenirs, sunglasses, binoculars, and sunscreen”; “Before now, 
this pier was lined with the shops of shipbuilders, candle makers, blacksmiths, and 
sail makers”). The tourists’ excitement upon first seeing a whale breach contrasts 
vividly with the moment in times past when the whalers shared the same sight and 
began their chase; double-page spreads for these scenes mark the climax of parallel 
adventures. The narrator clearly loves the family business, which allows respectful 
whale viewing from a safe distance, but she isn’t sternly judgmental about whale 
hunting in the past; in fact, she takes pride in the fact that she is a descendant of 
generations of African-American whalers. Karas’ pictures are not only engaging but 
packed with visual information that effortlessly supplements the text. Endnotes, 
complete with a glossary and a half dozen resources for further investigation, expand 
on the whaling industry (with a nod to critique of well-meaning eco-tourism, which 
may be interrupting whales’ behavior) and remark on black abolitionist and whaler 
Paul Cuffee, for whom the fictional tour boat is named.  EB
CollArd, sneed b., iii Fire Birds: Valuing Natural Wildfires and Burned Forests; 
by Sneed B. Collard III; illus. with photographs by Braden G. Collard, Sneed B. 
Collard III, Richard L. Hutto, et al. Bucking Horse, 2015 48p
ISBN 978-0-9844460-7-0 $17.00   
R Gr. 3-5
If a forest catches fire, it intuitively seems right to put out the blaze straightaway. If 
many species of birds had their way, however, they’d cancel the call for firefighters 
and let those trees burn. As ornithologist Dick Hutto has discovered, many birds 
thrive in burned-out areas, and some species, like the black-backed woodpecker, 
depend on them almost exclusively. In this brief but information-rich photoessay, 
Collard explains some of the more obvious advantages of a fire clearing—soil is 
fertilized, seed pods open, debris is cleared, sunlight reaches the ground to renew the 
growth cycle. He also attends to benefits that Hutto has found for specific species 
394 • The BulleTin
like the woodpecker—infrared radiation from the burn attracts beetles, who lay 
eggs in tree remains, which morph in to larvae, which attract woodpeckers. In what 
will be a significant bonus to middle-grades science teachers, Collard also covers a 
debate over the destructiveness of salvage logging in burned forests. Information 
is broken into short, clearly organized chapters, with captioned photographs of 
featured birds. A glossary, index, and list of further resources are included.  EB
Connolly, mArCyKAte Monstrous. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 424p
ISBN 978-0-06-227271-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Kymera is happy to have a father who rebuilt her from scrap parts and made her 
better than human; she has a stinging tail that can put folks to sleep and wings 
that allow her to fulfill her mission of snagging girls so that her creator can save 
them from an evil wizard. She has almost no memory of life before her reassembly, 
and Barnabas, the man presenting himself as her father, has an ability to make 
her forget any worries merely by touching her. Readers will therefore likely realize 
before Kymera does that the man who made her is a terrible force at work. Once 
Kymera does figure it out, she springs into action, despite her lack of skills or 
knowledge—or, for that matter, a plan. There is something both endearing and 
frightening about Kymera, and the references to Frankenstein go beyond spare 
parts and bolts physicality to that book’s emotional dilemma. The plot is slightly 
overwritten, but the scenes shine most when Kymera is herself, however flawed, 
flying and grasping for a life of her own and stumbling into a more glorious version 
of who she could be away from the horrible man who made her. Readers seeking a 
lengthy, thoughtful novel, particularly those who appreciate careful world-building, 
will find this worth their time.  AS
Coville, KAtherine The Cottage in the Woods. Knopf, 2015 389p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75574-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75573-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75575-7 $10.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Ursula Brown, a young bear, has just been hired as governess for little cub Teddy 
Vaughn at the Cottage in the Woods, a manor house in the Enchanted Forest. 
Both Enchanted animals and humans live in the area, and some of the humans are 
agitating for stricter laws governing the Enchanted creatures. In the cottage, Ursula 
encounters an abused young human girl, dubbed Goldilocks, who has secretly been 
taken in by the kind bear family. When a menacing woman (who falsely professes 
to be Goldilocks’ mother) and the anti-Enchanted group get wind of the girl’s pres-
ence, all heck breaks loose, and Goldilocks’ future is threatened. Will Goldilocks 
get to stay with the Vaughns? And will Ursula find happiness with her yearned-for 
Mr. Bentley or turn her affections towards Reverend Wright? Fortunately for gentle 
readers, this is the kind of lightly gothic tale that ends happily ever after.  While 
the writerly period style (“With a deep sense of melancholy, I came to the conclu-
sion that I must simply resign myself to the specter of Nurse’s hateful countenance 
popping out at me at any moment like some depraved jack-in-the-box”) may chal-
lenge less patient readers, the Victorian echoes will appeal to others. The classic 
tropes of mysterious manor house, villainous nemeses, and impossible love affairs 
are appealingly presented, and middle-graders who like fairy-tale fiction and enjoy 
period melodrama may find this title just right.  JH
April 2015 • 395
Coyle, KAtie Vivian Apple at the End of the World. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2015 262p
ISBN 978-0-544-34011-4 $17.99   
R Gr. 8-12
In an America where public discourse is now largely driven by the Church of 
America and its charismatic leader, Beaton Frick, seventeen-year-old Vivian Apple 
is the skeptical daughter of Believers. She’s therefore stunned when they disappear 
on the night of the promised Rapture, along with the parents of her friend Harp 
and hundreds, maybe thousands of others across the country. The nation is con-
fused, frightened, and divided, with Believers agonizing over being Left Behind 
and trying to purge any seeming ungodliness—gays and lesbians, sexually active 
single women—in hopes of a second chance, and nonbelievers known as New 
Orphans attempting to make sense of the situation and construct a future. Amid 
the growing chaos, Vivian and Harp join with Peter, who may have inside infor-
mation about Church activities, on a cross-country trip to California, where they 
think they may find the truth and, Vivian somehow believes, her parents. This is 
a fascinatingly literal post-apocalyptic scenario, and where most such stories focus 
on the logistics, this is instead deeply immersed in the impact on human emo-
tions and culture. Vivian’s anger and grief at her parents’ willingness to toss her 
aside is authentic and compelling, and her transformation from being a second 
banana to the audacious Harp to “Vivian 2.0,” who makes things happen herself, 
realistically surprises Vivian and changes her relationship with Harp—and Peter. 
While keeping her tone thoughtful rather than cutting, Coyle spices her view of 
both Believers and their antagonists with a sprinkling of satire that allows readers 
some wry recognition; at the same time, she keeps readers guessing just as much as 
Vivian is. The story isn’t without a few logic holes, but the logistics aren’t really the 
point; it’s a gripping scenario that elicits an epic road trip and that stars a conflicted 
and impressive heroine.  DS
CroW, mAttheW The Brilliant Light of Amber Sunrise. 
Simon Pulse, 
2015 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1873-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1875-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
“If I died now,” thinks fifteen-year-old Francis, who’s just been diagnosed with 
leukemia, “it would be all that anybody remembered about me. It would be my 
death that mattered. Not my life.” When he goes into the hospital for treatment, 
he’s stoutly supported by his sharp-tongued dynamo of a mother (his father has 
long since drifted away) and his older brother; in the ward, he bonds with brazen 
and funny Amber Spratt, who “erupted onto the ward like Randle McMurphy in 
One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest” and becomes Francis’ first love. It’s hard to pull 
such a story out of the shadow of The Fault in Our Stars (BCCB 5/12); while this 
British title is also deeply absorbing, it’s very different. Francis’ narration may verge 
on the preternaturally witty, but he’s not wise at all; instead, he’s a deeply likable, 
credible, and nerdy fifteen-year-old who’s horrified that treatment makes him lose 
his pubic hair and who’s often more concerned about his love life and his hurt 
feelings than about Amber’s health. The storytelling is exuberant and at times even 
raucous, with swift humor in the characterizations (in particular, Francis’ mother is 
a fierce delight) and in events ranging from first sex to first bust for attempted pot 
396 • The BulleTin
sales, but there’s also no glossing over of the fear, sadness, and eventual grief. And 
ultimately it’s a story about moving through the trajectory of illness and loss and 
then beyond it, to a happy adulthood where the lives of those who didn’t survive 
still matter very much indeed.  DS
Cullen, lynn Dear Mr. Washington; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. Dial, 
2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3038-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
It’s known that George Washington visited his portraitist, Gilbert Stuart, in the 
artist’s home; it’s also known that George Washington regarded posing as a weari-
some trial. Cullen connects these facts to posit domestic mayhem that could have 
accounted for Gilbert’s austere portrayal of the Founder. Stuart’s children take the 
blame, tearing through the house with pets and antics that annoy rather than amuse 
Washington. The premise of the book is that daughter Charlotte is forced to send 
letters to the great man after each sitting, apologizing for the kids’ collectively poor 
behavior and promising to heed the lessons in the book of manners with which 
Washington has presented them (“When Mother served Coffee & Cakes, we 
were so very Polite. We only ate such a Little Bit. Even Baby John sucked quietly 
on your shoe”). Pictures of the children’s rowdiness and the adults’ exasperation, 
rendered by Carpenter in droll line and watercolor scenes, supply the real story 
behind Charlotte’s demure epistolary efforts. It’s a thin story, but there’s humor in 
the contrast between the sedate text and chaotic events. A closing note implies that 
this is all speculation in service of good fun and remarks that Washington’s proffered 
book of advice, Rules of Civility & Decent Behavior in Company and Conversation, 
was actually one he copied in his youth. For another lighthearted riff on one of the 
very real problems besetting our first president—and a more historically grounded 
reason for his refusal to smile—turn to Deborah Chandra’s George Washington’s 
Teeth (BCCB 2/03).  EB
dAyton, ArWen elys Seeker. Delacorte, 2015 435p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99148-6 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74407-2 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37857-4 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Fifteen-year-old Quin Kincaid has been training to be a Seeker, an elite shadow 
warrior who uses magic and high-tech weapons to defend the weak, just like the 
rest of the family. Then she learns that the Seekers are mercenaries, her family 
legacy is a lie, and her father is a vicious leader intent only on gaining power. 
When her true love, John, returns to seek revenge for crimes against his family and 
nearly gets her killed, Quin escapes to Hong Kong with fellow Seeker and distant 
cousin Shinobu; John and Shinobu continue on violent, vengeful quests, while a 
secretive young girl known only as the Young Dread watches from the shadows, 
waiting for a reason to intervene. When the pull of ancient magic brings the four 
together, they may find redemption, or the secrets they reveal may cause the end 
of the world. This complex, multi-threaded, genre-blending novel recovers from a 
sluggish start to offer a fast-paced story overflowing with secrets and action, often 
savagely violent. Unfortunately, the overall effect is uneven: the world-building 
involves a handful of memorable elements but ends up a confusing mess of fantasy 
April 2015 • 397
and futurism with no clear sense of time. The layered backstory seems designed 
to create dramatic tension, but it is plagued by vagueness that distances the reader 
from the narrative. The underlying moral ambiguity also leaves the novel without a 
clear hero or even anti-hero; the most compelling character, the mysterious Young 
Dread, hovers on the edges of the story. Still, for the reader willing to forgo clarity 
in exchange for a wild ride, there is a challenging read to be had here and planned 
sequels to follow.  AM
deKeyser, stACy One Witch at a Time. McElderry, 2015 202p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1351-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1353-4 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
In this follow-up to The Brixen Witch (BCCB 7/12), Rudi willingly seeks the witch’s 
counsel once more when a mysterious girl from neighboring Petz brings magic beans 
into the town borders—and Rudi’s neighbor, the precocious Susanna Louisa, trades 
Rudi’s father’s cow for them. With Susanna Louisa in tow, Rudi must journey to 
ever-frozen Petz to return the beans to that village’s witch, a giant who has stolen 
summer all for himself, before the misplaced magic starts misbehaving. A beanstalk, 
the reappearance of the mysterious girl, Agatha, and the rules governing magic make 
his journey a perilous one, but twelve-year-old Rudi again rises to the challenge. 
Readers will enjoy identifying the folkloric references that DeKeyser seamlessly 
combines with elements of the Old World, such as the town’s weekly market and 
its apprentice-taking blacksmith. The thoughtful exploration and explanation of 
magic, nuanced understanding of the pitfalls of power and popularity, and insightful 
treatment of Rudi’s coming of age create an original and heartfelt novel that, while 
atmospheric, remains enjoyably untethered to specific time and place. Effectively 
coupling quiet reflection and suspenseful action, this well-paced story and its cast 
of believable characters—from the admirable Rudi to the pesky Susanna Louise to 
the strong-willed Agatha—might just work magic as a classroom readaloud.  AA
dyCKmAn, Ame Wolfie the Bunny; illus. by Zachariah OHora. 
Little, 
2015 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-316-22614-1 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
When the Bunny family takes in the wolf pup left in a basket on their doorstep, 
daughter Dot predicts doom: “He’s going to eat us all up!” The Bunny parents 
continue to dote on their new offspring as Wolfie grows; despite his devotion to his 
big (but now much smaller than he is) sister, however, Dot remains unconvinced. 
When Wolfie is seized by a hungry bear at the grocery store, though, fierce Dot 
rises in defense of her brother. “Let him go!” Dot insists. “Or . . . I’ll eat you all 
up! . . . I’ll start on your toes,” she pragmatically threatens, sending the frightened 
bear scurrying. The story of the sibling who’s opposed to the new baby until an 
outsider threatens him isn’t new (see Jenkins’ That New Animal, BCCB 3/05), 
but Dot’s bunny ferocity adds a particularly enjoyable touch to the saga, as do 
stealthy touches of wit (Dot finally bails midway on her repeated prediction of 
Wolfie’s eventual savagery). OHora’s smoothly painted figures give his scenes the 
trim regularity of digital art, while the still and solid linework, especially in the 
rhythmic hatching marks, suggests linocuts; an unusual palette draws on retro 
favorites mustard and avocado but livens them up with vivid shots of bright pink. 
398 • The BulleTin
There’s a touch of folklore here that will please fans of that genre, and this title 
could partner effectively with Chen’s delightful look at another animal adoptee, 
Guji Guji (BCCB 9/04).  DS
edWArds, KArl neWsom Fly!; written and illus. by Karl Newsom Ed-
wards. Knopf, 2015 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39284-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39283-9 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49654-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. K-1
A bemused fly unsure about locomotion tries to take his cues from other animals: 
when the cheerful worm goes “WIGGLE!”, for instance, he tentatively tries to 
do the same with an uncertain “wiggle?” That’s not right, and neither is jump-
ing like the grasshopper, rolling like the pillbug, etc. Fortunately, a bee, butterfly, 
and dragonfly turn up together, and the dauntless fly finds their buzz, flutter, and 
flit just the right cues for launching, leading him finally to properly take to the 
air and fly. Fly’s an endearing little guy, with his repeated resilience in the face of 
disappointment, and his triumph at finally getting into the groove is worth the 
celebration it receives from the other characters. The seriously simple text, some-
times with just one repeated word per spread, makes excellent use of action verbs, 
so this could serve equally well as a beginning reader and a readaloud cue for some 
audience action (with creative interpretation on the “fly” part). The illustrations 
are a digital evocation of line and watercolor, with trim, casual black lines forming 
the animals and forest green demarcating the foliage; the draftsmanship is simple 
and cartoonishly comic, with funny bug eyes—sometimes literal bug eyes—and 
speedily expressive mouths dominating the critters’ features. The fly-inclined can 
use this as a stepping stone to Arnold’s Fly Guy beginning reader series (Hi! Fly 
Guy, BCCB 10/05, etc.), and others will just enjoy the fly’s goofy flight path. A 
quick overview of the featured insects closes the book.  DS
emerson, Kevin Breakout. Crown, 2015 295p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39113-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39112-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39114-6 $10.99   
R Gr. 6-8
Eighth grade is hard, but it’s even harder if you’re fourteen and should be in ninth 
grade already. Anthony Castillo can’t seem to please his teachers, his parents are 
exasperated, and his ex-girlfriend is now dating his best friend, Keenan; it’s all just 
badness except for after-school Rock Band club. When he’s playing his music, 
everything else just falls away, and the thing is, he’s really good and he works hard 
at it, giving the lie to his teachers’ impressions that he’s a disruptive, no-talent 
slacker. After he records a song one night and sends it to Keenan, Keenan uploads 
it to the internet, and before the weekend is over, they have close to three thousand 
downloads, which would be great if the song didn’t feature the f-bomb, repeatedly. 
The reception of the song might be fiction, but Anthony’s narrative voice is the 
very real cri de coeur of every middle-school boy who feels as though his real talents 
are being underserved by the school curriculum. Anthony’s a master of figurative 
language and allusion, but only in reference to his music and when he’s comparing 
the entrapment he feels to a video game; he challenges his English teachers, who will 
April 2015 • 399
never know how well he can really write because they won’t let him write what he 
wants. Indeed, what’s so relatable in this voice-driven narrative is his self-awareness 
that, when facing the wrath and disappointment of adults, he knows that he should 
really just keep his mouth shut, let it go, not push the point, it’s not going to end 
well, but, ugh, there he goes again, calling out the hypocrisy of adults and suffering 
the consequences. Give this, then, to disaffected tweens who might be surprised to 
find their frustrations with school reflected in a book of all places.  KC 
funAro, gregory Alistair Grim’s Odditorium; illus. by Vivienne To. Disney 
Hyperion, 2015 419p
ISBN 978-1-4847-0006-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-6
This sharp, widely accessible novel tosses a bit of the supernatural, a hint of steam-
punk, some Victorian-era references, and an instantly memorable protagonist, 
Grubb, into a pot and delivers a quirky, promising beginning to a new series. 
Grubb is truly relieved to have been rescued by Alistair Grim, the creator of the 
Odditorium, a magical location that promises adventure, as his situation as op-
pressed workhorse for the cruel Mr. Smears was rough and likely to get worse. 
Things certainly seem safer with Grim, though not for long after Grubb divulges 
a key secret about Grim’s magic, and the bad guys come flocking to them. Grubb 
has the narratively necessary qualities of being fundamentally unable to mind his 
own business or obey orders, and readers will soak up the cool, secret information 
he gleans because of these traits. Of course, since Grub was left as a baby on a 
doorstep and intentionally kept small by being starved so that he can be a better 
chimney sweep, it’s understandable that he’s lacking many social graces, and the 
result is atmospheric and suspenseful. A glossary, cast of characters, and occasional 
black and white illustrations that highlight significant moments help make this 
complex book accessible.  AS
gArdner, sCot The Dead I Know. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-544-23274-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
When Aaron Rowe takes a job with a local funeral director, he never expects to 
find his calling. But Aaron’s natural inclination toward silence and his willingness 
to take on even the strangest and grossest of tasks make him an instant success, and 
under the tutelage of the caring John Barton, he soon finds himself happily consid-
ering his future in the industry. The past won’t let Aaron go so easily, though, and 
nighttime finds him plagued by long-suppressed memories turned violent dreams 
and increasingly dangerous bouts of sleepwalking. Though consoling the bereaved 
raises the specter of his own tragic past, Aaron finds solace in his work and learns 
that his connection to the dead might give him a path to new relationships with 
the living. Powerful storytelling, perfectly toned writing, and memorable characters 
turn this brief Australian import into a compelling read. Despite hints of the past 
and hope for the future, the story remains firmly grounded in the present, with 
a sense of immediacy that draws the reader in. Aaron’s narrative voice shifts and 
grows with the character: stark and remote in his isolation, gradually revealing 
emotional depth as his connections to others grow stronger. Funeral home scenes 
are equal parts humane, grotesque, and funny. Readers looking for a tightly crafted 
character-driven story will happily find themselves making friends with the darkly 
400 • The BulleTin
strange Aaron, and they may want to move on to adult books on the topic such as 
Caitlin Doughty’s Smoke Gets in Your Eyes.  AM
gAvin, CiArA Room for Bear; written and illus. by Ciara Gavin. Knopf, 
2015 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75474-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75473-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75475-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 4-7 yrs
“One spring, Bear came to visit and never left.” The jolly duck family he moves 
in with loves their new housemate, but there’s a problem: “Duck houses were not 
built with bears in mind.” When looking for a shareable property proves fruitless, 
the housemates sadly part—but then Bear has the cunning idea to build a new 
home that suits both ducks and bears. The interspecies amity is endearing, and the 
sweetly compact sentences (“But Bear began to worry. Maybe he and his family didn’t 
fit together”) move the story along at a rhythmic, readaloud-perfect pacing. The 
watercolor and pencil art makes big brown bear cozy in his softly blurred textures, 
and his big, shadowy brownness contrasts effectively with the precise configuration 
of the little ducks (who are a little chickeny with their smaller beaks, but no less 
adorable for that) and their few pieces of colorful furniture. Though the big reveal 
of the house for everybody isn’t clear enough on the duck advantage, other scenes 
are rife with soft humor as Bear unbalances the ducks’ sofa or submits patiently to 
the overexcited attentions of the ducklings in a series of vignettes. Fans of Becker’s 
Bear and Mouse books (A Visitor for Bear, BCCB 1/08, etc.) will find a new ursine 
friend (with bonus ducklings!) here.  DS
grAnt, holly The League of Beastly Dreadfuls: Book 1; illus. by Josie Porti-
llo. Random House, 2015 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37008-0 $23.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37007-3 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37009-7 $10.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Poor Anastasia McCrumpet! Not only has she just received the news about her 
beloved father and not-so-beloved mother (may they rest in peace), she’s been 
whisked away with two great aunties she’s never heard of, let alone met. Though 
Primrose and Prudence look delicate and bespectacled as great-aunties might, 
their metal teeth hint at something more menacing. Anastasia’s daily chores allow 
her to explore, and she soon realizes that many other children have come to the 
house—and never left. She discovers two brothers alive and well, kept so by Prim 
and Prude so they can harvest the boys’ supernatural abilities. Together the three 
children, self-dubbed the Beastly Dreadfuls, plan a Daring Escape, one filled with 
sleeping potions and chocolate laxatives administered to their captors. Between the 
flatulence and poo references, more subtle jokes, and the engaging narrative voice 
that addresses the reader and emphasizes phrases like Premonition of Doom, this 
story is likely to hit the mark with its intended audience. The tone slips occasionally 
and some important revelations come a little late, but abundant humor more than 
compensates. This charmingly offbeat first in a series is sure to entertain, and the 
intimations of Anastasia’s own supernatural abilities will have readers returning to 
learn—and laugh—more. Oh, and extra props for the librarian love.  AA
April 2015 • 401
The Great War: Stories Inspired by Items from the First World War; by David Almond, 
John Boyne, Tracy Chevalier, et al.; illus. by Jim Kay. Candlewick, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7554-7 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Eleven young adult writers contribute original stories that offer a range of perspec-
tives on World War I. The theme of artifacts that survived the war and the natural 
aftermath of casual discard is a promising one, and several of the authors put them 
to excellent use: a compass in A. L. Kennedy’s tale of a young boy’s loving sup-
port of his facially disfigured father; a hand-painted commemorative butter dish 
that launched the career of a teenage girl in an entry by Adèle Geras; the horn 
of a musician recruited into James Reese Europe’s regimental band in Tanya Lee 
Stone’s story in verse. Other contributors’ offerings, though, are less successful, e.g., 
Michael Morpurgo’s rambling opener about a contemporary family’s rediscovery 
of an heirloom helmet, Marcus Sedgwick’s supernatural-infused tale of the angel/
ghost of a downed German pilot; Tracy Chevalier’s overorchestrated piece on a 
clairvoyant girl who foresees how Princess Mary’s Christmas tin gift will save the 
girl’s father in battle. Back matter includes not only information on the authors 
but also pictures of and comments on the artifacts themselves; what’s missing is 
explanation of how each item came to be a specific writer’s focal point, which could 
have shed light on the collection’s editorial process and the writers’ inspiration. Kay’s 
atmospheric black and white illustrations, captioned on the page following each 
picture, expand visual context for the war but do not consistently incorporate the 
items in the stories. Even though not all stories are successful, readers will likely 
discover resonant offerings among this collection, and they might want to pair them 
with the authentic soldier voices and imaginative contemporary artwork in Duffy’s 
poetry collection Above the Dreamless Dead (BCCB 11/14).  EB
griffin, n. Smashie McPerter and the Mystery of Room 11; illus. by Kate Hind-
ley. Candlewick, 2015 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6145-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Unlike her best friend, Dontel, and the rest of her third-grade class, Smashie 
McPerter does not like the new class pet, a hamster named Patches. When Patches 
goes missing, Smashie (despite her hamster revulsion) and Dontel launch an in-
vestigation to find the culprit behind not only Patches’ disappearance but also the 
theft of a teacher’s prize brooch and a stealth “glue-er” who keeps applying glue to 
objects that then end up stuck to people. Smashie and Dontel work methodically 
through the various possibilities, but their hasty (and incorrect) public accusation 
of hamster-loving classmate Willette leaves the accused in tears and their classmates 
and teacher righteously angry. Humbled, the detective duo redouble their efforts, 
more carefully, to solve the three mysteries, and Smashie is able to finally reveal to 
the class, with diplomacy and dramatic flair, the identities of all involved, restoring 
not only Patches but also classroom harmony. Smashie is a unique and engaging 
heroine, and her relationship with the likable Dontel is credible and endearing. 
Plentiful humor in the colorful characterizations and amusing phraseology (“The 
children waved their outerwear like pitchforks”) make this an excellent readaloud 
selection as well. Smashie and Dontel’s deduction procedures and their list of 
“investigator language” also expand the use possibilities for class discussions of the 
402 • The BulleTin
mystery genre. Hindley’s casual, sketchy illustrative style suits the animated narra-
tive, and the frequent pictures lighten the somewhat lengthy text. Kids moving up 
from Cam Jansen will find Smashie an entertaining next step.  JH
henn, sophy Where Bear?; written and illus. by Sophy Henn. Philomel, 
2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17158-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-6 yrs
A boy and a white bear cub happily cohabitate in a house until the bear grows up, 
when it becomes clear that the full-grown bruin needs other lodgings. The boy 
suggests place after place—the toy store, the zoo, the jungle—but the bear rejects 
each suggestion. To each refusal the boy queries, “Then where, bear?” until he 
finally hits upon an acceptable solution for the (polar) bear: the Arctic. After the 
bear’s relocation, the two happily maintain a long-distance friendship via phone, 
and the bear suggests that they should “go somewhere together like we used 
to.” “But where, bear?” asks the boy, and the final page turn reveals the boy and 
Hawaiian-shirt-clad bear headed for a departures gate. The patterned text makes 
for enjoyable listening (though the pattern goes on perhaps a beat or two too long), 
and it offers a nice twist in the bear’s declaration of “Snow!” rather than “No” in 
the Arctic scene. There’s more style here than substance, though, since there’s not 
a lot of weight to the plot. Henn’s bold illustrations use sketchy outlines, simple 
compositions, and muted hues of salmon, turquoise, rose, and green to evoke an 
attractively retro (perhaps too retro for youngsters at times, since they may not 
recognize the ancient landline the friends possess) sensibility. The big, teddy-ish 
white bear with his rounded features and protruding tummy is a winning fellow 
and the cowlick-sporting, stripy-shirt-wearing boy is pretty cute as well. Folks 
looking for a fun (if slightly lightweight) addition to a polar- or bear-themed story 
session may want to add this into the mix; it could also be a novel addition to a 
study of animal habitats.  JH
hoKenson, terry Leif’s Journey.  Namelos, 2015 174p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-183-0 $18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-184-7 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-185-4 $7.95   
R Gr. 6-10
Seventeen-year-old Leif is the youngest child of Swedish immigrants in Minnesota 
during the early 1880s. His older siblings, fed up with their negative, overbearing 
father, have long since bolted from the family farm, and Leif is trying to decide 
whether to follow their lead or stay to run the farm with his dad. On a trip to a 
nearby town, Leif encounters Anna (the daughter of a local farmer) in the woods 
during a snowstorm; the two take shelter together and become friends, a bond 
that eventually becomes a gentle courtship. Though Leif temporarily runs away to 
Minneapolis, he misses Anna and returns home to think over his options. There 
Leif finally learns the reasons behind his father’s surliness (Pa’s difficult childhood 
in Sweden), and this revelation brings the two closer; weighing the balance, Leif 
decides to stay put after all. The pacing here is occasionally uneven, but Leif’s story 
is dynamic and engaging and the details of late nineteenth-century life among rural 
Swedish-American settlers are intriguing. Though set in the past, Leif’s struggles 
with Pa have a timelessness that makes the story accessible (but not anachronistic) 
April 2015 • 403
to a modern audience, while Leif’s relationship with Anna is romantic but cred-
ibly modest. Occasional Swedish words or phrases add interest and authenticity to 
the narrative, and an author’s note explains the geographical and historic basis for 
Leif’s chronicle. Adults may have to do a little selling, given the bland cover, but 
historical fiction fans who crack open this book will be rewarded.  JH
hurley, Jorey Fetch; written and illus. by Jorey Hurley. Wiseman/Simon, 
2015 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8969-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8970-7 $12.99   
R Gr. K-2
A day at the seaside is a joyous adventure for the Labrador retriever protagonist 
of this restricted-vocabulary picture book. Each spread has a verb describing the 
pooch’s action as she chases after her beloved red ball; “fetch” when it’s tossed, 
“search” when she’s hunting for the ball bobbing on the waves, “splash” when she 
paddles out toward it, etc. As the dog pursues the prize, she engages with local 
wildlife, passing a moment with some seagulls and sporting with some dolphins, 
until finally she brings the ball back to her beloved little girl for an inevitable eager 
“again?” While there’s plenty of readaloud hay to be made of this (a “guess the word” 
challenge would elicit some energetic participation), it’s beginning readers who will 
really appreciate the easy gamesmanship of figuring out the single word per spread 
and the genuine story behind the spare text. Digital art has the smooth solidity of 
cut-paper collage shapes, especially in the sandy figure of the dog, whose poses are 
well-observed authentic canine moves. While lack of contrast occasionally dilutes 
the art’s visual impact, the frozen tableaux are effective partners for the simplicity 
of the text, and the surprise discovery of various marine animals will provide audi-
ences/readers with added diversion. This is rife with language arts potential, and it’ll 
make a lively next step after Sullivan’s one-word wonder, Ball (BCCB 5/13).  DS
JACobson, Jennifer riChArd Paper Things. Candlewick, 2015 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6323-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
The only family eleven-year-old Ari has left in the world is her nineteen-year-old 
brother, Gage, so when he decides in anger to leave their legal guardian’s house 
Ari goes with him. Unfortunately, Gage doesn’t really have any place to go, so he 
and Ari, now homeless, alternate between slipping illicitly into a local shelter and 
crashing with friends. Once the school golden girl, Ari slides there into exhaustion 
and disarray, endangering her application to Carter Middle School, which has long 
been her dream; her unkempt appearance also starts eliciting social scorn, so she 
remains even more determined to hide the truth (“We’re just between homes,” she 
tells herself). Jacobson writes with accessible fluency, and Ari’s longing for the family 
she doesn’t have is made clear in her attachment to her Paper Things, a collection of 
cutout figures from catalogues that have become a beloved pretend family. There’s 
too much going on in the story, however, with Ari’s being orphaned, her exploration 
of her guardian’s past with her father, her desire to bring back school traditions, 
her growing friendship with a supportive classmate, and so on, in addition to her 
homelessness; Ari’s dilemma is poignant but also purposive, with messages about 
the problem of homelessness sometimes drowning out the story. Ari’s struggle 
to stay afloat as the bottom drops out of her world is compelling, however, and 
404 • The BulleTin
readers will be glad to see her successfully negotiate her divided loyalties and find 
a safe home.  DS
JAmieson, viCtoriA Roller Girl; written and illus. by Victoria Jamieson. Dial, 
2015 [240p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8037-4016-7 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 4-7
In this sharp and engaging graphic novel, Astrid and her best friend, Nicole, have 
always done everything together, so Astrid has just assumed Nicole would join 
her for roller-derby camp. Readers will spot trouble right away in reticent Nicole’s 
evasion of the topic, so it is little surprise when Nicole chooses ballet camp and 
boy-watching instead, leaving Astrid without an emotional safety net or a literal 
ride home from the rink (she walks/skates it instead). In addition, Astrid’s not quite 
the roller derby prodigy she imagined, and she’s bumped, bruised, and exhausted 
every single day. There is a delicious, albeit painful, absurdity in the distance be-
tween how impressive Astrid thought she would be and the skills she is actually 
bringing to the table (she didn’t really know how to skate, for example); readers 
will sympathize, and it is also makes for effective humor. The dynamic between 
Astrid and her single mother is impeccably developed—it is clear how Astrid be-
came the headstrong, confident girl she is under the care of a woman who shrugs 
and admits her long-standing disdain for Astrid’s old best friend (and that girl’s 
mother) before lovingly addressing her daughter’s grief. The roller derby elements 
are sprinkled like candy throughout, with clever names, hip derby terminology, a 
kickass mentor structure that is authentically described, and even a full exhibition 
match to absorb. Crisp, bright illustrations (think Raina Telgemeier) primarily 
reflect the text, though there are moments of true slump, dejection, or weariness 
that are perfectly conveyed in the illustrations that would have been difficult to 
express without them. Expect follow-up requests for roller derby books, even from 
readers who might have imagined themselves to be more aligned with Nicole.  AS
JArroW, gAil Fatal Fever: Tracking Down Typhoid Mary. Calkins Creek, 
2015 175p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-62091-597-4 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-9
By the first decade of the twentieth century, the Salmonella typhi bacterium had been 
identified, the transmission of typhoid fever through contact with infected human 
fecal matter was understood, and the need for public sanitation was recognized. 
Why, then, did America continue to experience deadly outbreaks? Jarrow follows the 
tribulation of the disease’s most notorious—and victimized—carrier, Mary Mallon, 
to reveal just how stubborn an issue public health can be, and how the rights of 
an individual can conflict with the welfare of the community. The account opens 
with the work of George Soper, a respected sanitary engineer who helped Ithaca, 
New York and Cornell University to halt a current epidemic and prevent a future 
one. Later called upon to investigate an outbreak within a well-to-do family, Soper 
traced a series of afflictions to an apparently healthy cook and worked with public 
health officials to put her in quarantine. Mallon, however, fought her incarceration 
tooth and nail, eventually obtaining release from exile on North Brother Island, only 
to be re-apprehended when she broke the terms of her release and infected others 
years later. Jarrow limns Mallon with respect and sympathy, suggesting just how 
April 2015 • 405
difficult it would be for an uneducated, asymptomatic woman to believe she could 
be responsible for suffering and death. However, she makes clear the responsibility 
of carriers to adhere to hygiene protocols (and even occupational limitations) to 
secure the common good. Three substantive insets discuss the disease, asymptomatic 
carriers, and carriers contemporary to Mallon who were never incarcerated. Period 
photographs, a timeline of Mallon’s story, a glossary, source notes, a bibliography, 
suggestions for further research, and an index are included.  EB
JenKins, emily A Fine Dessert: Four Centuries, Four Families, One Delicious Treat; 
illus. by Sophie Blackall. Schwartz & Wade, 2015 38p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96832-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86832-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98771-7 $10.99   
R* 6-9 yrs
This gracefully crafted picture book looks at the tasty old-fashioned dessert of 
blackberry fool over four centuries. First it’s in England in 1710 that a girl and her 
mother pick the berries, whip the cream (and lick the spoon!), chill it in a cold 
spot and then serve it up to the very pleased family. Then it’s in Charleston in 
1810 that an African-American woman and her daughter prepare the dessert and 
then serve it up to the master’s family. In Boston in 1910 a mother and daughter 
enjoy the convenience of pasteurized cream and a rotary beater as they prepare the 
dish. Finally, a father and son in 2010 pull the recipe off the internet, shop for the 
ingredients, enjoy the benefits of electricity in preparing them, and then serve the 
dessert up to a feast for a multicultural cast of friends. This is classic Jenkins in its 
seemingly casual, observation-rich text; the folkloric structure of the process (and 
isn’t the learning of food preparation a kind of folklore?) makes the prose rhyth-
mic and readable, while the changing settings mark the significant historical and 
industrial shifts over the centuries. The untold backstory of the sequence featuring 
the enslaved African-American woman challenges the book’s tranquil domestic 
presentation, but there are subtle indicators (the girl and her mother “hid in the 
closet” to lick the bowl together) that point the observant to the troubling truth 
(and the author’s note delves deeper into the issue), and her inclusion is an appro-
priate acknowledgment of the importance of such women in the culinary tradition. 
Blackall’s delicate ink and watercolor art is well suited to period portrayals; soft 
detailing and repeated compositional patterning that echoes the textual repetition 
makes for attractive design, but there’s enough shadow and precision to give some 
steel to the sweetness. Sharp-eyed viewers will spot repeated motifs (look for the 
horse statuette, for instance) and will also note similarities and contrasts even beyond 
those foregrounded by the text. A recipe for blackberry fool is included; a historical 
note, a list of sources, and an illustrator’s note about research are appended.  DS
JenKins, steve Egg: Nature’s Perfect Package; by Steve Jenkins and Robin Page; 
illus. by Steve Jenkins. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-95909-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Jenkins and Page’s new natural history outing focuses on that key player in repro-
duction, the egg.  The book refreshingly notes from the start that “almost every 
animal” begins with an egg, with some growing inside the mother’s body and some 
outside, and then goes on to a glorious exploration of the oval experience. Spreads 
display captioned thumbnails treating various egg layers, offering insight into egg 
406 • The BulleTin
sizes and how they don’t always correlate to adult size, describing threats to eggs 
and protections for eggs, and, of course, busting out of eggs. By using the egg itself 
as a focal point the authors shift perspectives, putting squid, spiders, chickens, 
and alligators suddenly all on the same plane and, literally, starting from the same 
place. The result is a fascinating lesson on unexpected sameness and intriguing 
difference, with a sequence that’s both browsable and readable. Jenkins’ cut-paper 
illustrations are particularly vibrant here, the broad remit allowing for dramatic 
display from various taxonomical orders so that audiences are treated to the plumage 
of the toucan and the showy shades of the weedy seadragon; poses suggest candid 
mid-action snaps. Though the title is not glitch free (why, for instance, isn’t the 
mother platypus shown in the incubation position described in the text?), it’s an 
engaging step up from Aston’s An Egg Is Quiet and a thoughtfully original look at a 
key stage of the animal world, and readers will realize that you can’t make animals 
or omelettes without breaking eggs. A concluding spread offers more information 
about the animals featured.  DS
Jensen, miChAel Woven; by Michael Jensen and David Powers King. Scholastic, 
2015 344p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-68572-6 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-68573-3 $18.99   
R Gr. 8-10
This rich, elegant fantasy follows Nels as he goes from beloved local kid (whose 
mother has always tried to keep him hidden away without telling him why) to 
dead to not quite dead to savior, all in a short span of time. A shapeshifting bad 
guy, a mysterious and inscrutable mentor, and a giant needle all come into play as 
the story of how Nels is not actually dead (but absolutely dying should no change 
occur) is laid out. The epic quest for Nels to save himself, and perhaps the whole 
kingdom, involves Tyra, a cranky, spoiled princess who grows in leaps and bounds 
due to her association with Nels, a peasant who is wise beyond his stature; however, 
both characters are so intriguing beyond their stereotypical roles, and their journey 
so fraught with danger, that all is forgiven for the occasional dip into well-worn 
high fantasy tropes. The continuing theme of tapestries, needlework, and threads is 
effective in conveying this gorgeously detailed world where lives can be changed by 
fabricators, individuals who can alter the very threads from which reality is woven. 
A simple map is included.  AS
Kelly, erin entrAdA Blackbird Fly. Greenwillow, 2015 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223861-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223863-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
The only Asian American in her Louisiana town, Apple has always felt different. 
Her widowed mother, the first in her family to emigrate from the Philippines, 
snacks on sardines from the can, refuses Apple’s repeated requests for a guitar, and 
never lets her order pizza when they have perfectly good garlic rice to eat. Still, 
Apple has her deceased father’s Abbey Road cassette and her friends Gretchen and 
Alyssa—that is, until their new boyfriends both accuse Apple of eating dog and  put 
her on the Dog Log, the infamous list of the ten least attractive girls at their middle 
school. Soon her friends will barely speak to her and the boys bark at her in the 
hallway, heightening her self-loathing and desperation, as well as her resentment 
April 2015 • 407
toward her mother, until a teacher, a guitar, and two unexpected friends help her 
move beyond the hurt and into what it means to be Apple. The author, herself a 
first-generation Filipina American, skillfully and sensitively captures the challenges 
of early adolescence and the way those challenges are heightened by ethnic dif-
ference; the book effectively evokes all the frustration tweens and teens feel with 
their parents, the complications of school, and the cruelty of peers and loneliness 
of ostracism. She avoids sentimentality or condescension, instead providing readers 
with a smart, sensitive, and resilient heroine who is authentic and relatable in her 
strengths and imperfections. This poignant novel would make for a particularly fine 
readaloud; expect visceral reactions to the treatment by her peers. Though good 
for aspiring musicians and Beatles fans, this is a must-read for those kids cringing 
at their own identities.  AA
Kern, peggy Little Peach. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-06-226695-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 10-12
Even though her drug-addicted mother wasn’t a reliable presence in her life, Michelle 
was always well loved and cared for by her grandfather in their African-American 
Philadelphia community. When Grandpa dies, fourteen-year-old Michelle must 
find somewhere else to live; she heads to New York City to find a friend living in 
the notorious Pink Houses project, but she is immediately targeted by Devon, a 
member of the Bloods. He offers her a place to live with his “family,” two girls 
named Kat and Baby who call Devon “daddy.” The arrangement appeals to love-
starved Michelle, even after Devon drugs her and she is raped by one or more of 
his crew. From that night on, Michelle works for Devon as a prostitute, learning 
the ropes from Kat. It’s a price she’s willing to pay to be a member of Devon’s 
family, especially since they all believe his promises that he will move them into a 
real home once they’ve earned enough money. Michelle’s naïveté and her need are 
painful to witness; she has no good options, and her desperation to normalize the 
situation she finds herself in is palpable and heartbreaking. Kern pulls no punches 
in her description of the exploitation the girls, particularly twelve-year-old Baby, 
suffer at the hands of the well-organized Bloods, for whom they are a major source 
of income. Pinning all her hopes on a social worker she meets when Kat suffers a 
miscarriage, Michelle makes a smart but grim calculation to effect her escape, but 
her future is by no means secure at the end of the book. An author’s note on her 
research into the sex trade suggests that outrage, awareness, and compassion are 
the first steps toward a solution; this novel offers a healthy dose of all three.  KC  
Kerr, esme The Girl with the Glass Bird. Chicken House/Scholastic, 
2015 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-69984-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-69985-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
With few other good options, eleven-year old orphan Edie jumps at the chance 
when a distant relative enlists her to infiltrate Knight’s Haddon boarding school. 
Her mission: to befriend the princess Anastasia and determine if the increasing 
disappearance and reappearance of Anastasia’s belongings—including the titular 
glass bird—result from the girl’s dreamy ways or from something more sinister. As 
408 • The BulleTin
Edie grows accustomed to the rituals of the school and embraces its opportunities, 
she suspects that something darker than Anastasia’s absent-mindedness is at work, 
though fulfilling her mission under the watchful eyes of the staff and the scrutiny 
of the headmistress proves difficult. Not in her wildest dreams could she imagine 
where this will lead; readers may feel similarly perplexed, though not displeased, as 
this many-layered mystery unfolds. The premise, though farfetched, will appeal to 
fans of boarding-school stories, and mystery lovers will enjoy trying to assemble the 
pieces of this puzzle. Edie, however, tends to be either inauthentic or underwritten, 
and the plot complexities clunk more than click as a result of cursory exposition. 
The effect is one of a slightly detached, sufficiently pleasant read; readers will be 
glad enough that Edie finds a happy ending in a new home even if they don’t recall 
the particulars—or really, much at all—of her story after closing the book.  AA
KoChAlKA, JAmes The Glorkian Warrior Eats Adventure Pie; written and illus. by 
James Kochalka. First Second, 2015 125p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-133-3 $19.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-021-3 $12.99   
R Gr. 2-4
The Glorkian Warrior had pie of a different sort in the previous outing (The Glorkian 
Warrior Delivers a Pizza), but this graphic novel is all about sweet pies, especially 
the delicious ones that pop out of defeated space snakes. There’s not much to the 
story itself: the Glorkian Warrior, his backpack, and his pet/baby (an alien creature 
that, we later learn, has been sucking out the brain of our hero) are reunited after 
some space adventures, but their peaceful home is disrupted by new emergencies 
and bad guys. However, anyone seeing the wild cover will correctly expect the goofy 
plot and the dopey, snortworthy jokes here. The coloration is absurd and pleasing, 
shades of aqua crashing into pinks, purples, and oranges that are madcap in a joyful 
way, much like the text itself. Readers who can’t get enough fart jokes (really, there 
are an impressive number for such a trim volume), musings about elbows, and 
brain-sucking aliens will find this just about perfect. Offer this to fans of Trondheim 
and Parme’s Tiny Tyrant (BCCB 9/07) and, of course, Captain Underpants.  AS
Krug, Ken No, Silly!; written and illus. by Ken Krug. Beach Lane/Simon, 
2015 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0066-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0067-1 $12.99   
Ad 2-4 yrs
Each section of this concept picture book offers three plausible behaviors (“I like to 
sleep in my bed. I like to sleep in my dad’s big chair. I like to sleep in my mama’s 
lap”) and one absurd conclusion (“And I like to sleep on cookies”), allowing for a 
happy correction (“No, silly! You eat cookies”). The book moves through eating, 
reading, and riding, and it finally heads off to bedtime—with one last misstep: “And 
then I like to put Mama and Dad to bed. No, silly . . . Mama and Dad put you 
to bed.” This draws on the classic little-kid-friendly joke of subverting the known 
with an obvious mistake, and while the blunders aren’t as inarguable as they might 
be (is the kid sitting in the plane-shaped spring toy really riding any more than 
the kid dreaming in his bed?), the audience will be happy to chime in on the “No, 
silly!” refrain. The oil-painted illustrations make a new animal the subject of each 
sequence with the soft, toylike bear sharing his cookies with a cheerful piglet, who 
becomes the hero of the eating sequence and passes the baton to a mouse, who 
April 2015 • 409
moves on to a bunny; the bedtime sequence then cycles through all four animals. 
The draftsmanship is often pedestrian and flat, but the art’s sunny cheer may still 
be inviting to young audiences. Ji’s No, That’s Wrong! (BCCB 5/08) is a more hilari-
ous take on the concept, but this may suit kids looking for gentler opportunities 
to be wise guys. DS
Kurti, riChArd Monkey Wars. Delacorte, 2015 407p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99165-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74441-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38848-1 $10.99   
R Gr. 8-10
This grim fable starts rough and gets rougher as Mico and Papina, two different 
species of monkeys, attempt to maintain a friendship (and, eventually, a relation-
ship) in the midst of a vicious war. Both are natural leaders, inclined toward kind-
ness and gentle authority, but they are primarily surrounded by blindly obedient 
followers who obey bloodthirsty rulers. The worst is Tyrell, a horrifyingly sneaky, 
tyrannical, and abusive monkey who oozes his way into power and then enforces 
his reign with terror and torture. There’s an intriguing balance between monkey 
behaviors and those that mirror humans; additionally, while there is lots of groom-
ing and shrieking, there are also species-specific behaviors (the Barbary apes who 
will do anything for money) that are more difficult to map onto human actions. 
Although there are genuinely poignant, loving moments nestled among the trag-
edies, mostly Kurti successfully (if depressingly) presents what it would look like 
if small, individual battles over territory or food escalated, under the direction of 
a single bloodthirsty, charismatic, insane leader, into a full-scale monkey war. Ap-
parently, war is hell for monkeys too.  AS
lAnders, melissA Invaded. Hyperion, 2015 356p (Alienated)
ISBN 978-1-4231-6949-9 $17.99   
R Gr. 8-12
Just as the romance between seventeen-year-old Cara and her L’eihr exchange 
student Aelyx was beginning to heat up, a global tragedy threatened to derail the 
alliance between their planets in Alienated (BCCB 4/14). Now, to save the inter-
galactic coalition and Earth itself, Cara must travel to L’eihr, where she will work 
to establish a human colony, while Aelyx remains behind in Manhattan as part of 
a diplomatic delegation. Mysterious events soon place their separate missions in 
jeopardy, though. Cara enrolls in the alien school, only to find that a series of vicious 
pranks leave her looking like the villain. Meanwhile, Aelyx begins a cross-country 
tour to gather support for the interplanetary treaty but finds himself the target of 
repeated assassination attempts. Soon they discover that the seemingly unrelated 
attacks may actually be connected, and that a secretive, powerful force may be 
working against both planets. This sci-fi romance sequel continues to tell a familiar 
story in a new way, but it also moves beyond the first novel’s integration-focused 
conflict. Since the characters spend much of the novel apart, the narrative loses some 
of its romantic intensity, but the addition of the political conspiracy is sure to keep 
readers engaged, especially as it endangers Cara and Aelyx’s future together. The teen 
lovers likewise evolve, facing the inevitable changes to their relationship caused by 
distance and outside pressures, and secondary characters develop dimensions and a 
few new romances of their own. This is a solid title that builds on the strengths of 
its predecessor, and it ends with a looming fight for control of the destiny of two 
races that will have readers eagerly awaiting another sequel.  AM 
410 • The BulleTin
levithAn, dAvid Hold Me Closer: The Tiny Cooper Story. Dutton, 2015 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42884-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
If there was a character that stole both hearts and the show in John Green and David 
Levithan’s Will Grayson, Will Grayson (BCCB 5/10), it was big-boned, gloriously gay 
Tiny Cooper. The autobiographical musical extravaganza that he fretted and sweated 
over in that book is presented here in all its fabulous glory, full of big production 
numbers, tender ballads, and a full chorus of ex-boyfriends. The musical traces 
Tiny’s life from birth through age sixteen, starting with the belty, sparkly number 
“I Was Born This Way” and ending with a show-stopping, full-cast homage to the 
joys of falling in love. Tiny, being Tiny, delivers extensive stage directions that tell 
some of the story behind the story, indicating tone, mood, and what other musicals 
he’s channeling so that readers will be able to visualize the production. There is 
no musical score, but fans of Tiny will likely find that no impediment to creating 
their own versions of his lively lyrics. Plenty of stylish good fun is on offer here, yet 
the book offers more than that, as Tiny’s reflections on life and love shine through 
with a wisdom hard-won after having his heart broken by most of his seventeen 
ex-boyfriends. His mentors along the way include his lesbian babysitter, the ghost 
of Oscar Wilde, the ever-steadfast Will Grayson, and his parents, and they each 
offer a nugget of wisdom or support that any teen navigating the treacherous shoals 
of heartbreak and bounce-back will find inspiring. The award for most inspiring 
might go to the ghost of Oscar Wilde, who reminds Tiny that a partner isn’t the 
only source of passion; certainly Tiny’s passion for composing a big, beautiful life 
and a big, beautiful show overflows in this thoroughly magical book.  KC 
loWe, nAtAshA The Courage of Cat Campbell. Wiseman/Simon, 2015 278p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1870-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1872-0 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Cat may have been born to do magic, but she seems to not have inherited any 
magical ability. Her mother, Poppy, is deeply relieved, given her own disastrous 
history with spells (Poppy was the child protagonist of the captivating The Power 
of Poppy Pendle). Cat can’t accept her own normalcy, though, and it turns out she’s 
right: a moment with one of her greatest fears, spiders, seems to shake magic out of 
her. Terror-elicited powers are known to be extremely hard to tame, however, and 
Cat’s so eager to try them out that she doesn’t wait for proper training, turning her 
best friend into an animal and causing other disasters. There are no true villains 
this novel, just misunderstood people pushed beyond their reasonable tolerance 
into reaction. This nuance is warmly conveyed, and the characters are therefore all 
compelling, whether “bad” witch or plucky heroine; all of them mess up and all 
of them have the capacity to try to right their wrongs. Clever end materials offer 
recipes (all of which would produce yummy products, even without, for example, a 
griffin’s tooth), simple spells, and advice to late-blooming witches. Fans of the earlier 
novel will rejoice in seeing how Poppy has managed to fulfill her own dreams, and 
they’ll appreciate the headstrong daughter that she has raised, a realistic offspring 
given Poppy’s own irascible, determined personality.  AS
April 2015 • 411
lupiCA, miKe The Only Game. Simon, 2015 310p (Home Team)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0995-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0997-1 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Jack’s world revolves around baseball, and he has the loving (and sane) support of 
his parents in all his efforts. As the season opens, Jack is star player on the Little 
League team favored to make it to the World Series in Williamsport, Pennsylvania. 
His best friend is on the team, his coach and teammates are charged up—and now 
Jack announces he’s not playing. Why? Jack—and Lupica—play it close to the vest, 
patiently waiting to reveal the motivation that has Jack’s team and family flum-
moxed: he blames himself for the death of his older brother, a chronic daredevil 
whose fatal midnight dirt-bike outing Jack kept to himself. In short, he’s punishing 
himself and probably taking his team down with him. Cassie, a star as bright as 
Jack on her own softball team, breaks through his silence, keeps him tethered to 
baseball by arranging for him to assistant coach her team, brokers a rapprochement 
among Jack and his buddies, and sets him on the road to readjustment just in time 
to save the season. This is a heartfelt story, neatly choreographed to maximize the 
emotional tension on the way to the satisfying climax that is never in any real 
doubt. The frequent heart-to-hearts between Jack, his parents, and his friends 
that are necessary for Jack’s healing may feel like digressions to readers looking for 
on-field action, but the family story is a solid one in its own right. It’s refreshing 
to watch a plot turn on the patient support of true friends and on parents who let 
their son have the time and space he needs to work through issues on his own.  EB
mCCully, emily Arnold Queen of the Diamond: The Lizzie Murphy Story; written 
and illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. Ferguson/Farrar, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30007-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Lizzie Murphy, who played first base in semi-professional ball at the beginning of 
the twentieth century, was unquestionably a baseball pioneer—the first woman to 
play against major leaguers in an exhibition game; the first player to participate 
in all-star games in both leagues; the first woman (and white, at that) to play in a 
Negro League game. Although most of these facts are included in McCully’s clos-
ing notes, the text is more concerned with Lizzie’s childhood and the launch of 
her career. Readers meet a talented little girl, an all-round athlete, who elbowed 
her way into her big brother’s games by toting around the equipment and waiting 
for her break. Against the advice of her mother, who appreciated her daughter’s 
talent but saw no future in women’s baseball, Lizzie made it onto a men’s semi-pro 
team and, as McCully’s narration showcases as its climax, challenged the team’s 
manager to pay her the wages he withheld from her debut appearance. This focus 
subtly extends the story’s interest from a girl-makes-good historical set piece to an 
accessible bit of consciousness-raising regarding gender and wage parity; Lizzie was 
the team star—and certainly not above making money on the side selling her own 
baseball cards—but wasn’t about to fall for a manager’s argument that “you’ll quit 
to get married someday.  These fellows have to earn a living.” Line and watercolor 
paintings convey the Rhode Island environment in which Lizzie got her start, as 
well as the contrast between her shirtwaist and boater everyday garb and the men’s 
uniform she audaciously wore on the field. A brief list of sources is included.  EB
412 • The BulleTin
meyer, susAn lynn New Shoes; illus. by Eric Velasquez. Holiday House, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2528-0 $16.95   
R 5-8 yrs
Ella Mae is used to getting her cousin Charlotte’s outgrown shoes, just as her brother 
Clayton gets cousin Winslow’s hand-me-downs. This time, though, as Ella Mae is 
happy to discover, Charlotte’s shoes pinch and she’ll actually get a new pair of her 
own, the saddle shoes in Mr. Johnson’s store window. The experience isn’t all she 
hoped it would be, though; white customers who arrived after her and Mama were 
served first, and rather than being allowed to try on shoes for a proper fit, Mama 
had to trace her daughter’s foot on brown paper so Mr. Johnson could estimate 
Ella Mae’s size. The humiliation takes much of the shine right off those new shoes, 
but Ella Mae and Charlotte find a clever way to fight the system. Doing chores for 
five cents and an old pair of shoes as payment, the girls refurbish the footwear and 
open up their own shoe store in the shed, with “price 10¢ and another used pair” 
and everyone invited to try on the goods. An author’s note establishes that the story 
is set in the 1950s, a period when “segregation was especially strong in the South, 
but it could be found throughout the United States,” and she remarks on other 
common discriminatory practices. Velasquez portrays Mama and the resourceful 
girls with near-photorealistic precision, slightly stylizing the background and sup-
porting cast to bring the protagonists into relief. Pair this with Ramsey’s Ruth and 
the Green Book (BCCB 12/10) for a fist-bumping storytime on the way that sharp 
wits and cooperation outsmarted Jim Crow.  EB
mirAndA, megAn Soulprint. Bloomsbury, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-3774-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 9-12
In a future where the soul is scientific fact and reincarnation can be traced like DNA, 
Alina Chase has spent her seventeen years imprisoned for crimes committed in a 
previous life. When three young strangers risk everything to free her, she naïvely 
trusts them, but she soon realizes that it isn’t her they want but June, her former 
criminal self, and the secrets to a soul-tracking database that she possessed. Now, 
to save her own life, she must exploit the soul-deep connection she’s spent her life 
fighting and uncover a long-buried lie at the heart of the soul-science that claims to 
predict her destiny. This absorbing adventure story succeeds largely because of its 
pacing: a heady mixture of consistent action, well-timed reveals, and unpredictable 
twists. Teen readers will appreciate Alina’s battle to establish her own identity, and 
despite her unique situation, she emerges as an authentically overprotected teen 
facing challenges on her own for the first time. Compelling secondary characters, 
both allies and villains, are also well crafted, with painful motivations all their own. 
While the novel overexplains its premise at times, it’s never at the expense of plot 
and action. A strong science thriller with a romantic subplot, the story pairs well 
with Young’s The Program (BCCB 7/13) for readers interested in a future where 
behavior predictors control the lives of young people.  AM 
April 2015 • 413
myers, KAte KAe Inherit Midnight. Bloomsbury, 2015 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-219-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-220-2 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Though her plan to escape from her oppressive boarding school is foiled, Avery’s 
adventure is just beginning. Grandmother VanDemere, who reared now seventeen-
year-old Avery after her mother died and her alcoholic father disappeared from her 
life, has devised a competition to test her potential heirs’ knowledge and virtues in 
order to decide who will inherit her vast fortune. Faced with jealous cousins and 
treacherous uncles, Avery teams up with Riley, the handsome son of the family 
lawyer, to meet her grandmother’s challenges, which each relate to some aspect 
of family pride that her grandmother feels has been lost. When Avery discovers 
that her mother is alive and her grandmother might be the most treacherous of 
all, Avery’s goal in winning the competition becomes getting as far away from her 
family as possible. The competition creates a lively vehicle for international travel 
and plenty of action and suspense, and the romance that develops between Riley 
and Avery is as sweet as it is predictable, with Riley being cardboard-cutout perfect 
and about as deep. The ending unfortunately turns Avery into a scripted scold, 
confronting her father, her grandmother, and even Riley with wooden accusations 
of all the wrongs they have perpetrated against her in a way that sounds completely 
forced and unnatural given her character. Readers may forgive this disappointing 
dénouement for the breathless excitement that came before, however; hand this to 
fans of high-stakes reality challenge shows as well as those who count Raskin’s The 
Westing Game (BCCB 9/78) as a favorite.  KC
nelson, theresA The Year We Sailed the Sun. Jackson/Atheneum, 2015 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-6898-5827-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0649-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Cover art of the sweet, flowing-haired child running through a sun-dappled field 
gives little indication of the brassy St. Louis spitfire readers meet herein. Eleven-
year-old Julia Delaney and her older siblings, Mary and Bill, are left without any 
near relatives following their grandmother’s death, and Julia reacts to their intern-
ment in Catholic-run charitable homes by biting the nun who arrives to claim 
them. Bill, fifteen and nearly a man by early twentieth century standards, promises 
to get the girls out of House of Mercy as soon as he can, but until then, he’ll live 
at Father Dunne’s News Boys Home and try to make some money. Mary adjusts 
reasonably well, working in the school laundry and then being sent on to work in 
a private home. Julia, though, takes every opportunity to act out, run off, and track 
down her brother, whose involvement on the fringes of a kids’ street gang puts him 
and his little sister in the sights of a truly dangerous adult crime boss, Timothy 
Egan. Nelson crafts Julia’s story from two true sources—childhood experiences of 
her own mother-in-law and St. Louis history surrounding the real-life Timothy 
Egan—and readers who attend to the author’s note may be pleasantly startled to 
learn that much of what appears to be generic, spunky orphan-story fare is well 
grounded here in reality, right down to the happy ending of Julia’s new life with a 
kind guardian. Julia’s kickin’ and screamin’ resistance to inevitable changes in her 
life is both comical and heart-wrenching, and readers who like their historical fic-
tion heroines feisty will be happily immersed in her story.  EB
414 • The BulleTin
neWmAn, Aline AlexAnder How to Speak Cat: A Guide to Decoding Cat Language; 
by Aline Alexander Newman and Gary Weitzman, D.V.M. National Geographic, 
2015 176p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-1864-1 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-1863-4 $12.99   
R Gr. 5 up
Newman and Weitzman provide a wealth of information on a wide variety of top-
ics of interest to cat lovers, from body language (which is broken down into both 
specific actions—such as licking—and by body part—such as the positioning and 
movement of a cat’s tail) to vocalized communication. Information is also given on 
problematic behavior and cat “feelings” such as happiness or anger (although being 
“alert” or “on the hunt” are more conditions than emotions) as well as training 
tips, cat history, cat myths debunked, and cat breeds and colors. The browsable 
format generally offers one topic per page, with sidebars and asides in larger type 
sometimes providing additional trivia or pertinent advice. Full-page and smaller 
color photos of cats in action are sharp and clear, engaging, and (usually) relevant 
to the text. While a few of the book’s assertions are questionable (“Adult cats don’t 
play with other cats. They only play with toys”), there’s a lot of solid information 
on cat behavior that goes beyond the basic, such as the countering of the assump-
tion that purring always indicates contentment or the revelation that not all experts 
agree on whether or not a cat can be depressed.  Much of the information has a 
direct application for young owners as well, such as the numerous suggestions for 
training cats (although the authors repeatedly make it clear that great patience 
will be required), ideas for appropriate play (such as making a treat-dispensing toy 
using a plastic bottle), and useful recommendations for introducing a new cat to 
one that’s already in residence. Kitty aficionados will find this both entertaining 
and instructive, and it may drive them to explore their pets’ behavior more deeply. 
Quizzes, a list of resources, and an index are also included.  JH
nielsen, Jennifer A. Mark of the Thief: Book 1. Scholastic, 2015 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56154-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56203-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Nic has never bowed to his role as a Roman slave: he pretty much only follows the 
orders that seem logical to him unless his little sister is at risk. This defiance turns 
out to be a lucky trait when Nic is ordered to find an amulet that belonged to Julius 
Caesar and give it to a power-hungry general. He does find it, and a frightening 
griffin guarding it, but decides to try to keep the treasure for himself. Though his 
determination to save his sister trumps other goals, even he can see that the magical 
amulet and his own new supernatural powers are highly desired by various political 
factions and may make him either a pawn or a game-changer. The Imperial Ro-
man setting is impeccably conveyed throughout the book; Nielsen wisely sprinkles 
historical details in subtle ways so that readers will be able to imagine the context 
without ever feeling overtly educated about an era. Their attention will be on 
Nic, who is often foolish and abrasive but who always has noble intentions. There 
are several other engaging key characters, including Nic’s opportunistic frenemy, 
Aurelia, who began as his guard, sold him out, and then experienced one of her 
greatest losses with Nic. Nielsen fans and historical fiction buffs who don’t mind 
a dose of fantasy mixed in will appreciate this promising start to a new series.  AS
April 2015 • 415
o’Connor, george If I Had a Triceratops; written and illus. by George 
O’Connor. Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6013-0 $15.99   
R 4-6 yrs
Our hero and narrator longs for a pet Triceratops, and he knows exactly how to be a 
responsible pet owner (“I would take her for lots and lots of walks. . . . Playing fetch 
would be another excellent way for her to get exercise”). He’d forgive small trespasses 
(like her eating his homework), because “it will all be worth it when she runs out to 
greet me at the end of the day” and, of course, bowls him over completely. The text 
is straightforward and largely straight-faced, leaving the humor to the illustrations, 
and the smooth line and watercolor art picks up the challenge—not so much in style, 
with its airy wide-open spreads and streamlined focus continuing the realism, but 
with the comic interpretation of events. The illustrations add a sweet progression 
to the text, starting with the boy’s seeing the huge orange triceratops sprawled on 
shavings in a pet-store window; her happy galumphing and destructive romping 
is classic big-dog stuff but writ huge and reptilian, as Sara the Triceratops fetches a 
pulled-up tree and high-fives her tiny owner with her humongous foot. The kids 
for whom this is a straight-up wishful fantasy will revel in the notion, and the book 
may spark discussion about other technically impossible but delightful pets.  DS
pizzoli, greg Tricky Vic: The Impossibly True Story of the Man Who Sold the Eiffel 
Tower; written and illus. by Greg Pizzoli. Viking, 2015 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01652-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-9
Evidently “Go big or go home” applies to crime as well as sports, and it could be 
an apt mantra for Robert Miller, alias Count Victor Lustig, an early twentieth 
century swindler whose cons grew to monumental proportions. Pizzoli’s short and 
stylish account follows Miller from his early years as a gifted student and gambler, 
who finds a way to put his multilingual skills, good looks, and polished demeanor 
to lucrative, if risky, use. First, he bilks ocean-liner passengers out of their money, 
comes to America and cons Al Capone into blessing his game, and then ups the 
ante with the Romanian Money Box con, an oldie but goodie that lets the perp slip 
out of town before the mark finds himself stuck with nothing. The acme of Lustig’s 
career, though, was convincing contractors to bid on demolishing Paris’s aging and 
decrepit Eiffel Tower and selling the valuable iron for scrap—award going to the 
gullible high bidder and cash going into Lustig’s pocket. Yes, he got his comeuppance 
and spent his final days in federal prison—but what a fabulous story he left behind. 
Pizzoli nimbly walks the line between censure of Lustig’s crime and utter delight in 
his cleverness and boldness. The picture-book format—a mash-up of retro-styled 
cartooning and period reproduction vignettes, with our bowler-hatted anti-hero 
portrayed with a pixelated fingerprint for a face—works wonderfully. Sidebars 
supplement the text, and visual gags complement the wry tone, with would-be 
buyer Mr. Poisson depicted with a fish head, and another mark helpfully sporting 
a name tag, “Hello, my name is Mark.” A glossary, selected sources, and an author’s 
note are included, and Pizzoli clarifies how he dealt with shaky information. After 
all, “I wouldn’t want you to feel as though you’ve been conned.”  EB
416 • The BulleTin
proimos, JAmes, iii Apocalypse Bow Wow; illus. by James Proimos Jr. Blooms-
bury, 2015 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-442-8 $13.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-443-5 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
It’s apparently the apocalypse outside, in this humorously dystopian graphic novel, 
but the big goofy mutt and the little yappy dog inside the house are mostly con-
cerned that their people haven’t come home to feed them. They head out into the 
world to find a blasted landscape and a few other dogs, one of whom points them 
to the grocery store (“Building full of food!”). Once there, they join forces with 
the resident bulldog and gorge themselves silly; the three, aided by a local rat and a 
tick who’s been reading Sun Tzu’s The Art of War, then take on a horde of invaders 
who seek to claim the territory. This is typical Proimos (Proimoi?) in its affable 
weirdness and loopy, slightly edgy cartoonish artwork; though occasional scenes 
are on the dark side, the black and white illustrations have a countercultural feel 
that adds extra appeal. The dogs’ dialogue is snappy, with fine comic contrast as 
the dopier dog starts passing on the tick’s sophisticated observations from Sun Tzu. 
The action transpires in brief demarcated scenes, making this loopy story perfect 
for reluctant readers who need frequent breaks. The plot trickles to a stop rather 
than ending with a bang, but it’s clearly setting up for a sequel, so the forthcoming 
Apocalypse Meow Meow should satisfy kids desperate to know what happens next.  DS
pyron, bobbie Lucky Strike. Levine/Scholastic, 2015 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-59217-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-59219-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Nate’s routine is as follows: pocket his well-worn rabbit’s foot; touch the photo of 
his deceased parents; grab his camera—and head out to the kitchen for his usual 
breakfast of burnt toast. Despite those hopeful morning rituals, Nate seems to be 
the unluckiest kid in Paradise Beach, Florida. When he wakes up on his eleventh 
birthday (on the eleventh of April), he dares to hope that his luck might change. And 
it does—when he’s struck by lightning while losing a game of mini-golf, transform-
ing him into luck’s darling. He pulls winning raffle tickets, makes perfect toast, and 
hits home runs; his grandfather’s floundering fishing business begins to boom. Nate’s 
good luck brings newfound popularity—and newfound resentment—straining his 
friendship with his best (female) friend Gen and taking a toll on his own mental 
state, until he wants only to be his old, unlucky self. A celebration of community 
and place peppered with folksy charm, Pyron’s novel recalls DiCamillo’s Because 
of Winn Dixie (BCCB 6/00) and Schindler’s The Junction of Sunshine and Lucky 
(BCCB 2/13). The story embraces diversity (Gen is African-American; the town 
has a synagogue), skillfully employs wry humor, and elicits sympathy for its likable 
characters, all in a frank and approachable narrative voice. It will be an excellent 
fit for the kid who feels chronically unlucky, or for the ultra-literally minded who 
would still like to believe in magic.  AA
April 2015 • 417
rhAtigAn, Joe Inventions That Could Have Changed the World . . . But Didn’t; 
illus. by Anthony Owsley. Imagine/Charlesbridge, 2015 80p
ISBN 978-1-62354-024-1 $14.95   
R Gr. 3-6
“For every amazing invention, there are thousands that are never produced, arrive 
too soon or too late to be of any use, or simply don’t work.” In this tidy volume 
examining just such inventions, Rhatigan organizes snippets of information into 
four main chapters on transportation, efficiency, recreation, and baby and pet 
care—an odd assortment of themes, certainly, but useful in providing structure 
for this joyride through the world of fascinating failures. Here kids learn about 
important inventors’ brainchildren that never became commercially viable—from 
Thomas Edison’s concrete houses (cheap materials, but huge overhead for contrac-
tors), to Buckminster Fuller’s easy-to-park, eleven-seater, three-wheeled Dymaxion 
car (a prototype crashed at the World’s Fair. Oops). Rhatigan also discusses the 
short-lived—cages that attached to the outer walls of apartment buildings to al-
low babies to get sunshine; a gas-powered pogo stick (even Grandpa can handle 
it in the commercials); Gerber’s 1974 marketing of adult baby food (No. Just, 
no). And then there are the total duds, such as Franz Reichelt’s early version of a 
wingsuit, in which he plummeted to his death off the Eiffel Tower. Short entries 
are accompanied by technical drawings from patent applications and/or cartoon-
styled reconstructions of the inventions. Rhatigan includes an occasional link to 
a website or video for selected topics, but enterprising kids will quickly figure out 
that there’s a lot more on the web than the author suggests, and just about any 
entry will lead to online amusement. A list of resources concentrates on websites; 
subject and inventor indexes are also included.  EB
roCK, mAyA Scripted. Putnam, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25733-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Conflict escalates to open warfare between the mainland and the Drowned Islands, 
but the residents of Bliss Island have found a way to ensure their own peace and 
prosperity: the entire island is the set of a reality TV show, broadcast to provide 
the Reals with a diverting spectacle. The Characters are safe unless they break the 
fourth wall or their popularity dips, which is the threat Nettie Starling faces as 
she fails to meet her ratings target. When several of her friends get cut from the 
show, Nettie is called on by an ambitious young producer to follow through on 
some “suggestions” that turn out to be mandates. Her ratings soar, but she starts 
to question what’s happening behind the scenes, and what she finds out changes 
everything. Shades of Hunger Games (BCCB 11/08) and other such titles filter 
through this dystopian text that explores the excesses of surveillance culture as well 
as the cost of being among a privileged elite shielded from hardship. Readers are 
immersed in the world of the show from the start, forcing thoughtful engagement to 
understand a specialized vocabulary that Nettie has never thought to question and 
hence never explains. Fortunately, contemporary readers have enough media and 
slang savvy to figure out references to “camperf,” “propro,” and “fralling” in context, 
and the Characters have tricks to hide some of their goings-on as they pursue the 
mystery. Details regarding the war are kept vague, giving the end a mildly sinister 
foreshadowing that never turns into anything; instead, the conclusion’s tidiness 
belies the menacing set-up and dissipates the gathered tension. Readers may wish 
418 • The BulleTin
for something more substantive as a result, but they’ll at least be relieved to see the 
protagonist get a chance at a happy ending.  KC
rodriguez, Cindy l. When Reason Breaks. Bloomsbury, 2015 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-412-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-413-8 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Since her father left their family, Elizabeth Davis can’t contain her explosive an-
ger. By contrast, her classmate Emily Delgado dissolves into meekness under the 
thumb of her oppressive father, who wants his family to maintain a squeaky-clean 
image so that he can run for office. It’s therefore a problem when her friends post 
a picture of Emily’s first kiss at a party where there was obviously underage drink-
ing. The kisser, Kevin, genuinely likes Emily, but she has a hard time going public 
with their relationship, fearing her father’s wrath. Both girls are inveterate journal 
writers, and their English teacher, Ms. Diaz, becomes their accidental confidant, 
receiving anonymous letters that she assumes are from Elizabeth and turns over to 
the guidance counselor to put her on alert. When Ms. Diaz arrives at school one 
morning to find a suicide note, she realizes her mistake and races to save Emily, 
whose emotional state has degraded to the point where she feels her only option is 
to take her own life. While the book makes clever use of Emily Dickinson’s life and 
poetry, the prose itself is pedestrian and the plot is riddled with narrative cheats. 
For instance, there’s no mention of Kevin and Emily having sex until Emily takes 
a pregnancy test, Elizabeth’s backstory is deliberately provocative and ambiguous, 
and the confusion over who is sending the letters is an obvious device. However, 
Rodriguez captures the many moods, dark and light, of Dickinson through the 
book’s characters, and the author’s note that follows the text neatly explains all of 
the connections.  KC 
rosen, miChAel J. Place Hacking: Venturing Off Limits. Twenty-First Century, 
2015 71p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2515-6 $24.99   
R Gr. 8-10
This brief but lively introduction to the joy of urban trespass is the stuff reluctant-
reader dreams are made of. Rosen investigates three aspects of place hacking: urban 
exploration, which generally involves ascending or descending into remote city 
locations and photo-documenting the site or the view; urban adventure, which 
involves a riskier degree of interaction with the surroundings, from parkour to 
death-defying B.A.S.E. jumping; and infiltration, an amped-up version of old- 
school party-crashing. Wildly varying motivations and ethical codes are discussed, 
and myriad color photographs are included, from the giddy extreme ironing on a 
rock-climbing wall, to the stunningly beautiful rooftop view of Paris’ Notre Dame 
Cathedral. Almost as entertaining as the subject itself is the adult squirming in-
volved in the presentation: three paragraphs of fine-print disclaimer get the ball 
rolling; Rosen confesses to his personal timidity in his introduction; Five Dangers 
of Place Hacking quickly follow (“And now, a brief word from our legal depart-
ment: Don’t”); and reminders of peril abound (“Climbers require ropes. Drainers 
need waders. . . . And B.A.S.E. jumpers needs their heads examined, plus a wingsuit 
or parachute”). Lest readers remain in doubt of the overall message—read about 
this, don’t try it—a persuasive writing activity on place-hacking ethics is included, 
April 2015 • 419
a buzzkill if ever there was one. A selective timeline of place hacking, a glossary, 
source notes, an index, and resources for further research (and lots of delightfully 
bad ideas) are also included.  EB
sAlisbury, melindA The Sin Eater’s Daughter. Scholastic, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81062-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81973-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Twylla thought she would grow up to be a Sin Eater like her mother, who symboli-
cally consumes the sins of the dead (by eating amounts of food that proportionately 
represent their sins) in order to free their souls. Twylla is, however, released from 
that role and offered a different life in the kingdom if she can survive the process 
of becoming the Daunen Embodied, a child of a goddess whose returned presence 
could restore the faith of the flagging population. Though this gives her a comfort-
able life, she has thereby become untouchable, with poison coursing through her 
skin that can kill anyone with whom she shares physical contact (or so she’s told); 
she’s therefore an important political focus for the populace—and also the queen’s 
pawn. Though it’s slightly unrealistic (and a bit sad) that Twylla falls hard for the 
only two men who are close to her in age, they are so startlingly different that they 
make for good romance triangle fodder, and the prince and the lowly guard both 
push her to be more than she thought she was. Indeed, all of the side characters 
are compellingly written, with the tortured, torturing queen ultimately emerging 
as a deliciously complex villain who is ghastly, sure, but also vulnerable in subtle 
ways. Narrator Twylla is kept largely in the dark, so only especially sharp and careful 
readers will catch most of the political maneuverings and lies before she does; that’s 
all right, though, because the point is seeing how Twylla survives the reveals, not 
to spot them early. Offer this to patient fantasy readers or romance buffs—either 
group is likely to appreciate the careful, elegant text.  AS
shAKespeAre, WilliAm Macbeth; ad. and illus. by Gareth Hinds. Candlewick, 
2015 152p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6943-0 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7802-9 $12.99   
R* Gr. 7-12
Teachers and students alike can rejoice that Hinds has turned his considerable 
talent for graphic adaptation to the Scottish play. Here’s Macbeth as a handsome, 
well-formed warrior beckoned to madness and treason by his beautiful, scheming 
wife as she goads him to man up and embrace his destiny by any means necessary. 
In full-color panels with just the right amount of foregrounded detail, Hinds shows 
Macbeth’s triumph shading into tragedy through a subtle move from sunlit pastel 
backgrounds to ever-darkening scenes of paranoid horror. The three crones and other 
mystical elements are particularly effective in living color, as Hinds incorporates 
multicultural archetypes into the witches’ graphic presentation and manipulates 
hue, blurred panel edges, perspective, and ominous shadows as cryptic elements 
that highlight the shifts between reality and the many haunts of the play. A map 
and graphic organizer of the main characters front the blood-soaked narrative, and 
a full set of notes follows it, offering a brief account of Shakespeare’s likely source 
material and the liberties he took with it, a rationale for Hinds’ own abridgments 
and variations in the language of the text, and then detailed lessons on how to read 
420 • The BulleTin
the pictures for maximum uptake of the many codes and meanings therein. These 
notes are in and of themselves worth working into a unit on the play, since it is here 
that Hinds draws attention to the humor, pathos, allusions, and staging difficulties 
that an in-depth study will want to focus on anyway. This is an essential addition 
to Hinds’ growing library of engrossing adaptations and a must-have companion 
to Shakespeare’s original.  KC 
smAle, holly Geek Girl. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2015 362p
ISBN 978-0-06-233357-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Harriet Manners knows she’s a geek because she’s looked it up in the Oxford 
English Dictionary she keeps on her bedside table—and because she keeps an 
Oxford English Dictionary on her bedside table. She is also clumsy and fashion-
challenged, so the last thing she expects is to be scouted as a model at a fashion 
show her best friend, Nat, drags her to. Her clumsiness causes some expensive 
damage at the show and her geekiness is beginning to get her down, so maybe be-
coming an international fashion model will solve both problems. Worried that Nat 
will be angry that Harriet was spotted and Nat wasn’t, and forbidden to consider 
modeling by her stepmother, Harriet maps out an elaborate plan of lies for her 
father and her to follow as she travels to Moscow for her first gig. The plot may be 
silly and somewhat predictable, but Harriet’s voice is so fresh and funny and the 
various characters so over the top that plot hardly matters. Most endearing of the 
lot is Toby, Harriet’s stalker and fellow geek, who unashamedly keeps tabs on her 
by hiding in the bushes outside her house and following her about town. Harriet 
herself is the oblivious but obvious product of the system-driven stepmother and 
awkwardly uncool father she shakes her head over. Even when readers are wincing 
at Harriet’s literal and figurative missteps they will be laughing or nodding their 
heads in reluctant agreement with her assessments of how things are for the tire-
somely intelligent. The daffy physical humor and intelligent wit hit the sweet spot 
between Louise Rennison’s Georgia Nicolson books and Erin McCahan’s Love and 
Other Foreign Words (BCCB 9/14).  KC  
smith, AndreW The Alex Crow. Dutton, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42653-0 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 385, for review.
sonniChsen, A. l. Red Butterfly; illus. by Amy June Bates. Simon, 2015 392p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1109-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1111-0 $10.99   
R Gr. 5-7
“Even though I look Chinese/ I’m American on the inside.” So says eleven-year-old 
Kara, protagonist of this verse novel, who was abandoned as an infant in Tianjin 
(not only is she a girl, she has a disfigured hand) and taken in by an American living 
in China. Life with her American mother has been loving but limited, because her 
mother has illegally overstayed her visa and Kara was never officially adopted, so 
there’s little money and Kara hasn’t been able to go to school. When Kara’s visiting 
adult half-sister ends up in the hospital, the authorities catch up to Kara’s situation; 
Kara finds herself in a Chinese orphanage, waiting for adoption by a U.S. family but 
April 2015 • 421
hoping to be reunited with her now-deported foster mother. The story is unusual 
and compelling, and Kara’s viewpoint is plausibly conveyed—she’s anxious about 
the scarcity of money, but she never really questions the family situation until she 
begins to put together bits of information. It’s shocking just how stranded Kara 
really is, and it’s understandable that she’s resistant at first when she moves to her 
new adoptive family’s home in Florida. While there’s some appropriate implicit 
criticism of Kara’s foster mother, the book also respects Kara and Mama’s bond, and 
Kara’s ability to stay connected with Mama and with her friends in the orphanage 
is part of the successful synthesis of her experience that gives her a happy ending. 
Both an individually compelling tale and an acknowledgment of the complexity of 
adoption, this would draw readers moved by Peacock’s Red Thread Sisters (BCCB 
11/12). Small black and white vignettes intriguingly combine digital patterning 
with sometimes scratchy, sometimes fluid, ink strokes, making vivid use of the 
generous margins. An author’s note relates her own experience in Hong Kong and 
China and notes that Kara’s story is based on the true experiences of many unof-
ficial adoptive families there.  DS
stAnley, diAne The Chosen Prince. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 357p
ISBN 978-0-06-224897-8 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Foretold at birth to be the goddess Athene’s hero-redeemer and save the kingdom 
from Zeus’ curse, twelve-year-old prince Alexos has grown up under constant 
scrutiny, with only his love of running and his beloved younger brother Teo to 
bring him joy. Then a wasting disease cripples his legs and Teo goes missing at sea, 
leaving Alexos devastated. Forced to prove that he can still rule, he finds surprising 
bodily and inner strength and a new cadre of friends who grow into loyal advisors. 
However, he feels responsible for his brother’s loss, and he’s haunted by guilt and 
a yearning for forgiveness. Seven years later, Athene arranges for just that, when 
a shipwreck strands Alexos and his comrades on a magical island where Teo has 
been living happily with a foster family. There Alexos, now king, has the chance 
to fulfill his destiny, triumphing over his kingdom’s longtime enemy, finding love 
and family, and bringing peace and prosperity to two nations. The first part of 
this middle-grade fantasy offers a remarkable coming of age story, with a poignant 
mixture of heartbreak and resiliency. The characters are almost too good, revealing 
a depth of kindness and wisdom that limits their relatability, but that quality gives 
the narrative a legendary air and recalls classic hero-education stories like White’s 
The Once and Future King. The second part of the novel is unfortunately less suc-
cessful; weighed down by extensive exposition and backstory, it leaves little room 
for actual plot. Instead, readers are left with a quick, tidy resolution and a deus ex 
machina that has little to do with Alexos and his hard-earned personal growth. Still, 
the novel as a whole has a solid, wholesome feel that may win over readers with its 
flawed but worthy hero and its strong hero-myth conventions.  AM
tAylor, seAn Hoot Owl, Master of Disguise; illus. by Jean Jullien. Candlewick, 
2015 48p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7578-3 $15.99    
R 5-7 yrs
At least in his own mind, Hoot Owl has all the stealthy craft of a ninja. He’s con-
vinced he can catch a rabbit by disguising himself as a carrot (nope), a lamb by 
disguising himself as a ewe (nuh-uh), a pigeon by disguising himself as a birdbath 
422 • The BulleTin
(nice try). Finally, he hits on his master stroke—he disguises himself as a waiter 
to attack a pizza, and the unsuspecting pizza fails to flee and yields its pepperoni 
to Hoot Owl’s “deadly-dangerous beak.” Hoot Owl’s grandiloquent narration (“I 
swoop through the bleak blackness like a wolf in the air”) will make for comic 
reading aloud, especially when contrasted with his failures, and there’s a lilting 
rhythm in the recurring refrain and careful structure. The digitally created art uses 
thick, painterly black outlines contour its simple elements, giving the scenes a bit 
of a flannel-board feel; scarlet Hoot Owl’s insistently peering eyes nicely balance 
between manic intensity and dorky overfocus, and though it’s confusing that some 
of the owl’s disguises are actually pretty good, the art is zesty and high-impact. Fans 
of DaCosta’s Nighttime Ninja will appreciate Hoot Owl’s melodramatic pursuit, 
and they may be inspired to emulate his hunt of a helpless pizza.  DS
volponi, pAul Game Seven. Viking, 2015 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78518-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Sixteen-year-old Julio Ramirez, Jr. is in a delicate position in his Cuban homeland. 
As the most talented shortstop being scouted, he should be a shoo-in for a coveted 
position on the Junior Nacionales team, but as the son of a defector to the U.S., 
who’s now pitching for the Miami Marlins in the World Series, he’s likely to be 
shut out of his opportunity. Julio and his mother have heard nothing from Papi, 
nicknamed El Fuego, since he sought asylum in the U.S. six years ago, but now 
Papi’s brother, Uncle Ramon, breaks the news that Papi has set up a contact who 
can get Julio, cousin Luis, and himself to Florida and freedom, but they have to 
leave immediately. With his mother’s hasty blessing, Julio and his two relatives 
climb aboard an aging Buick converted into a boat and take their chances with 
the contact, Gabriel, whom they have just met. As they make their way through 
three days at sea, followed by processing in Miami and transfer to a comfortable 
apartment complex, they follow the tight World Series on the radio and television, 
but Julio hears nothing from Papi himself. Julio takes the initiative to finagle his 
way into the stadium for Game Seven, where he confronts his father and demands 
answers about Papi’s new life and three-year-old son, even as El Fuego attempts to 
give total focus to the game. The conclusion isn’t as conclusive as it might be, but 
the mixed emotions of a proud but quasi-abandoned son are well drawn, and the 
father’s and son’s common struggle to reconcile family duty and individual freedom 
is realistically complex. Julio is caught in a situation worth further exploration, 
so maybe this will be the exception to Volponi’s sequel-avoiding tendencies.  EB
WAllACh, tommy We All Looked up. Simon, 2015 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1877-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1879-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
If there were a 66.6% chance of the world ending in two months, would you 
change anything? In this novel, four teens tackle that question when the Earth 
is faced with a rapidly approaching asteroid that is much more likely to hit than 
miss. Each of the protagonists (the story alternates among the teens’ viewpoints) 
had a social label before all this happened, but high school hierarchies crumble 
under the threat of world annihilation, and the teens are suddenly freed to create 
April 2015 • 423
themselves anew. While the individual stories are sometimes unevenly told, the 
story really isn’t about the single teens; this novel is much more of a big-picture 
glimpse into their whole lives (friends, enemies, families, etc.) and how people orbit 
around and bump into one another in evolving ways, particularly during a crisis. 
It’s a dark novel, particularly as things fall apart and stop working (many people 
abandon even important posts to be with their loved ones), but Wallach uses black 
humor, sharp literary references (Vonnegut gets some attention, for example), and 
startlingly beautiful moments of true kindness to balance the dismal aspects. Long 
after the details of these particular teens have faded, the question of what one might 
do in that situation will likely provoke contemplation or discussion. Pair this with 
Wallenfels’ novel about the apocalypse via alien invasion, Pod (BCCB 5/10), for a 
broader exploration of the ways the world might end and what heroism and villainy 
may emerge when it does.  AS
WillArd, nAnCy The Three Mouths of Little Tom Drum; illus. by Kevin 
Hawkes. Candlewick, 2015 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5476-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M 5-7 yrs
Tom’s mother has made his very favorite pie (strawberry) for his eighth birthday. 
Not content with the single slice he wheedles before bed, he wishes for three 
mouths; unfortunately, this birthday wish comes true. Plagued with three pieholes, 
he cannot possibly have a birthday party or even attend school, and his mother’s 
initial reaction is to shriek “There’s a monster in the house!” before the family falls 
together weeping on the kitchen floor. He studies with a tutor, begins inventing 
contraptions, and wishes fervently for his previous face; only when his innovations 
matter more than his appearance and the neighborhood children appreciate him 
just as he is does he return to his single-mouthed self. The message is ambiguous 
in this convoluted cautionary tale of greed and gluttony (or maybe of the superfi-
ciality of appearances—hard to say); the logic is unclear and random plot devices 
are confusing. The pen, ink, and pastel illustrations confound rather than clarify 
the issue, with an anthropomorphized moon implicated but never convicted in 
Tom’s initial transformation. With its combination of a 1950s-like backdrop, fable 
conventions, and incongruous inventions the art pairs realism and whimsy without 
really coming down on either side; lightness is never fully embraced nor darkness 
fully explored. Neither a clear morality tale nor a successful satire—and entirely too 
text-heavy for the crowd who could simply laugh at Tom blowing bubbles from all 
three mouths—this perplexing book, like a pie, is best left to cool on the shelf.  AA
yee, lisA The Kidney Hypothetical: Or How to Ruin Your Life in Seven 
Days. Levine/Scholastic, 2015 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-23094-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63399-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Senior year is neatly funneling eighteen-year-old Higgs Boson Bing into the fu-
ture and dental career (following in his father’s footsteps) he’s planned, with his 
acceptance to Harvard and status as Prom King and co-valedictorian only a few of 
his many successes. He starts to deviate from the smooth path, however, when he 
breaks up with his longterm girlfriend, Roo (in an argument about whether he’d give 
424 • The BulleTin
her one of his kidneys); then his campaign posters for Senior of the Year are being 
relentlessly defaced; then he meets a seemingly tough and wild girl, Monarch, who 
frightens and challenges him. When Harvard gets wind of a possible falsehood on 
his application, will all his plans crumble? Smug Higgs is amusingly unlikable, and 
Yee does a fine job of damning him by his own words and disdain (Monarch aptly 
dismisses the love of Vonnegut he considers as a mark of superiority to be more a 
mark of being a predictable type). There’s window enough on his family situation, 
where he’s become the shining star who’s making up for the promise cut short when 
his older brother died, to both explain his attitude and reveal some of the cracks 
behind the Bing façade. The storyline is pretty predictable, though, and Monarch, 
who turns out to be just another child of privilege going through a rebellious stage, 
seems more a device than a person. Additionally, the book generally treats character 
at a fairly superficial level, never really challenging Higgs’ contemptuous view of 
Roo and leaving interesting other people, like Higgs’ marginalized younger sister 
and put-upon best friend, unexplored. Readers with their own family pressures 
may nonetheless recognize Higgs’ tightly created world and his unacknowledged 
desires to break free of it.  DS
yep, lAurenCe A Dragon’s Guide to the Care and Feeding of Humans; by Laurence 
Yep and Joanne Ryder; illus. by Mary GrandPré. Crown, 2015 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39229-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39228-0 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39230-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys    
R Gr. 2-4
Miss Drake, an ancient dragon, isn’t sure what to think of the granddaughter of 
her former pet human, who recently died. Winnie is sassy and creative, and she 
won’t take no for an answer. The two are still circling around one another, trying 
to figure out how dragon and kid can connect, when Winnie unwittingly unleashes 
a flurry of creatures into California via a magical sketchbook. As the two try to 
gather them all up, they bond without even really knowing what is happening, 
and all ends well with the city saved and a friendship sparked. While there is a bit 
of tension when one of the unleashed creatures turns out to be dangerous, mostly 
this is a clever and amusing novel that imagines a magical world that nestles right 
up against our own and sometimes crosses over. The humorous chapter headings 
that inform dragons how to make humans into tolerable pets effectively foreshadow 
each chapter’s events, and it’s clear Miss Drake has her hands full in the effort, since 
Winnie is tough to tame. Once the two connect, however, and share a poignant 
scene wondering about lost loved ones, there’s no separating them. Small, appealing 
illustrations by Mary GrandPré accent the first page of each chapter, depicting a 
key moment or event. Heavy-hitter authors (and illustrator) plus the instant appeal 
of dragons means this won’t need much selling—happily, it is worth the attention 
it will receive.  AS
zommer, yuvAl The Big Blue Thing on the Hill; written and illus. by Yuval Zom-
mer. Templar/Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7403-8 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
Howling Hill is quiet by day but it lives up to its name at night, when the bears, 
wolves, foxes, boars, etc. emerge to revel in some ferocious vocalizing. Their rou-
April 2015 • 425
tine is interrupted one night by the arrival of a “big blue thing”—a blue and white 
VW-style van. The animals try various means to shoo it off the hill but to no avail 
(in fact, it even frightens them when the engine starts up—“It’s waking up!” they 
shout, then scatter). Finally they consult Wise Old Owl, whose foolproof removal 
plan—enlisting the aid of swarms of stinging, biting insects and “a snake or two for 
good measure” to enter “the mouth of the beast” and do their thing—works, and 
the big blue thing hits the road. The animals relax back into their normal pattern 
again—until a spaceship lands on Howling Hill. The narrative is a little wordy, but 
it offers lots of audience opportunities for sound effects (frequently emphasized by 
a larger, huskier font), the conversational tone of the writing adds solid readaloud 
value, and the surprise ending is genuinely amusing. Additionally. youngsters 
may appreciate the fact that the smaller critters are the smartest and that they’re 
eventually the ones who save the day. Digital illustrations have a casual, painterly 
feel, utilizing a palette of outdoorsy greens, browns, grays, and blues; black details 
(and the occasional black nighttime sky) and the orange tones of the foxes (and 
the van’s Weber grill) add zest. This might make an interesting partner with Ed 
Young’s Seven Blind Mice (BCCB 3/92); creative types might also find dramatic 
performance possibilities here.  JH
426 • The BulleTin
ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2015
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Kwame Alexander for The Crossover 
(Houghton Mifflin Harcourt). Two Newbery Honor Books also were named: El 
Deafo, by Cece Bell (Amulet/Abrams); and Brown Girl Dreaming, by Jacqueline 
Woodson (Paulsen/Penguin).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Dan Santat for The Adventures of Beekle: The 
unimaginary Friend, illustrated and written by Dan Santat (Little). Six Caldecott 
Honor Books were also named: Nana in the City, written and illustrated by Lauren 
Castillo (Clarion); The Noisy Paint Box: The Colors and Sounds of Kandinsky’s Ab-
stract Art, illustrated by Mary GrandPré and written by Barb Rosenstock (Knopf); 
Sam & Dave Dig a Hole, illustrated by Jon Klassen and written by Mac Barnett 
(Candlewick); Viva Frida, illustrated and written by Yuyi Morales (Roaring Brook); 
The Right Word: Roget and His Thesaurus, illustrated by Melissa Sweet and written 
by Jen Bryant (Eerdmans); and This One Summer, illustrated by Jillian Tamaki and 
written by Mariko Tamaki (First Second).
The Coretta Scott King Book Award for writing goes to Jacqueline Woodson 
for Brown Girl Dreaming (Paulsen/Penguin). Three King Author Honor Books 
were selected: The Crossover, written by Kwame Alexander (Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt); How I Discovered Poetry, written by Marilyn Nelson and illustrated by 
Hadley Hooper (Dial); and How It Went Down, written by Kekla Magoon (Holt). 
The Coretta Scott King Book Award for illustration goes to Christopher Myers 
for Firebird, written by Misty Copeland (Putnam). Two King Illustrator Honor 
Books were selected: Josephine: The Dazzling Life of Josephine Baker, illustrated by 
Christian Robinson and written by Patricia Hruby Powell (Chronicle); and Little 
Melba and Her Big Trombone, illustrated by Frank Morrison and written by Katheryn 
Russell-Brown (Lee & Low). The Coretta Scott King/John Steptoe New Talent 
Award goes to Jason Alexander for When I Was the Greatest, written and illustrated 
by Jason Alexander (Atheneum). Deborah D. Taylor is the winner of the Coretta 
Scott King—Virginia Hamilton Practitioner Award for Lifetime Achievement. 
The Pura Belpré Award for illustration goes to Yuyi Morales for Viva Frida, il-
lustrated and written by Yuyi Morales (Roaring Brook). Three Belpré Illustrator 
Honor Books were named: Little Roja Riding Hood, illustrated by Susan Guevara 
and written by Susan Middleton Elya (Putnam); Green Is a Chile Pepper, illustrated 
by John Parra and written by Roseanne Greenfield Thong (Chronicle); and Separate 
Is Never Equal: Sylvia Mendez & Her Family’s Fight for Desegregation, illustrated and 
written by Duncan Tonatiuh (Abrams). The Pura Belpré Award for writing goes to 
Marjorie Agosín for I Lived on Butterfly Hill, illustrated by Lee White (Atheneum). 
One Belpré Author Honor Book was named: Portraits of Hispanic American Heroes, 
written by Juan Felipe Herrera and illustrated by Raúl Colón (Dial).
April 2015 • 427
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most 
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is 
Eerdmans Books for Young Readers for Bibi Dumon Tak’s Mikis and the Donkey, 
translated from the Dutch by Laura Watkinson and illustrated by Philip Hopman. 
Two Batchelder Honor Books were also selected: Hidden: A Child’s Story of the Holo-
caust, written by Loïc Dauvillier, illustrated by Marc Lizano and translated by Alexis 
Siegel (First Second); and Nine Open Arms, written by Benny Lindelauf, illustrated 
by Dasha Tolstikova, and translated by John Nieuwenhuizen (Enchanted Lion).
The Michael L. Printz Award for excellence in literature written for young adults 
goes to Jandy Nelson for I’ll Give You the Sun (Dial). Four Printz Honor Books 
also were named: And We Stay, by Jenny Hubbard (Delacorte); The Carnival at 
Bray, written by Jessie Ann Foley (Elephant Rock); Grasshopper Jungle, written by 
Andrew Smith (Dutton); and This One Summer, written by Maiko Tamaki and 
illustrated by Jillian Tamaki (First Second).
The Robert F. Sibert Medal for most distinguished informational book for chil-
dren goes to The Right Word: Roget and His Thesaurus, written by Jen Bryant and 
illustrated by Melissa Sweet (Eerdmans). Five Sibert Honor Books were named: 
Brown Girl Dreaming, written by Jacqueline Woodson (Paulsen); The Family 
Romanov: Murder, Rebellion, & the Fall of Imperial Russia, written by Candace 
Fleming (Schwartz & Wade); Josephine: The Dazzling Life of Josephine Baker, writ-
ten by Patricia Hruby Powell and illustrated by Christian Robinson (Chronicle); 
Neighborhood Sharks: Hunting with the Great Whites of California’s Farallon Islands, 
written and illustrated by Katherine Roy (Macaulay/Roaring Brook); and Separate 
Is Never Equal: Sylvia Mendez & Her Family’s Fight for Desegregation, written and 
illustrated by Duncan Tonatiuh (Abrams).
The Theodor Seuss Geisel Award for most distinguished beginning reader book 
goes to You Are (Not) Small, written by Anna Kang and illustrated by Christopher 
Weyant (Two Lions). Two Geisel Honor Books were named: Mr. Putter & Tabby 
Turn the Page, written Cynthia Rylant and illustrated by Arthur Howard (Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt); and Waiting Is Not Easy! written and illustrated by Mo Willems 
(Hyperion).
The Schneider Family Book Award for books that embody an artistic expression 
of the disability experience goes to A Boy and a Jaguar, written by Alan Rabinowitz 
and illustrated by Catia Chien (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt) in the category for 
young children. Ann M. Martin is the winner of the middle-school award for Rain 
Reign (Feiwel). Girls Like us, written by Gail Giles (Candlewick), is the winning 
book in the teen category.
The Stonewall Children’s and Young Adult Literature Award, for children’s and 
young adult books of exceptional merit relating to the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 
transgendered experience, was given to This Day in June, written by Gayle E. Pitman, 
Ph.D. and illustrated by Kristyna Litten (Magination). Three honor books were 
selected: Beyond Magenta: Transgender Teens Speak Out, written and photographed 
by Susan Kuklin (Candlewick); I’ll Give You the Sun, written by Jandy Nelson (Dial); 
and Morris Micklewhite and the Tangerine Dress, written by Christine Baldacchio 
and pictures by Isabelle Malenfant (Groundwood/House of Anansi).
428 • The BulleTin
The Andrew Carnegie Medal for excellence in children’s video goes to Paul R. Gagne 
and Melissa Reilly Ellard of Weston Woods Studios, Inc., producers of Me . . . Jane. 
The Laura Ingalls Wilder Award for a substantial and lasting contribution to lit-
erature for children goes to Donald Crews. 
The Odyssey Award for excellence in audiobook production goes to H. O. R. S. E.: 
A Game of Basketball and Imagination, produced by Live Oak Media. The book is 
written by Christopher Myers and narrated by Dion Graham and Christoper Myers. 
Three Odyssey Honor Recordings were selected: Five, Six, Seven, Nate!, produced 
by Audioworks (Children’s), written and narrated by Tim Federle; The Scandalous 
Sisterhood of Prickwillow Place, produced by Listening Library, written by Julie Berry, 
and narrated by Jayne Entwistle; and A Snicker of Magic, produced by Scholastic 
Audiobooks, written by Natalie Lloyd, and narrated by Cassandra Morris.
The 2016 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by author and 
literary advocate Pat Mora.
The Margaret A. Edwards Award for lifetime achievement in writing for young 
adults goes to Sharon M. Draper. 
The William C. Morris Award for a book written by a first-time author for young 
adults goes to Gabi, a Girl in Pieces, written by Isabel Quintero (Cinco Puntos). 
Four additional books were shortlisted: The Carnival at Bray, written by Jessie Anne 
Foley (Elephant Rock); The Story of Owen: Dragon Slayer of Trondheim, written by 
E. K. Johnston (Carolrhoda Lab); The Scar Boys, written by Len Vlahos (Egmont); 
and The Strange and Beautiful Sorrows of Ava Lavender, written by Leslye Walton 
(Candlewick).
The YALSA Excellence in Nonfiction Award goes to Popular: Vintage Wisdom for 
a Modern Greek, written by Maya Van Wagenen (Dutton). Four other books were 
shortlisted for the award: Laughing at My Nightmare, written by Shane Burcaw 
(Roaring Brook); The Family Romanov: Murder, Rebellion & the Fall of Imperial 
Russia, written by Candace Fleming (Schwartz & Wade); Ida M. Tarbell: The 
Woman Who Challenged Big Business—and Won! written by Emily Arnold McCully 
(Clarion); and The Port Chicago 50: Disaster, Mutiny, and the Fight for Civil Rights, 
written by Steve Sheinkin (Roaring Brook).
The Scott O’Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Dash, by Kirby Larson 
(Scholastic).
The Canadian Library Association’s 2014 Book of the Year for Children is Curse of 
the Dream Witch, by Allan Stratton (Scholastic). Two Honor Books are The Metro 
Dogs of Moscow, by Rachel Delaney (Puffin), and Prince Puggly of Spud and the 
Kingdom of Spiff, by Robert Paul Weston (Puffin). The Amelia Frances Howard-
Gibbon Illustrator’s Award goes to Jon Klassen for The Dark, written by Lemony 
Snicket (HarperCollins). The Young Adult Canadian Book Award goes to Karen 
Bass for Graffiti Knight (Pajama Press). The Honor Book is The unlikely Hero of 
Room 13B, by Teresa Toten (Doubleday). 
April 2015 • 429
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Kevin Brooks for The Bunker Diary (Puffin).
The Kate Greenaway Medal for distinguished illustration in a book for children 
was awarded to This Is Not My Hat, written and illustrated by Jon Klassen (Walker). 
The 2015 NCTE Orbis Pictus Award for outstanding nonfiction for children goes 
to The Family Romanov: Murder, Rebellion & the Fall of Imperial Russia, written by 
Candace Fleming (Schwartz & Wade); honor books are: A Home for Mr. Emerson, 
written by Barbara Kerley and illustrated by Edwin Fotheringham (Scholastic); Mr. 
Ferris and His Wheel, written by Kathryn Gibbs Davis and illustrated by Gilbert 
Ford (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt); The Right Word: Roget and his Thesaurus, writ-
ten by Jen Bryant and illustrated by Melissa Sweet (Eerdmans); Separate Is Never 
Equal: Sylvia Mendez & Her Family’s Fight for Desegregation, written and illustrated 
by Duncan Tonatiuh (Abrams); and Star Stuff: Carl Sagan and the Mysteries, written 
and illustrated by Stephanie Roth Sisson (Roaring Brook).
The Center for Children’s Books’ 2015 Gryphon Award goes to goes to Skateboard 
Party, written by Karen English; illustrated by Laura Freeman (Clarion). Three 
honor books were named: Gravity, written and illus. by Jason Chin (Porter/Roar-
ing Brook); The Slug, written and illus. by Elise Gravel (Tundra); Maddy Kettle: 
The Adventure of the Thimblewitch, written and illus. by Eric Orchard (Top Shelf).
430  •  The BulleTin
Actors and acting–fiction: Levithan
Adoption–fiction: Sonnichsen
Adoption–stories: Dyckman
ADventure: Dayton; DeKeyser; 
Funaro; Jensen; Miranda
African Americans–fiction: Abdul-
Jabbar; Kern
African Americans–stories: Cline-
ransome; Meyer
Aliens–fiction: Kochalka
Animal behavior: newman
Animals–fiction: Kurti
Animals–stories: Dyckman; Zommer
AnthoLogieS: Great War
Arithmetic: Banks
Asian Americans–fiction: Kelly; Yee
Babies–stories: Child
Baseball: McCully
Baseball–fiction: Lupica; volponi
Basketball–fiction: Abdul-Jabbar
Bears–fiction: Coville
Bears–stories: Berger; gavin; henn
BeDtiMe StorieS: Krug
Behavior–fiction: emerson
BiogrAphieS: McCully; pizzoli
Biology: Collard; Jenkins, S.
Birds: Collard
Birds–stories: taylor
Black people–stories: Child
Boarding schools–fiction: Kerr
Brothers–fiction: Abdul-Jabbar; 
Stanley
Brothers–stories: Banks; Child
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Banash; 
Bliss; Jacobson; nelson; nielsen
Brothers and sisters–stories: Dyck-
man
Bullying–fiction: Kelly
Cats: newman
China–fiction: Sonnichsen
Class–fiction: Almond
Clothing–stories: Meyer
Contests–fiction: Myers
Contests–stories: Bee
Coyotes–stories: Appelt
Crime and criminals–fiction: 
Banash; Dayton; Kern; Landers; 
nelson; pizzoli
Death–fiction: Crow; gardner
Depression–fiction: Birdsall
Diaries–fiction: rodriguez
Dinosaurs–stories: o’Connor
Disabilities–fiction: Sonnischsen; 
Stanley
Dogs–fiction: hurley; proimos
Dragons–fiction: Yep
Dreams–fiction: gardner
Ducks–stories: gavin
Dystopias–fiction: rock
Ecology: Collard
eggs: Jenkins, S.
england–fiction: Almond
Environmental studies: Cline-
ransome
Ethics and values: Banash; Coyle; 
rock; Smith
FABLeS: Willard
Failures: rhatigan
Faith–fiction: Bliss; Coyle
Families–fiction: Birdsall; Bliss; Lu-
pica; Myers; Smale; Sonnichsen
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
April 2015  •  431
Families–stories: Appelt; Dyckman
FAntASY: Connolly; Coville; Day-
ton; Funaro; grant; Jensen; Lowe; 
nielsen; Salisbury; Yep
Farm life–fiction: hokenson
Fashion–fiction: Smale
Fathers–fiction: Connolly; hokenson; 
volponi
Filipino Americans–fiction: Kelly
Fire: Collard
Flies–fiction: edwards
FoLK-LiKe tALeS: Willard
FoLKtALeS AnD FAirY tALeS: 
Clarkson
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: Co-
ville; DeKeyser
Food and eating–stories: Jenkins, e.; 
taylor; Willard
Friends–fiction: Almond; Jamieson; 
pyron; Wallach
Friends–stories: henn
gLBtQ people–fiction: Levithan
governesses–fiction: Coville
grandparents–fiction: pyron
grAphiC noveLS: Jamieson; Ko-
chalka; proimos; Shakespeare
grief–fiction: Banash; Lupica
guilt–fiction: Lupica
Health: Jarrow
hiStoriCAL FiCtion: Almond; 
Buxton; Cullen; hokenson; nelson
History, U.S.: Cline-ransome; Jarrow
History, world: Jenkins, e.
homelessness–fiction: Bliss; Jacobson
horror: Smith
houses–stories: gavin
huMor: Bee; Clarkson; Crow; 
Cullen; Dyckman; edwards; 
grant; griffin; Kochalka; Krug; 
o’Connor; proimos; Smale; taylor; 
Zommer
illness–fiction: Crow; Jarrow
immigrants–fiction: volponi
insects–fiction: edwards
inventions: rhatigan
Jesus Christ–fiction: Buxton
Language arts: Clarkson
Latinos–fiction: rodriguez; volponi
Literature, English: Shakespeare
Luck–fiction: pyron
Magic–fiction: DeKeyser; Funaro; 
grant; Lowe; nielsen; Willard
Middle east–fiction: Buxton
Monkeys–fiction: Kurti
Monsters–fiction: Connolly
Monsters–stories: Bee
Moving–fiction: Brewer
Music and musicians–fiction: emer-
son; Kelly
Musical theater–fiction: Levithan
MYSterieS: Abdul-Jabbar; griffin; 
Kerr
Mythology, classical: Stanley
Nature study: Collard; Jenkins, S.; 
newman
orphans–fiction: grant; nelson
parents–fiction: Coyle
parkour: rosen
perception–stories: Zommer
pets: newman
pets–stories: o’Connor
Physical education: Abdul-Jabbar; 
Jamieson; McCully; rosen
politics–fiction: Salisbury
prejudice–fiction: Kelly
presidents–stories: Cullen
prostitution–fiction: Kern
racism–stories: Meyer
Reading aloud: DeKeyser; edwards; 
griffin; hurley
Reading, beginning: edwards; hurley
Reading, easy: Yep
Reading, reluctant: newman; pizzoli; 
proimos; rosen
refugees–fiction: volponi
reincarnation–fiction: Miranda
relationships–fiction: Crow; hoken-
son; Levithan; Salisbury; Wallach; 
Yee
roman empire–fiction: nielsen
romance–fiction: Bell; Landers
royalty–fiction: Kerr; Stanley
runaways–fiction: Kern
School–fiction: emerson; griffin; 
Jacobson; Kelly; Wallach; Yee
SCienCe FiCtion: Connolly; 
Landers; Miranda; Smith; Wallach
432  •  The BulleTin
Scientists–fiction: Smith
Seasons–stories: Berger
Secrets–fiction: Bell; Birdsall; Brewer; 
Dayton; Myers
Short StorieS: Great War
Space travel–fiction: Kochalka
SportS StorieS: Abdul-Jabbar; 
Jamieson; McCully; rosen
Spring–stories: Berger
Stepfamilies–stories: Appelt
Storytime: Meyer; o’Connor; taylor
Suicide–fiction: rodriguez
television–fiction: rock
time travel–fiction: Bell
toDDLer BooKS: Krug
twins–fiction: Brewer
verSe noveLS: Sonnichsen
voyages and travel–fiction: Coyle; 
DeKeyser; Jensen; Smale; Stanley
voyages and travel–stories: Banks; 
henn
War–fiction: Kurti
Whales–stories: Cline-ransome
Witches–fiction: Lowe
Women’s studies: McCully
Work–fiction: gardner
World War i–fiction: Great War
Writers and writing–fiction: rodriguez
 
To order or To Join
Call 360.571.4520; visit us online at www.childlitassn.org; or 
write ChLA at P.O. Box 138, Battle Creek, MI 49016-0138.
MeMbers get it.
Claudia Nelson, Editor  
Texas a&M UniversiTy
Anne Morey, Texas a&M UniversiTy and  Sara K. Day, 
soUThern arkansas UniversiTy, Associate Editors
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly publishes 
first-rate scholarship in children’s literature studies. 
Each issue features an editorial introduction, juried 
articles about research and scholarship in children’s 
literature, and book reviews. The Quarterly is available 
to members of the Children’s Literature Association 
(ChLA) as a benefit of membership.  
Published quarterly in Spring, Summer, Fall, and Winter for 
the Children’s Literature Association (ChLA). Volume 40 (2015). 
ISSN 0885-0429; E-ISSN 1553-1201.
Children’s literature assoCiation Quarterly
Individual and institutional 
subscription is one of many benefits of 
membership to the ChLA.
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Claudia Nelson, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
