T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
February 2014
Vol. 67   No. 6
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 67 (2014).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $60.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$100.00 (print); $110.00 (online);  
$140.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
February 2014
Vol. 67 No. 6
301  the BIg PICture
 
  Weasels  written and illus. by Elys Dolan
302  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
303 • The Crossover  by Kwame Alexander
306 • The Lion Who Stole My Arm  by Nicola Davies; illus. by Annabel Wright
328 • Zane and the Hurricane: A Story of Katrina  by Rodman Philbrick
334 •  The Port Chicago 50: Disaster, Mutiny, and the Fight for Civil Rights  by 
Steve Sheinkin
336 •  Grasshopper Jungle: A History  by Andrew Smith
341  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
342  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Kim Naples, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $100.00 or electronic $110.00; combined print & electronic $140.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Weasels. Copyright © 2013 by Elys Dolan.  Reproduced by permission of the 
publisher, Candlewick Press, Somerville, MA on behalf of Nosy Crow Ltd, London.
February 2014 • 301
the BIg PICture
Weasels
written and illustrated by Elys Dolan
You may think that weasels just hang around doing weaselly things all day, but 
Dolan reveals the truth in this droll picture book: “What they really do is . . . plot 
world domination!” Spreads reveal a teeming nerve center of wall to wall technology 
and a multitude of coordinating weasels, all ready to take over the world—until the 
countdown to world domination is interrupted by a power outage. “But technical 
difficulties won’t stop a weasel,” and the crew scurries around to find the fault, in-
vestigating the problem in the lab, checking the Rube Goldbergian connections in 
the machinery, until finally the little coffee-serving weasel discovers that he pulled 
the plug out when he tripped over a cord. Countdown is swiftly resumed, and the 
weasel takeover changes the world. 
The complex weasel domain resembles some of Arthur Geisert’s elaborate 
piggy realms and technologies, while the goofy humor and text-spattered art hits 
some of the same notes as Mélanie Watts’ Scaredy Squirrel. The medium is simple 
line and translucent paint in gentle, noncompeting colors, with the toasty brown 
of the weasels predominating against the ivory brackgrounds, the better to focus 
on the multitude of activities that fill each oversized spread. Small intricate dramas 
peppered with speech bubbles abound across the scenes, often in neat horizontal 
layers (the towering machines have railinged levels, each abuzz with busy weasels), 
as weasels obsess over coffee, slack off to play “World of Woodcraft,” and work 
feverishly over test tubes and electrical wiring to solve the problem. Yet composi-
tions are cleverly rhythmic: an initial sequence of thumbnails builds up the pace to 
the packed scenes, and the blackout spread effectively counterpoints the frenetics 
of the surrounding visuals.
As usual with such multi-ring circus spreads, there’s much pleasure to 
be had in hunting down all the individual stories and piecing together the odd 
ongoing plotline (the introduction of a new specialty coffee drink fails miserably), 
and that’s a joy that middle-grade fans of Geisert and Watts will immediately 
embrace. However, Weasels offers even broader appeal through its humor, which 
is laced with absurdity that links it to recent surreal comedy such as Monroe’s 
Monkey with a Toolbelt (BCCB 6/08) and steeped in a campiness and affectionate 
satire that suggests cartoons and pop-culture memes. The note is set right from the 
cover’s tagline of “Megalomania has never been so furry!”; as the action progresses, 
the monocled archvillain weasel Bondishly strokes a white mouse, a helpful sign 
on the machine states “This is the machine,” the science lab includes delightful 
1950s-serial style rayguns and transmogrifiers, and even the font has a dot-matrix 
machined look that evokes old-school conceptions of computerized text. Kids well 
302 • The bulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
up into middle school will snicker at the random and bizarre comedy in elements 
such as the installation’s drawing board (which offers proposed solutions ranging 
from the use of a coathanger to buying a new machine) and the persistent weasel 
grandstanding through the spreads determined to apply his big drill to anything 
in his way (“Without this drill, I am nothing”). In a move that echoes cinematic 
end credits that reveal the characters’ futures, the closing spread shows vignettes 
from the now thoroughly weaselized planet, with weasels raising a weasel flag à la 
Iwo Jima, a weasel ensconced on the British throne, a pair of weasels looking in 
satisfaction on the newly weaselly Sphinx (“Much better,” one says proudly), and 
a steaming cup of coffee bearing the Starweasels logo. 
The result is an appealing combination of sophisticated yet goofy humor 
and undemanding text that will draw many youngsters, and the book’s appeal to a 
wide age range makes it an excellent choice for older and younger kids to share and 
snort over together. Weasels is just the mammalian madhouse to move kids from 
Anno to the anarchic. (See p. 307 for publication information.)
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Abbott, tony The Forbidden Stone; illus. by Bill Perkins. Tegen/HarperCollins, 
2014 [432p] (The Copernicus Legacy)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219447-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219445-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Spring break with his astrophysicist father and stepbrother Darryl proves to be 
eventful for twelve-year-old Wade Kaplan; first, his cousin Lily and her friend Becca 
are dropped off on their doorstep, and then his father’s mentor mysteriously dies, 
but not before emailing an encoded message. Decrypting the code hints that the 
death may have been murder, and the four children and their reluctant chaperone 
fly to Berlin to investigate; there they discover a vast international conspiracy involv-
ing ancient artifacts with ties to Copernicus and a possible time machine. Using 
Wade’s sixteenth-century star map as their guide, the unlikely team races across 
the globe, solving puzzles and deciphering clues; time is running out to find the 
first hidden relic, though, and even if they succeed, eleven more must be found if 
Wade and his friends are to keep the world safe and Copernicus’ machines out of 
the wrong hands. The plot and its underlying secrets are ludicrous, but readers are 
unlikely to care as they get caught up in this fast-paced and diverting page-turner. 
The real draws here are the adventure, a James Bond–lite narrative complete with 
February 2014 • 303
car chases and gun battles, and the puzzles, quirky brain-teasers that are ultimately 
explained in detail. Each young member of the team brings his or her own special 
talents and unique idiosyncrasy to the table, giving readers plenty of characters to 
like. The first of six interconnected novels, with six more interstitial novellas and 
a real-life treasure hunt attached, this lively escapade will suit fans of the 39 Clues 
series who are looking for a new puzzle to solve.  AM
AlexAnder, KwAme The Crossover. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-544-10771-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
Twins Josh and Jordan have always been friendly rivals on the basketball court, 
where they are following in their basketball legend father’s footsteps. Over the course 
of the season, though, Josh finds his world rocked by small and large changes: he 
loses a bet that results in him having to cut off his lucky locks, he feels abandoned 
when Jordan starts hanging out with a girl, and his mother and father are fighting. 
When his anger and frustrations get the best of him, Josh lashes out at his brother 
on the court, and his mother, a principal at his school, suspends him from the 
team—and things get worse from there. Alexander fully captures Josh’s athletic 
finesse and coming-of-age angst in a mix of free verse and hip-hop poetry that will 
have broad appeal. The lively basketball poems in particular beg for energetic oral 
performance, while the free verse shows the multidimensionality of a teen wordsmith 
figuring out the shifting conditions of life on and off the court. The book draws 
additional strength from the portrait of Josh’s father, a strong but flawed role model 
who’s so haunted by his own father’s early death that he won’t take steps to guard 
his health. With pithy poems that use basketball as a metaphor for life lessons off 
the court, two-voiced poems that highlight the ebb and flow of conversations that 
say too much and nothing at all, and poems inspired by vocabulary words that 
require extended definitions to tease out their emotional relevance and force, this 
will inspire budding players and poets alike.  KC 
blAcKstone, mAtt Sorry You’re Lost. Farrar, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-374-38065-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-8
It’s been three short months since his mother died, and Denny is desperate for a 
distraction, but his usual outlet of annoying his teachers is beginning to have con-
sequences. His best friend, Manny, who has serious family problems of his own, 
comes up with a bogus fundraising scam to enable Manny and Denny to attract 
girls with expensive stuff. Meanwhile, Denny’s dad has ballooned to three hundred 
pounds and is acting out in ways akin to Denny’s own, but with a meaner edge. 
The only bright spot in Denny’s life is Sabrina, who challenges Denny to stop his 
pretense of boisterous cheer and just be himself. While Denny’s grief is palpable 
throughout the novel, his manic narration, which expands every expression into 
apologetic awkwardness, stretches his story nearly to the breaking point of readerly 
patience, especially for a realistic middle-school novel. This narrative technique 
does, however, convey just how wearing this defense mechanism is for those around 
him; his attempts at humor provoke embarrassed sympathy but ultimately lead the 
adults in his life as well as most of his peers to give him an uncomfortable brushoff, 
rather than insisting that he get the help and support he and his father need to 
304 • The bulleTin
deal with their grief. That his ultimate breakdown, which finds him laughing and 
crying uncontrollably in the hallway until he passes out, doesn’t result in a trip 
to guidance counselor strains credulity, and Manny is more of a caricature than a 
character. There is some ingenuity in the way Denny solves his problems, though, 
and the cinematic happy ending, though pat, is in keeping with the hyperbolic 
tone of the novel. Middle-school readers looking for someone more awkward than 
they feel will find that here.  KC 
borden, louise Baseball Is . . . ; illus. by Raúl Colón. McElderry, 2014 [44p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-5502-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Borden shares her devotion to baseball in this free-verse paean to America’s pastime. 
The focus is on major league baseball, with only the slightest nod to the sandlot 
players, student athletes, Little Leaguers, office teammates, and other amateurs 
with cleats on the ground, but even slugs who bask in the peanuts and hot dogs 
and sunshine will understand the bliss. Unfortunately, the title amounts to little 
more than lists of definitions, observations and descriptions: “Baseball is wide gates 
to a swirl of noise,/ ticket takers,/ ticket stubs,/ and vendors,/ selling souvenirs”; 
“Baseball is nine innings, and sometimes more,/ with a top and a bottom for 
each.” Occasionally, though, a verse rises well above the quotidian with a genuine 
flash of poetic power hitting: “Baseball is a crescendo of joy that fills the stands./ 
And baseball is/ sudden silence./ The hush of error.” Colón’s grainy, atmospheric 
paintings, though often prone to chaotic composition, manage to capture more 
of the passion of the game, particularly as experienced by fans and stadium staff. 
Moreover, Colón highlights players, sportscasters, teams, and stadiums from across 
the country and over time, inviting young fans to search for their favorites and vie 
with their peers for the title of baseball cognoscente. This won’t substitute for an 
afternoon on the field or in the stands, but it may just help some kids keep their 
spirits up until opening day.  EB
bruchAc, Joseph Killer of Enemies. Tu/Lee & Low, 2013 361p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62014-143-4 $19.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62014-144-1 $7.99  
R Gr. 9-12
When a mysterious alien cloud touched Earth years ago, all technology ceased to 
function, leaving survivors to eke out an existence in isolated rural communities. 
Seventeen-year-old Apache hunter Lozen is both protector and prisoner after being 
forcibly recruited by one of these communities to fight on their behalf. In exchange 
for food, shelter, and the lives of her remaining family, she hunts the genetically 
modified monsters that prowl the sparse forests that surround the compound and 
runs errands across the dangerous landscapes. Lozen, though, is planning her es-
cape, and her emerging ability to read the thoughts of others helps her find allies, 
including a shy, musical young gardener, a disfigured leader with secrets of his own, 
and a sasquatch who could be seeing Lozen as a friend or as a meal. This unusual 
survival story brings a tight, emotionally spare narrative into the often overwrought 
dystopian genre. Lozen is a captivating heroine who uses her heritage of survival to 
find hope and strength, and the novel as a whole draws strongly on Apache language 
and folklore without being heavy-handed. The plotting has an episodic, almost 
mythological, feel, as Lozen ventures out to kill terrifying beasts only to be forced 
February 2014 • 305
home for new assignments. Vivid descriptions of her kills and bloody fights with 
her human enemies are authentically gory, and the battle scenes are well paced for 
maximum heart-racing effect. Readers who prefer their warrior heroines with more 
battle-hardened sass and less self-reflection will find a lot to love here, as will fans 
of post-apocalyptic survival stories in less well-worn settings.  AM
cAlmenson, stephAnie No Dogs Allowed; by Stephanie Calmenson and Joanna 
Cole; illus. by Heather Ross. Ottaviano/Holt, 2013 114p (Ready, Set, Dogs!)
ISBN 978-0-8050-9645-3 $14.99 
 Ad Gr. 2-3
Lucie and Kate are best friends, next-door neighbors, and dog lovers, but neither of 
their mothers will allow them to have a pet, so they focus on supporting the local 
shelter via a songwriting contest. When they acquire identical thrift-store necklaces 
with pink, bone-shaped pendants, they discover that the jewelry can magically turn 
them into dogs. Entertained by their newfound transformational abilities, Kate 
and Lucie alternate between doggy pursuits, such as eating new foods and teas-
ing a pair of annoying neighborhood boys, and working on their song as human 
girls. The light tone, playful premise, and canine connection will appeal to many 
youngsters, and the clear writing, quick pace, and large font will all help support 
chapter-book newbies. The characters are pretty two-dimensional, however, and 
the plot is utterly predictable—not only do the girls win the songwriting contest 
but they do so after teaming up with the annoying boys. Ross’s frequent black and 
white illustrations, featuring a multicultural cast, are lighthearted and comic; the 
dog versions of Kate and Lucie even goofily resemble their human counterparts. 
Despite its shortcomings, this will appeal to pet lovers, especially those looking for 
a breezy chapter book.  JH 
cArleson, J. c. The Tyrant’s Daughter. Knopf, 2014 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-449-80998-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-449-80997-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Laila has always lived in isolated luxury in the fictional Middle 
Eastern country where her father was, she believed, the king. When her father is 
killed, she, her mother, and her six-year-old brother escape to the U.S., which 
sees her father as a tyrant who maintained power by torturing and killing his own 
people. An open-hearted American girl, Emmy, takes Laila on as a project, and 
Laila, who resents the restrictions placed on women in her home country, guard-
edly experiments with an American identity. More importantly, though, she learns 
about her father’s regime and the even stricter one her uncle is now attempting 
to impose. She finds that her mother has struck a deal with a CIA agent to secure 
their safety, but she needs to decide for herself which side she is on and what she 
will risk to intervene in dangerous political dynamics. Pulling from a tangle of 
real-world scenarios, Carleson draws on her experiences as a CIA officer to create 
Laila as a privileged but thoughtful young woman who had no context for under-
standing her situation until she came to the U.S. Her conflicts with friends as well 
as with her politically savvy mother are recognizably teen, but it’s also clear that 
she doesn’t share the naïve openness of her American agemates. Ultimately, while 
she is compassionate regarding the suffering her father has caused, she understands 
that she must be as crafty and duplicitous as the mother she critiques if she is going 
306 • The bulleTin
to make any difference at all. Timely, relevant, and fascinating, Laila’s story offers 
readers an accessible understanding of the seemingly intractable nature of Middle 
East politics. An equally fascinating additional note by Dr. Cheryl Benard offers 
more real-world context for Laila’s fictional but very credible position. Resources 
for further research are included.  KC 
cotter, bill Don’t Push the Button!; written and illus. by Bill Cotter. Source-
books, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4022-8746-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 3-5 yrs
Larry, a friendly purple monster, gives one admonition to the audience, “Don’t push 
the button,” referring to the large, round red button pictured on the verso of every 
spread. Of course, Larry begins to fall prey to temptation and eventually suggests 
that the viewer go ahead and push that button. One push turns Larry yellow, an 
additional push covers him in polka dots, and two more pushes clones Larry: “Ack! 
Now there’s two of me. Push it a bunch of times!!!” Doing so increases the number 
and variety of Larrys running about, so the original Larry suggests that readers shake 
the book to get rid of the extra monsters. A guide labeled “So You’ve Pushed the 
Button” instructs Larry (and the readers) that a tummy scratch will return Larry to 
his normal appearance. Normalcy doesn’t last long, though, as Larry’s last instruc-
tions are “Maybe just a couple more pushes . . . ” while the closing page shows 
multiple Larrys running amok again. The interactivity is playfully entertaining but 
lacks the skillful execution of Long’s Tickle the Duck! (BCCB 2/06). Cotter’s art is 
clean and simple with monsters and button posed against plenty of white space, 
keeping the focus tightly on the action, but some illustrations are strangely blurry. 
Larry himself is a charming, noseless purple guy, a bit like McDonald’s Grimace, 
with two small blue horns. While other interactive titles possess more visual and 
textual finesse, this could still be a diverting addition to a lively story session or a 
useful prompt for a writing activity.  JH
dAvies, nicolA The Lion Who Stole My Arm; illus. by Annabel Wright. Candle-
wick, 2014 [96p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6620-0 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 2-5
Pedru hasn’t got much of a catch to show for a day’s fishing with his friends, and 
he hopes to soften his mother’s wrath for coming home late by bringing back a 
guinea fowl from one of his snares in the African grasslands. A lion gets there first 
and lingers long enough to pounce on Pedru, severing his arm before the boy is 
able to break free. Now disabled, Pedru takes some comfort from his hunter father’s 
encouragement that his other significant skills remain intact; however, it’s revenge 
that Pedru really wants, and he gets an opportunity when a lion enters his village 
and the men organize a hunt to kill the intruder. Pedru and his father bring the 
beast down, but upon seeing the corpse up close, Pedru begins to wonder whether 
the lion was in fact the same one who maimed him. Scientists at a nearby tracking 
station were actually monitoring the animal, which was wearing a collar, and when 
Pedru returns the collar, he discovers a new opportunity to work with scientists 
and villagers to strategize how to keep humans and lions apart without further 
bloodshed. Davies, already well established as a premier science writer for children 
February 2014 • 307
(Deadly!: The Truth About the Most Dangerous Creatures on Earth, BCCB 3/13, etc.), 
demonstrates her considerable fiction-writing chops, elegantly tailoring this to a 
middle-grades audience and utilizing a recognizable chapter-book format of short 
chapters and plentiful spot art. Pedru’s tale is seamlessly blended with a clear-eyed 
portrayal of perilous relationship between lions and farmers in regions of present 
day Africa, and an afterword entitled “Living with Lions” summarizes the problem 
of peaceful coexistence in direct terms. This will be a first choice for big-cat lovers 
and a powerful selection for a classroom animal conservation unit.  EB
dillArd, sArAh Extraordinary Warren: A Super Chicken; written and illus. by 
Sarah Dillard. Aladdin, 2014 [64p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5340-1 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5341-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 2-3
Life on the farm stifles Warren, who tires of all the repetitive pecking day after day 
and declares himself “more than just an ordinary chicken!” His dreams are aided 
and abetted by sinister Millard the rat, who’s licking his chops as he dubs Warren 
“Chicken Supreme.” When Warren realizes that Millard’s celebratory chicken bar-
becue is going to feature the coop members as entrees rather than guests, Warren 
tries to warn them and heroically—and accidentally—saves the day. Dillard has a 
light hand in this easy reader, touching with gentle absurdity on the desire to be 
extraordinary and adding in some amusing details (Warren, for instance, befriends 
an egg). Unfortunately, the plot meanders off into strange directions (chicken flying 
lessons suddenly appear) and loses momentum, and the dénouement involves too 
many devices and not enough punch. The digital illustrations have a tidy perkiness, 
with trim lines and simple backgrounds; with its frequent panel sequences and 
speech bubbles, the layout resembles an airy graphic novel. The easygoing layout 
and friendly charm of the dialogue may still appeal to early readers, who may ap-
preciate the hint that subsequent adventures are to come.  DS
dolAn, elys Weasels; written and illus. by Elys Dolan. 
Candlewick, 
2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7100-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 2-6
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 301, for review.
ellis, m. henderson Petra K and the Blackhearts. Young Europe, 2014 [208p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-9850623-8-5 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 5-8
Mocked at school and neglected at home, young Petra K finds sanctuary in the 
streets of Pava, where forbidden magic is still practiced, mechanized automatons 
hawk their wares, and miniature dragons run wild. Archibald the Precious, the ruling 
dictator of Pava, has already outlawed magic and is now having his military (the 
Boot) scour the streets, taking into custody any dragonka, the miniaturized show 
dragons that were once pets of the wealthy. Petra K finds an injured dragonka and 
takes the creature home to care for it, naming it Luma, but her mother turns the 
dragon in, abandoning Petra K to the Boot. Petra K escapes and joins the Black-
308 • The bulleTin
hearts, a gang of orphaned children turned revolutionaries. When she realizes that 
Archibald plans on killing Luma to use its heart to replace his failing one, she and 
the Blackhearts storm the castle, sparking the much awaited revolution. The blend 
of magic and machinery is eerily intriguing, much as in William Alexander’s Goblin 
Secrets (BCCB 4/12). Petra K is a stalwart but accessible heroine—her struggles with 
her friends and her mother give her immediate appeal while her transformation from 
schoolgirl to revolutionary is authentically bumpy, occurring in fits and starts as she 
is plagued by doubts and miscalculations. Her simple, direct narration doesn’t do 
much scene-setting (more description of the dragonka would have been welcome), 
but it also provides moments of poignancy (“Deklyn was the most alone person I 
had ever met”). The ending makes this a bit of a tearjerker for pet lovers—Luma 
does indeed die—but sharing this as a classroom or family readaloud may soften 
the blow and spur some thoughtful discussion about love, loss, and loyalty.  KQG
engle, mArgAritA Silver People: Voices from the Panama Canal. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-544-10941-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-8
If they think about it at all, contemporary students are likely to take the Panama 
Canal for granted, not realizing the amazing, horrifically dangerous engineering 
feat that it was at the beginning of the twentieth century. This verse novel offers 
multiple perspectives on the enormity of the project, highlighting the material 
difficulties as well as the racially based system of inequality that governed the 
types of labor and the pay scale: white American and European workers had safer 
jobs, better housing and food, and were paid in gold, while islanders from Cuba, 
Jamaica, Barbados, and Haiti were housed in boxcars, worked in constant danger 
of mudslides that resulted in mass casualties, ate substandard food while standing 
up, and were paid in silver. Engle gives voice to Mateo, a war orphan from Cuba; 
Anita, an herb girl from the forests of Panama; Henry, a laborer from Jamaica; 
and Augusto, an engineer from the States, who cultivates Mateo’s artistic talent 
to record the indigenous flora and fauna. To fill in gaps in her story, she provides 
occasional poems from real historical personages, such as a ruthlessly expansionist 
Theodore Roosevelt and the agents he dispatched to manage the project. She also 
devotes poems to the forest dwellers: the howler monkeys, various types of ants 
and birds, giant hissing cockroaches, the trees, and other native animals displaced 
and unsettled by the building of the canal. As always, Engle’s poetry captures with 
sympathetic wonder and delicate beauty the plight of these disenfranchised voices; 
here in particular she highlights the natural beauty and love that Mateo, Anita, 
and Henry find and cling to in the midst of their back- and heart-breaking labor. 
A prose epilogue in character from Augusto and a historical note from the author 
provide context for the Engle’s project of giving voice to the “silver people.”  KC
eulberg, elizAbeth Better Off Friends. Point/Scholastic, 2014 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55145-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55146-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
People have always asked whether men and women could be best friends without 
romantic complications getting in the way. Eulberg approaches this question for 
February 2014 • 309
teens in nearly the same format as the classic film When Harry Met Sally, interspers-
ing quip-laden and sometimes tense retrospective dialogue between Macallan and 
Levi with the narrative of how they met, how their relationship grew, the difficulties 
they had as they dated other people, and the multiple near-misses as they stumbled 
toward each other. Levi moved from California to Wisconsin while Macallan was 
still reeling from the loss of her mother in a car accident, and their families became 
close, with Levi’s mom often standing as surrogate during Macallan’s adolescence. 
Eulberg openly acknowledges her debt to When Harry’s screenwriter Nora Ephron, 
as she should: age and material considerations aside, Levi’s and Macallan’s char-
acters are similar to Harry’s and Sally’s as well, with Macallan being uptight and 
often self-righteous, while Levi is more interested in pursuing his own popularity 
and insecure about his ability to sustain a relationship. Levi stands a bit in awe of 
Macallan, and Macallan always needs to have the last word, a condition that Levi 
indulges and even seems to enjoy. Heck, even the boyfriends and girlfriends they 
leave along the way are supportive of their eventual, inevitable coupling. The fits 
and starts of their relationship provide that delicate sense of frustration and suspense 
that readers are looking for, and teens seeking light romance laced with just enough 
melancholy, setbacks, and relatable insecurities to make them want nothing but 
happiness for the characters will enjoy this.  KC 
ewing, lynne The Lure. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2014 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220688-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220690-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
On the mean streets of Washington D.C., fifteen-year-old Blaise knows that her 
best chance for staying safe and earning money to help her ailing grandmother with 
their living expenses is to get ganged up. She and a friend agree to be jumped in to 
the gang (that is, beaten by the other girls without fighting back for sixty seconds), 
but another girl, Melissa, is convinced by Trek, the gang’s leader, to be sexed in—she 
rolls a pair of dice and her number determines how many boys will rape her for her 
initiation. They all survive their ordeals, physically if not emotionally, but Blaise 
is chosen for a special task—to lure guys from rival gangs into letting their guards 
down to make them vulnerable to attack from Trek. When things get out of hand 
and a young boy gets caught in Trek’s crossfire, Blaise decides that Trek’s reign is over, 
but she’s not sure who she can trust to side with her instead of Trek. The despair 
regarding the inevitability of early death is palpable among these teens; they all have 
individual backstories of shame and parental failure that have broken them to the 
point where survival is all that matters to them, and yet even within that life there 
are clear distinctions between the bad guys and the good guys. While Blaise’s story 
is as gritty as it gets, the extent to which she is willing to sacrifice herself for her 
friends ennobles even her most questionable decisions and keeps her sympathetic, 
and readers will be heartened by the fact that things work out sort of okay, as long 
as they don’t think too hard about what will happen to these characters after the 
book ends. The emotional tenor therefore resembles Hinton’s The Outsiders, but 
the circumstances are raw to the power of ten compared to that book; readers will 
realize that while the mean streets have gotten infinitely meaner in the intervening 
years, the kids caught in the crossfire, indeed, the kids doing the firing, still rate 
more compassion than condemnation.  KC 
310 • The bulleTin
Fern, trAcey Dare the Wind: The Record-Breaking Voyage of Eleanor Prentiss and 
the Flying Cloud; illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. Farrar, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-374-31699-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
Ellen (Eleanor) Prentiss, daughter of a nineteenth-century sea captain, learned navi-
gation from her father and, smitten with life at sea, married Josiah Creesy, captain 
of a merchant ship. Plying the waters at the onset of the California Gold Rush, the 
husband and wife team accepted the opportunity to transport passengers and cargo 
from New York to San Francisco aboard the clipper Flying Cloud, a sleek-hulled, 
sail-heavy vessel built for speed. Josiah was in command, but it was Ellen who 
set the course; it was Ellen who may have been responsible for pushing the vessel 
so hard that its mainmast broke; and it was definitely Ellen who navigated them 
safely around the storm-tossed tip of South America and up the western coast of 
the Americas to break the maritime speed record for that journey. While children 
have access to many picture-book biographies of women ahead of their time, Fern 
offers the story of a woman who could be considered relatively rare even in our 
own era, as a skillful and, as the concluding notes point out, daringly progressive 
navigator. McCully’s watercolors capture the sea in many moods, from eerily glassy 
doldrums that left the Flying Cloud with sails drooping, to the wind-whipped waves 
that pressed the ship sideways as it neared Cape Horn. A map, a brief glossary of 
nautical terms, and resources and notes on the Flying Cloud are included.  EB
Foxlee, KAren Ophelia and the Marvelous Boy; illus. by Yoko Tanaka. Knopf, 
2014 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75355-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75354-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75357-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-7
Still reeling from the death of her mother, eleven-year-old Ophelia Jane Worthing-
ton-Whittard copes by restricting her beliefs to the scientifically proven. However, 
science fails her when, at a strange museum, she meets a mysterious, nameless boy 
(locked behind a door and visible only through the golden keyhole) who tells her 
he has been chosen by wizards to deliver a magical sword to the One Other who 
will defeat the Snow Queen and save the world. After helping the boy escape his 
prison, Ophelia embarks on an adventure including encounters on various museum 
floors with monstrous “misery birds” (huge eagle-headed, human-eating creatures 
with bat wings), ghosts of girls whom the Queen has fed into a mysterious machine 
that sustains her life, and malevolent mannequins and taxidermy that occasionally 
come to life. Foxlee inventively weaves familiar folkloric elements—an evil snow 
queen, a magic sword, a quest, a chosen one—into her modern setting, all the 
while evoking a mood of dreamlike foreboding. Ophelia and the boy are intriguing 
characters, reluctant in their heroism (“She had expected magic to be very clean 
and powerful, but instead it was messy and uncomfortable and full of decisions. It 
made her legs tremble”) but plowing ahead anyway. Her astute observations about 
her family’s grief add a touching and serious note; equally poignant is Ophelia’s 
encounter with the ghosts of the girls killed by the Queen. Atmospheric, full-
spread monochromatic illustrations open each of the book’s three parts, adding 
February 2014 • 311
to the story’s sense of magic. The combination of fairy tale elements and a bit of 
age-appropriate darkness calls up Ursu’s Breadcrumbs (BCCB 10/11), and this will 
appeal to Ursu’s fans.  JH
FreedmAn, russell Angel Island: Gateway to Gold Mountain. Clarion, 
2014 [78p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-90378-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Impelled by poverty and political upheaval, particularly in the Pearl River Delta, 
and lured by the California gold mines and railroad construction opportunities 
of mid nineteenth-century America, thousands of Chinese workers sought their 
fortunes, if not permanent residence, in the United States. San Francisco became 
the main port of entry, and Angel Island, the city’s immigration station from 1910 
through 1940, acquired the reputation of a portal designed as much to keep “unde-
sirable” Chinese immigrants out as it was to welcome them. Angel Island and the 
concomitant story of Chinese Exclusion have recently received deserved attention 
within children’s literature, and Freedman offers here a brief but comprehensive 
overview of the station’s history. Background information on anti-Chinese actions 
by citizen groups and government policies not only documents the bigotry but also 
highlights resistance and protests within the Chinese community, which does not 
always find its way into other accounts. Moreover, Freedman also discusses other 
immigrants who passed through Angel Island with different experiences—Japanese 
picture brides in arranged marriages, Indian activists seeking independence from 
Britain, Korean activists rallying against Japanese colonial rule, Jews fleeing the 
Holocaust via temporary refuge in Singapore. Most spreads feature one or more 
photographs, slightly oversized text, and generous margins, making this an appealing 
selection for readers who find nonfiction daunting. Source notes and bibliography 
are included; the bound book will include an index.  EB
FreitAs, donnA Gold Medal Winter. Levine/Scholastic, 2014 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-64377-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-64473-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Unexpected joy comes to fifteen-year-old Esperanza Flores when she wins a place 
on the Olympic figure-skating team after a leading competitor injures herself too 
badly to go. Espi may be an underdog, but she and her coach are determined that 
she can be a real threat if she perfects her quadruple salchow, a jump never landed 
by a female figure skater at the Olympics. She’s daunted, however, by the bullying 
of the other members of the team, who resent Espi’s displacement of their former 
teammate; she’s also floored by the media circus and intrigued by the attentions of 
two young male Olympians, one a famous figure skater and the other a quiet hockey 
player. Can she keep her focus to become the first Dominican-American skater 
to medal at the Olympics? The answer will surprise absolutely no one, as will the 
discovery that the famous male figure skater is a shallow player and that the quiet 
hockey player is the guy for her; indeed, there’s a generic flavor throughout as Espi 
triumphs against all obstacles—so generic, in fact, that the location of the actual 
Olympics is never actually given. The story is, however, sweet and innocent, with 
Espi reading much younger than fifteen (and the portrait of the Olympic Village 
312 • The bulleTin
thoroughly sanitized), and the details of skating practice, morning television ap-
pearances, and Vera Wang costumes are fresh and specific enough to advance the 
wish-fulfillment. Armchair ice princesses looking for a sports fairy tale will likely 
overlook the book’s weaknesses and find it a cozy accompaniment to the Winter 
Olympics.  DS
gAlveston, louise By the Grace of Todd. Razorbill, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-677-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Todd’s reluctance to pick up his dirty laundry has led to the spontaneous generation 
of a civilization of ant-sized people on his fungus-encrusted sock who call themselves 
Toddlians and revere sixth-grader Todd as their god. After Max, the most popular 
and powerful kid at school, chooses Todd to be his science-project partner, Todd 
accidentally reveals the Toddlians’ existence to him; Max then decides their science 
project should be to train the Toddlians to perform in a circus, cruelly working 
them for days and bargaining Toddlians off as slaves to his cronies. Todd tacitly 
accedes, hoping to stay popular and avoid bullying, until the gumption of some 
Toddlians escaping from Max’s lackeys and the threat of an exploitative performance 
at a fair spur Todd into confronting Max. Todd’s troubles with family, school, and 
friends are pretty standard middle-school fare, but the generosity toward Todd as 
a character through his sloppiness and self-absorption is refreshing, and the zany 
science fiction/fantasy premise is skillfully executed. The Toddlians, too, are enter-
taining, with their preference for munching on “Sweat à la Todd Bod” and their 
English garnered from watching Downton Abbey, John Wayne movies, and reality 
TV (“Ashley [a contestant on The Bachelorette] should not marry Jordan. . . . Will 
you please warn her? . . . Save Ashley! Save Ashley!”). The gratifying conclusion sees 
the Toddlians to safety, and an epilogue that reveals that the whole story has been 
recounted by an elder of Toddlandia suggests that the Toddlians might return for 
future adventures, sure to be welcome news to the fans of both the smart and the 
gross that will take to this one.  TA 
gArzA, xAvier Maximilian & the Bingo Rematch; written and illus. by Xavier 
Garza. Cinco Puntos, 2013 219p (Max’s Lucha Libre Adventures)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-59-7 $19.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-46-7 $12.95  
R Gr. 4-6 
In Max’s debut outing (Maximilian and the Mystery of the Guardian Angel), family 
secrets were revealed and family rifts healed, but there are still plenty of drama 
in the Texas middle-schooler’s life. First, there’s the contentious tías; you’d never 
guess the aunts love each other from the cutthroat way they battle over the Queen 
Bingo church trophy. Then there’s Max’s dream girl, Cecilia, who agrees to be his 
girlfriend and seals the deal with a kiss; her family moves to California two weeks 
later, leaving Max hopeless and heartbroken until Paloma, a beautiful new girl at 
school whose idea of flirtation is lying through her teeth to get Max in trouble, 
shows up. Paloma is also the niece of a luchadora who travels in the same circuit 
as Max’s beloved Tío Rodolfo, the feared tecnico Guardian Angel. And let’s not 
overlook the main event, the world championship tag team battle by Rodolfo/
Guardian Angel and Tío Lalo/El Toro Grande; new stars rise in the family, but 
the pressure of competition calls for hard decisions. The juxtaposition of wryly 
February 2014 • 313
narrated middle-school woes against the background of professional lucha libre 
wrestling continues to be a winner, and the bilingual text, heavy on conversation 
and idiom, can be engaged with, toyed with, or ignored, as the English or Spanish 
language reader prefers. This series should definitely be on the radar of bilingual 
classroom teachers, though, whose students can meet on common literary ground, 
while stretching across the gutter to appropriate the chatter of their classmates. This 
might also serve as an introduction for middle-schoolers to the goals and strategies 
of translators; kids need not be bilingual adepts to figure out that “por el amor de 
Dios” and “for crying out loud” are not exactly the same thing.  EB
grAudin, ryAn All That Glows. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 [480p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-218741-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-8 
As a Frithemaeg, or faery guardian, Emrys has watched over the kings and queens 
of Britain since the time of King Arthur, so she’s well aware of the antics that royals 
get can up to. Unfortunately, she’s finding her latest assignment to look after Prince 
Richard, the handsome, hard-partying heir to the throne, especially difficult—not 
because of the late nights at the pub, but because for some reason, Emrys’ cloaking 
spell fails around Richard and she’s forced to reveal herself to him, a faery guard 
no-no that could get her banished. Complicating matters further is the sudden 
uptick in attacks on the royals, with Banshees and Green Women lurking around 
every corner, ready and willing to suck the life out of Richard in an attempt to 
disrupt the royal line. Multiple action sequences and plenty of dialogue make the 
400+ pages here breeze by quite easily, and readers who can overlook more than 
a few contrivances (the most obvious being the magic failure’s being limited to 
this particular spell and this particular king’s presence) may find this a pleasing 
romantic adventure that manages to be dramatic without being too serious. The 
look at both the faery world and the history of England is cursory, but Graudin 
does mine familiar folklore to make several terrifying villains (the Banshee is par-
ticularly disturbing). Both Richard and Emrys are fairly shallow characters, but 
their inevitable relationship is genuinely sweet and tender, with an innocence that 
may appeal to younger teens who prefer the romance and magic of Camelot over 
the actual mythology.  KQG 
gude, pAul When Elephant Met Giraffe; written and illus. by Paul Gude. Disney 
Hyperion, 2014 [52p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-6303-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Three short stories depict the budding friendship between a lively elephant and a 
silent giraffe, beginning with their initial meeting in “The Water Hole,” in which 
Elephant can’t understand why Giraffe won’t verbally respond to her friendly over-
tures. Once Elephant realizes that Giraffe’s taciturnity is a species trait rather than 
a dismissal of her friendship-making efforts, the two bond. In “Pretzels,” Giraffe 
decides to whip up some pretzels; Elephant’s help turns the project into more of a 
culinary mess than a masterpiece, but the end result is tasty anyway. “The Bossy 
Pirate” finds Elephant so narrowly dictating the pair’s pretend play that Giraffe gives 
up and reads a book instead, until Elephant acquiesces that each friend can choose a 
pretend identity. There’s a slight Daniel Pinkwater-esque flavor to this matter-of-fact 
314 • The bulleTin
yet amusingly absurd narrative, and the brevity of Gude’s text makes this accessible 
to young audiences while the simplicity of the vocabulary and the large, clear font 
also put this within range of novice readers. Shy children will particularly appreciate 
that Giraffe’s quietness is presented as an acceptable facet of his personality rather 
than a problem to be fixed. Gude’s childlike digital illustrations, with the blocky, 
rounded figures of Giraffe and Elephant outlined in black and smoothly filled with 
solid color, are a congenial partner to the unadorned text. Humorous details, such 
as Elephant’s lavender and yellow, dinosaur-shaped swim ring and Giraffe’s white 
chef’s hat that adorably covers his ossicones, add to the fun. Pair these pals with 
Marshall’s George and Martha for a funny, friendship-themed story session.  JH
hAgen, bethAny Landry Park. Dial, 2014 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3948-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
At seventeen, Madeline Landry is heir to Landry Park, the wealthiest estate in what 
remains of the United States in a dystopian future and part of the legacy of her 
ancestor, Jacob Landry, who invented the nuclear-powered lantern that eventually 
put an end to the twenty-first century energy crisis. The invention of the lantern 
also brought about a newly structured society, with the elite gentry hoarding power 
and governing the other classes, including the Rootless, the impoverished people 
who handle the nuclear materials needed to keep the lanterns going. Madeline is 
supposed to be busying herself with efforts to land a suitable husband, but lately, 
she’s plagued with doubts regarding the superiority of the gentry and their need 
to govern the Rootless with cruelty and abuse. The appearance of David Dana, a 
wealthy playboy who leads a double life as a Rootless sympathizer and organizer, 
complicates matters, and soon Madeline finds herself the keeper of secrets that could 
destroy both her home and her society. The dystopian world here, containing an 
ironfisted upper class lording over a weaker population, is by now a familiar one 
in YA lit, but it’s the upper-class perspective of Madeline’s narration that makes 
this a compelling, thoughtful look at the structuring of power and what it takes to 
dismantle it. Hagen manages to humanize the elite without absolving them, focusing 
on Madeline and David as they struggle to make the choice between a comfortable 
life and a comfortable conscience; especially moving is their ultimate realization 
that merely providing resources to the Rootless while enjoying the fruits of their 
diseased labor is the worst kind of charity. Heated debates and similarly heated 
kisses fuel Madeline and David’s will-they/won’t-they relationship, tempering the 
social commentary with a bit of romantic drama.  KQG 
hAll, shyimA Hidden Girl: The True Story of a Modern-Day Child Slave; by Shyima 
Hall and Lisa Wysocky. Simon, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-8168-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Former child slave Shyima Hall, whose story has been recounted in bits and pieces 
in newspaper articles, gives a complete account of her life here. In her early years 
in Egypt she was poor but happy; when she was eight, her parents sold her to a 
wealthy family in payment for a debt. That family moved with Shyima as their 
only servant to California when she was ten, keeping her in captivity and forcing 
February 2014 • 315
her to work sixteen-hour days until she was rescued at age thirteen. Upon her res-
cue, she was cowed by the Immigration agents not only because her captors had 
instilled in her a fear of police but also because as a Muslim girl she was forbidden 
to speak to unrelated men. Through counseling, education, and an intermittently 
positive experience with the foster-care system, she has emerged a strong and 
healthy woman with a goal to become an ICE agent herself. The book includes 
plentiful commentary on how slavery affects the emotional, mental, and physical 
health of its victims. The writing is straightforward and expository in style, with 
as much space given to Hall’s life after her rescue as during her enslavement. She is 
honest about her anger toward those who hurt her but also pragmatic and hopeful 
in relating the support she has from the family she has chosen for herself. Readers 
will likely be disappointed that there are no pictures, but a quick internet search 
will fill in those gaps. Most valuable are the tips she gives for people to understand 
how to detect when someone is possibly being enslaved and how to interact with 
someone who has been rescued, making this an important intervention into a 
growing problem.  KC
herrndorF, wolFgAng Why We Took the Car; tr. by Tim Mohr. Levine/
Scholastic, 2014 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-48180-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-58636-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
German fourteen-year-old Mike Klingenberg fears that he is both boring and 
friendless. When he and a raggedy Russian classmate, Tschick, are among the 
few classmates not invited to the delicious Tatiana’s birthday party, Mike realizes 
just how low on the social scale he really is. With his mother in rehab again and 
his father off on holiday with his assistant, Mike can’t think of any good reason 
not to take off with Tschick in a stolen car for a holiday of his own. As the boys 
pursue their trek across Germany to nowhere in particular, they meet their share 
of remarkably kind if slightly odd people, causing Mike to wonder if everything 
he’s ever heard about stranger danger might have been overblown; the only abuse 
he receives comes at the hand of his father upon their return after the predictable 
show-stopping disaster that lands them in trouble with the law. The narrative style in 
this translated text is completely without imagery or metaphor, save the overarching 
metaphor of the road trip itself; Mike merely describes everything that happens as 
it happens while filling in some gaps about his home life. Only towards the end 
does anything like a theme emerge, as Mike reflects on how unfairness of the class 
difference between him and Tschick results in their differential treatment under 
the law, how getting in legal trouble elevates your social status in high school, and 
how there are worse things than having an alcoholic mother. Readers looking for a 
buddy road-trip book with more to chew on will do better with Levithan’s Are We 
There Yet? (BCCB 7/05) or Meehl’s You Don’t Know About Me (BCCB 6/11), but 
those interested in German teen life and some travel disasters may still find this a 
diverting outing.  KC 
316 • The bulleTin
hodge, rosAmund Cruel Beauty. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2014 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222473-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222475-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 8-10
Centuries ago, the Gentle Lord sundered Arcadia from the rest of the world, 
establishing himself as its ruler and the demons that haunt it as his minions. 
Seventeen-year-old Nyx Triskelion has been raised since birth to marry and kill the 
Gentle Lord in order to redeem her father, who made a bargain with the demon 
that resulted in the death of Nyx’s mother. As it turns out, however, Ignifex, as the 
demon lord prefers to be called, is a rather beguiling, very human-looking monster, 
and Nyx finds herself falling for him even as she uncovers more of his terrible deeds. 
While an obvious twist on “Beauty and the Beast,” this also includes elements 
of “Bluebeard,” “East of Sun, West of Moon,” and Roman mythology, and the 
book totally immerses readers a world of dark magic and terrible bargains, where 
everything good comes at a cost. The push and pull romance between Nyx and 
Ignifex is pure fairy tale, but the characters themselves are complex and genuinely 
human as they struggle with their own culpability in a situation that forces them 
to choose between selfishness and selflessness. Additionally, Nyx’s efforts to shed 
the assumptions of her father and shift the dynamics in her family while establish-
ing her own identity will likely strike a deep chord with many adolescent readers. 
The twist at the end literally undoes the world and propels the story momentarily 
into tragedy, but a bittersweet reunion gives the book and its readers the fairy-tale 
ending they rightly deserve.  KQG 
howArd, A. g. Unhinged. Amulet/Abrams, 2014 387p (Splintered)
ISBN 978-1-4197-0971-5 $17.95  
R Gr. 9-12
Alyssa Gardner’s life changed forever after she visited Wonderland, cleaned up 
Alice’s messes, and was crowned queen of the netherlings (in Splintered, BCCB 
3/13). While she’s since tried to turn her back on her fantastic past, the chaos of 
Wonderland refuses to be ignored, especially now that deposed Queen Red has 
emerged from hiding and the looming war threatens to spill over into Alyssa’s 
fragile normal life. Now Alyssa’s childhood playmate and determined netherling 
suitor Morpheus has returned as well, filling Alyssa’s dreams with violent images 
of a Wonderland in danger and demanding that she return to take up her throne 
and destroy Red forever. When she tries to refuse, Morpheus takes up residence in 
the real world, bringing assorted characters such as Chessie the cat with him and 
sending out a ripple effect that could have disastrous consequences for the people 
Alyssa loves. As intense, dark, and weird as the first volume, this worthy sequel cre-
ates a parallel narrative that brings the action out of Wonderland and into Alyssa’s 
hometown. Many of the story’s initial strengths carry over, including the fantastical 
creatures, the exciting adventure, and Alyssa’s struggle to understand and accept her 
dual nature as human and netherling. The narrative is slightly more effortful in its 
refashioning of Carroll’s story, but fans of Splintered will happily throw themselves 
back down the rabbit hole for this new exploit, and a final showdown that ends 
with three central characters in peril will have readers lining up for more.  AM 
February 2014 • 317
isAAcs, Anne Meanwhile, Back at the Ranch; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2014 [54p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96745-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86745-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98788-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Where can you find a tortoise the size of a horse, tomatoes you have to climb a 
ladder to pick, and a watermelon whose rind you can use for a hay shed? Texas, of 
course! So the widow Tulip Jones discovers in 1870 when she inherits thirty-five 
million dollars and a ranch, prompting her to leave England for the Lone Star State. 
Undeterred by temperatures so high that chickens lay hard-boiled eggs, Tulip soon 
cultivates her land into a self-sustaining enterprise where she and her ranch hands 
can peacefully sip tea after an afternoon ride on their tortoises. Word gets out that 
a wealthy widow has come to town, and soon every unmarried man in Texas—“and 
in 1870, every man in Texas was unmarried”—attempts to win her hand, much to 
her dismay. As she seeks counsel from her newly hired baker, Charlie, who always 
has a cookie and a kind word in a crisis, she not only outsmarts the suitors but finds 
true love. Cheeky illustrations meet clever prose in this rollicking, welcome addi-
tion to the American canon of tall tales. Hawkes’ acrylic and pencil drawings invite 
readers to pore over the detail as they capture Tulip’s journey from lush England 
to the Texas desert, where lizards walk on stilts to avoid the hot ground and even 
the snakes wear ten-gallon hats. Isaacs’ folksy sensibilities and gifts for hyperbole 
and wordplay emerge in her smart, winking text, where she metes out delightful 
absurdity alongside enough human emotion to create a memorable story. Good 
for those independent readers who want a laugh as well as those who want a little 
heart with their humor, this book will earn a prominent place on any library or 
classroom shelves—in Texas or otherwise.  AA
JeFFers, oliver The Hueys in It Wasn’t Me; written and illus. by Oliver Jef-
fers. Philomel, 2014 26p (The Hueys)
ISBN 978-0-399-25768-1 $17.99  
Ad 5-7 yrs
The Hueys, the beanlike beings with stick appendages from The Hueys in the New 
Sweater (BCCB 7/12), are back. In this outing, an observation of a fly prompts a 
discussion among the Hueys (in speech bubbles containing pictures rather than 
words) about flying. One pair thinks of a bird, which eventually segues into a 
communal thought of a flying elephant. This idea causes the Hueys to argue (a 
thunderous storm dwarfs the flying elephant in the speech bubble) until another 
Huey, Gillespie, intervenes and asks reasonably “What are you fighting about?” The 
Hueys realize that they don’t even remember the topic of disagreement, so when 
Gillespie asks them “Want to see a dead fly?” they return to their good-natured 
selves and bond over their desire to go look at the deceased insect (“How long has 
it been dead?” inquires one cheerfully). Jeffers’ tidy art remains as winning as in 
the first title, and the use of copious white space, simple lines, and a clear palette 
puts the emphasis on the Hueys’ words and actions. Although the topic addressed 
here—getting past an argument—is a good one for primary-graders to contemplate, 
the story is pretty slight, and the solution, while entertaining, is too random to be 
of much practical help to younger children. Still, fans of the first book will want 
318 • The bulleTin
to catch up with the Hueys here, and the simplicity of the art may inspire kids to 
come up with their own Huey adventures.  JH
Jensen, mArion Almost Super. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220961-0 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220963-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Every Leap Day, any member of the Bailey family newly over the age of twelve 
develops a superpower, and Rafter and his younger brother Benny wait with bated 
breath to claim their extraordinary skill this time around. Unfortunately, they’re 
disappointed when their powers end up being less than super: Rafter can strike 
matches on polyester, while Benny can pop his innie bellybutton into an outie 
and back. They’re afraid they’ll be left out of their family’s sworn struggle against 
a supervillain family, the Johnsons, until a confrontation with Juanita Johnson 
reveals that the Johnsons consider themselves the town’s superheroes, archenemies 
of the heinous Baileys, and that Juanita’s similarly found herself with a fizzled-out 
ability (effortlessly unclogging toilets). These surprises lead the three to dig a little 
bit deeper and uncover a master plot hatched by the truly villainous family of 
Joneses that will require their families to team up to overcome. Weak characteriza-
tion and run-of-the-mill action scenes mean that the execution is less engaging 
than the concept, and the resolution, designed to set up for future vanquishing 
of the still-pretty-mysterious Joneses in a sequel, barely scrapes by as satisfying as 
a conclusion to this novel. Underdog superhero kids are usually crowd-pleasers, 
however, so this may gain traction as an up-and-coming series for fans of Cody’s 
Powerless (BCCB 2/10).  TA
KAlmAn, mAirA Thomas Jefferson: Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Everything; writ-
ten and illus. by Maira Kalman. Paulsen/Penguin, 2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24040-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-10 yrs
Kalman launches right in to this attractive picture-book biography with a succinct, 
spot-on summary of what made Thomas Jefferson memorable: “What was he 
interested in? Everything. I mean it. Everything.” The ensuing pages support the 
claim with a litany of his personal enthusiasms, his multitudinous concerns as a 
statesman, and his mind-boggling legacies, edited and arranged to pique children’s 
interest even as it covers salient textbook facts. Kalman has reprises some elements 
of her marvelously innovative picture-book biography Looking at Lincoln (BCCB 
2/12), including an accessibly informal tone, a fruit bowl of vibrant colors, a frequent 
focus on a single telling artifact, and plenty of holes punched through the fourth 
wall to invite readers into the conversation. However, in this case there is no child 
guide regaling her peers with her discoveries about a Great Man, and thus the naïve 
comments and asides that pepper the text are a little more more distracting (“His 
favorite vegetable was peas. Peas really are wonderful and fun to count”). Still, her 
candid discussion of Jefferson’s contradictory views on slavery is particularly well 
handled, and a closing observation gives kids permission to be perplexed by this 
complicated guy: “If you want to understand this country and its people and what 
it means to be optimistic and complex and tragic and wrong and courageous, you 
need to go to Monticello.” Yes, indeed.  EB 
February 2014 • 319
KAneField, teri The Girl from the Tar Paper School: Barbara Rose Johns and the Ad-
vent of the Civil Rights Movement. Abrams, 2014 56p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-0796-4 $19.95  
R Gr. 5-8
The “separate but equal” doctrine established in 1896 in Plessy v. Ferguson certainly 
wasn’t working in Prince Edward County, Virginia in 1951. Moton High School, 
the black high school for the legally segregated district, was obviously substandard 
to the white high school, and junior Barbara Johns was determined to do something 
about it. Protests and petitions that went through appropriate board meeting chan-
nels were dismissed with vague promises of better conditions to come, but when 
nothing concrete materialized, Jones organized a student strike. Kanefield follows 
the students’ strategies with an immediacy that will have readers chuckling and 
cheering and marveling at their clever audacity, as they lure the principal away from 
the building on a wild goose chase, forge notes to convene an all-school assembly, 
rally classmates to defy the probable censure of their parents, and call in the big 
guns from the NAACP to provide legal support. The Moton High School case was 
joined with similar cases in 1954 Brown v. Board, and although it was instrumental 
in rendering racial segregation unconstitutional, it failed to make any immediate 
change in Prince Edward County and was largely forgotten. Just as Hoose’s Claudette 
Colvin: Twice Toward Justice (BCCB 2/09) left readers wondering why they hadn’t 
heard of Claudette Colvin before, however, Kanefield’s work will invoke a similar 
response for teen activist Barbara Johns. Based largely on interviews, memoirs, 
and other primary source material, and liberally illustrated with photographs, this 
well-researched slice of civil rights history will reward readers who relish true stories 
of unsung heroes.  EB 
KAplAn, michAel b. Betty Bunny Wants a Goal; illus. by Stéphane Jorisch. Dial, 
2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3859-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
Betty Bunny (of Betty Bunny Loves Chocolate Cake, BCCB 5/11, etc.) returns, and 
this time she’s in cleats, because it’s soccer time. She starts with a head of steam, but 
her first match is a dismal disappointment, and she swears off the game entirely. 
Her siblings try, with various degrees of enthusiasm, to encourage her to stick to 
it and to practice until she improves, and finally her first goal restores her to her 
old bumptious self. Kaplan has created a comfortable and effective pattern in 
Betty’s outings, with sparky Betty backed by her gaggle of siblings and especially 
counterpointed by sardonic older brother Bill as she comes to terms with a difficult 
developmental challenge. The wit and liveliness of the dialogue and the emotional 
authenticity of Betty’s struggle makes it all enjoyably sympathetic rather than 
didactic, and many, many youngsters will recognize the frustration of dreams that 
outstrip their ability. Pencil, ink, watercolor, and gouache is zingy and vivacious, 
with the anthropomorphized Bunny family airily balloon-like in their earthtoned 
roundness against creamy white pages; the lively vignette sequences of the young 
pigs, elephants, and bunnies playing soccer captures the chaotic action of kids 
throwing themselves at organized sports (and sometimes missing). Betty is both 
perfectly herself and developmentally everykid, and youngsters will find her an able 
representative of their own travails.  DS
320 • The bulleTin
KAuFmAn, Amie These Broken Stars; by Amie Kaufman and Meagan Spoon-
er. Hyperion, 2013 [284p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-7102-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8778-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
When the universe’s most luxurious spaceliner mysteriously falls out of hyperspace 
and crash-lands on an alien planet, sixteen-year-old heiress Lilac LaRoux and 
eighteen-year-old war hero Tarver Merendson are the sole survivors. Certain that 
help, or at least a wreckage crew, is on the way, Tarver wants to leave the safety of 
their escape pod to trek across unknown territory to the crash site of the doomed 
ship. With the inappropriately dressed but surprisingly resilient Lilac in tow, he starts 
the journey to find the situation stranger and more dangerous than he expected: 
the terraformed planet is oddly abandoned, the wreckage is miles away on the 
other side of a mountain pass, and Lilac is starting to hear voices and hallucinate. 
Lilac, meanwhile, wants to prove herself more than just a damsel in distress, and 
she uncovers a shocking secret that might explain her visions, the planet’s empti-
ness, and even the ship’s demise. With shades of Titanic alongside bits of Robinson 
Crusoe, this engaging read offers a compelling survival story and science fiction 
adventure with a heavy dose of romance. Narration in alternating points of view 
gives insight into Tarver and Lilac’s miscommunications while allowing readers to 
revel in the slow burn of their growing attraction. At the same time, brief snippets 
of Tarver’s eventual debrief provide evocative hints about the characters’ futures 
but manage not to spoil any of the plot’s twists or surprises. As class-line-crossing 
lovers and deserted-island stories go, no new ground is being broken here, but the 
novel brings together a strong mix of familiar tropes and popular storylines for a 
thoroughly entertaining result. Loose ends and unanswered questions, despite an 
otherwise satisfying conclusion, leave the door open for expected sequels.  AM
Kimmel, elizAbeth cody A Taste of Freedom: Gandhi and the Great Salt March; 
illus. by Giuliano Ferri. Walker, 2014 [42p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-9467-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
In this fictionalized account of the seminal 1930 protest march to end British 
rule in India, a great-grandfather recalls for his great-grandson how he witnessed 
the arrival of the Mahatma in his town, Aslali. Eavesdropping as a young boy on 
enough of Gandhi’s public speeches and his relatives’ private whisperings, he pieces 
together the injustice of the British salt monopoly and the potency of a march to 
reclaim the Indians’ right to produce their own salt. Stirred to action, the boy packs 
a small bag to slip out in the night, only to be discovered by an older brother, who 
agrees to go along and keep him safe. The brothers join the ever-growing crowd of 
marchers, and upon reaching the coast at Dandi, the boy draws a salt lump from the 
mud and touches it to his tongue. “No one,” the great-grandfather observes, “ever 
forgets their first taste of freedom.” The narrator does supply the sad coda to the 
triumphant march, explaining that British soldiers were sent in to the demonstration 
and arrested and imprisoned Gandhi, but the extent of the post-march violence 
is implied only in the photos in newspapers strewn on the ground and discussed 
explicitly in the author’s afterword. The rhythmic composition of the marchers, the 
formally outstretched arms of the townspeople, and the haze that gently tempers 
February 2014 • 321
Ferri’s fiery palette all augment the feeling of a distant memory brought back to life. 
A list of websites and child-appropriate books is included, as well as a color map 
of the march route. Pair this with McGinty’s Gandhi: A March to the Sea (BCCB 
6/13) for complementary views of the historic event.  EB
KlAss, dAvid Grandmaster. Foster/Farrar, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-374-32771-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 6-10
Freshman Daniel Pratzer, a self-taught chess player, is making modest progress 
in his high school chess club, but he’s nowhere close to matching the abilities of 
the two senior officers. He’s therefore amazed when Eric and Brad invite him to 
participate in a high-profile chess tournament in Manhattan, in teams that will 
comprise a trio of father-son partners. The guys are frank with Daniel—it’s not his 
skills they’re after, but those of his grandmaster father. Grandmaster? That’s news 
to Daniel, who promptly confronts Dad for confirmation. It’s true, and Dad has 
no intention of returning to the game. However, he agrees on the condition that 
this is a one-off, and it will be played for the sake of father-son camaraderie rather 
than winning. In the course of the tournament, however, Dad faces off with an 
old, desperate rival who knows how to push all his buttons and induce a repeat of 
the breakdown that drove him from competitive chess years ago. Klass is in excel-
lent control of his plot, moving swiftly to the tournament action, exploring the 
prickly behavior of Mr. Pratzer under pressure, and steadily closing in on the final 
showdown and likelihood of tragedy. Although much of the action revolves around 
Mr. Pratzer, Daniel is a credible narrator, by turns resentful, puzzled, and proud 
of his father’s hidden past. This will be a fine companion piece for Rich Wallace’s 
Perpetual Check (BCCB 4/09).  EB
KuKlin, susAn Beyond Magenta: Transgender Teens Speak Out; written and illus. 
with photographs by Susan Kuklin. Candlewick, 2014 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5611-9 $22.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7035-1 $22.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Author and photographer Kuklin turns her eye toward the often-overlooked T in 
the canon of LGBT books for young people in this series of six interviews with 
teenagers and young adults who identify as transgender. Beyond this (and the fact 
that five of the interviewees live in New York), they’re a varied group: the interviews 
incorporate a wide range of diversity of race, socioeconomic status, family structure, 
sexual orientation, and gender identity (with interviewees identifying or presenting 
as male, female, gender neutral, gender queer, gender fluid, and gender fuck). The 
in-depth interviews, in the teens’ own voice with only minimal and clearly differen-
tiated commentary or additional information from Kuklin (and in one case, from 
the interviewee’s mother), also cover a gamut of topics, ranging from their internal 
process of identification growing up, reactions from parents, struggles at school, 
medical aspects of their transition, dating and sex, and interests and education. The 
presentation of the spectrum of experiences is remarkably nuanced and sensitive, 
never insisting that the trans-ness of the teens is the defining feature of their lives 
but also not ignoring its importance. Kuklin also brings her skills as a photographer 
to the book’s design, using some pictures documentary-style interspersed through-
322 • The bulleTin
out an individual’s interview, others grouped as breathtaking galleries that explore 
expression or isolation. This is a resource a number of different libraries will want to 
have, for teens looking for representations of those like themselves or those they’re 
operating in solidarity with, for teens who are beginning to have questions about 
identity or transition, and for teens who are seeking to expand their understanding 
of the rainbow. Extensive back matter includes an authors’ note about the origins 
of the book, a glossary, and a hefty list of additional resources.  TA
levy, JAnice Thomas the Toadilly Terrible Bully; illus. by Bill Slavin and Esperança 
Melo. Eerdmans, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8028-5373-8 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
 R 5-8 yrs
Thomas the toad hates being ignored, so he decides to become a bully. The trouble 
with this plan is that Thomas isn’t particularly good at bullying: he’s not strong 
enough to be intimidating, and his insults merely invite giggles. Even he confronts 
Gomer, the weakest toad around, it turns out that what made Gomer cry wasn’t 
Thomas’ insult but a much bigger bully, complete with warts, a leather jacket, and 
low-slung jeans revealing heart-patterned boxers. After cleverly tricking the big bully 
into picking a fight with his own reflection, Thomas realizes that he makes a much 
better friend than a bully. Thomas’ strategies not to be ignored by his peers will be 
familiar to kids, and Thomas’ change from bully to friend becomes a plot point 
rather than a lesson. The illustrations, acrylic on gessoed paper, take on a texture 
reminiscent of fresco painting, and the swatches of tan, chartreuse, and vermilion 
call to mind fall foliage. The big-eyed toad caricatures capture mood perfectly 
through dramatic facial expressions (the gulp is almost audible when Thomas 
cowers in the shadow of the “baddest-to-the-bone bully”). This is a slightly more 
serious take than Willems’ Leonardo the Terrible Monster (BCCB 2/05), but the 
similarities are striking, and it might be interesting to pair the two as explorations 
of the failures of being mean.  TA
lobel, AnitA Taking Care of Mama Rabbit; written and illus. by Anita Lo-
bel. Knopf, 2014 [20p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75369-2 $14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75368-5 $11.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75370-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 3-5 yrs
Mama Rabbit is sick in bed, so her ten little rabbits spring into action to try to 
make her well. Each brings her something meant to help her feel better, ranging 
from things that might actually aid a sick person (a fresh hankie, a cup of hot cocoa) 
to those intended more for cheering one up (a flower, a necklace, a drawing). The 
little rabbits are about to begin their pièce de résistance (putting on a show for their 
mother) when Papa Rabbit shows up with medicine. Mama informs him that she 
doesn’t need it after all (“Our darling rabbits have made me all better without it”), 
and it’s on with the show. The story is sweet and the message of everyone pitch-
ing in to try to help Mama feel better is a good-hearted one, but the premise that 
the children cure the mother’s illness through their actions alone, without phar-
maceutical help, might also be problematically wishful, particularly for kids with 
seriously ill parents. Lobel’s vibrantly hued gouache and watercolor illustrations 
February 2014 • 323
are warm and cozy, though, and the kids who prefer their stuffed animals to dolls 
will be drawn to the cute, clothes-wearing little bunnies. While those looking for 
a get-well-themed title may be better off with Karma Wilson’s Bear Feels Sick or 
Rosemary Wells’ Felix Feels Better (BCCB 6/01), fans of Lobel’s 10 Hungry Rabbits 
(BCCB 3/12) may particularly enjoy this new bunny outing.  JH
lord, cynthiA Half a Chance. Scholastic, 2014 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-545-03533-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year old Lucy Emery has just moved to a New Hampshire lakeside cottage, 
the latest target of her photojournalist father’s wanderlust. A work assignment soon 
takes him away for the summer, leaving Lucy and her mother to once again settle 
into a new home without him. Her own love of photography helps her channel 
her hurt over her father’s enthusiastic departure, and she decides to anonymously 
enter a photography competition he’s slated to judge, determined to win his ap-
proval through images that offer thought-provoking interpretations of the contest’s 
mandatory prompts. Luckily, she has help from her new friend, Nate, whose family 
summers at the neighboring house owned by his naturalist grandmother. When 
Lucy joins him on daily “Loon Patrol” kayak trips to track the hatching and growth 
of loon chicks, she discovers unexpected fodder for photographs and friendship 
and keenly feels how much she needs both. Lord offers a tender treatment of early 
adolescent needs and struggles in this thoughtful coming-of-age novel. The book 
sensitively depicts the complicated feelings and competing desires that afflict even 
ostensibly happy, middle-class families, understanding that things can be painfully 
amiss even when nothing big is wrong. With subtle but effective imagery (includ-
ing the touching, recurring use of a loon call) and a relatable protagonist, the title 
speaks to both human loneliness generally and the plight of a young girl in need 
of friendship. Put this poignant and restrained novel in the hands of a preteen girl 
who has it all, or just seems to.  AA
lowry, lois Gooney Bird and All Her Charms; illus. by Middy Thomas. Hough-
ton/Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-544-11354-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-5
It’s March in Mrs. Pidgeon’s second-grade classroom, which means it’s time to study 
the human body. Luckily, Gooney Bird Greene (from Gooney Bird and the Room 
Mother, BCCB 4/05, etc.) has arranged for her uncle to loan the class a real skeleton 
from the medical college where he teaches. Soon inspiration strikes, and she leads 
her classmates (and teacher) in posing the skeleton around the school so as to teach 
all the students about anatomy. When the skeleton disappears, the class must crack 
the case before Gooney Bird’s uncle finds out. Gooney Bird—perhaps the young-
est in the tradition of temperamental red-haired freckle-faced heroines—amuses 
and inspires again in this latest installment of her series. As individualistic as ever, 
she displays her precociousness and fashion sense with a t-shirt reading “Humpty 
Dumpty was pushed” and a secondhand bracelet featuring the literal charms referred 
to in the title, and she combines both characteristics in her storytelling. By the 
time this entertaining chapter book ends, she has found a way to interweave the 
seemingly disparate charms with the story of the skeleton and all the class learned 
324 • The bulleTin
during his stay at the school, thus modeling for young readers how the pieces of 
a story come together and providing ample opportunity for reader prediction in 
both independent and readaloud encounters. With apt jokes, recognizable class-
room curriculum, and comfortably familiar characters, not to mention sly jabs at 
censorship, Lowry’s Gooney Bird and her skeletal adventures will satisfy readers 
who appreciate a humerus tale.  AA
lynch, chris The Right Fight. Scholastic, 2014 [183p] (World War II)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-52294-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-52296-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Roman Bucyk, in a steady slide down the batting order in his minor league team, 
knows there’s no future for him in pro ball, but his determination to keep the world 
safe for baseball will make him an excellent soldier as soon as America gets into 
the fight against the Nazis. Not waiting while Uncle Sam drags his heels, Roman 
proposes to his girlfriend (she accepts) and enlists to get a jump on training, and by 
the time the smoke clears at Pearl Harbor, he’s ready to run his tank right over the 
Fuehrer himself. The Army has other plans for him, though, and he finds himself 
in North Africa, trying to figure out why the subjugated French are fighting for the 
Nazis, how to dodge strafing attacks by the Luftwaffe, and how to outmaneuver 
Rommel’s panzers. The first volume in Lynch’s new World War II series seems likely 
to follow the pattern of his recent Vietnam books, focusing on the experiences of 
one soldier per entry. Veterans of the Vietnam series (Sharpshooter, BCCB 5/12, etc.) 
will recognize the Bucyk surname and realize that Roman is Ivan’s father and the 
apple didn’t fall far from the tree. The rest of the featured cast is less clear, although 
the possibility of following Roman’s fiancée, Hannah, through her enlistment with 
the WAAC (Women’s Army Auxiliary Corps) is tantalizing. If Volume One is any 
indication, Lynch has another success in the pipeline.  EB
meyer, mArissA Cress. Feiwel, 2014 [560p] (Lunar Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-312-64297-6 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
High above the plague-ravaged streets of New Beijing, sixteen-year-old Cress is 
imprisoned in a satellite where she observes on netscreens the events of Earth, 
with a specific focus on the rebel cyborg Cinder and her accomplices (from Cinder, 
BCCB 2/12, and Scarlet, BCCB 2/13), who are now on the run as enemies of the 
Lunar Queen. Cress has been tasked by the queen to pinpoint the group’s location, 
but the computer-savvy girl instead uses her hacking skills to direct Cinder’s rogue 
spaceship to her own satellite, thus orchestrating her own rescue. Unfortunately, 
her dreams of joining the rebels (and making Captain Thorne, Cinder’s pilot, fall in 
love with her) go terribly awry when one of the Queen’s mind-controlling lackeys 
shows up mid-rescue, sending the satellite that holds Cress and Thorne plummet-
ing to the Earth. Meyer continues her mash-up of fairy tales and science fiction 
in this third installment of the Lunar Chronicles, this time focusing on Cress, 
the Rapunzel figure. The addition of a third heroine makes the plot occasionally 
unwieldy, with the narration taking time away from Cress’s story to follow both 
Cinder and Scarlet in their own endeavors. Still, the shifting focalization allows the 
world to continue to expand, solving some old puzzles and providing a few new 
February 2014 • 325
ones, while also giving more depth to the characters. The male romantic leads, for 
example, become particularly fascinating as readers see them in their relationships 
to each of the women, as love interests, friends, and strangers. This is very much 
a middle-of-the-series book, dependent on knowledge from the previous books 
while amping up the stakes for subsequent volumes, but fans will be thoroughly 
engrossed—and suitably intrigued to continue the series when a new girl ready to 
play the Snow White role shows up in the final pages.  KQG
mitchell, sAundrA Mistwalker. Harcourt, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-547-85315-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Fishing runs in Willa Dixon’s blood, and she plans on continuing her family’s 
lobstering legacy after high school, taking over her father’s ship and living out the 
rest of her days in the sea-sprayed town of Broken Tooth, Maine. At least, that 
was the plan until her brother was shot and killed in a dispute with another fisher-
man and Willa’s father forbade her to step on a boat again. Now Willa’s basically 
sleepwalking through the rest of school, dreading her court date to testify against 
the shooter (she witnessed her brother’s death), and feeling a strange pull toward 
the local lighthouse, a place supposedly haunted by the Grey Man, a ghost who 
may grant wishes but at a cost. When a foggy night brings Willa to the foot of the 
lighthouse she does indeed meet Grey, who offers a grieving Willa the opportunity 
to take his place as the guardian of Broken Tooth’s waters. Both the ethereal power 
of the ocean and the hardscrabble milieu of a struggling fishing town are capably 
evoked here, and Willa’s affection for her home and her place in it are clear from 
the beginning. Narration alternates between Willa and Grey, but unfortunately, 
neither character is all that engaging: while understandably depressed, Willa is so 
closed off that she’s almost callous, and her tendency to brush off any emotion as 
dramatic makes her somewhat unsympathetic. Grey, on the other hand, exults in 
the melodrama of his situation, but his self-recriminations at offering Willa his 
post seem more showy than genuine. Still, there’s enough ghostly creepiness here 
to ensure a few shivers, and Willa’s struggle to sort out her fate and her family will 
likely keep readers turning the pages.  KQG 
moriArty, JAclyn 
The Cracks in the Kingdom. 
Levine/Scholastic, 
2014 [480p] (The Colors of Madeleine)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-39738-4 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63369-7 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Book Two of the Colors of Madeleine series (following A Corner of White, BCCB 
5/13) opens with the revelation of the whereabouts of the lost members of the 
royal family of Cello; each is leading a quietly despairing life in a separate city, 
utterly unaware of their real identity and past life. Back in the realm of Cello, 
Princess Ko has assembled a small group of young Cellians, including Elliot Ba-
ranski, protagonist of the previous book, to help her recover her family from the 
World, a project she must carry out in secret since congress between the worlds is 
a capital offense. Elliot, meanwhile, is hopeful when a pair of whip-smart agents 
has been assigned to rescue his father from the Hostiles, but less hopeful that he 
can complete his assigned task of stretching the tiny crack between the worlds he 
326 • The bulleTin
uses to communicate with Madeleine, his Cambridge-dwelling contact. While the 
first book focused more on developing the delightfully eccentric world of Cello, 
this book is more plot-driven, with the fascinating color storms only coming in 
at the most suspenseful times. Though this outing isn’t quite as stylish as the first 
book, Moriarty still provides more frissons of delight than many other authors, and 
the different parts of the Cellian Kingdom take on a kind of exaggerated, offset 
resemblance to England’s varied landscapes, from the fields and green spaces of the 
Farms, to the high-tech wonderland of Jagged Edge, to the curiously old-fashioned 
landscapes of Olde Quainte. Alarming plot twists and welcome surprises greet 
readers at every turn, and enough ends are left dangling to engender anticipation 
for the next installment.  KC 
morrill, lAuren Being Sloane Jacobs. Delacorte, 2014 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99024-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74179-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98712-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
At sixteen, figure skater Sloane Emily Jacobs finds herself shying away from triple 
salchow jumps and suffering through family dinners, where her perfectionist 
mother can’t contain her disappointment and where Sloane can’t look her senator 
father—whom she recently caught in flagrante with a young staffer—in the eye. She 
also dreads attending skate camp in Montreal, where she will spend four grueling 
weeks working at a sport she is no longer sure she loves. Meanwhile, Sloane Devon 
Jacobs is also headed to Montreal, in her case after a blowup on the ice has her 
benched, making hockey camp there her last chance to control her temper; with 
her mother in rehab for alcohol abuse, she has a lot of anger to manage. When the 
two Sloanes’ luggage gets swapped at their hotel, and they overcome their immedi-
ate antipathy toward each other, they concoct a plan by which they can be Sloane 
Jacobs without being themselves at all. Told in the voices of both Sloanes (which 
proves slightly confusing in shared scenes), this is a feel-good story with flashes of 
honesty: the two girls learn to respect each other (and each other’s sport) without 
become besties, find themselves capable of surviving in unfamiliar territory without 
discovering latent genius, and ultimately make tentative peace with their families 
while knowing the road to healing will be long. Morrill understands and embraces 
the must-haves of satisfying teen fare; she breaks no new ground here with elements 
of uptown-meets-downtown and storied camp bullies, pranks, and romance, but 
she does strike a successful balance between the real and the rewarding. This book 
will suit romantics who hadn’t thought to wonder what would happen if The Parent 
Trap met The Cutting Edge.  AA
murphy, mAry Say Hello Like This!; written and illus. by Mary Murphy. Candle-
wick, 2014 [16p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6951-5 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 1-4 yrs
A menagerie of creatures—frogs, beetles, donkeys—greet each other in their dis-
tinctive ways, culminating in a “hullabaloo” that only has “one hello missing—let’s 
hear it from you.” Some hellos will certainly be familiar, as with the dogs’ “licky 
and loud” bow-wow, while others like the beetles’ tiny “tip tap tip tap” might be 
February 2014 • 327
new to wee ones. As with A Kiss Like This (BCCB 2/13), the half-page flaps that 
reveal the salutations (“A chicken hello is flappy and clucky . . . /like this! cluck 
cluck cluck”) will be extra fun layered on top of the boisterous animal noises that 
kids will surely want to chime in on. Murphy’s distinct ink and watercolor illus-
trations again pair strong shapeliness and a candy-coated color scheme to make 
for a friendly visual experience that matches the book’s sweet, silly tone. The bold 
outlining of the pictures and the participatory nature makes this a winning choice 
for library lapsits or storytimes on animal sounds—especially ones that enthusiasti-
cally encourage toddler noisemaking.  TA
nelson, KAdir Baby Bear; written and illus. by Kadir Nelson. Balzer + Bray/
HarperCollins, 2014 [26p]
ISBN 978-0-06-224172-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 3-6 yrs
Baby Bear is lost and seeks help in finding his way home from a variety of animals. 
Each offers slightly different advice, from the Squirrels, who advise him to “hug a 
tree and think of home,” to the Ram who suggests climbing up high for a better 
view and singing a song to lift his spirits, to the Salmon who agrees to actually 
show him the way, providing Baby Bear promises not to eat him, and leads him 
back home. The gentle cadences of the animals’ voices and the large, dream-like 
illustrations in deep twilight tones make this suitable for bedtime reading or for an 
evening story hour. Unfortunately, some of the animals’ advice is sentimental and 
clichéd (the Moose offers, “When I am lost, I sit very still and try to listen to my 
heart. It speaks as softly and sweetly as a gentle breeze. And it is never wrong”), and 
Baby Bear’s slow progress, a result of the largely abstract advice he receives, gets a 
bit tedious. Nelson’s artwork, done in oil paint on canvas, is thoughtfully composed 
with unusual perspectives (extreme close-ups of some of the animals, viewpoints 
that are above or below Baby Bear), giving the pictures a fresh originality. Some 
illustrations are plasticky in their stiff glossiness, but others are lovely—the nearly 
glowing snowy owl perched in a dark tree seems almost ethereal. Nature-loving 
youngsters may nonetheless enjoy this journey, and it could easily be paired with 
Root’s Oliver Finds His Way (BCCB 2/02) for a duo of lost bear books.  JH
nicKerson, JAne The Mirk and Midnight Hour. Knopf, 2014 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75287-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75286-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75289-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
When her father goes off to fight in the War between the States, Violet is left 
to manage the family’s Mississippi farm, which is suddenly host to several new 
faces, including Violet’s laudanum-addicted stepmother, a snooty stepsister, and 
two rowdy cousins. A walk in the woods leads to Violet’s discovery of Thomas, a 
badly injured Union soldier who is being cared for by the VanZeldts, a local free 
African-American family with rumored ties to hoodoo and magic. Enemies abound 
as Violet’s house is set ablaze, her cousin suffers several mysterious accidents, and 
she learns that Thomas is to be used as a sacrifice by the VanZeldts to gain more 
power. While the plot is packed with significant events, there’s a languid ease to 
the prose that invites readers to become fully immersed in the sweltering heat of a 
328 • The bulleTin
Mississippi summer, and Nickerson paints a picture of the Southern landscape that 
is rustic but ethereal and at times, eerie. Violet’s conflicted feelings about the war 
and slavery are honestly but sensitively depicted: she’s certainly a product of her 
times, casually tossing about the idea that her father “bought” Laney, her ostensible 
best friend, but she’s also coming to realize that an institution that regards people 
as property is in fact morally compromised. Unfortunately, this realization comes 
with too much helpful reassurance from Laney, and most of the African-American 
players are reduced to being either wise templates or, as in the case of the VanZeldts, 
creepy others. The direct correlation to the Tam Lin folktale only shows up in the 
final chapters, but the blend of fairy tale tropes and the Southern Gothic setting 
make this a compelling, if somewhat flawed, retelling.  KQG
ondAAtJe, griFFin, ad. The Camel in the Sun; illus. by Linda Wolfsgru-
ber. Groundwood, 2013 42p
ISBN 978-1-55498-381-0 $17.95  
R Gr. 3-6
For years a traveling merchant thinks nothing of his put-upon camel’s comfort, 
viewing it more as a tool to get goods from one place to another than as a living 
creature. During a trip through the city of Medina, the merchant snoozes in the 
shade of one of the city’s many gardens while the camel stands tied up in the hot 
sun. The Prophet Mohammed, living in Medina at the time, sees the camel and 
compassionately comforts it, an act that unleashes the camel’s sorrow at being treated 
merely as a conveyance, causing the animal to weep. Its tears soak into the sand and 
enter the dreams of the merchant, who absorbs the camel’s sadness and begins to see 
things from the animal’s perspective. Upon waking, the merchant contritely accepts 
the Prophet’s censure of his behavior towards the camel and humbly begins to treat 
it more kindly. Ondaatje’s version of this story, inspired by a hadith (“an account 
of the Prophet’s words or actions passed from generation to generation”), has an 
elegant simplicity that allows the tale’s lesson to take center stage in a non-didactic 
way. An author’s note gives background on Ondaatje’s interaction with the tale 
and provides a cursory explanation of the hadith tradition; a handful of resources 
are also listed in the author’s acknowledgments. Wolfsgruber’s art, monoprints 
combined with drawing and printed on matte paper, is stunning in its evocation 
of the desert setting (and tastefully avoids depicting the Prophet); varying tones of 
brown and gold are accented with cooler blues and greens while the pencil details 
give texture and vibrancy to the otherwise stark desert and dusty city backgrounds. 
This provides a solid, accessible base for some thought-provoking discussion about 
human-animal (or even just human) relationships, compassion, and empathy.  JH
philbricK, rodmAn Zane and the Hurricane: A Story of Katrina. Blue Sky/
Scholastic, 2014 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-34238-4 $16.99
E-book ISBN 978-0-545-63347-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
To say that Zane has bad timing is “the understatement of the century”; the twelve-
year-old (accompanied by his beloved dog, Bandit) makes his first visit to New 
Orleans and his late father’s grandmother just as Hurricane Katrina bears down 
on the city. What starts as an idyll turns into an evacuation; then Bandit leaps out 
February 2014 • 329
of a stopped vehicle, Zane dashes after him, and they end up back at Zane’s great-
grandmother’s house in the Ninth Ward as the storm rages. Flooding forces them to 
the roof, where they’re rescued by Mr. Tru, a local musician, and Malvina, Mr. Tru’s 
prickly young charge. Together, the group boats and then walks their way through 
the devastated city to find safety, only to discover the Superdome barred to them, 
the unflooded wealthy districts armed and hostile, and help nowhere to be found. 
Philbrick writes with a taut pace, turning the realities of the Katrina disaster into 
a grim, absorbing adventure that incorporates the infamous details without forc-
ing documentary into the story. Resilient, plainspoken Zane makes an engaging 
narrator, and his position as an outsider allows explanation to happen organically; 
his personal journey of connection to the father he never knew (“A dead man who 
was once exactly my age, and who looked at this place through eyes not much dif-
ferent than my own”) and the African-American side of his family add a personal 
dimension. Zane’s triumphant survival doesn’t undercut the sheer horror of Katrina’s 
wrath and civilization’s breakdown, and young readers who know Katrina only as a 
distant headline memory will gain understanding of nature’s fury and humanity’s 
failure. End matter includes a map, a timeline, and a collection of relevant facts as 
well as an author’s note that mentions source material.  DS
polAcco, pAtriciA Clara and Davie: The True Story of  Young Clara Barton; 
written and illus. by Patricia Polacco. Scholastic, 2014 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-545-35477-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
Drawing on stories from her extended family, Polacco recounts the formative child-
hood of distant cousin Clara Barton, the “angel” of the Civil War battlefield and 
founder of the American Red Cross. Born in 1821, Clara grew up motherless in 
a large family of siblings and formed a particular attachment to her older brother 
Davie. Every little girl’s image of the ideal brother, Davie championed Clara against 
the stricter discipline of their sensible sisters, taught her to embrace nature with 
gusto, defended her when she was teased or censured for her lisp, and recognized 
her affinity with animals and innate talent for healing. Never was her talent more 
urgently required than when Davie broke both legs in a fall from a roof beam, and 
Clara served as nurse, therapist, and guilt-tripper-in-chief during his long recovery 
(“You have always told me that I have the gift of healing. Unless you try to walk, 
I’ll never believe that again”). Davie walked, and Clara’s future accomplishments 
became the subject of a plethora of biographies. With her customarily intimate 
storytelling and fluid, loose-lined pencil and watercolor pictures, Polacco renders 
a portrait of a child discerning and testing her own strengths. Children will recog-
nize through this pivotal episode that healing is not always a matter of life-saving 
heroics but the steady application of comfort, exhortation, and lots and lots of 
patience, a consideration worth pondering for those kids who want to be a doctor 
or a nurse when they grow up. An author’s note on Barton and her place on the 
author’s family tree is included.  EB 
330 • The bulleTin
robinson, shAron Under the Same Sun; illus. by AG Ford. Scholastic, 
2014 [42p]
ISBN 978-0-545-16672-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 6-9 yrs
A family of nine in Tanzania is anxiously preparing for their Auntie Sharon and 
Bibi (grandmother) to visit from America, and after the pair arrives, there’s joyous 
celebration and trips to the market for the next few days. With Bibi’s birthday com-
ing up, there’s also a mysterious drive to the mountains that ends in a surprise safari 
trip, crossing the gorgeous savannah and spotting wildlife. The last day of the safari 
brings the group past Bagamoyo, the ruins of a slave-trading post, which prompts 
reflections on the family’s history during a walk on the beach before a heartfelt 
farewell. The text of this story, based on Robinson’s own life as Auntie Sharon, is 
both protracted and busy in trying to pack in details of a genealogy rooted in the 
slave trade in addition to the extended visit. Still, this is a compelling story that may 
challenge popular notions of African family life, while the adventure in the grassland 
will appeal to animal lovers. Ford’s photorealistic oil and acrylic illustrations provide 
an authentic cultural landscape both in the city and on the savannah with their 
eye for detail and expert use of perspective, although the characters’ expressions are 
sometimes a bit stiff. The large trim size and crispness of the illustrations would 
lend this to sharing with a particularly patient storytime audience or a classroom 
interested in different kinds of families or life in other parts of the world.  TA 
rosenstocK, bArb The Noisy Paint Box: The Colors and Sounds of Kandinsky’s 
Abstract Art; illus. by Mary GrandPré. Knopf, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-307-97848-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 6-9 yrs
This fictionalized biography of artist Vassily Kandinsky starts with his childhood, 
where young Vasya lived a stiff and proper Russian life until he received a gift of 
paints, whose colors he synesthetically heard as sounds (“The swirling colors trilled 
like and orchestra tuning up for a magical symphony”). Despite his joy in painting, 
Vasya turned his back on art and grew up to become a lawyer; when he could resist 
his colors no longer, he dove back into creating, studying with various painters and 
eventually debuting his own completely abstract art. While the blend of fiction 
and nonfiction is a little confusing, the story of a young kid who wants to shake 
things up will appeal to many junior artists, and the details of Vasya’s sonic joy 
in color may inspire further artistic exploration. GrandPré’s acrylic illustrations, 
occasionally enhanced with touches of paper collage, ably convey the gloomy re-
spectability of young Vasya’s household with deep smoky tones weighted down by 
fusty brocades. Unfortunately, they’re not very successful at expressing his break 
with propriety; the creamy backgrounds and misty textures undercut the pop of 
his colors and sometimes lack compositional focus; additionally, the layout, with 
its tidy borders and common font (save for some peculiar breaks into san serif), 
has a stodgy conventionality at odds with its subject. Winter’s Just Behave, Pablo 
Picasso! (BCCB 5/12) is a more effective picture-book treatment of an artist who 
shattered the rules, but this could add dimension to an exploration of that artistic 
era or prompt a project combining music and art. An author’s note gives more 
details about Kandinsky’s life, and a quartet of Kandinsky paintings are reproduced 
alongside it.  DS
February 2014 • 331
roth, veronicA Allegiant. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2013 526p
ISBN 978-0-06-202406-0 $19.99  
R Gr. 9-12
The highly anticipated conclusion to Roth’s Divergent series follows Dauntless 
heroes Tris and Tobias as they make their way out of the walled city of Chicago to 
the Bureau of Genetic Welfare, where they discover the legacy of genetic tamper-
ing that led to the faction-based society that has ruled Chicago for generations. 
The city is one of the Bureau’s greatest experiments and a successful one at that, 
with the factions providing the social conditioning needed to supplement genetic 
predispositions. Now that the factions have fallen apart, however, Chicago is under 
siege from both within and without. Tobias’ mother, the leader of the factionless, 
is about to start a war with the newly formed Allegiant group within the city while 
the Bureau is considering wiping the memories of Chicago’s residents in an attempt 
to reset the experiment. The plot is believably complex, and Roth makes the wise 
decision in this last installment to reveal the secrets early on and let the focus fall 
on her characters as they grapple with this new reality, the choices that face them, 
and the repercussions of their actions. Tris shares narration with Tobias, and the 
dual perspective makes this a less action-intensive outing than the previous books 
but rewards readers with a fuller, more complete picture of both the world and its 
inhabitants. The relationship between Tris and Tobias is sorely tested, battered and 
bruised as it is by the lies they must tell in order to survive, and while the ardent 
lust of their affection is still there, it is tempered now with new notions of love, 
forgiveness, and sacrifice. In the end, this is a world replete with loss, and the heroes 
must suffer their own in a twist that will break the hearts of many readers but stays 
true to the merciless dystopia that Roth has created.  KQG
sAndler, mArtin w. How the Beatles Changed the World. Bloomsbury, 
2014 [192p] illus. with photographs 
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3566-9 $21.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3565-2 $20.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-9
Yes, it really has been half a century since the opening salvo of the British Invasion, 
the Beatles’ February 9, 1964 debut on the Ed Sullivan Show. In this adulatory 
volume Sandler attempts to recapture the frenzy of Beatlemania and to consider 
the broader influence of the band on aspects of American culture from fashion to 
religion, studio recording to movies. There’s something here for every Beatle in-
terest—band history, mob scenes, album-burning backlash, facial-hair evolutions, 
Iron Curtain censorship, record-breaking musical triumphs, and alas, break-up 
and deaths. Organizational switches between chronological narration and subject 
themes, however, require nimbleness on the reader’s part to keep milestones in 
alignment, and not every picture in Sandler’s extensive photo gallery matches neatly 
with text. Readers who truly want to understand social and musical forces behind 
the hoopla will find the context a bit thin, with only a couple of lines addressing 
the dynamics of, for example, the Vietnam War and the Rolling Stones. For kids 
who simply want to know why Grandma still swoons over Sir Paul, however, and 
why Grandpa speaks of “the white album” with reverence, this is just the breezy, 
image-rich source to consult. The bound book will include a discography, bibli-
ography, and index.  EB
332 • The bulleTin
schindler, holly The Junction of Sunshine and Lucky. Dial, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3725-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Auggie Jones desperately wants to discover her shine, because it seems like ev-
erybody she knows has a talent: her best friend, Lexie, creates striking hairstyles, 
neighbor Irma Jean alters rags into stylish clothing, and classmate Weird Harold 
has a remarkable aptitude for facts and figures. Starting at Dickerson Elementary 
after her old school closes gives Auggie—named for the grandfather who takes 
care of her—the perfect chance to discover her own hidden talents. Soon, though, 
Lexie falls under the spell of resident mean girl Victoria, who makes no attempt 
to disguise her disdain for Auggie’s masculine name, her grandfather Gus’ work 
(trash hauling), or Serendipity Place, the neighborhood Auggie has called home all 
her life. When Victoria and her father, the head of the town’s newly formed House 
Beautification Committee, target Serendipity Place, residents scurry to meet their 
requirements as best they can. Determined to save her home, Auggie finds inspira-
tion in the trash hauled by Grampa Gus and in items donated by neighbors, and 
soon pottery shards, vivid glass, and metal sculptures transform the house’s exterior 
into a vibrant expression of the love within its walls. In Auggie, Schindler creates a 
spunky, sympathetic character young readers will engage with and enjoy. Though 
the voice and even elements of the plot are derivative of DiCamillo’s Because of 
Winn Dixie (BCCB 6/00), the lively narration is enjoyable, and the diverse cast of 
characters (Auggie herself is African American, though many in her neighborhood 
are white) brings meaningful messages of community and self-respect to the fore. 
Some readers may wish Schindler had provided more detailed descriptions of the 
sculptures, but aspiring artists and anyone else looking for their shine will appreciate 
this satisfying portrait of a young girl and her close-knit community.  AA
scott, lisA Ann School of Charm. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220758-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220760-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 4-6
It’s 1977, and eleven-year-old Brenda “Chip” Anderson is not one bit thrilled with 
her new Southern surroundings at the house of her estranged grandmother in North 
Carolina. Unlike her older and younger sister, nature-loving tomboy Chip can’t 
seem to fit into a life dominated by her grandmother’s heavy-handed machinations 
to prepare the girls for the local beauty pageant. The girls’ newly widowed mother 
isn’t much help, and the grandmother’s persistent unkindness towards Chip goes 
largely unchecked. Desperate for some positive attention, Chip stumbles upon the 
nearby home of a woman who runs a unique charm school. Miss Vernie treats Chip 
kindly and, with the help of what Chip believes are magic charm bracelets, trains 
Chip and two other girls—plump, insecure Karen and fierce, African-American 
Dana—for the pageant in her own unorthodox way. Chip veers between trying to 
make herself into something she’s not and being herself as the pageant approaches 
and, as she discovers some secrets about her grandmother’s past, she learns that 
people are more complicated than they seem. Chip is a likable heroine, and the 
period setting is cozy but still realistic (there is resistance to Dana taking part in what 
has traditionally been a white pageant, setting up the 1983 conclusion in which 
February 2014 • 333
Vanessa Williams is crowned Miss America). The family dynamics are engaging but 
overdrawn: Chip’s grandmother is so nasty to her for so much of the book that her 
change of heart near the end, while a relief, is hard to swallow. Chip’s willingness 
to participate in a pageant may be equally unbelievable, but her sorrow at the loss 
of her father is entirely credible. Despite the book’s shortcomings, readers who like 
heart-warming family stories, spunky heroines, and Southern settings may still find 
this an entertaining read.  JH
seArles, rAchel The Lost Planet. Feiwel, 2014 [384p]
ISBN 978-1-250-03879-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
When thirteen-year-old Chase Garrety suddenly appears within the well-fortified 
walls of an isolated compound on the planet Trucon, he has a blaster wound to the 
back of his head and no memory of his name, his life before, or how he got there. 
Things get even more complicated when the compound’s only other resident, the 
friendly but petulant fourteen-year-old Parker Mason, tricks him into an unau-
thorized trip to a nearby moon, and the boys inadvertently survive Trucon’s total 
destruction as a result. Suddenly they are being chased by intergalactic Federation 
Fleet soldiers, dragged into dangerous, illegal deals with underground crime lords, 
and rescued by an alien who may be the terrorist responsible for Trucon’s demise. 
Desperate to save themselves and uncover the truth of Chase’s past, they instead 
discover a vast conspiracy that could make them enemies of the Federation itself. 
A rollicking space adventure in the spirit of classic juvenile science fiction from 
Heinlein and Hoover, this fast-paced novel will keep readers on the edge of their 
seats from page one. Chase and Parker are amusing, likable, authentically realized 
teenage boys, as likely to put their foot in their mouth as to save the day with un-
expected courage. Strongly crafted alien worlds, discordant alien races, and often 
unsound space vehicles only add to the overall sense of strange and dangerous fun. 
Perfect for readers ready to graduate from Colville’s My Teacher series and Star Trek 
and Star Wars fans who want a middle-grade adventure of their own, this novel will 
have readers jetting across space itself for probable sequels.  AM
sellier, mArie, ad. What the Rat Told Me: A Legend of the Chinese Zodiac; writ-
ten and illus. by Marie Sellier, Catherine Louis, and Wang Fei. NorthSouth, 
2014 [40p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-7358-4158-1 $7.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs 
Once upon a time—“at the dawn of the dawn of the world,” to be exact—the rat 
and the cat were best friends. However, when the emperor of the world invited all 
of the animals in creation to visit him before sunrise, the cunning rat left his lazy 
friend sleeping while he, the rat, sneaked between the horns of the ox to ride up 
the Jade Mountain. Pleased with the twelve animals that journeyed to see him, 
the emperor of the world gave each of them a year for all time, with Rat the owner 
of the first year. Having slept through the whole event, however, the cat received 
no year at all, leaving him and the rat mortal enemies. This colorful, collaborative 
adaptation of an ancient Chinese legend comes to the U.S. translated from its origi-
nal French publication. Highly stylized linoleum prints employing a strict palette 
of black, white, and red pack a graphic punch; black figures are often silhouetted, 
334 • The bulleTin
contrasting with the vivid red stamp of a Chinese character on every page, and 
subtle texturing of the ink adds dimension to the crisp planes of color. Storytime 
participants will enjoy these bold visuals, the text’s conversational tone and apt 
personifications of the zodiac animals, and mention learning their own zodiac sign 
using the provided list of years and corresponding animals at the back of the book. 
The creators have delivered a complete package, presenting the Chinese character 
for each of the animals as well as a zodiac wheel and source note in the end mat-
ter. Visually compelling and engaging in its observations, this pourquoi tale could 
find use in both the library and the classroom on its own or in conjunction with 
other animal folktales or in contrast with Ed Young’s retelling Cat and Rat (BCCB 
11/95); also consider it as an unexpected but enjoyable supplement to a lesson on 
the animal kingdom.  AA
senzAi, n. h. Saving Kabul Corner. Wiseman/Simon, 2014 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-8494-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
At twelve, Ariana can’t cook traditional Afghan meals, she moves more like a gallop-
ing horse than a dignified lady, and she inevitably makes a mess when stocking the 
pistachio bins at her family’s grocery store, the titular Kabul Corner. Unfortunately, 
her cousin Laila flips pancakes like a pro, veritably glides when she walks, and never 
spills anything. Worst of all, Ariana must share everything with Laila, who has re-
cently arrived from Afghanistan: her cramped California bedroom, her sixth-grade 
class, and even her best friend. When a series of accidents rocks Kabul Corner and 
a neighboring store, Ariana suspects that someone is trying to scare away the plaza’s 
tenants. She finds an ally in Laila, and soon the girls and their friends are on the 
case to save Kabul Corner. In her second novel, Senzai ambitiously explores family 
dynamics and preteen preoccupations alongside immigration, Middle East poli-
tics, and even disabilities (Ariana has a mild sensory processing disorder). Though 
explanations of weightier issues verge on the conspicuous, the book maintains a 
fairly light touch when helping young readers understand Ariana and her family’s 
culture, keeping these details in the background and wisely allowing the mystery 
plot to take center stage. Thoughtfully written, with just the right amount of hint-
dropping to get readers guessing, this engaging story features immigrants, minorities, 
and complex political issues while credibly treating the thoughts and feelings of a 
twelve-year old girl and the bonds of family. This is one for any preteen interested 
in the broader world, or just navigating the one at home.  AA
sheinKin, steve The Port Chicago 50: Disaster, Mutiny and the Fight for Civil 
Rights. Roaring Brook, 2014 [208p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59643-796-8 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-10
Sheinkin presents the compelling tale of African-American sailors who enlisted with 
the expectation of serving on vessels bound for the European or Asian theaters of 
operation and instead found themselves loading arms onto carriers at the California 
base of Port Chicago. All recognized the importance of the task, but the fact that 
only black seamen were assigned to the labor and nobody received training in han-
dling the munitions (some of it “hot cargo” with attached detonators) bred further 
resentment against the policy of racial discrimination that was enforced throughout 
February 2014 • 335
the military. An explosion, which was all but inevitable, killed 320 sailors on July 
17, 1944 and left many of the survivors understandably reluctant to return to the 
loading docks. When several divisions were reassigned shortly after the explosion, 
fifty seamen refused the assignment and were subsequently brought up on charges 
of mutiny. Sheinkin handily sketches in the background of segregation at the time 
period and allows much of the episode to unfold through first-hand accounts and 
extensive excerpts from the trial itself, supplying commentary to assist readers in 
following the prosecution and defense strategies. The result is a gripping narrative 
that underscores the tragic fallout from misguided military policy, while involving 
readers in the courtroom debate and the exact meaning of “mutiny.” The fifty now-
deceased defendants (all convicted, all released back into active duty after serving 
a fraction of the original sentence, some pardoned) remain in a posthumous legal 
limbo, and only a later generation can rally for the conviction to be overturned and 
restore reputations—sounds like a challenge some blossoming activists might want 
to take on in their near futures. Black and white photographs, citations, extensive 
resources arranged by documents type, and an index are included.  EB
shields, cArol diggory Baby’s Got the Blues; illus. by Lauren Tobia. Candle-
wick, 2014 [26p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3260-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
“You think babies have it easy?” begins this infant lament. It’s not true: “Sometimes 
being a baby/ is enough to make you cry.” The song traces the travails of babyhood 
from diaper issues (“Woke up this morning soggy,/ And that smell kept getting 
riper”) to coordination (“But every time I try to walk,/ I fall flat on my face”) to 
bedtime (“But I’m doing time behind these bars—/ Is it a crib or is it a jail?”). 
Fortunately, it all ends up in big loving snuggle that makes the baby “lose those 
baby blues.” The text follows the classic bluesy form, including a classic chorus (“B-
A-B-Y, baby”), and it’s both funny and accurate in the details of infant frustration 
(some of which continue well beyond babyhood). The art gives viewers a hook in 
the form of baby’s older sister, who’s squirming away from the diaper change and 
zipping around with the freedom that the baby yearns for, thereby cleverly turning 
the book into a celebration of all the things post-baby kids can do that babies can’t. 
Figures in the ink, pencil, and digital illustrations have a combination of flow and 
rotundity that recalls Patricia Polacco at times, though the compositions are cleaner 
and more rhythmic and the linework crisper. Kids plagued by attention-grabbing 
new babies will find this a sly and lively reminder of their own superiority and 
their siblings’ lovability.  DS
shustermAn, neAl Tesla’s Attic; by Neal Shusterman and Eric Elfman. Disney/
Hyperion, 2014 [256p] (Accelerati)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-4803-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-5512-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-8
Following the death of his mother in a house fire, Nick Slate moves with his father 
and brother to Colorado Springs, taking up residence in the down-at-the-heels 
house of a deceased relative. Nick has two immediate goals: to stay under the radar 
at his new middle school, and to make some quick cash by selling attic junk at a 
336 • The bulleTin
garage sale. Goal one is a non-starter when garrulous classmate Mitch takes Nick 
loudly under his wing, but goal two is unbelievably successful, especially once Nick 
turns on an antique lamp that seems to draw customers who bid up the prices on 
the castoffs. When the appliances begin acting strangely all over Colorado Springs 
and shady adults clad in pearlized suits take sinister interest in Nick, he discovers 
that his distant auntie had been Nikola Tesla’s fancy lady, and he deduces that the 
bits and bobs now scattered over the city fit together into a mysterious but potent 
machine. This surely sounds like the storyline to any number of novels already on 
the shelf, and even Tesla has become a bit too ubiquitous of late, but Shusterman 
and Elfman have crafted a plot more devious, characters far quirkier, climaxes (yes, 
there are two) more breathless, and a narration much, much funnier than recent 
mad-science offerings. Sticking with a third-person narration frees the authors to be 
as wryly and sophisticatedly witty as they please without compromising the veracity 
of their middle-school cast, resulting in storytelling as delightful as the story being 
told. At the end of the first book in a planned trilogy, Tesla’s invention has wrought 
some serious damage, and Nick and friends are off to reanimate a dearly departed 
pal. If that won’t bring back readers for Volume Two, what will?  EB
smAllmAn, steve Bear’s Big Bottom; illus. by Emma Yarlett. Capstone, 
2014 26p
ISBN 978-1-62370-118-5 $14.95  
R 3-5 yrs
In this rhyming story, Bear’s exceptionally large derriere causes his smaller woodland 
friends no end of trouble, from sending them airborne off the teeter-totter to deplet-
ing the pool water (“The pool was emptied with one splash, because of Bear’s big 
bottom”). The final straw is his inadvertent squashing of Squirrel’s birthday cake, 
which causes his pals to lose their patience and which prompts Bear to run away 
and hide in shame. When his penitent friends go looking for him, they find instead 
a fox, who “tried to bite their bottoms!” The critters call out to Bear for help but 
his rear is stuck in a hollow tree. Bear perseveres, though, and drags the tree along 
with him, thus scaring off the fox (“A monster!”) and saving the day. The story, told 
in verse that clips along at a gallop, may be as slight as Bear’s bottom is large, but 
youngsters will likely overlook that deficit in favor of enthusiastically chiming in on 
the word “bottom,” which—let’s face it—is just plain fun to say. Yarlett’s comical 
illustrations feature attractive woodsy tones of brown, red, and turquoise against 
a creamy background. Frequent handwritten exclamations (“Look out, Mouse!”; 
“My poor cake!”) and tiny visual details (the poolside mouse wearing a scuba mask, 
the mustache-sporting snail) add richness, and the gentle stylization of the animal 
figures keeps the look classy. Pair this with Black’s Chicken Cheeks (BCCB 1/09) 
or Manushkin’s The Tushy Book (BCCB 5/09) for a humorous paean to posteriors, 
or, for bonus points with the preschool crowd, partner it with a clip of the Walt 
Disney short “In the Bag” featuring trash-collecting, booty-bumping bears.  JH
smith, Andrew Grasshopper Jungle: A History. Dutton, 2014 [464p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42603-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Austin faces two dilemmas: he is in love with both his girlfriend, Shann, and his 
best friend, Robby, and the world is ending. This last circumstance is the result of 
a chain of events that he and Robby have unwittingly set in motion, involving the 
February 2014 • 337
release of a genetic agent that infects its human victim with a larva that consumes 
the host and erupts into a six-foot-tall praying mantis bent on only two things: 
eating and reproducing. The play of themes and metaphors here is as multi-tiered 
as a wedding cake but with significantly more deadpan irony than icing; mostly the 
irony centers on Austin’s confusion with regard to his sexuality, which he continually 
refers to as experimenting, calling that designation for teenage sexual identity into 
question as well as drawing subtle attention to the unintended consequences of the 
decades-long experimenting that led to the giant bug mutations. Austin’s narrative 
voice fizzes with catchphrases that keep the reader on track as he dives into history 
and backstory. His obsessively repetitive but somehow endearing style calls to mind 
Vonnegut and Heller, which, given the characters’ ultimate descent into a bunker 
left over from the early ’70s, is more than thematically appropriate; indeed, the 
raw postmodern aesthetics of this text accord with its theme of flawed humanity. It 
would be easy enough to label the novel edgy, but since many of Smith’s previous 
offerings, such as Stick (BCCB 12/11), The Marbury Lens, and Passenger (BCCB 
12/12), have redefined where exactly the edges are, it’s more accurate to say that 
this one approaches its own edge of sophisticated brutality, sensory and intellectual 
overload, and sheer weirdness, and then jumps right off.  KC
stAnton, KAren Monday, Wednesday, and Every Other Weekend; written and illus. 
by Karen Stanton. Feiwel, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-250-03489-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
“My name is Henry Cooper and I live in two houses. So does my dog, Pomegran-
ate.” Mama’s apartment, where Henry and Pomegranate live Monday, Wednesday, 
and every other weekend, is colorful and lively, but a restless Pomegranate “wants 
to go home”; Papa’s house, where they live the rest of the time, is a feast of music 
and pizza, but again, “Pomegranate wants to go home.” When Pomegranate runs 
away one day, Henry knows where he’s gone: back to the house where they all lived 
together before his parents divorced. Can Henry convince him to let go of the old 
home for the new? The theme and the poignancy are reminiscent of Coffelt’s Fred 
Stays with Me! (BCCB 9/07), but here Pomegranate is proxy as much as pet, sym-
bolizing Henry’s own wish to return to the family that’s dissolved. While his return 
with Pomegranate to his new life may indicate his own adjustment, the mourn-
ing for what’s gone comes through strongly, giving the title a refreshingly candid 
acknowledgment of loss. Acrylic and collage art hums with vivid contrasting color 
in a fruity palette in full-bleed scenes; figures are drawn with folk-art naïveté and 
gaiety, and landscapes are cheerily crowded with toylike houses in non-Euclidean 
shapes, so the illustrations keep the mood from descending into gloom. Plenty of 
kids know the experience of divorced parents and house-to-house shuttling, and 
they’ll embrace the device of a pet’s acting out their own feelings.  DS
templemAn, mccormicK The Glass Casket. Delacorte, 2014 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99113-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74345-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81315-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12 
The sleepy tranquility of Nag’s End is shattered when five of the king’s men are 
brutally killed in the local woods. The village elders initially insist that the attacks 
338 • The bulleTin
are animal in nature, but sixteen-year-old Rowan Rose and her friend Tom remain 
unconvinced, especially when the attacks start occurring within the village bound-
aries. The violence coincides with the arrival of several strangers: a breathtakingly 
beautiful girl, who is rumored to be Rowan’s cousin, and the king’s brother-in-law, 
who is presumably there to investigate the murders but who seems much more 
interested in Rowan’s ability to translate an old text. Nag’s End becomes a town 
under siege, paralyzed by its residents’ inability to grapple with an evil far beyond 
their imagining, and there’s a quiet stillness to the prose as Rowan and her friends 
essentially wait to discover who will be killed next. The cool aloofness of the folkloric 
narration manages to simultaneously mute the graphic horror of the attacks and 
ratchet up the tension as the situation escalates. Plot layers twist upon plot layers 
and the relationships among the characters prove increasingly complex: Tom, for 
example, is initially portrayed as the stalwart, steady best friend, but his romance 
with Rowan’s cousin and his subsequent devastation drive him to actions that en-
danger the whole town. The titular allusion to “Snow White” is accompanied by 
several other nods to classic fairy tales, and indeed, this has both the stylish beauty 
of those tales and the chilling darkness that makes them timeless.  KQG 
vicente, Alidis The Missing Chancleta and Other Top-Secret Cases/La chancleta 
perdida y otros casos secretos; tr. from Spanish by Gabriela Baeza Ventura. Piñata/
Arte Público, 2013 [80p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55885-779-7 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-3
“They call me Flaca. DETECTIVE Flaca,” the eight-year-old narrator of this 
casebook insists, before launching into a retelling of her first case as a gumshoe 
trying to locate her missing chancleta (flip-flop). She interrogates the members of 
her family, only to reach a dead end . . . at which point she remembers that she 
threw the missing shoe at a mosquito last night, where it slid behind her nightstand. 
Flaca tells readers about two other cases she’s taken on: the time she faced an as-
sassination attempt when a fruit cup someone slid into her lunch box contained 
oranges (she’s allergic), and the case of her missing salsa when her mother signs her 
up for dance lessons in preparations for her sister’s quinceañera. This collection of 
three brief short stories, peppered with both with Spanish vocabulary, as well as 
some more difficult English phrasing (“contact with a food allergen”) that might 
push it toward stronger readers or a readaloud, is followed by a parallel Spanish 
translation. Flaca is delightfully smart-alecky for an eight-year-old (she calls her 
sister “La Bruja”), and her insistence in her sleuthing skills despite the anticlimactic 
nature of what she usually uncovers will be endearing to aspirant investigators. A 
hardboiled, bilingual version of Nate the Great, Flaca and her age-appropriate grit 
will likely spur new interest in the whodunit. Final art not seen.  TA
vlAhos, len The Scar Boys. Egmont, 2014 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-439-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-440-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
After a bullying incident leaves Harry Jones literally scarred, he’s socially skittish 
until charismatic and popular Johnny takes Harry under his wing. When they form 
a band, Harry approaches the project obsessively, and soon enough the band is a 
February 2014 • 339
huge success, especially after the beautiful and talented Cheyenne joins them. Johnny 
eventually becomes anxious to leave Harry and the band behind for college, but the 
other band members convince him to go on a last-ditch summer tour, where the 
inevitable car trouble, romance trouble, and money trouble lead to the de rigueur 
metaphorical and actual break-up of relationships on the road to growing up and 
away from childhood. The ’80s setting and reflective tone impose a problematically 
adult sensibility on what’s supposed to be an extended college-entrance essay; the 
retrospective wisdom strips the immediacy of emotion from Harry’s narration and 
makes the book read more like a vehicle for adult nostalgia than teen investment. 
Some readers will appreciate the additional insight, though, and while the familiar 
elements of realistic boy fiction here—strong language, cruel bullying, a traumatized 
underdog hero, an enigmatic and untouchable girl, an eventful road trip, and a 
redemptive moment with a friend—aren’t surprising, they’re popular for a reason. 
Ultimately, this text performs adequate service as an paler but more emotionally 
straightforward read-alike for fans of Portman’s King Dork (BCCB 5/06), Smith’s 
Winger (BCCB 6/13), and Green’s Paper Towns (BCCB 10/08).  KC 
weill, cynthiA Mi Familia Calaca/My Skeleton Family; illus. by Jesús Canseco 
Zárate. Cinco Puntos, 2013 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-50-4 $14.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-935955-51-1 $14.95 
 R Gr. 1-2
Weil, noted for her concept books drawing on Oaxacan art, returns here with an 
offbeat bilingual easy reader. The text is simple: Anita, the narrator, introduces 
the reader to her family (“My brother Miguel. He’s a brat”), noting all the kids, 
parents, grandparents, great-grandparents, and pets. There’s no story, but the voice 
is quite lively for such a list, casually varying phraseology and family groupings 
in ways that allow for additional vocabulary exploration. What really makes the 
book, however, are the titular skeletons, handmade figures by Zárate posed against 
attractive backgrounds in vibrant fiesta colors; subtle patterning below their feet 
suggests linoleum flooring, and kids will be tickled to realize that the attractive 
decorative asterisks aren’t snowflakes but bones. Zárate’s papier-mâché skeletons 
are less skeletal than some Day of the Dead celebrants, with cheerful faces drawn 
on their round heads and natty outfits rendering particularly festive, so the effect 
will be more ludicrous than spooky even for kids unfamiliar with the tradition. The 
contrast of the utterly straightforward text and the chipper cadaverous figures turns 
the everyday text into a poker-faced joke where the very ordinariness of the prose 
becomes funny (the skeletal cat and dog are particularly amusing); that contrast also 
cunningly removes any babyish implications from the simplicity of the vocabulary. 
This is therefore a witty backdoor beginning reader in two languages as well as an 
entertaining entry in a unit on the Day of the Dead.  DS
williAms, cArol lynch The Haven. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2014 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-312-69871-3 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-02253-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
The Haven is a hospital and school where Shiloh and her friends are protected 
from the hostile forces outside and from the Disease that occasionally infects them, 
forcing doctors to remove an infected lung or leg or skin graft—or at least that’s 
340 • The bulleTin
what the residents, young children and teens called Terminals, have been told. 
The rebellious Gideon, however, tells Shiloh the truth—they are actually clones, 
manufactured in a lab and kept healthy until their Receivers need a transplant—and 
urges her to join his escape plot. Meanwhile, the girl from whom Shiloh is cloned 
has died, and her family wants Shiloh freed to replace her. Now Shiloh must decide 
if she can stay at the Haven, knowing the terrifying and dangerous truth, or if she 
dares to risk her life for freedom, her friends, and the possibility of family. Readers 
familiar with Ishiguro’s Never Let Me Go will find this novel a pale imitation, and 
fans of clone-centered science fiction will likely deduce its primary reveal from its 
very premise. Still, Shiloh emerges as a compelling character, as she fights a deeply 
entrenched desire to obey authority for the sake of her freedom and the lives of 
those she cares about. Even readers who guess the truth early on will get caught up 
in her emotional journey: her sense of betrayal, her fears of getting caught, and her 
hesitation to risk any connection with the reckless Gideon. The moral compass of 
the story points unwaveringly toward life and liberty for the clones, making this 
a solid recommendation for those who like their science fiction with clear heroes 
and villains as well as fans of clone-perspective stories like Farmer’s The House of the 
Scorpion (BCCB 2/02) and Pearson’s The Adoration of Jenna Fox (BCCB 4/08).  AM
winters, KAy Voices from the Oregon Trail; illus. by Larry Day. Dial, 
2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3775-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Winters reprises a format she employed in Colonial Voices (BCCB 5/08) and Voices 
of Ancient Egypt (BCCB 2/03) to recreate the experiences of common people in 
historically significant eras. Here fifteen overlanders and a Sioux scout comment in 
free-verse poems about personal episodes that illuminate typical occurrences along 
the wagon route from Missouri to Oregon in the mid 1800s. Patience Mills has 
no choice but to follow her husband once he sells the family farm, even though 
it means leaving behind the grave of her baby son. Carl Hawks, son of the wagon 
master, embraces the excitement of the journey and his considerable responsibili-
ties, even as he worries about repeats of previous disasters. A three-year-old is lost 
in a river crossing, a pair of teens meet and marry, the Indian scout ponders the 
changes the settlers bring (“No good can come of this”), a farmer revels in a buf-
falo hunt, a young man helps lower his wagon down a three-hundred-foot drop. 
Many stories interconnect and the voices are lively and engaging, although each 
individual is given only a single hearing, leaving readers unable to gauge changes 
in attitude along the way. Copious endnotes expand on various aspects of wagon 
train organization, and Day’s detailed watercolor artwork nimbly switches mood 
from the grief of a mother making a last visit at her child’s tombstone, to the cow-
pie-slinging antics of kids inventing their own fun to shake off boredom. This 
format will enliven middle-grades history classes as a readaloud or, better still, as 
an adaptable script for readers theater.  EB
February 2014 • 341
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
mArcus, leonArd Randolph Caldecott: The Man Who Could Not Stop Drawing. 
Farrar, 2013 64p illus. with photographs 
ISBN 978-0-374-31025-7 $24.99
With an enthusiastic tone and a keen eye for fascinating and relevant details, noted 
literary historian Marcus chronicles the life and work of eighteenth-century illustra-
tor Randolph Caldecott, beginning with Caldecott’s birth and then following the 
man through an ailing childhood, to his employment as a bank clerk in Manches-
ter, to his networking with the British publishing world that eventually led to the 
publication of his works, to his ultimately untimely death. Crisp reproductions 
accompany the text while the thick, creamy paper lends an old-fashioned richness 
to the simple layout. Caldecott’s life is presented in one fluid narrative, essentially 
mirroring a picture book, but chapter separations and headings would have been 
helpful for navigating the wealth of information presented here, especially since 
both the accessible tone and the trim size make this appealing to younger readers 
who might be interested in the man behind the medal that appears on their favorite 
books. A timeline, source notes, and a bibliography are included. 
schiller, Justin g. Maurice Sendak: A Celebration of the Artist and His Work; by 
Justin G. Schiller and Dennis M.V. David, ed. by Leonard S. Marcus.  Abrams, 
2013 224p  illus. with photographs 
ISBN 978-1-4197-0826-8 $45.00
This latest tribute to Sendak features more than two hundred previously unpub-
lished sketches and other works from the late artist along with twelve essays from 
art curators, librarians, and scholars, including well-known names such as Iona 
Opie and Paul O. Zelinsky. Marcus, who edits the collection, provides the first 
chapter, offering historical context for Sendak’s work both in the art world and the 
realm of children’s literature and highlighting the artist’s creative evolution, with 
specific attention given to Where the Wild Things Are and In the Night Kitchen. A 
large trim size and oversized photo reproductions make for easy browsing and the 
juxtapositions of sketches next to final works provide a glimpse of the artist’s pro-
cess. Though most of the essays are more admiring than academic, this still makes 
a fine addition to the shelves of any Sendak fan.  KQG
Adventure: Abbott; Jensen; 
Lynch; roth; Searles; Shusterman
Afghan-Americans–fiction: Senzai
Africa–fiction: davies
Africa–stories: robinson
African Americans: Kanefield; 
Sheinkin
African Americans–fiction: Alexan-
der; nickerson; Schindler
Animals–fiction: davies; Ondaatje
Animals–stories: Murphy; nelson; 
Sellier; Smallman
Arguments–stories: Jeffers
Art and artists–fiction: Schindler
Art and artists–stories: rosenstock
Asian Americans: Freedman
Athletes–fiction: Morrill
Babies–stories: Shields
Baseball–poetry: Borden 
Basketball–fiction: Alexander
Bears–stories: nelson; Smallman 
Behavior–stories: Murphy
BiLinguAL BOOKS: garza; 
vicente; Weill
BiOgrAPHieS: Fern; Hall; Kal-
man; Kanefield; Kuklin; Polacco; 
Sandler
Bisexuality–fiction: Smith
Brothers and sisters: Polacco
Brothers and sisters–stories: Kaplan
Bullying–fiction: galveston; vlahos
Bullying–stories: Levy 
Chess–fiction: Klass
Chickens–fiction: dillard
Civil rights: Kanefield; Sheinkin
Civil rights–fiction: Kimmel
Civil War–fiction: nickerson
Class–fiction: Herrndorf
Cloning–fiction: Williams
Colors–fiction: Moriarty
Cousins–fiction: Senzai
Crime and criminals: Hall
Crime and criminals–fiction: Carle-
son; ewing; Herrndorf; temple-
man
Current events: Hall
demons–fiction: Hodge
divorce–stories: Stanton
dogs–fiction: Calmenson; Philbrick
dogs–stories: Stanton
dragons–fiction: ellis
dystopias–fiction: Bruchac; Hagen
elephants–stories: gude
Environmental studies: davies
Ethics and values: Carleson; ewing; 
Hagen; Herrndorf; Ondaatje; 
Williams
Fairies–fiction: graudin
Families–fiction: Alexander; Black-
stone; Jensen; Lord; Morrill; Scott
Families–stories: Jeffers; robinson
FAntASy: ellis; Foxlee; galves-
ton; graudin; Hodge; Howard; 
Meyer; Moriarty; templeman
Farms–fiction: dillard
Fathers–fiction: Carleson; Klass
Fishing–fiction: Mitchell
FOLK-LiKe tALeS: Hodge
FOLKtALeS And FAiry tALeS: 
Meyer; Ondaatje; Sellier
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
February 2014 • 343
Friends–fiction: Calmenson; eul-
berg; Lord; vlahos
Friends–stories: gude; Levy; Small-
man
Frontier and pioneer life: Winters
Future–fiction: Hagen
gangs–fiction: ellis; ewing
gender: Kuklin
ghosts–fiction: Mitchell
giraffes–stories: gude
gLBtQ people: Kuklin
grandparents–fiction: Schindler
grief–fiction: Blackstone; eulberg; 
Foxlee; Mitchell
HiStOriCAL FiCtiOn: engle; 
Scott
History, U.S.: Freedman; Kalman; 
Kanefield; Polacco; Winters
History, world: Kimmel; Sandler
HuMOr: Cotter; dillard; dolan; 
galveston; isaacs; Jeffers; Shields; 
Shusterman 
Hurricanes–fiction: Philbrick
ice skating–fiction: Freitas
identity: Kuklin
identity–fiction: Morrill; Scott; Wil-
liams
illness–stories: Lobel
immigration: Freedman
india–fiction: Kimmel
inventors and inventions–fiction: 
Shusterman
Latinos–fiction: engle; Freitas; garza
LegendS: Sellier
Lions–fiction: davies
Literature, children’s: Howard
Lost and found–stories: nelson 
Magic–fiction: Calmenson; Foxlee; 
graudin; nickerson
Mexican Americans–fiction: garza
Middle east–fiction: Carleson
Misbehavior–fiction: Blackstone
Monsters–stories: Cotter
Mothers–stories: Lobel
Music and musicians: Sandler
Music and musicians–fiction: vlahos
MySterieS: Abbott; Lowry; Sen-
zai; vicente
native Americans–fiction: Bruchac
new Orleans–fiction: Philbrick 
Olympics–fiction: Freitas
Panama–fiction: engle
Parents–stories: Stanton
Photography–fiction: Lord
POetry: Borden
Presidents, u.S.: Kalman
rabbits–stories: Kaplan; Lobel
Readers theater: Winters
Reading aloud: Alexander; ellis; 
Lowry; vicente Winters
Reading, easy: isaacs; Lowry; Weill
relationships–fiction: garza; Hodge; 
Smith; templeman
revenge–fiction: davies 
revolution–fiction: ellis
rHyMing StOrieS: Smallman
romance–fiction: eulberg; Hagen; 
Howard; Kaufman; roth
royalty–fiction: graudin; Moriarty
russia–stories: rosenstock
School–fiction: Lowry
SCienCe FiCtiOn: Kaufman; 
Meyer; roth; Searles; Smith; 
Williams
Secrets–fiction: Klass
Sexuality: Kuklin
Ships and sailing: Fern
Sisters–stories: Shields 
Slavery: Hall
Slavery–fiction: nickerson
Slavery–stories: robinson 
Soldiers–fiction: Lynch
Space travel–fiction: Searles
Sports–fiction: Freitas 
Sports–poetry: Borden
Sports–stories: Kaplan 
SteAMPunK: Meyer
Storytelling–fiction: Lowry
Storytime: Sellier
Superheroes–fiction: Jensen
SuPernAturAL StOrieS: 
Bruchac
SurvivAL StOrieS: Kaufman; 
Philbrick
tALL tALeS: isaacs
toads–stories: Levy
344 • The bulleTin
tOddLer BOOKS: Murphy
verSe nOveLS: Alexander; engle
voyages and travel–fiction: Abbott; 
Herrndorf; Kaufman; vlahos
voyages and travel: Fern; Winters
Weasels–fiction: dolan
Women’s studies: Fern; Polacco 
World cultures: Weill 
World religions: Ondaatje
World War ii–fiction: Lynch
World War ii: Sheinkin
Wrestling–fiction: garza
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
exploring literature 
for children.
David L. Russell, Ferris sTaTe UniversiTy; Karin E. 
Westman and Naomi J. Wood, Kansas sTaTe UniversiTy, 
Editors 
The Lion and the Unicorn, an international theme- and 
genre-centered journal, is committed to a serious, 
ongoing discussion of literature for children. The 
journal’s coverage includes the state of the publishing 
industry, regional authors, comparative studies of 
significant books and genres, new developments 
in theory, the art of illustration, the mass media, 
and popular culture. It is especially noted for its 
interviews with authors, editors, and other important 
contributors to the field, as well as its outstanding 
book review section. 
Published three times a year in January, April, and September. 
Volume 38 (2014). ISSN 0147-2593; E-ISSN 1080-6563.
the lion and the unicorn
a criTical joUrnal oF children’s liTeraTUre
annUal individUal sUbscripTions
$40.00 (print); $45.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbscripTions
$128.00 (print); $140.00 (online);  
$179.00 (print & online)
