T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
February 2008
Vol. 61   No. 6
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
February 2008
Vol. 61 No. 6
239  the BIg PICture
 
 Season of Ice by Diane Les Becquets
240  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
243  • Total Constant Order by Crissa-Jean Chappell
244  • Medusa Jones written and illus. by Ross Collins
250  • Hide and Seek: Nature’s Best Vanishing Acts by Andrea Helman; illus. with  
 
 photographs by Gavriel Jecan
256  • Ain’t Nothing But a Man: My Quest to Find the Real John Henry  by Scott  
 
 Reynolds Nelson and Marc Aronson
271  • The Kayla Chronicles by Sherri Winston
273  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
274  suBjeCt And use Index
238 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $85.00; combined print & electronic $119.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $53.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $14.30 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.90. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2008 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Season of Ice ©2008. Used by permission of Bloomsbury Children’s Books.
FeBruary 2008 • 239
the BIg PICture
Season of Ice
By Diane Les Becquets
“In the beginning, there was snow.” Seventeen-year-old Genesis, a lifelong inhabit-
ant of northern Maine, isn’t fazed by the flakes drifting from the sky that signal 
the first big storm of the winter, but she doesn’t then know what they herald. By 
nightfall her father, who had gone out on the lake to perform some dock repair, 
is missing, his empty boat found drifting in the frigid water the next day; within 
hours, the lake ices over with a completeness that prevents a search for his body, 
leaving Genesis, her stepmother, and half-brothers to make it through the winter 
facing the near-certainty that the man at the center of their lives is dead—and also 
the tormenting possibility that he’s not.
That situation may sound like the setup for a mystery, but there’s really not 
much doubt about Mike’s fate; it’s just that the merest possibility of his deliberate 
departure, a possibility fed by an offhand rumor, leaves Genesis with a focal point 
for her anxiety and longing. Her pursuit of the slender thread of gossip (which 
suggests that he might have taken off with another woman) provides her with a way 
to remain involved with him still and to explore parts of his life, such as his long 
periods away at a logging camp, of which she previously knew nothing. Ultimately 
what she realizes is that she did, in fact, know the important aspects of her father’s 
life—that he was a good man who loved his family devotedly.
It’s a heartbreaking story from the very beginning, but Les Becquets turns 
it into something well beyond a mere tearjerker. The setting is as much the point as 
plot here, with the author moving from her previous southern spicy Cajun venue 
(in Love, Cajun Style, BCCB 1/06) to frigid northern with touches of Acadian in 
Genesis’ paternal grandmother. The iced-over northern Maine milieu is superbly 
realized: Genesis races cars on the frozen lake in winter, a popular regional pastime, 
but locals are also keenly aware, and periodically reminded by tragedy, of the ice’s 
intolerance for folly. The winter conditions are vivid in their concrete implications, 
as Genesis races across the ice under which her father’s body is almost certainly 
imprisoned, but the setting is also emotionally apt, as Genesis’ bereavement hits 
a state of suspended animation: “I didn’t think of my dad as dead, even if he was 
below the ice cover. Instead, what I felt was that he was in some kind of hiberna-
tion, and eventually he would wake up and come home.”
In Genesis’ case, that hibernation is, etymologically speaking, literal, and 
the suspended state of her grief seems logical given the circumstance. Yet such is 
grief in general; the unusual situation merely gives Les Becquets a particularly tell-
ing way to explore the frozen world of sadness and the bafflement that descends 
upon the bereaved as they struggle to understand a world suddenly empty, a world 
that changed in an instant (Genesis keeps going over that last afternoon for signs, 
240 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
or to reprove herself for her own insufficiencies). Plainspoken Genesis, who has 
already lost a mother to abandonment, is articulate about the true extent of her 
devastation: “I had not just lost someone I loved. I had lost someone who loved 
me more than anyone might ever love me again.”
Yet Genesis is a character of tremendous strength, a girl of whom her father 
is understandably proud, and even if she doesn’t find the answers she thought she 
wanted, she finds enough in her father’s legacy to bring her peace, thawing out of 
her frozen grief into life just as the spring brings thaw, and answers, to the lake. 
It’s a tender story of a tough, smart, loving girl who finds that she can rise to the 
challenge of what she’s lost because of what she’s gained. Readers will understand 
her and admire her, and find her difficult indeed to forget. (See p. 253 for publica-
tion information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Ábalos, Rafael Grimpow: The Invisible Road; tr. from the Spanish by Noël Baca 
Castex. Delacorte, 2007 493p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90389-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73374-8 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-9
In this Spanish import set in fourteenth-century Europe, a boy discovers that his 
destiny is much greater than the apprentice thiefdom he was expecting. This intricate 
fantasy follows young Grimpow’s dramatic life changes after he finds a mysterious 
amulet on a dead Knight Templar’s body. Suddenly, the boy is able to read all lan-
guages and use his new wisdom to solve key puzzles, whose solutions will protect 
the world from evil. Armed with his new skills and aided by various kind adults 
along the way, Grimpow takes on the mission he now knows to be his: spreading the 
light of wisdom and fighting against the tyranny, ignorance, and superstition that 
led to the death of the Knights and threaten the world at large. The protagonist’s 
sweeping, dramatic goals seem appropriate and noble in this extravagantly harsh 
and beautiful historical setting, where violent public hangings occur even while 
brilliant monks contemplate infinity in the stars. In addition, Grimpow, irascible 
and flawed despite his noble efforts, is an ideal character to take on these nearly 
impossible tasks. Although the plethora of solvable puzzles, riddles, and mysteries 
invites easy comparison to The Da Vinci Code, the slower pace, elaborate setting, 
and careful character development may make this novel more appealing to fantasy 
fans than adventure-seekers. End matter includes a cast listing and a glossary.  AS
alteR, stephen Ghost Letters. Bloomsbury, 2008 [250p]
ISBN 978-1-58234-739-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Instant messages sent via blue glass bottle connect two boys one hundred years and 
FeBruary 2008 • 241
two continents apart. In Massachusetts in 2007, seventh-grader Gil Mendelson-
Finch is staying with his grandfather after having been thrown out of boarding 
school for plagiarism. He makes friends with an Indian-American girl named 
Nargis, and they begin investigating the supernatural stories about the wandering 
path of the Unknown Postman, the creeping dead hand of Camellia Stubbs, and 
the fate of her spurned admirer, Gil’s great-great-granduncle. In Ajeebgarh, India, 
in 1896, Sikander Khan is a young calligrapher’s apprentice whose friend Lawrence 
has been kidnapped just as war looms with the British over a picture on a postage 
stamp. There are ties that bind this group throughout history, and together with a 
genie who is willing to negotiate for number of wishes, the kids resurrect old letters 
and discover new delivery routes in order to save a life, reunite lovers, and stop a 
war. Ghost hunters looking for an adrenaline rush best look elsewhere; this has the 
type of muted thrills fitting for a story hinged on snail mail, appealing to History 
Channel fans of the stamp-collecting, tea-drinking, romantic ilk. Occasionally, the 
otherwise engaging plot stagnates in expository writing or gets confused among 
the alternating chapters (how is it that the blue bottle is sitting on Gil’s desk, only 
to have Gil fish it out of the ocean the next day?), but Alter makes the dangling 
chapter endings enticing enough to compel the reader to the end. Today’s email 
dependents will get a good sense of how something as small as one letter gone astray 
can change the course of history, and kids with big imaginations may be able to 
conjure up some shivers.  KB
applegate, KatheRine Home of the Brave. Feiwel, 2007 249p
ISBN 978-0-312-36765-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 6-9
Famous for exploring alien worlds in Animorphs, Katherine Applegate here explores 
the more serious topic of feeling alone and alienated in a strange world, telling 
the story of Kek, a recent immigrant from an unspecified country in sub-Saharan 
Africa. Arriving in Minneapolis on a snowy day, Kek couldn’t be more out of 
his element. Still, he is determined and optimistic, much more so than his older 
cousin Gunwar, who has lost a hand in the conflict that tore Kek’s village apart 
and resulted in the deaths of Kek’s father and brother, and the disappearance and 
probable death of his mother as well. Drawn to animals (he befriends a sad cow 
immediately upon his arrival), he finds working at a farm reassuring, both because 
it’s reminiscent of home and because it provides him with a realm of competence 
amid a strange and bewildering new place. Meanwhile, he relates the process of 
adjusting to his new life in poignant and lyrical free verse, a stylistic choice that helps 
set the tone of a character who of necessity thinks in images when he can’t find the 
words to carry him from his old to his new language. His fifth-grader hopefulness 
contrasts sharply with his older cousin’s anger and despair, a keen observation on 
Applegate’s part of the difficulties older teens face upon being uprooted from their 
homes in adolescence, and the relative ease with which younger children adjust to 
new experiences. Kek’s observations about the weirdnesses of American culture and 
customs will be familiar to new immigrants and will cause non-immigrants to see 
everyday patterns and material possessions in a new light; the evocative spareness 
of the verse narrative will appeal to poetry lovers as well as reluctant readers and 
ESL students.  KC
242 • The BulleTin
baRRows, annie The Magic Half. Bloomsbury, 2008 211p
ISBN 978-1-59990-132-9 $15.95   
R Gr. 4-6
Stuck in the middle of a twin sandwich, eleven-year-old Miriam Gill is on her own 
between twelve-year-olds Ray and Robbie and four-year-olds Nell and Nora. Luckily, 
Miri has a vivid imagination that’s excellent company, but she’s not playing make-
believe the day she discovers a piece of glass taped to the baseboard in the corner 
of her attic room and uses it to transport herself back in time to the year 1935. 
There, Miri meets the previous occupant of her bedroom, another brown-haired, 
nearsighted eleven-year-old girl, in this case Molly Gardner, who is struggling to 
survive while living with her greedy and judgmental cousins, including the murder-
ous and abominable Horst. It is up to Miri to discover the secret of time travel and 
rescue Molly from the right place at the wrong time. Miri’s familial predicament 
may be atypical (only one in eight million families has two sets of twins, as her 
proud father loves to point out) but her frustration at being left out will be instantly 
recognizable to middle children everywhere, and readers anywhere along the birth 
order will understand her desire to find that other half with whom she can share 
her innermost thoughts and feelings. Barrows is particularly deft with characters’ 
language (“Golly Moses!” exclaims Molly; “Ray. Dude.” says Robbie), effectively 
distinguishing between the time periods and mirroring the way kids really talk to 
each other. This is a handy introduction to time travel for a younger set; the rules 
are not so complex as to befuddle the reader, but they’re intricate enough to pique 
interest and challenge precepts, and it’s always a revelatory exercise to look at today’s 
world through the eyes of someone living over seventy years ago. Happily, Miri and 
Molly manage to change history without negative repercussions, leaving readers to 
ponder the possibility of fixing other errors in time.  KB
beRnheimeR, Kate The Girl in the Castle Inside the Museum; illus. by Nicoletta 
Ceccoli. Schwartz & Wade, 2008 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93606-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83606-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
There’s a miniature castle in a museum, and young visitors press their noses to 
the glass globe protecting it in hopes of seeing the mythical girl who lives within 
the structure. This book lets viewers in on the secret of the girl’s existence as she 
plays within her castle, hoping for company, and eventually finds a way to magi-
cally connect with other children—through this very book that they’re looking at. 
The text is smooth, but it’s also somewhat arch in its mannered interaction with 
the viewer; this is also more a glamorous setup than a story in its own right, and 
audiences will wait impatiently for something to actually, rather than conceptually, 
happen. Glamorous it is, though, helped considerably by Ceccoli’s elegant mixed-
media art that blends interpolated photographs and digital elements with acrylic; 
she creates a lushly fantastical world for her little chatelaine that’s all the more 
haunting for its seasonings of realism, the result seeming like a memory that can’t 
be precisely sourced as either dream or reality. While this won’t satisfy the hunger 
for real dollhouse fantasy (kids drawn to miniaturized existence should turn instead 
to O’Connor’s The Snow Globe Family, BCCB 12/06), it could be an imagination-
provoking readaloud in concert with a historic-dollhouse viewing.  DS
FeBruary 2008 • 243
Chappell, CRissa-Jean Total Constant Order. Tegen/HarperTeen, 
2007 278p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-088606-6 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-088605-9 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
“I was always in danger of doing something wrong,” says fourteen-year-old Fin, who 
desperately tries to follow her inner voice’s commands and perform the prescribed, 
seemingly random behaviors of counting, tapping, or holding. These demands have 
become more strident since the family moved from Fin’s beloved Vermont home 
to Miami, her parents divorcing soon after and leaving Fin stuck friendless amid 
hostile classmates. Her mother does arrange for visits to a psychologist, but what 
really helps Fin is not the Paxil prescription but her growing friendship with edgy 
outsider Thayer, who’s sublimely comfortable with being “the weird kid.” Chap-
pell goes deeper than usual narratives of cure and control, writing with challenging 
vividness of the indistinguishable blend of person and compulsion and allowing Fin, 
with Thayer’s encouragement, to consider the possibility that losing her compul-
sion, much as she hates it, would be losing part of her identity. Yet Fin’s narration is 
also articulate about the embarrassment of being in the grip of behaviors that draw 
unwanted attention, suck up time, and mistakenly suggest recalcitrance to adult 
authorities. Ultimately, though, the main focus of the book is her friendship (and 
possible budding romance) with Thayer, which goes beyond the usual necessary 
literary friendship to depict with understanding a meeting of two original minds, 
in young people both suffering for their position on the bell curve. Plenty of kids, 
OCD or not, will be able to empathize with Fin’s social dilemma, and they’ll find 
the exploration of disorder and identity thought-provoking.  DS
Clinton, CatheRine When Harriet Met Sojourner; illus. by Shane W. Evans. Te-
gen/Amistad/HarperCollins, 2007 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-050426-7 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-050425-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Despite the title, this book is not so much an account of a meeting as a bi- 
biography of two legendary figures in the history of abolition. Clinton switches 
back and forth between the lives of the two heroines, describing their sometimes 
different, sometimes similar experiences from youth through the Civil War. The 
side-by-side accounts help broaden the picture of slavery and tacitly make the 
point that heroism and opposition weren’t localized phenomena. The chronicles 
are slight and sketchy, though, and since the account of the women’s meeting is 
imagined (a fact the text acknowledges), it’s rather an anticlimactic conclusion; the 
claim that sharing stories “built a friendship” seems a bit of an overstatement for 
two women who apparently never saw or communicated with each other again 
and who reportedly disagreed on a fundamental issue. Evans’ mixed-media art, 
combining line, paint, and textiles in three-quarter-spread illustrations, has an epic 
yet contemporary tone; the images, dramatic portraiture, have a strength of line 
and eloquence of expression that would suit a mural and that will carry well in a 
group showing. While Weatherford’s Moses (BCCB 11/06) and Rockwell’s Only 
Passing Through (BCCB 1/01) are better explorations of these legends’ lives, this 
could be used to expand the view of abolitionism as a movement featuring many 
heroes and heroines. The final page provides a concluding paragraph about each 
woman’s life; there are no notes.  DS
244 • The BulleTin
Cohn, RaChel You Know Where to Find Me. Simon, 2008 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-689-87859-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Though Miles and Laura are actually cousins, they grew up as inseparable as sis-
ters (Miles and her mother lived in the carriage house on the property of Laura’s 
wealthy adoptive father) until high school hit, taking Laura’s golden beauty into 
the popular mainstream while overweight and belligerent Miles trod a different 
social path. Now Laura is dead by her own hand, and an angry Miles responds 
mostly by raising her consumption of illicit prescription medication, one pastime 
she had still shared with Laura, and developing a strange pattern of secret smok-
ing breaks with Laura’s grieving father; she’s also hanging out with her best friend 
and burying her anguish at his newly developed romantic interest in Laura’s best 
friend. This is an acute character study, with the living people distinct and believ-
able, while Laura remains a haunting and nebulous presence in memory. Miles is 
so smugly loathing of self and everything else, however, that it’s difficult to wrap 
readerly empathy around her. More problematically, there’s not much narrative 
progression; the characters mostly drift slowly into each other and away without 
responding or changing, so that Miles’ bitter alienation seems a trait rather than 
a response to the situation, and her more life-focused turn at the end isn’t clearly 
rooted. Nonetheless, the poignant situation and prickly and complicated characters 
make this a tense human drama.  DS
Collins, Ross Medusa Jones; written and illus. by Ross Collins. Levine/Scho-
lastic, 2008 [144p]
ISBN 978-0-439-90100-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
It’s already tough enough to face bullies, especially ones deemed the Champions, 
but when you have to restrain yourself from turning them into stone in retribution, 
it is particularly a bummer. Medusa can’t understand the point of having a head 
full of snakes (especially ones that resist fashionable styling and begrudge being 
squished under hats) and mythical powers if she isn’t allowed to defend herself 
and her two best friends, a centaur and minotaur, from taunts and threats. The 
underdogs have their day, however, when an elementary-school camping trip finds 
the Champs stranded and panicked on a ledge, with only Medusa and her friends 
around to save them. Although the conclusion does go astray (why spend so much 
time reinforcing Medusa’s need for restraint, only to have her unleash her irreversible 
power on the oafish but relatively harmless villains at the end?), the snarky humor 
and a realistic focus on middle-grade school details are both impeccably employed 
throughout. Frequent pencil drawings complement the text, often adding amus-
ing reinterpretations (although the story simply mentions a bus, the horse-drawn, 
wooden-wheeled cart shown is a far cry from the assumed large yellow vehicle). 
The quick reversal of fortune shown herein could, depending on whether readers 
are on the bullying or bullied side of relationships, serve either as a stern warning 
or a reassuring possibility, and the brief glimpses into the legendary characters may 
spark further interest in Greek mythology (the irresistible puppy version of Cerberus 
may be a particular draw).  AS
FeBruary 2008 • 245
CRowley, suzanne The Very Ordered Existence of Merilee Marvelous. Green-
willow, 2007 380p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-123198-8 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-123197-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
“There’s a thin line between genius and bottom-barrel stupidness. I hover delicately 
on a tightrope between the two, wondering where I’ll land if I ever fall.” So says 
Merilee, known to her classmates as “the weirdo who loves dragons,” and com-
manded by her compulsions to follow the carefully outlined tasks of her V.O.E., 
very ordered existence. Life in Jumbo, her colorful small Texas town, provides more 
excitement than order, however, especially when she becomes the chosen friend of 
Biswick, the developmentally impaired son of an alcoholic poet, and when retired 
nurse Verna Holliday spontaneously moves into Merilee’s home, bringing warmth 
and good cooking. First novelist Crowley proves herself a virtuoso at creating an 
ensemble cast richly adorned with quirky particulars, and several chapter openings 
have an emphatic absurdity that makes them beg to be read aloud. Though the plot 
is a little hackneyed and it sometimes gets overshadowed by the many character-
ful characters, the writing cooks along with sufficient warmth and savor to keep 
readers satisfied as Merilee gradually acknowledges that she can find satisfaction 
in human connection as well as in her compulsions. Readers graduating from the 
sweetly idiosyncratic world of Because of Winn-Dixie (BCCB 6/00) will likely find 
themselves at home in Jumbo.  DS
Cummins, Julie Women Daredevils: Thrills, Chills, and Frills; illus. by Cheryl 
Harness. Dutton, 2008 48p
ISBN 978-0-525-47948-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 3-6
More than a dozen women who performed heart-stopping feats at the turn of the 
last century are featured here in brief but lively profiles. Cummins introduces cir-
cus performers such as Zazel, the human cannonball (and explains how the stunt 
is performed); bicyclists Mlle. d’Zizi and Gertrude Breton, who were flying over 
chasms and elephants long before Evel Knievel was a twinkle in his daddy’s eye; 
automobile stunt drivers who looped upside down on precarious wooden tracks; 
and others such as wingwalkers, a lion tamer, a bareback rider, and a high diver 
who performed on horseback. There’s plenty of ballyhoo packed into the sketches, 
and plenty of reminders of just how shocking the women’s behavior and outlandish 
attire were considered to be by their contemporaries. Cummins is also conscien-
tious enough, however, to note contradictions in the legends and to identify a 
few outright lies told to wow a credulous public. Harness supplies mixed-media 
illustrations in appropriately big-top-worthy colors, bordered in red for optimum 
visual splash. An appended timeline sets these daring dames into the context of 
other women achievers of the era, and source notes round out the volume. This 
could be a breezy read for vicarious thrillseekers or an introductory resource for 
some nifty research topics.  EB
Cutbill, andy The Cow That Laid an Egg; illus. by Russell Ayto. HarperCollins, 
2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-06-137295-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 5-8 yrs
Yes, you read that right—Marjorie the cow lays an egg. Or so she thinks, but really 
it’s that the friendly chickens have decided to help out after Marjorie bemoans her 
246 • The BulleTin
lack of special gifts. When she finds the egg and assumes she’s laid it, a PR pande-
monium breaks loose around the apparently oviparous bovine, but what will happen 
when the egg actually hatches? This sly yet outrageous tale gains power from deftly 
constructed silliness (the other cows outclass Marjorie by riding bicycles and per-
forming handstands, while the plotting chickens conspire merely by passing along a 
sotto voce “cluck”) that’s snicker-worthy in its own right. It is the art, however, that 
truly takes this cow-chronicle into delicious absurdity: mixed-media illustrations 
layer cutout drawings and photographic elements on zingily hued backgrounds; 
figures are strong graphics with drolly scrawled eyes and a high-energy verticality 
to ears and tails that suggests electrocution; compositions rocket between panel 
sequences, lunatic close-ups (often of gaping mouths with uvulas—do cows even 
have uvulas?—prominently visible), and whacked out, cracked-up landscapes. The 
twist in the ending will send kids into giggles, and hapless, hopeless Marjorie is 
an endearing heroine; even if her parenting is a little unorthodox, a chick could 
do worse.  DS
dowell, fRanCes o’RoaRK Shooting the Moon. Atheneum, 2008 [176p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-2690-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-8
T. J. Dexter couldn’t wait to enlist in the Army at age eighteen, following his father, 
the Colonel, into a military career. His thirteen-year-old sister, Jamie, couldn’t be 
more proud—or more jealous—of his likely deployment to Vietnam. Both siblings 
are therefore surprised when the Colonel isn’t at all happy about his son’s decision 
and tries to dissuade him before the commitment locks in. After T. J. wins out, 
he’s sent overseas, and soon his mail begins arriving at the house—letters to his 
parents talking up the lousy food and good comradeship, and rolls of undeveloped 
film to his sister. Jamie uses her volunteer position in the base recreation center to 
learn to develop the film on her own, and each roll tells her a little more about his 
true circumstances than her parents’ letters reveal. Jamie begins to realize that her 
brother has had a harsh confrontation with reality, and the glamour of war loses 
its shine for her as well. With a clearer idea of what Vietnam service entails, Jamie 
importunes the Colonel to change the orders of her friend, Private Hollister, and 
leave him in a stateside posting, only to discover that her seemingly gung-ho father 
had, in fact, petitioned one of his superiors for the same consideration for T. J. and 
had been turned down. There is no shortage of children’s literature on wartime disil-
lusionment, but Dowell approaches the discussion from a different angle, studying 
the complex emotions of the larger-than-life Colonel—his pride and dedication to 
the military and his country, his respect for his maturing son’s decisions, and his 
paternal instinct to keep his son from harm’s way. That the Colonel’s interior crisis 
is witnessed by his adoring daughter, who is experiencing a rude awakening of her 
own, makes the drama all the more poignant. There is comfort in an ending that 
assures readers that T. J. makes it home alive, but readers are left to ponder whether 
the next generation of the Dexter family will be quite so anxious to enlist.  EB
english, KaRen Nikki & Deja; illus. by Laura Freeman. Clarion, 
2008 [80p]
ISBN 978-0-618-75238-6 $15.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Third-graders and next-door neighbors Nikki and Deja are close friends, especially 
FeBruary 2008 • 247
since neither has any siblings. When a troublesome new girl moves into their Afri-
can-American neighborhood and ends up in their class, Nikki and Deja are initially 
united in their dislike of the self-centered Antonia, forming a drill club primarily 
for the purpose of excluding her. The club idea backfires, however, when Nikki 
rashly quits, sending her friendship with Deja into a rocky patch; Nikki then finds 
herself joining Antonia’s new club, in part to provoke Deja, but when Deja defends 
Nikki against a classmate’s hurtful accusation, the girls finally manage to repair their 
friendship. English, who has been an elementary school teacher, clearly knows her 
audience and understands the intricacies of their relationship dynamics, particularly 
the way that seemingly small (to adults, anyway) actions can have major ramifica-
tions for the kids involved. Also true to life is the girls’ excited discovery that their 
teacher shops at “Big Barn” and their subsequent stealthy inspection of the items in 
her cart (“They are amazed over and over that their teacher eats diet TV dinners and 
washes her hair with herb-scented shampoo”). The short chapters, quick pacing, and 
frequent black-and-white illustrations will both appeal to and assist young readers. 
Kids negotiating the sometimes treacherous waters of middle-grade friendship will 
find Nikki and Deja’s story both truthful and comforting.  JH
funKe, CoRnelia Igraine the Brave; written and illus. by Cornelia Funke; tr. from 
the German by Anthea Bell. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2008 212p
ISBN 978-0-439-90379-0 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-6
This German import features the twelve-year-old daughter of two magicians, who 
wants nothing more than to be a dashing knight. Igraine soon has a chance to 
prove her mettle when a treacherous neighbor attempts to abscond with the family’s 
singing magic books just as her parents have accidentally turned themselves into 
swine. Leaving her magically adept older brother in charge for a few days, Igraine 
sets out to retrieve the giant’s hairs necessary to reverse the pig spell, and on the 
way she meets with a depressed but still gallant knight who agrees to show her the 
ropes. Of course, all ends well with parental figures restored to their human form, 
Igraine emerging as a fine knight-in-training, and the magic books remaining safely 
out of the hands of oafish villains, but there is enough genuine tension built in 
along the way to keep readers on edge. While the illustrated listing of characters is 
largely unnecessary given the relatively trim cast, it does provide additional context 
for the characters and their motivations, as do the interspersed black-and-white 
illustrations that primarily reflect key dramatic plot moments (although the moody 
and self-important singing books, dotted throughout the pages, offer a nice bal-
ance of comic relief). Middle-grade fans of Funke’s Dragon Rider (BCCB 10/04) 
will be thrilled to see this new fantasy offering, as will readers seeking tough young 
heroines who can save the day and not give a second thought to dirt, moat water, 
and danger along the way.  AS
gallo, donald R., ed. Owning It: Stories about Teens with Disabilities. Can-
dlewick, 2008 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3255-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Ten original stories from prominent YA authors such as David Lubar, Brenda 
Woods, and Ron Koertge focus on young people with disabilities in this collection 
by veteran anthologist Gallo. The concept of disability is applied broadly, with char-
acters afflicted by migraines and mired in alcoholism, dealing with asthma and living 
248 • The BulleTin
with obesity, as well as by more familiar incarnations of disability such as blindness 
and paraplegia. While many of the stories are strongly written, they fall into well-
worn thematic patterns for the subject, focusing almost entirely on the medical 
model rather than the social model of disability (the latter particularly important 
in the deaf community, of which the book unfortunately offers no representation) 
and offering situation after situation wherein acceptance by the able-bodied is the 
measure of achievement (interestingly, the one exception is Robert Lipsyte’s dramatic 
“Let’s Hear It for Fire Team Bravo,” wherein testicular cancer patients band together 
as a military platoon fighting their common enemy). This is therefore largely a fairly 
predictable outsider’s view of the notion of disability without any of the deep and 
challenging perspective of Harriet MacBryde Johnston’s searing Accidents of Nature 
(BCCB 6/06), but it could provide some useful talking points for discussion or just 
food for thought. Author bios are appended to the stories.  DS
geoRge, Jean CRaighead Goose and Duck; illus. by Priscilla Lamont. Geringer/
HarperCollins, 2008 [48p] (I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-117077-5 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-117076-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 1-3
When a little boy is the only being present at the sudden hatching of an egg, the 
newborn gosling thinks he is its mother and copies his every action, with the boy 
matter-of-factly declaring, “That’s how it is with birds.” The cycle is repeated when 
the pair finds a duck egg that hatches as they watch, except that this time Goose 
becomes the “mother,” as he is the first creature the duckling spies. The follow-the-
leader life of boy, goose, and duck continues until the night that house-dwellers 
Goose and Duck head outside and, mistaking a policeman on patrol for their boy, 
flap their way into the police car. Luckily, the boy is able to retrieve his “children” 
from the police station the next day, and all is well until autumn arrives and Goose 
and Duck realize who (and what) they really are and head south. The boy takes it 
all in stride, however, accepting that his feathered friends were bound to grow up 
and fly away because “that’s how it is with birds.” George’s simple language and 
short, solid sentences will aid young readers, and the birds’ mimicking of the boy’s 
behavior adds a humorous touch to the situation as well as some helpful repetition. 
The police interlude is a little superfluous, but young readers will undoubtedly get 
a giggle from the next-door neighbor’s inaccurate assertion that “Goose and Duck 
were arrested!” Lamont’s warm and gentle watercolor illustrations match the calm 
flow of the text, and her dot-eyed, tousle-haired boy and lively, inquisitive birds are 
cozily appealing. Youngsters, especially nature-lovers, looking for a quick, pleasant 
read will find what they need here, while their adults may get a bit choked up at 
the reminder that all too soon their own young will leave the nest.  JH
geoRge, JessiCa day Sun and Moon, Ice and Snow. Bloomsbury, 
2008 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-109-1 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
All the traditional elements are present in this novelized version of “East o’ the 
Sun and West o’ the Moon”; the heroine is the youngest daughter of a woodcutter 
living with her large family in the far north until, at the age of seventeen, she is 
taken by an ice bear to reside with him for one year and one day. By day the lass, 
FeBruary 2008 • 249
as she’s referred to throughout, roams the palace, uncovering the secrets of the 
enchantment, and by night she shares her darkened bedchamber with a stranger. 
Unable to contain her curiosity, the girl breaks the rules and lights a candle to look 
at her bedmate, dooming him to marry a troll princess unless she can win him 
back. Superb and seamless additions to the story include Rollo, the lass’ protective 
pet wolf, and Hans Peter, her heartsick oldest brother, who has a sad secret of his 
own. In a clever twist, the young woman’s experience is not isolated; instead, she 
is one in a long line of inquisitive females failing to keep their word and fighting 
to keep their princes. George has a knack for storytelling, and she is at her best 
when describing her fully imagined world of ice bears, fauns, gargoyles, and selkies. 
This entry has a sarcastic kick, and while some of the humor initially seems out of 
place in the setting, the protagonist’s wry comments are sure to generate laughter. 
While it remains true to the original tale, this retelling has an aura of anticipation, 
as if it could veer in a new direction at any moment, so the even the well-versed 
will find it suspenseful reading. George has clearly done her homework; an author’s 
note describes her journey to the novel, a glossary provides the pronunciation and 
definition of select Norwegian words, and a bibliography both cites her sources 
and provides further reading material. With appeal for those new to the classic 
or already enchanted by Pattou’s East (BCCB 10/03), this should surely enhance 
interest in folk and fairy tales of the colder regions.  KB
godbeRsen, anna The Luxe. HarperCollins, 2007 433p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-134567-8 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-134566-1 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Proper, dignified, and rather mousy Elizabeth Holland has returned from finish-
ing school abroad, in the year 1899, to find that her future has been decided: due 
to financial difficulties bequeathed to the family from their beloved but fiscally 
unwise deceased father, she will be wed to a wealthy man from a good family, who 
needs a steadying influence in his life if he is to avoid scandal while his father seeks 
public office. Henry, the fiancé in question, has been toying with the affections 
of Elizabeth’s best friend, Penelope, who does not take the news of the engage-
ment well and who is easily capable of acting on her self-righteous anger. Despite 
Penelope’s seething and plotting, however, Henry’s romantic interests have already 
moved on, this time to his betrothed’s younger sister, Diana. Diana is fascinated 
by Henry’s dissipated character, but she is willing to play the martyr to ensure her 
sister’s happiness, which of course will not at all be ensured by the marriage, as 
Elizabeth herself is in love with a most inappropriate man, her family’s coachman. 
As might be expected, scandal ensues, but these elites are cagey enough so that 
it never actually erupts, making it all the more thrilling to be getting an insider’s 
view. As delicious and insubstantial as cotton candy, this peek into the lives and 
misfortunes of the wealthy and profligate in New York City’s nineteenth-century 
upper crust is skillfully plotted and full of decadent detail. Godbersen captures 
the drawing-room sensibilities and society flair of Wharton, Thackeray, and James 
without burdening readers with their posh literariness or social critique; this is 
House of Mirth lite—a good bit sexier and not at all satiric or political, clear kin to 
contemporarily set chick-lit. For readers destined to become English majors, this 
makes a delightful appetizer before meatier fare.  KC
250 • The BulleTin
gRant, K. m. How the Hangman Lost His Heart. Walker, 2007 244p
ISBN 978-0-8027-9672-1 $16.95   
R Gr. 6-10
Alice Towneley is the only one of Uncle Frank’s relatives present for his date with 
the executioner. Hanged, drawn, and beheaded for treasonous allegiance to Bon-
nie Prince Charlie, Uncle Frank forges into eternity with his torso bound for the 
ancestral seat at Towneley Hall and his head on a pike on London’s Temple Bar. 
Unable to abide that indignity, Alice makes an early-morning scamper up onto 
the Temple Bar roof to retrieve the head, thereby catching the attention of Major 
Slavering, who regards the pilferage as yet another act of treason, and handsome 
Captain Ffrench, who is smitten with her courage and beauty. Aided by Captain 
Ffrench and the tender-hearted executioner, Dan Skinslicer, Alice tries to make a 
getaway to Towneley Hall, with Slavering in hot pursuit. Uncle Frank’s head, hid-
den in a series of such odd receptacles as a wig bag, a laundry basket, and a hatbox, 
proves astonishingly difficult to keep track of. While Alice is squarely focused on 
the whereabouts of the head, her accomplices are concerned with matters of the 
heart, falling ever more deeply in her thrall, until they all land in jail and Slaver-
ing offers the trio the cruel choice of betraying their friends or losing their lives. 
Grant’s tale, at once hilarious and thrilling, is inspired by her own family history, 
which boasts “the last man in Britain to be hanged, drawn, and quartered,” whose 
head waited generations to be reunited with its body. One trusts that the late Uncle 
Frank would approve of this audacious tribute combining gallows humor, breakneck 
pacing, and true love.  EB 
helman, andRea Hide and Seek: Nature’s Best Vanishing Acts; illus. with photo-
graphs by Gavriel Jecan. Walker, 2008 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9691-2 $17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9690-5 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Natural history tells kids early that animal coloring helps with camouflage, but it’s 
difficult to imagine how that works in practice; fortunately, Helman and Jecan here 
provide a multiplicity of “I get it now!” examples of protective coloration at work. 
Each of five sections is focused on a different habitat (savanna/grasslands, sea, desert, 
arctic, forest, mountains), and each section includes four to five examples, one to 
a page, of residents particularly well suited to escape detection in that region, with 
accompanying text giving a brief overview of that animal’s existence. The success of 
such a project hinges largely on the photographs, and Jecan’s images are excellently 
geared to this particular exploration, with animals usually discernible but definitely 
pretty well obscured: the marbled tree frog blends tastefully into his tree-bark 
background, for instance, and the Eurasian golden plover tucks away effectively 
in a lichen-thick rock cleft. Each section is introduced with a bonus picture and a 
general explanation of that habit, while closing pages offer further details about the 
pictured species, including the location of the photograph, and provide a thumbnail 
that conveniently highlights the hidden subject. The photography raises the stakes 
from Steve Jenkins’ collage-illustrated I See a Kookaburra! (BCCB 5/05), and you 
could easily add an even more realistic degree of difficulty by initially holding the 
pictures up at a distance (even the seemingly flashy giraffe pert near disappears 
when seen at long range), since the book is also eminently shareable as a readaloud. 
Camouflaged or no, this will be a standout in nature study units.  DS
FeBruary 2008 • 251
heRnandez, david Suckerpunch. HarperCollins, 2008 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-117331-8 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-117330-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Marcus Mendoza spends most of his time drinking, drugging, fantasizing about 
sex, and trying to cope with the guilt he feels for failing to protect his younger 
brother, Enrique, from their abusive father’s violent outbursts. Now that Mr. 
Mendoza has left the family, Enrique seems on the surface to be doing pretty well: 
he has a girlfriend, Ashley, and knows how to work his good looks and charm to 
advantage. Marcus knows, however, that Enrique punches holes in his wall from 
time to time and that Zoloft is all that stands between him and meltdown. When 
their mother breaks the news that their father is back in touch and wants to return 
home, Enrique convinces Marcus to join him on a road trip to find Dad and dish 
out some payback for the misery he caused his sons. They pile in a car with Ashley 
and buddy Oliver, neither of whom knows the real purpose of the road trip; off 
his meds and spiraling into dangerous depression, Enrique finally terrorizes his 
father with a starter pistol, and it’s up to Marcus to keep the confrontation from 
turning into outright tragedy. This is tough and emotional subject matter, and 
there’s wrenching pathos in flashbacks to Enrique’s beatings and strong dramatic 
momentum in the teens’ journey toward vengeance. Unfortunately, the characters 
are too carefully fashioned into poster children for disaffected youth to be very 
sympathetic, and Marcus’ mercy killing of a suffering horse toward novel’s end has 
the earmark of Meaningful Metaphor rather than logical plot point. Still, teens 
who hit the road with Wolf’s Zane’s Trace (BCCB 12/07) may want to climb in for 
an even grimmer ride.  EB
hood, ann How I Saved My Father’s Life (and Ruined Everything Else). Scho-
lastic, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-439-92819-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Eleven-year-old Madeline is convinced she worked a miracle that saved her father’s 
life, but only to ironic success: soon after, her parents split and her father leaves, so 
she’s living without him anyway. A bitter Madeline blames her mother for driving 
her father away, for failing to keep up Madeline’s ballet classes in Boston (mother 
and daughter live in Providence), for basically everything, and she finds consolation 
in her dreams of her own surely impending sainthood and her new friendship with 
a devout Catholic. Hood is a witty and poignant writer; Madeline’s fascination 
with faith (and, really, anything that’s not associated with her mother) is explored 
with both humor and sympathy, and her near-allergic recoiling from her mother is 
painfully vivid. While the book’s sympathy lies with Madeline’s mother a bit more 
than it ought to (including relying on the familiar trope of Mom nobly keeping 
quiet about Dad’s feet of clay), there’s originality in the characters and their direc-
tions and sad authenticity in the dilemma of the distressed family. Fans of family 
drama and those reconsidering their own relationships with their parents will find 
Madeline’s story rewarding.  DS
252 • The BulleTin
Johnson, vaRian My Life as a Rhombus. Flux, 2008 [312p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7387-1160-7 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Rhonda Lee has decided pursuing math glory and eating her feelings are perfectly 
good ways to cope with life after her abortion and the death of her mother. Now, 
three years later, she’s an overweight geek with only two really good friends in her 
racially mixed prep school where the most important color is green. When she is 
asked to tutor Sarah, a rich, popular hottie with an even hotter brother, she only 
says yes so that she can get a letter of recommendation to Georgia State from 
Sarah’s high-powered mother, a state Supreme Court justice who is one of their 
most famous alums. Very quickly, though, Rhonda recognizes the symptoms of 
early pregnancy in Sarah, and the two strike up a friendship as Rhonda helps Sarah 
decide whether or not she will keep her baby. Meanwhile, Rhonda’s never-again 
attitude toward dating in high school gets seriously challenged by Sarah’s brother’s 
interest. The dialogue is sometimes a bit stiff, but Johnson’s exploration of Rhonda’s 
unprocessed anger over her own abortion is deftly handled; even though she doesn’t 
realize it, she has a lot of relationship repair and self-forgiveness to work through. 
The book is subtle in guiding her through that process; it offers the cold judge as 
a likely model for Rhonda’s future if she follows her current tack of burying her 
heart under her ambitions, demonstrating that she’ll be successful, but at what 
cost? The author offers up the melodrama of contemporary high school without 
the overbearing angst; these kids have the money, the moxie, and the motivation 
to take the bumps in stride and take the consequences of their own sometimes 
imperfect solutions.  KC
KephaRt, beth Undercover. Geringer/HarperTeen, 2007 278p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-123894-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-123893-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Elisa has a way with words and a love of metaphor, which she puts to dubious use 
by writing compelling love letters for the boys in her class to woo their crushes. 
Her talents work too well when Theo, a bookish boy who’s really quite cute when 
you look at him the right way, lands the possessive affections of the popular and 
beautiful Lila. Realizing that she has feelings for Theo and growing increasingly 
anguished over the prolonged absence of her father on an extended business trip, 
Elisa retreats to a pond in the woods, where she teaches herself to ice skate, a skill 
she had formerly relegated to her graceful mother and sister, whose talent for beauty 
equals her talent for expression. She finds in her skating yet another way to express 
deep feeling, by embodying it rather than writing it down. Laced with metaphor 
and etched with longing, Elisa’s first-person narration is deeply in character for a 
girl with a passion for language, making this a literary love story as much about 
learning to grow oneself as it is about learning to grow and nurture relationships. 
Though the consummate loner, Elisa finds when she reaches out to her mother 
and sister that they have been waiting for her all along, feeling as intimidated by 
her intellect as she is of their beauty. Put it all together and you have a moving 
story for readers with a taste for finding beauty in language and intellect instead of 
seeing them as separate spheres.  KC 
FeBruary 2008 • 253
les beCquets, diane Season of Ice. Bloomsbury, 2008 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-063-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 239, for review.
manushKin, fRan How Mama Brought the Spring; illus. by Holly Berry. Dutton, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-525-42027-9 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Sick and tired of a snowy Chicago winter, young Rosy Levine refuses to get up, but 
her mother manages to coax her out with a story about her childhood in Minsk. 
As a child, Mrs. Levine also refused to rise one morning, but her mama roused 
her with mysterious doings in the kitchen. It turns out that her mother, Rosy’s 
grandmother, was making blintzes, which were so warm and golden they acted 
upon the town like the suns they resembled, warming not only Mrs. Levine’s family 
but also the landscape outside their cottage, thus bringing spring to Minsk. After 
hearing the family story, there’s only one thing for Rosy (now wide awake and out 
of bed) and her mother to do: bring a blintz-induced spring to Chicago. Though 
not exactly a folktale, this story-within-a-story has definite folkloric echoes, and 
the lively, conversational style of Mrs. Levine’s storytelling (“Oh, we ate like three 
bears after waking from their naps!”) lends itself particularly well to reading aloud. 
Manushkin’s vivid descriptive phrases (“One by one, I lined up the golden circles 
on the tablecloth, like sunflowers against a blue sky”) are complemented by the 
richly colored and patterned mixed-media illustrations. Off-center compositions 
are frequently partially framed with what appears to be strips of patterned fabric 
or cut paper, and sketchy swirls of wind, music, and steam add movement to the 
pages. Berry does an especially nice job depicting the transition from bitter cold 
to sunny warmth, with Mama’s multiple wraps gradually flying off and piquant 
details like a hibernating bear popping one eye open at the scent of blintzes wafting 
from the cottage door. A recipe for blintzes is provided (the story’s instructions and 
illustrations of blintz-making will also assist would-be cooks), so children and their 
adults can try their own hand at making some tasty midwinter magic.  JH
maRKle, sandRa Finding Home; illus. by Alan Marks. Charlesbridge, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-58089-122-6 $15.95   
R 5-8 yrs
When a koala and her baby joey lose their habitat in a brushfire, they must seek a 
new home. Struggling to carry her heavy baby, the mother ventures forth, finding 
the nearest edible trees to lie within a human enclave. The curious suburbanites 
gather around to see animals not usually found in their backyard but try to avoid 
interfering with the koalas, who finally find a new home range of eucalyptus in 
which to settle. Loosely based on the adventures of a real koala, the story is quiet but 
intense, the present-tense, animal-centered narration hushed yet concrete. The book 
refreshingly eschews portraying humans as saviors or saboteurs, instead making clear 
through the koala’s-eye-view that it’s their mere presence in the habitat, no matter 
how benign their intentions, that’s distressing to wild animals. Marks’ watercolor, 
pencil, and ink illustrations are dominated by landscape, tinted in sweeping washes 
of color, but they effectively foreground the mother and baby; the change from 
wild to settled areas is subtly flagged by increasingly geometric elements of house 
254 • The BulleTin
silhouette and road and fence lines. This will likely elicit youngsters’ own stories 
of animal encounters, but it’s also a useful entrée into discussion about the erosion 
of habitats and its effect on the wild.  DS
matthews, l. s. The Outcasts. Delacorte, 2007 259p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90382-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73367-0 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 7-9
Five teenagers are thrust into an otherworldly adventure during a previously nor-
mal school field trip, and they’re suddenly reliant on one another for survival after 
being pushed into a new dimension (whose primary feature seems to be that rules 
of space and time are significantly warped) where they must work together or die. 
Each of the teens bring his or her own challenges in the forms of abusive parents, 
poor social skills, or unspecified behavioral problems, though all learn to recognize 
their individual strengths, forged out of adversity, and use them to help the group 
escape. It is never entirely clear why the teens are necessary to retrieve a missing skull 
(hidden in the other dimension), but readers will have little time to question this 
plot point as the teens face a daunting series of challenges that would test even the 
most heroic: poisonous jellyfish and giant mushrooms, a protective black panther 
mother, and giant plummeting dice are all obstacles through which the teens must 
navigate. Unfortunately, while the death-defying solutions they come up with are 
exciting fare, the heavy-handed moral lessons about the importance of working 
together in spite of surface differences weigh down the novel. In addition, the dra-
matic conclusion wherein the teens, like Ebenezer Scrooge, get glimpses of their 
possible future seems entirely unnecessary given the life changes already wrought 
by the events they shared. Nevertheless, science fiction fans seeking an enjoyable 
afternoon read will still likely be satisfied with this British import’s gripping pace, 
nifty video game-esque challenges, and sympathy-inspiring protagonists.  AS
mCmullan, maRgaRet When I Crossed No-Bob. Houghton, 2007 209p
ISBN 978-0-618-71715-6 $16.00   
R* Gr. 5-9
Addy O’Donnell and her mother show up at the wedding of Mr. Frank Russell 
and Miss Irene hoping to get a free meal, but Addy walks away with a new family 
when her mother disappears sometime during the wedding feast with a stranger, 
leaving a note on their cabin door that simply says “GONE TO TEXAS.” Miss 
Irene convinces her new husband to take Addy in, and he does, even though he, 
like everyone else in their tiny Mississippi community, has good reason to write any 
O’Donnell off as a bad seed. With only a few missteps, Addy earns her keep, and 
things seem hopeful for her and the Russells until her rabble-rousing relations join 
forces with some of the other Civil War veterans in town to form a new group calling 
themselves the Ku Klux Klan. Suspenseful plotting and language that whispers with 
the soft cadences of a Mississippi pine forest and crackles with wry wit blend with 
very appealing characters to craft a compelling portrait of life in Mississippi during 
Reconstruction. Most effectively explored is the profound ambivalence Addy feels 
toward her reputation as a hardscrabble O’Donnell; she is drawn to and respects 
people who show the kind of viper meanness, wily opportunism, and headstrong 
rebellion that she has grown up around, but she sees her people with new eyes after 
her stay with the kind and upright Russells. Though the book is set in 1875, the 
thematics of personal and community reconstruction, coping with residual bad 
feelings, making tough moral choices, and finding grace and healing after trauma 
find relevant reflection in many contemporary circumstances.  KC 
FeBruary 2008 • 255
mills, Claudia The Totally Made-Up Civil War Diary of Amanda MacLeish. Far-
rar, 2008 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-374-37696-3 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
There are two civil wars in Amanda’s life: there’s the subject of her fifth-grade class, 
for which she must write a fictional diary; there’s also the state of her household, 
where her parents’ warring has finally resulted in the departure of her father. What 
could be a heavy-handed contrivance is, under the deft hand of Claudia Mills, an 
unusual opportunity for reflection and exploration of some complicated and painful 
feelings; Amanda’s Civil War diary, which gives fictional voice to a girl whose family 
is divided when two brothers enlist on different sides, is a wee bit overimpressive 
for a fifth-grade writer, but it’s an absorbing story in its own right that definitely 
contributes to the overall narrative rather than slowing it down. The book goes for 
realistic dynamics over convenient didacticism: while Amanda is oversimplifying 
things in blaming her mother entirely for the separation (her father actually has 
a new relationship), her mom is nonetheless no picnic; there’s also some honest 
examination of youthful racial issues as Amanda examines her own overconsidered 
responses to a black classmate. Ultimately, this is a polished and accessible explora-
tion of a tough situation, sure to resonate with kids, who are all familiar, one way 
or another, with threats to domestic tranquility.  DS
moses, shelia p. Sallie Gal and the Wall-a-Kee Man; illus. by Niki Daly. Scho-
lastic, 2007 152p
ISBN 978-0-439-90890-0 $15.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Sallie Gal wants nothing more than colorful hair ribbons like her cousin Wild 
Cat, but she knows that, with her dad away in Vietnam, money is too tight for 
such extravagances and her mother is too proud to take even the slightest bit of 
charity. When a traveling salesman from the Wallace Company (which Wild Cat 
misreads as Wall-a-Kee, a name that sticks) shows up, she begins to plot ways to 
earn her own money for hair ribbons. The girls open a lemonade stand, but when 
Sallie Gal breaks Momma’s good pitcher, she’s even further behind than when she 
started. Things get even more complicated when the Wall-a-Kee man gives Sallie 
Gal some hair ribbons and she accepts, even though she knows her mother would 
not approve. Moses captures the frustration of working too hard for too little pay 
and the angst of keeping secrets you know will disappoint in this old-fashioned 
moral tale. In the tradition of Maria Edgeworth, however, she also honors the en-
ergy and voice of her characters so that the theme doesn’t overwhelm the pleasure 
in the storytelling. Energetic black-and-white illustrations, digitally created but 
resembling ink, graphite, and watercolor, capture the many moods of Sallie Gal and 
Wild Cat, always calling attention to their multiple ponytails in perpetual motion. 
An author’s note informs readers that this is set in Moses’ beloved Rich Square, 
North Carolina, and accurately reflects the shopping practices and everyday hopes 
and dreams of folks there forty years ago.  KC
256 • The BulleTin
nelson, sCott Reynolds Ain’t Nothing but a Man: My Quest to Find the Real 
John Henry; by Scott Reynolds Nelson and Marc Aronson. National Geographic, 
2008 64p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0001-1 $27.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0000-4 $18.95   
R Gr. 4-8
Recrafting his Steel Drivin’ Man: John Henry  for a young audience, historian Nelson 
offers not only startling speculation on the authenticity of the John Henry legend 
but also fascinating insight into how a historian conducts his research. Readers fol-
low Nelson as his research on Southern railroad history leads him to suspect that 
the folktales and songs about the hammer-swinging hero might have some basis 
in fact, then as a fresh look at an old postcard suggests where he might look for 
clues, and finally as he ferrets out evidence, pursues promising leads, and even hits 
a few dead ends. What emerges is a coherent theory that the real John Henry was 
a nineteen-year-old convict who worked on a railroad construction crew leased by 
the Richmond Penitentiary, who probably assisted in excavating the Lewis Tun-
nel for the C&O Railroad, who may well have taken part in a man vs. machine 
test of the steam drill, and most likely died of lung disease and was buried on the 
prison grounds, along with about three hundred other prisoners whose remains 
were discovered in the early 1990s. Nelson’s argument is convincing, aligning clues 
from the ballads and work songs with more objective documentary evidence, but 
he stops short of claiming certainty, noting gaps that research has, at least to this 
point, been unable to fill. Period photographs, document reproductions, song ex-
cerpts, and artwork appear throughout the text, and end matter includes notes on 
sources, lists for further reading, notes on current research, variations of the John 
Henry folksong, and a brief essay by Marc Aronson on how historical research is 
conducted. This is a must-read for kids who have been captivated by tall tales or 
who enjoy untangling historical mysteries.  EB
oKoRafoR-mbaChu, nnedi The Shadow Speaker. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 
2007 336p
ISBN 978-1-4231-0033-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-9
Fourteen-year-old Ejii lost her father to a beheading five years ago, and she is now 
faced with a dreadful choice: staying home with her mother, or losing her mother’s 
love by seeking her destiny on a heroic quest to find herself and (as she has been 
told by the shadows that surround her) prevent a war. Choosing adventure, Ejii sets 
across the 2070 Nigerian landscape, heading toward a monumentally important 
meeting that will decide the fates of the five non-Earth worlds that have suddenly 
lost all borders. Since her supernatural role in the prevention of violence is not 
unveiled until the final section, the story is as much a coming-of-age novel about a 
girl who shifts from an insecure outsider to a defiant and confident young woman 
as it is a science fiction plot. The author excels at building intricate and engaging 
characters: there are no true good or evil individuals, with even the murderer of 
Ejii’s father ultimately emerging as a woman with honorable intentions, though 
they are too frequently overshadowed by her bloodlust. Ejii herself, haunted by 
her father, her choices, and literally by the shadows that have always been part of 
her life, will inspire deep sympathy. In addition, the harsh yet stunningly beautiful 
desert landscape through which Ejii journeys, where one is as likely to encounter 
fury-driven sentient sandstorms as camels, straddles realism and fantasy perfectly. 
FeBruary 2008 • 257
Fans of Okorafor-Mbachu’s Zahrah the Windseeker (BCCB 10/05) will be excited 
to see another exploration of this nature-based technological future world, and new 
readers will also find the setting an intriguing bonus in this gripping novel.  AS
pateRson, KatheRine The Light of the World: The Life of Jesus for Children; illus. 
by François Roca. Levine/Scholastic, 2008 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-545-01172-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-8 yrs
In language both plainspoken and graceful, Paterson retells the story of Jesus, 
emphasizing his roles of teacher and healer. She begins not with the Fall in Eden 
but with a people in exile trusting in the words of Isaiah that “the people who were 
living in darkness would someday see a great light.” Jesus’ birth, public ministry, 
death, and resurrection all advance the theme: “The light had come into the world, 
and not even the darkness of death could overcome it.” The art was apparently 
originally employed to illustrate a French life of Jesus for young audiences, but 
it’s effectively repurposed here: facing each page of text is a delicately bordered, 
full-page painting that complements Paterson’s tone with stark simplicity. After 
allowing viewers one good look at newborn baby Jesus (whose dark honey skin 
and black hair are refreshingly Middle Eastern), Roca offers only distant glimpses 
of the boy and the man: running away from the viewer as he plays alongside his 
mudbrick house, a tiny figure preaching to a crowd, a forlorn sufferer under a tree 
at Gethsemane. More often, the audience sees the reactions of the people who 
encounter Jesus—excited children running toward him, angry adults accusing him 
of heresy, protective disciples struggling to roll a huge stone across the entrance of 
his tomb. Solemn, dignified, and hopeful, this handsomely presented retelling will 
be welcome in most collections of Christian literature for children.  EB 
pietRomaRChi, sophie benini The Book Book: A Journey into Bookmaking; written 
and illus. by Sophie Benini Pietromarchi. Tara, 2007 131p
ISBN 978-81-86211-24-3 $19.95   
R Gr. 4-9
We’ve seen books describing the process of book creation (Aliki’s How a Book Is 
Made, BCCB 11/86), but instead of a description of how grownups publish, Pi-
etromarchi (a French author/illustrator of books for young people) offers a detailed 
enticement to young people to create their own literary works. The book includes 
a section devoted to the writing of the story, with some nice prompts for the plot-
challenged, but most of the explanation is geared to encouraging a full sweep of 
visual creativity, from considering and repurposing found objects to constructing 
a cover to crafting various different incarnations of books, from your basic pages 
between a cover to a “feather book,” with text on feathery bundled strips of paper, 
to pop-up and shaped books. A final chapter describes a workshop with kids, which 
seems to be Pietromarchi’s regular practice, and the books created therein. The 
book takes a musing and artistic approach very different from the cold practical-
ity of most craft books, and it’s as much an exhortation to artistry as it is a guide 
to creation. Though some of the picture-book-style books produced may initially 
seem a little young for kids old enough to read the comparatively sophisticated 
text (and convert the metric measurements and British/Indian terminology), there 
are plenty of compact illustrated texts that could serve as models for thoughtful 
upper-grades projects, and adults could also use this as a readaloud starting place 
for bookmaking projects with younger kids.  DS
258 • The BulleTin
pRéveRt, JaCques How to Paint the Portrait of a Bird; tr. from the French and 
illus. by Mordicai Gerstein. Roaring Brook, 2007 40p
ISBN 978-1-59643-215-4 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 4-6
In Prévert’s lyrical free-verse poem, the prospective artist is advised to lure the bird 
in with a painted cage with an open door, waiting patiently until the bird flies in, 
and then painting the door closed upon him. Gerstein’s translation of this metaphor 
for the artistic process is pleasingly simple, gently colloquial where appropriate (“If 
it doesn’t sing, don’t be sad. You did your best”). The illustrations would seem to 
skew younger than likely for understanding of the poem; while there’s an interesting 
Magrittian surrealism to their literal interpretation of the words, that interpretation 
makes the verse into a captivity drama likely to concern young audiences, though 
Gerstein has softened the situation somewhat by allowing the bird to escape in the 
concluding image. Nonetheless, this might pique the imagination of young poetry 
lovers, or it could be used in contrast with the Ferlinghetti or the video versions, 
musical and non-, available on the Web.  DS
puRmell, ann Maple Syrup Season; illus. by Jill Weber. Holiday House, 
2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-1891-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
“It is the time the Brockwell family comes together to make maple syrup,” and 
come together they do, tramping out to the sugar bush behind Grandpa’s farmhouse 
to tap the trees, then boiling down the sap into syrup and, for the kids, getting a 
treat of maple taffy candy. The process will be news to many kids (it’s also unlikely 
that most youngsters are pouring the real maple stuff, but that’s not something the 
book goes into), and the step-by-step details are absorbing. Unfortunately, many 
aspects aren’t well explained in context (why does the hydrometer float and what 
does it mean when it happens? What is “sheeting”? How does Grandpa grade the 
syrup?), and even the appended notes and glossary fail to address some points, so 
kids will be left with unanswered questions as well as an unslaked sweet tooth. 
The mixed-media art employs naïve folk-style drafting for its figures, which has a 
certain Grandma Moses aptness even though it leaves the family distressingly slack-
jawed throughout. More enticing to viewers will be the cast of furry critters that 
scamper through the landscapes, intruding fancifully into the process (a raccoon 
and a bunny team together to spirit away a bucket of sap on a sled; hibernating 
bears are awakened by the thick scent of boiling maple syrup on the breeze). While 
some information will need to be filled in by other sources, this could still make a 
companionable partner to the author’s Christmas Tree Farm (BCCB 11/06) for kids 
drawn to the rural lifeways that create some of their favorite products.  DS
Rex, adam The True Meaning of Smekday; written and illus. by Adam Rex. Hy-
perion, 2007 423p
ISBN 978-0-7868-4900-0 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Gratuity Tucci doesn’t join the other human beings in the rocketpods on Moving 
Day; she’s seen her mother sucked up through a tube into a spaceship of aliens who 
have declared Earth a colony of the tentacled, big-headed Boov, and she’s tired of 
being pushed around. If she’s going to be forcibly resettled into a human reservation 
in Florida, then she will drive there herself, thank you very much. Thus begins an 
FeBruary 2008 • 259
extended odyssey of adventure, strange encounters with humans and aliens, narrow 
escapes, and eventual heroics. Early on, she teams up with a rogue Boov who’s made 
the horrible mistake of sending an insulting message across the galaxy, alerting the 
Boov’s archenemy, the Gorg, to the whereabouts of their new home. The Gorg 
show up to conquer what the Boov have already stolen, but they’ve never met with 
the likes of Gratuity and J.Lo (the Boovs have learned much about Earth’s culture 
from TV), and they are soon sent packing with a little help from a cat named Pig. 
What carries the day in this zany sci-fi treat is Gratuity’s comic voice; she’s a sassy 
black girl with a gift for well-aimed quips and trenchant observations about, well, 
nearly everything. J.Lo grows more endearing for both readers and Gratuity as the 
trip progresses; his grasp of English improves as surely and subtly as his sensitivity 
for human family relationships. Along the way, Rex takes slanted potshots at the 
displacement of Native Americans, current American foreign policy, and a certain 
well-known theme park in Orlando. Written in the form of a school assignment, 
the text is supplemented by antic spot art of maps, photos, and comics that explain 
the history of the Boov and the nature of the Gorg. The plotline gets a bit drawn 
out and attenuated, but a single reading is insufficient to catch all of the jokes as 
they fly by fast and furious; fortunately, there’s enough spark here to lure readers 
back for a second go.  KC
Rubin, susan goldman Delicious: The Life & Art of  Wayne Thiebaud. Chron-
icle, 2007 108p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8118-5168-8 $15.95   
Ad Gr. 4-8
Best known for his paintings of bakeshop-trim scrumptious desserts, Thiebaud 
worked for years before receiving recognition as a serious artist. Rubin’s biography, 
which draws on interviews with Thiebaud, his son, and his artistic champion, traces 
Thiebaud’s life from early youth but focuses primarily on his adult development as an 
artist. The account includes touches of interesting information, such as Thiebaud’s 
own uncertainty and then conviction about his homely subjects, and the difficulty 
of breaking out as a representational artist when the art world was abuzz over ab-
stracts. Unfortunately, the account is fairly superficial and the writing unpleasantly 
choppy, a problem exacerbated by layout that interrupts text with pull quotes and 
a full-page illustration facing every page of text. The reproductions are elegant and 
inviting (and some apparently show rarely seen works), but their placement is often 
chronologically puzzling, with art from the 1990s appearing opposite a discussion 
of his life in the late 1950s and vice versa. Kids who actually want to sit down and 
read about the artist’s life will therefore probably want to look elsewhere, but this 
is a visually enticing and browsable volume that manages to tempt if not satisfy the 
artistic appetite. A bibliography of books, articles, and catalogues indicates material 
particularly suitable to young readers, and an index is appended.  DS
Rupp, RebeCCa Sarah Simpson’s Rules for Living. Candlewick, 2008 [96p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3220-5 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
“My name is Sarah Elizabeth Simpson. I am twelve years old. I have orange hair and 
I am fat.” So writes Sarah in the journal she begins on New Year’s Day, in which 
she chronicles her resentment toward her father (who left her mother a year ago 
to marry his young girlfriend), her mother (who claims to be platonic friends with 
Jonah when it’s clear they’re actually dating), and a variety of other thorns in her 
260 • The BulleTin
side (ranging from snobby classmates to stupid school plays). The story is hemmed 
in by both predictability and purposiveness, with Dad’s new wife turning out to be 
pregnant, Mom indeed getting hitched to Jonah (since that’s two remarriages within 
eighteen months of the divorce, Sarah’s resentment at the size of the changes seems 
pretty justifiable), and Sarah finding a friend in an unlikely classmate. Sarah’s diary 
voice, however, is fresh and believable in its sulky yet humorous resentment, and her 
compact daily entries, almost every one incorporating an itemized list, are painless 
and unintimidating reading. Kids looking for a light yet respectful treatment of a 
fairly heavy subject may want to have a look at Sarah’s journal.  DS
sandeRson, bRandon Alcatraz versus the Evil Librarians. Scholastic, 
2007 308p
ISBN 978-0-439-92550-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Clumsy, impulsive Alcatraz never dreamed that a mysterious thirteenth-birthday 
present, a bag of sand, would unveil secrets about his biological family or would 
be stolen within just a few hours by evil librarians. Raised in foster homes, Alcatraz 
had resigned himself to never staying in one place long enough to be loved (or love 
back), until his grandfather (a surprise in himself, since Alcatraz didn’t know he 
had one) appears, enlisting him in an adventure to recapture the gift. The nefarious 
librarians, with their penchant for order and control over information, seek world 
domination, and the sand, once melted into glass for a powerful lens, may just give 
them the advantage they need to take over the Free Kingdoms that had heretofore 
resisted librarian rule. Alcatraz soon learns that he has a rather large family (though 
most members are MIA) and that his extreme klutziness is actually his biologi-
cal talent. Surrounded by truly dastardly villains, talking British dinosaurs, and a 
cousin with an astonishing collection of weaponry, Alcatraz still easily emerges as 
the novel’s star, interrupting his own narration frequently with sardonic asides and 
assurances to the reader that he is, at best, an inadvertent hero. Readers will likely 
bond with the hapless Alcatraz immediately, soundly rejecting his self-deprecations 
and cheering his ultimate forays into heroism and familial bonding. As the first in 
a tetralogy, the novel concludes with several open-ended conflicts, though the im-
mediate crisis resolves in such a manner that this also works as a stand-alone read. 
Most librarians will appreciate the satiric teasing, and they will also see the strong 
appeal and easy genre-crossing potential in this futuristic fantasy adventure.  AS
sayRe, apRil pulley Trout Are Made of Trees; illus. by Kate Endle. Charlesbridge, 
2008 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-137-0 $15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-58089-138-7 $6.95   
Ad 5-8 yrs
“Trout are made of trees,” this natural history text startlingly asserts up front, go-
ing on to support its contention by describing a riverine cycle. First, the fall leaves 
settle in the stream, feeding bacteria, algae, and small leaf shredding critters such 
as crane flies and shrimp; then small fish and other predators eat the leaf shredders, 
joined by the trout, which indiscriminately snack on leaf-shredders and their preda-
tors alike. The idea of the book is intriguing, and though it loses focus a little by 
talking about other benefits trees confer on the trout (by shading the stream and 
sheltering hatchlings), Sayre puts the concept forth with her usual deftly crafted 
language, simple despite its poetic touches. Mixed-media collages are at their best 
in depicting the underground world, wherein speckly, dappled textures contrast 
FeBruary 2008 • 261
with the sharp edge of layered outlines of the river’s fishy and buggy inhabitants. 
Less successful are the above-water scenes, dominated by over-stylized humans with 
flatly cartoonish faces and figures. Despite the flaws, this would be an unusual and 
memorable approach to a discussion of the food web, and perceptive young listeners 
will be quick to offer up their own explanations of what various critters—including 
themselves—are made of.  DS
sChReibeR, ellen Vampire Kisses: Blood Relatives Volume I; illus. by Rem. Tegen/
HarperCollins, 2007 96p (Tokyopop)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-134081-9 $7.99   
Ad Gr. 6-8
In this graphic-novel adaptation of Schreiber’s Vampire Kisses series (Vampire Kisses, 
BCCB 10/03) series, the relationship between Raven, goth outsider at Dullsville 
High, and Alexander, her gorgeous vampire boyfriend, is explored further. Here 
the couple’s late-night graveyard dates are interrupted by Alexander’s cousin and 
his friends, who seek vials of blood that will turn them full vampire, erasing their 
half-mortal weaknesses. Alexander is determined to keep them from the vials, know-
ing that the teens’ lack of ethics or responsibility will result in them being deadly, 
vicious vampires, living the antithesis of his own moderated lifestyle. Setting up for 
future volumes, the book doesn’t let the teens find the vials yet, but they do establish 
themselves as transfer students in Raven’s school, and with Alexander inaccessible 
all day, Raven quickly finds herself (and her naïve best friend) in grave danger. The 
plot is streamlined to the extent that readers who are not already familiar with the 
series will likely find themselves confused and frustrated by the plot holes and lack 
of character development. In addition, fans coming for the manga may feel cheated 
by the extensive behind-the-scenes exploration into the shift from novel to graphic 
format and the addition of a print chapter from the fourth novel in the series. The 
primary audience seems to be fans who are interested in revisiting these characters 
in a new format, and the dramatic gray, black, and white manga-style illustrations 
do add new life to the characters and setting. Even with a scant plot, the hunky 
vampires, an immaculately dressed goth protagonist, and the thrill of forbidden 
love may still draw in readers who can’t get enough of undead romances.  AS
sChulman, Janet Pale Male: Citizen Hawk of New York City; illus. by Meilo 
So. Knopf, 2008 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94558-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84558-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
Red-tailed hawk Pale Male is a bit of a literary cause célèbre these days, what with 
a multitude of books (Winter’s The Tale of Pale Male, BCCB 3/07, and McCarthy’s 
City Hawk, BCCB 10/07) and a film featuring this unusual denizen of the Big 
Apple. Schulman’s account stands out for being a more thorough overview that 
discusses the tidbits either relegated to a final note in or absent entirely from the 
others, such as his succession of mates, the role of changing laws in the fate of Pale 
Male’s nest, and the appearance of a new generation of hawks, possibly Pale Male’s 
offspring, in the area. The book has a pleasing touch with colorful detail (Pale 
Male was once nominated for Father of the Year) and neat phrasing (“Taking down 
the nest seemed like such a heartless act coming from people living in their own 
well-feathered nests”). So’s elegant watercolors move from limpid fluidity in their 
washes of hue in aerial and animal images to urbane gaiety in the cornucopia of 
262 • The BulleTin
humans teeming along the streets and sidewalks of Manhattan; the frequent focus 
on the bird-level view and the avian world in and out of Central Park gives subtle 
priority to the subject species over their human watchers. Offer this as an explana-
tory complement to the more art-focused accounts or as a spur to an interesting 
direction in an environmental discussion. An author’s note and a slender list of 
additional resources are appended.  DS
sheth, KashmiRa Keeping Corner. Hyperion, 2007 281p
ISBN 978-0-7868-3859-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
In accordance with Brahman custom in the early twentieth century, Leela was 
engaged at two and married at nine. Now twelve, she is looking forward with 
some trepidation to moving in with her husband and his family when her young 
husband is tragically killed. Disgraced, Leela must now live the rest of her life as 
a widow in her parents’ home, wearing only brown saris and none of her beloved 
bangles. Worse, she has to shave her head and stay in her home for an entire year. 
Leela, who up to this point has been spoiled by both her parents and her child-
less aunt and uncle who live with them, finds her fate cruel indeed, and yet she is 
reluctant to embrace the liberated future her brother is trying to plan for her. A 
follower of the new leader, Gandhi, Kanubhai believes that women and men should 
have equal opportunities; unbeknownst to Leela, he has taken a vow that he will 
not marry until their parents allow Leela to go the city to continue her education. 
Leela’s character arc is skillfully handled as she changes from an almost unbearably 
spoiled and unpleasant brat to a thoughtful young woman ready to challenge the 
customs of her culture. As her story unfolds, readers get a strong sense of not only 
the practices of the time, but also of the intense family loyalties and tensions that 
those practices reinforce. In-text glosses on unfamiliar words are intrusive and a 
note on the history would have been welcome, but the story provides enough of its 
own contexts to be accessible and informative about restrictive laws and traditions 
of the Gandhi years and the revolutions that initiated change.  KC 
shusteRman, neal Unwind. Simon, 2007 335p
ISBN 978-1-4169-1204-0 $16.99   
R Gr. 8-10
In this dystopic thriller, children between thirteen and eighteen can be “unwound” 
by their parents if they are deemed unsuitable in any way. Unwinding is considered 
the ethical middle ground coming out of a war between the pro-choice and pro-
life armies: parents can retroactively “abort” a child as long as all of the parts are 
used for medical purposes, thus ensuring the child doesn’t officially die. The story 
focuses on three young people: Lev, a thirteen-year-old, who has always known his 
purpose was to be unwound as a gift to God; and Connor, a troubled teen, and 
Risa, a not-gifted-enough musician, who are both shocked to learn of their fate. 
Although the three initially have little in common when they meet en route to 
an unwinding camp, they soon form a tight bond as they travel the underground 
escape route to finally land at a seeming haven, an airplane junkyard headed by a 
well-meaning admiral haunted by memories of his own unwound son. The shocking 
premise is unveiled immediately, and a nail-biting pace is sustained throughout, 
with the teens flung headlong into a true life-or-death struggle. In the quiet mo-
ments of safety, philosophical explorations of what it means to be alive, what the 
rights of children are, and whether or not one’s soul resides in the whole body or in 
individual pieces unfold, and these haunting debates will likely linger in the reader’s 
FeBruary 2008 • 263
mind even after the riveting plot fades. Fans of Farmer’s The House of the Scorpion 
(BCCB 11/02) will find intriguing overlaps on the ethics of harvesting humans, 
and science fiction buffs in general will find this an ideal blend of philosophy and 
action set in a compelling futuristic landscape.  AS
sKlansKy, amy e. The Duck Who Played the Kazoo; illus. by Tiphanie 
Beeke. Clarion, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-618-42854-0 $16.00   
R 3-6 yrs
Spare rhyming text tells of a little white duck whose favorite pastime is the playing 
of his kazoo (“La ditty, da ditty/ zu zu”). Increasingly lonely on his little lake, he flies 
south when winter comes and finds a welcoming new flock. Come spring, though, 
the musical duck gets homesick; fortunately, his newfound friends are eager to “see 
someplace new” and happily travel back home with him. Compact dimeter lines 
salted with musical phrases break occasionally for couplets that add a contempla-
tive touch to the pace, making this a lyrical yet simple readaloud. While the events 
don’t bear too close an examination (isn’t the new flock going to get homesick as 
well? Or are they going to do a seasonal share?), this is an enjoyable whimsy rather 
than an exploration of avian behavior, and the kazoo is a delightfully ducky ac-
coutrement since waterfowl sound pretty kazoolian in their natural voices anyway. 
Beeke’s illustrations layer smudgy paints on watercolor, picking up on the slightly 
wistful tone of the story rather than turning it into an odyssey of cute. Juicily rich 
colors mark the landscapes both north and south, while the ducks themselves are 
a joyous, modestly accessorized (trim carry-on-size bags seem the order of the day 
for migration) crew. This is a gentle yet spirited story, and an ideal entry in that 
slender genre, the lap-sitting musical-kazoo tale. Zu zu.  DS
smith, sheRRi l. Hot, Sour, Salty, Sweet. Delacorte, 2008 [176p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90431-5 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73417-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Middle-school graduation doesn’t go quite as Ana Shen had expected: a burst pipe 
interrupts her salutatorian’s speech and results in cancellation of the graduation 
dance, where Ana had hoped to get some alone time with Jamie Tabata, the boy of 
her dreams. Ana’s bold friend Chelsea helpfully convinces the Tabatas to come for a 
celebratory dinner at the Shens instead, but that means Ana must corral her Chinese 
grandparents from her father’s side and her African-American grandparents from 
her mother’s into ceasing hostilities long enough to prepare a meal and be pleasantly 
hospitable to the surprise visitors. This is steeped in contrivance and didacticism, 
and Ana’s character gets rather overshadowed by the strong adult characters clash-
ing around her. Smith writes with keen perception, however, of the tightrope walk 
forced upon a kid caught between family antagonists (the gift-supremacy contest 
between the two grandparental sides is a particularly vivid and credible touch), and 
Ana’s agony of self-consciousness is absolutely fourteen-year-old authentic. Even if 
the lessons sour the story a little, readers will still likely sympathize with a girl trying 
to solve a situation that shouldn’t be her problem in the first place.  DS
264 • The BulleTin
spitz, bob Yeah! Yeah! Yeah!: The Beatles, Beatlemania, and the Music That Changed 
the World. Little, 2007 234p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-316-11555-1 $18.99   
R Gr. 7-10
What Elizabeth Partridge did for John Lennon in John Lennon: All I Want Is the 
Truth (BCCB 12/05), Spitz does for the Fab Four as a whole: provide a compelling, 
highly readable biography and offer convincing proof that these rockers changed 
the world as we know it and gave an entire generation a soundtrack that grew up 
as they did. From the band’s early days as the Quarrymen, through excruciating 
growing pains and mad popularity, to gradual drift and breakdown, the author sets 
the group in its contexts, giving equal weight to each member and highlighting 
the dynamics of their various relationships. Spitz, who has previously biographized 
the Beatles and other musicians for adults, here downplays but doesn’t completely 
eliminate references to their drug use; he does, however, apply a liberal dose of 
whitewash to the band’s sexploits, choosing to chronicle only those relationships 
that ultimately mattered in some lasting way. What he does particularly well in this 
offering is to emphasize the prisonhouse of fame that constantly threatened to crush 
the group and show the innovations the group introduced, such as the inclusion of 
lyrics in liner notes, that contemporary audiences take for granted. Generous use 
of photographs reinforces the antic nature of the group and conveys how much 
fun they must have had in the early days, and text inserts provide additional tidbits 
of information that broaden the context. Interesting anecdotes about song origins 
and lots of quotations from the Beatles themselves demystify the magical mystery 
tour of legends that haunts the legacy of the group; readers will end up feeling very 
cool and in the know when they finish. U.S. discography, selected bibliography, 
and index are included.  KC 
st. geoRge, Judith The Ghost, the White House, and Me. Holiday House, 
2007 153p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2045-2 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Being daughter of the president has some perks, eleven-year-old KayKay con-
cedes, but what she really wants is a chance to spend the night ghost-hunting in 
the Lincoln Bedroom. Her stern presidential mother initially forbids it, putting 
KayKay’s uncle in there instead—or so KayKay thinks until a practical joke on her 
uncle results in her awakening and startling a visiting dignitary, perhaps creating 
an international incident. Her mother eventually relents and allows KayKay and 
her sister to spend the night in the historic bedroom, but is KayKay after the ghost 
or is the ghost after KayKay? The story is strained and cheesy, with educational 
tidbits about the White House tending to be obtrusively wedged into the narrative. 
The book does, however, capably meld a humorous family story with an exotic 
setting; the unintimidating pleasures of family pranks and goofy sibling bickering 
gain interest from their occurrence in the corridors of history amid hordes of staff 
and enviable perks such as the White House chef and recreational facilities. Kids 
usually resistant to history may succumb to the lure of this private jaunt around a 
possibly haunted White House.  DS
FeBruary 2008 • 265
stanley, diane The Mysterious Case of the Allbright Academy. HarperCollins, 
2008 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-085818-6 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-085817-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8 
Franny Sharp never expected to spend eighth grade on scholarship in an exclusive 
boarding school like Allbright Academy, founded by two Nobel-winning scientists 
to develop scholastic and leadership skills in young people in all academic areas. 
She recognizes it is largely a stroke of luck—it’s younger sister Zoe who was actu-
ally recruited for Allbright, but Zoe would only attend if her siblings J. D. and 
Franny were there too. Franny flourishes, though, forming satisfying friendships 
with classmates Calpurnia (Cal) and Brooklyn, developing a strong work ethic, 
maintaining high grades, and improving her social skills and personal habits. In 
fact, she’s becoming such an uncharacteristic paragon that, when Cal voices her 
suspicions that there’s something in the ubiquitous dining hall brownies that’s 
altering their personalities, Franny is inclined to agree. Together the friends un-
cover the real purpose behind Allbright’s educational program and they execute a 
plan to bring the adult culprits to justice. This followup to The Mysterious Matter 
of I. M. Fine (BCCB 10/01) sees Franny three years older but just as likable, and 
Stanley continues to execute her mystery plots with style. In less capable hands, 
this could amount to little more than a clever students vs. evil administrators plot, 
but the author raises the bar by taking the overall ambitions of the academy quite 
seriously and displaying genuine respect for its pedagogical strategies, directing her 
humor-tinged venom at the dastardly goal of bending young minds toward a nar-
row, political agenda. Kids who enjoyed Stewart’s The Mysterious Benedict Society 
(BCCB 5/07) should be delighted to meet another group of youngsters who bring 
down the school and quite probably save the world.  EB
tafuRi, nanCy Blue Goose; written and illus. by Nancy Tafuri. Simon, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-4169-2834-8 $15.99   
Ad 3-5 yrs
When Farmer Gray goes away for the day, his colorful livestock decide to liven up 
the look of things around the barnyard. Blue Goose, Red Hen, Yellow Chick, and 
White Duck gather their respective hues of paint and get to work adding color to 
their monochromatic landscape. Predictably, they must work together to create 
some of the colors they need (green for the grass, light blue for the sky), and they 
just manage to get their painting finished in time to surprise Farmer Gray on his 
return. There are some logical leaps here, and the ending, in which Blue Goose 
paints everything blue for the night, seems a bit anticlimactic and unnecessary after 
the build-up to the farmer’s surprise; as color-mixing concept books go, this seems 
a little tepid in comparison to the old favorite Mouse Paint. However, the inclusion 
of White Duck does allow for some brief exploration of creating tints, as opposed to 
mere primary and secondary colors, and the transformation of the landscape from 
monochrome to color is original. The multimedia drawn and painted illustrations 
are simple and bold, and the large, clean layouts make this highly suitable for group 
sharing. Brushy, layered strokes give the barnyard birds’ feathers depth, making them 
stand out against the broad expanses of flat color or gray, while crisp black outlines 
and page borders add pleasing contrast to the bright colors and gray tones. This 
266 • The BulleTin
passel of painting poultry may help adults looking to spice up their color-themed 
storytimes or to kick off an exploration of color-mixing.  JH
thompson, Kate Origins. Bloomsbury, 2007 313p (The Missing Link 
Trilogy)
ISBN 978-1-58234-652-6 $17.95   
R Gr. 7-9
This British import, the final volume of the Missing Link Trilogy (Fourth World, 
BCCB 5/05 and Only Human), focuses both on the end days of teenager Chris-
tie, the narrator throughout the series, and on a future world of humans directly 
impacted by the scientific experimentation of his adopted family. As a spread-
ing infection and its dire consequences for humanity slowly play out through 
Christie’s journal, alternating chapters focus on Nessa, one of the Cat people, and 
Farral, a member of the Dogs, who become journeying companions in spite of 
the differences between their peoples. Their alliance will not be enough to change 
the longstanding differences that have sparked a vicious current war, but their 
discovery that both Cats and Dogs are descendents of twins from Christie’s era 
will certainly shake the religious foundation around which each group has built 
its culture. Christie’s measured narration contrasts with the raw emotionality of 
Nessa and Farral’s quest for peace, maintaining the balance of scientific dispassion 
and powerful ethical exploration that has marked the series as a whole. Readers 
who have been desperately waiting to see how the lives of these characters play out 
will be both haunted by the tragedy of one generation and intrigued by the ways 
in which their lives had such a significant role on future ones. Although this could 
be an effective pairing with Ann Halam’s Dr. Franklin’s Island (BCCB 5/02) for a 
heated discussion on the ways in which genetic experimentation can go horribly 
awry, the searing emotional struggles of Nessa and Farral would also make this an 
easy sell to science fiction fans seeking character depth in addition to a futuristic 
headline-worthy plot.  AS
tigelaaR, liz Pretty Tough. Razorbill, 2007 246p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59514-112-5 $8.99   
R Gr. 7-9
Krista and her younger sister, Charlie, used to be pretty close, but a fork in the 
adolescent road has led Krista to the pinnacle of junior-year popularity and Char-
lie to seething jealousy and a craving to tip Krista off her pedestal. Opportunity 
knocks in the guide of a new soccer coach who happens to see Charlie surfing 
and, appreciating her athleticism, recruits her to try out for the team. Charlie not 
only makes the team, she’s assigned to play center forward alongside Krista, who’s 
moved up to center mid. Clearly there should be enough glory here to satisfy both 
siblings, but their now nasty rivalry and stubborn refusal to cooperate off the field 
or on threatens to dash any hope the team has for a stellar season. Readers will 
know all along there’s a train wreck coming when these tracks converge, and the 
chapters that alternate between the sisters’ points of view rack up the tension. Just 
beneath the sororal cat-scratching, though, there’s enough genuine vulnerability 
in each sister to keep spitefulness from turning to hatefulness, and there’s enough 
high-school angst over clothes, grades, and virginity to keep readers invested in 
this classic story of sibling and sports rivalry.  EB
FeBruary 2008 • 267
tuRneR, ann Sitting Bull Remembers; illus. by Wendell Minor. HarperCollins, 
2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-051400-6 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-051399-3 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 3-6
Confined in his final years to a reservation, Hunkpapa chief Sitting Bull recalls 
events in his life and the struggle for justice of the Sioux nation. Turner imagines 
his thoughts and ascribes a sometimes wistful, often justifiably bitter tone to his 
musings as he litanizes depredations of tribal land and the indignities suffered by 
his people, and contrasts them with the glory days of his youth. There’s more than 
a touch of matinee Indian to the free-verse sentence construction (“How could 
they break their word/ for the sake of a yellow rock?”), and Minor’s illustrations, 
which attempt to blend literal depictions of the action with ledger-book-styled 
visions and memories, are sometimes stiff and awkwardly composed. Still, Sitting 
Bull’s prophetic vision of victory at Little Big Horn is compelling, and children 
seeking a brief introduction to this tragic hero can derive a fair amount of infor-
mation from this fanciful telling. A note on Sitting Bull’s leadership and his death 
is included.  EB
uRban, linda A Crooked Kind of Perfect. Harcourt, 2007 213p
ISBN 978-0-15-206007-7 $16.00   
R Gr. 4-7
Zoe Elias dreams of being a world-famous piano player, but her real life isn’t so 
promising. Her father is a borderline agoraphobic who panics whenever he has to 
leave the house, and her mother is a workaholic who likes nothing better than a good 
budget crisis that keeps her at the office crunching numbers. She manages to get her 
father to agree to buy her a piano, but a trip to the mall proves too much for him, 
and he’s seduced into buying a Perfectone D-60 organ with “luxuriously realistic 
walnut veneer” instead, which comes with free lessons and “Twenty-four (24!) rhythm 
styles” but lacks the elegance and grace of Zoe’s imagined piano. While ten-year-old 
Zoe has a love/hate relationship with the organ, her dream of piano-prodigy glory 
never falters, since she maintains that a piano experience would be different, i.e., 
she would love practicing, she would sound better, she could play classical music 
rather than theme songs from ’70s TV shows, etc. Short, funny chapters full of 
exaggeration and exasperation provide lots of laughs and keep the plot chugging 
along. Secondary character Wheeler Diggs, a rough and rowdy classmate who fol-
lows Zoe home and soon becomes a fixture in her family’s kitchen helping her dad 
with his endless pursuit of baking classes from Living Room University, is refresh-
ingly charming and original. Readers with their own dreams, weird obsessions, and 
quirky hobbies will be heartened by the message that a few bumps, compromises, 
and sour notes along the way can pay off in a major key.  KC
uRbanoviC, JaCKie Duck Soup; written and illus. by Jackie Urbanovic.  
HarperCollins, 2008 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-121442-4 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-121441-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Culinary artiste Max the duck yearns to create his own original soup recipe, “the 
soup that he, Maxwell Duck would be remembered for inventing.” His taste-test 
of the soup in progress prompts a quick trip to the garden for just the right herb, 
268 • The BulleTin
and in his absence his animal friends enter and discover the bubbling soup pot with 
one lone feather floating on the soup’s surface. Fearing that Max has become one 
with his soup (“I told him he should never cook alone!” cries Bebe the bird), friends 
Brody the dog, Dakota the cat, and Bebe stage various soup-kettle rescue attempts, 
culminating in a straining of the soup in hopes of finding Max. Naturally, the trio 
is relieved to see Max when he returns from the garden; while poor Max is crushed 
to discover that his perfect soup has dribbled down the drain, he’s bolstered by his 
friends’ reassurances and by their reminder that at least he’s not a key ingredient in 
said soup. Any kid who’s labored over the building of a block tower only to have 
it mowed down will sympathize with Max’s struggles with the creative process and 
with his chagrin at the inadvertent destruction of his creation by his friends. The 
misunderstanding about his whereabouts is also genuinely funny, with the animal 
friends providing lots of comic melodrama (“His eyeballs!” shrieks Bebe as they 
drain the soup, while Brody assures them, “Guys, it’s only tiny onions!”). Urbanovic’s 
vibrant watercolor and pencil illustrations are also humorous and expressive, with 
a dash of Loony Tunes in the animals’ histrionics. Max’s agony over his search for 
the right ingredients is evident in the way he slumps at the table and tugs on his 
chef’s hat, while his friends are pop-eyed and frantic in their frenzy to rescue him 
from his apparent demise. Adults looking for a readaloud choice that will really 
“quack up” their audience will find this title just ducky.  JH
walteRs, eRiC Sketches. Viking, 2008 [232p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06294-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Life on the Toronto streets may be rough for teenaged Dana, but it’s better than 
what she left behind at home. At least here she has good friends in Brent and Ashley, 
fellow street teens, and she’s beginning to find satisfying expression at a drop-in 
art center for the homeless called “Sketches,” where her natural artistic ability al-
lows her to shine, and where helpful adults begin to elicit her trust and convince 
her to face the traumas of her past. The story is programmatic from the get-go, 
with Dana’s dark, secret history (her stepfather molested her) immediately appar-
ent to any experienced genre fan, characters neatly divided into heroes or villains, 
and events, including the happy ending for the deserving, more convenient than 
believable. The text is more accessible than in many stories of homelessness (such 
as Blank’s much tougher and more realistic Almost Home, BCCB 11/07), however, 
and the artistic slant is an original one. Dana’s wholesome suburbanity makes her 
a figure with which the similarly young and sheltered will empathize, and while 
her story offers some cautionary elements, readers will be glad to see her finally in 
safer quarters.  DS
weeKs, saRah Oggie Cooder. Scholastic, 2008 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-439-92791-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Oggie Cooder is a mite off-center in his fourth-grade class, or, as his classmates 
would say, he is a “weirdo. Dork. Doofus. Dweeb.” He dresses in mismatched 
clothing from his parents’ second-hand shop, crochets his own shoelaces, talks 
incessantly, and doesn’t clue in to social nuance, especially the social nuances of 
sarcasm that are repeatedly thrown his way by Donnica Perfecto, class mean girl. 
His weirdness pays off, however, when his talent for charving—nibbling slices of 
FeBruary 2008 • 269
American cheese into perfect replicas of each of the United States—is recognized 
by the producer of the TV show Hidden Talents. Oggie is off to Hollywood, with 
the opportunistic Donnica as his manager. When cleaning up his act doesn’t work, 
Donnica decides to Oggify it, but ramping up his Oggie quotient doesn’t quite fit 
Oggie’s style either, and he decides that Hollywood glory just isn’t for him after all. 
Weeks manages pitch-perfect humor for the age group here, with just the right touch 
of zaniness combined with a slightly more serious look at social dynamics and the 
lure of fame and popularity in late elementary school. While Oggie’s characterization 
may be a bit over the top, it makes him humorous without losing him audience 
sympathy, and Donnica has her analogues on playgrounds everywhere, making her 
comeuppance all the more satisfying for kids who don’t quite make the cool cut, as 
well as for the henchgirls and sidekicks of bullies everywhere.  KC
whelan, gloRia Parade of Shadows. HarperCollins, 2007 295p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-089029-2 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-089028-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
When Julia Hamilton’s father agrees to bring Julia along on a business trip to the 
Levant, the sixteen-year-old imagines honing her drawing skills on views and ruins, 
and possibly experiencing a bit of adventure that her proper British upbringing 
seems to discourage. Even under the watchful eye of her father and the tour guide 
assigned to their group by the Turkish government, at least she’ll have something 
exotic to write home about. The politically naïve girl soon learns, though, that each 
member of their small European touring party has some stake in the fortunes of 
the 1907 Ottoman Empire, and each—including her father—finds a subtle way to 
use amicable Julia to further his or her own agenda. Julia is smitten with an Oxford 
student, Graham Geddes, who is covertly aligning support for the Young Turks 
and the restoration of constitutional government, even as Mr. Hamilton works on 
behalf of the Foreign Office to secure British interests in a stable sultanate. Julia, 
easily swayed by her first taste of both political and romantic passion, provides 
cover for Graham’s activities, and when the young man is ultimately arrested, she 
must decide whether to expose her father’s diplomatic identity in order to secure 
Graham’s release. Delivering a serious indictment of European colonialism, Whelan 
supplies within her tale the requisite background information to allow readers to 
sort through the players’ competing interests. Most importantly, she carries it off 
with a whirl of intrigues, betrayals, attempted murder, and of course, romance that 
should render teen readers oblivious to the fact that they’re also getting a crash 
course in Middle Eastern history.  EB
whittenbeRg, allison Life Is Fine. Delacorte, 2008 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90478-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73480-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
Life is very much not fine for fifteen-year-old Samara, whose mother clearly 
prioritizes her boyfriends over her daughter, and who is the despair of the school 
guidance counselor. Her perspective changes when a substitute teacher, Mr. Hal-
brook, introduces her class to poetry, and the experience results in Samara’s not 
only responding to the verse but also unexpectedly making a friend in class—and 
developing a crush on Mr. Halbrook. This compact tale has many elements of the 
classic teacher-crush story, but Whittenberg’s spare prose and taut, underplayed 
270 • The BulleTin
emotionality makes it a dramatic and contemporary variant. It’s subtly clear and 
credible that Samara is yearning desperately for a father figure and that she’s only 
seeing one way to interpret her response to the first man who has taken a genuine 
interest in her welfare and future, and the book gains additional traction by avoid-
ing making her a misunderstood prodigy instead of just a smart girl who hasn’t had 
much reason to do well. Mr. Halbrook is also an interesting character in his own 
right, a retired businessman who decided to give back to the African-American 
community by teaching, who has his own depths and demons. This could arouse 
its own classroom discussions, or it could simply give the cynical yet secretly wishful 
some encouragement for their belief in the possibilities of hope.  DS
whyman, matt Icecore: A Carl Hobbes Thriller. Atheneum, 2007 307p
ISBN 978-1-4169-4907-7 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Seventeen-year-old Carl Hobbes never had any intention of robbing Fort Knox; 
the ambitious hacker just wanted to prove he could open the vault. So he did. 
And got caught. Now the British teen is in U.S. custody, and he’s more than will-
ing to explain exactly how he did the deed, volunteering to undergo some intense 
questioning. However, he’s not even remotely prepared for where that questioning 
will take place—in an undisclosed location above the Arctic Circle in a secret U.S. 
prison for suspected terrorists. Of course, Carl believes he’s the victim of some 
horrible administrative error, until he discovers that hardcore criminals have pig-
gybacked on his hacking exploits, stolen gold bars from Fort Knox, and funneled 
the treasure to a terrorist group. If the brutal strategies of his captors to break his 
will aren’t enough, a murderous inmate turns the tables on the guards and plans 
an escape that’s a virtual death sentence for almost everyone at the site. It’s up to 
Carl and his would-be love interest Beth (it’s awfully hard to get a romance cookin’ 
when you’re caged in a jail in a frozen wasteland) to apply their respective illegal 
skills to outthinking their psychopathic fellow inmate and save the day. Don’t come 
looking around here for character development or nuanced discussion of alleged 
terrorists and the American judicial system; this is purely plot, plot, and more plot, 
with plenty of twists and turns and bullets and blood, and some superlatively hokey 
dialogue (“‘You’re one of a kind, Hobbes.’ ‘No, I’m just a scared kid who wants 
to see another day’”). Carl and Beth are last seen with “a pistol, one snowmobile, 
a hypothermia problem, and each other,” stranded in the Arctic. But there’s every 
reason for hooked teen readers to believe a sequel will lead them into more cinema-
worthy mayhem.  EB
willaRd, eliza Totally Crushed. Scholastic, 2008 [160p]  (Candy Apple 
Books)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-02814-1 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Seventh-grade Valentine’s Day should be terrific for Annabel, who adores hearts 
and who is thrilled that the school’s Spirit Week coincides with her favorite holiday. 
Things go awry, however, when she gets an “I like you” Valentine flower from her 
platonic male friend, Sam; what’s worse, Annabel’s best friend, Phoebe, was hoping 
for her own flower from Sam, whom she likes. Can Annabel convince Sam to like 
Phoebe and find a boy for herself in time for the upcoming skating party? While 
this plot is a venerable one, Willard writes with flair and a happy wit that make the 
story classic rather than hackneyed. Some elements are cozily familiar (it’s not likely 
to shock anybody that there are several sets of crossed romantic wires here), while 
FeBruary 2008 • 271
others are creative (Annabel realizes she actually likes the offbeat boy who comes to 
“Pirate Day” as a copyright pirate), and characterization is touched with sparkling 
charm even in peripheral cast members. The paperback format and big print will 
help reassure reluctant readers and invite those looking for frothy pleasures. Pair 
this with a box of candy hearts and, one hopes, a multitude of floral tributes for a 
sprightly middle-school Valentine.  DS
williams, maRCia Archie’s War; written and illus. by Marcia Williams. Can-
dlewick, 2007 46p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3532-9 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 4-8
Archie Albright, a fictional English boy, senses that the outbreak of war is worth 
documenting, and so he keeps a scrapbook of letters, clippings, mementos, and his 
own cartoons and doodlings from 1914 through Armistice in 1919. His wry wit 
and keen observations of family members’ reactions to World War I are cleverly 
presented, as is his sadder, frightened side, which he keeps confined to this per-
sonal journal. Although the scrapbook layout seems to invite casual flipping and 
browsing, readers must pore over the ostensibly hand-lettered entries carefully and 
systematically to piece together the domestic drama involving the fates of family 
members who go to war, the subtle change in attitude of his hawkish father and 
dovish older sister when war gets up close and personal, and Archie’s own expanding 
interests when he makes a temporary move from the privations of London to the 
relative abundance at his uncle’s farm. There is, however, little evidence of Archie’s 
maturation in the construction of the scrapbook itself, and it’s difficult to believe 
that the artwork, printing, and expressions of ten-year-old Archie in 1914 should 
be essentially identical to those of fifteen-year-old Archie in 1919. Nonetheless, kids 
who enjoy examining the close-packed layouts will be rewarded with an engaging 
history lesson that they probably didn’t bargain for.  EB
winston, sheRRi The Kayla Chronicles. Little, 2007 195p
ISBN 978-0-316-11430-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Kayla was living with her idol, her hard-driving feminist academic grandmother 
JoJo, while her parents and younger sister were overseas, and she’s still adjusting 
to JoJo’s death and to life with the nuclear family. She’s also caught in an ethical 
dilemma as her friend Rosalie, “the Convenient Latina,” tries to hold her feet to 
the fire of her grandmother’s convictions by forcing the flat-chested Kayla to try 
out for her school’s high-powered dance team in order to prove that they only want 
well-endowed dancers (“My A-cup breasts,” she wryly observes, “are pawns in a 
vicious power struggle”). The plan is that she will write a scathing critique about 
her rejection for the school newspaper; trouble is, she makes the squad, and she 
finds that the girls are not as vapid as their booty-shaking routines would imply. 
Rosalie feels self-righteously betrayed, but Kayla is just confused: how can she 
become a strong black woman of power on her own terms when so many people 
are trying to get her to conform to their expectations? Peppered with feminist 
quotations, clever portmanteau neologisms (“stankalicious, “astromiraculation”), 
and funny tabloid-style headlines, Kayla’s diary account of the summer before she 
enters her prestigious prep school is a rich education in how girls stare down the 
contradictions of high school expectations in the wake of a strong commitment to 
sisterhood and girl power. Armed with the knowledge that even Condi Rice has a 
passion for shoes, Kayla negotiates her middle ground with style and an unflagging 
sense of humor; readers will be empowered to do the same.  KC 
272 • The BulleTin
zaRR, saRa Sweethearts. Little, 2008 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-316-01455-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Eight years ago, Jennifer could bear life as a plump and lisping school pariah only 
because of the staunch friendship of Cameron Quick; Cameron suddenly disap-
peared from her life just after the two had a disturbing and creepy encounter with 
his abusive father, and Jennifer was told he was dead. Since then she slimmed 
down, lost her lisp, and reinvented herself as Jenna, now a popular, seemingly 
happy seventeen-year-old with a cute boyfriend. The Jenna world is shaken off its 
foundation, however, when a very much alive Cameron turns up at her door—and 
at her school, where Jenna’s boyfriend becomes increasingly jealous of Jenna’s 
obvious absorption in her rediscovered soulmate. Though this may sound like a 
story of star-crossed lovers reunited, it’s more complicated and interesting than 
that: Cameron essentially brings up Jenna’s own lost self, forcing her to confront 
the girl she’d been and disowned; also, Jenna’s mother’s concerned fussing over the 
boy (who is now a largely homeless emancipated minor) serves to highlight how 
isolated she left her own daughter when she was most needed. Jenna’s narration is 
poignant in its uncertainty, and her voice is well balanced by the swift, effective 
characterizations of her friends and family (her kind and concerned stepfather 
is particularly nicely drawn). A thoughtful investigation of growth, change, and 
relationships, this will start readers thinking about their own misplaced long-ago 
friends and selves. DS
ziegleR, JennifeR How Not to Be Popular. Delacorte, 2008 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90463-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73465-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Portland used to be Maggie’s home, but her hippie parents have felt the urge to 
relocate again, this time severing Maggie’s relationship with her boyfriend, Trevor, 
in the process. Now Maggie’s in Austin, Texas, and she’s so bitter about her constant 
rootlessness that she’s decided she’ll ensure she makes no friends there, thus reduc-
ing the pain when she and her family inevitably leave. To this end, she wears the 
weirdest clothes she can find in the resale shop her parents are now running, and she 
throws her lot in with the obvious geeks in the Helping Hands Club, determined 
to get a recommendation that will see her off to college where she can meet up 
again with Trevor. The deliberate flouting of high-school priorities is an intriguing 
notion, and the book mines comedy from the fact that the more Maggie defies the 
established order, the more the established order loves her, copying her outlandish 
outfits and running her for homecoming queen. The story would have been more 
effective as a truly broad comedy based on that premise, however, since Maggie’s 
angst about Trevor and her broken connections takes up space without becoming 
particularly emotionally compelling, seeming mostly to justify the exploration of 
her becoming a deliberate outsider. More problematically, Maggie isn’t actually very 
likable, since her contempt for those classmates she uses to achieve her purpose is 
pretty venomous, and her final recantation just results in yet another situation’s 
being All About Maggie. Readers interested in true outsiderdom may therefore tire 
a bit of Maggie’s inability to shake popularity no matter what she does, but the 
humorous dissection of the social order and the suggestion that movement within 
it is voluntary may nonetheless entertain youthful social critics.  DS
FeBruary 2008 • 273
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
Casement, Rose Black History in the Pages of Children’s Literature. Scarecrow, 
2007 315p
ISBN 978-0-8108-5843-5 $55.00
This meticulous and thoughtful volume offers a capable overview of this key 
American history. Chapters are chronologically and thematically focused, with 
subjects ranging from “The Beginning of Slavery in the New World” through “A 
Land of Promises: Exploring and Settling the West” to “Telling It Like It Is: Stories 
of Today.” Each chapter includes a careful introduction and several comparatively 
long and detailed annotations for the focus titles, which are divided by audience 
age; chapters then each conclude with endnotes for quotations, a bibliography of 
further works for young people, and a bibliography of relevant adult references. 
Both fiction and nonfiction appear, and titles are drawn from publishers large and 
small, institutional and trade. The longer annotations provide an opportunity for 
commentary on a book’s specific contribution to the overall genre and some per-
spective on the challenges of black history, while the frequent use of brief excerpts 
helps convey stylistic flavor; the cohesive linear approach helps counterbalance the 
tendency for historical writing to cluster around particular eras or events.  A final 
chapter examines the issue of inclusion in historical literature for young people, 
while generous end matter contains career summaries of notable authors and il-
lustrators, a glossary, and an index. This is a scrupulous and well-considered volume 
that’s useful both as a resource and as a thought-provoking exploration of history 
for young people.  DS
274  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Hernandez; Walters
Adventure: Ábalos; Grant; 
Sanderson; Whyman
Africa–fiction: Okorafor-Mbachu
African Americans: Clinton
African Americans–fiction: english; 
Johnson; Moses; Smith; Whitten-
berg; Winston
Agriculture: Purmell
Animals: Helman; Schulman
Animals–stories: Cutbill; Markle; 
tafuri; urbanovic
AntHOlOGieS: Gallo
Art: Pietromarchi; Prévert
Art and artists: rubin
Art and artists–fiction: Walters
Asian Americans–fiction: Smith
BiBle StOrieS: Paterson
BiOGrAPHieS: Clinton; Paterson; 
rubin; Spitz; turner
Biology: Helman
Birds: Schulman
Birds–fiction: George, Jean; Prévert
Birds–stories: Sklansky
Books and reading: Pietromarchi
Brothers–fiction: Hernandez
Brothers and sisters–fiction: dowell
Bullies–fiction: Weeks
Christmas: Paterson
Circuses: Cummins
Cliques–fiction: Ziegler
Colors–stories: tafuri
COnCePt BOOkS: tafuri
Cows–stories: Cutbill
CrAft BOOkS: Pietromarchi
Crime and criminals–fiction: 
Whyman
Culture studies: Spitz
Current events: Applegate
death–fiction: les Becquets
disabilities–fiction: Gallo
divorce–fiction: Hood; Mills; rupp
dolls–stories: Bernheimer
drug abuse–fiction: Cohn
dystopias–fiction: Shusterman
Ecology: Sayre
Environmental studies: Markle; 
Schulman
ePiStOlAry fiCtiOn: rupp
Ethics and values: Clinton; dowell; 
Johnson; Matthews; Moses; Shus-
terman; thompson; Winston; 
Ziegler 
faith–fiction: Hood
families–fiction: Barrows; Cohn; 
Crowley; kephart; les Becquets; 
Mills; Smith; urban
fAntASy: Ábalos; Alter; Barrows; 
Bernheimer; funke; George, Jes-
sica; Okorafor-Mbachu; Sander-
son
fathers–fiction: dowell; les Bec-
quets
fish: Sayre
fOlktAleS And fAiry tAleS: 
George, Jessica; nelson
food and eating–stories: Manushkin; 
Purmell; urbanovic
friends–fiction: Chappell; Crowley; 
english; Matthews; Stanley; Win-
ston; Zarr; Ziegler
Subject and uSe Index
keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
February 2008 • 275
Future–fiction: Okorafor-Mbachu; 
Thompson
Ghosts–fiction: Alter; St. George
GrAphic nOvelS: Schreiber
Grief–fiction: cohn; les Becquets
hiSTOricAl FicTiOn: Dowell; 
Godbersen; Grant; McMullan; 
Moses; Sheth; Whelan; Williams
History, U.S.: clinton: nelson; 
Turner
History, world: Williams
homelessness–fiction: Walters
huMOr: collins; cutbill; rex; 
rupp; urban; urbanovic; Weeks
identity–fiction: chappell; Smith; 
Zarr
immigrants–fiction: Applegate
india–fiction: Sheth
Knights and chivalry–fiction: Funke
Language arts: pietromarchi
latinos–fiction: hernandez
letter-writing–fiction: Alter
librarians–fiction: Sanderson
Magic–fiction: Funke
Manufacturing–stories: purmell
Middle east–fiction: Whelan
Mothers–fiction: hood
Museums–stories: Bernheimer
Music and musicians: Spitz
Music and musicians–fiction: urban
Music and musicians–stories: Sklan-
sky
MySTerieS: Stanley
Mythology, classical: collins
native Americans: Turner
Nature study: George, Jean; 
helman; Sayre
Obsessive-compulsive disorder– 
fiction: chappell; crowley
parties–fiction: Smith
pOeTry: prévert
politics–fiction: Whelan
pregnancy–fiction: Johnson
presidents–fiction: St. George
racism–fiction: McMullan; Mills
Reading aloud: helman
Reading, beginning: George, Jean
Reading, easy: collins; english; 
Moses; St. George; Weeks
Reading, reluctant: Applegate; 
cummins; rupp; Willard
relationships–fiction: Godbersen; 
Kephart; Willard
Religious education: paterson
rhyMinG STOrieS: Sklansky
rOMAnce: George, Jessica
romance–fiction: Grant; Willard
rural life–stories: purmell
School–fiction: collins; Schreiber; 
Stanley; Whittenberg; Winston; 
Ziegler
Science FicTiOn: Matthews; 
rex; Shusterman; Thompson
ShOrT STOrieS: Gallo
Sisters–fiction: Tigelaar
Slavery: clinton
South, the–fiction: McMullan
SpOrTS STOrieS: Tigelaar
Storytelling–stories: Manushkin
Storytime: Markle; Sklansky; urba-
novic
Suicide–fiction: cohn
Tall Tales: nelson
Teachers–fiction: Whittenberg
Television–fiction: Weeks
Terrorism–fiction: Whyman
Time travel–fiction: Alter; Barrows
uncles–fiction: Grant
valentine’s Day–fiction: Willard
vampires–fiction: Schreiber
verSe nOvelS: Applegate
vietnam War–fiction: Dowell
voyages and travel–fiction: Ábalos; 
Okorafor-Mbachu; rex; Thomp-
son; Whelan
Winter–fiction: les Becquets
Winter–stories: Manushkin
Women’s studies: clinton; cum-
mins; Sheth
World War i–fiction: Williams
Writers and writing–fiction: Keph-
art; Mills
