T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
December 2015
Vol. 69   No. 4
New perspectives  
that are anything 
but elementary.
JHU Press scholarly journal offerings in  
Children’s Literature:
Bookbird: A Journal of International Children’s Literature
ISSN: 0006-7377 / E-ISSN: 1918-6983
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books  
ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Children’s Literature ISSN: 0092-8208 / E-ISSN: 1543-3374
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly ISSN: 0885-0429 / E-ISSN: 1553-1201
The Lion and the Unicorn ISSN: 0147-2593 / E-ISSN: 1080-6563
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
December 2015
Vol. 69 No. 4
181  the BIg PICture
 
  Toys Meet Snow: Being the Wintertime Adventures of a Curious Stuffed  
Buffalo, a Sensitive Plush Stingray, and a Book-Loving Rubber Ball    
by Emily Jenkins; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky
182  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
182 •  The Green Bicycle  by Haifaa Al Mansour
184 •  The Thing about Jellyfish  by Ali Benjamin
215 •  Dear Santa, Love, Rachel Rosenstein by Amanda Peet and Andrea Troyer; 
illus. by Christine Davenier
216 •  Samurai Santa: A Very Ninja Christmas  written and illus.  
by Rubin Pingk
218 •  How to Catch Santa by Jean Reagan; illus. by Lee Wildish
233  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
234  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $108.00 or electronic $120.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2015 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Toys Meet Snow: Being the Wintertime Adventures of a Curious Stuffed Buffalo, a 
Sensitive Plush Stingray, and a Book-Loving Rubber Ball © 2015 by Paul O. Zelinsky and used by 
permission of Schwartz & Wade Books.
December 2015 • 181
the BIg PICture
Toys Meet Snow: Being the Wintertime Adven-
tures of a Curious Stuffed Buffalo, a Sen-
sitive Plush Stingray, and a Book-Loving 
Rubber Ball
by Emily Jenkins; illustrated by Paul O. Zelinsky
There is perennial pleasure to be had in stories of toys come to life, and fans of 
Jenkins’ Toys Go Out (BCCB 11/06), its sequel, Toy Dance Party, and its prequel, 
Toys Come Home, already know and love stuffed buffalo Lumphy, plush StingRay, 
and Plastic (a rubber ball). Now Jenkins and Zelinsky bring these appealing char-
acters, previously appearing in longer works for reading alone or aloud in sections, 
to a new audience with this classic picture-book format tale.
In this outing, the trio of toys sneaks outside to experience their first 
snow while their owner, the Little Girl, is away on winter vacation. Two of the 
three require a bit of preparation before heading out—Lumphy pulls on a mitten 
“hat” to keep warm while dry-clean-only StingRay dons a plastic baggie to stay 
dry—but the cheerfully all-weather Plastic “just goes natural.” After some perse-
verant teamwork to open the front door, they make it out into the snow, where 
inquisitive Lumphy asks lots of questions about the white stuff (“What do you think 
snow is exactly?”). StingRay answers in her airily confident and fanciful way (“It’s 
a blanket of peace over the world”), but bibliophile Plastic, ever the pragmatist, 
takes a more literal view of Lumphy’s inquiries (“No, it’s frozen water. I read it 
in a book”). Their two different perspectives are both, in fact, true, as Zelinsky’s 
stunning and imaginative pictures make clear. Together the toys wonder as they 
wander, inspecting snowflakes at close range, building a snowman (with great 
difficulty—after the trio manages to stack two balls of snow for the body, Plastic 
perches on top to briefly be the head), creating snow angels, and discovering ice as 
well as snow. After a breathtaking sunset makes even Plastic wax poetic, the pals 
head indoors and snuggle together while Lumphy diligently records their activities 
with crayon and paper. 
The trio will be greeted as friends by those familiar with previous titles, 
but familiarity isn’t necessary in order to enjoy and appreciate this gentle adventure. 
The varying personalities of the toys are pithily and amusingly expressed through 
their entertaining dialogue (bossy, dry-clean-only StingRay commands the others to 
“Poke me some air holes” in her plastic baggie, for example), and the contemplative 
tone of the storytelling suits the snow-hushed world that the toys are exploring. 
The large format allows Zelinsky’s digital illustrations to, delightfully, take 
center stage. Muted turquoise blues, grays, browns, and beiges set off the blurry, 
182 • The bulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
pristine white of the falling snow, while red and pink accents (including the cherry-
colored Plastic) punch up the quieter tones. The soft smudginess of the figures 
and the snowy landscape are deftly accented with crisper, pencil-like lines that add 
supportive structure to the painterly soft-focus pictures. Inventive compositions 
effectively intersperse close-up views, sometimes with unusual perspectives (viewers 
often see the scene from behind the toys, for instance), with broader perspective 
tableaus and multi-panel scenes. Particularly winning is the sequence of panels 
that depict the struggle to open the front door, as Lumphy repeatedly attempts 
to balance on Plastic while turning the door handle; success is finally achieved, 
but it also results in Lumphy cartwheeling backwards in midair, limbs splayed, as 
Stingray slithers under the door, Plastic rolls to the side, and snow blows inward. 
This would make a charming gift for both newcomers to the series and 
fans of the previous books. It would also be a snug snow-day read, or (if school 
stubbornly stays in session) a fun way to break up a bleak winter day and perhaps 
inspire some creative writing, art projects, or outdoor exploration. (See p. 203 for 
publication information.)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer
Al MAnsour, HAifAA The Green Bicycle. Dial, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42806-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
At eleven, Wadjda is old enough to be aware of the strictures on women and girls 
in her hometown of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. She’s a rebel, however, engaging in en-
trepreneurial wheeling and dealing at school (mainly reselling snacks for a profit) 
and reveling in competition with her friend Abdullah, whose bicycle she desperately 
envies. When a beautiful green bicycle comes up for sale at a nearby shop, she’s 
determined to buy it, despite its being inappropriate for a girl, and the only way 
she can earn the money is to go completely against character, become a diligent 
student, and win the 1000-riyal prize in the Quran Recitation Competition. Based 
on the author’s prize-winning film Wadjda, this novel has a cinematic sense of 
place; the details of Saudi life—heat, delicious food, working women’s reliance on 
drivers to get them to work, the difference between the public and private worlds 
for women—are vividly evoked. Wadjda is charismatic without being a clichéd 
figure, and her impulsivity and her failure to defend her school friends at a key 
moment—their grappling to hide forbidden objects under each other’s clothes is 
December 2015 • 183
perceived as a lesbian embrace—make her realistically flawed. Though the story 
starts slowly, it’s accessibly written and stealthily gripping, and the subplot about 
her mother’s growing desperation in her marriage complements Wadjda’s own 
experience, making this a tale of a girl and a mother who adore each other and 
inspire each other in unexpected ways.  DS
AlpHin, ToM The Lego® Architect. No Starch, 2015 186p illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-1-59327-613-3 $24.95  
R* Gr. 4-12 
There is certainly no shortage of idea books for Lego creations, but while most 
sort into either aspirational or playable toy categories, Alphin’s well-organized and 
beautifully photographed title takes a different tack. Seven main chapters are devoted 
to architectural styles: Neoclassicism, Prairie, Art Deco, Modernism, Brutalism, 
Postmodern, and High-Tech. Each begins with a discussion of the style itself and 
offers photos of actual iconic buildings; next come plastic brick models based on 
the style; the chapter concludes with step-by-step directions for a simple model. 
Alphin’s directions not only emphasize the look of the style but even venture oc-
casionally into construction mechanics, with variant curtain-wall facades attaching 
to a load-bearing central core. All directions include the number and type of bricks 
required, and Alphin notes that although many of the models can be constructed 
with the Lego Architecture Studio set, practiced builders will probably be able to 
ransack their bins for necessary parts. Lego enthusiasts will appreciate finding this in 
the library collection and may also want to add this to their holiday wish lists.  EB
Anderson, Jodi lynn My Diary from the Edge of the World. Aladdin, 
2015 419p
ISBN 978-1-4424-8387-3 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Imagine a world where all of the creatures from myth and folklore are real, and 
they pose clear and present dangers to the humans who inhabit it. Humans adapt 
by building tunnels in which to get around during dragon migration season and 
using underwater mirrors to discourage mermaids and sea serpents from getting 
too close to shore. This is Gracie Lockwood’s world. Her father fervently believes 
in a parallel existence where things like this don’t happen, so when a Cloud, which 
is a harbinger of death that hangs around until its victim is taken up into it, starts 
hovering over their home, he is determined to outrun it. Accompanied by Oscar, 
a schoolmate of Gracie’s whose parents have been killed by sasquatches, the family 
takes off from Connecticut to points west in a Winnebago. Their first stop is the 
mountains of West Virginia to get advice from Gracie’s grandmother, who is a 
witch. From there, the trip is fraught with wonders and perils, all related in diary 
form by Gracie, whose burgeoning self-awareness and appreciation of her family 
is as much as part of the story as the road trip itself. While there are some loose 
ends in the plot that never get tied up, the draw here is Gracie’s vibrant, relatable 
voice and her offhand remarks about the world that is so close to but not at all like 
the one we live in. Fans of Ingrid Law’s Savvy and its sequels (BCCB 9/08, etc.) 
will enjoy this.  KC
184 • The bulleTin
ApplegATe, KATHerine Crenshaw. Feiwel, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-250-04323-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Rising fifth-grader Jackson prefers fact to fancy, so he’s alarmed when he sees an 
oversized talking cat, which is invisible to everyone else. Jackson recognizes the 
feline as the long-lost imaginary pal he once dubbed Crenshaw, who previously 
appeared when Jackson’s family briefly became homeless and lived in their van. 
Along with Crenshaw’s appearance there are other signs that the family is headed 
for trouble again: Jackson’s multiple sclerosis–stricken father and his mother sell 
many of the family’s possessions, and there is less and less food in the cupboards. 
Crenshaw begins to be a source of comfort and guidance, especially when the cat 
urges Jackson to ask his parents about their situation. Jackson’s family situation 
highlights the ways in which families can be one diagnosis or job cut away from 
financial and emotional heartbreak; the hopeful but realistic resolution (Dad finds 
part-time work and the family finds temporary housing arrangement) gives readers 
enough of a happy ending to satisfy while still remaining credible. Unfortunately, the 
character of Crenshaw, while original, never gets past being a gimmick; his relent-
lessly larger-than-life persona wears thin in the face of Jackson’s serious problems 
and sometimes jarringly interrupts the flow of the story’s arc. Still, the imaginary-
friend concept and mysterious big cat on the book’s cover might draw readers into 
the story, and those who stick with it may gain a new perspective on hardship.  JH
BenJAMin, Ali The Thing about Jellyfish. Little, 2015 399p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-38086-7 $17.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-38083-6 $9.99  
R Gr. 5-7
Suzanne has gone almost entirely silent since the death of her friend Franny last 
summer, but her feelings are complicated: she and Franny had grown apart as Franny 
joined the popular crowd. Suzanne also resists the notion that her friend, a decent 
swimmer, could have drowned without explanation, and she fixes on the notion 
that Franny was stung by a jellyfish. Her seventh-grade science project provides 
the perfect opportunity for her to dive deeper into her obsession with jellyfish 
(“Jellyfish are survivors. They are survivors of everything that ever happened to 
anyone else”), as flashbacks provide witness to her and Franny’s friendship and its 
erosion. Suzanne is clearly mourning all kinds of loss—the breakup of her parents, 
her rejection by Franny, as well as Franny’s death—and her grief and desperation 
make her sympathetic. She’s also plausibly angry and palpably out of step in her 
social interactions, though, so readers will see Suzanne and Franny’s changing 
relationship as the complex situation it was, and Benjamin makes it clear that 
Franny was not simply the villain who left her friend behind. It’s a satisfying touch 
that science isn’t just a target for sublimation but also, along with new friends, a 
source of comfort for Suzanne (“If we each had 20 billion of Shakespeare’s atoms 
in us . . . we must have Franny’s atoms in us too”), making this a science-focused 
counterpart to Arnold’s spiritually focused A Question of Miracles (BCCB 2/15).  DS
December 2015 • 185
Bow, erin The Scorpion Rules. McElderry, 2015 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4271-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4273-2 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
The world is so much better since an artificial intelligence named Talis stepped in to 
save humans from their own stupid selves, which he explains with sharp humor and 
world-weary wit in the prologue to this intriguing dystopia. In the 400 years since 
Talis made humans behave, things have been relatively peaceful and productive, 
though limited resources and human’s warlike natures keep tensions high. There’s 
a price to battling now, however, in that all regions must submit a beloved child 
who will die if a government declares war. Greta is one of those children, carefully 
following the dictates of the quiet enclave where such kids are kept. Then a new 
teen arrives who breaks the rules, accepts the punishments, and continues to chal-
lenge his society, both as a person selected to serve as war bounty and as a citizen 
of a planet that is imperfect even with a benevolent overlord. Suddenly Greta can’t 
go back to moving in bland ways, and her new realization leads to rebellion and 
an acknowledgment of her love for her roommate, the brilliant Xie, who returns 
Greta’s affection. Political, social, and romantic passions are all effectively devel-
oped, both in Talis who really does think he is in the right, and in the teens, who 
slowly but steadily awaken to the potential individuals might have to change the 
world. Teens in the know about AI will find this tantalizingly, albeit horrifyingly, 
close to reality, and they’ll revel in pointing out real-life examples where our robot 
overlords have already taken over key government/global operations.  AS
Brown, don Aaron and Alexander: The Most Famous Duel in American History; 
written and illus. by Don Brown. Roaring Brook, 2015
ISBN 978-1-59643-998-6 $17.99 
 R Gr. 2-4
“Aaron and Alexander could have been friends. They were alike in many ways. 
But the ways in which they were different made them the worst of enemies.” 
With that simple, direct statement, Brown proceeds to rip the rug out from under 
elementary-schoolers who assume the Founding Fathers—here Vice President Aaron 
Burr and Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton are cases in point—belong 
on marble pedestals. Both orphans, both raised by estimable guardians, both well 
educated, both ambitious, both dedicated to the Colonies’ independence, Burr and 
Hamilton might have teamed up at the Nation’s founding. Instead, the rise of the 
two-party system found them in opposite corners, exchanging jabs through the 
press (Hamilton’s, Brown observes, were especially vitriolic), and ultimately facing 
off at gunpoint to defend their challenged honor. This battle of words and ideas, 
carried out by a couple of guys in high-waisted coats and knee breeches, would 
seem to hold little promise for replay in a picture book, but Brown keeps the visuals 
lively with his keen sense of irony and flair for capturing pathos and bombast with 
the turn of a lip line or the elevation of an eyebrow. The book closes on a perfect 
note: survivor Burr regretfully states, “I should have known the world was wide 
enough for Hamilton and me,” leaving readers to ponder how many reputations 
and would-be friendships are crushed under the weight of arrogance and public 
attention. An author’s note and bibliography are included.  EB
186 • The bulleTin
Brown, MonicA Lola Levine Is Not Mean!; illus. by Angela Dominguez. Little, 
2015 [96p]
ISBN 978-0-316-25836-4 $15.00
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-3
Lola Levine really isn’t mean; she’s just very competitive and and single-minded in 
her love of soccer. When she and her classmates are playing a game one afternoon, 
she takes out her friend Juan with a slide tackle that ends up injuring his ankle and 
earns her the name Mean Lola Levine. Banned from playing any more sports by 
the principal and shunned by most of her friends, Lola feels terrible, but her initial 
attempts to make amends are met with further hostility. A discussion with her 
family bolsters her self-esteem, though, and her loyal best friend and mischievous 
but loving little brother support her until all is forgiven on the soccer playing field. 
Lola’s personality shines through here, with a vibrant first-person narration that 
matches her energetic spirit. Her Peruvian and Jewish heritage is also on full display, 
with Lola’s entries in her diario telling some of the story, and cultural references 
such as bubbe, tía, flan, and matzo ball soup peppered through out the narrative. 
Perhaps most refreshing, however, is her family’s unwavering support—they see 
her competitive nature as a good thing rather than a character flaw that needs to be 
fixed, and while they (and Lola) concede that the slide tackle was rough, they also 
believe her when she says she is genuinely sorry. Plentiful dialogue, short chapters, 
and black and white illustrations (featuring a diverse cast) that break up the text 
make this an easy choice for transitional readers.  KQG
Brown, Teri Velvet Undercover. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232127-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232129-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 7-10
After graduating from Great Britain’s Girl Guides during World War I, seventeen-
year-old Samantha Donaldson, who has a knack for puzzles and codes as well as a 
brilliant intellect, is recruited by MI5. The military brass invites her to join the secret 
spy organization La Dame Blanche, with the promise that if she accepts the posi-
tion they’ll find information about her missing diplomat father. Her first mission’s 
a doozy, though: infiltrate Kaiser Wilhelm’s palace and locate and extract Velvet, 
a spy who had a lead on Germany’s possible development of a deadly weapon but 
who has now seemingly vanished. With little information to go on and only the 
barest of training, Sam finds herself in a veritable hornet’s nest of political intrigue, 
surrounded by people who are not what they seem and a situation that is not nearly 
as cut and dried as she was led to believe. A vividly drawn picture of life during 
World War I, both in Britain and Germany, serves as a backdrop to this edgy, taut 
thriller. Sam’s character arc is entirely believable: encouraged by her father that she’s 
got the brains to do anything, she’s a cocky hotshot during training, but in the field 
she begins to realize that the very real complications of espionage demand more 
than her burgeoning skills. Readers may spot Velvet quicker than Sam does, but 
Brown executes a spy trick of her own, distracting her audience with a red herring 
until the real story behind Sam’s mission is revealed. Sam’s romance with a palace 
guard adds some amount of lightness and hope to this wartime tale, so readers 
looking for a slightly more optimistic historical thriller than Wein’s Code Name 
Verity (BCCB 6/12) will find it here.  KQG
December 2015 • 187
cArleson, J. c. Placebo Junkies. Knopf, 2015 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49725-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49724-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49726-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Audie broke free from her foster-care, minimum-wage-job, 
homeless-teen life to become a full-time lab rat, signing up for as many clinical trials 
of experimental drugs and cosmetics as she can endure. In addition to meeting her 
own living expenses, she’s saving up for the trip of a lifetime with her boyfriend, 
Dylan, who is recovering from cancer. When her friend Charlotte suggests that 
they max out their participation by gaming the system for a big payday before 
quitting and moving on, Audie’s in. Charlotte dies, and Audie is forced to face 
some uncomfortable truths, like the fact that maybe she doesn’t really do all those 
drug trials for real money, and that maybe, just maybe, she’s in a psych ward, and 
the drugs she’s testing have a return to reality as an unfortunate side effect. As the 
lines between Audie’s reality and her delusions fuzz, so does the ethical simplicity 
of the novel: on the one hand, human trials are necessary for the development of 
new medications and products, but on the other hand, using people who are not 
necessarily in full command of their mental faculties smacks of the worst kind of 
exploitation. Carleson keeps the situation nicely ambiguous through Audie’s razor-
sharp interrogation of a dissatisfying real life played off against the empowerment, 
community, and enjoyment she feels in her delusions. Any reader desire for moral 
simplicity will fade in light of the discussions that will no doubt be sparked by 
Audie’s personal dilemma, as well as by readers’ own use of products and medica-
tions that had to be tested on somebody before they came to market.  KC 
cArson, rAe Walk on Earth a Stranger. Greenwillow/HarperCollins, 
2015 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224291-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224293-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Carson, best known for her fantasy, dips into the Old West here but brings a bit of 
supernatural ability to the mix. Leah can sense the presence of gold, easily finding it 
in the ground, and her family is hiding a sturdy amount until they can find a way 
to sell it discreetly. After her parents are murdered and the gold stolen, Leah escapes 
from her only remaining relative, a sinister uncle, and determines to make her own 
life, ignoring assumptions about women’s limited abilities as she always has. News 
of the gold rush is just making its way east, and when Leah gets word, she leaves 
her Georgia home and heads west, joining a scrappy group of travelers and hoping 
to catch up with her crush, a half-Cherokee boy who left a few days earlier. For the 
most part, Carson does nice work adding nuance to her side characters, showing 
minor evolutions that challenge the racism, sexism, and classism deeply rooted in 
most of the people Leah encounters. If Leah’s reveal as a girl after pretending to be 
a young man most of the trip is accepted a bit too readily, it can be forgiven as a 
result of Leah just being so darn useful to people. While the approach to historical 
fact is freewheeling, fantasy readers will likely find Leah and her gold-sensing core 
to be intriguingly different than the usual heroine. An author’s note describes some 
wording choices and a bit of personal context.  AS
188 • The bulleTin
cHupeco, rin The Suffering. Sourcebooks Fire, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-4926-2983-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-10
In this startling, impressive sequel to The Girl from the Well (BCCB 12/14), Tark, 
freed from the demon who haunted him, remains close to Okiku, the vengeful but 
vulnerable Japanese teen girl ghost who keeps him safe. Okiku’s blood lust dooms 
only those who truly deserve it, and Tark and Okiku go on frequent Dexter-style 
missions around DC to destroy otherwise ordinary-looking men who are dragging 
around ghost children. Tark tries not to spend much time wondering about his 
feelings for the centuries-old, very dead Okiku, and instead he flirts, goes to high 
school, and tries to stay out of legal trouble (given the nighttime killing of bad guys). 
When an old pal goes missing in Japan, they travel there to seek her in an ancient 
forest that holds horrifying secrets. Chupeco smoothly catches readers up on the 
complex series of events that landed Okiku and Tark together, and both get subtle, 
elegant character development here that elevates their personalities. Okiku’s disgust 
with the horrible events that took place in the Japanese forest pushes her morality 
off the very tenuous track on which it already rests; the resulting tension is palpable 
as the book explores the way she views herself and the possibility that Tark may 
not be able to save her from her own darkness. It’s an unexpectedly complex bit of 
philosophical musing about how damaged is too damaged, so offer this to ghost 
and horror fans who appreciate sharp intelligence woven into their narratives.  AS
coccA-leffler, MAryAnn A Homemade Together Christmas; written and illus. by 
Maryann Cocca-Leffler. Whitman, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-3366-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
When his big sister, Rosie, suggests that the family make homemade Christmas gifts 
this year, little pig Luca is excited, but none of his ideas—origami, honey granola, 
a snow bear—turn out well. On Christmas Eve, his mom assures him that spend-
ing time together is the best gift of all, but Luca still wants to give something. His 
mother’s comments spark a new plan: he uses his origami rejects, the empty honey 
jar, and the snow bear’s scarf to make a jar of “365 Days of Together To-Dos” for 
his family. On Christmas morning, Rosie pulls out the first “To Do”—“Watch the 
sunrise from the porch”—and the pigs do just that, wrapped in Dad’s homemade 
family blanket, eating Momma’s homemade pancakes and listening to Rosie’s spe-
cially composed Christmas song. This thoughtful text is a winsome ode to the joys 
of creating and of sharing holiday time with loved ones. Kids who balk at creative 
endeavors may particularly relate to Luca’s dilemma—and may find some practi-
cal inspiration in the family’s gift ideas. Cocca-Leffler’s warm artwork is crisply 
presented against the white space, and judicious use of patterns (the red plaid of a 
patch on Luca’s pants, the black and white checks of Dad’s shirt) and small details 
(Luca’s drawings of a superhero pig on his wall) add to the homey appeal. Add this 
to a holiday storytime lineup (possibly followed by a gift-making craft session) or 
use it to inspire some homemade family gift-giving.  JH
December 2015 • 189
colfer, eoin The Forever Man. Hyperion, 2015 339p (W. A. R. P.)
ISBN 978-1-4847-2603-7 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-10
You can’t keep a good villain down, as proven by Albert Garrick, the Victorian 
assassin and dastardly foe from the previous installments of Colfer’s W.A.R.P. 
series (The Reluctant Assassin, BCCB 6/13, et al.). He returns from near-death-
by-wormhole with two goals: to wreak maximum tribulation on his charge, Riley, 
and to dominate the universe. Unexpected consequences of time travel have put 
Garrick, Riley, and FBI teen consultant Chevron Savano in a rural region of 1647 
England, where Garrick had previously established a reputation as a witch hunter. 
What better place to stage his ultimate act of vengeance, forcing Riley to watch 
his dear (and now beloved) friend Chevron horrifically executed as a witch, before 
Garrick unleashes hordes of beasts and mutants through a rift in the wormhole 
and becoming master of a truly warped dominion. Of course, that’s not going to 
happen, but readers will enjoy one heckuva ride as another FBI agent and his dog-
man partner (unfortunate mutation, long story), who protect time travel inventor 
Charles Smart (or, more precisely, his revenant), step in to seal the rift and save 
the day. The friendship between Riley and Chevie has been steadily growing into 
something stronger, and their prospects for a long-term relationship take a sweet 
but unsettling turn here. Romantics can close the book’s back cover with hopeful 
glimpse into their adult future, but action fans will cling to the hope that another 
adventure waits in the wings for this pair.  EB
collins, renee Until We Meet Again. Sourcebooks Fire, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4926-2116-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Dragged off to a wealthy oceanside town for the summer, brooding Cassandra 
forgoes garden parties for petty crime. Lawrence chafes under his father’s control-
ling ways, desperately wanting to become a poet rather than the lawyer his father 
envisions. The lives of the two teens are separated by nearly one hundred years, but 
a cosmic glitch allows them to meet on a stretch of beach near their house (rented 
by Cassandra in 2015, and home of Lawrence in 1925). Romance inevitably blos-
soms, but when Cassandra learns from an old newspaper article that Lawrence 
ends up murdered just a few days after they meet, she becomes intent on saving 
him. Cassandra and Lawrence are charming in their separate chapters; a wry wit 
gives strength to Cassandra’s voice, while Lawrence manages to be both cocky and 
vulnerable, with amusing 1920s slang seasoning his narration. Unfortunately, 
when they get together, their personalities dissolve into vanilla blandness and their 
declarations of love are both melodramatic and generic, taking much of the life out 
of the novel. The twist behind Lawrence’s death, however, sets in motion a series 
of intriguing events that will compel the reader forward, and the conclusion may 
appeal to readers of romantic mysteries.  KQG 
coy, JoHn Game Changer: John McLendon and the Secret Game; illus. by Randy 
DuBurke. Carolrhoda, 2015 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2604-7 $17.99  
Ad 6-9 yrs
In North Carolina, 1944, Jim Crow laws against “race mixing” meant that no playoff 
system existed to determine, definitively, whether the black powerhouse team of 
190 • The bulleTin
North Carolina College for Negroes could best the nationally acclaimed basketball 
players from Duke. A clandestine match-up, now dubbed “The Secret Game,” 
would answer the immediate question but would also become anti-segregation 
legend. Coy adheres closely to Scott Ellsworth’s description of the game, recounted 
in his 1996 New York Times article, which Coy cites in a selected bibliography. 
Audiences watch the Duke players hustle across town in the early hours of a Sun-
day morning and sneak into the NCC gym, with its doors promptly locked. The 
nervous players stumble through the opening plays, and then hit their stride and 
have such a good time (88 to 44, NCC) that they stick around for a second game: 
shirts and skins, with the two teams mixed. It’s a great story, as far as it goes, but 
Coy’s omission of background leaves readers wondering just how this game was 
ever organized, and why it was Duke’s medical school students rather than the 
Blue Devils who took on NCC. DeBurke’s mixed-media illustrations, with their 
muted colors and grainy photorealism, are a fine complement to the text, and the 
manual typewriter–styled font cleverly underscores this “report” from the past. 
Pair this with Raven’s Let Them Play (BCCB 2/06) for a readaloud on teams who 
challenged segregation.  EB
crAnse, prATiMA All the Major Constellations. Viking, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01645-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
For years, Andrew has confided everything except his obsession with the beautiful, 
unattainable Laura to his two best friends, Sara and Marcia. When Sara ends up 
in a coma after a car accident, eighteen-year-old Marcia camps out at the hospi-
tal, but Andrew is set adrift and soon finds himself being welcomed into Laura’s 
Christian youth group. Andrew has never been a believer, but he does experience 
some comfort and otherworldly presence as they pray; soon, though, he disrupts the 
group, outing one of the boys and having sex with one of the girls, more in anger 
and frustration than desire. Left to deal with his problems mostly on his own, he 
returns to Marcia, who needs him as much as he needs her. There’s a fair bit of YA 
literature situational box-checking here, but enough moments of genuine emotion 
break through the stereotypes to generate engagement and genuine insight. Cranse 
has a keen ear for dialogue and an equally sharp eye for the unspoken tensions in 
family and friendship dynamics. Her world building includes a ripped-from-the-
headlines subplot about Andrew’s homophobic jock brother, who is accused and 
acquitted of the rape of a prostitute with his buddies, providing an opportunity for 
Andrew to demonstrate his capacity for forgiveness and open-mindedness beyond 
that of the Christian friends he leaves behind. Give this to fans of skilled heartfelt 
YA by the likes of David Levithan and John Green.  KC 
crossAn, sArAH One. Greenwillow/HarperCollins, 2015 393p
ISBN 978-0-06-211875-2 $17.99  
R* Gr. 7-10
“Normal is the Holy Grail/ and only those without it/ know its value,” says Grace, 
who’s been conjoined to her twin, Tippi, since birth and who is embarking on 
her first experience of school with other teens now as a junior. Much to the girls’ 
surprise, they find good friends at school, friends who engage in some teenaged 
vices that Tippi in particular enjoys. Grace begins to think about one of the crew, 
Jon, romantically, though she knows a relationship would be a difficult thing. The 
family hits a bump when their mother loses the job that’s keeping the household 
December 2015 • 191
afloat, so Grace and Tippi finally agree to be filmed for a reality show that will pay 
them well; that’s the least of their problems, though, when they discover that Grace 
has serious heart problems that mean the girls must undergo dangerous separation 
surgery, a procedure that Grace quite possibly won’t survive. This verse novel takes 
what could be a sensationalistic topic and turns it into a tender yet resilient story of 
closeness and identity. It’s a nice touch that the narration is only Grace’s, making it 
one of the few things she doesn’t share with headstrong Tippi, and the book creates 
additional complexity with the portrait of the girls’ financially struggling family and 
the very human, cliché-averting reality-TV producer. Mostly, though, it’s a story 
of Grace, who’s built her entire identity and existence on being entwined with her 
sister and who now contemplates what it would mean to be a single person. This 
will be great discussion-bait, and you can start by asking readers to interpret the 
cleverly ambiguous title.  DS
crowder, MelAnie A Nearer Moon. Atheneum, 2015 150p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4148-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4150-6 $10.99  
R Gr. 4-6
When Luna’s little sister, Willow, gets a mouthful of water from the local swamp, 
the girls know Willow is in trouble; the water is known to cause a wasting sickness 
that lasts for three weeks and ends in death. While Luna desperately seeks a cure 
for the sickness, another narrative unfolds: in an earlier time, an adventurous young 
water sprite, Perdy, seeks to explore as much of the human world as she can before 
her people leave for a new realm unspoiled by humans. Perdy’s sister, Gia, gives the 
ever-wandering Perdy a magical locket that will call Perdy back to Gia when the 
sprites leave the human world behind, but Perdy loses the locket before the critical 
moment. As Luna’s story continues, it becomes clear that there’s a link between 
miserable Perdy and the dangerous swamp water, and in the end, it’s up to Luna 
to make a sacrifice that may both save Willow and free Perdy. Crowder writes with 
a pleasantly understated lyricism, and there is real emotional resonance to both 
Luna’s and Perdy’s stories. The connections between the two interwoven narratives 
are effective in their gradual revelation to readers, and the increasing urgency of 
the pacing will keep readers absorbed until the end. Luna’s relationship with her 
mother—who, in her own grief, seems to blame Luna for Willow’s illness—is also 
poignantly articulated. This would make a bonding family readaloud, and kids 
who prefer their fairy stories with a bit of realism thrown in will take to this like a 
sprite to a crystalline river.  JH
cuevAs, MicHelle Confessions of an Imaginary Friend: A Memoir by Jacques Pa-
pier. Dial, 2015 168p
ISBN 978-0-525-42755-1 $16.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Jacques Papier enjoys his life with his twin sister/best bud, Fleur, his easygoing 
parents, and even François, their pet “evil wiener dog.” It is something of a shock 
to him, then, to discover that it is all a lie and that he is Fleur’s imaginary friend 
rather than a flesh-and-blood person. While stumbling through his existential 
identity crisis, Jacques makes the acquaintance of several other imaginary friends 
(who helpfully hold support group meetings), one of whom tells him that if Fleur 
lets him go, he can be free. It turns out to be not quite that simple—there’s actually 
a surprising amount of paperwork involved—and Jacques ends up being reassigned 
192 • The bulleTin
multiple times to various children. Although some of his new assignments are ac-
tually satisfying, Jacques eventually casts caution to the wind at the reassignment 
office and refuses to be reassigned. This bold step results in his going into a long, 
hazy dormancy, until he reawakens to learn he’s been imagined anew as a Dragon 
Herring (part dragon, part fish) by Fleur’s little sister, Felice. Jacques’ first-person 
narration is both hilariously droll and keenly touching in the way that it explores 
themes of childhood, imagination, and identity. His angst about being invisible 
(“The truth is, that’s all anyone wants, to be known that way, to be seen”) and the 
bittersweetness of moving from childhood to adolescence will ring poignantly true 
with many middle graders. This would make a funny, thought-provoking family or 
classroom readaloud selection, or an interesting contrast to Applegate’s Crenshaw 
(reviewed above).  JH
dAnTicAT, edwidge Untwine. Scholastic, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-42303-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-84331-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
A split second changes Giselle’s identity as well as her life when a van hits the fam-
ily car, seriously injures Giselle and her parents, and kills Giselle’s identical twin, 
Isabelle. It takes days for sixteen-year-old Giselle to come back to full conscious-
ness in the hospital and to understand that her twin has died (in fact, the hospital 
initially mistakes her for Isabelle in the confusion), but as she inches her way back 
toward health, she must face the fact that her life will never return to what it was. 
The book effectively follows the deliberate and grief-burdened tempo of a narrator 
dealing with physical and familial loss simultaneously, punctuating the narrative 
with heartbreaking truths about Giselle’s experience (“I know exactly what I look 
like dead,” says Giselle at her sister’s funeral. “I look like Isabelle”). Cursed with 
little to distract her, Giselle understandably dives deep into memories of her sister 
as well as tortured explorations of what her life means without her twin and what 
the effect will be on her close-knit but sometimes mercurial Haitian-American 
family. The book goes off the rails into melodrama with a subplot about the girl 
who drove the van, but this is still an affecting story of a twin going on alone. Start 
teens on this and then tell them to follow with Arcos’ There Will Come a Time 
(BCCB 6/14) for an account of the aftermath.  DS
dAvis, KenT A Riddle in Ruby. Greenwillow/HarperCollins, 2015 425p
ISBN 978-0-06-236834-8 $17.99  
R Gr. 4-6
In this alternative history, chemystry—ostensibly alchemy—rules politics, academ-
ics, and the everyday lives of commoners in 1718 Europe and the colonies in the 
New World. Ruby Teach, thief, smuggler, and pirate’s daughter, has no real use 
for magic or science, relying instead on her wit and stealth to get whatever goods 
she’s after. Her cleverness, however, is no match for the Royal Navy when sailors 
board her father’s ship looking for some mysterious cargo. The crew hastily locks 
Ruby up in a secret compartment, along with Lord Athen, who has also taken a 
recent interest in Ruby and her father. When it becomes clear that the ship has 
been abandoned, Ruby, Athen, and his servant make their way to Philadelphi 
(yes, without the final a), where Ruby makes a few shocking discoveries, namely 
that her father is not who he says he is, Lord Athen is a girl, and several secret 
December 2015 • 193
societies are after Ruby for . . . well, something. This action-packed adventure 
doesn’t leave much room for world building, but readers are unlikely to notice as 
they bound from one danger to the next with Ruby and pals, narrowly escaping 
bloodthirsty mechanical dogs; a terrifying, maniacal scarred man; and a haughty 
master of chemystry (to name just a few). As a series opener, this introduces the 
players but not their motivations, the place but not its secrets, and the problem 
with seemingly no easy answers—all ensuring that readers will happily jump on 
board the promised sequel.  KQG 
de los sAnTos, MArisA Connect the Stars; by Marisa de los Santos and David 
Teague. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 341p
ISBN 978-0-06-227465-6 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Thirteen-year old Audrey can tell whenever anyone lies— an “un-superpower” 
that has led her to shut herself off from the possibility of friends. Aaron has a 
preternatural memory, which allows him to recall verbatim information he has 
seen or heard. When their uncanny abilities lead to alienating experiences at their 
respective schools, Audrey and Aaron welcome their enrollment in wilderness 
camp, where they meet and find both bullies and kindred spirits with whom they 
cooperate and compete in Survivor-type challenges. The desert setting of the wil-
derness camp, rendered here with awe and respect, makes an effective, evocative 
background for their internal journeys, where Audrey must learn that people have 
reasons for the lies they tell, while Aaron must go beyond facts to understand feel-
ings. de los Santos and Teague (Saving Lucas Biggs, BCCB 7/14) again make big 
philosophical questions approachable and meaningful, creating a poignant novel 
that grapples with the variety of struggles people face and the beauty of embracing 
life and friendship anyway.  AA
deeM, JAMes M. The Prisoners of Breendonk: Personal Histories from a World War 
II Concentration Camp; illus. with photographs by Leon Nolis et al. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 340p
ISBN 978-0-544-09664-6 $18.99  
R Gr. 10 up
Breendonk, just outside of Antwerp in Belgium, was one of the smaller and lesser-
known concentration camps, but the experiences of those who lived and died there 
are no less tragic for that. Deem traces the camp through many of its inhabitants, 
describing with meticulous care Breendonk’s emergence as a repository for Belgian 
Jews, for refugee Jews fleeing Germany, and for troublesome or Nazi-unfriendly 
Belgians; as the war went on, the camp also became a way station for prisoners who 
were than transported east en masse to concentration camps such as Mauthausen or 
Auschwitz-Birkenau. While this is not the oral history the subtitle might suggest, 
the book keeps individuals at the fore, describing their families and origins, resisting 
the dehumanization the camp demanded while still telling heartbreaking tales of 
torture, atrocities, and murder. The thoroughness here is an act of testimony and also 
a recognition of complexities—that Jewish Zugführers, heads of the barracks rooms, 
tortured and abused other Jews, that gentile resistance fighters were sometimes also 
anti-Semites, that some thieves were heroes—and Deem follows those who figure 
large in the Breendonk story to the sometimes savagely bitter end, chronicling 
the destinies of transports carrying Breendonk prisoners. The result is startlingly 
illuminating: the relevant factors and factions are all clearly laid out in context, 
and the tight focus on Breendonk means the horror remains at a comprehensible 
194 • The bulleTin
scale while still being part of a cataclysmic larger whole. Additional information 
is plentiful and well placed, with a glossary up front and maps throughout, while 
period images from an imprisoned artist, Nazi photographs, and other sources 
interweave with contemporary black and white photography. An afterword listing 
the fates of many prisoners and their families, source notes, a detailed bibliography 
and list of archival materials, and an index are included.  DS
derBy, sAlly Jump Back, Paul: The Life and Poems of Paul Laurence Dunbar; illus. 
by Sean Qualls. Candlewick, 2015 122p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6071-3 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-9
Though Paul Laurence Dunbar’s best-known contemporary legacy is probably the 
poetic line “I know why the caged bird sings,” popularized by Maya Angelou’s mem-
oir, he was a pioneering and influential African-American poet who, at the turn of 
the century, mastered poetry in both formal diction and faithfully notated dialect. 
Derby, a native of Dunbar’s hometown of Dayton, Ohio, opts to narrate with the 
lively folksy persona of a grandmother as she describes Dunbar’s early promise, his 
relationship with his loyal patron, his growing fame, and his tragically early death. 
The style is a little mannered at times and occasionally glosses over challenging 
details, but the book effectively and compactly treats key aspects of Dunbar’s life 
and work, generously lacing the text with examples of Dunbar’s poetry and giving 
special attention to the implications of Dunbar’s choice to write so often in dialect. 
Qualls’ eloquent black and white paintings bring out Dunbar’s youth (he was only 
thirty-three when he died) and dramatically interpret the poems. This will be an 
engaging introduction to one of the lesser-known greats, especially if paired with 
recorded readings of his poetry to bring out its music. Copious end matter includes 
a timeline, endnotes that include lively and readable further explorations of the 
lives of secondary figures, a bibliography, and an index.  DS
doyle, roddy Brilliant; illus. by Emily Hughes. Amulet, 2015 183p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1479-5 $16.95  
R Gr. 4-6
Gloria and her big brother Raymond are initially thrilled when their beloved uncle 
Ben comes to live with the family in their Dublin home, but it turns out Ben is 
staying with them because he’s suffering from depression, which the adults char-
acterize as the “Black Dog.” While the grownups use this phrase as a metaphor 
for the illness, the kids soon discover that the Black Dog is a literal reality, it’s 
terrifying, and it’s threatening more of Dublin’s adults than just their own uncle. 
Gloria and Raymond bravely take off into the night to hunt down the Black Dog, 
and they are joined by neighbor kid Ernie (the local mischief-maker) and several 
other children in their search. The Black Dog is tricky, though, and more than 
once leads the group into both literal and emotional darkness, a condition that is 
alleviated when the children discover that uttering the word “brilliant” lightens the 
dark and weakens the dog. After a lengthy chase and struggle, Raymond and Ernie 
must face the beast head on to restore joy to Uncle Ben and to Dublin. The book 
captures with perfect specificity the ways in which complicated family dynamics 
operate and the kinds of shared touchstone experiences that siblings create together. 
The almost folkloric battle between the kids and the Black Dog is both powerful 
and empowering. Doyle wisely injects notes of humor to add levity to the darker 
December 2015 • 195
elements the kids encounter during the chase. The tidy resolution isn’t realistic to 
the reverberations of true depression, but the ending nonetheless provides a measure 
of wish fulfillment to this rousing but moving tale.  JH
ducie, Joe The Rig. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 308p
ISBN 978-0-544-50311-3 $16.99 
 R Gr. 9-12
After escaping from three of the world’s most secure juvenile detention centers, 
fifteen-year-old Will Drake is transported to the Rig, a derrick turned prison for 
teens run by corporate military giant, the Alliance, in the middle of the Arctic 
Ocean. Now, surrounded by icy shark-infested waters and tracked by a bracelet that 
records his every move, Drake almost gives up hope of escaping. But vicious guards, 
violent bullies, and a desperate need to reach his mother motivate him to try, and 
unexpected new allies soon help him find a weakness in the seemingly impregnable 
maze of tunnels and cells. His clandestine explorations inadvertently uncover a 
terrible secret about the Rig’s true purpose, though, one that the warden and the 
Alliance will do anything to protect. Readers will pick up this near-future prison-
break adventure for its unique premise and stay for the taut action sequences and 
likable cast of misfit characters. The rig is fantastically wrought, almost a character 
unto itself, and the plot builds tension into a few really strong nail-biting events. 
There are some implausibilities, but readers who are willing to roll with them will 
enjoy a wild, riveting ride that packs action right through to the final pages. The 
novel ends with freedom for Will but an uncertain future on the run, setting up 
audiences for more thrills and a final showdown in expected sequels.  AM
fArisH, Terry Either the Beginning or the End of the World. Carolrhoda Lab, 
2015 109p
ISBN 978-1-4677-7483-3 $18.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Sofie is her daddy’s girl, having weathered real and metaphori-
cal storms with him as he tries to make a living as a New Hampshire fisherman. 
Needing to travel further to make his catch, he invites her Cambodian mother 
and grandmother to stay with her while he’s gone. Sofie is angry—angry that her 
mother left her and is now coming back pregnant after all these years, but also angry 
that she can’t help longing for maternal closeness. Additionally, she’s smitten with 
troubled Luke, a twenty-two-year-old medic back from Afghanistan and suffering 
from PTSD. Her steamy but always discreetly rendered relationship with him helps 
her understand her mother’s and grandmother’s responses to their traumatic past 
under the Khmer Rouge, a past that has left her mother feeling unable to care for 
her daughter and frightened for the future of her unborn son. The storytelling here 
has the logic of a dream, condensing the realistic moments of Sofie’s days, her grand-
mother’s heartbreaking memories, her mother’s fears, and Luke’s compelling need 
into interlaced metaphors that help Sofie sort out her complicated feelings while 
still leaving tantalizing gaps for readers to fill in. A hopeful ending doesn’t undercut 
the realism, as both Luke and Sofie come to an understanding of what they need 
to heal. Give this to readers who enjoy sophisticated literary prose and a narrative 
where love is as strong and complex as the many forces that work against it.  KC 
196 • The bulleTin
fiTzpATricK, BeccA Dangerous Lies. Simon, 2015 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-4814-2491-2 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
When seventeen-year-old Estella witnesses a drug-related murder, she’s placed in 
Witness Protection until she can testify against a brutal cartel leader. Initially happy 
to be away from her drug-addict mom, the newly renamed Stella Gordon balks 
when safety means trading her posh Philadelphia lifestyle for small-town Nebraska 
and a crusty retired female cop as guardian. Stella is determined not to set down 
roots, but unexpected new friends and a simmering attraction to the hot boy next 
door soon make her rethink the allure of country life. Yet even as she considers 
spilling the truth of her real identity, dangers from both her past and her present 
put her newfound happiness at risk. This gripping if predictable thriller pairs a 
conventional crime drama with a potent romance, and it ultimately gives aficionados 
exactly the kind of delicious, heart-thumping excitement they want. Stella is the 
bratty poor-little-rich-girl heroine who is taught the value of faith, home, and hard 
work by a cast of friendly locals and a harsh but caring chaperone. Meanwhile, 
sexy neighbor Chet, is the cowboy prince charming, complete with pick-up truck, 
ranching job, innate decency, and haunting secrets of his own. Two-dimensional 
villains, both local and Philly-based, create page-turning tension but cause little 
actual harm and inevitably get exactly what they deserve. Overall, nothing new or 
unique is being done here, but that won’t keep readers from diving right in and 
relishing every moment of this genre treat.  AM
floreen, TiM Willful Machines. Simon Pulse, 2015 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3277-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3279-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
In the near future, national security is threatened by a rogue artificial intelligence 
who has infected the information network and is using it to wage war against the 
U.S. Meanwhile, the president’s son, sixteen-year-old Lee Fisher, is just trying to 
make it through junior year at boarding school: avoiding bullies, focusing on his 
robotics projects, and keeping his politically divisive sexual identity buried deep in 
the closet. Then hot transfer student Nico catches his attention, and the two begin 
a surreptitious romance. National concerns soon become personal ones, though, 
when Lee’s own inventions turn on him, and he becomes the AI’s new target. Worse 
yet, Nico may be in on the scheme. This novel offers an entertaining, fast-paced 
sci-fi adventure with a strong romantic element. The pacing is particularly success-
ful, building tension with a blend of looming threats and nail-biting escape scenes. 
Readers will likewise be drawn in by the authentic portrayal of first romance with 
all its thrills and anxieties. Lee transitions from melancholy outsider to confident 
hero with unbelievable speed, and the narrative is too predictable and agenda-
driven (the villain’s attempts to link technophobia and homophobia are particularly 
awkward) to be truly effective. Still, while readers looking for compelling queer SF 
may prefer London’s Proxy (BCCB 9/13), fans of movie versions of Asimov and 
Dick may appreciate the story’s cinematic feel and anticipate expected sequels.  AM
December 2015 • 197
floriAn, douglAs Pig Is Big on Books; written and illus. by Douglas Flo-
rian. Holiday House, 2015 [24p] (I Like To Read Books)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-3393-3 $14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-3424-4 $6.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-3513-5 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. K-1
A reading enthusiast, Pig (previously appearing in A Pig Is Big, BCCB 12/00) reads 
all kinds of books in all kinds of places (“Pig reads at home. Pig reads at school. Pig 
reads on the bus”). When he can’t find reading material (“Pig looked and looked. 
He did not find even one book”), he creates his own: “So Pig wrote a book. Pig 
wrote this book.” Kids already “big on books” may connect with this title the most, 
but this easy reader picture book (part of the “I Like to Read” series) also extends 
an attractive invitation to non-readers to jump on the reading bandwagon, and the 
easy, accessible vocabulary and use of repetition bolster that invitation. Florian’s 
mixed-media illustrations (done in gouache, watercolor, colored pencil, and collage 
on printed paper bag) have a kid-friendly, DIY vibe, and the warm scenes and rich, 
textured artwork paints the act of reading in a flattering, cozy light. The green-eyed, 
vividly pink Pig is an endearing fellow, and his book love is made clear in the way 
he pores over pages and hugs his tomes to his tummy. The large format of the 
book and the simple text will make this a successful addition to a book-themed 
storytime, as well as a useful touchstone text for parents, teachers, and librarians 
introducing lifelong reading habits to the young’uns.  JH
frAnKlin, Jo I’m an Alien and I Want to Go Home!; illus. by Marty Kelley. Clar-
ion, 2015 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-544-44295-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Sixth-grader Daniel has never quite fit in with his family: he’s a foot taller than 
nearly all of them, with brown eyes and dark hair instead of the Kendal blue eyes 
and blonde hair. School isn’t any better, since the few friends he has are misfits as 
well: Eddie’s main objective is to disgust as many people as possible with his farts, 
while geeky Gordon spends as much time worrying about germs as he does fidget-
ing with his gadgets. So when Daniel’s sister tells him he’s an alien their parents 
adopted, it seems like a plausible theory, especially when he discovers a newspaper 
clipping about a meteor landing near his town on the day he was born. It becomes 
his mission, with Eddie and Gordon’s help, to find a way to Kepler 22b, the planet 
Gordon believes to be his home; that includes figuring out how to be cryogenically 
frozen, coming up with enough cash to get to Russia, and convincing their space 
program to take him. Absurdity is the name of the game here and Franklin takes 
it to the nth level, with the story culminating in Daniel’s parents’ kidnapping by 
a cult of alien believers. Between the scatological humor and the hilarious antics 
of Daniel and his friends, there’s some genuine contemplation of what it means 
to fit in, to be the one left out, and the advantages and disadvantages of both. The 
exaggerated expressions and poses of Kelley’s figures along with the gentle pencil 
shades of black and white reflect the story’s combination of weirdness and tender-
ness. Pair this with Klass’ Stuck on Earth (BCCB 4/10) for the kid who feels more 
alien than human.  KQG 
198 • The bulleTin
gessner, MArinA The Distance from Me to You. Putnam, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17323-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When McKenna’s best friend, Courtney, drops the bomb that she is no longer on 
board with the girls’ plan to hike the entire length of the Appalachian Trail after 
graduation, McKenna decides to go it alone. Knowing that her parents would 
never agree to a solo hike, she convinces Courtney to lie for her, and even has 
Courtney text McKenna’s parents as if she were on the trail with their daughter. 
When McKenna meets and falls in love with Sam, though, she goes against both her 
instincts and her plans, allowing him to convince her to leave the trail with nearly 
fatal results. Despite the romance plot, McKenna is more of a hard-headed realist 
than a lovesick pup, and Gessner crafts her as a character with both gravitas and 
dignity. After a hubris-challenging first day, McKenna faces the trail with respect 
and determination, setting her goal of finishing even above her feelings for Sam. 
While Gessner head-hops in her third-person narration to create sympathy for Sam 
through a difficult backstory and to convey McKenna’s mother’s off-scene worries, 
the main character here is securely McKenna, and the story arc is the her develop-
ment as a strong, assertive problem-solver who falls in love without losing herself 
and who makes mistakes and recovers from them. Nature-loving readers will enjoy 
the compelling, well-paced depiction of the adventure and lore of the AT, and they 
will be glad to find such a tough-minded, capable heroine in a realistic novel.  KC 
going, K. l. Pieces of Why. Dawson/Penguin, 2015 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3474-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 6-9
Unspoken tension pervades the New Orleans home where twelve-year-old Tia lives 
with her guarded and overworked single mother. The two don’t talk about why 
her mother never attends Tia’s choir concerts, and they certainly never discuss Tia’s 
father, incarcerated for armed robbery and completely removed from their lives for 
the past eight years. When the shooting of an area toddler brings the truth of her 
father’s crime to the surface, Tia questions her own character as she wants to know 
and understand her father. Her conflicts—with her mother, with the specter of her 
father, with her best friend, and with herself—are true and unembellished, as is her 
growing curiosity about her absent parent. Though Tia is white, the multiracial 
cast and evocative New Orleans setting offer readers multiple points of access to 
this compelling and sensitive exploration of self-determination and coming of age. 
Tia’s remarkable singing voice and the importance of music in her life add a nice 
point of attraction for musically inclined readers in this novel about relationship, 
identity, and forgiveness.  AA
grAinger, A. J. Captive. Simon, 2015 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2903-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2905-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Robyn cannot forget that awful moment when her father, the prime minister of the 
United Kingdom, was shot (fortunately, not fatally) while protecting her from a 
terrorist in Paris. Her fears of subsequent attack are realized when she is kidnapped 
December 2015 • 199
and held hostage by three captors: a sadistic creep named Scar, a kind and seem-
ingly regretful boy her own age called Talon, and their leader, a scary zealot named 
Feather. Their immediate goal is the release of Feather’s brother, who has confessed 
to being the PM’s would-be assassin, from prison. However, their larger goal is to 
bring awareness to the misdeeds of a pharmaceutical company, whose experimental 
drug killed Talon’s little brother. While the plot is suspenseful and it raises interest-
ing and complicated moral questions regarding terrorist tactics, parental fallibility, 
and overly cozy relationships between government and Big Pharma, it goes pear-
shaped after Robyn’s release; by that time, she’s in love with Talon, and too many 
preposterous chase and fight scenes ensue that strain credulity. Though Robyn 
insists that her feelings for Talon are real and lasting, readers will likely be on the 
side of everyone, including Talon himself, who tries to explain how the stress and 
a sad story confuse emotions; she just moves from a naïve belief in her father to 
a naïve belief in Talon. Nonetheless, readers looking for a story of crime, politics, 
fathers, and adventure may wish to see Robyn’s story play out.  KC 
grAudin, ryAn Wolf by Wolf. Little, 2015 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40512-6 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40510-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
In an alternate world where Germany and Japan won World War II, the two empires 
celebrate their global dominance with an annual three-continent motorcycle race, 
but in 1956, the group of contenders includes a secret revolutionary. Using the 
shape-shifting skills she gained as a victim of scientific experiments in the death 
camps, seventeen-year-old Yael impersonates the race’s only female victor, Aryan 
poster child Adele Wolfe. Years of training have prepared her to face the harsh 
terrain and even the subterfuge of fellow competitors. Still, nothing turns out to 
be harder to navigate than Adele’s and her own complex relationships with other 
riders, including a former lover and Adele’s twin brother. At the same time, Yael is 
haunted by the memories of friends and family lost, and the distraction may cost her 
the race. With this complex and well-crafted mix of action, emotion, and alternate 
history, Graudin provides something new and notable for readers of historical and 
dystopian fiction. The pacing is perfectly balanced, as race scenes rev up the ten-
sion and flashbacks shift story back into neutral. Yael’s backstory is both poignant 
and brutal, leaving her hesitant to show her true self, and the resulting emotional 
distance may challenge readers’ ability to connect with her. Still, it rings true for 
the story, and a touch of romance and a fraternal bond help humanize Yael; indeed, 
the story is at its best when Yael is struggling between her heart and her duty. An 
offbeat choice for fans of Wein’s Code Name Verity (BCCB 6/12), this title will also 
be at home on a shelf beside any strong dystopian adventure. AM
HAHn, reBeccA The Shadow behind the Stars. Atheneum, 2015 240p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3571-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3573-4 $10.99  
R* Gr. 9-12
The mythical Fates get closer examination in this intriguing, startling novel, where 
Serena, Xinot, and Chloe each play their roles in the thread that controls human 
life. None of them, though, knows what to do when a girl comes to their door, 
demanding answers about how her life was horrifyingly overturned in a day. They 
200 • The bulleTin
try to remove her memories, but this is merely a temporary and flawed solution, 
and the inevitable undoing of the memory block sets this girl free in ways that 
may change the whole world. Chloe narrates the story with much direct address to 
the audience, warning us that grappling with fate can never end well. The story’s 
timelessness allows it to close the gap between classical mythology and modern 
realism—at its core, this is about a girl who dares to challenge her crushing life and 
three imperfect, exceptional beings who, drawn by that girl’s indomitable spirit, 
seek to push the boundaries of their own fates. This lyrical, thoughtful novel moves 
slowly but gracefully, but is well worth the measured pace; it will likely linger with 
philosophical readers, particularly those familiar with the mythological Fates, long 
after they’ve finished.  AS
HAlpern, JAKe Nightfall; by Jake Halpern and Peter Kujawinski. Putnam, 
2015 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17580-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In this atmospheric, spooky book, a startlingly long day/night cycle (fourteen years 
of each) controls this completely unfamiliar world. The whole town departs the 
island each time night falls, carefully following rigid rules about how they leave their 
homes. It becomes clear that they are setting things up for others, though Marin, 
her twin brother Kana, and their friend Line have no idea whose houses they have 
been living in or why this arrangement exists. When the three accidentally get left 
behind, however, they get a full, terrifying lesson in just who awakens at nightfall as 
they run for their lives in a desperate attempt to find a way to rejoin their families. 
The pace is splendidly set, with slow, careful revealing of clues early on giving way 
to a breathless chase away from monsters and against time as two of the characters 
face life-threatening issues (gangrene for one and, for another, alarming physical 
changes that suggests he is half monster). Ultimately, this is a gem of a supernatural 
book, and the impeccable details about the kids’ island home make the develop-
ment of setting as strong as that of the characters. Readers will be relieved that the 
book ends with the teens apparently out of danger, and they’ll be thoughtful about 
the book’s explorations of who the true good or bad guys are and how sometimes 
horror comes not from evil but from intrinsic differences.  AS
HenKes, Kevin Waiting; written and illus. by Kevin Henkes. Greenwillow/
HarperCollins, 2015 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-236844-7 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-236843-0 $17.99 
Ad 3-5 yrs
Five toys wait on a windowsill: an owl figurine waits for the moon, an umbrella-
wielding pig waits for rain, a bear with a kite waits for the wind, a puppy on a sled 
waits for the snow, and a bunny with an accordion pleated body is “happy just 
looking out the window.” While they wait, they witness a toy leaving and returning, 
a new toy arriving but then going away (a tumble from the sill distressingly breaks 
it into bits), and rainbows and fireworks appearing in the sky outside the window. 
When a spotted cat nesting doll shows up, four kitty dolls (in decreasing sizes) hatch 
out of her body and join the lineup: “Now there were ten of them. And they were 
happy together, waiting to see what would happen next.” What toys do when no 
one is around is popular picture book territory (see Jenkins’ Toys Meet Snow, this 
December 2015 • 201
month’s Big Picture), and Henkes’ cast of playthings are an appealing, pastel-hued 
bunch. There is more contemplation here than action, though, and that, coupled 
with the somewhat meandering plot, causes the story to lose momentum. The toy 
that falls off the windowsill (a fragile elephant) and is broken beyond repair adds a 
slightly jarring note of pathos to the proceedings as well. The soft tones and clean 
compositions of the attractive pictures (rendered in brown ink, watercolor, and 
colored pencil on large, creamy pages) gently complement the simple text, and while 
there is clearly a limit to the toys’ mobility, the flexibility of their body positions 
and facial expressions allows them to be emotionally demonstrative characters. Use 
this to bring a little peace and tranquility to a busy day or to an active storytime 
audience.  JH
HogArTH, Ainslie The Boy Meets Girl Massacre (Annotated). Flux, 2015 [288p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7387-4472-8 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
This gruesome tale of a haunted hotel dives right in with diary entries describing 
cold spots and eerie sensations. The premise is that a movie is being made from 
the diary, which was found at a bloody crime scene, so the book itself comprises 
diary entries, movie ideas “handwritten” off to the side, and occasional footnotes 
written by an investigator, providing context and background to the story. Noelle, 
writer of the diary, doesn’t want to become a psychotic killer—she just wants to 
work her summer job and see where her evolving feelings about her best friend 
take them—but when you spend time in a hotel where cannibalism was known 
to have happened . . . you’re sort of asking for it. Noelle’s entries are effectively 
creepy, showing a clear devolution into insanity that she fights during her mo-
ments of clarity and offering a slow reveal of just how messed up her childhood 
was and how far she is from the sturdy, normal teen she first paints herself to be. 
Unfortunately, the movie details are sometimes forced, with the brassy gimmickry 
of turning tragedy into money not always working as the black humor it seems 
intended to be. In addition, a disappointingly fuzzy resolution that seems to of-
fer either a scenario that is almost physically impossible for Noelle to have pulled 
off, or a true supernatural element (which had been cleverly alluded to but never 
pinned down until that point). Even so, there’s no denying this is an intensely 
scary, captivating book, and horror fans who have a strong stomach for gore will 
likely leave feeling they got a good dose of fear.  AS
Howe, KATHerine 
The Appearance of Annie Van Sinderen. 
Putnam, 
2015 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16778-2 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
M Gr. 8-12
With hopes of transferring to NYU’s film school, nineteen-year-old Wes is spending 
the summer in the city making a documentary when he meets Annie, a beautiful 
girl whose tendency to leave Wes just as the two are getting to know each other only 
further intrigues him. He eventually realizes, however, that Annie’s disappearing 
act is more supernatural than coy; meanwhile, Annie finds herself caught between 
the modern day and her memories from 1825, when she and her family perished 
in an incident that may have resulted from her father’s shady business dealings. 
Annie must recover an object and set a wrong right before she can move on, and 
202 • The bulleTin
Wes must help her despite the fact it means losing her. Any sense of tension here, 
be it spine tingling or passionate, is utterly muted by the bland personalities of the 
lead characters: Wes is as generic as the cargo shorts he insistently tells the reader 
he wears, and Annie’s personality changes as the plot requires, ranging from con-
fused and desperate to oddly forward and flirtatious. Wes’ obsession with Annie 
is both creepy and predictable, given that he objectifies nearly every woman that 
he encounters. Additionally, the plot starts to turn circles midway and the writing 
becomes increasingly repetitive. Fortunately, the premise of a ghostly romance is a 
common one in YA, and readers will be able to find satisfaction with alternatives 
such as with Whitcomb’s A Certain Slant of Light (BCCB 9/05) or Balog’s Sleepless 
(BCCB 9/10).  KQG
HuTcHinson, sHAun dAvid, comp. Violent Ends; by Kendare Blake, Steve Breze-
noff, Delilah S. Dawson, et al. Simon Pulse, 2015 338p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3745-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3747-9 $10.99  
R Gr. 9-12
In this ambitious collection of stories, a single school shooting is explored in takes 
from seventeen different authors. Most of the contributors will be immediately 
familiar to YA readers, including Neal Shusterman (and his son Brandon) who, in 
an experimental twist, chose to take on the gun itself, describing its own story from 
defective factory reject to murder weapon, and Hannah Moskowitz, whose character 
is an outsider to the school but who has disturbing memories of the shooter as a 
young child. The twenty-two minutes from first shot to suicide of the shooter are 
addressed, but mostly this is about the before, after, and around of the story. Some 
of the narrations head far afield from the shooting itself—an intriguing choice 
given their ultimate relevance to the sense of isolation, desperation, and anger that 
pushed Kirby, who in many ways did not fit the profile of angry loner, to the acts 
he took. A brief author’s note introduces readers to the premise of the shared world 
and shared characters with connections that wind through in spite of the different 
authors. It’s not clear whether the book will help readers understand, as the note 
suggests, what leads teens to use guns in school, but it is an interesting, challenging 
project and it is certainly rich with curricular possibilities.  AS
JeAn, eMiKo We’ll Never Be Apart. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-544-48200-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
A fire, set by Celia, has ended with her twin, Alice, badly burned and Alice’s boy-
friend, Jason, dead. Flashbacks reveal that the twins have a tragic history: on their 
sixth birthday, they discover their caretaker, their grandfather, dead, and they live 
for four days on cake in a freezing house until a neighbor discovers them. They 
meet Jason in one foster home, where he protects them as best he can from their 
sadistic foster father, but they are separated when the girls’ social worker notices 
their bruises. When the three are reunited years later, Jason confesses his love for 
Alice, and the three go on the run after setting fire to the abusive family’s home; they 
are caught and incarcerated in the hospital after Jason savagely beats a convenience 
store clerk. Alice recounts all of this horror in her journal, gradually coming to 
terms with the fact that Jason, whom she has always seen as her protector, is not a 
nice guy. She is also afraid that Celia will kill her, so she asks Chase, another boy 
December 2015 • 203
in the facility, to help her find Celia so that Alice can kill her first. The mystery is 
fairly contrived, and the secret—that Celia doesn’t exist—will be easily guessed by 
readers familiar with tales of twin delusions. However, the spooling out of the nar-
rative between present reality and Alice’s journal keeps the suspense of the mystery 
alive, there’s an interesting twist in the reveal of Jason’s true nature, and the whole 
plot is humanized by the sadly misguided efforts of Chase to help Alice come to 
terms with herself. Give this to readers who enjoy psychological melodrama with 
lots of action and slightly creepy elements.  KC 
JenKins, eMily Toys Meet Snow: Being the Wintertime Adventures of a Curious 
Stuffed Buffalo, a Sensitive Plush Stingray, and a Book-Loving Rubber Ball; illus. by 
Paul O. Zelinsky. Schwartz & Wade, 2015 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37331-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37330-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37332-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R* 4-6 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 181, for review.
KAufMAn, AMie Illuminae; by Amie Kaufman and Jay Kristoff. Knopf, 
2015 [608p] (The Illuminae Files)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49912-4 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49911-7 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49913-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
At the core of this massive, ambitious collection of fictional interviews, diary entries, 
chat transcripts, and more is a gripping love story, but even that becomes a shaky 
center when it looks like characters may not be who they say they are. Kady and 
Ezra, former boyfriend/girlfriend, escape to two different space vessels after an attack 
on their settlement in 2575. However, they are still being hunted in space, and a 
horrifying virus quickly spreads among the ships that causes those infected to go on 
murderous rampages. They try to keep in touch with each other, with Kady sharing 
hacked information and Ezra sharing whatever military secrets he is able to catch, 
but will that save them from all manner of likely doom? The composite narrative 
is a visual feast, particularly any passages or visual images created by AIDAN, the 
artificial intelligence core of one of the ships (which has been damaged, resulting 
in a brilliant, chilling, and satisfyingly unreliable narrator given that he is meant 
to be the solid, factual center). The formatting serves the book well, steering away 
from gimmick successfully. Readers more accustomed to a traditional text narrative 
should be encouraged to keep going with this masterful sci-fi undertaking; if they 
end up as fans they’ll be pleased to see it is only volume one.  AS
KiTcHings, TAylor Yard War. Lamb, 2015 216p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50754-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50753-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50755-3 $10.99  
R Gr. 5-7
Trip Westbrook is a good kid, the paragon of politeness, but inclined (at least in his 
parents’ view) to push the envelope whenever he can. When friendships reconfigure 
as the old crew reaches junior high in 1964 Jackson, Mississippi, Trip could use 
204 • The bulleTin
another buddy to throw the football around with, and he lights on Dee, the black 
sixth-grade son of the Westbrooks’ housekeeper, Willie Jean. Dr. Westbrook is an 
anti-segregationist, and it’s fine with him if the guys play together; Mom has lived 
behind the Magnolia Curtain all her life, but she’s cautiously onboard, too. Even 
Trip’s longtime friends come around when they experience Dee’s throwing arm. 
The neighbors, however, are another matter, and as Trip advocates for his new pal, 
threats and reprisals escalate against the Westbrooks. The theme of a white family 
confronting racism—and their awakening to the limits of their own support of civil 
rights—makes this title an analog to Kidd’s Night on Fire (BCCB 11/15). Kitch-
ings uses Trip’s ingrained politeness to soften the racist discourse that roils around 
him and thereby makes breakout lines on both sides of the color divide that much 
more explosive: “Martin Luther Coon is tellin’ them they’re all African kings and 
queens”; “I am not your pet nigger to show off to white people.” Age-appropriate 
nuance and a hopeful but not overly rosy ending make this a good recommenda-
tion for tweens ready to explore how the civil rights struggle plays out, not just in 
newsworthy demonstrations, but in the everyday decisions of those far from the 
lunch counters and picket lines.  EB
Ko, sAngMi A Dog Wearing Shoes; written and illus. by Sangmi Ko. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2015 40p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38397-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38396-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38398-1 $10.99 
 R 5-7 yrs
When Mini’s mom almost runs over an adorable shoe-wearing dog in the middle 
of the busy city street, Mini quickly claims the dog for her own. Her mother tries 
to convince Mini that the dog, having shoes, must belong to someone, but her 
observations (and the dog’s increasingly frantic barking) fall on deaf ears. It’s only 
when the dog takes off during a game of fetch and ends up in the animal shelter 
that Mini accepts that she must look for the dog’s real owner; a “found dog” poster 
does the trick and the dog is joyfully reclaimed by a thankful, curly-haired kid. A 
few days later, Mini and her mom return to the animal shelter, this time to pick out 
a dog to keep: a wide-eyed, dark poodle that Mini dresses in a frilled yellow outfit 
to match her own. The clear, understated text springs to life through Ko’s lively 
and expressive illustrations. Detailed monochromatic pencil drawings, skillfully 
shaded and highlighted, are strikingly accented with sparing amounts of digitally 
applied color. The ethical dilemma here may be a small one in the great scheme 
of things, but it’s a kid-friendly one that may lend itself to some useful discussion 
on pet ownership, and animal lovers will love the feel-good ending. Pair this with 
Graham’s “Let’s Get a Pup!” Said Kate (BCCB 9/01) for a dynamic duo of doggy-
adoption tales.  JH
KrAus, dAniel The Death and Life of Zebulon Finch: Volume One: At the Edge of 
Empire. Simon, 2015 [656p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1139-4 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1141-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Zebulon Finch died a violent death in 1897, but came back to life seventeen min-
utes later (one for every year of his life). Zebulon wasn’t really the philosophical 
December 2015 • 205
type before he died, but he has plenty of time to think things through now, so he 
comes to various conclusions about why he is an animated corpse (while decay is 
slow, he doesn’t eat, sleep, feel true pain, or breathe) and decides how to spend his 
years. It’s little surprise that a murdered, rebellious criminal whose only love was 
a prostitute would be well behind the curve on determining how to be an ethical 
“person” in the world, but that does indeed seem to be Zebulon’s goal, at least as 
he looks back on it all in this dense, diary-style narrative that spans his birth until 
he readies himself to enter his second world war. As a narrator, Zebulon is prone 
to exaggeration and self-pity, but readers will likely forgive and spot his need to 
find comfort in painting himself a certain way, as he has suffered the unendurable 
over and over, forced to emerge, still undead, from war, cruel medical experiments, 
enslavement, the deaths of those he actually did learn to love, and all the many 
indignities of a body that does nothing it should. It’s a splendid, poetic, ambitious 
undertaking, and the significant page count is put to good use, with Kraus fear-
lessly weaving gore, love, philosophy, and social justice issues into one sharp whole. 
There’s one more volume coming, a relief for those who will undoubtedly want to 
see this unlife through to some sort of conclusion.  AS
Kreller, susAn You Can’t See the Elephants; tr. from the German by Elizabeth 
Gaffney. Putnam, 2015 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17209-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
In this German import, thirteen-year-old Mascha doesn’t mind spending her sum-
mer days alone, largely ignored by the other kids in her grandparents’ neighbor-
hood. She thinks about her physically and emotionally distant father and watches 
as her neighbors obsess over their lawns, dutifully attend one another’s parties, and 
maintain a veneer of perfection. Her solitude—and the neighborhood’s façade—is 
shattered with the appearance of Julia and Max Brandner, children of a respected 
local business owner, who exhibit signs of physical and emotional abuse but whose 
problem no one will acknowledge. Mascha’s fear for the children and her frustration 
at adults’ refusal to listen to her concerns ring true, particularly as the vehemence 
of her emotions stand starkly against her self-contained nature and the placidity 
of the community. Similarly, her desperate approach to helping them has the im-
passioned feeling and lack of forethought authentic to her age. The nature of the 
community translates less well to the U.S. setting that the book has been retrofitted 
to have, but that doesn’t spoil an otherwise thoughtful, atmospheric, and resonant 
novel, understated yet powerful in its depiction of abuse and subtle but effective 
in its revealing of Mascha as a complex person with her own pain to confront.  AA
KresleHner, gABi I Don’t Live Here Anymore; tr. from the German by Shelley 
Tanaka. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2015 [128p]
ISBN 978-1-55498-803-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-12
Fifteen-year-old Charlotte struggles with her parents’ divorce and its aftermath 
in this understated and poignant Austrian import. She often returns to their old 
home, now sold to another family, so as to see her “wishing” tree and ruminate on 
the many changes in her life. Restrained, honest, and evocative, Charlotte’s narra-
206 • The bulleTin
tion exposes much about her and her world while still leaving plenty for the reader 
to infer—an exemplar of showing and not telling that reveals a complicated and 
believable teen amidst her complicated and believable struggles. Kreslehner handles 
the passage of time and its accompanying healing with particular grace as Charlotte 
works through the divorce, school drama, and a love triangle, ultimately finding 
increased clarity and acceptance as well as first love. Subtle and nuanced, this fine 
coming-of-age novel has the delicate strength of a strand of silk.  AA
Kulper, KendAll Drift & Dagger. Little, 2015 358p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40453-2 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40455-6 $9.99  
R Gr. 8-10
This novel uses the same setting and world of Salt & Storm (BCCB 12/14) to intro-
duce an earlier generation of characters; the result works as a standalone while also 
offering juicy, heartbreaking insight into one of the previous title’s most memorable 
characters: the mother of the protagonist. While Mal, a blank on whom magic 
doesn’t work, narrates the story, it is his best friend turned enemy, Essie Roe, who 
is the magnetic center of the novel. Her struggle to hone her witch powers under 
the crushing tutelage of her gifted mother, her ambivalence about being a witch 
on an island that uses their witches but also distrusts them, and her sincere regret 
over her frequent unkindnesses are powerful. Mal is right to hate Essie, but he is 
also right to love her, and their unlucky connection haunts both of them in ways 
that will have romance buffs gasping at the injustices they face. The world building 
is strong, surprisingly standing up just as well as in the earlier novel without ever 
feeling repetitive; this historical fantasy setting, particularly the witch-protected 
island, is so vibrantly described as to become a character in itself. Mal’s struggles 
when he runs away from the island are horrible, but his resilience and willingness 
to grow will keep readers willingly slogging through with him, as invested as he is 
in a better life somewhere ahead.  AS
leAver, TrisHA Sweet Madness; by Trisha Leaver and Lindsay Currie. Merit, 
2015 223p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4405-8894-5 $17.99  
R Gr. 8-12
Miller, sArAH The Borden Murders: Lizzie Borden & the Trial of the Cen-
tury. Schwartz & Wade, 2016 [304p] illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49809-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49808-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49810-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
This double dose of Borden offers one fictional look and one impeccably researched 
nonfiction account. Leaver and Currie’s novel is narrated by Bridget, the live-
in maid of the Borden household; while many passages describe Bridget’s own 
romance and struggles as an immigrant, the ultimate focus is the Borden house 
itself, claustrophobic with secrets, horrors, and tragedies, and the trio of Lizzie, 
her stepmother, and her brutal father. Miller’s nonfiction account begins with the 
murder and mostly moves forward from there, though passages throughout hint at 
what life had been like before in that undeniably stifling and dismal home. While 
both falter on occasion, the issues (slight anachronisms in the novel, sidebars with 
December 2015 • 207
low payoff in the nonfiction) are minor. Readers who can’t get enough of Borden 
stories (or readers stumbling across this gossipy, complex, never-resolved murder 
case for the first time) will be thrilled to have two new books that utilize drastically 
different approaches and perspectives to showcase the same events.  AS
leAviTT, MArTine Calvin. Ferguson/Farrar, 2015 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-374-38073-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Despite his parents’ insistence to the contrary, Calvin believes that his name, his 
personality, his possession of a stuffed tiger named Hobbes, the fact that his best 
friend from childhood is named Susie, and the fact that he was born on the day the 
last Calvin and Hobbes strip was published must add up to something meaningful. 
The onset of schizophrenia at seventeen heightens that conviction, as he starts see-
ing and hearing Hobbes, and believes if he can just meet Watterson and convince 
him to write one more strip where Hobbes is imaginary and a seventeen-year-old 
Calvin is healthy and normal, his own delusions will go away. The fastest way 
for Calvin to get to Watterson in Ohio is to hike directly across frozen Lake Erie 
from his Canadian home. Susie, who has lately abandoned him for the popular 
crowd, insists on going with him, and the two slip away to embark on his nearly 
fatal quest. This barely credible premise proves to be a clever sheen on a novel that 
takes on the extreme questions of teenage angst—how do we know the difference 
between what we imagine and what is real; how should friendships and romantic 
relationships work; how are we related to the environment; what is worth valu-
ing; how should we grieve the loss of childhood? Insider references to Calvin and 
Hobbes abound, but while not knowing them limits understanding of the humor, 
it doesn’t affect access to the deeper insights, which are handled with a light touch 
through the well-paced dialogue that makes up the majority of the novel. This is 
more a treatise on philosophy than psychology, this is schizophrenia-lite, so give it 
to thinkers with a sense of humor.  KC 
lee, Tony Messenger: The Legend of Joan of Arc; illus. by Sam Hart. Candlewick, 
2015 112p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7613-1 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7614-8 $12.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Using a similar graphic-novel format, Lee already tackled King Arthur (Excalibur, 
BCCB 5/11) and Robin Hood, and now young Joan is getting her fact-informed 
fictional turn. Joan is presented as a trailblazer who defied conventions and risked 
everything, but she is also presented as vulnerable, happiest in moments when 
she can be with her family, and quietly fearful behind her stern assertion that 
she is doing exactly what she was chosen to do. Historical context is worked in 
effortlessly through both the illustrations and effective dialogue; text passages of 
philosophical, religious, political, and personal musings make Joan human rather 
than merely a historical cipher. While the ending is obviously known (and even if 
it wasn’t, it is foretold in the first pages), there is still plenty of palpable tension as 
Joan is repeatedly offered chances to choose quiet or compliance and refuses. Color 
blocks in the background evoke emotional response as war scenes are drawn over 
reds, political scenes play out over sickly greens, and shadowy dealings play out in 
carefully lighted scenes over grays and purple shades. The perspective frequently 
208 • The bulleTin
changes, adding variety; this is particularly useful as there is little expression change 
in the characters, particularly in Joan herself once she seems to realize that fully 
committing to her destiny will inevitably cost her her life. Historical fiction buffs, 
even if they don’t normally grab graphic novels, will find this an impressive mix of 
truth and emotion.  AS
leHrHAupT, AdAM Please Open This Book!; illus. by Matthew Forsythe. Wise-
man/Simon, 2015 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5071-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5072-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
The animal cast from Warning: Do Not Open This Book! (BCCB 9/13) have returned 
with an attitude change: they’re delighted to have the book opened and light cast 
onto their lives again. In fact, they’re quite hurt that anybody would ever close 
the book—literally hurt, in the case of the alligator and the toucan, who sport 
bandages—and they’re mournful that a “really good banana” got smushed in the 
process. They try to convince the viewer to cease the merciless progression to the 
end of the book, but of course, the conclusion is inevitable, and the critters are 
back in the dark again. This is upping the ante on the interactive/metafictive to 
the point of slapstick; while kids who bond deeply with the characters in books 
may struggle with even comic cruelty, audiences down with the joke will find this 
increased power even headier and the witty text uproarious. The softly textured 
figures, in digital art that has painterly dimension paper-collage layered effects, 
stand out against the inky blackness of their book purgatory, and while the action 
is streamlined, details are often funny, such as the much-hyped story being typed 
out that actually just reads “banana banana banana banana.” Audiences will relish 
the game and delight in their own playful tyranny.  DS
lewis, r. c. Spinning Starlight. Hyperion, 2015 327p
ISBN 978-1-4231-8515-4 $17.99  
R Gr. 8-10
The weight of her family’s legacy rests heavily on the shoulders of sixteen-year-old 
Liddi; after all, she’s a Jantzen, and her parents and eight older brothers have devel-
oped and produced nearly all the technology used on her home planet of Sampati 
and the six other planets in their galaxy. As heir to the family’s fortune, she’s usually 
hounded by paparazzi and vidcams, but one night armed men enter her house and 
she just barely escapes, only to learn that all of her brothers have been kidnapped. 
A trusted friend turns enemy, takes Liddi’s voice, and threatens to destroy both 
her family and the portals that connect the seven planets. An accidental journey 
through the portals lands Liddi on the supposedly nonexistent eighth planet, where 
she finds help from a variety of sources (including a very helpful, very handsome 
boy), but her inability to speak leads to miscommunication and she’s on the run 
again to save herself, her brothers, and the eight planets. As with her previous novel 
Stitching Snow (BCCB 12/14), Lewis takes inspiration from a classic tale—in this 
case, “The Wild Swans”—and turns it into a full-blown space opera, complete 
with exuberant and satisfying melodrama, sigh-worthy romance, well-paced action, 
and a vividly drawn world that has its own conflicted history and cultural clashes. 
Liddi’s a believable heroine—she’s not as skilled as her brothers, but she’s brave and 
determined, and while insecurities plague her, she refuses to let them distract her 
December 2015 • 209
from her objective. The details of portal travel, connections between the planets, 
the galaxy’s various creatures get quite complicated, but the world building also 
adds philosophical and ethical issues that will likely spark discussion. Lewis’ fans 
will be anxious to see what traditional tale she turns sci-fi next.  KQG
loMBArdo, consTAnce Stunt Cat to the Stars; written and illus. by Constance 
Lombardo. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 233p (Mr. Puffball)
ISBN 978-0-06-232065-0 $12.99 
 R Gr. 3-5
Young cat Mr. Puffball has always dreamed of following in the footsteps of his 
cinematic idol, El Gato, and making it big in Hollywood, so when he spies an ad 
for auditions for The Great Catsby, it seems like kismet. Mr. Puffball confidently 
makes his way west from New Jersey to the land of the silver screen, but he quickly 
discovers that fame doesn’t come easily. He befriends some older mentors and 
eventually lands a job as a stunt double for—gasp!—El Gato, only to find that 
the real El Gato is actually kind of a jerk. Mr. Puffball rallies, however, and works 
his way up to the top, eventually winning over (and changing for the good) El 
Gato himself and landing a buddy role in E. G.’s upcoming film. In this heavily 
illustrated novel, Lombardo positively revels in loading on the cinematic clichés 
and topping them with a generous sprinkle of cat-themed wordplay (a song from 
“My Fair Kitty” includes the line, “Wouldn’t it be love-fur-ly?”), and Mr. Puffball’s 
breathless, straightfaced delivery of one droll line after another adds to the fun. Mr. 
Puffball’s tale (much like his tail) is fluff, but it is clever fluff, and while the plot 
line rambles and wanders a bit, the absurd humor is so diverting that kids likely 
won’t care a jot. The numerous comical black and white line drawings continue 
the jokes, with plenty of speech bubbles (“This milk is not organic!” snarls El Gato 
in one picture) and amusing visual details adding another layer of fun. Cat lovers, 
budding cinephiles, and fans of Federle’s Better Nate than Ever (BCCB 2/13) will 
find this the cat’s meow.  JH
lyncH, p. J. The Boy Who Fell Off the Mayflower, or John Howland’s Good Fortune; 
written and illus. by P. J. Lynch. Candlewick, 2015 64p
ISBN 978-0-7637-6584-5 $17.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Through the fictionalized voice of real-life New Plymouth colonist John Howland, 
readers follow his adventures (as gleaned from contemporary and scholarly sources 
noted in a brief bibliography). They also imagine the hardships of the religious Sepa-
ratists and their secular shipmates who, after landing hundreds of miles from their 
Virginia destination, found themselves making up a new plan as they went along. 
Howland’s voice is vibrant and convincing, and Lynch deftly integrates information 
known about Howland’s future (fifty years of marriage to Lizzy Tilley, whom he 
primly romances in this book) and episodes of contact with the Wampanoag (the 
1623 harvest feast; the colonists’ unwitting theft of cached seed corn) into the text. 
The titular dunking is contextualized as one more nerve-racking incident within 
a peril-fraught adventure that claimed the lives of half its participants. Lynch’s wa-
tercolor paintings harken back to the dramatically composed and illuminated work 
of N. C. Wyeth. However, careful viewers familiar with wildly inaccurate images of 
the colonists and their reluctant Wampanoag hosts will appreciate his less reverent 
takes on overdressed colonists learning to plant their fields Indian-style, and armed 
Wampanoag hiding behind trees as Howland recalls, “We did not know how to 
210 • The bulleTin
find or meet the native people we knew inhabited this land.” A brief concluding 
note on John Howland and a list of resources are included.  EB
MAcKler, cArolyn 
Infinite in Between. 
HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2015 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-173107-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232305-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
At the start of freshman year, Gregor, Whitney, Zoe, Jake, and Mia are all in the 
same freshman orientation group in their Vermont school, and together they write 
letters to their future selves to read upon their graduation. The book follows each of 
the five on their journey through those four years as they remain distantly aware of 
one another or become more closely involved. There’s a lot of drama in those four 
years: Gregor’s father dies; Whitney cycles through her friend group and deals with 
being biracial in a white community; Zoe adjusts to the distance from her alcoholic 
movie-star mother; Jake comes out; Mia explores her identity from indie nerd to 
hottie and back again. The book is structured episodically, broken up into compact 
sections identified by month, within which are a few two- to three-page chapters 
that follow the character named at the beginning. The effect is like a detailed look 
through the yearbooks from somebody else’s school, as events happen in quick 
snapshots but the narrative marches steadily on. Unfortunately, characterization is 
thin; the short dips into the kids’ lives focus mostly on stuff that happens to them 
rather than who they are, so they’re more compelling for their situations than for 
themselves, and the dizzying array of secondary and tertiary characters makes it 
even harder to keep track of the protagonists. There’s still fascination in following 
a group of people over time, especially when so many of the threads conclude in 
romantic triumph, so readers may enjoy seeing the multiple plots play out and the 
cast successfully achieve graduation.  DS
MAnzAno, soniA Miracle on 133rd Street; illus. by Marjorie Priceman. Ath-
eneum, 2015 42p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-689-87887-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2892-7 $10.99  
R 6-8 yrs 
When the roast José’s mother is preparing for Christmas Eve dinner won’t fit in 
their tiny apartment oven, José jokes that they need a pizza oven. Papi thinks this 
is actually a good idea, so he and José box up the roast and head to the local piz-
zeria to see if they can use the oven there. The owner, Mr. Ray, agrees, and three 
hours later José and his dad are taking the magnificent roast—and Mr. Ray—home 
with them. Along the way, the smell of the roast evokes changes in the people they 
encounter: people haggling over the sale of a Christmas tree come to an amiable 
agreement, grumpy neighbors become light-hearted, and the other apartment 
residents follow their noses and hearts to José’s family’s dinner table for a shared 
celebration. Best known for her role as Maria on “Sesame Street,” author Man-
zano here crafts a solid modern folktale about the power of food to bring people 
together. The text, liberally sprinkled with dialogue, is well suited to reading aloud 
and injects welcome notes of humor. The almost-magical allure of the roast’s ap-
petizing scent is palpable as well: “The aroma seemed to lift José to his feet and 
wrap itself around all of them like a scarf. There was nothing left to do but hug.” 
December 2015 • 211
Priceman’s vibrant gouache and ink art utilizes a zesty palette of reds, golds, and 
oranges balanced by deep blues and soft greens, carefully placed accents of black 
and white, and dynamic compositions to bring the multicultural cast and urban 
setting to vivid life. Share this with students before the winter holidays begin (pos-
sibly followed by a group meal), or use it to fill the pre-feast wait time at a family 
or neighborhood holiday celebration.  JH
Meyer, MArissA Winter. Feiwel, 2015 [800p] (The Lunar Chronicles)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-312-64298-3 $22.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-06875-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Cinder, the scrappy cyborg from Earth who is actually the rightful heir to the 
Lunar throne (from Cinder, BCCB 2/12, et al.), is finally on her way to the moon 
to overthrow Levana, the imposter queen who is poised to extend her tyrannical 
rule to Earth. Fortunately, Cinder is joined by a ragtag group of loyal and heroic 
friends: Kai, the Earthen emperor whose ruse as Levana’s fiancé grants the group 
entrance to Luna; Cress, a computer whiz who can outwit any security system; 
Thorne, a cocky pilot and helpful thief; and Wolf, a former Lunar soldier whose 
brute strength is bound to be useful in the coming revolution. Cinder also has a 
few allies on Luna as well: Scarlet, Cinder’s fierce friend who was kidnapped by 
Lunar soldiers, and Winter, Levana’s stepdaughter, who has witnessed the horrors 
of Levana’s rule first hand. Despite their careful planning, the group is continu-
ally outmatched by Levana, who manages to stay one step ahead of them at each 
turn—will Cinder and her friends find their happy ending or will the villain emerge 
victorious? This final installment to Meyer’s Lunar Chronicles mostly earns its 800-
plus page count, weaving together the multiple threads spun in the previous sci-fi 
fairy tale mashups into a complete, compelling final tapestry. Characters are given 
room to breathe, and their previously sketchy, sometimes stereotypical qualities are 
given more nuance here. Prior knowledge is obviously a must, but fans of the series 
will happily settle in with this tome and sigh at its satisfactory conclusion.  KQG 
Miller, sArAH The Borden Murders: Lizzie Borden & the Trial of the Century.
See review under Leaver, p. 206.
MlynowsKi, sArAH Upside-Down Magic; by Sarah Mlynowski, Emily Jenkins, 
and Lauren Myracle. Scholastic, 2015 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-80045-7 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-80047-1 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Daughter of a powerful headmaster of a magical school, ten-year-old Nory wants 
to be a magician, too. Unfortunately, her magical abilities are “wonky”: a simple at-
tempt at the basic black kitten transformation ends in Nory becoming a half-kitten/
half-beaver creature who gnaws up her father’s furniture and leaves a pile of poop 
in his study. There’s no way she can attend her father’s prestigious Sage Academy, 
so he sends her off to attend Dunwiddle Magic School, which has a program in 
Upside-Down (i.e., wonky) Magic for students. When a mean girl starts bullying a 
fellow UDM student, it’s up to Nory and her classmates to save the day with their 
unusual powers, and she discovers that having upside-down magic isn’t such a bad 
212 • The bulleTin
thing after all. Yes, this is formulaic and predictable, but it’s also fast-paced and 
fun. The descriptions of Nory’s transformations gone awry are vivid and amusing, 
and humorous details—such as obstreperous classmate Bax who frequently turns 
into a rock, requiring a trip to the school nurse every time—add to the appeal. 
The urgency of Nory’s concerns about being perceived as normal will also ring 
true to middle graders entering the perils of adolescence. Kids who enjoy a touch 
of magic but who aren’t ready to commit to a larger page-count or more intense 
storyline may happily fall under Nory’s spell.  JH
Moore, wes This Way Home; by Wes Moore with Shawn Goodman. Delacorte, 
2015 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99019-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74169-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98671-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Elijah Thomas and his pals Michael and Dylan are determined to enjoy one last 
hurrah of basketball glory before senior year and college recruiters inevitably send 
them down different paths. For the moment, their concentration is on the three-on-
three street ball championship held in a run-down but popular court on the divide 
between their own stable neighborhood and the seedier side of town. Michael has 
miraculously come up with a “sponsor” who supplies them with shoes and uniforms 
worthy of champs, but when he reluctantly admits there’s a gang connection to 
this windfall, the boys decide to play and win in their own old ratty gear, thereby 
incurring the wrath of their shadowy patron. Dylan is killed by a bullet to the 
back, Michael is scared stiff he’ll be next, and Elijah desperately seeks the help of a 
neighborhood man, an ex-Green Beret for whom he does yard work. Many readers, 
by process of elimination, will suss out Dylan’s killer and perhaps even the gang’s 
leader, but that won’t diminish the tense and tragic drama that leads to the revela-
tion. With its focus on African-American basketball talents who are challenged by 
off-court situation, this is a good call for fans of Kevin Waltman’s D-Bow series 
(Next, BCCB 3/14, Slump, BCCB 12/14) who are ready for a bit more grit.  EB
MurpHy, Julie Dumplin’. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2015 375p
ISBN 978-0-06-232718-5 $17.99  
R Gr. 8-10
Growing up in a small South Texas town can be pretty stifling, and Willowdean, a 
self-described fat girl who’s the daughter of the obsessed local pageant coordinator, 
certainly finds it so despite her impressive confidence. She deeply misses her late 
aunt Lucy, who lived with Will and her mother and who provided the unconditional 
acceptance of Will and her weight (Lucy weighed over 400 pounds) that Will never 
felt from her mother. Will decides to buck the system that says pageants aren’t for 
girls like her by entering, inspiring three other outsider girls to follow her lead, 
and together the four plan for their hopefully triumphant pageant experience. This 
richly enjoyable novel is much more than a pageant story, though; there’s Will’s 
smoldering romance with handsome co-worker Bo, her friendship break with long-
term bestie Ellen, and her realization that her deeply uncool outlier classmates are 
funny and interesting. Will’s adoration of Dolly Parton, which she shared with her 
aunt and which leads her and the other non-traditional pageant competitors to a 
distant drag bar, is a solid but never overdone theme, and she’s simultaneously a 
December 2015 • 213
shrewd observer of microaggressions and shamefacedly complicit in the stratifying 
of her classmates. This is a clever and funny book to please lovers of thoughtful 
romance and secret pageant fans.  DS
Myers, wAlTer deAn Monster: A Graphic Novel; ad. by Guy A. Sims; illus. by 
Dawud Anyabwile. Amistad/HarperCollins, 2015 153p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227500-4 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227499-1 $9.99  
R Gr. 8-12
Walter Dean Myers’ award-winning classic Monster (BCCB 5/99) gets the graphic 
novel treatment here, with an adaptation that is likely to please fans of the original. 
The groundbreaking story of Steve Harmon, a teen grappling with his sense of self 
while on trial for murder, survives the translation process surprisingly well, especially 
given the loss of the novel’s memorable storytelling format, with its combination 
of handwritten journal and movie script. Illustrator Anyabwile’s grayscale panels 
skillfully convey the intensity and stark emotion of Myers’ evocative prose, most 
notably in the use of close-ups to render the deeply personal nature of the story. 
Likewise, scene transitions and various framing techniques mirror the cinematic 
intent of the novel’s initial style and give readers a chance to consider the kind of 
film that may have emerged from the draft Steve writes during the trial. Adaptor 
Sims’ poetic revisions take some license with the text, some of which work better 
than others, but the underlying rhythm of the narrative remains. Since key points 
aren’t as clear, this unfortunately can’t function as an alternative or as an entry point 
to the novel; instead, consider this a solid supplement that uses textual variations 
and compelling art to add layers of discussion-worthy complexity.  AM 
nApoli, donnA Jo, ad. Treasury of Norse Mythology: Stories of Intrigue, Trickery, 
Love, and Revenge; illus. by Christina Balit. National Geographic, 2015 192p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-2099-6 $34.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-2098-9 $24.99  
R* Gr. 7-12
This newest volume in a striking series of mythology collections (Greek and 
Egyptian myths have already had their turn) focuses on eighteen Norse stories, 
packaged together in a sophisticated, visually stunning collection. These stories 
skew older than many collections, as rape (subtly referenced) and other violence 
(gleefully described) pop up, and the context information is dense with intriguing 
facts that will be richer if readers already have some historical knowledge. This is 
truly a layered work, with the illustrations standing alone as startling works of art, 
and the frequent informational sections (fact boxes, sidebars, character lists, maps, 
an introduction, a substantial afterword, and a bibliography) offering a thrilling 
amount of extra material for true fans. For those who just want some mythology, 
the key folks all get their due in lyrical, elegant stories that also rely on casual, 
sometimes snarky asides and wording to keep them accessible. Major themes are 
covered, from creation to destruction, with greed, jealousy, vengeance, lust, and 
adventure all examined through stories of Loki, Freyja, Thor, Odin, and other 
flawed but powerful gods. Gleaming blues, whites, and golds reference the snow 
and fire of the region, and the frequent double-page illustrations allow for authentic 
exploration of the grit and horror, wealth and capricious adventuring of Norse gods 
and goddesses. Older readers who haven’t revisited mythology recently will likely 
find this to be a treasure: it doesn’t skip the juicy stuff, there’s plenty of detail to 
214 • The bulleTin
explain how these myths evolved, and the accompanying illustrations make it clear 
this is no simple picture book. A table of contents organizes the stories up front; 
an index is also included.  AS
newMAn, pATriciA Ebola: Fears and Facts. Millbrook, 2015 48p illus. with 
photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-9240-0 $31.99  
R Gr. 4-7
Ebola may not currently be the lead story on the six o’clock news, but according to 
international health organizations, it is certain to make a comeback, and the harsh 
reality is that right now no sure preventive vaccine or cure is known. Newman traces 
the viral outbreak to its first appearance in the Democratic Republic of Congo in 
in 1976, where it was hastily (and somewhat inaccurately) named for the nearby 
Ebola River. With background on early misunderstandings of the disease in place, 
she turns to the 2014 pandemic of which most readers will be aware. It is, of course, 
a story not just of medical crisis but of cultural conflicts and xenophobic mistrust 
as well, as West Africans’ traditional patterns of personal, hands-on community 
care and their skepticism of foreigners collided with Western medicine’s more 
impersonal and aggressive approaches to disease control. A well-chosen selection 
of photographs underscores the text’s focus on the valiant efforts of African and 
Western medical workers and volunteers who risk their lives for sufferers, and on 
patients who are forced to forego the TLC of human contact in the hope of saving 
themselves and protecting their families and communities from contamination. 
Although publisher notes suggest this might “inform while helping to alleviate 
fears,” readers are not assuaged with an overly rosy view of Ebola’s near future. An 
appended FAQ section notes that Westerners are in relatively better circumstances 
to contain an outbreak and support victims’ general health while they fight the 
virus. However, while Newman’s unsensationalized account leaves room for hope, 
it refuses to whitewash grim news. A glossary, source notes, index, and resources 
for further information are included.  EB
nielsen, Jennifer A. A Night Divided. Scholastic, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-68242-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-68243-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7 
It’s four years now since the Wall has divided Berlin; twelve-year-old Gerta misses 
her brother and father, who were caught in West Berlin when the city was divided, 
and she hates life under the scrutiny of the East German Stasi. When Gerta catches 
glimpses of her father on the other side of the wall, she realizes he’s trying to send 
her a message; she pieces it together and finds a boarded-up old house with an 
ancient air-raid shelter in the basement, a shelter whose soft earthen walls can be 
dug into to create a tunnel. Since Gerta’s brother, Fritz, will shortly be called up for 
the army, Gerta and Fritz desperately excavate, knowing that this is their family’s 
last chance for freedom and reunion. The story is absorbing and deeply suspense-
ful, with plenty of ticking-clock tension and classic obstacles of bugged rooms and 
tunnel-dirt disposal. The plotting is sometimes facile, especially when it comes to 
Gerta’s relationship with her friend Anna and the climactic scenes when Gerta, 
Fritz, and a number of others make their break through the tunnel, giving the story 
the air of a good old live-action Disney adventure. Those grabbed audiences for a 
December 2015 • 215
reason, though, and this will be an eye-opening glimpse of history for readers not 
ready for Kephart’s Going Over (BCCB 6/14).  DS
oHlin, nAncy Consent. Simon Pulse, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-6490-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 9-12
Senior Bea Kim is having a hard time admitting to her true passion; the one time 
when her father walked in on her playing piano, a talent she clearly inherited from 
her professional pianist mother, who died giving birth to Bea, he flew into a tearful 
rage. When Dane, a gorgeous, talented new music teacher hears her play, however, 
he recognizes her as a prodigy. Ohlin wastes no narrative time on a slow build of Bea 
and Dane’s mutual attraction; they’re twitterpated at first sight, he by her talent and 
she by his looks, his sexy British accent, and his passionate knowledge of classical 
music. When he insists that she play for his former teacher at Juilliard, her talent 
proves to be the real deal, and she has to find a way to tell her father that she will 
be following in her mother’s footsteps. Meanwhile, she and Dane have consum-
mated their passion while in New York, and though they agree to stay away from 
each other until she is eighteen, well, there’s a dark, locked practice room at the 
school. . . . At this point, it seems contrived and obligatory that they get caught 
and Bea finds out that he may be a repeat offender, as the book devolves from a 
steamy mentor/protégé romance that clearly benefits the protégé into an excuse 
to expose and rail against consent laws and impose a flimsy moral and practical 
lesson. Bea’s wearing passivity and perpetual angst put her somewhat out of step 
with twenty-first century girl power sensibilities, but that is also what makes her a 
perfect heroine for the kind of story this is—a romance where talent is the broody, 
seductive vampire that almost leads her to her doom but ends up lighting the way 
to her destiny.  KC 
peeT, AMAndA Dear Santa, Love, Rachel Rosenstein; by Amanda Peet and Andrea 
Troyer; illus. by Christine Davenier. Doubleday, 2015 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51062-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51061-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51063-8 $10.99  
R 5-8 yrs
At Christmastime, “Rachel felt like a kid in a candy store with no mouth”; much 
as she loves the holiday, her Jewish family won’t put up lights or even a tree. De-
termined to taste a little of that sweet Christmas magic, Rachel pens an imploring 
letter to Santa (“I know that you are a fair person and will not mind that I am 
Jewish”) and preps the house with Santa treats and decorations on Christmas Eve. 
She’s crushed when the jolly old elf doesn’t show, but some wise words from her 
mother, a trip to the snowy park, and a traditional Chinese-restaurant Christmas 
dinner (where she meets other non-Christmassy classmates) smooths her ruffled 
feathers. While the book engages in some gentle comedy (Rachel leaves Santa latkes 
with chocolate chips smushed into them as a snack), it’s both good-humored and 
sympathetic about our heroine’s feelings; the reminder from her mother, a nurse, 
that some work still must be done even on holidays is an important point that 
even young Christmas celebrants must sometimes face. Davenier’s loosely flowing, 
kinetic line and slightly muted watercolors are festive yet idiosyncratic; the shaded 
teal and softened red that predominate are neither Christmas nor Hanukkah, yet 
216 • The bulleTin
they bring their own celebratory vigor, and they contrast effectively with creamy 
white backgrounds and gleaming white snow. There are a lot of kids in Rachel’s 
situation, and sharing this with them would be a mitzvah.  DS
peeT, MAl The Murdstone Trilogy. Candlewick, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-8184-5 $18.99  
R* Gr. 10 up
In a world of big fat fantasy trilogies, Philip Murdstone, a frowsy but award-winning 
middle-aged author who made his bones with the “Sensitive Dippy Boy genre” is in 
danger of dying a poor, forgotten man. His haute agent won’t hear of that, and she 
insists that he turn his attention to the genre he despises. Drowning in self-doubt, 
he takes a drunken ramble to the standing stones outside his village, where he slips 
into a trance and receives the first book all at once, leaving him no work except the 
typing. Unfortunately, the story comes complete with Pocket Wellfair, a coarse, 
demanding, and untrustworthy narrator from another dimension who intrudes 
not only on his prose but into his life with a Faustian ultimatum. Pocket’s book 
is an unprecedented success that outshines all of young adult publishing’s recent 
unprecedented successes, and now the pressure is really on poor Murdstone, who 
has no idea how to corral Pocket into writing the next installment. Peet sends up 
the entire young adult publishing enterprise in this funny, hopelessly irreverent 
parody. Utterly unencumbered with any commitment to political correctness or, 
indeed, sensitivities of any kind, this book, released in the UK in 2014, will be 
relished by American readers whose taste for stunning verbal finesse outweighs 
any tendency to outrage over carnal humor, cultural indelicacies, or lack of respect 
for the fantasy genre as such, making it a meaty feast for knowing teens who can 
laugh at what they love and hoot at naughty jokes they aren’t supposed to admit 
are funny. An angry edge of authorial disgruntlement over the state of publishing 
only serves to sharpen the wit as Peet literally and figuratively scours the shire of 
the fantasy genre while reminding readers of what artful literary language should 
sound like.  KC 
pingK, ruBin Samurai Santa: A Very Ninja Christmas; written and illus. by Rubin 
Pingk. Simon, 2015 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3057-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3058-6 $10.99 
 R 3-6 yrs
When the snow falls, Yukio yearns for a snowball fight, but all the other ninjas 
refuse for fear of Santa’s disapproval. Yukio therefore determines to “run Santa out 
of Ninja Village,” and while initially the ninjas successfully chase off the red-garbed 
intruder, they’re suddenly faced by a white-bearded samurai with an army of snow-
men. A massive snowball fight ensues, the Samurai disappears unscathed, and Yukio 
returns to the house to find a pile of gifts and a note from “Samurai Santa”: “I hope 
you enjoyed the EPIC snowball fight. I made it just for you.” Don’t look for logic 
or historical validity here: this is about combining the popular juggernaut of ninjas 
with the ever-popular figure of Santa to create some kid-appealing mayhem, and 
it’s satisfyingly on-target there. The digital art employs a limited palette of black, 
rusty red, and slate blue, adding a retro touch to the solidly lined figures; it’s a 
sophisticated look that’s at times a bit dull compared to the story, but the array of 
December 2015 • 217
black-clad kid ninjas cut a fine figure against the snow, and the army of snowmen 
manage to look like worthy opponents without being overtly frightening. The 
title is a clarion call to just the kids who will revel in this outing, and you’ll likely 
know exactly who they are, so confiscate their throwing stars and get reading.  DS
pinKney, AndreA dAvis Rhythm Ride: A Road Trip through the Motown 
Sound. Roaring Brook, 2015 [176p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59643-973-3 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Assuming a self-styled narrative voice, the “Groove,” Pinkney introduces readers 
to Detroit entrepreneur Berry Gordy, who took inspiration from the Ford Motor 
Company’s assembly methods and applied it to manufacturing a distinctive musical 
sound and assembling his own line of highly polished performers from local talent. 
Readers who are interested enough to glom onto this title will already be familiar 
with the luminous names dropped here: The Supremes, Smokey Robinson, The 
Four Tops, The Temptations, Marvin Gaye, Martha Reeves and the Vandellas, The 
Jackson Five, etc. Kids may not realize, though, just how much “finishing school” 
work and choreography went into the groups’ signature performance styles, and 
how Gordy’s California dreamin’ and personal involvement with Diana Ross split 
the company and drove away many of its biggest stars. Pinkney spreads her coverage 
thin, and page space better devoted to the lowdown on Motown musicians is too 
often spent on the Groove’s patter. Moreover, although black and white photographs 
abound, relatively few feature Berry Gordy himself. An index, bibliography, and 
timeline are included, but the most appealing feature of the end matter is a lengthy 
discography with Motown hits arranged by year—the perfect guide to YouTube 
viewing, or shuffling through Grandpa’s vinyl.  EB
preller, JAMes The Fall. Feiwel, 2015 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-312-64301-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
“I am, you should realize by now, a complete idiot,” narrator Sam says flatly as 
he unspools the story of his classmate—and maybe friend?—Morgan, who killed 
herself after bullies—and maybe Sam?—tormented her online and in person. As 
the aftermath ripples through high school, Sam documents the stealthy growth 
of his off-campus friendship with Morgan and her clearly pre-existing problems 
alongside his cruel yet joyous scapegoating of her to please queen bee Athena Luikin, 
“a goddess in tight jeans and a North Face jacket.” Sam’s narration is an accessible 
blend of sarcastic and culpable as he peels back the layers of his relationship with 
Morgan, and his short, often barren sentences are shrewd and emotionally telling 
(“Every kid has secrets,” says Sam after considering his own suicide. “Parents are 
mostly in the dark”). There’s inevitably a programmatic aspect to the story, but it’s 
still no simple tale of amoral bullies and innocent victims. Readers will easily relate 
to Sam’s being torn between the right thing and the immediately satisfying thing, 
and they’ll find the book elicits plenty of discussion.  DS
218 • The bulleTin
rAsH, Andy Archie the Daredevil Penguin; written and illus. by Andy Rash. Vi-
king, 2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-451-47123-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
Archie is the risk-taker of his penguin colony, whether climbing Mount Nosebleed, 
tobogganing through Craggy Pass, or, in his latest venture, attempting to fly via 
mechanical means to Iceberg Nine to partake in a fish fry. His flight attempts (a 
giant slingshot, Flap-O-Matic™ wings, and a rocket) are valiant efforts but each 
ultimately fails, and another penguin guesses what Archie is trying to hide: he is 
“afraid of the water and the strange creatures who lurk in the briny deep.” When 
his last flight trial lands him directly in the sea, Archie must confront his fears head 
on, but fortunately, the creatures he dreaded quickly and kindly surround him with 
helpful advice and encouragement to help him swim. While the ease with which 
Archie conquers his fears is more convenient than realistic, the consolation and 
support offered by the ocean dwellers is still satisfying. The text, presented entirely 
in speech bubbles, is snappy and straightforward with entertaining vocabulary 
(“Zounds!”) interspersed into the narrative. The humor is underscored by Rash’s 
high-contrast, slightly cartoonish digital illustrations in which big-beaked Archie, 
amusingly differentiated from the other penguins by his red safety helmet, intrepidly 
hurtles through the air and barrel-rolls under the sea. Kids who get a kick out of the 
penguins from Madagascar movies will find Archie’s stunts particularly diverting.  JH
rAy, deliA Finding Fortune. Ferguson/Farrar, 2015 [288p] illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-0-374-30065-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Sixth-grader Ren can’t believe her mom is going on a date with Rick while Ren’s 
father is away in Afghanistan, even though her dad had moved out prior to his 
deployment. When she sees a sign advertising rooms for rent in a dying town 
nearby, she heads over, vowing not to return until Rick is no longer in the picture. 
Ren manages to trick the landlady, Hildy, into letting her stay, and while poking 
around, Ren and another tenant, a boy named Hugh, discover that Hildy is look-
ing for a cache of pearls that belonged to her father and vow to find it for her. This 
is a solid middle-grade tale where seeking a treasure acts as both a catalyst and a 
mirror for Ren’s character development; she must use her wits and develop her 
empathy to succeed in her quest. She also learns a good bit about the pearl button 
trade of the Mississippi River (an author’s note, complete with photographs of 
historic Muscatine, Iowa, provides factual detail). As Ren’s discoveries and insights 
accumulate, the payoff is assured and multilayered, resulting in a well-conceived 
mystery where learning about history, working together, preserving the past, and 
coming to terms with change are as valuable as the treasure itself.  KC
reAgAn, JeAn How to Catch Santa; illus. by Lee Wildish. Knopf, 2015 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49840-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49839-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49841-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
Oh, that elusive Santa—will any kid ever manage to ask him the important ques-
December 2015 • 219
tions, share the crucial information, and just plain get a look at the big guy? The 
narrator here understands the dilemma and walks viewers through the possibilities, 
suggesting clever ways to stop Santa in his tracks, such as leaving a note for him 
filled with glitter (“glitter will sprinkle all over him and he’ll leave a trail”) or set-
ting cookies for him beneath a string booby-trapped with bells. The narrative line 
is pretty rambly, and most of it isn’t really about how to catch Santa so much as 
to find ways to prove he’s been there; however, it’s a playful and spirited holiday-
themed jest with amusing detail and opportunities for eliciting parental Christmas 
stories. Digital art employs spidery lines with saturated but not overbright colors, 
and the spreads are most effective when text and art interweave in lists or diagrams. 
This might even convince Santa-hunting kids to eschew tablets and nannycams for 
traditional low-tech (and easier to foil) approaches—and make sure they check out 
the amusing endpapers featuring letters to Santa.  DS
resAu, lAurA The Lightning Queen. Scholastic, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-80084-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-80086-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 4-7
When twelve-year-old Mateo visits his grandfather Teo on the Hill of Dust in rural 
Mexico, he soon finds himself drawn into stories of Teo’s childhood and his unlikely 
friendship with the remarkable Esma, self-proclaimed Gypsy Queen of Lightning. 
Eleven-year-old Teo is a lonely outsider still mourning the loss of his twin sister 
when Esma sweeps into his small Mixteco community as part of a traveling Romani 
caravan. The two quirky youngsters quickly see each other as kindred spirits, and a 
series of small adventures cements their connection, as they foster injured animals, 
face down a despotic teacher, and defeat the schemes of Teo’s uncle. As Mateo’s 
grandfather’s stories draw to a close, Mateo senses that the tale is not complete 
and sets out to find Esma. With this beautifully rendered novel, Resau delivers a 
simple yet profound story about the magic of friendship. The two main characters 
spring to life in equal but different ways: Teo with his quiet power and Esma with 
her fragile spark. The evocative prose perfectly captures both the setting and the 
personalities of the memorable cast, deftly connecting people and place. The nar-
rative explores themes of acceptance that will resonate with contemporary readers 
while paying tribute to the folkloric roots of the communities that inspired the story. 
Readers looking for new, often marginalized groups to read about will appreciate 
the thoughtful portrayal of Mixteco and Romani cultures that celebrates diversity 
rather than exploiting it. Overall, this is a poignant, lovely work that weaves humor, 
heartbreak, and whimsy into a narrative spell that will surely capture readers’ hearts. 
End matter includes detailed notes about the Romani and Mixteco peoples and 
Mexican Spanish-English, Mixteco-English, and Romani-English glossaries.  AM
rosA, soniA When the Slave Esperança Garcia Wrote a Letter; tr. from the Portu-
guese by Jane Springer; illus. by Luciana Justiniani Hees. Groundwood/House 
of Anansi, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-1-55498-729-0 $18.95 
 Ad Gr. 2-5
“Esperança Garcia is famous in the Brazilian state of Piauí, and I would like her to be 
celebrated all over Brazil and the rest of the world.” Author Rosa makes a good case 
for this wider recognition through her portrayal of the eighteenth-century slave who 
220 • The bulleTin
learned to read and write from the Franciscan missionaries who owned her family, 
and was later sold apart from her husband and older children to the cruel Captain 
Antonio Vieira de Couto. Garcia took the probably unprecedented step of writing 
a letter of complaint to the regional governor asking for relief, and when a copy of 
the letter was discovered in a Piauí archive in 1979, it became a testimony to the 
tribulations and resistance of the indigenous enslaved population. Rosa notes that 
there is no record of a reply from the governor, and this bitter uncertainty is built 
into the reimagining of Esperança’s story: “Esperança Garcia could think of nothing 
else. The answer could arrive at any moment.” The universal sadness of the slave’s 
story, together with Hees’ arresting folkloric artwork that renders Esperança as a 
stalwart, dignified profile with a wide eye on the future, will draw in the audience. 
However, since the letter itself is the crux of this tale, much more explanation—or 
even informed conjecture—is needed. How did a slave come by writing paper and 
pen? How did she get the letter itself to the governor? Why was a copy of the letter 
found in Piauí while the original is archived in Lisbon? While these omissions are 
disappointing (particularly in view of the fact that no source notes are offered), this 
title can nonetheless provide younger children with a broader view of the history 
of slavery beyond the United States.  EB
rozier, lucy MArgAreT Jackrabbit McCabe & the Electric Telegraph; illus. by Leo 
Espinosa. Schwartz & Wade, 2015 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37844-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37843-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37845-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
With long, loping legs that propel him past horses and trains, Jackrabbit McCabe 
is the fastest thing to hit his prairie town since . . . well, ever. That is, until the 
electric telegraph arrives. When a race proves that this newfangled contraption 
can deliver a message faster than Jackrabbit, he must find a new sense of purpose 
in this tall tale of technology and identity. Rozier’s tone and vernacular hit the 
right notes, with thematic styling and turns of phrase that feel native to American 
folkloric tradition and set this up as a likely companion to John Henry tales (such 
as Lester’s John Henry, BCCB 10/94). There’s a touch of the Provensens’ retro style 
in Espinosa’s fresh and colorful pencil and digital illustrations, which match the 
sense of promise and progress inherent to such a story. The folksy prose, winking 
allusions, and movement of the tale make this a solid readaloud choice; an author’s 
note, complete with a Morse Code key, might inspire readers to send messages in 
the new old-fashioned way.  AA 
ruBin, susAn goldMAn Sondheim: The Man Who Changed Musical Theater. Por-
ter/Roaring Brook, 2015 [192p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-884-2 $21.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-10
Hitting the sweet spot for stagestruck tweens and teens is this lively biography of 
Stephen Sondheim, the face that launched a thousand high school musical produc-
tions. The tense collaborations, the glorious hits, the deflating busts, the eyes fixed 
on the next big thing—all the putting-on-the-show tropes are rooted in reality in 
Sondheim’s career, and the focus shifts quickly from early years to a chronological 
December 2015 • 221
review of his productions, how they fared with critics and the public, their in-
novations, and of course, the backstage gossip. With each chapter’s spotlight on a 
particular play, kids who are interested or involved in a Sondheim production can 
skip directly to that work and enjoy a satisfying encapsulation of its history. Lots 
of black and white pictures from the original cast productions are included, as are 
source notes, a bibliography, and lists of Sondheim’s stage works and their film and 
television adaptations. Have extra copies on hand when the high school casting 
call goes out for West Side Story or Into the Woods or Sweeney Todd and all the Tiny 
Coopers come out of the woodwork.  EB
sAnds, Kevin The Blackthorn Key. Aladdin, 2015 376p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4651-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4653-2 $10.99  
R Gr. 4-6
As an orphan in 1660s London, Christopher is lucky: he managed to find a warm 
and brilliant apothecary willing to take him on as an apprentice. When his master 
is brutally murdered, a heartbroken Christopher is determined to find the villains 
and bring them to justice. He has a keen eye for puzzles, handy as all final clues his 
master left are coded, and he’s aided by his loyal best friend, Tom, but that’s really 
not much against a murderous crew, some of whom turn out to be from within the 
one group Christopher thought he could trust. The protagonist is memorable from 
the start: an amusing opening scene establishes him as a risk-taker and impulsive 
kid (a gunpowder experiment results in the apothecary shop’s taxidermized bear 
being shot); these traits then pay off in later credibility when Christopher flings 
himself repeatedly into startling danger. Accurate historical details— the background 
on the apprentice system, the period take on childhood—add depth, and details 
such as the recipe for saltpeter involving pigeon droppings and urine will surely 
be key booktalk features. A brief author’s note explains some spelling and calendar 
choices, and a warning reminds readers that they shouldn’t be trying anything in 
here at home.  AS
sAy, Allen The Inker’s Shadow; written and illus. by Allen Say. Scholastic, 
2015 [80p]
ISBN 978-0-545-43776-9 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
“I was fifteen when I decided to go to America and make a name for myself,” 
says author-illustrator Say in this followup to his memoir Drawing from Memory 
(BCCB 9/11). Here he chronicles his stay in the early 1950s as a working student 
at a California military academy, then his switch to a public high school with art 
opportunities that he devoured, leading eventually to a scholarship for classes at an 
art academy and finally to his graduation from American high school. Throughout, 
he’s almost entirely on his own—his father lives in California but is so distant that 
young Allen must rent a room in a hotel for most of his high school years—so he 
greatly values those adults who take the time to encourage his talent and mentor 
him in art and in life. It’s a highly unusual experience, and Say’s open, heavily il-
lustrated format helps steep readers in the days of a young teen fending for himself 
in a country where he barely speaks the language (at least initially) and where his 
face is that of the recent national enemy. Say’s narrative style is engaging yet low-
key, so emotional moments revealing his fury at his father or his gratitude toward 
222 • The bulleTin
his benefactors stand out vividly. The art varies from cartooning to heavily hatched 
line drawings to line, pencil, and watercolor scenes, many of them created by the 
young art student at the time to document and practice; their style is more informal 
and immediate than Say’s best-known portraiture. While knowledge of the first 
book will provide some framing and useful backstory, especially on young Allen’s 
cartooning career, it’s not necessary for enjoying this tale of a resolute teenager 
finding value in an extraordinarily challenging time. An author’s note provides 
additional detail and photographs of the main players.  DS
scHMATz, pAT Lizard Radio. Candlewick, 2015 282p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7635-3 $16.99 
 R Gr. 9-12
In this dystopian, futuristic novel, gender is rigidly structured, enforced, and 
observed. If you don’t conform by the time you near adulthood, you have a last 
chance with a gender reinforcement camp, but you’re pretty screwed if you don’t 
make it there, as the only place left for you is Blight (more really needn’t be said 
with a name like that). Lizard was raised to resist conformity by a loving but flighty 
adopted mother, but now that Lizard is at camp, she must find ways to adjust. 
There Lizard finds many true friends, something she didn’t have in the outside 
world. This closeness and her first real crush provide respite from the sinister drugs 
and camp activities designed to push gender compliance. Lizard as a character is 
endearing from the start, relying on a pretend Saurian identity to push the idea that 
she doesn’t fit. Schmatz freewheels her way through various made-up or reassigned 
terms, assuming the reader will catch the meaning or not; this device adds to the 
world building as much as the more careful sections where context and history is 
offered via conversation. Sci-fi buffs who love character-driven novels and teens on 
the GLBTQ spectrum who are looking for a book that isn’t realistic fiction will all 
find much to appreciate in this clever, edgy novel.  AS
senzAi, n. H. Ticket to India. Wiseman/Simon, 2015 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-4814-2258-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2260-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
The death of her beloved grandfather brings sixth-grader Maya and her family 
from California to Karachi, Pakistan, her mother’s birthplace and the site of many 
blissful visits with Maya’s grandparents. Maya’s grandmother is understandably 
distraught over her husband’s sudden passing but she’s intent on going ahead with 
their planned trip to India, despite her family’s protests. Maya is shocked to learn 
that her naniamma only settled in Karachi when, as a Muslim, she was forced to 
flee India during the 1947 Partition. Maya and her older sister Zara decide to help 
their grandmother on her clandestine mission to recover a piece of her family’s 
history in India, but when the journey goes awry, Zara forges ahead alone. This is 
mostly a history lesson about India, Pakistan, and their fraught relationship, but 
the information is conveyed initially in the lively conversations between Maya 
and her grandmother by which Maya learns both about her family’s past and their 
homelands. The device becomes more forced and awkward when the sisters conve-
niently overhear strangers talking about India and Pakistan’s current state or meet 
random people whose only purpose is to happily provide further facts and tidbits 
about the two countries. Still, Senzai makes an effort to show readers both the 
December 2015 • 223
beauty of India’s countryside and the generosity of its people alongside the harsh-
ness of its economics and the desperation of those on the margins of society. Pair 
this with Nye’s The Turtle of Oman (BCCB 10/14) for an compelling look at two 
kids negotiating their places in their family’s history and country of origin.  KQG
sHeinMel, AlyssA Faceless. Scholastic, 2015 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-67601-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-67602-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Maisie is out on a run and thinking about junior prom with 
her beloved boyfriend, Chirag, when a storm-felled electrical wire burns her side 
and her face, the latter so savagely that her choices are a lifetime commitment to 
reconstructive surgery or a face transplant. The face transplant seems the obvious 
decision, but Maisie struggles with life post-transplant; she loathes her scars, rages 
against her medication regiment, and mourns what she’s lost (she’s not allowed 
to run anymore) and losing (she can’t cope with being merely Chirag’s dutiful 
project) through the year following her transplant. It’s a compelling concept, and 
Maisie’s emotional torment is authentically conveyed; her interest in her donor 
adds a thoughtful dimension. However, Maisie’s not very outer-directed even 
before the accident, and while her self-pity is understandable, her unrelieved self-
hatred and ableism makes it hard to connect to her as a character; additionally, 
the implications for adult life, including the possibility that Maisie won’t be able 
to have children because of the immunosuppressive medication, are mentioned 
but left largely unexplored despite their dramatic potential. Nonetheless, this is a 
high-concept and easily booktalkable read, and could be paired with Burgess’ Sara’s 
Face (BCCB 6/07) to generate plenty of lively discussion.  DS
siy, AlexAndrA Spidermania: Friends on the Web; illus. with photographs by 
Dennis Kunkel et al. Holiday House, 2015 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-2871-7 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8234-3523-4 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
With an estimated 100,000 spider species thriving today—and roughly only 
46,000 identified —it’s unlikely that young arachnophiles will become sated with 
this engrossing subject anytime soon. Therefore, welcome to the spider collection 
yet another title, which is distinguished for its admirable harmony of text and il-
lustration. Immediately eye-catching are the pristine color photographs (credited 
to various sources) and Kunkel’s vividly colorized electron micrographs. Detailed 
captioning allows browsers and visual learners to cull vast amounts of informa-
tion on spider physiology without ever consulting the text, but what a shame it 
would be to miss the eeew! moments that Siy so liberally provides. The infamous 
black widow, it turns out, isn’t quite as lethal as her reputation suggests, but her 
cousin, the Australian redback, does eat her mate “unless he dances for at least one 
hundred minutes.” And then there’s the sac spider who entombs herself with her 
newly laid eggs, dies, and nourishes her hatchlings postmortem as “they feast on 
their mother’s body until they are old enough to live on their own.” Useful end 
matter includes both the expected—index, websites, glossary, resources—and the 
unexpected—an eye pattern chart and a flow chart–styled list of questions to aid in 
224 • The bulleTin
spider identification. Face-out this arresting cover to lure and capture kids prowling 
around the 595s.  EB
sMiTH, sHerri l. The Toymaker’s Apprentice; illus. by Sarah Watts. Putnam, 
2015 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25295-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 5-7
Memories of his recently deceased mother haunt Stefan’s home in nineteenth-
century Nuremberg, so the young boy decides to strike out on his own, with hopes 
that his skills gained as his toymaker father’s apprentice will earn him a job elsewhere. 
No sooner is Stefan out the door, though, than his peculiar uncle, Christian Dros-
selmeyer, requests that Stefan join him on a dangerous journey. Seven years ago, 
hubris led Christian, the royal clockmaker of the kingdom of Boldavia, to accidently 
incite an uprising of mice and rats that left the Royal Princess cursed; Christian is 
tasked with the responsibility of find the krakatook, a magical nut that can break 
the spell, and Stefan’s just the boy to help him. A voyage filled with spectacular 
automatons, talking squirrels, and enemies at every turn ensues, culminating in a 
mighty battle that pits young Stefan against the seven-headed Mouse King. Stefan’s 
story alternates with that of Ernst, an old rat and troubadour, who sings of the 
long ago tragedy of Hameln and wonders if the current mouse rebellion will end 
the same way. Smith manages to tease out the darker elements of her inspiration, 
the Nutcracker, while still maintaining a sense of whimsy, resulting in a story that 
blends wonder, melancholy, and adventure. Deft pacing builds tension both in the 
human and mouse worlds, compelling readers forward to the ultimate collision of 
the two species. Stefan makes a winning and sympathetic protagonist, but it’s Ernst 
who steals the show, with a wit and wisdom that both entertains and intrigues. 
An author’s note elaborates on the several iterations of the Nutcracker and Smith’s 
fascination with the tale.  KQG 
sTeggAll, susAn Colors; written and illus. by Susan Steggall. Frances Lincoln, 
2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-84780-742-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 2-6 yrs
A parade of lovingly rendered vehicles, identified in chunky font; a gallery of objects, 
posed solo on the page and identified by color in chunky font; we’ve seen both these 
picture book concepts before. Steggall fuses these themes into something different, 
something more—a introduction to the color wheel that bypasses explanation in 
favor of demonstration. She opens with “red dump truck” and “red digger” on 
facing pages and moves on to “orange digger” and “orange roller” on the following 
spread. The roller is back again as the color shifts to yellow, and it’s paired with a 
yellow bulldozer. Find that text pattern and you’re only halfway there; there’s still 
the color pattern to discover, as the image featured on the recto of each spread is 
a different shade of the named color, closely related to the image that follows the 
page turn. Thus “orange digger” is visually related to the red of the previous page, 
while “orange roller” is related to “yellow roller” on the next. Steggall optimizes 
each vehicle’s hue by placing it against a background designed to either mute or 
pop the color, and all the vehicles make an encore appearance at the end against a 
plain white backdrop. The inclusion of pink, white, gray, and black, which muscle 
December 2015 • 225
in between purple and red, deviates from the standard six-color circle, and the 
exclusion of brown means that little kids won’t find the entire kindergarten color 
canon represented. They’ll surely get the idea of color relationship, though, and 
the bound book promises a die-cut color wheel mounted in the back cover, which 
kids will doubtless delight in spinning.  EB
sTiefvATer, MAggie The Anatomy of Curiosity; by Maggie Stiefvater, Tessa Grat-
ton, and Brenna Yovanoff. Carolrhoda Lab, 2015 286p
ISBN 978-1-4677-2398-5 $18.99  
R Gr. 9-12
The Merry Sisters of Fate (as these three authors and co-bloggers call themselves) 
return with another book of instruction and support for aspiring authors. As in 
The Curiosities (BCCB 1/13), the emphasis is on providing a conscious look at 
craft. An introduction suggests that readers can simply read each novella (there are 
three, one by each author) sans commentary, or they can focus on the pieces as 
examples of the particular emphasis of each writer (Stiefvater’s primary emphasis 
is character, Gratton’s is world building, and Yovanoff’s is the idea behind the 
work). Each author speaks to all three aspects in further introductory material, 
but the prologues to their individual pieces focus specifically on the area in which 
they feel most invested. Additionally, comments on each story pinpoint how their 
foci turn into strategies in their fiction. Gratton is perhaps best at this, and that’s 
a good thing, as her contribution is the most subtle in terms of how features of 
world building matter to story development, theme, and character arcs. In fact, her 
entry offers a case study in how close reading can reveal unexpected connections. 
The pieces themselves vary considerably: Stiefvater tells an intriguing story about 
a very ladylike character with an unusual diet; Gratton explores the aftermath of a 
devastating war in which former enemies negotiate gender differences and passion 
in the midst of cleaning up leftover magical bombs; and Yovanoff creates a writing 
persona critiquing her way through multiple versions of a mostly realistic story about 
drowning—actually and metaphorically—in the midst of a drought. Appreciating 
all three stories equally will be a challenge to adherents of any particular genre, 
but the writing instruction, which includes advice on what makes a good critique 
partner and some smartly expanded takes on the adage to write what you know, 
has broad applicability for realists and fantasists alike.  KC 
sylvesTer, Kevin Minrs. McElderry, 2015 332p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4039-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4041-7 $10.99  
R Gr. 5-7
Christopher is the child of parents who agreed to live on Perses, part of a mining 
operation on a planetoid that is sending ore back to earth. No one’s terribly alarmed 
about the upcoming two-month blackout where communications with Earth will 
be impossible, until raiders strike just as the blackout begins, killing most of the 
colonists and hunting down the survivors. Christopher is not only overwhelmed 
by the stress of keeping littler kids alive and hopeful, but he also encounters a truly 
awful secret the adults of Perses knew (not all horrifying jobs are being carried out by 
machines), his peaceful approach is challenged regularly, and there is a spy in their 
midst who is working with the raiders. It’s a lot of plot, and occasionally second-
ary characters become more device than fully developed humans, but Christopher 
himself is compelling as he strives against his own despair and the crushing odds 
226 • The bulleTin
they all face. The ending guarantees a sequel, and fans of action-drive sci-fi will 
likely want to keep an eye out for it.  AS
TAMM, HenriK Ninja Timmy; written and illus. by Henrik Tamm. Delacorte, 
2015 211p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99170-7 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74451-5 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39021-7 $9.99  
R Gr. 4-6
In this Swedish import, a young tinkerer cat learns to be a ninja and sets out to 
save his town from an evil blue bunny that wants to rob the town’s children of 
their laughter. Best not to dwell too long on the spare plot, as the character devel-
opment and artwork are the true stars of this gorgeous book. There’s never much 
doubt as to whether the ragtag group of scrappy animals will actually succeed in 
stopping the bunny and becoming heroic ninjas, but the animal-specific traits of 
the characters blend well with the energetic text, sweeping readers along through 
to the movie-ready climax wherein the hero uses his new training to stop the bad 
guy and save the girl (though the girl, a pilot and adventurer, had seemed to be 
capable of saving herself). The vibrant illustrations have the luster of good anima-
tion, and they transform the text by highlighting the best parts, such as the intricate 
machines Timmy and his friend develop, and offering dramatic portraiture of the 
sinister, sapphire blue bunny and this dark, European city. Readers who are drawn 
in by Timmy and his crew will be pleased to see that a sequel is strongly hinted at 
in the final page.  AS
TougAs, sHelley Finders Keepers. Roaring Brook, 2015 280p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-990-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-991-7 $9.99  
R Gr. 4-6
It’s the last summer that ten-year-old Christa and her family will be spending at 
their beloved cabin in Whitefish Lake, Wisconsin, since financial pressures mean 
the cabin will be sold. A furious Christa attempts to sabotage sales attempts with 
the help of her new friend Alex, but their antics result only in their supervision by 
Grumpa, Alex’s cranky old grandfather who’s less than pleased to be babysitting 
some spoiled kids for the summer. He does have stories, however, and shares a 
whopper with the kids: his family had ties with Al Capone, and it’s rumored the 
gangster stashed a fortune in Whitefish Lake, perhaps even somewhere in Grumpa’s 
house. He insists they’re just rumors, but Christa jumps at the chance to find the 
treasure and save her family’s cabin. Tougas has crafted a sparkling cast of char-
acters here, from Alex, who hides his intense anxiety with over-the-top bravado; 
to Christa’s boy-crazy sister, who actually has quite the clever brain behind all 
that glossy hair; to Christa’s parents, who are just as devastated to sell the cabin 
as Christa but who must make grownup financial decisions. The stars of the story 
are, however, Christa and Grumpa, two peas in a pod—they both hate change, 
both express their emotions through harrumphs and grumbling, and both would 
do anything to protect the people they love. That last quality comes in handy as 
the hunt for the treasure becomes dangerous, and friends quickly turn to enemies. 
Readers of Preus’ Enchantment Lake (BCCB 9/15) will happily return to another 
area of Wisconsin’s northwoods for this mystery.  KQG
December 2015 • 227
Tyre, lisA lewis Last in a Long Line of Rebels. Paulsen/Penguin, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16838-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
It’s 1999, and Lou has a lot on her twelve-year-old mind: her mama is pregnant, 
and her parents are about to lose their house. Determined to save her home, which 
has been in her family since before the Civil War, Lou musters her Southern girl 
pluck and sets out on a quest to find the gold rumored to exist somewhere on the 
property. Along the way, her family’s proverbial skeletons come out of the closet, 
leaving Lou to wrangle with issues of identity and morality. The ideals espoused of 
equality and social justice are at times heavy handed, but they’re admirable. More 
subtle is the mystery plot, as the rumors of the gold, a found diary, and the arrival 
of a visitor strangely interested in Lou’s house add up to an engaging amateur sleuth 
story, complete with a satisfying ending. A fine readalone, this might also provide an 
approachable and entertaining supplement to a classroom unit on the Civil War.  AA
uMezAwA, rui Strange Light Afar: Tales of the Supernatural from Old Japan; illus. 
by Mikiko Fujita. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2015 160p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-723-8 $18.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-724-5 $16.95 
 R Gr. 6-9
In this impeccably researched, carefully sourced collection of supernatural stories, 
readers will experience just how spooky and haunting a centuries-old tale can be, 
and some will spot the influence stories like these have had on video games, manga, 
and anime. The book features major storytelling themes, one story per topic, in-
cluding tales that describe betrayal, vanity, envy, tricksters, and honor. The bones 
of these stories are strong, and the details Umezawa weaves in add psychological 
depth and atmospheric creepiness to them. The eight stories are each punctuated 
with a full-page illustration that piques interest with shadowy details drawn with 
foggy grays. Readers may need a bit of coaxing given the often formal language 
and likely unfamiliar details, but once they’re in, they’ll be hooked. Storytellers will 
find this a rich mine for new tales, and the straightforward story structure makes 
these accessible even for newbie tellers.  AS
vAlle, suzeTTe 101 Movies to See Before You Grow Up; illus. by Natasha Hel-
legourach. Walter Foster Jr./Quarto, 2015 144p
ISBN 978-1-63322-043-0 $12.95  
R Gr. 3-8
A bucket list for young cinema fans; a canon for family viewing; a viewers’ advi-
sory or programming tool for youth librarians; a gauntlet thrown down to incite 
debate—this volume should serve movie enthusiasts in multiple ways. Valle orga-
nizes her suggestions into six categories: Family, Action/Adventure/Drama, Sports, 
Musicals, School, and Documentary/History; each movie features a substantial plot 
description, with sidebar consistent information on director, release date, rating, 
runtime, lead actors, box office gross, and music. The number of Academy Awards 
an entry received are noted but not specified by award category. Did You Know 
insets are varied and intriguing, from Robin Williams’ daily four-hour makeup 
ordeal for Mrs. Doubtfire, to the twenty-one hours and forty-nine minutes required 
to binge watch all the Harry Potter movies. Some truly uninspiring cartoon art 
provides a visual break for each entry, doubtless occasioned by the prohibitive cost 
228 • The bulleTin
of securing movie stills; perhaps reflective of Hollywood’s milquetoast demographic 
bias, only a score or so of the selections represent non-Anglo cultures or persons of 
color. Nonetheless, there’s bound to be lively discussion over Valle’s choices (Star 
Wars, in, but Star Trek, out? Spellbound, yes, but Mad Hot Ballroom, no?), and the 
ratings from G to PG-13 should provide viewers of all ages with a broad selection 
of parent-approved films.  EB
vAn HAeringen, AnneMArie Coco and the Little Black Dress; tr. from the Dutch; 
written and illus. by Annemarie Van Haeringen. NorthSouth, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7358-4239-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
The story starts in an orphanage, with little girls in the hallway all in a row. This is 
decidedly not Madeline; these girls are scrubbing floors, and Coco Chanel, whose 
famous surname never appears in the text, “was very tired, and she was always 
hungry.” But the girls in this orphanage learned to embroider beautifully, and 
when Coco grew up, she had the skills to become a seamstress and rub shoulders 
with the wealthy. Soon she was turning out women’s riding jodhpurs and trim 
boater hats in an age of frou frou and feathers (“The dignified ladies, glorious in 
their full skirts and tightly laced corsets, watched jealously. . . . ‘We want that too! 
Away with corsets!’”) Having dispensed with the stays, it was time to dispense with 
color as well, and Coco made her signature contribution to fashion with “The Little 
Black Dress—the magic little dress that shows how beautiful a woman is.” Omit-
ting the “Chanel” is a coyly effective device whereby young fashion cognoscenti 
can boast their superior knowledge of the iconic perfume bottle on the cover and 
anticipate the introduction of the LBD. And for those in the dark, it casts Coco 
Chanel’s story as a sort of fairy tale, in which the orphan girl makes her mark on 
the world. Van Haeringen’s line and watercolor pictures sport the dashed-off air 
of a fabulous idea captured in a quick sketch, and her humorous take on pudgy 
matrons bulging in their corsets and ultimately casting them off in a gleeful dance 
of freedom is delightful. Readers won’t get a complete and accurate picture of 
Chanel’s complicated life here, but those who appreciate the miracle of the LBD 
will applaud at the final spread, where black-clad women of all ages and body types 
proudly strut their stuff.  EB
wAllMArK, lAurie Ada Byron Lovelace and the Thinking Machine; illus. by April 
Chu. Creston, 2015 40p
ISBN 978-1-939547-20-0 $17.99  
R Gr. 2-5
The 510s shelves are hardly in danger of collapsing under the weight of children’s 
books about women mathematicians, and librarians will welcome this picture book 
biography of Augusta Ada Lovelace, whose assistance to Charles Babbage resulted in 
what is credited as the first computer program. Wallmark offers a smooth narrative 
that blends the human-interest details of her life—the absence of her famous poet 
father, the influence and support of her mathematically gifted mother, her tempo-
rary blinding and paralysis from measles—with the importance of her own work, 
particularly her invention designs and the algorithms she wrote that would theoreti-
cally enable Babbage’s Analytical Engine to function. While Lovelace’s achievement 
gets the spotlight in the main text, Wallmark acknowledges in a closing note that 
her accomplishments were hidden from most contemporaries behind the cryptic 
December 2015 • 229
“A.A.L.” with which she signed her work. Wallmark also effectively explains the 
mathematical innovation in simple terms, stressing Lovelace’s knack for breaking 
down complex tasks into orderly steps, which would enable machines to perform 
complex calculations more easily and quickly than a the most nimble person 
armed only with a pencil. Chu’s illustrations, “colored on an Analytical Engine,” 
are occasionally stiff, but they’re an intriguing mashup of Pixar-style polish and 
romantic Victorian detail. An appended timeline, which hints at further landmarks 
of Lovelace’s adult life, may encourage readers to seek out more information via 
the bibliography; a note on Ada Lovelace Day should spark celebratory activities, 
especially among the STEM girls, in October.  EB 
wesTerfeld, scoTT Zeroes; by Scott Westerfeld, Margo Lanagan, and Deborah 
Biancotti. Simon Pulse, 2015 546p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4336-4 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4338-8 $10.99  
R Gr. 8-10
This new series certainly has some authorial heavy-hitters (YA readers may not 
know Biancotti’s name as well as the other two, but if they go looking for her short 
stories, they’ll likely be well pleased) bringing their talents together in this sturdy 
first volume of a planned series. The Zeroes are a group of misfits whose supernatu-
ral abilities had drawn them together as a team until they were torn apart by one 
member, Ethan, whose power is a voice that comes out of his mouth, knows way 
more than Ethan about people and how to compel them, and spouts off at the worst 
times. The ethnically and culturally diverse team had to overcome awkwardness and 
their natural tendencies to keep their powers secret to join up in the first place, so 
reuniting to save Ethan after he stumbles into a dicey situation with drug dealers 
isn’t easy for them, but at least they get to add a new member—Kelsey, who has 
the power to influence crowds—to their mix. The varied perspectives help develop 
the characters, allowing readers to share the teens’ view of their own abilities and 
of the other characters. Fans of superhero teams will appreciate with this group of 
teens who are each memorable as individuals but who are clearly meant to work 
together, as their abilities are enhanced, tempered, and understood only by others 
who share this particular experience of being different.  AS
wicKs, MAris Human Body Theater; written and illus. by Maris Wicks. First 
Second, 2015 233p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-277-4 $19.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-929-0 $14.99  
R Gr. 5-10
This graphic novel takes a dramatic approach to physiology, with a skeleton 
(sometimes accessorized with other organs) on a velvet-draped stage presenting 
the wonders of the human body in eleven informative acts. Explorations delve 
into the easily visible, talking about the shape of ears and the value of skin, and 
also the micro, with personified molecules being breathed in and personified cells 
involved in the immune process. The book ranges through many systems and 
organs and manages to give significant detail on each, and it’s particularly strong 
at incorporating physical issues kids may be familiar with—broken bones, asthma, 
allergies, cuts and bruises—in terms that will make sense to young readers. The 
volume’s breeziness sometimes slides into the slapdash, with several typos remain-
ing, labeling on diagrams challenging at times, and a text-promised index nowhere 
230 • The bulleTin
to be found, but it’s overall both thorough and approachable. Kids will find plenty 
to snicker at (more in the bold excretory system chapter than in the tastefully al-
lusive reproductive system section) and also much to absorb, and the book will 
encourage a lot of competitive “Gross!”, “Ew!”, and “That totally happened to 
me!” exclamations. A table of contents introduces the drama; a glossary and small 
bibliography are appended.  DS
willeMs, Mo I Really Like Slop!; written and illus. by Mo Willems. Hyperion/
Disney, 2015 58p (Elephant & Piggie Books)
ISBN 978-1-4847-2262-6 $9.99 
 R Gr. K-1
It was bound to happen—a Gerald and Piggie update on Green Eggs and Ham. 
Piggie is, well, a pig, so her idea of gourmet chow is a bowl of undifferentiated slop 
surrounded by flies anticipating their chance for a taste. Gerald is not anxious to 
share, especially when Piggie takes a huge sniff that turns her head into a comically 
psychedelic version of itself that, if it had a sound, would certainly be a siren. Even 
after that, Piggie persuades Gerald to give the slop a chance, and a tiny bite turns all 
of Gerald’s body, not just his head, into three whole page-openings’ worth of livid, 
shifting hues and patterns that are sure to evoke howls of laughter. While the food 
is in fact reminiscent of Sam I Am’s offering with its bright green hue, it’s clear that 
the problem with Piggie’s slop lies not in its color but in its flavor profile. Unlike 
in the Seuss, Gerald’s relatively quick acquiescence to Piggie is overtly explained: 
while he doesn’t like the slop, Gerald says, “But, I am glad I tried it. Because I 
really like you.” As an early reader, this is less about the words than about the way 
pictures can help tell a story and evoke emotion. An additional point is subtly made 
when Piggie explains, “Eating slop is part of pig culture,” giving a nod toward the 
tendency of children to dismiss the food of friends outside their culture as weird 
and full of alien tastes; turns out it is weird and you might not like it after all, but 
that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t give it a try, for friendship’s sake.  KC
woolsTon, BlyTHe MARTians. Candlewick, 2015 216p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7756-5 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Sophomore Zoë Zindleman finds high school a crushing bore, but when the an-
nouncement comes that the school is closing and she is to be given her “e-tificate 
of graduation and referral to an appropriate entry-level position,” she nonetheless 
is caught off-guard. That very night, her mother announces that she is leaving their 
precisely staged but unsellable house to seek employment elsewhere—without Zoë. 
Since the economy has collapsed to the point where a university education is not 
possible, even for a smart girl like Zoë, she is sent to work an AllMART, a huge 
department store where shoppers are channeled into buying whatever the corpora-
tion needs to push, and employees are in perpetual debt from the moment they get 
their uniforms and take up residence in the store’s dorms. It gradually dawns on 
Zoë that her mother is not going to call for her, and unless she does something to 
escape the clutches of AllMART, her future is grim. There is nothing subtle about 
this dystopian novel, though the sources of the trouble are never specified beyond 
hints of a total collapse of the real estate market, the takeover of all school subjects 
by a consumer mentality, the jobs crisis for graduates, and the privatization of gov-
ernment. The fact that her mother has also implanted a chip in Zoë’s head to keep 
her docile comes as a surprise and, frankly, a real cheat in terms of her character arc; 
December 2015 • 231
those looking for a similarly themed but much more deeply realized satire should 
stick with Anderson’s Feed (BCCB 11/02), but readers may still feel for Zoë, who 
has been abandoned and had her future co-opted by corporate greed.  KC 
yoon, nicolA Everything, Everything; illus. by David Yoon. Delacorte, 
2015 309p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49665-9 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49664-2 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49666-6 $10.99 
 R Gr. 9-12
Madeline has been largely content with her existence as a “bubble girl,” confined to 
her hermetically sealed house under her doctor mother’s watchful eye because of an 
immune disorder that means she’ll die if she goes outside. Her acquiescence ends 
when Oliver moves in next door, and the two begin to connect first by window-
to-window miming and then by IM and email. Soon they’re falling for each other 
and Oliver is being snuck into the house while Madeline’s mother is out; when 
Madeline’s mother finds out and cracks down on the relationship, eighteen-year-old 
Madeline decides it’s time for rebellion and plans a glorious trip to Hawaii with 
Oliver to see everything she’s longed to see and enjoy the experiences—including 
sex with Oliver—she’s been yearning for. The narrative style is contemporary and 
accessible in its weaving together of short first-person chapters, texts from Mad-
eline, her occasional drawings, and bits of other documentation. However, there 
are some vintage echoes, as the story not only recalls the fairy tales Madeline wryly 
acknowledges but also Victorian sentimental novels where the cloistered girl breaks 
free from the hold of a stern paterfamilias. Even in this modern form that plot still 
makes for a deeply satisfying combination of rebellion and romance, and the final 
twist adds a delicious touch of sensation without undoing the story’s essential fabric. 
This is a readymade booktalk and an accessible quick pick for reluctant readers 
seeking that sweet spot of a cheesy but not goopy romance.  DS
young, suzAnne Hotel Ruby. Simon Pulse, 2015 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2300-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2302-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-10
After Audrey loses her mother unexpectedly, her father takes her and her brother, 
Daniel, to go live with their grandmother. On the way, however, her father decides 
to stop at the Hotel Ruby, a strange, elegant hostelry in the middle of nowhere. He 
and Daniel are invited to a formal party, held nightly to commemorate a fire that 
consumed the ballroom and all of its inhabitants in 1937; an uninvited Audrey 
sneaks into the affair and meets Elias, to whom she is immediately attracted despite 
having a boyfriend back at home. Through stories told by Elias and the staff, the 
secrets of the Ruby slowly unfold; mysteries remain, however, with Audrey haunted 
by a recurring tune, a phantom pain in her arm, and horrifying visions of people, 
including herself, bleeding from inexplicable wounds that disappear on their own. 
Elements of Gothic opulence and horror decorate the story of a girl working through 
grief, and a not-so-surprising reveal explodes into a well-played stunner. Audrey’s 
memories and complex feelings about her mother, her brother, her boyfriend, and 
herself slow the pace of the main action down in a way that deepens the novel’s 
emotional core and develops empathy for her character, making her ultimate 
232 • The bulleTin
decision both agonizing and triumphant. Readers looking for something spooky, 
romantic, and a little bit heartbreaking will love this.  KC 
CorreCTion:
We thought our October Big Picture, Baba Yaga’s Assistant, was cool; that’s probably 
why we referred to the author, Marika McCoola, as “McCool” in several places. 
We still should have called her by her correct name, though, and we apologize.
In the same issue, in the review of Stephanie Calmenson’s Ollie’s Class Trip: A Yes-
and-No Book, we mistakenly credit the illustrations to the ever-talented Calmenson 
instead of the ever-talented Abby Carter. Our apologies for the error.
December 2015 • 233
BrAdford, clAre, ed. Girls, Texts, Cultures; ed. by Clare Bradford and Mavis 
Reimer. Wilfrid Laurier, 2015 331p illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-77112-020-3 $48.99
Two editorial stars—Bradford is a professor and prominent scholar from Deakin 
University in Australia, while Reimer is a noted children’s literature expert and pro-
fessor at the University of Winnipeg—bring together a collection of twelve essays in 
this cross-disciplinary title. Contributors from a vast array of fields provide thought-
ful, complex, and compelling essays in this book focusing on girlhood—what it is, 
the cultural contexts that surround and shape it, the texts that portray and inform 
it, and the perceptions of it that translate into girls’ real world experience and the 
politics that govern them and their lives. The introduction discusses the importance 
of the book’s cross-disciplinary approach; the editors argue that the field of girls’ 
studies has much in common with the study of children’s literature—including 
marginalization in the larger academic arena—but the two groups have remained 
on separate scholarly paths. This book seeks to remedy that, pulling together con-
tributors from sociology, gender studies, education, social activism, and creating a 
comprehensive examination of girlhood. Highlights include “Disgusting Subjects: 
Consumer-Class Distinction and the Affective Regulation of Girl Desire” by 
Elizabeth Bullen, senior lecturer in literary studies at Deakin University, Australia; 
contrasting the portrayal of sex in the Gossip Girl series against Julie Burchill’s novel 
Sweet, Bullen argues that girls’ sexual experiences “are more highly valued when 
they are associated with the consumption of luxury commodities.” Stereotypes of 
Indigenous girls and the predominance of whiteness in the representation of girls in 
pop culture and literature are examined in “Warrior Girl and the Searching Tribe: 
Indigenous Girls’ Everyday Negotiations of Racialization under Neocolonialism.” 
Authors Sandrina de Finney, an associate professor in the School of Child and 
Youth Care at the University of Victoria, and Johanne Saraceno, a doctoral student 
at the same school, pull from their studies that engaged young Indigenous girls 
as both participants and researchers. A multi-year project focusing on gender and 
game play examines the stratifying of the legitimacy of girl gamers is presented in 
“Dynamic (Con)texts: Close Readings of Girls’ Video Gameplay,” by Stephanie 
Fisher, a doctoral student at York University’s language, culture, and teaching 
program in Toronto, Jennifer Jenson, a professor of pedagogy and technology at 
York University, and Suzanne de Castell, the dean of the Faculty of Education at 
the Ontario Institute of Technology in Canada. While the individual essays offer 
plenty of academic and research fodder, the work as a whole is a fascinating look 
at the history and the continually shifting notion of what it means to be a girl in 
both the real and fictional worlds.  KQG
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
234  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Kreller
Actors and acting–fiction: Lombardo
Adventure: Brown, t.; Colfer; 
davis; doyle; ducie; Floreen; 
Grainger; Halpern; Lewis; Lynch; 
Meyer; nielsen; tamm
African Americans: Coy; derby; 
Pinkney
African Americans–fiction: danticat; 
Moore; Myers
ALternAtive History: Grau­
din
Anatomy: Wicks
Animals–fiction: tamm
Animals–stories: Lehrhaupt
Appearance–fiction: Murphy; shein­
mel
Architecture: Alphin
Art: say
Art and artists: say
Artificial intelligence–fiction: Bow; 
Floreen
Asian Americans: say
Asian Americans–fiction: Chupeco
Assassins–fiction: Colfer
Basketball: Coy
Basketball–fiction: Moore
BioGrAPHies: Brown, d.; derby; 
Pinkney; rosa; rubin; say; van 
Haeringen; Wallmark
Books and reading–fiction: Florian 
Books and reading–stories: Lehr­
haupt
Brazil: rosa
Building: Alphin
Bullying–fiction: Preller
Cambodian Americans–fiction: 
Farish
Camps and camping–fiction: de los 
santos
Cats–fiction: Applegate; Lombardo
Christmas–stories: Cocca­Leffler; 
Manzano; Peet, A.; Pingk; reagan
Clothing: van Haeringen
Cold War–fiction: nielsen
Colonial life–fiction: Lynch
Colors: steggall
Communication–stories: rozier
Computer science: Wallmark
ConCePt BooKs: steggall
Contests–fiction: Al Mansour; 
Graudin
CrAFt BooKs: Alphin
Creative writing: Hutchinson; 
stiefvater
Crime and criminals: Miller
Crime and criminals–fiction: 
Collins; Fitzpatrick; Grainger; 
Hutchinson; Leaver; Moore; 
sands; sylvester; tougas
Cryptids–fiction: Anderson
Current events: newman
death–fiction: Benjamin; danticat
depression–fiction: doyle
diaries–fiction: Hogarth
divorce–fiction: Kreslehner
dogs–stories: Ko
dystopias–fiction: Graudin; 
schmatz; Woolston
epidemics: newman
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL­CAPs 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
DecemBer 2015  •  235
ePistoLAry noveLs: Kaufman
Ethics and values: Bow; Brown, M.; 
Carleson; Cranse; Hahn; Halpern; 
Kitchings; Kraus; Kreller; Myers; 
ohlin; Preller; sylvester; Woolston
Families–fiction: Applegate; doyle; 
Franklin; Kreslehner; nielsen; 
senzai; tyre
Families–stories: Cocca­Leffler
FAntAsy: Anderson; Carson; 
Chupeco; davis; Kraus; Kulper; 
Meyer; smith; stiefvater; tamm; 
Westerfeld
Fashion: van Haeringen
Fathers–fiction: Grainger; young
Fear–stories: rash
Films and filmmaking–fiction: Hog­
arth
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: Lewis; 
Meyer; umezawa
Food and eating–fiction: Willems
Food and eating–stories: Manzano
Friends–fiction: Benjamin; Cranse; 
Crossan; Cuevas; de los santos; 
Franklin; Kreller; Leavitt; Mackler; 
Mlynowski; Preller; resau; shein­
mel; Westerfeld; Willems
Gender–fiction: Al Mansour; schmatz
Ghosts–fiction: Chupeco; Howe
Gifts–stories: Cocca­Leffler
GLBtQ people–fiction: Floreen; 
schmatz
Gods and goddesses: napoli
Gold rush–fiction: Carson
Grandparents–fiction: resau; senzai
GrAPHiC noveLs: Lee; Myers; 
Wicks
Grief–fiction: Benjamin
Gypsies–fiction: resau
Health: Wicks
Hiking–fiction: Gessner
HistoriCAL FiCtion: Kitchings; 
Leaver; Lee; Lynch; nielsen; resau; 
sands
History, U.S.: Brown, d.; Coy; 
Lynch; Miller; Pinkney
Holocaust: deem
Holocaust–fiction: Graudin
Horror: Hogarth; young
HoW­to BooKs: Alphin
HuMor: Franklin; Ko; Lehrhaupt; 
Peet, M.; Pingk; rash; reagan; 
rozier; Willems
identity–fiction: Cuevas; Franklin; 
Murphy; sheinmel
illness: newman
illness–fiction: Crowder; yoon
imagination–fiction: Applegate; 
Cuevas
immigrants: say
independence–fiction: yoon
indian Americans–fiction: senzai
Japan–fiction: Chupeco
Jews: deem
Jews–stories: Peet, A.
Journals–fiction: Jean
Latinos–fiction: resau
Latinos–stories: Manzano 
LeGends: Lee
Literature, English: derby; Myers
Magic–fiction: Crowder; Mlynowski
Medicine: newman
Mental illness–fiction: Carleson; Jean; 
Leavitt
Mexico–fiction: resau
Mice–fiction: smith
Monsters–fiction: Halpern
Mothers–fiction: Al Mansour; Farish; 
Going; Murphy; ray; yoon
Movies: valle
Movies–fiction: Lombardo
Murder–fiction: Moore
Music and musicians: Pinkney; rubin
Music and musicians–fiction: Going; 
ohlin
Muslims–fiction: Al Mansour
Mysteries: Jean; Leaver; Miller; 
ray; sands; tougas; tyre
Mythology, classical: Hahn
Mythology, world: napoli
Nature study: siy
ninjas–stories: Pingk
orphans: van Haeringen
Pageants–fiction: Murphy
Penguins–stories: rash
Pets–stories: Ko
Philosophy: Hahn
Pigs–fiction: Florian
236  •  The BulleTin
Pigs–stories: Cocca­Leffler
Pilgrims–fiction: Lynch
Pirates–fiction: davis
Poetry: derby
Political science: Brown, d.
Politics–fiction: Grainger
Prisons–fiction: ducie
Ptsd–fiction: Farish
Puzzles–fiction: sands
racism: Coy
racism–fiction: Kitchings
Reading aloud: Crowder
Reading, beginning: Willems
Reading, easy: Brown, M.; Florian
Reading, reluctant: valle; yoon
relationships–fiction: Cranse; Mack­
ler; ohlin
romance–fiction: Collins; Farish; Fitz­
patrick; Floreen; Gessner; Howe; 
Kaufman; Kulper; yoon
runaways–fiction: ray
santa Claus–stories: Peet, A.; reagan
sAtire: Peet, M.
saudi Arabia–fiction: Al Mansour
school–fiction: Al Mansour; Hutchin­
son; Kreslehner; Mackler; Mly­
nowski; Preller
Science: Benjamin; siy; Wicks
science and scientists–fiction: Benja­
min; Carleson
sCienCe FiCtion: Bow; ducie; 
Floreen; Halpern; Kaufman; Lewis; 
schmatz; sylvester
secrets–fiction: Going; Kaufman; 
sylvester; tyre; young
sHort stories: napoli; stief­
vater; umezawa
sisters–fiction: Crowder; danticat
slavery: rosa
snow–stories: Jenkins
soccer–fiction: Brown, M.
space travel–fiction: Lewis; sylvester
spiders: siy
spies and espionage–fiction: Brown, t.
sPorts stories: Brown, M.; Coy; 
Kitchings; Moore
sports–fiction: 
steAMPunK: Meyer
Storytelling: umezawa
Storytime: Cocca­Leffler; Florian; 
Henkes; Jenkins
suicide–fiction: Preller
summer–fiction: tougas
suPernAturAL stories: doyle; 
Howe; umezawa; Westerfeld
superpowers–fiction: de los santos; 
Westerfeld
surgery–fiction: Crossan
susPense: Fitzpatrick
tALL tALes: rozier
teachers–fiction: ohlin
television–fiction: Crossan
time travel–fiction: Colfer; Collins
toddLer BooKs: steggall
toys: Alphin
toys–stories: Henkes; Jenkins
treasures–fiction: ray
twins–fiction: Crossan; danticat; Jean
uncles–fiction: smith
voyages and travel–fiction: Anderson; 
Carson; Cuevas; Gessner; Leavitt; 
senzai; smith
War–fiction: Bow; Lee
West, the–fiction: Carson
Witches–fiction: Kulper
Women’s studies: Wallmark
Work–fiction: Woolston
World cultures: Al Mansour
World War i–fiction: Brown, t.
World War ii: deem
Writers and writing: derby; stiefvater
Writers and writing–fiction: Peet, M.
Zombies–fiction: Kraus
Library and Information Science:
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Library Trends ISSN: 0024-2594 / E-ISSN: 1559-0682
Portal: Libraries and the Academy ISSN: 1531-2542 / E-ISSN: 1530-7131
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
To us, the role of libraries and the 
future of information science clicks.
ONLINE REFERENCE RESOURCES
Five outstanding online references from the Johns Hopkins University Press  
deliver seminal works and cutting-edge scholarship to students and researchers.
press.jhu.edu/references
• Flexible search options, powerful results.  Results are ranked and sorted by relevance   
 
or date, with direct links to documents and related materials.
• Intuitive browsing.  Wander through entire volumes without getting lost.
• Reliable usage statistics. COUNTER-compliant usage reports let you track activity  
 
 
according to the most current standard available. Statistics are compiled and ready to  
 
 
download once a month. 
• Always available. Our collections are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week from any   
 
IP-authenticated address. No special hardware or software is required. And we offer full   
 
technical and customer support.
The Early Republic
Critical Editions on the  
Founding of the United States
Primary material documenting the 
actions, debates, and thoughts of the  
First Federal Congress (1789–1791) and 
its members. 
earlyrepublic.press.jhu.edu
Encyclopedia of  
American Studies
Edited by Simon Bronner
Interdisciplinary articles from  
hundreds of scholars cover the history 
and cultures of the United States from  
pre-colonial days to the present.
eas-ref.press.jhu.edu
The Johns Hopkins  
Guide to Literary  
Theory & Criticisim
Edited by Michael Groden,  
Martin Kreiswirth, and Imre Szeman
A comprehensive historical survey of the 
field’s most important figures, schools, 
and movements.
litguide.press.jhu.edu
The Papers of Dwight 
David Eisenhower 
Edited by Louis Galambos, Alfred D.  
Chandler Jr., Daun van Ee, et. al.
Combines the full text of all 21 
volumes—over 14,000 pages—with 
a powerful search engine and 
user-friendly interface.
eisenhower.press.jhu.edu
The World Shakespeare 
Bibliography ONLINE
Edited by Laura Estill and an  
international committee of correspondents
The single largest Shakespeare  
database in the world. 
www.worldshakesbib.org
