T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
July/August 2016
Vol. 69   No. 11
New perspectives  
that are anything 
but elementary.
JHU Press scholarly journal offerings in  
Children’s Literature:
Bookbird: A Journal of International Children’s Literature
ISSN: 0006-7377 / E-ISSN: 1918-6983
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books  
ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Children’s Literature ISSN: 0092-8208 / E-ISSN: 1543-3374
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly ISSN: 0885-0429 / E-ISSN: 1553-1201
The Lion and the Unicorn ISSN: 0147-2593 / E-ISSN: 1080-6563
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
July/August 2016
Vol. 69 No. 11
561  the BIg PICture
 
  Lowriders to the Center of the Earth  by Cathy Camper; illus. by Raúl the 
Third
562  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
566 •  Talking Leaves by Joseph Bruchac
592 •  Lucy and Linh  by Alice Pung
593 •  School’s First Day of School  by Adam Rex; illus. by Christian Robinson
600 •  Pasadena  by Sherri L. Smith
603 •  Ghosts written and illus. by Raina Telgemeier
607  suBjeCt And use Index
610  AnnuAL Author And tItLe Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/bulletin_of_the_center_for_childrens_books/pricing.html. Volumes available in microfilm 
from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in micro-
fiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should 
be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2016 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Lowriders to the Center of the Earth © 2016 by Raúl the Third and used by permis-
sion of Chronicle Books.
July/August 2016 • 561
the BIg PICture
Lowriders to the Center of the Earth
by Cathy Camper; illustrated by Raúl the Third
It’s such a treat when incredible illustrations, buoyant text, and well-researched 
cultural references all come together in one book, and Cathy Camper and illus-
trator Raúl the Third have done it twice now, first with with Lowriders in Space 
(BCCB 1/15) and now with Lowriders to the Center of the Earth. This second outing 
sparkles with the same mix of zippy bilingual dialogue, cool car references, and 
visual surprises that made the first graphic novel so impressive. Antelope Lupe is 
the mechanic, Flappy, the octopus, cleans everything, and Elirio paints with his 
mosquito bill, and in the last outing they finally (after a brief jaunt into space) 
achieved their dream of a garage of their own to work on those sweet, sweet lowrid-
ers. Now they’re reaping the benefits of their new garage, at least until their missing 
cat sends them off on a remarkable adventure to the center of the earth. There they 
encounter the legendary Mictlantecuhtli, the Aztec god of the underworld, who says 
they can have their cat back—if they make it through the Wind of Knives, which 
strips people to their bones so they can stay in the realm of the dead as skeletons. 
It’s a challenge that pushes Lupe, Flappy, and Elirio to their limits, but, of course, 
they ultimately emerge triumphant.
It’s impossible to overstate the impact that the artwork has in this book—it 
elevates everything while also remaining accessible. The artist’s low-tech approach to 
drawing (three colors of pens applied to a creamy, off-white background) reminds 
readers that it isn’t necessary to have expensive art software to produce brilliance. 
The spirited linework is detailed but never crowded, with intricate backgrounds 
contrasting with the high-action, speech-balloon-rich foregrounds. Panels change 
size according to the drama needed, occasionally giving way to full-page spreads 
that invite readers to stay a while and soak in the rich details, many of which don’t 
even pop up in the dialogue. The result is undeniably edgy and hip but also warm 
and welcoming, matching both the high-energy adventure and cozy “we make our 
own families” message of the text. 
The book offers both footnote translations and an extensive glossary in 
the back of the generous Spanish. It’s clear throughout that bilingual is the name of 
the game here and that these are characters who live their lives straddling Spanish 
and English, and many readers will be able to relate to the imperfect, complex, and 
entirely authentic blending of two cultures, languages, and identities. The inclusion 
of Coyote, La Llorona, and Mictlantecuhtli, easily identifiable characters to readers 
familiar with Latino culture, will likely spark some research on the part of readers 
562 • the Bulletin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
who don’t know these references; what they’ll find will add depth to the story, but 
Camper effectively introduces enough context so that they stand alone. 
As in the last book, the real point is the fun of traveling with Lupe and 
her gang; there may be characters with more worldly goods, but it’s the ones with 
community who succeed in the end. It’s a nice takeaway, as is the secondary message 
about cleverness and determination trumping might and brute strength. Indeed, 
these are solidly uplifting graphic novels that still offer plenty of comedy, adventure, 
information, and magnificent art. One can only hope another outing comes along 
soon. (See p. 568 for publication information.)
April Spisak, Reviewer
AcAmporA, pAul How to Avoid Extinction. Scholastic, 2016 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-89906-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-89908-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
It’s nearly been a year since Pop’s death, but Leo and his family are still feeling the 
loss of his grandfather. Gram seeks to throw off the fog of sadness that’s settled 
over the house, however, so she plans a road trip to the Cleveland-Lloyd Dinosaur 
Quarry in Utah, a place she and her husband had planned to go before he passed. 
In a 1973 Buick Electra, she and Abbey, aspiring paleontologist and Leo’s older 
cousin, head out and bring practical Leo along on their trip. He may be stuck in 
the backseat with Abbey’s gassy old dog, Kermit, but he’s crossing the country, 
seeing the sights, and learning some much desired information about his absent 
father. There’s little tension in the story but there’s plenty of tenderness and affec-
tion, and the characters all find ways to deal with their grief (not only over Pop, 
but eventually over Kermit) and create their path forward with joy and optimism. 
The small moments between Leo and his grandmother make for some real tear-
jerkers, but a road trip story with a batty old grandmother and a flatulent dog is 
inherently humorous, and this one serves up witty jokes in spades, in the vein of 
other road-trips-with-old-ladies books such as Bauer’s Rules of the Road (BCCB 
2/98) and Gantos’ From Norvelt to Nowhere (BCCB 10/13). Love plus laughter is 
pretty much an extinction-proof formula for a middle-grade book, and jokesters, 
dinosaur fans, and those looking for a satisfyingly hopeful family drama will find 
plenty to dig up and enjoy here.  KQG
July/August 2016 • 563
Allen, elAnnA Poor Little Guy; written and illus. by Elanna Allen. Dial, 
2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42825-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
A tiny yellow fish almost makes it past an octopus without attracting attention, 
but he is snatched (“Hello, little guy!”) by a tentacle-lined leg. Then he’s subjected 
to some physical and verbal teasing in a lead-up to—gulp—being eaten: “You’re 
so cute, you’re more of a breathmint than a fish, really. I bet you even taste cute!” 
It looks like the end for our small yellow friend, until a page turn reveals his true 
identity: pufferfish, now in full-on inflated mode. “AAAAHHH!” shrieks the oc-
topus as the pufferfish escapes with the last word: “Poor little guy.” It’s a one-note 
joke, but it’s a funny one, and youngsters will be tickled by both the illustration 
of the angry, expanded pufferfish busting out of the startled octopus’s maw and by 
the satisfying comeuppance, served up to the bully by a surprisingly tough little 
guy. The illustration are elegant and striking, featuring the diminutive golden 
pufferfish (wearing his oversized black specs) bobbing against a swirling sea of pale 
blue-grays that are punctuated by the octopus’ sinuous gray and white form. The 
hand-lettered text is equally graceful, with the changing size and font providing 
mood and emphasis cues. Both story and art will carry well to a crowd, making 
this a particularly seaworthy addition to an ocean-themed storytime or classroom 
study, or pair it with Klassen’s This Is Not My Hat (BCCB 11/12) for a duo of (fish) 
tales about rough justice, marine style. Endpapers show our hero’s puffy thwarting 
of numerous other unsuspecting sea creatures.  JH
Anderson, John dAvid Insert Coin to Continue. Aladdin, 2016 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4814-4704-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Bryan Biggins usually uses video games to escape the misery of 
middle school. Now, though, middle school has magically morphed into a video 
game, complete with a mysterious coin slot that needs to be filled when he takes 
too many hit points. Bryan must conquer a series of quests: battling enemy com-
batants (a gang of jocks in dodgeball), tracking a monster through the dungeon 
(a mouse in the boiler room), saving the world (a globe-shaped class project), and 
taking down the big boss (the school’s biggest bully) to get to the prize: a chance 
to win the girl of his dreams. This enjoyable adventure with plenty of laugh-out-
loud moments wins because it never takes itself too seriously. Reveling instead in its 
own oddly relatable premise, the novel offers readers an awkward nerd-turned-hero 
who learns lessons in real-world courage and self-confidence, while the story itself 
avoids the pitfalls of anti-gaming didacticism. The video game challenges are well 
crafted, and they reference a diverse list of unnamed games from Tetris to Frogger 
to Rock Band to Mortal Kombat, giving knowledgeable readers a chance to play 
guess-that-allusion. The overall quirky tone and set-up make for a likely success 
among readers who want a gamer hero and with retro-loving gamer-readers who 
aren’t quite ready for Cline’s Ready Player One.  AM
564 • the Bulletin
Austin, mike Rescue Squad No. 9; written and illus. by Mike Austin. Random 
House, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-101-93662-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
The first responders assembled at their coastal headquarters are keeping watch 
from the lighthouse, tidying up the rescue boat, and loading medical supplies 
into the helicopter when a storm hits and the distress call comes in: “SOS . . . 
MAYDAY! MAYDAY! MAYDAY!” Then it’s “GO! GO! GO!” as the teams scurry 
into action. The helicopter takes off into the blackening sky and the boat speeds 
off into the chop. “HELP! HELP!” and “BARK! BARK! BARK!” cry the woman 
and her dog, their sailboat run aground. The helicopter rescuer splashes down and 
assists the pair into a basket, which lifts them up to safety; as the storm begins to 
dissipate, the boat picks up the rescuer and tows the sailboat back to port. Disaster 
is averted, and in a satisfying dénouement, the Rescue 9 team struts its gear and 
the grateful boaters fly a banner reading “Thank you, Rescue Squad No. 9” at the 
annual regatta. The limited vocabulary text, with bold font and repeated words, 
will be a lure for emergent readers. However, the real payoffs are for the kids who 
like to inspect pictures carefully—catching the newspaper article warning of the big 
storm to come, watching the darkening sky, wondering who will rescue the rescuer 
left behind on the rocks, following the personnel as they assume various roles in 
the rescue. Opaque, looming storm clouds and Pollock-esque splattered, flecked 
waves in steely grays, deep blues, and white frosted dashes contrast effectively with 
the more static oranges and reds of the rescue team equipment. Endpapers feature 
captioned items used throughout the story, and a final note briefs kids on how to 
“be water smart.”  EB
Beckhorn, susAn WilliAms The Wolf’s Boy. Disney Hyperion, 2016 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-4847-2553-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Born with a clubfoot, Kai is considered cursed; he was left to die by his father, 
according to the customs of their Paleolithic tribe, but a female wolf saved his life. 
He therefore has an affinity for the yellow wolf pack that lives nearby, adopting an 
orphaned pup and naming her Uff. She and Kai learn to hunt together, but the 
unprecedented bond between the boy and his wolf, along with a few unfortunate 
accidents, increases suspicion among the tribe, and Kai must leave to protect Uff 
from being killed as a dangerous wild animal. Their journey involves both danger 
and triumph for Kai, as he is able to complete his rites of passage and become a 
blood hunter in ways that would have been denied him had he stayed. While the 
events in this imaginative reconstruction of prehistory, including Kai’s older brother’s 
recovery from an attack by a big cat and Kai’s taking down a fully grown cave bear, 
are sometimes more wish-fulfilling than strictly realistic, this first-dog, coming-of-
age, and survival story hits all the right psychological notes for the middle-school 
reader. Kai is an appealing underdog while Uff is just an appealing early dog (an 
author’s note clarifies that while Kai calls Uff a wolf, she’s really a dog). Beckhorn 
creates her prehistoric setting with a light touch, providing just enough details tied 
to what we do know about the period without overburdening the plot and giving 
Kai period-appropriate gifts of art and music to compensate for his disability. Give 
this to readers who enjoy animal stories and wilderness survival tales. KC
July/August 2016 • 565
BingBo The Pear Violin; tr. from the Chinese; illus. by Gumi. Starfish Bay, 
2016 32p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-76036-020-7 $9.99  
R 4-7 yrs
Chinese author Bingbo is a prolific contributor in his home country, but his books 
have rarely been seen in translation in America until Starfish Bay’s recent importa-
tion of several titles. In The Pear Violin, a creative squirrel makes a violin with the 
uneaten half of a pear and a bow with “small twigs and whiskers plucked from his 
beard.” When he begins to play, the music is so beautiful it halts the fox’s pursuit of 
a chicken and stops the lion chasing a rabbit; all the animals convene to enjoy the 
concert, suffused with good fellowship from the music (“The lion let the rabbit lie 
in his arms, so that the rabbit would feel warmer when listening to the music”). A 
seed from the pear violin grows a new pear tree that bears pears of all sizes, resulting 
in instruments for all the animals from the great lion to the “teeny tiny beetles.” 
The tale is gently folkloric, with its underlying message and touches of serendipity, 
and while the lack of tension lessens the impact, the originality and the entertaining 
details provide interest. The comparatively small trim size doesn’t show Gumi’s full-
bleed watercolor spreads to their best advantage, but there’s a Disney-esque charm 
to the animal figures that lends appeal. Plenty of amusing elements are tucked into 
the spreads, such as the snakes and moles traveling from underground to hear the 
music or the monkey engaging in a goofy balancing act with the pears. This will 
see its best use as an international ambassador in an introduction to books from 
other countries, but it may also inspire some DIY instrument making after a lively 
musical storytime. A long author’s note gives more information about Bingbo.  DS
BirchAll, kAty The It Girl. Aladdin, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-6362-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-6363-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Nerdy twelve-year-old Anna is on thin ice socially, as she is too klutzy and too 
obsessed with Marvel comics and her dog, Dog, to ever be truly popular. She’s 
mostly okay with that, as long as she can stay buddies with friends Jess and Danny. 
Her life spins sideways, though, when her journalist dad reveals that he’s going to 
marry famous actress Helena Montaine, making Anna the stepsister to Marianne 
Montaine, Britain’s current “It Girl.” Now Anna has to reconcile the sudden media 
attention with her humble, offbeat personality, no small feat when national maga-
zines are examining her every move. The plot may be unsurprising (Anna’s new 
status attracts the popular but fickle crowd until she realizes the truth, and Anna’s 
initial encounters with Helena and Marianne are a bit rough), but the formula’s 
executed with style and wit. Anna’s narration sparkles with insightful humor, and 
the group conversations between Anna and her pals via emails and notes are equally 
hilarious. Anna and her family are sympathetic originals, and many an overlooked 
middle-schooler will enjoy pondering the details of a geeky girl’s unexpected rise to 
fame; fans of Cabot’s Princess Diaries series may particularly enjoy this as well.  JH
566 • the Bulletin
BruchAc, Joseph Talking Leaves. Dial, 2016 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3508-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Uwohali hasn’t seen his father, Sequoyah, in six years and he’s not 
particularly thrilled about the man’s return. There are rumors among the Tsalagi 
people that Sequoyah is a practitioner of black magic and that the signs that he 
constantly draws are evil hexes. Sequoyah also has a new family; he’s remarried 
with a young daughter since Uwohali’s mother divorced him years ago. Uwohali is 
nonetheless drawn to his father, curious about the supposedly cursed work he does 
and about this unknown stepmother and half sister. Sequoyah welcomes the boy 
with open arms and, despite Uwohali’s misgivings about his place in Sequoyah’s life, 
he soon forms a deep bond with the man, listening to his stories and apprenticing 
in Sequoyah’s lifelong work of creating a Cherokee syllabary. Uwohali’s voice is 
perfectly pitched as a boy whose certainty in his identity (as his mother’s son and a 
Tsalagi boy) is shaken by the arrival (or return, in this case) of a new dynamic that 
casts what he has previously believed in a different light. Cultural and historical 
context is given through the interspersed Cherokee legends and Sequoyah’s war 
stories of his time under General Andrew Jackson. This is as much a story about 
fathers and sons as it is about the legendary Sequoyah’s hugely significant work, 
and it offers multiple points of access for history buffs or fans of family dramas. 
Extensive end matter includes a note about the historical Sequoyah, the Cherokee 
syllabary, a glossary of Cherokee words, and suggestions for further reading.  KQG
BryAnt, Jen Six Dots: A Story of Young Louis Braille; illus. by Boris Ku-
likov. Knopf, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-449-81337-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 6-9 yrs
Stories of Louis Braille and his perfection of a writing system for the blind already 
populate the picture book and juvenile collections, but even in a crowded field 
Bryant’s tightly focused work, cast in the fictionalized voice of Braille himself, 
is particularly distinguished. Bryant was blinded by an accident and subsequent 
infection as a child; unlike many disabled children of the early nineteenth century, 
however, Braille had a host of resources available to him with a family and townsfolk 
that supported him, helped him toward independence, and acceded to his desire 
to enroll at the Royal School for the Blind in Paris. Excelling at his studies, he was 
introduced to oversized books with raised lettering, and he quickly understood 
the need to improve the system. The chance arrived when a French army officer’s 
raised code, readable by touch, provided Louis with the groundwork for a vastly 
superior method based on six raised dots, which was immediately adopted within 
the school and then rapidly spread throughout blind communities. Although many 
Braille biographies stress his disability, Bryant’s title subtly emphasizes his creativity 
and celebrates him as an inventor, making this an excellent addition for STEM 
collections. Illustrations in Kulikov’s signature style, light-hearted with a touch of 
tartness, deftly toggle between sun-washed scenes in which the world views Louis 
and blackened scenes in which Louis recreates the world he sees in his mind. End 
matter includes an author’s note, a Q & A on Louis as inventor, and lists of resources 
for further investigation.  EB 
July/August 2016 • 567
Budhos, mArinA Watched. Lamb, 2016 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53419-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53418-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53420-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Naeem’s not really a bad kid, just a garden variety screw-up who’s watching his 
grades slip during senior year, who would rather roam the streets than help out in 
his father’s shop, and who isn’t too sharp when it comes to judging his friends. An 
American-born teen of similar mindset could stay under the radar, but a Bangladeshi 
immigrant like Naeem is likelier to attract official attention, as he discovers when 
his buddy Ibrahim leaves him literally holding the bag with shoplifted shirts. The 
police make him an offer: spy on his Muslim peers, or land in a juvenile facility 
while his father’s green card gets revoked. Certainly the coercive element of the deal 
is repulsive, but Naeem initially revels in the drama of his new mission, going so far 
as to convince himself that he’s helping protect his family and neighbors. He even 
benefits from the discipline and from the near-paternal interest he receives from 
one of his police contacts. As he’s drawn into more complex assignments, though, 
he begins to realize how pernicious profiling can be and how little agency he has 
over sorting potentially dangerous suspects from quirky lost souls and outliers. 
There’s plenty of timely matter here to ponder or discuss, making this a strong 
recommendation for class reading and book clubs. It’s also a compelling coming-
of-age story, and even readers who choose to downplay the current events threads 
will find Naeem’s strange path to reconnection with his family rewarding.  EB 
cAmeron, shAron The Forgetting. Scholastic, 2016 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-94521-9 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-94522-6 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Every twelve years, the people of Canaan forget their lives—the memories of parents, 
siblings, children, occupations are all erased, with only a book documenting their 
former lives to remind them. Most of these books, however, contain not truth but 
whatever the author wishes reality to be, and they certainly don’t contain the events 
leading up to the day of Forgetting, during which the residents of Canaan commit 
the foulest of crimes knowing that everyone will forget soon enough. Even members 
of the ruling Council lose their pasts, but within days, they are back to rationing 
the food and punishing anyone who goes beyond the wall that surrounds the city. 
Seventeen-year-old Nadia, who is unlucky enough to remember everything, flouts 
this restriction every chance she can get; when she finds something in the woods 
beyond the wall that could potentially stop the Forgetting, she’s determined to find 
a way to put an end to the horror. With its oppressive government, mysterious 
rules that supposedly protect its citizens, and defiant teen heroine, this seems like 
a simple run-through of YA dystopian tropes. Cameron, however, has an ace up 
her sleeve, and when she throws it, the whole story goes from basic to brilliant, 
morphing into a clever genre mash-up that manages to be a whole heckuva lot of 
fun as it presents complicated questions about identity, community, and reality. A 
refreshing take on an already popular genre, this is an easy sell.  KQG
568 • the Bulletin
cAmper, cAthy Lowriders to the Center of the Earth; illus. by Raúl the 
Third. Chronicle, 2016 [128p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4521-2343-1 $22.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4521-3836-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 561, for review.
cherry, Alison Look Both Ways. Delacorte, 2016 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51187-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51186-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51188-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
Growing up in a family of famous Broadway stars, Brooklyn Shepard has always 
felt inadequate—she can play almost any show tune on the piano, but performing 
just isn’t her thing. When she lands a coveted spot in a summer stock apprentice 
company, she hopes that her performer genes will kick in, but she’s distressed to 
learn that she hasn’t actually been cast in any of the shows. The only thing that 
might save Brooklyn’s summer is her roommate, Zoe. Zoe is a shining talent, but 
she’s also really nice and clearly attracted to Brooklyn, even though Zoe has a seri-
ous boyfriend and Brooklyn isn’t quite convinced that she wants to date a girl. The 
book falls back on cliché sometimes, but the romance turns certain expectations on 
their heads: Brooklyn’s mom really wants her to have sex and would much prefer 
that she get involved with a girl, Zoe is very gentle and supportive as a friend but 
sexually pushy as a girlfriend, and Brooklyn, while she is head over heels and wants 
to spend every minute with Zoe, doesn’t want to go any further than kissing. While 
characterization and emotional range is only as deep as it needs to be to carry the 
convenient plot twists, theater kids will enjoy the behind-the-scenes look at summer 
stock, as will those looking for affirmation that romantic experimentation doesn’t 
always lead to commitment or debilitating heartache.  KC 
clAnton, Ben It Came in the Mail; written and illus. by Ben Clanton. Simon, 
2016 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0360-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0361-0 $10.99  
R 4-7 yrs
Liam loves to get mail, or he would love it, if he ever received any. In a moment 
of inspiration, he sends a letter to his mailbox, asking it to send him “something 
BIG!” The mailbox delivers and in grand fashion: when Liam opens the box, he 
is singed by the fiery breath of the friendly dragon inside. When Liam sends ad-
ditional requests for mail, he is inundated with a flood of crazy deliveries (pickles, 
pigs, a funny bone, a flying whale) by his obliging mailbox. The outpouring gets 
to be overwhelming, though, so Liam enlists the mailbox’s help in spreading the 
love; as Liam stuffs various items back into the box, they are then sent to other kids’ 
mailboxes, resulting in the sharing of joy. The simple text plays the story straight, 
but illustrative speech bubbles and sound effects (“TOOT! WHIRR! WINK 
SQUIBBLE WIBBLE WHOOP!”) emphasize the humor, as does the old-school 
draftsmanship that’s just this side of cartoonish. Photographic images of envelopes 
and postcards, incorporated into the backgrounds of many scenes, add interest, 
July/August 2016 • 569
and the dragon-arrival page is cleverly punctuated by realistic-looking burnt spots. 
The wish-fulfillment plot will appeal to kids and could be used to liven up a mail-
themed storytime, to rekindle interest in a letter-writing lesson, or to spark some 
creative writing.  JH
cook, eileen With Malice. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-544-80509-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 7-10
Two best friends—financially privileged and academically driven Jill, and poor 
yet popular and outgoing Simone—take the trip of a lifetime to Italy their senior 
year, only to have it end in a horrific car crash. Jill awakens in a hospital with in-
termittent aphasia and no memory of the past six weeks only to find that Simone 
is dead and that she might be legally responsible. As the story unfolds, even she 
doubts her innocence, especially when she learns that she was uncharacteristically 
involved with, and lost her virginity to, their Italian tour guide, an older guy who 
she and Simone allegedly fought over during the trip. When an autopsy reveals 
that Simone was stabbed prior to the crash and a knife is found with Jill’s finger-
prints, the question becomes one of motive, and one is supplied by Jill’s bracingly 
honest roommate in rehab, making the final story, revealed in a dream that may 
or may not be true given Jill’s retrograde amnesia, nicely ambivalent. Interspersed 
throughout the main narrative are transcripts from police statements, emails, and 
blog posts, ensuring that the whole package takes on a ripped-from-the-headlines 
feel (it will immediately raise thoughts of the Amanda Knox case) and causing 
readers to consider how all these bits and pieces call into question any coherent 
narrative. Jill’s condition makes her a cipher even to herself, which is disconcerting 
but also credible; under the influence of an unfamiliar environment, resentment 
in a friendship, and first infatuation, smart girls are perfectly capable of making 
stupid choices.  KC 
cooper, ABBy Sticks & Stones. Farrar, 2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30287-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 4-7
Elyse has an unusual medical condition: her skin displays the text of any emotionally 
charged words people say about her. In elementary school, her doctor counseled 
her classmates on her syndrome, but now that she’s entering sixth grade at a new 
school, she keeps her condition private, wearing long sleeves and pants to hide it. 
She also gets a new symptom—the words aren’t just coming from other people, but 
from her own head, and they aren’t all nice. In fact, as Elyse moves through her year, 
she finds herself caught in a maelstrom of mood swings as her best friend ditches 
her for the popular girls, the boy she likes ignores her, and a boy she doesn’t really 
like becomes her boyfriend. She’s buoyed by a series of anonymous notes, however, 
that encourage her to try for the much-coveted position of student leader for the 
sixth grade wilderness trip. This is programmatic but clear, making it a solid choice 
for readers transitioning from the relatively tame emotional landscapes of their 
elementary years to the more treacherous terrain of middle school. Elyse narrates 
every step of her growth and setbacks in ways that young readers will find easy to 
follow, and they will certainly recognize both the pendulum swing of her emotions 
570 • the Bulletin
and her growing ambivalence toward parental intervention. Her monthly letters 
to her future self are a clever idea for imitation as they help readers as well as Elyse 
herself gain perspective on what, for many, is a difficult time.  KC 
crum, shuttA William and the Witch’s Riddle; illus. by Lee Wildish. Knopf, 
2016 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93270-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93269-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93271-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Right away, this book shows its fairy-tale colors with a “once upon a time” and a 
reference to a pricked finger. This spinoff of “Sleeping Beauty” doesn’t start with 
the princess, however, but instead her son William, who is in a bind—he’s trying to 
protect his little brother, Pinch, but both of his parents are missing and now there’s 
a dangerous woman, Morga, who informs him he must solve riddles and return 
a lost spindle to her or she’ll take Pinch. William’s thrown into an adventure that 
is sometimes exciting but mostly terrifying, though he manages to gain powerful 
allies along the way. The happy ending is probable from the start, but there are 
some genuine perils as William dangerously angers Morga. Since the princess is 
already sleeping before the book starts, it’s understandable that she can’t be the 
star here, but it is a shame that once again she’s relegated to dozing until some 
male, in this case her older son, saves her. This is a minor quibble, however, and 
the book as a whole feels rich and timeless. William’s allies are nicely varied, and 
they encourage and guide rather than outright assist, allowing him room to grow 
in both confidence and ability. Older fans of fairy tales will likely appreciate this 
deeper look at a classic favorite. Final illustrations not seen.  AS
dAmico, ginA Wax. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-544-63315-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Of course Paraffin, Vermont would be the home of a candle factory that is the pri-
mary source of both industry and tourism in the small town. Poppy has grown up in 
this town, leaving only for a brief, disastrous stint on a talent-based reality television 
show, but she hasn’t really given the factory much thought until she ducks out of 
a tour and finds a secret back room filled with an odd old woman and a bunch of 
lifelike wax figures. She leaves the factory with a mysterious candle and a stowaway 
in her car, an animated wax figure, Dud, who knows nothing about the world but 
is very dedicated to Poppy. Poppy’s got to be quick-witted to convince her family 
to let Dud stay with them and to convince the world that he’s an exchange student 
and not, in fact, a wax dude. She must also puzzle out what pod people horrors are 
unfolding in her town as wax figures take the place of townspeople, all without the 
help of her formerly perfect best friend who is suddenly being very strange. The 
snappy humor and wry commentary keep things from ever becoming too scary, 
but there’s plenty of implied horror in how close this town comes to being 1,014 
wax beings, run by two immortal, selfish souls who just want plenty of bodies that 
they can step into at a moment’s notice. Fans of Lish McBride’s hybrid humor/
horror Necromancer series (Hold Me Closer, Necromancer, BCCB 12/10, etc.) will 
appreciate the similar vibe here.  AS
July/August 2016 • 571
dolAn, elys The Mystery of the Haunted Farm; written and illus. by Elys 
Dolan. Nosy Crow/Candlewick, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-8658-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Something has gone horror-ifically wrong at Farmer Greg’s farm, so he calls in the 
Three Pigs Ghost-Hunters to investigate the situation. They’re baffled that the 
Phantom Finder 5000 doesn’t register any paranormal activity when faced with 
zombie ducks, howling ghost cows, and sinister green slime. A mysterious chicken 
coop reveals the truth—an “underground fear factory” created by the barnyard 
animals to scare off a terrible beast that appears on the farm. Moonlight comes 
and the frightening creature proves to be Farmer Greg, who turns into a werewolf, 
but the three pigs discover that he’s a friendly and trainable wolf, so they save the 
barnyard after all. Don’t think too hard about the ridiculous plot—the fun here 
lies in the supernatural barnyard bedlam, displayed in oversized spreads crammed 
full of speech balloons and subplots. Readers familiar with Dolan’s Weasels (BCCB 
2/13) will recognize the chaotic comedy and cunning animal characters, and they’ll 
know to search the spreads for rewarding detail: the snail who repeatedly scoffs at 
the frenzy, the source of the sinister slime (let’s just say it’s gross), the media hat-
tips ranging from The Shining to Frankenstein to, of course, Ghostbusters (“I ain’t 
afraid of no goat!” says a fearless pig). For those who prefer Halloween silliness to 
Halloween spookiness, this will be right up their alley.  DS
ehrlich, Amy Willa: The Story of Willa Cather, An American Writer; illus. by 
Wendell Minor. Wiseman/Simon, 2016 [72p]
ISBN 978-0-689-86573-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
M Gr. 2-4
In this chapter-book biography of Willa Cather, elementary-grade readers may be 
lured by a story initially reminiscent of Laura Ingalls Wilder; Cather was trans-
planted from the East (in this case, Virginia) to the Midwestern plains (for Cather, 
Nebraska), and later notably chronicled the experiences of pioneers during white 
settlement. Wilder’s writing is accessible to younger children, though, while Cather’s 
work leans toward an older audience, and it’s unlikely that Ehrlich’s intended 
reader will have encountered Cather’s work. Perceptive kids will glean the basics 
here—that Cather’s Western sojourn and acquaintances formed the basis of many 
of her novels, even though her own education and experiences were broader than 
this interest might suggest. However, there is little explanation of the importance 
of the literary luminaries she encountered, little investigation of her personal adult 
life, and little effort to clarify the few relatable childhood anecdotes that offer the 
most kid-friendly appeal. Minor’s illustrations, some color, some monochromatic 
sepia-toned, offer stiff, literal images drawn from the text, a timeline extends the 
list of people Cather met, a bibliography is directed to adult readers, and fifteen 
thumbnail bios of noted American women writers are appended, of which only 
Dorothy Canfield Fisher, Louisa May Alcott, and Emily Dickinson may have any 
appeal for Ehrlich’s readers.  EB
572 • the Bulletin
eve, lAure The Graces. Amulet, 2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-2123-6 $18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
Fenrin and Thalia Grace (seventeen-year-old twins) and their fifteen-year-old sister 
Summer rule their school with charm and charisma, but it’s rumored that those 
qualities are the work of witchcraft. Fifteen-year-old River desperately needs their 
magic to be the real deal, so she is thrilled when she’s taken under Summer’s wing. 
She’s also keenly aware of how easy it is to lose favor with the siblings, so River has 
calculated every move to make certain she stays as close to the family as possible: she 
knows to stay coolly aloof so as not to seem to needy, she knows to seem interesting 
but not more interesting than the Graces themselves, and she knows to accept their 
apparent magic without anything that resembles awe. She can’t however, prevent 
the tragedy that tears them apart and eventually leads to such a hostile encounter 
that River’s life becomes forfeit. Despite River’s narration, readers know next to 
nothing about her (River is not even her real name, but one granted to her by the 
Graces) for a large portion of the novel, while the intimacies, secrets, and desires 
of the Graces are laid bare by River’s careful study. It’s clear, though, that she’s not 
just some obsessed sycophant—she wants something from them, and acceptance 
might be part of it but there is something more, and perhaps something darker. The 
dialogue can be a bit awkward in this British import, but River’s evasive narration 
is enough to compel readers forward. Even putting the magic aside, this will still 
ring true to the many teenagers who have tried desperately to shape their identities 
around others.  KQG 
FABer, polly Mango & Bambang: The Not-a-Pig; illus. by Clara Vulliamy. Can-
dlewick, 2016 [144p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-8226-2 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-3
In this British import, Bambang, a talking Malaysian tapir, is lost in the middle of 
a busy city street when young girl Mango finds him and gently leads him to her 
house with the promise of banana pancakes. In subsequent episodes, Bambang 
finds the perfect pool in a public fountain, escapes a neighbor with a taste for 
taxidermy, and reassures Mango as the girl struggles with an upcoming music 
concert. The absurdity of the premise, Mango’s combination of gentle kindness 
and steely determination, and the charm of Bambang himself provide immediate 
appeal, while the brief page count, large font, and plentiful illustrations will buoy 
novice chapter book readers. The slight formality of the narrative voice is matched 
by Vulliamy’s visual representation of Mango (she often appears in a cardigan, skirt, 
and knee socks and her sleek black bob sports a jaunty side bow), and there’s an 
easy elegance to the smooth mixed-media art, done in shades of white, gray, and 
black. Fans of the recent Paddington Bear movie and those who love Hilary McKay’s 
animal-centric “Lulu” series may especially enjoy this introduction to Mango and 
Bambang’s adventures.  JH
July/August 2016 • 573
Ford, gilBert The Marvelous Thing That Came from a Spring: The Accidental 
Invention of the Toy That Swept the Nation; written and illus. by Gilbert Ford; illus. 
with photographs by Greg Endries. Atheneum, 2016 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5065-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5066-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R 6-9 yrs 
Working for the Navy in World War II to reduce vibrations to delicate ships’ in-
struments, Richard James was distracted—and then inspired—by a spring that fell 
from his shelf, or more precisely, seemed to walk off his shelf. That may not have 
been the tool the Navy needed, but it could be one heckuva fun toy, and with the 
assistance of his wife, Betty (who found the perfect name for the toy in the diction-
ary), he set out to market his serendipitous find as the Slinky. After being turned 
down many times, he begged his way into Gimbel’s department store before the 
Christmas holiday, going so far as to hire a shill who would publicly applaud his 
demonstration. No need: it was an instant sell-out, and the rest—a post-war baby 
boom, a dedicated factory, and an expanded staff—is Toy Industry Hall of Fame 
history. Darker episodes from the inventor’s life, such as financial failure and the 
implied marital rift between the Jameses, are relegated to an endnote that raises as 
many questions as it answers. Kids who are content to focus on the Slinky itself, 
though, are rewarded with a lively and visually entertaining tale. Illustrations cre-
ated from cutouts, painted backgrounds, and realia (including lots of kids’ period 
dollhouse furniture, toy vehicles, and games) will prove as fascinating for many 
readers as the narration itself. Pair this with Chris Barton’s Whoosh! (BCCB 6/16) 
on the invention of the Super Soaker for a crowd-pleasing invention-themed story 
time.  EB
FriedmAn, sAmAnthA What Degas Saw; illus. by Cristina Pieropan and with 
photographs. Modern of Modern Art, 2016 36p
ISBN 978-1-63345-004-2 $19.95  
R 7-10 yrs
This day-in-the-life-of-an-artist focuses not on the technical details of French artist 
Edgar Degas’ works but on where he found his subject matter. Breaking from older 
traditions, “he wanted to find a way to capture the beauty of the passing moment,” 
so he went out into the streets, theaters, and race courses, observing humanity going 
about its daily business. There’s little plot, but text is simple yet fluid, capturing 
the artist’s milieu and perspective. Pieropan’s delicate, scratchy linework has the 
formality of etching, appropriate to the intricate and old-fashioned scenes; the gentle 
palette, with pale peaches, golds, and blues predominating, distances the scenes 
somewhat, but it makes for an effective contrast with the interpolated paintings and 
prints from Degas’ oeuvre. While not as quirkily impressive as Winter’s Gertrude Is 
Gertrude Is Gertrude Is Gertrude (BCCB 1/09), this is an interesting view into the 
relationship between an artist and his daily life, and it will be useful as a prepara-
tion for a museum trip. End matter includes a key to the artworks reproduced in 
the book and a brief overview of the artist’s life.  DS
574 • the Bulletin
gAither, steFAnie Into the Abyss. Simon, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4995-3 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4997-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 8-10
This conclusion to a duo of novels about two sisters, focuses on Violet, the former 
human who is now a clone, rather than her fiercely devoted sister Cate, who was 
the star in Falls the Shadow. Violet’s much angrier than her sister, bitter about her 
treatment in society and aware that it will only get worse as the rest of the clones 
follow their coding and become weapons. She follows a slightly different path, but 
she’s still carefully controlled as she trains to be a weapon against the other clones. 
Society’s falling apart around them, and soon there are even bigger issues than 
who Violet wants to work for, as she’s running for her life and that of her beloved 
sister, picking up clues along the way about how to stop the other clones and regain 
any semblance of humanity. Unfortunately, Cate’s largely absent in this outing, 
and Violet is an unlikable protagonist for at least the first half of the novel. She 
remembers nothing prior to her clone awakening, so she lacks empathy, interest 
in humanity, or trust in anything; she’s also violent, reveling in ideas of damaging 
her bullying peers. There’s something tragic and desperate underneath her shell, 
however, and she begins to seem sympathetic once she starts admitting to herself 
that she might actually care about the lives of those around her. It’s helpful that 
Violet is the narrator, as she, like readers, needs a lot of exposition to catch up. 
Even those who read the earlier novel, though, may find this complex, dystopic 
world daunting to unpack but possibly worth the effort.  AS
gill, timothy Flip & Fin: Super Sharks to the Rescue!; illus. by Neil Number-
man. Greenwillow, 2016 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-224301-0 $15.99 
 R 5-8 yrs
In this followup to Flip & Fin: We Rule the School, sand sharks Flip and Fin are pals 
with a shared devotion to TV superheroes Sammy Saw Shark and Harry Hammer-
head, so they decide it’s time for them to save the day too. Joined by pals Swimmy 
(an octopus) and Molly (an anglerfish), they find a floating beach ball that they can 
return to the “human people” (“We will be heroes”), but their helpful approach 
sends people fleeing. Deciding that the humans are scared of the beach ball, they 
pop the ball (“Our work here is done”) and leave to the sound of cheers from the 
humans—who are obviously less concerned about the ball than they are relieved 
that the sharks are departing. The action starts out slowly, but the manic merriment 
is enjoyable from the get-go, and audiences will get a huge kick out of the heroes’ 
situational misunderstanding. The watercolor and pencil art is zippy and playful, 
with both aquatic creatures and humans distinctly cartoonish; sound effects and 
motion lines are genre appropriate, and speech balloons carry key moments of the 
text. Simple sentence structures and lots of repetition make this equally suitable as a 
readalone, especially for shark sympathizers. The final page includes informational 
tidbits about real sand sharks.  DS
July/August 2016 • 575
girArd, m-e Girl Mans Up. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2016 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-240417-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-240419-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 8-10
Pen just wants to be herself, but it’s a lot to navigate in her Portuguese-American 
family where she’s expected to be a girly girl. Her brother tries to run interfer-
ence with her strict parents, but when he moves out, Pen’s on her own. She’s got 
a group of friends, all guys, who mostly accept her, but she’s starting to see some 
real character flaws in them, particularly in the leader, who burns through girls at a 
startling rate. Once she admits her feelings and finds her first girlfriend, Pen ditches 
her friends and starts flagrantly breaking her parents’ rules. The cultural elements 
are handled well, with Pen’s large extended family representing a wide range of 
assimilated cousins and traditional older relatives, all of whom have something to 
say about Pen’s new haircut, clothes, or goals. There are occasional repeat concepts 
or phrases that wear a bit thin, but that’s a minor quibble in what is otherwise a 
powerful book about identity, belonging, and the collision between sexuality and 
cultural expectations.  AS
grAy, kArlin Nadia: The Girl Who Couldn’t Sit Still; illus. by Christine Dav-
enier. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-544-31960-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 6-9 yrs
The Olympics are coming, which means it’s time for new media darlings. Gray’s 
picture-book biography takes us back to a star of yesteryear, the inimitable Nadia 
Comaneci, starting with her early childhood love of climbing trees. Her parents 
signed her up for gymnastics to channel that energy, and after a few setbacks she 
became the top gymnast in the world. The main focus, of course, is the legendary 
Olympics where fourteen-year-old Nadia scored a stream of unprecedented perfect 
10s (leading to dramatic confusion with a scoreboard that hadn’t been programmed 
to display such a result). The text is formulaic, never going beyond the expected 
template, but it’s sprightly and well researched. The loose linework in Davenier’s 
illustrations is as limber as Nadia herself, and the liquid dabs of translucent comple-
mentary teals and reds add to the sense of movement. This is a serviceable outing 
that will best entertain youngsters who already have the gymnastics bug, and while 
they might already know about the great Nadia, they may enjoy reliving her story. 
Thorough end matter includes an afterword briefly covers Nadia’s subsequent life; 
a timeline; and detailed source notes. Photographs of Nadia, only one of them in 
action, are sadly relegated to the jacket flap.  DS
hAddix, mArgAret peterson Children of Exile. Simon, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5003-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5005-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year old Rosi has grown up in peaceful Fredtown, where she, her younger 
brother Bobo, and dozens of other refugee children have been raised by loving 
foster Fred-parents who taught them the values of trust, honesty, and nonviolence. 
Now she and all the other children have returned to their real parents in a town 
576 • the Bulletin
scarred by war and divided by lingering animosity. Rosi’s naïveté and righteousness 
soon place her and others in danger she doesn’t understand, and she’s also faced 
with harsh truths about the Freds themselves. This fast-paced, harrowing tale of 
innocence lost is a solid dystopia for beginners. The war between brown-eyed and 
green-eyed people sets a simple, straightforward stage for conflict, while naïve Rosi 
stands in for the naïve reader to whom everything is explained by adults. Savvy 
readers will likely catch on quickly to the fact that the Freds are aliens trying to 
save humanity from itself, but readers new to the genre will appreciate the story’s 
clarity. What the novels lacks in subtlety, it makes up for with a strong narrative 
that packs an emotional punch. Dark and heart-wrenching, this first volume in a 
planned series should excite readers who want thought-provoking stories and those 
who have outgrown the need for easy answers.  AM
hAll, mAry lou Wirewalker. Viking, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01646-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When Y, a local drug dealer and runner of dogfights, offers fourteen-year-old Clar-
ence the opportunity to run drugs for his operation, Clarence is game. He’s sick 
of watching his dad (who is white) drown in drink since Clarence’s mom (who 
was African American) was murdered several years ago, sick of being called Itty for 
his size, sick of seeing a future with no respect, so he takes the deal, undergoing 
initiation to become a Y-Boy. He’s committed, though, to walking the fine line 
between surviving the rough streets and becoming the respectable man his mother 
had raised him to be, to be a force of good like the superheroes he so admires. And 
he might just do it. Besides being a good student, Clarence has Mr. Khabir, owner 
of the Kwik-Bi, and Ms. Angelique Moffet, his English teacher, to support and 
guide him. Mona, a Great Dane that’s caught Y’s attention as a possible competitor 
at his illegal dog fights, and Billie, a foul-mouthed, abused sixth-grader Clarence 
has agreed to mentor, both give his life some purpose (and inspire his imaginary 
superhero persona of Wirewalker). Debut novelist Hall paces her story patiently, 
allowing each questionable decision Clarence makes to increase the dramatic tension, 
while quietly raising the stakes for the secondary cast—human and canine—as well. 
There’s grit and challenging honesty here to serve readers who are not quite ready 
for full-out Urban Lit. By story’s end, Clarence is simply relieved to be reconnected 
with his father and out of Y’s organization, but readers will recognize his change of 
direction as the superheroic act he always hoped Wirewalker would accomplish.  EB
hAutmAn, pete The Forgetting Machine. Simon, 2016 [224p] (The Flink-
water Chronicles)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-6438-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-6440-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
In this bright, funny sequel to The Flinkwater Factor (BCCB 11/15), readers see 
more of the wacky town of Flinkwater, where most people are extra smart and where 
experimentation on the citizens results in regular scientific advances. Our narrator 
is, once again, the optimistic Ginger Crump, who is growing increasingly concerned 
by the weird memory loss in those around her and by the talking, reading cat that 
has a new affinity for her. It all comes together eventually, and the bad guy is caught 
July/August 2016 • 577
(and gets a taste of his own medicine when his own extreme memory technique 
happens to him and all of his personal recollections are crowded out by the OED 
and Wikipedia), memories are restored, and the animal receptacles of knowledge 
are freed. There is additional memorable content in Ginger’s wry observations 
about her odd town, a sad subplot about an isolated kid and her hyper-religious 
family, and a sturdy amount of thoughtful commentary about e-books versus print 
books and the future of reading. A snappy afterword explains whether the scientific 
advances mentioned in the book are possible in the present or if readers will have 
to wait a bit longer to see them in action, as with the pizza-delivering drones.  AS
hodge, rosAmund Bright Smoke, Cold Fire. Balzer + Bray, 2016 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-236941-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-236943-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 9-12
The domed city of Viyara is the only place that survived the Ruining, a fog that left 
the walking dead in its wake, and it’s Viyara that serves as the setting for Hodge’s 
take on Romeo and Juliet. Here Juliet is a trained assassin, compelled by magic to 
murder anyone who kills a member of the Catresou family. Romeo, from the Catre-
sous’ rival family, kills Juliet’s kinsman Tybalt, and so Juliet must take her revenge, 
despite her secret relationship with Romeo. She manages to defy the spell, but the 
ritual she performs to do so goes horribly awry and causes a world of trouble not 
only for Romeo and Juliet but also the two other main characters, Runajo (Rosaline) 
and Paris. Runajo, a novice member of the Sisters of Thorn, is sitting vigil to the 
Mouth of Death when she pulls Juliet from its depths. Paris, who was meant to 
be Juliet’s protector, is now tethered to Romeo through a psychic connection. Oh, 
and there’s necromancers. And homicidal Sisters of Thorn. And lost libraries. It’s 
all quite unwieldy as a plot, and the framework of the play constrains and detracts 
from what might have been an interesting story focusing on Runajo and her efforts 
to save her city. Focalization shifts between Runajo and Paris, but it’s clear that 
the girls are having all the fun here as Runajo and Juliet fight death reapers, fell 
revenants, and track down murderous Sisters while Paris and Romeo mope around 
the city until they stumble across the Catresou family’s connection to necromancy 
and perhaps the origins of the Ruining. Spitfire Runajo is and really the star here, 
putting R&J’s insta-love on the backburner, but an open ending hints at romance 
and action to come.  KQG
holmes, kAthryn 
How It Feels to Fly. 
HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238734-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238736-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Rising junior Samantha loves ballet, but the anxiety it causes her is starting to 
lead to panic attacks, so she’s attending a summer program for young athletes 
and artists with anxiety problems. Her anxiety manifests as a self-hating, franti-
cally self-conscious voice in her head and severe control of her food intake, in an 
attempt to bring her curvy body into line with ballet standards. As she works on 
those challenges, she gets to know the other kids in the program, and she falls hard 
for the college-aged peer counselor, Tim, whom she believes returns her feelings. 
578 • the Bulletin
Sam’s inner voice dies down with surprising speed, and what seems to be meant 
as a shocking reveal of her bulimia is both predictable and obvious. However, her 
body dysmorphia and anxious tendencies are effectively conveyed, as is the fact 
that her mother plays a key role in both of them. Mostly, though, this is a cheesy 
but enjoyable tale of group dynamics and unlikely friendships, sort of a Breakfast 
Club for athletes and performers, and while the characters are all pretty familiar 
and the explorations aren’t very deep, it’s the formula that gives this TV-movie 
story its charm. Though the psychological side of the plot could have resonance 
for anxious readers, mostly this may be an undemanding outing for those seeking 
summer reads that offer a compromise between the deep and the shallow end.  DS
hooks, gWendolyn Tiny Stitches: The Life of Medical Pioneer Vivien Thomas; 
illus. by Colin Bootman. Lee & Low, 2016 32p
ISBN 978-1-62014-156-4 $17.95  
Ad Gr. 3-5
The work of surgical assistant Vivien Thomas, who with Alfred Blalock and Helen 
Taussig pioneered the cardiac surgery for repairing the “blue baby” heart defect in 
children, was chronicled for older readers in Murphy’s Breakthrough! (BCCB 1/16), 
and now he’s receiving the picture-book biography treatment. The book traces 
his early skill at carpentry and his Depression-crushed dreams for medical school, 
then his work with Blalock at Vanderbilt University and their move together to 
Johns Hopkins, where they created the innovative surgery. The book serviceably 
covers Thomas’ remarkable career, with ongoing attention to how much racism the 
African American man faced in the mid-century South and how many demeaning 
forms it would take (Thomas was, for instance, long paid as a janitor rather than a 
research assistant at Vanderbilt). Unfortunately, the prose is often textbook-stodgy, 
and important details—like Thomas’ family, unmentioned until when Thomas 
and Blalock move to Johns Hopkins—are glossed over. Bootman’s watercolors are 
occasionally awkwardly or confusingly drafted, but they convey the intensity of 
Thomas’ approach and the reality of his existence within a sea of white faces. Thomas 
is a fascinating figure both as a pioneer and as an example of the importance of 
the technical side of medicine, and despite its flaws, this book gives young readers 
a look at both these contributions. Extensive notes include an explanation of the 
Tetralogy of Fallot that Thomas’ surgery repairs, additional information about the 
man, a brief glossary, and a list of sources.  DS
hopkinson, deBorAh Dive!: World War II Stories of Sailors & Submarines in the 
Pacific. Scholastic, 2016 [384p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-545-42558-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
There’s no shortage of adventure in this look at the World War II submarines that 
prowled the ocean in search of enemy vessels, skimming just beneath the surface 
while their crewmen hoped the vessels’ periscopes wouldn’t be visible and their 
ships could outlast depth charges. Organizing her account into four chronological 
sections, from 1941 through the 1945, Hopkinson focuses on the missions and 
crew of several submarines that kids are likely to encounter in broader histories of 
the War in the Pacific, especially Seawolf, Trigger, Wahoo, and Tang. Although it’s 
feasible that a reader might want to skip straight to a particular story, reading in 
sequence facilitates an understanding of the strategies employed by Allies and the 
July/August 2016 • 579
Japanese, the development of submarine design and weaponry, and the innovations 
in command policy that evolved throughout the hostilities. The real appeal, of 
course, is danger and heroism, and in drawing liberally from first-person accounts 
by surviving veterans, Hopkinson often emulates the tone of Greatest Generation 
memoir. In additional to copious end matter—index, source notes, weighty bibliog-
raphy, web links, glossary, timeline, rosters, lists—black and white photos abound, 
and themed sidebars offer information ranging from submarine management to 
the next good read. And kudos to Hopkinson, whose eagle eye even located the 
contingent of women nurses evacuated by sub from the Philippines; fans of Farrell’s 
Pure Grit (BCCB 4/14) will be particularly intrigued. EB
ignAtoW, Amy The Mighty Odds; written and illus. by Amy Ignatow. Amulet, 
2016 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1271-5 $15.95 
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
When four dramatically different middle-schoolers find they’ve developed weird 
superpowers (one, for example, can teleport himself four inches to the left) after 
being in a bus crash, they must work together to unravel the mystery of what hap-
pened to them. There are sneaky bad guys, hints of conspiracy, even suggestions of 
aliens, but the focus is mostly on how the four handle one other, as each represents 
a distinct social group in a very diverse urban middle school. Black and white spot 
art, occasionally expanded into a comic-panel spread, is interspersed with the text, 
continuing the action; the illustrations (sometimes accompanied by speech balloons) 
add accessibility and break up the longer chapters. In addition, snarky newspaper 
articles help readers catch subtleties and push them to consider both logical and 
ridiculous explanations for what happened. There’s plenty here to spark curiosity, 
and the characters are memorable—it will be interesting to see how their wonky 
powers can be used in future outings. Fans of the author’s Popularity Papers series 
will be pleased to see this new outing.  AS
kennedy, kAtie Learning to Swear in America. Bloomsbury, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-909-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-910-2 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
No ordinary seventeen-year-old, Yuri Strelnikov holds a doctorate in physics. When 
an enormous asteroid with the potential to destroy the west coast of the United States 
is spotted, Yuri travels from Russia to the U.S. to help work out a plan to prevent 
the disaster, but his youth and the untested nature of his research make it difficult 
for him to convince his colleagues that his plan is the only real chance they’ve got. 
To make matters worse, he is caught looking at some top secret documents, and he 
overhears that he will not be allowed to go home even if they manage to save the 
world. Meanwhile, he meets Dovie, a girl who addles his hormones and distracts 
him from his work but who is willing to help him with a plan for escape after the 
crisis has passed. The balance of wit, romance, danger, and one huge philosophical 
and ethical dilemma is brilliantly managed here, as Yuri tries to negotiate cultural 
differences while pitting the moral clarity and confidence of youth against the 
equally stubborn mass of experience that drives his colleagues. Meanwhile, Yuri’s 
experiencing the love of a family for the first time, and a goofy California family 
580 • the Bulletin
at that; Dovie’s parents are tie-dyed-in-the-wool hippies, and she and her brother 
seek to fill in the gaps of Yuri’s social and emotional education with gentle teasing 
and real sensitivity. A nail-biting climax with a cinematic aftermath and an even 
more nail-biting resolution round out this thoroughly entertaining sci-fi disaster, 
romance, action/adventure mashup.  KC 
kerr, Judith Mister Cleghorn’s Seal; written and illus. by Judith Kerr. Harp-
erCollins, 2016 94p
ISBN 978-0-00-817083-7 $14.99  
R Gr. 2-4
In a time with horse-drawn buggies and “newfangled” cigarettes, Albert Cleghorn is 
ruing his recent choice to sell his shop, as he misses chatting with customers. While 
visiting his seaside fisherman cousin, Mr. Cleghorn encounters an orphaned seal 
pup and, seeing a kindred lonely spirit, rescues the animal and takes him home, 
where he hopes the local zoo will take the little guy. The conditions at the zoo are 
awful, though, so Mr. Cleghorn ends up keeping the seal with him, at least until 
his livid landlord discovers the seal and demands immediate eviction. The zoo’s 
now closed after its dishonest owners took the profits and ran; in a satisfying turn of 
events, however, Mr. Cleghorn uses the money from his shop’s sale to buy the zoo 
and run it, and he also asks his neighbor, Miss Craig (who has helped care for the 
seal pup), to marry him and to move into a cottage in the zoo: “And they all lived 
happily ever after!” Despite his adult status, kind Mr. Cleghorn will be a relatable 
character to animal-loving kids, and they may vicariously scratch that itch of car-
ing for undomesticated but adorable animals through Mr. Cleghorn’s gentle story. 
There are no chapter breaks in this short novel, but its brief page count, engaging 
story, and the plentiful (and cozy) monochromatic sketches will spur on solo read-
ers. Kerr, author of the famous When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit, explains her real-life 
inspiration, the sad ending of which prompted Kerr to create this happier, fictional 
version for her first book in thirty-seven years. Hand this to animal lovers, or share 
it as a snug family or classroom readaloud selection.  JH 
khorAnA, Aditi Mirror in the Sky. Razorbill, 2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-856-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
On the eve of Tara Krishnan’s junior year, scientists discover a planet hidden at 
the edge of the galaxy. Soon, detected signals suggest that it may be an alternate 
Earth, and suddenly the world is swept up in the furor of what-ifs as adults become 
obsessed with paths not taken. Tara, meanwhile, struggles to focus on her own 
path, including new, unexpected attention from popular Nick and his enigmatic, 
seemingly perfect girlfriend Halle; she quickly gets caught up the jumble of par-
ties, flirtations, and camaraderie that revolve around them. It’s almost enough to 
distract from the chaos at home, where her mother is falling under the lure of a 
planet-worshipping cult. Now, as waves of changes personal, social, global, and 
interplanetary, rock her previously predictable life, Tara must find the strength to 
mark a path for herself locally as well as galactically. This thoughtful science fiction 
novel offers an emotionally and psychologically driven alternative to the recent spate 
of action-packed, alien-ridden sci-fi adventures. Khorana uses her sci-fi premise 
to explore the angst and excitement of possibilities, crafting a story with a deeply 
personal, potently adolescent vibe. Realism fans will welcome the academically 
July/August 2016 • 581
gifted but socially awkward Tara and her more ordinary woes, while science fiction 
readers will appreciate the novel’s use of interplanetary drama to raise philosophical 
questions. A strong readalike for Wallach’s We All Looked Up (BCCB 4/15), this 
novel is the perfect fit for readers prone to introspection and those looking for more 
than just the next fast-paced page-turner.  AM
kirBy, mAttheW J. A Taste for Monsters. Scholastic, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81784-4 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-81794-3 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 8-12
Disfigured by her factory work and penniless after her father’s death, seventeen-year-
old Evelyn Fallow nonetheless manages to secure herself a position at the London 
Hospital in 1888. It’s far from the nursing job she desired, though—she is to be 
a maid and assistant to the Elephant Man, Joseph Merrick, whose body has been 
horrifically malformed by a mysterious disease. Despite his appearance, Evelyn finds 
him to be a gentle and caring soul with whom she has much in common. When 
the Ripper starts terrorizing the women of the East End, Evelyn is particularly glad 
to be safely shut in at the hospital; unfortunately for her, the ghosts of the Leather 
Apron’s victims start appearing to both Evelyn and the Elephant Man, begging 
them to put some past wrong right and forcing Evelyn out into the world once 
more. The sweet, developing friendship between Evelyn and Merrick, in which 
both find acceptance and comfort, is surrounded by an atmosphere of menace 
and terror. Though the murders occur offstage, their gory results are described as 
Evelyn hunts for clues, emphasizing the evil at work. Even more chilling, though, 
is the appearance of the ghosts, not so much for their presence but more for the 
personal histories they tell as women already beaten down by the world well be-
fore the Ripper got to them. Kirby paints a picture in which the Ripper’s crimes 
are really just the extreme of the accepted abuse of women, abuse that Evelyn too 
encounters. Readers will find themselves falling down deep internet holes about 
both the Ripper and the Elephant Man, but if they catch a few current headlines, 
they may also wonder if the world has changed much in our treatment of the op-
pressed and helpless.  KQG
knoWles, Jo Still a Work in Progress. Candlewick, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7217-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Noah’s life is pretty idyllic by most standards, and most of his problems make for 
funny stories. There’s one thing the seventh-grader can’t talk about, though, and 
that is his sister Emma’s eating disorder. Since an episode that sent her into therapy, 
Emma has been given free rein in the family kitchen, and she insists that they adopt 
an increasingly restrictive vegan diet. Despite this, Noah rightly suspects that his 
sister is still starving herself while their parents persist in denial. When she ends up 
back in the hospital and then in a long-term residential treatment facility, Noah goes 
into a bit of a depression himself, and he’s angry that others are going about their 
lives as if nothing serious were happening. With help from his teacher, his friends, 
his art, and Emma herself, he slowly gets it together, reminding himself and readers 
that paying attention to everyday things even when bigger things are happening 
can be a salvation instead of a distraction. With moments of genuine warmth and 
582 • the Bulletin
middle school humor, this is a less intense but equally heartfelt exploration of the 
effects of an eating disorder on a younger sibling than Vrettos’ Skin (BCCB 5/06). 
Readers will appreciate the honesty and accessibility of this tale about Noah’s desire 
to save the sister he loves but doesn’t understand.  KC 
kurtAgich, dAWn And the Trees Crept In. Little, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-29870-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-29869-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Silla and her little sister run away from their abusive father and land at the rambling, 
creepy home of their aunt. Even though the whole house is painted red (never a 
good sign) and it’s surrounded by ominous woods, things there at first seem promis-
ing for the damaged, traumatized girls. The situation quickly turns very, very bad, 
however, and the aunt locks herself in the attic, the little sister plays with invisible 
beings, and Silla grows frantic about them all starving and dying—and that’s if 
they can survive whatever awfulness might come from the house or woods. Terse 
storytelling heightens tension, with journal entries, short poems, and old memories 
of the aunt and her sisters all mixed in with Silla’s increasingly panicked narration. 
There are too many twists to even make a guess at what the ultimate mystery is, but 
Kurtagich is careful to plant just enough hints throughout that it’s not a complete 
shock, and there’s an immediate sense that this is a story to just dive into rather 
than carefully analyze for exact plot predictability. Horror fans will be caught by 
the gripping cover image, and there’s plenty to scare them here, even during the 
second reading that the surprise ending might encourage them to undertake.  AS
leno, kAtrinA The Lost & Found. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223120-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223122-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Rising senior Frannie discovers that her grandparents have been lying to her: her 
mother wasn’t in Florida, as her grandparents told her, but in an institution, and has 
now committed suicide; she wrote Frannie a bunch of letters that her grandparents 
intercepted; and her mother claimed Frannie’s real father is not the man jailed for 
stabbing Frannie with a pen but rather a famous actor living in Texas. Her mom 
wanted Frannie to find her biological father, and Louis, who’s been online friends 
with Frannie for years in a forum for traumatized children (he was riddled with 
guilt about the accident that resulted in his sister, Willa, losing her legs, and Fran-
nie was still a little upset about the pen episode) sees the trip to Texas as fate, since 
he just got a scholarship offer from the University of Texas. Two roadtrips to the 
Lone Star State ensue, Frannie traveling with her cousin and best friend, Arrow, and 
Louis traveling with Willa, finally converging in Austin with some expected failures 
and unexpected successes. What seems like a lot of plot unfolds naturally and even 
humorously as narration alternates between Frannie and Louis; details of the four 
main characters’ past tragedies and current travails are organically incorporated into 
a rich, witty mixture. The magical realism element of Frannie’s and Louis’ losses 
taking concrete form, with physical items disappearing from their lives and then 
later turning up in each other’s, is played effectively straight and left comfortably 
July/August 2016 • 583
unexplained. The result is a story of charm and wisdom that honors loss in all its 
forms but offers the hope of being found.  DS
lo, cAtherine How It Ends. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-544-54006-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In sophomore year, Jessie still suffers with depression and anxiety issues that require 
medication after her junior-high bullying. Annie has a stepmother-shaped chip on 
her shoulder and finds the cool masks of the mean girls at her new school to be 
irritating phoniness. She and Jessie become fast friends, with Annie enjoying Jessie’s 
goofy but loving parents as much as Jessie herself. As the year wears on, however, 
the A-list girls decide to open their ranks to Annie, and Annie naïvely thinks she 
can effect a rapprochement between Jessie and her former tormentors. There are 
no real villains here, as Lo creates nuanced characters whose intentions are always 
credibly motivated. Jessie’s mom, for instance, violates Jessie’s privacy by telling 
Annie about Jessie’s mental health challenges, and Annie’s decision to share that 
information in order to encourage empathy among her friends is a disaster; Jessie’s 
hints to Annie’s boyfriend about Annie’s pregnancy result in turmoil, including an 
abortion that Annie hadn’t yet made up her mind about. The argument that plays 
out between Jessie’s parents over her mental health is fist-pumpingly insightful as her 
dad reams her mother out for visiting her own unresolved issues on their daughter, 
but so is Jessie’s mother’s insistence that it’s her job to interfere when she suspects 
that Jessie might be abusing her medication. The plot thus spirals rather than arcs, 
as Jessie and Annie work back, forth, and around pain, forgiveness, mistakes, self-
awareness, anger, betrayal, and heartache until they finally break through to the 
tenacity of a friendship worth keeping.  KC
logAn, kenneth True Letters from a Fictional Life. HarperTeen/HarperCol-
lins, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238025-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238027-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
Cute, amiable James is considered a catch in his small Vermont town. There’s 
a complication, though: he’s not attracted to Theresa, the girl in his group that 
he should be dating, but rather his friend, Tim, who is gracious but completely 
uninterested. Indeed, James is really only fully honest in his secret letters that he 
writes to himself and others and then promptly hides. Along comes Topher, who 
is gay and interested, and James makes his first forays into actually coming out. 
However, James’ letters are stolen and distributed, and all of his secrets, both good 
(many of the letters are well intentioned, as to a bullied kid in school) and bad (he’s 
pretty dismissive and self-centered on occasion) are revealed. James is an effective, 
if sometimes unreliable, narrator of his own life, quick to give himself credit that 
he doesn’t always extend to others, but he’s also pushing himself to do the right 
thing, even if it feels uncomfortable. His painful, funny experiences with family, 
love, and friends will resonate with many teens.  AS
584 • the Bulletin
mAttheWs, oWen The Fixes. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2016 [528p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233689-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233691-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
Student of the year at his posh California high school, Eric Connelly has lived his 
life to this point sipping his driven father’s Kool-Aid, eschewing any relationships 
or distractions that would keep him from getting into law school, entering politics, 
and ultimately ending up in the White House. Then he meets Jordan, the obscenely 
rich, obscenely charming son of a film mogul. Eric is sucked into Jordan’s orbit, 
which includes Haley and Paige, a girl Eric dated before he decided he preferred 
boys. Calling themselves the SuIcIdEpAcK, the four commit increasingly violent 
acts of protest against the phoniness and moral failings of their wealthy community, 
which they film and post to their school’s private message group. Adopting the same 
quick-cut, detached style he used with How to Win at High School (BCCB 5/15), 
Matthews goes even further with the postmodern metafiction in this offering, often 
reminding readers that this is a story that operates under certain genre constraints, 
such as a love interest, a meet-cute, a hero’s journey, and a moral lesson that, he 
hints, is imposed by the publisher. The tone is sly and enjoyably cynical, drenched 
in world-weary hipster-speak and updated from Holden Caulfield with a readable 
narrative technique of short chapters, lists, online messages, and parenthetical asides 
that emphasize the disjointed surface impressions and managed public personae 
that cover inner longings and hidden doubts. In the end, it offers a compelling 
caution for smart, angry teens to beware the charismatic psychopath who may look 
and sound just like them.  KC 
mccully, emily Arnold Clara: The (Mostly) True Story of a Rhinoceros Who 
Dazzled Kings, Inspired Artists, and Won the Hearts of Everyone . . . While She Ate 
Her Way Up and Down a Continent!; written and illus. by Emily Arnold Mc-
Cully. Schwartz & Wade, 2016 42p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52247-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52246-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52248-8 $10.99  
Ad 6-9 yrs
In the mid-eighteenth century, an orphaned baby Indian rhinoceros was adopted by 
Dutch merchant Douwe Mout van der Meer, and the pair embarked on a whirlwind 
show-and-tell tour of Europe, to the delight of European audiences. A rhino was 
a novelty in that time and place, and Clara was purportedly a docile and enchant-
ing ambassador for the species. McCully is upfront, in the title and in the closing 
authorial note, about the poetic license she has taken in her literary recreation of 
this relationship, but it’s not always clear which textual details are fact and which 
are fiction (for example, did Clara really enjoy drinking beer?). She also sometimes 
gets carried away, anthropomorphically speaking, in her portrayal of Clara: “Clara 
was hoisted slowly onto Van der Meer’s ship. It must have been frightening, but 
she trusted the captain.” McCully’s pen and ink and watercolor illustrations ably 
convey the formality of the period (kids will get a kick out of all the wigs, especially 
those created to imitate Clara’s horned head) while the casual strokes keep the action 
down to earth, and the seemingly smiling Clara is a winning, personable figure. A 
list of resources and two maps depicting Clara’s travels are included. Pair this with 
July/August 2016 • 585
Cox’s Elizabeth, Queen of the Sea (BCCB 7/14) for another fictionalized true story 
of a community’s relationship with a captivating creature.  JH
mcelligott, mAttheW The Weather Disaster; written and illus. by Matthew 
McElligott. Crown, 2016 [40p] (Mad Scientist Academy)
ISBN 978-0-553-52376-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4 
Weather is the focus of the current curricular unit at the Mad Scientist Academy, 
so Dr. Cosmic dons an inflatable weather balloon Sky Suit and heads into the at-
mosphere, reporting back on the air masses that generate the winds that determine 
his course, and on the formation of the clouds around him. His students (a mix of 
monsters that incudes Frankenstein and a werewolf) listen attentively, but the real 
test of their learning comes when CHAOS, his Cooling/Heating Airflow Operating 
System, goes on the fritz and the class has to figure out a fix. As half the students 
go off to the greenhouse (where it is now raining) and half to the pool (now frozen 
over in an ice storm), they apply what they’ve learned about the water cycle and 
the effect of heat on air pressure and precipitation to determine that they’ll just 
have to destroy CHAOS with a tornado, which they now know how to engineer. 
It’s pretty much impossible to discuss the Academy without referencing the vener-
able Magic School Bus and, fortunately, the MSA does not suffer by comparison. 
The graphic novel format, with tidy frames and several well-placed splash pages, 
is an excellent vehicle for organizing the lesson, and the orderliness of the visual 
presentation makes it easy to go back and review material. The send-ups on stock 
monsters are cleverly played, adding humor without sacrificing content. A page 
of climate and weather notes extends the information, and endpapers diagrams of 
the Sky Suit and CHAOS walk the line between science fact and fun. No need 
for MSA kids to take a field trip: what could be more interesting than school?  EB
mcginnis, mindy 
The Female of the Species. Tegen/HarperCollins, 
2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232089-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232091-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
There are two sides to high school senior Alex Craft—there’s the awkward, aloof 
girl who shows a natural kindness to the animals she works with at the local 
shelter. Then there’s the brutal, vengeance-seeking girl who gruesomely killed the 
murderer and rapist of her older sister and who often feels compelled to kill again. 
She’s mostly isolated herself, afraid of what her penchant for violence will bring, 
but now her walls are cracking. A girl nicknamed Peekay is a new volunteer at the 
shelter who accepts and enjoys Alex’s strangeness, and there’s Jack, the golden boy 
who has secretly had his eyes on Alex for awhile but is finally making his move. 
Just as Alex thinks she’s got a chance at normal, however, two incidents send her 
reeling back into vigilante mode. McGinnis links very clearly the little microcosm 
of rape culture that is high school to society’s larger model; in one scene, a boy 
jokes that if anyone should be raped, it’s the school’s hottest girl, who then tries to 
contain her tears as she laughs it off. Alex, Peekay, and Jack share narration, and 
their experiences with and perspectives on sex and violence vary. Jack’s not a bad 
guy, but he’s still a low-key sexist in his behavior at school, his view of women, and 
586 • the Bulletin
his relationship with Alex; Peekay plays along with the boy v. girl dynamic until 
she’s confronted with its results; Alex has a surprisingly nuanced view of gender 
relations but has no guilt over killing men who take their power too far. The ending 
of this dark novel leaves much to be unpacked, and it would certainly spark heated 
discussion in a book club or classroom.  KQG
miller, pAt ZietloW Sophie’s Squash Go to School; illus. by Anne Wils-
dorf. Schwartz & Wade, 2016 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50945-8 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50944-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50946-5 $10.99  
R 5-8 yrs
In Sophie’s Squash (BCCB 10/13), Sophie’s comfort object was a squash she named 
Bernice, who eventually got planted underground and resulted in a plant bearing 
new baby squash. It’s presumably those two squash, now named Bonnie and Baxter 
in this outing, that Sophie takes to school on her first day. School doesn’t go well, 
with stressed little Sophie clinging to Bonnie and Baxter rather than making friends, 
even with friendly and vegetable-informed Steven Green, who clearly is ready for 
a squash-inclined buddy. Sophie’s pretty miserable when it’s time for Bonnie and 
Baxter to take their autumnal dirt nap, but Steven eventually manages to cheer her 
by coming up with a plant project she can share with the class and their friendship 
flourishes. First day of school books are legion, but this one maps out the steps 
with painful clarity and offers respect for the time it can take to bond with new 
acquaintances (“Sometimes growing a friend just takes time”). Sophie’s focus on 
her squash is believable, while her parents and the book share a deft touch with her 
unusual predilection, recognizing it as a safety zone but encouraging her to expand 
her perspective. The art is as easygoing as the text, with school and home comfort-
ably overcrowded in cheerful colors; the contrast emphasizes the poignancy in the 
twilit spread where a lonely Sophie sits huddled by the garden bed where Bonnie 
and Baxter were planted. Kids skeptical of school-start stories where everything’s 
great by the end of first day will find Sophie a brave and sympathetic model, and 
all viewers will want a peek at the endpapers, which feature a multitude of different 
small vignettes of Sophie goofing around with her squash friends.  DS
mills, clAudiA The Trouble with Babies; illus. by Katie Kath. Knopf, 
2016 [192p] (The Nora Notebooks)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39166-5 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39165-8 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39168-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-4
Fourth-grader Nora (from The Trouble with Ants, BCCB 10/15) should be overjoyed: 
it’s the season of the science fair, which she loves, and her older sister is about to 
have a baby, making Nora an aunt. Unfortunately, on the school front, she’s been 
partnered up for the science fair with classmate Emma, who loves cats, the color 
pink, and, especially, her own way. On the home front, super-competent Nora is 
completely thrown by baby Nellie, uncertain of how to interact with her and startled 
by her scientist parents’ and sister’s descent into baby-craziness. Mills deploys her 
usual sympathetic yet keen insight into her characters as Nora negotiates these 
challenges. The book is particularly thoughtful in exploring the implications of 
July/August 2016 • 587
personality; Emma proves there’s more to her than Nora had credited, and Nora 
both gets over her discomfort with the baby and adjusts her view of herself. As in 
the last book, segments from Nora’s scientific journal are interspersed, this time 
containing her research and observations about babies. Kath’s monochromatic line 
and watercolor art is scribbly without being cartoonish, conveying energy and also 
respect for the kids. The problems are standard middle-grade challenges that will 
ring true to readers, while the thought-provoking reflections on personality and 
growth add insight and discussability.  DS
mittleFehldt, rAFi It Looks Like This. Candlewick, 2016 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-8719-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Mike’s quiet, guarded narration explores a period of self-discovery and indepen-
dence as he navigates coming out and experiencing his first relationship. He already 
knows that his religious family and “man’s man” father isn’t going to be pleased, so 
Mike hides everything as long as he can, until a filmed incident and subsequent 
tragedy push him permanently out of the closet. There are few rosy moments in 
this book, as Mike’s physical relationship is closeted and short lived, and the events 
that unfold afterwards (Mike is sent off to camp to be turned straight; the other 
boy dies) are shocking. There is a grace in the slow reconciliation of Mike with 
his family; hard-won connections feel authentic as Mike’s dad slowly thaws long 
after his mother has adjusted. Mike’s wry, wise-beyond-her-years sister, Toby, is a 
contemporary Phoebe Caulfield, and she bears a lot of social risk to protect her big 
brother. There are plenty of sunny coming-out stories; this stark reminder that being 
gay can also still mean getting prayed over at straight camp or being shunned is also, 
unfortunately, part of the lived experience. It’s handled with beauty and care here, 
and the concluding muted hopefulness is perfectly aligned with the novel’s arc.  AS
montgomery, ross Perijee & Me. Lamb, 2016 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-399-55398-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-399-55397-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-399-55399-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Caitlin is a lonely kid, so when she finds an alien alone on the beach, she promptly 
declares him her best friend and lavishes love and attention on him. The alien, 
Perijee, thrives on the affection, growing until he no longer comfortably fits on 
the small island where she lives. A misunderstanding results in Perijee’s feeling 
threatened and then all heck breaks loose, because there’s a vicious monster wait-
ing in the alien body that’s ready to grow massive and destroy the world. Perijee, 
the sweet little alien, is still at the top of this giant monster body, though; Caitlin 
just has to find him and remind the tiny version about love so he can control the 
giant version. It’s a slightly confusing plot, but the message of kindness trumping 
aggression is clearly conveyed. Caitlin’s desperation for friendship is palpable, and 
the book powerfully conveys the longing for connection that drives her to risky 
actions. This British import is earnest, often quietly thoughtful, and quirky; offer 
it to fans of Brown’s The Wild Robot (BCCB 4/16) for another look at an outsider 
who forms deep bonds in spite of the odds against it.  AS
588 • the Bulletin
mukherJee, sonyA Gemini. Simon, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5677-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5679-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 8-12
Hailey is sunny and adventurous, while her sister Clara is sharp and wary. Ordinar-
ily that would take them on different paths, but they’re conjoined twins, so they’re 
constantly negotiating their conflicting impulses. Their parents have deliberately 
sheltered them by raising them in a tiny town where everybody knows everybody 
and by planning to keep the girls at home even after high school graduation, and 
the girls have always been accepting. Now, though, Hailey is starting a possible 
relationship with a fellow artist, Sam, Clara is yearning for new boy Max, and 
they’re both starting to consider life outside of their bubble. Mukherjee leans 
overheavily on narrative device at times, but the alternating narration of the girls 
is thoughtful and compelling. The romantic possibilities add interest, but they’re 
more an engine to the girls’ contemplation of what adulthood could mean for them, 
with self-discovery and separation from their parents being the real plot. The dual 
themes of overprotectiveness and normality are well explored as the girls begin 
to challenge their mother’s fears of people’s reactions (in an era when everyone’s 
in the internet, they believe that being “those girls we saw on YouTube” is better 
than being a frightening unknown). There’s less nuance here than in Crossan’s One 
(BCCB 12/15) but more concrete exploration, and readers of that title will appreci-
ate this; more broadly, so will anyone interested in independence and embracing 
one’s lack of normality.  DS
nielsen, JenniFer A. The Scourge. Scholastic, 2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-68245-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-68246-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Ani is sure that she doesn’t have the Scourge, the deadly plague that seems to have 
returned after centuries of dormancy. Nevertheless, she tests positive for it, and off 
she goes to Attic Island, a quarantine colony where the infected receive extremely 
limited amounts of medicine and wait to die. Ani’s not content with that fate, 
however, and she’s certain that there is something suspicious afoot, so she causes 
trouble for the guards (who curiously never contract the supposedly contagious 
illness) and for the governor. She’s absolutely correct in her suspicions, but whether 
or not she has the true Scourge or a manufactured lookalike, she may not survive 
the murderous governor long enough to tell the world what she has discovered. 
Readers will almost certainly have it all figured out before the protagonist, but 
given the fact that she is in mortal peril most of the time, it’s forgivable that she’s 
a bit slow on the uptake. There are old animosities between two cultures, Ani’s 
River People and the posher townsfolk, that are now being thrown together in the 
quarantine community that make the lack of collaboration understandable. Ani’s 
willingness to help others, a hard battle in herself as she tries to get over long-held 
assumptions, demonstrates effectively how emergencies can bridge distances.  AS
July/August 2016 • 589
pAige, dAnielle Stealing Snow. Bloomsbury, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-68119-076-1 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-68119-077-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 M Gr. 7-10
Snow was six when her parents committed her to Whittaker Psychiatric Institute, 
and for the last eleven years that has been her home. Now a strange boy shows up in 
her room, telling her she’s the princess of Algid and that she needs to walk through 
a magical tree to reach her country. Normally, Snow would consider upping her 
meds after such an encounter, but she earlier witnessed Bale, a fellow patient and 
her boyfriend, being pulled through a mirror by fiery hands, and he hasn’t been seen 
since then, so a magical tree doesn’t sound so far-fetched. She does indeed manage 
to walk through the tree and discover the frozen land of Algid, a realm that she 
is supposedly prophesied to save. She’s only looking to rescue Bale, but the hero 
route seems to be a direct line to him, so with the help of a River Witch, a broody 
engineer, a thief and his cadre of beautiful female robbers, and her burgeoning 
abilities to use snow and ice as weapons, she finds him. Of course, however, he’s 
not at all who he is supposed to be, and neither is she and neither is the prophecy. 
Characterization is snowflake-thin and the story is a derivative flurry of worn-out 
tropes, awkwardly inserted allusions, and convenient plot devices. Any tension that 
arrives is quickly removed as the pace moves speedily to the next obstacle and/or 
love interest. There is some payoff is at the end, when the extraordinarily evil villains 
reveal how really extraordinarily evil they are, but it will leave readers suspecting 
the villains’ stories might have been more interesting.  KQG
pAyne, c. c. The Thing about Leftovers. Paulsen/Penguin, 2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17204-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
After her parents’ divorce, eighth-grader Fizzy moves to a new school where no-
body’s group seems to need a new, slightly shabby friend. There’s a near-perfect 
stepmother in her father’s house and her mother has a fastidious new boyfriend 
who makes Fizzy feel like a guest in her own home, so she feels like a leftover in 
both her parents’ lives. Determined to earn back her pride of place in her families, 
she enters the Southern Living Cook-Off and tries her best to be perfect when her 
mother remarries and her father and stepmom have a baby. While the new friends 
she meets in the process help keep her grounded, Fizzy bears the extra burden of 
the Southern manners her mom has drilled into her, which she feels prohibit her 
from burdening adults with her problems. Her aunt and her school counselor break 
through some of that; in fact, the adults in this novel, while flawed, are ultimately 
forgivable, especially as they admit that they need to be forgiven. The leftovers 
metaphor is cleverly worked throughout, as Fizzy relates her knowledge of cooking 
into an accessible way of thinking about her life, including how some things taste 
better the next day, while others find new life in new combinations. With some 
really solid emotional insights and an energetic, engaging style, this will enlighten 
middle-school readers trying to sort through the complexities of family situations 
they didn’t ask for but need grace to deal with nonetheless.  KC
590 • the Bulletin
peck, richArd The Best Man. Dial, 2016 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3839-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
“Call my story ‘A Tale of Two Weddings.’ I was in both of them.” So says narra-
tor Archer Magill as he stands amid the cake crumbs of wedding number two, 
chronicling in flashback the trail between being a first-grade ring bearer in the 
first wedding all the way to his current role as sixth-grade best man in the latest 
nuptials. The reminiscences appear in episodes, beginning with his meeting with 
flower girl Lynette, who stands up for him despite (or because of) his split shorts 
in wedding one; the memories become more hilariously interconnected as the years 
roll past. Yet it’s all building to a point: it’s important that Lynette’s mom becomes 
Archer and Lynette’s teacher, and that an incompetent school secretary triggers a 
school lockdown and media circus when Illinois National Guardsman Ed McLeod 
arrives as a new student teacher. And yes, it’s important that McLeod outs himself 
as gay to support a student who’s been bullied, because that’s how Archer knows 
McLeod’s a really great guy and perfect for Uncle Paul, who’s his hero, even though 
Archer just figured out what everyone else already knew about Uncle Paul (now 
he knows why his primary-school teachers read the class And Tango Makes Three 
and Daddy’s Roommate). Love wins the day and, after a wild ride among a family 
so warm and loving and liberal and politically correct that they’ve forgotten kids 
may actually require information, Uncle Paul and Ed McLeod tie the knot. Every-
one’s there and everyone’s happy, even “Grandpa, still there in our hearts, except 
for about a tablespoon of him in Wrigley Field.” Sorry, you just have to read that 
part for yourself.  EB
phelAn, mAtt Snow White; written and illus. by Matt Phelan. Candlewick, 
2016 [216p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7233-1 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 4-6
This intelligent graphic novel version of “Snow White and the Seven Dwarves” 
places the action in New York City in the late 1920s, with seven homeless boys 
taking the place of the dwarves and stock-market ticker tape guiding the wicked 
stepmother instead of a mirror. Sweet heroine Samantha has inherited a significant 
sum of money from her father, and her stepmother will clearly stop at nothing 
to get all the estate for herself. The story incorporates many familiar elements of 
the familiar tale, including the poisoned apple and the kiss being as catalyst for 
awakening, and then expands for an older audience. Samantha has just enough 
spark to make her interesting, but the increasingly evil stepmother and the quiet 
but loyal boys are the real stars here. There’s grittiness to both the illustrations and 
the sparse text—it’s clear that most of this takes place after the stock market crash 
meant the collision of decadence and desperation. The visuals are deeply effective: 
entire sections are wordless, propelling the reader through dramatic scenes and 
inviting reflection during quiet, contemplative spots, as when the boys watch over 
Snow White’s sleeping form. Pencil, ink, and watercolor illustrations break out of 
loose panel structuring; sharp lines and shadow heighten tension and expanses of 
open white space sometimes draw the eye to a specific scene. This graphic novel 
will find a welcome home with fairy-tale fans who have outgrown the Disney ver-
July/August 2016 • 591
sion (or, less likely, the Grimm version) but still find the tale compelling. Final full 
color illustrations not seen.  AS
poBlocki, dAn Shadow House: The Gathering. Scholastic, 2016 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-92550-1 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-92575-4 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Five preteens (one of whom turns out to be a ghost) receive invitations to a mysteri-
ous house that seems like it holds the key to each of their dreams—for Marcus the 
invitation describes a music school, for Dash and Dylan, a new acting opportunity, 
for Azumi, distance from the loss of her sister, and for Poppy, raised in an orphanage, 
the promise of family. When they all arrive, they realize their time at this creepy 
estate will be far from wish-fulfilling, and in fact, they may not even survive to 
complain about having been tricked. Other than one gripping and surprisingly 
poignant subplot (the aforementioned ghost who is presented as a living teen for 
most of the book), the real meat of this book is horror. Dead kids in masks that 
grow back when torn off, haunting notes from a horrible man who experimented 
on them, and a ramshackle setting do their scaring work, and readers will enjoy 
barreling through to the end just to escape their own imagination about what could 
happen next. The book ends with the kids still in the house (though they at least 
now have a solid plan about how to escape), but readers likely won’t mind a return 
visit to see how they fare in a sequel.  AS
preller, JAmes The Courage Test. Feiwel, 2016 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-250-09391-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Having spent years researching what will be his grand opus on the Lewis and 
Clark Expedition, William Meriwether Miller’s father, a history professor with 
serious writer’s block, takes his son on a summer road trip along a segment of the 
trail, hoping Will’s fresh observations and insights will get the ink flowing. There 
was a time when Will might have welcomed the chance to go adventuring with 
Dad—back before the divorce, back before Will’s opportunity to play summer ball 
on an All-Stars team—and if truth be told, it doesn’t take much for Will to drop 
his adolescent resentment and start to enjoy himself. However, a brief but intense 
comment dropped and quickly retracted by one of Dad’s colleagues they not-so-
accidentally meet in the wilderness puts Will on the alert that there may be more 
to this trip than rescuing a professional paper, or even making up for lost father/son 
time. Dad already knows what Will eventually discovers: that they will both need 
undaunted personal courage to support Mom through cancer treatments she has 
just begun in her son’s absence. Preller traverses both domestic drama and adventure 
story with equally sure footing, delivering the thrills of a whitewater rafting accident 
and a mama bear encounter, and shifting effortlessly to the revelation of Mom’s 
illness and the now urgent rapprochement between Dad and Will. Whatever young 
explorers look for on their literary road trips, they’ll find it here.  EB
592 • the Bulletin
pullmAn, philip The Golden Compass: The Graphic Novel: Volume Two; tr. from 
the French by Annie Eaton; ad. by Stéphane Melchior; illus. by Clément Oubre-
rie. Knopf, 2016 [80p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53514-3 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53512-9 $18.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53513-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-10
This second of three graphic novels (translated from the 2014 French version) cov-
ering the events of The Golden Compass focuses primarily on Lyra’s journey north 
to save her friend Roger and seek Lord Asriel. The highlight in this volume is the 
connection between the irascible bear Iorek Byrnison and Lyra, once she manages 
to help him retrieve his sky armor. Additionally, the story follows the traumatized 
children who are missing their daemons, the animals spiritually tied to them, and 
the research of the formidable Mrs. Coulter on separating children from daemons. 
There is generally a lot of text per panel, making the occasional wordless illustration 
all the more powerful. The illustrations themselves are stunning—most of the scenes 
take place in an Arctic location, and the blues, violets, creams, and sharp white are 
used to good effect to depict the frozen setting. Size is used effectively as well, with 
Iorek, for example, dominating a panel when he needs to be a fierce protector and 
appearing closer to Lyra’s size in companionable moments. It’s possible that folks 
who haven’t read the original novel but did read the previous graphic novel will 
feel informed enough, but truly this is for readers who have completed both—it’s 
a complex plot that dives in with little exposition. For those in the know, however, 
this continues to be a visual treat.  AS
pung, Alice Lucy and Linh. Knopf, 2016 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-399-55049-2 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-399-55048-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-399-55050-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R* Gr. 9-12
When fifteen-year old Lucy receives a scholarship to Melbourne’s prestigious 
Laurinda Academy, she leaves behind her crew at her old school, including Linh, 
a bold, brash girl whose influence Lucy misses deeply as she becomes embroiled in 
the murky politics of her new school. Chinese immigrants to Australia (by way of 
Vietnam), Lucy’s hardworking family provides both a counterpoint and ground-
ing touchstone to her life at Laurinda, where her privileged classmates operate by 
different, powerful, and cruel rules. This is all related through Lucy’s letters to 
Linh—astute, measured, and engrossing epistles which, in turn, reveal the falling 
out between the two. While Lucy’s observations are detached, mature, and sophis-
ticated, Linh’s authentic adolescent voice and raw, incisive reactions as imagined 
by Lucy provide a critical counterpoint; even readers who figure out the twist in 
the Lucy-Linh connection through certain well-placed clues will feel the impact 
of the reveal. In prose deft and clear-eyed, Pung captures Lucy’s two worlds, with 
unflinching depictions of parental relationships, poverty, and elitism, as well as 
her emotional journey to incorporating all of her personality. Part Mean Girls, part 
Lord of the Flies, and part Special Topics in Calamity Physics, this well-observed and 
unsentimental novel taps into what is primal within privileged adolescent girls.  AA 
July/August 2016 • 593
rex, AdAm School’s First Day of School; illus. by Christian Robinson. Roaring 
Brook, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-964-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 4-7 yrs
We have lots of books about kids attending school for the first time, but who thinks 
of the school’s point of view? Adam Rex, that’s who, in this story about the newly 
built Frederick Douglass Elementary, which is nervously opening to kids for the 
first time. His feelings are hurt when kids on the playground say they hate school or 
when a balking kid has to be carried in by a parent (“‘I must be awful,’ the school 
whispered to himself”). Things improve, however, as the kids are nice about the 
school’s unintentionally lettting go with a fire alarm and when the school eagerly 
learns information from lessons; at the end of the day, he excitedly asks his pal, 
the Janitor, if the kids can come back the next day. The book hits perfect childlike 
notes in the school’s responses, ranging from his doubt that he would enjoy the 
kids to his delight when a girl draws a picture of him, making him an appealing 
offbeat protagonist. His relationship with Janitor evinces real tenderness, and the 
humor throughout is gently witty rather than raucous. The art balances crisply 
cut paper layers with comfortable painterly sweeps of color and handhewn lines of 
brick and chair leg, all floating on white backdrops. There’s a hint of a face in the 
front doorway (whose smile soon tenses into a straight line), but otherwise there’s 
no overt visual personification, with the focus on what’s happening in the school 
rather than the school’s reaction. Anthropomorphization of the whole building is a 
new and promising approach for school-shy youngsters, and it’ll make the already 
school-positive want to give their beloved building a hug.  DS
riordAn, rick The Hidden Oracle. Disney Hyperion, 2016 376p (The 
Trials of Apollo)
ISBN 978-1-4847-3274-8 $19.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Apollo has been cast out by Zeus, and he won’t be welcomed back until he undergoes 
some hardships and learns important lessons—but geez, that’s tough when you are 
stuck in the body of a mortal teen boy. Off he goes to Camp Half-Blood (Percy 
Jackson fans will be thrilled with the significant amount of character and setting 
overlap here) to enlist some help, losing little of his imperious tone or haughty 
observations about meat sacks (humans) and their weaknesses as he travels. There 
are some serious problems brewing involving Oracles, the Roman emperor Nero, 
and the likely ruination of the world, but it’s all told in such a snappy, quick-paced, 
snarky way that there’s never any doubt that Apollo and his allies will save the day, at 
least for this go round, as the book ends with Apollo still not forgiven and restored 
to his godly self. Riordan fans will find all of the key elements here: wisecracking 
narration, underdog kid turned hero (well, god turned underdog turned hero in 
this case), mythological core, and robust side characters who round out the field. 
This is familiar territory for Riordan, but the formula works so well, and Apollo 
is just so appealingly unpleasant, that there’s little to fault in this adventure. A 
hearty glossary offers context for locations, characters, and historical references 
used throughout the book.  AS
594 • the Bulletin
roBBins, deAn Miss Paul and the President: The Creative Campaign for Women’s 
Right to Vote; illus. by Nancy Zhang. Knopf, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-101-93720-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R 4-7 yrs
Although women’s rights advocates are well represented within the picture-book 
collection, suffragist Alice Paul can’t claim as high a page count as the better-known 
Elizabeth Cady Stanton or Amelia Bloomer. This narrowly focused account explores 
Paul’s targeted confrontations with President Woodrow Wilson, from the time she 
upstages his 1914 arrival in Washington (who wouldn’t rather watch a protest parade 
than a train arrival?) until 1918, when Wilson, with some serious nudging by his 
daughter Margaret, agrees to put the weight of his office behind women’s right to 
vote. The lighthearted mixed-media illustrations undercuts the seriousness of the 
effort somewhat, but Robbins makes clear for a quite young audience through both 
main narration and endnote that there were very specific obstacles that had to be 
overcome to extend the vote to women (Congressional action, and the ratification 
of a Constitutional Amendment), and winning the endorsement of the president 
was a vital first step. Librarians and educators seeking accessible materials to draw 
pre-primary children into election year topics will want to consider this.  EB
rosen, lev Ac The Memory Wall. Knopf, 2016 [368p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93324-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93323-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93325-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Nick doesn’t believe that his mother really has early-onset Al-
zheimer’s, and after she moves to an assisted-living facility he seeks refuge in the 
online role-playing fantasy game that he and his mom used to play together. In 
the game, he finds himself playing alongside a character who reminds him of his 
mother, and he becomes convinced that his misdiagnosed mom is playing the 
character and asking for his help. Meanwhile, at school, a history class project gives 
him the opportunity to research his family, and biracial Nick chooses his mother’s 
German heritage over his father’s African-American one. Now with the game and 
his homework as cover, and a new game-playing friend at his side, Nick takes up 
the quest to uncover his mom’s secret illness and save his family. Between a devas-
tating illness, an online quest, family history, and school-based drama, there’s a lot 
going on here, but the novel weaves the various threads into an engrossing whole. 
The dual narrative, half Nick’s real life, half the fantasy journey of his elven avatar 
Severkin, offers two equally compelling storylines and broadens reader appeal. The 
connections between the narratives create space for thoughtful, open discourse on 
race, family, and identity that give the novel added depth and resonance. Overall, 
it’s a lovely, heartwarming story of a young man negotiating personal crisis with 
the help of games, friends, and family, perfect for readers who appreciate a blend 
of fantasy and realism.  AM 
July/August 2016 • 595
rudden, dAve Knights of the Borrowed Dark. Random House, 2016 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52298-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52297-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52299-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
After a lifetime spent in a dreary Irish orphanage, thirteen-year-old Denizen Hard-
wick has been offered a home with a mysterious aunt he’s never met. Seraphim 
Row turns out to be no ordinary home, though; it’s the secret headquarters for a 
cadre of knights who battle the Tenebrous, shadowy monsters from another realm. 
Now, having come into his own dark powers, Denizen is asked to join the fight. 
Meanwhile, three terrifying figures have taken over the orphanage and have trapped 
Denizen’s best friend Simon in a waking nightmare. With time running out and his 
training nowhere near complete, Denizen and his new compatriots must discover 
what angered the Endless King and defeat the Clockwork Three before shadows 
overrun the world. This fantasy novel offers a solid, spooky adventure with just 
the right amount of darkness and terror. The narrative is a familiar tale about the 
education of the hero, but the monster-ridden, fight-heavy plot makes for a real 
page-turner and provides plenty of backstory without getting bogged down by it. 
Denizen is a worthy knight, all orphan’s angst and adolescent awkwardness, and 
the memorable cast of supportive adults rivals Harry Potter for quirky mentors. 
Simon’s subplot is more original and therefore at times more interesting, and read-
ers will likely root for him to have a bigger part to play in planned sequels. Hand 
this to fans who have outgrown Nimmo’s Charlie Bone series (Midnight for Charlie 
Bone, BCCB 5/03) series and are ready for their next dark magic adventure.  AM 
rutkoski, mArie The Winner’s Kiss. Farrar, 2016 484p (The Winner’s 
Trilogy)
ISBN 978-0-374-38473-9 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-10
At the end of The Winner’s Curse (BCCB 3/14), Kestrel had been sent to the north-
ern work camps after her father, general of the Valorian army, turned her in to the 
emperor for treason. When Arin, the rebel leader for whom Kestrel betrayed her 
country, finally hears of this, he rushes to free her from the camp. The damage has 
been done, however: the drugs she was given have eradicated her memory, so she 
has no recollection of who she is, much less Arin, her father and his betrayal, and 
the war brewing between Valoria and Arin’s country of Herran. Rutkoski delivers 
the conclusion to this trilogy with aplomb and grace, seamlessly interweaving the 
political and the personal; the war and Kestrel and Arin’s relationship are linked by 
their good intentions, their secrets, their lies, and ultimately their romance, which 
was the convenient spark needed to incite the simmering tensions between their 
countries into outright war. The surrounding world is deftly constructed, making 
clear there are larger stakes at hand than a romance and fleshing out secondary 
characters to show who exactly will be affected, whatever the conflict’s outcome. 
The heart of this story, however, has always been Arin and Kestrel’s complicated 
love for each other, and here their once-sizzling chemistry is replaced with real 
affection and attempts to truly know each another, though fans can rest assured 
there are still plenty of passionate encounters in this satisfying conclusion.  KQG
596 • the Bulletin
sAlisBury, melindA The Sleeping Prince. Scholastic, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-92127-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-92132-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 8-10
This second novel in an anticipated trilogy (the first being The Sin Eater’s Daughter, 
BCCB 4/15) shares the world of the previous title but focuses on a very different 
group of characters and problems. Errin struggles to keep herself and her very sick 
mother alive, making ends meet by supplying a mysterious man with potions and 
poisons, trying to shake off her sexy but dangerous dreams about a different (but 
also mysterious) man, while longing for a more secure life. And this is all before 
the appearance of the Sleeping Prince, a murderous being (who could be mortal, 
monster, or god) who is hoping to, essentially, take over this corner of the world. 
There’s much of the same grappling with science and mysticism/magic as in the 
earlier book, but Errin doesn’t have much time for philosophical musings as she’s 
well aware that if she’s dead, there won’t be much point in deep thoughts. Even 
the romances are risky, a nice touch that keeps the tension high and reinforces 
the rarity of safety. It will be intriguing to see where the third novel goes and how 
tightly the threads from these first two will be woven together in the conclusion; 
regardless of where the trilogy heads, readers will undoubtedly be keeping an eye 
out for the final volume.  AS
sAunders, kAte Five Children on the Western Front. Delacorte, 2016 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49794-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49793-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49795-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 5-8
In Saunders’ homage and sequel to E. Nesbit’s Five Children and It, nine years 
have passed since the titular five children—Cyril, Anthea, Robert, Jane, and the 
Lamb—last saw the Psammead, the sand fairy, whose ability to grant wishes led 
to a series of whimsical adventures. He’s reappeared to a now eleven-year-old the 
Lamb and nine-year-old Edie, but his magic is gone and he’s weak and ailing. World 
War I preoccupies much of the elder children’s time: Cyril’s a lieutenant, Anthea’s 
a volunteer at the hospitals, and Robert will likely soon be conscripted, so it’s up 
to the two youngest to look after the cantankerous but loveable Psammead. As 
the events of the war unfold, however, so too does the Psammead’s backstory, and 
the parallels between his past misdeeds and the world’s current tragedies become 
painfully clear. Saunders strikes a surprisingly successful balance between the mis-
chievous magic of the sand fairy and the harsh realities of wartime England. This 
tension plays out in the Psammead as well; the endearing, often comical grump is 
revealed to be a former desert god whose tyranny led to the death of thousands. 
When he’s not making droll comments about his current accommodations (in a 
tub full of sand in the children’s house) or wryly mocking the ways of humans, he’s 
looking for a way to repent for his past cruelty so he can move on, hopefully to a 
state of peace. The relationships between the siblings and their love for each other 
and for the Psammead are clearly delineated here, so readers need not be familiar 
with Nesbit’s original text, though a curious few might want to visit the children 
pre-war to gain a sense of the innocence lost.  KQG
July/August 2016 • 597
sAvAge, stephen The Mixed-Up Truck; written and illus. by Stephen Savage. Por-
ter/Roaring Brook, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-153-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 2-5 yrs
A cement mixer arrives on the construction site with a broad smile and a can-do 
attitude: “How can I help?” The other trucks advise him to “mix up some powdery 
white cement.” He gets the “powdery white” part right but can’t quite come up 
with the “cement” part. In his first attempt, he goes to a flour storage facility and, 
mixing his load with water, makes a gigantic cake. Second attempt is at a sugar 
warehouse, and the powdered sugar and water turns into icing. Three’s the charm, 
though, and his penultimate mission results in a load of cement and a sturdy 
building. Why penultimate? Because the mix master makes a final trip to the soap 
factory for enough powder to give all the trucks a much-needed bubble bath. The 
toylike character of the work vehicles and the joyful silliness of the plot will ap-
peal to the storytime crowd, and timely pauses before critical page turns will elicit 
predictions of our muddled hero’s next creation. The artwork is sleek and crisp, 
with the towering structures and grainy textures suggesting an ever-so-appropriate 
Brutalist architectural style. Take out the Matchbox collection and get to work.  EB
sAxon, lucy The Almost King. Bloomsbury, 2016 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-627-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-699-6 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-9
In this companion novel to Take Back the Skies, Saxon revisits the same world of 
skyships and steampunk elements, but this time with a different set of characters. 
In this outing, the focus is on young Aleks, who just wants to make his own name 
in a family of strong parents and older brothers who know exactly what they want 
to do. A short stint goes horribly awry, and Aleks defects, landing in a completely 
different region, where he finds a cool job working with tech and metal (and an 
irascible shopkeeper who is building a secret skyship that seems tailor-made for 
Aleks) and a lovely girl. It’s a promising existence, but Aleks discovered many secrets 
during his time in the military, and there’s a lieutenant who is determined to drag 
him back and silence him for good. Intriguing hints of an elaborate and corrupt 
governmental structure come out here and there, emerging slowly as a clear picture 
by the end of novel. The scenes where Aleks is adventuring in the skyship are the 
most memorable, as he and his crew risk their lives in the name of exploration and 
knowledge. The romance is less gripping, but readers will undoubtedly feel that 
staunch, earnest Aleks deserves all the good that heads his way.  AS
scAttergood, AugustA Making Friends with Billy Wong. Scholastic, 
2016 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-92425-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-92429-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
A broken leg has left Grandma Clark in need of help, and although rising sixth-
grader Azalea doesn’t really know her maternal grandmother, she’s being dropped 
off to assist with housework and gardening. There’s not much happening in Paris 
598 • the Bulletin
Junction, Arkansas in the summer of 1952, and what little does go on seems to be 
everybody’s business, which doesn’t sit well with shy Azalea. Grandma Clark has 
no intention of keeping Azalea chained to garden and kitchen and urges her to 
make friends with Billy Wong, who’s staying with his aunt and uncle (the Chinese 
owners of Lucky Foods Grocery). Grandma likes Billy and his extended family, but 
not everyone in Paris Junction does; as Azalea narrates her summer experiences and 
her overcoming of her shyness, Billy’s voice alternates with short poems in which he 
hopes for high school success while allowing his anger at anti-Chinese discrimination 
to break beyond his ever-so-polite exterior. Scattergood has so assiduously gentled 
her tale that even the nastiness of a local bully and the vandalism of Lucky Foods 
fail to generate much tension, and the conversations between Azalea and Billy seem 
tonally attuned to much younger buddies. More successful is the depiction of the 
steadily growing affection between Azalea and her grandmother, which pleasantly 
upends the shopworn trope of resentful tween meets estranged gruff relative and 
makes each character all the more believable. An author’s note on Chinese Americans 
in the mid-twentieth-century South is included.  EB
selZer, AdAm Just Kill Me. Simon, 2016 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3494-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3496-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12 
Growing up above her mother’s funeral parlor, sharing her Disney villain slash-fanfic 
with an online girlfriend, eighteen-year-old Megan Henske has always felt doomed 
to the life of a lonely freak. When she gets a job working for a Chicago ghost tour 
company, though, she knows she’s finally found her people. Unfortunately, her 
dream job soon turns dark: the company’s financial struggles mean boss Cynthia 
needs help creating new ghosts by assisting elderly people who want to die. Then 
a tour-guide competitor is found murdered, a troublesome customer disappears 
mid-tour, and Cynthia starts hinting about Megan’s resemblance to a famous 1920s 
Chicago resident whose ghost would attract a crowd. From its oddball deadly 
heroine to its unconventional genre-mixing to its surprising final act, much about 
this novel is memorable. The narrative employs an entertaining mix of mystery, 
ghost story, and Chicago history to support what is ultimately a coming of age tale. 
The creep factor is perfectly executed and, as in any good ghost tour, relies more 
on storytelling technique than guts and gore. Megan and her coworkers emerge as 
lovable outsiders, and the novel celebrates their moral ambiguity as they “ghost” 
the elderly and draw hazy lines about the truth behind their ghost stories. This is 
a strange yet satisfying story that will please fans of the macabre and leave readers 
looking for ghosts around every corner, and it may lead readers to the author’s 
entertaining blog, containing many of the novel’s background stories on weird 
Chicago history. An author’s note provides some fact behind the fantasy.  AM 
shepherd, megAn The Hunt. Balzer + Bray, 2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224308-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224311-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
After months in captivity, Cora and her fellow teen abductees managed to escape 
their alien biosphere (in The Cage, BCCB 7/15), and now they’ve been scattered to 
different parts of the Kindred space station. Leon hides aboard a Mosca smuggling 
July/August 2016 • 599
vessel, trading favors for refuge, while Nok and Rolf are placed on display for alien 
scientists as they await the birth of their child. Cora, meanwhile, entertains Kindred 
guests in the Hunt, a safari-like biosphere, unaware that friends Lucky and Mali work 
backstage with the animals. Still desperate to earn their freedom, Cora finds that her 
only option may be to trust Cassian, the alien warden who loved and betrayed her. 
His plan is to train Cora for the Gauntlet, a test that could prove the equality of the 
human race, but Cora secretly reconnects with her former Cage-mates for a plan 
of their own. Even in the face of a very different plot and setting, all the strengths 
of the previous novel carry over here. Mindgames and escape plans continue to 
drive the intellectually and emotionally engrossing plot, with whole new trials to 
survive and villains to overcome. The focus of the narrative is still clearly on Cora, 
but other characters have their moments to shine, and Leon especially emerges as 
a fascinating hero in his own right. Final chapters ramp up the tension, including 
a few heartbreaking plot twists, until a last moment respite from the action creates 
a cliffhanger that will surely have readers returning for the final installment.  AM
shevAh, emmA Dara Palmer’s Major Drama. Sourcebooks Jabberwocky, 
2016 [288p] illus.
ISBN 978-1-4926-3138-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 3-5
When she’s passed over for the role of Maria—or any role, for that matter—in her 
London school’s production of The Sound of Music, fifth-grader Dara Palmer suspects 
it’s because she doesn’t look the part, since she was adopted from Cambodia as a 
baby. Not getting cast is just one of her struggles, as her chatty first-person narration 
dishes on the classmate who calls her “Noodlehead” while throwing noodles at her, 
her battles with her sister who, though also adopted, fits in better with the family 
in every way, and her struggle to decide whether or not to visit Cambodia and all 
the feelings about being adopted that such an opportunity would stir up. These 
weighty issues provide the reader with a tentative and much needed connection to 
the shallow Dara, who begins the book with such self-indulgence and unfounded 
conceitedness that it’s difficult to stick around as she reveals her depths. While she 
does grow over the course of the novel, largely due to the acting class she decides 
to take, her meaningful realizations about herself, her family, adoption, and acting 
are often immediately undercut. This is an easygoing entry into serious subjects, 
though, and doodles in the vein of Wimpy Kid add appeal. Dara occasionally 
amuses, and issues around microaggressions and adoption offer “a teaspoonful,” 
as Dara would say, of heart.  AA
smelcer, John Stealing Indians. Leapfrog, 2016 [198p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-935248-82-8 $13.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-10
Thirteen-year-old Lucy Secondchief is dragged kicking and screaming from her 
mother’s arms into a black car; miles away, Simon Lone Fight is forced onto a de-
parting train by two burly men. Elsewhere, Noah Boyscout is escorted away from 
the land and tribe he loves by a man with a briefcase; Elijah High Horse’s father 
silently drives him to a train station and hands him a one-way ticket. The destination 
for each teen is the same—Wellington School, where their native culture will be 
stripped away from them and they will become fully assimilated into white society. 
600 • the Bulletin
Their sufferings there are tremendous: the sleek long hair Simon is so proud is 
quickly sheared off, Lucy is terrified at night of the male teachers who wander the 
halls, and Elijah, a boy who sees spirits and who would have eventually become a 
shaman, is constantly haunted by the many ghosts of Indian children who died at 
Wellington. The friendship the four teens develop is a small light amidst the bleak-
ness, and their acts of defiance (spray painting “pervert” on the motorcycle of one 
of the rapist teachers, slipping food to Simon in solitary confinement) make it clear 
that Wellington is not going to take their spirit—at least not yet. Smelcer’s autho-
rial hand sometimes comes down too heavily with needless overexplanation, but 
this is generally a smooth, cadenced telling, and its mid-twentieth century setting 
offers a chilling reminder that such forced assimilation existed into recent times. 
The four protagonists are accessibly teen, which gives their plight an immediacy, 
and their small triumphs makes them easy to root for—which is why the ending is 
heartbreaking even as it is painfully honest. Discussion questions and a note about 
the Stealing Indians Oral History Project are included.  KQG 
smith, sherri l. Pasadena. Putnam, 2016 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-101-99625-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
It wasn’t an accident. It wasn’t suicide. No, Jude knows that the death of her best 
friend Maggie was murder—even if everyone’s saying it’s not—and she’s out for 
vengeance. Maggie trafficked in secrets and was at turns adored and feared by her 
friends, so the list of suspects is lengthy: is it Dane, the philandering, STD-riddled 
cad wearing the loyal boyfriend disguise? The sycophantic wannabe, Edina? Keith 
and/or Scott, the two brothers Maggie slept with? And there’s always Maggie’s 
bitter, jealous younger brother. Smith hits the noir genre right on target: Jude’s 
about as hardboiled and cynical as detectives come; Joey’s the love interest who 
won’t give up on her; flashbacks cast Maggie as the glamorous but vulnerable dame; 
the dialogue’s quippy and fast; the cast is eclectically shady; and the ending leaves 
Jude in the gloom, telling Joey, “Find a girl who knows how to love you the right 
way.” This is entirely satisfying as a murder mystery on its own, but there’s also a 
fair amount of emotional depth. Jude’s distrust of nearly everyone is authentically 
founded on a heartbreaking cause, and Maggie actually never told anyone’s secrets 
but instead often acted as a compassionate listener. The quick pace, easy appeal, 
breezy dialogue, and brief page count makes this a perfect quick pick for mystery 
lovers and reluctant readers.  KQG
sonnenBlick, JordAn Falling over Sideways. Scholastic, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-86324-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-86326-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Claire is having a difficult last year in middle school, separating from her best dance 
friends and struggling with being on the outs with the mean girls at school. At least 
her inner voice has a full stockpile of snark to get her through the day, although she 
doesn’t like it when her dad turns her exasperated sarcasm against her. She and he 
have always been close, which makes it all the more horrible when he has a stroke. 
That challenge takes center stage for everyone except Claire, who is still mostly 
invested in her adolescent problems, of which her father’s slow and incomplete 
July/August 2016 • 601
recovery becomes yet another one. A frank talk with her brother turns her around, 
and Claire slowly gets some perspective, not only on the relative weight of what 
matters in life but also on who her friends really are and how she might be able 
to help her father. Much of this novel is carried by the humorous voice, intimacy, 
and relatability of Claire’s perspective; it’s only when you go a few thousand miles 
out that you see this as the mild scold it is to middle-school students everywhere 
who think their relationship problems are the worst, most all-consuming things 
to ever happen in the history of the world. As a rebuke to such egoism, however, 
it’s pretty gentle and heartfelt and, well, completely necessary, so why not?  KC
springstuBB, triciA Every Single Second; illus. by Diana Sudyka. Balzer + Bray, 
2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-236628-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-236630-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Nella Sabatini knows that her Italian grandmother harbors a preju-
dice, rooted in decades-old racial strife, against the brown-skinned college students 
who live across the street and the black residents of the neighborhood that borders 
on Little Italy, but that is a minor embarrassment. Her more urgent difficulties 
stem from her father’s mysterious past, and the shame she feels for distancing herself 
from her former best friend, Angela, as the result of Angela’s family troubles. When 
Angela’s older brother, on whom Nella has always harbored a secret crush, kills a 
black man that he mistook for an intruder, racial tensions erupt, and Nella has to 
make some kind of sense of the situation. The several stories of the people in Nella’s 
life form richly interconnected layers that reflect on life and death, disappointment 
and forgiveness, sadness and hope (for instance, Angela’s father’s experiences in the 
Gulf War haunt the book) and help Nella to work toward empathy. The narrative 
alternates between Nella’s past and present, with interstitial observations in the 
voice of a statue keeping watch over the girls who seek privacy in the graveyard 
where he stands. Spot illustrations capture the soft sweetness of everyday life in 
Nella’s neighborhood; this is a warm, resonant reminder that forgiveness, care, and 
resolute kindness are at least part of the answer to the problem of life’s fragility.  KC 
stArin, liZ Splashdance; written and illus. by Liz Starin. Farrar, 2016 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-374-30098-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
Polar bear Ursula and her human water ballet partner, Ricardo, can’t wait to com-
pete at their pool’s water ballet championship, but that dream dies when the pool 
suddenly bans bears and fickle Ricardo replaces Ursula with Hortense the giraffe. 
Ursula then discovers and joins a kinder mixed-species water ballet group at the 
local pond, and the team attends the water ballet championship with their bears 
disguised as bunnies. In performance, the ursine team members shed their costumes 
and the group defiantly performs their dance, and while they don’t take the prize, 
they win a bigger victory, as the local citizens gleefully abandon the bear ban. The 
straightfaced silliness of the premise guarantees laughs, but there’s also real tender-
ness in the portrayal of Ursula’s sadness at her fair-weather friend’s rejection. The 
use of bears as this world’s scapegoat and the randomness of their ban may give 
kids new insights into the concept of prejudice as well, and the book comfortably 
602 • the Bulletin
and capably mixes absurdity with pathos. Slightly scratchy black outlines provide 
a casual structure to the watery coloration of the illustrations, and abundant amus-
ing details (the squirrel at the pool’s front desk is reading “Romeoak and Julinut”) 
add to the humor. Perfect for poolside reading or for storytimes about swimming, 
summer, or the Olympics, Ursula’s story is a real winner.  JH
stAuB, leslie Time for Earth School, Dewey Dew; illus. by Jeff Mack. Boyds 
Mills, 2016 32p
ISBN 978-1-59078-958-2 $16.95 
 R 5-7 yrs
Little one-eyed alien Dewey (short for Click-Clack Waddle-Waddle Dot-Dot Dewey 
Dew) is anxious about starting school on Earth, far from his home on “Planet 
Eight Hundred Seventy-Two Point Nine”—so much so that he “dorfles” (cries) a 
bit on the way there. His school outfit is uncomfortable (“Brand-new Earth shoes 
pinched his oofs”), and everything about the school feels foreign, from the language 
to the furnishings to the appearance of his Earth classmates. When it’s time to line 
up in pairs for recess, Dewey hides in the back of the room, until a friendly boy 
asks him to partner up, and Dewey leaves his first day thinking that maybe Earth 
school will be “ootay” after all. Sure, the setup is on the pedantic side, but the book 
succeeds in putting an original and successful spin on the first-day-of-school story. 
The alien perspective is at once relatable to kids and distant enough to provide a 
neutral, safe place to ponder the worries of starting school. The words in Dewey’s 
native tongue also inject a note of humor (and a teachable moment for inferences), 
further lightening the mood and upping the comfort level for listeners. Mack’s 
pencil, watercolor, and digital media illustrations effectively use shading and soft 
edges to create a cozy atmosphere both on Earth and on Dewey’s reddish, crater-
flecked planet (where fluffy poof-balls on stems have a vaguely Seussian look). Blue 
Dewey with his single antenna, three-fingered hands, and bulgy eye is an emotive 
and sympathetic little fellow, and viewers will be relieved to see his palpable distress 
lifted by the book’s end. This is just the ticket for freshening up a back-to-school 
storytime or a first-day-of-school readaloud session.  JH
tAylor, Billy Thieving Weasels. Dial, 2016 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42924-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Around the ripe old age of fourteen, Skip O’Rourke saw a way to ditch the criminal 
lifestyle of his entire extended family, clearing $100,000 out of Grandpa Patsy’s 
storage locker and enrolling in Wheaton Academy under the name Cam Smith. 
Conning his way into Wheaton was easier than shaking the family off his tail, but 
now nearing the end of high school, with a Princeton scholarship in the bag and a 
well-heeled girlfriend on his arm, he’s just a breath away from permanent freedom. 
At least he was until Uncle Wonderful showed up at his dorm, with news of Skip’s 
mom’s psychiatric hospitalization and a plan for a major con, in which the family 
insists Skip participate. It’s a convoluted idea involving money paid for a hit they 
have no intention of actually making, and if Skip doesn’t play along, the folks will 
blow his cover. With the complete roster of relatives confirmed liars and conmen, 
and the possibility that they know or suspect Skip had robbed the family coffers, 
our hero is backed into a dangerous corner: “If there was one thing I’d learned . . . 
it’s that if you’re not 100 percent sure who the mark is, then the mark is probably 
July/August 2016 • 603
you.” By the time Skip is ready to face that fear, he’s already on the verge of being 
framed for an assassination. Although the bad guys sport an air of Hollywood 
cinema that takes a bit of the edge off their villainy, the plot against Skip is clever 
enough and the stakes are high enough (yes, he really wants quit of this clan) to 
make the tension authentic. Don’t be deceived by the jokey prison jumpsuit cover: 
life with the O’Rourkes is no laughing matter.  EB
telgemeier, rAinA Ghosts; written and illus. by Raina Telgemeier. Graphix/
Scholastic, 2016 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54061-2 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54062-9 $10.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54067-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
In this gem of a graphic novel, there is a town where ghosts are real and they’ll be 
good company if you offer kindness back. Cat can’t really worry about the ghosts, 
though, because she’s already got too much on her plate with her family’s move to 
Bahía de la Luna and her sister’s struggle with cystic fibrosis. As November 1st ap-
proaches, everyone readies for the Day of the Dead celebration, where many ghosts, 
old and new, will come together to party with the living, and Maya, Cat’s sister, 
wants in on it. There’s sharply poignant commentary about breath throughout, as 
the ghosts require a bit of it to energize themselves and Maya has increasingly little 
to spare given her illness. The ghosts, blobs of silvery white until you make a connec-
tion with an individual one (after which it takes on a skeleton the approximate size 
of the human when he or she died), are clearly benign, so there’s little spook factor. 
The clear emphasis here is on inclusion, keeping the dead alive through memories, 
altars, and, in this town at least, occasional visits with their ghosts. Lushly colored 
illustrations are used to good effect, with shadowy grays and washed out greens 
(when Maya is not well and when Cat is scared) dramatically contrasting with the 
vibrant dark blue of calm nighttime scenes with friendly ghosts. A brief afterword 
describes Día de los Muertos and cystic fibrosis in clear, accessible language.  AS
turk, evAn The Storyteller; written and illus. by Evan Turk. Atheneum, 
2016 44p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3518-5 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3519-2 $10.99  
R 7-10 yrs
At a dried-up fountain in a thirsty Moroccan city, a boy encounters an old man 
who offers him a story. As the boy listens, returning each day for the next promised 
installment (each segment ends “Ah, well, that is a story for another day”), water 
appears in the cup he carries. Pouring the contents into the fountain produces even 
more water—and not a moment too soon, as a massive sandstorm kicked up by 
a djinn bent on the city’s destruction is headed their way. Luckily, the djinn is a 
sucker for a good yarn, and the boy just happens to know one, buying time enough 
for water to replenish the whole town and send the sand spirit packing. A veritable 
nesting doll of a narrative (that ends with a storyteller, who much resembles the 
boy, telling a little girl, “Ah, well, that is a story for another day”) complete with 
an informative author’s note, this story about the power of story is a call for recon-
nection with tradition, oral and otherwise. Turk’s illustrations transport the reader 
to a Morocco of the past and present, capturing the timelessness of the country 
604 • the Bulletin
juxtaposed against the cautionary message about disappearing customs. Turk has 
quite the toolkit for his art, using “water-soluble crayon, colored drawing pencils, 
inks, indigo, sugared green tea, a heat gun, and fire,” resulting in a desert-tinged 
color palette accented by the bold colors and distinct silhouettes of the Arabian 
world. While the text lends itself well to a readaloud—and, given the story’s moral, 
is probably its intent—the evocative, impressionistic renderings deserve one-on-one 
time with viewers for full use and appreciation.  AA
umminger, Alison American Girls. Flatiron, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-07500-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-07502-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Fifteen-year-old Anna feels out of place since her parents broke up, and when she 
finds out they will no longer fund her private school, she’s had enough: she steals 
her stepmother’s credit card and heads for LA to be with her older sister, Delia, an 
aspiring actress. Delia lets Anna stay for the summer, as long as she makes some 
money. One of Anna’s jobs is to research the Manson girls to help Delia’s ex-lover 
and current director develop a character for his indie film, and her research takes 
her deep into existential questions about why seemingly ordinary teen girls had such 
horrific violence inside them, as well as such desperate need for fame and a family 
that they would suffer substantial abuse. This theme resonates with both Delia’s 
and her own situation, particularly as Delia suffers both physical and emotional 
harm from her quest for fame. It would be easy to say that their experiences strip 
the Hollywood locale and Delia’s lifestyle of their glamor, and certainly, there are 
elements of seediness and banality to the days Anna spends on the set of a cheesy 
sitcom. However, it’s as if Anna, or the novel itself, can’t resist the allure of the 
scene even when it’s truly terrible, and the budding romance she has with a really 
nice, really famous teen actor belies the explicit theme that being regular is more 
satisfying than being either famous, infamous, or even interesting. It’s nonetheless 
an intriguing dive into a milieu and a topic, and it ends satisfyingly with a note of 
hope that Anna, if not her jaded sister, might be one of the girls that makes it out 
of adolescence with her dreams and possibilities for happiness intact.  KC 
WAtson, Jude Sting. Scholastic, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-86346-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-86348-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
In Loot (BCCB 7/14), twins March and Jules outran the curse that should have 
killed them both on their thirteenth birthday; they outlived their felonious father; 
they outmaneuvered their traitorous aunt; and now, together with two fellow outcast 
friends/partners-in-crime, Darius and Izzy, they’re living easy in a lavish apartment 
funded by their ill-gotten gains. The sedentary life is wearing kind of thin, though, 
and one last heist arranged by Uncle Hamish is an inviting challenge. Stealing the 
cache of diamonds goes terribly wrong, leaving them holding a cursed sapphire 
worth immeasurably more than the diamonds if only the owner can survive the 
specter and curse attached to it. A buyer thinks he can work the spell out but he 
needs the entire set of three sapphires, so one heist turns into three, and the urgency 
to finish the job escalates when Darius gets outconned by a financial investor, leaving 
July/August 2016 • 605
the teen team flat broke. Watson delivers more than another clever heist, however, 
with the bonds among the group thoroughly shaken by Darius’s misstep, and with 
March’s struggle with conflicting memories of his father. The life of a teen thief is 
comically amusing here: holed up with your best buds, unencumbered by ethics and 
parents, and floating on a cushion of a multi-million dollar bankroll. The gullible, 
venal character of the kids’ marks makes the romp all the more humorous and the 
kids’ criminal triumphs all the more glorious, but by book’s end they’ve also come 
to realize they might benefit from a little schooling and a touch more discipline. 
Whether that signals a wrapped-up twofer or the segue to a more complex series is 
hard to guess; stick around to see what Watson has up her sleeve.  EB 
WAtts, Jeri A Piece of Home; illus. by Hyewon Yum. Candlewick, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6971-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
Hee Jun and his family move from Korea to West Virginia, and the adjustment is 
difficult. His new world is uncomfortably different, particularly the language: “My 
new classmates smile and talk, but it is a sharp noise. Their names sit like stones on 
my tongue.” When his little sister, Se Ra, pitches a fit at school, Hee Jun’s grand-
mother begins accompanying her to smooth the transition. As the months pass, all 
three—Grandmother, Se Ra, and Hee Jun—slowly learn to be comfortable in their 
new environment and by the end of his first year, Hee Jun happily realizes that his 
new life in America has finally become “ordinary.” Watts presents an emotionally 
credible account of what life can be like for newcomers to a place and sensitively 
portrays Hee Jun’s experiences. There’s no single breakthrough moment for him 
but rather a series of small revelations that play out over a long time. Yum’s tidy 
watercolor illustrations feature her usual rosy-cheeked figures, and the art skill-
fully conveys emotion, increasing the amount of background detail and using an 
ever-livelier palette as Hee Jun gradually settles into American life. Use possibilities 
abound for this thoughtful and thought-provoking title.  JH
Wymer, trAcy edWArd Soar. Aladdin, 2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4711-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4713-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Since his dad died, Eddie has obsessed over finding the golden eagle his father dog-
gedly maintained he had seen, though his insistence led to his becoming something 
of a joke in their tiny town. Eddie’s school’s annual Seventh Grade Science Sympo-
sium provides just the vehicle for Eddie’s pursuit of the elusive bird; unfortunately, 
he’s been paired with Mouton, a friend-turned-bully with Tourette’s Syndrome who 
also possesses remarkable artistic talent. Cooperation creates understanding and 
even friendship between the two boys as Eddie navigates issues around his father’s 
integrity as a birder, a teacher who seems to have it in for him, and his deep, abiding 
grief. Wyman gets a surprising amount of mileage out of birding; readers will share 
Eddie’s frustration at fruitless expeditions, sadness at doubting his father, and elation 
when he finally spies the golden eagle. Introspective and insightful yet believably 
uncertain and unknowing, Eddie makes a resonant protagonist, and indications of 
his family’s low socioeconomic status, further strained after his father’s passing, add 
subtle tension to this quiet novel, as does his volatile relationship with Mouton. 
606 • the Bulletin
This would satisfy budding naturalists but also suit readers wrestling with grief or 
the confusing feeling of doubting a beloved adult.  AA
July/August 2016 • 607
Abuse–fiction: Kurtagich
Actors and acting–fiction: Cherry
Adoption–fiction: Shevah
Adventure: Anderson; Beck-
horn; Camper; Preller; Pullman; 
riordan; Shepherd; Watson
African Americans: Hooks
African Americans–fiction: Hall; 
rosen
Aliens–fiction: Khorana
Aliens–stories: Staub
Animals: McCully
Animals–fiction: Camper; Faber
Animals–stories: Bingbo; Starin
Anxiety–fiction: Holmes
Art and artists: Friedman
Asian Americans–fiction: Scatter-
good
Asian Americans–stories: Watts
Asians in Australia–fiction: Pung
Asians in Britain–fiction: Shevah
Aunts–fiction: Kurtagich
Babies–fiction: Mills
Bears–fiction: Pullman
BiogrAPHieS: Bryant: ehrlich; 
Ford; Friedman; gray; Hooks; 
robbins
Biracial people–fiction: Hall
Birds–fiction: Wymer
Brothers and sisters–fiction: 
Knowles; Mittlefehldt; Saunders
Brothers–fiction: Crum
Camps and camping–fiction: rior-
dan
Cars–fiction: Camper
Contests–fiction: Payne
Contests–stories: Starin
Cousins–fiction: Acampora
Crime and criminals–fiction: Hall; 
Kirby; Matthews; Mcginnis; Sel-
zer; taylor; umminger; Watson
Current events: Budhos
dance–fiction: Holmes
deteCtive StorieS: Smith
disabilities: Bryant
disabilities–fiction: Kirby
dystopias–fiction: Cameron
eating disorders–fiction: Holmes; 
Knowles
emotions–fiction: Cooper
emotions–stories: rex
ePiStoLArY noveLS: Pung
Ethics and values: Budhos; gaither; 
girard; Haddix; Hall; Khorana; 
Mcginnis
Fame–fiction: Birchall
Families–fiction: girard; Haddix; 
Knowles; Leno; Lo; Mittlefehldt; 
Payne; Peck; Preller; Springstubb; 
taylor
Families–stories: Watts
FAntASY: Camper; damico; 
Hodge; Montgomery; Paige; Pull-
man; rudden; rutkoski; Salis-
bury; Saunders; Saxon
Farms–fiction: dolan
Fathers–fiction: Bruchac; Hall; Son-
nenblick; Wymer
Fear–stories: Staub
Fish–stories: Allen
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
608 • the Bulletin
FoLKLiKe tALeS: Bingbo
FoLKtALeS And FAirY tALeS: 
Phelan
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: Crum
Food and eating–fiction: Payne
France: Friedman
Friends–fiction: Birchall; Cook; Coo-
per; eve; Faber; Leno; Lo; Mat-
thews; Mcginnis; Montgomery; 
Pung; Scattergood; Sonnenblick; 
Springstubb
Friends–stories: Clanton; Miller
games–fiction: rosen
genies–stories: turk
ghosts–fiction: Kirby; Poblocki; Sel-
zer; telgemeier
gLBtQ people–fiction: Cherry; 
girard; Logan; Matthews; Mittle-
fehldt; Peck
gods and goddesses–fiction: riordan
grandparents–fiction: Acampora
grAPHiC noveLS: Camper; 
Mcelligott; Phelan; Pullman; 
telgemeier
grief–fiction: Acampora; Wymer
Halloween–fiction: dolan
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Beckhorn; 
Bruchac; Kirby; Phelan; Scatter-
good; Smelcer
History, U.S.: robbins
History, world: Hopkinson
Horror: damico; Kurtagich; Pob-
locki; Selzer
HuMor: Allen: Anderson; Camper; 
Clanton; damico; dolan; gill; 
Hautman; ignatow: Peck; rex; Sav-
age; Selzer; Starin; Watson
identity–fiction: Birchall; Mills; 
Mukherjee
illness–fiction: nielsen; Paige; Preller; 
rosen; telgemeier
immigrants–fiction: Budhos
immigrants–stories: Watts
indian Americans–fiction: Khorana
inventors and inventions: Bryant; 
Ford
Knights–fiction: rudden
Latinos–fiction: Camper
Letters–fiction: Logan
Literature, children’s: Saunders
Literature, classical: riordan
Literature, English: ehrlich; Hodge
Magic–fiction: Hodge; Paige; Salis-
bury
MAgiCAL reALiSM: Leno
Mail–stories: Clanton
Medicine: Hooks
Memory–fiction: Cameron; Cook; 
Hautman; rutkoski
Mental illness–fiction: Lo
Monsters–fiction: Montgomery; rud-
den
Morocco–stories: turk
Mothers–fiction: Crum; rosen
Music and musicians–stories: Bingbo
Muslims–fiction: Budhos
MYSterieS: Cook; Smith
native Americans–fiction: Bruchac; 
Smelcer
Nature study: Allen
olympics: gray
orphans–fiction: rudden
PHYSiCAL eduCAtion: gray
Pregnancy–fiction: Lo
Prejudice–fiction: nielsen
Prejudice–stories: Starin
racism: Hooks
racism–fiction: Smelcer; Springstubb
Reading aloud: Kerr
Reading, beginning: Austin; gill
Reading, easy: Faber; Kerr; Mcel-
ligott
Reading, reluctant: Smith
relationships–fiction: Logan; Mukher-
jee
romance–fiction: Cameron; Cherry; 
Kennedy; rutkoski; Salisbury
School–fiction: Anderson; Birchall; 
Cooper; eve; ignatow; Mills; Pung; 
Shevah; Smelcer; Sonnenblick
School–stories: Miller; rex; Staub; 
Watts
Science and scientists–fiction: Ken-
nedy
Science: Hooks
SCienCe FiCtion: gaither; Had-
dix; Hautman; ignatow; Kennedy; 
Khorana; nielsen; Shepherd
July/August 2016 • 609
Seals–fiction: Kerr
Secrets–fiction: Leno; Saxon; taylor
Sharks–stories: gill
Ships and sailing: Hopkinson 
Sisters–fiction: gaither; Kurtagich; 
telgemeier; umminger
Space travel–fiction: Shepherd
SPortS StorieS: gray
SteAMPunK: Saxon
Storytelling–stories: turk
Storytime: Allen; Clanton; Ford; gill; 
Miller; Savage; Starin; Staub
SuPernAturAL StorieS: eve
Superpowers–fiction: ignatow
SurvivAL StorieS: Austin; Beck-
horn
toys: Ford
transportation–stories: Austin
trucks–stories: Savage
twins–fiction: Mukherjee
uncles–fiction: Peck 
vegetables–stories: Miller
video games–fiction: Anderson
voyages and travel: McCully
voyages and travel–fiction: Acampora; 
Leno; Preller 
War–fiction: Haddix
Weather–fiction: Mcelligott
Weddings–fiction: Peck
Witches–fiction: Crum
Women’s studies: ehrlich; Kirby; 
Mcginnis; robbins; umminger
World War i–fiction: Saunders
World War ii: Hopkinson
Writing and writers: ehrlich
Zoos–fiction: Kerr
610  •  The BulleTin
101 Movies to See Before You Grow Up. 
Valle. 227.
13 Days of Midnight. Hunt. 93.
23 Minutes. Vande Velde. 384.
5 Times Revenge. Eland. 463.
Aaron and Alexander. Brown. 185.
Abe Lincoln and the Selfie That Saved the 
Union. Potter. 267.
Absolutely One Thing. Child. 515.
Acampora. How to Avoid Extinction. 562.
Accident Season. Fowley-Doyle. 86.
Accidental Afterlife of Thomas Marsden. 
Trevayne. 60.
Acioli. Head of the Saint. 292.
Ada Byron Lovelace and the Thinking 
Machine. Wallmark. 228.
Ada’s Violin. Hood. 469.
Adler. Get a Hit, Mo! 292.
Adrian. Like It Never Happened. 74.
Adrift. Griffin. 90.
Adventures of Lettie Peppercorn. Gayton. 
305.
Adventures with Waffles. Parr. 42.
After the Red Rain. Lyga. 99.
After the Woods. Savage. 324.
Afterlife Academy. Cole. 139.
Agard. Book. 240
Agatha Parrot and the Odd Street School 
Ghost. Poskitt. 539.
Agee. Lion Lessons. 504.
Ahern. Flawed. 505.
Ahlberg. Fairy Tales for Mr. Barker. 400.
Airport Book. Brown. 513.
Al Mansour. Green Bicycle. 182.
Alexander, K. Booked. 454.
Alexander, S. Art of Not Breathing. 455.
Alexie. Thunder Boy Jr. 505.
Alive. Baker. 6.
All Better Now. Smith. 439.
All Rise for the Honorable Perry T. Cook. 
Connor. 410.
All the Major Constellations. Cranse. 190.
Allen, C. Spirit Week Showdown. 342.
Allen, Elanna. Poor Little Guy. 563.
Allen, Elise. Gabby Duran and the Unsit-
tables. 4.
_____. Gabby Duran: Troll Control. 293.
Almond. Half a Creature from the Sea. 
130.
_____. Song for Ella Grey. 130
Almost King. Saxon. 597.
Alphabet School. Johnson. 95.
Alphin. Lego® Architect. 183.
Altebrando. Leaving. 506.
Amateau. Two for Joy. 5.
American Ace. Nelson. 369.
American Girls. Umminger. 604.
Anatomical Shape of a Heart. Bennett. 243.
Anatomy of Curiosity. Stiefvater. 225.
And I Darken. White. 494.
And the Trees Crept In. Kurtagich. 582.
Anderson, Jodi. My Diary from the Edge of 
the World. 183.
Anderson, John. Dungeoneers. 5.
_____. Insert Coin to Continue. 563.
Anderson, L. Only Thing Worse Than Me 
Is You. 455. 
Anderson, M. Symphony for the City of 
the Dead. 75.
Anderson, R. J. Pocket Full of Murder. 131.
T  h  e  B  u  l  l  e  T  i  n
 
of the Center for Children’s Books
auThor/TiTle index, volume 69
sepTemBer, 2015—july/augusT, 2016
july/augusT 2016  •  611
Anderson, Robert. Dreamland. 131.
Andrews. Haters. 343.
Andy & Sandy’s Anything Adventure. 
dePaola. 461.
Angleberger. Inspector Flytrap. 401.
Anna and the Swallow Man. Savit. 291.
Anna, Banana, and the Friendship Split. 
Rissi. 48.
Anything Could Happen. Walton. 63.
Appearance of Annie Van Sinderen. Howe. 
201.
Appelt. Maybe a Fox. 293.
Apple Tart of Hope. Fitzgerald. 354.
Applegate. Crenshaw. 184.
Apples and Robins. Félix. 414.
Archie the Daredevil Penguin. Rash. 218.
Are We There Yet? Santat. 437.
Argos. Hardy. 417.
Ark Plan. Martin. 479.
Arnold, A. Gryphons Aren’t So Great. 170.
Arnold, E. Far from Fair. 401.
Arnold, M. Lost, Found. 241.
Arroyo. Will Wilder. 402.
Art of Being Normal. Williamson. 494.
Art of Not Breathing. Alexander. 455.
As Black as Ebony. Simukka. 113.
As Brave as You. Reynolds. 541.
Ashman. Henry Wants More! 294.
Ask Me How I Got Here. Heppermann. 
419.
Astounding Broccoli Boy. Cottrell Boyce. 
140.
Astrologer’s Daughter. Lim. 35.
Atkins. Finding Wonders. 506.
Attack of the Alien Horde. Venditti. 62.
Audacity Jones to the Rescue. Larson. 259.
Auggie & Me. Palacio. 159.
Austin. Rescue Squad No. 9. 564.
Austrian. Worm Loves Worm. 294.
Auxier. Sophie Quire and the Last Sto-
ryguard. 402.
Avery. Not As We Know It. 507.
Avi.  School of the Dead. 456.
_____. Most Important Thing. 403.
_____. Old Wolf. 132.
Away We Go. Ostrovski. 321.
Baa Baa Smart Sheep. Sommerset. 328.
Baba Yaga’s Assistant. McCoola. 73.
Bachmann. Drop of Night. 295.
Backyard Witch. Heppermann. 28.
Badger. State of Grace. 75.
Baker, C. Alive. 6.
Baker, J. Circle. 456.
Baker’s Magic. Zahler. 387.
Baldwin, C. Little Dee and the Penguin. 
343.
Baldwin, K. School for Unusual Girls. 6.
Ballad of a Broken Nose. Svingen. 487.
Ballet Cat: Dance! Dance! Underpants! 
Shea. 378.
Ballet Cat: The Totally Secret Secret. Shea. 
52.
Balthazar Fabuloso in the Lair of the Hum-
bugs. Brindle. 512.
Bamboo Sword. Preus. 162.
Bandit’s Tale. Hopkinson. 420.
Bandy. Granddaddy’s Turn. 76.
Bang. When Sophie’s Feelings Are Really, 
Really Hurt. 241.
Banks. Uprooted. 295.
Bardugo. Six of Crows. 132.
Barraclough. Mark of Cain. 456.
Barretta. Lincoln and Kennedy. 507.
Barry. Worst Class Trip Ever. 7.
Bartoletti. Terrible Typhoid Mary. 7.
Barton, Bethany. I’m Trying to Love 
Spiders. 76.
Barton, Byron. My House. 508.
Barton, C. That’s Not Bunny! 344.
_____. Whoosh! 508.
Bascomb. Sabotage. 509.
Bathtime for Chickies. Trasler. 60.
Battle of the Vegetables. Sylvander. 381.
Bauer. Soar. 296.
Bayou Magic. Rhodes. 47.
Bean. This Is My Home, This Is My 
School. 242.
Bear and Bunny. Pinkwater. 323.
Bear Is Not Tired. Gavin. 304.
Beard in a Box. Cotter. 60.
Beasley. Circus Mirandus. 8.
Beast of Cretacea. Strasser. 169.
Beaton. Princess and the Pony. 8.
Beatrix Potter and Her Paint Box. McPhail. 
263.
Beatty. Serafina and the Black Cloak. 9.
Because You’ll Never Meet Me. Thomas. 
117.
612  •  The BulleTin
Beck. Glow. 242.
Becker. Worms for Breakfast. 457.
Beckhorn. Wolf’s Boy. 564.
Becoming Darkness. Brambles. 245.
Becoming Jinn. Goldstein. 24.
Bedford. Twenty Questions for Gloria. 403.
Been There. Done That. Winchell. 278.
Beginner’s Guide to Bear Spotting. Robin-
son. 323. 
Behold the Bones. Parker. 321.
Behrens. Summer of Lost and Found. 404.
Believe Your Eyes. Doerrfeld. 516.
Bell. Chuck and Woodchuck. 404.
____. I Yam a Donkey! 9.
Bemis. Wooden Prince. 296.
Benjamin. Thing about Jellyfish. 184.
Bennett. Anatomical Shape of a Heart. 243.
Benoit. Snow Job. 344.
Benway. Emmy & Oliver. 9.
Bernice Gets Carried Away. Harrison. 92.
Bernstein. Bridget Wilder. 133.
Berry, J. Passion of Dolssa. 405.
Berry, L. Pig and Pug. 10.
Bertman. Book Scavenger. 10.
Best Friend Next Door. Mackler. 37.
Best Friends For Never. Vrettos. 491.
Best Man. Peck. 590.
Best Worst Thing. Lane. 476.
Beware That Girl. Toten. 548.
Biancotti. Zeroes. 229.
Big Dark. Philbrick. 267.
Big Friends. Sarah. 324.
Big Princess. Miura. 40.
Big Top Burning. Woollett. 65.
Bingbo. Pear Violin. 565.
Binny in Secret. McKay. 39.
Birchall. It Girl. 565.
Bird. My Second Life. 243.
Bird Is a Bird. Rockwell. 48.
Bishop. Distance to Home. 457.
Bitter Magic. Townley. 275.
Bitter Side of Sweet. Sullivan. 328.
Black Widow. Stohl. 169.
Black, H. Copper Gauntlet. 134.
Black, J. Nightstruck. 509.
Blackford. Lizzie and the Lost Baby. 244.
Blackhearts. Castroman. 298.
Blackthorn Key. Sands. 221.
Blake. Suffer Love. 510.
Blakemore. Firefly Code. 458.
_____. Friendship Riddle. 11.
Blankman. Traitor Angels. 510.
Bleeding Earth. Ward. 120.
Blood and Salt. Liggett. 155.
Bloodline. Jiménez. 525.
Bloom. Cronin. 411.
Blue in the Face. Swallow. 329.
Bluescreen. Wells. 331.
Bobet. Inheritance of Ashes. 134.
Bodeen. Detour. 135.
Boecker. Witch Hunter. 11.
Boiger. Max and Marla. 135.
Bolger. Fun with Ed and Fred. 458.
Bond, G. Lois Lane. 12.
Bond, R. Out of the Woods. 3.
Book. Agard. 240
Book Scavenger. Bertman. 10.
Booked. Alexander. 454.
Borden Murders. Miller. 206.
Bosma. Fantasy Sports No. 1. 13.
Bow. Scorpion Rules. 185.
Bower. Mummy Makers of Egypt. 511.
Boy at the Top of the Mountain. Boyne. 
511.
Boy Meets Girl Massacre. Hogarth. 201.
Boy Who Fell Off the Mayflower. Lynch. 
209.
Boy, Were We Wrong About the Human 
Body! Kudlinski. 153.
Boy, Were We Wrong about the Weather! 
Kudlinski. 97.
Boyne. Boy at the Top of the Mountain. 
511.
Boys of Fire and Ash. McIsaac. 38.
Brace. You’re Pulling My Leg. 487.
Bracken. Passenger. 244.
Bradbury. River Runs Deep. 13.
Brallier. Galactic Hot Dogs. 14.
___. Last Kids on Earth. 136.
___. Wiener Strikes Back. 512.
Brambles. Becoming Darkness. 245.
Bray. Lair of Dreams. 77.
Break Me Like a Promise. Schmidt. 484.
Breakthrough! Murphy. 264.
Brennan. Tell the Wind and Fire. 345.
Breslaw. Scarlett Epstein Hates It Here. 
459.
Bridget Wilder. Bernstein. 133.
july/augusT 2016  •  613
Bright Lights, Dark Nights. Emond. 86.
Bright Sky, Starry City. Krishnaswami. 32.
Bright Smoke, Cold Fire. Hodge. 577.
Brilliant. Doyle. 194.
Brindle. Balthazar Fabuloso in the Lair of 
the Humbugs. 512.
Bring Me a Rock! Miyares. 535.
Broken Crowns. DeStefano. 351.
Bross. Tangled Webs. 14.
Brown, D. Aaron and Alexander. 185.
_____. Drowned City. 77.
Brown, G. Josh Baxter Levels Up. 297.
Brown, J. How Lunchbox Jones Saved Me 
From Robots. 78.
_____. Shade Me. 245.
Brown, L. Airport Book. 513.
Brown, Marc. Monkey. 14.
Brown, Monica. Lola Levine Is Not Mean! 
186.
Brown, N. Saga of Gudrid the Far-Traveler. 
78.
Brown, P. Wild Robot. 405.
Brown, T. Velvet Undercover. 186.
Bruchac. Long Run. 513.
_____. Talking Leaves. 566.
Brumbach. Eye of Midnight. 345.
Bryant. Six Dots. 566.
Bubonic Panic. Jarrow. 421.
Buckley. Undertow. 15.
Buckley-Archer. Many Lives of John Stone. 
245.
Budhos. Watched. 567.
Buitrago. Two White Rabbits. 246.
Bulldozer’s Big Day. Fleming. 21.
Bunting. Forbidden. 136.
Burach. There’s a Giraffe in My Soup. 297.
Burleigh. Solving the Puzzle Under the Sea. 
298.
Burn Baby Burn. Medina. 428.
Burnham. Teddy Mars: Almost a Winner. 
406.
Burning. Rollins. 376.
Burning Midnight. McIntosh. 318.
Burt. Sliver of Stardust. 137.
Busby. Nine Lives of Jacob Tibbs. 406.
Butler, D. Kidnap Plot. 514.
Butler, E. Case of the Devil’s Interval. 137.
Butterworth. Where Did My Clothes 
Come From? 79.
Byrne. Lottery Boy. 407.
Cakes in Space. Reeve. 46.
Calame. Dan versus Nature. 407.
Caletti. Essential Maps for the Lost. 346.
Call of the Osprey. Patent. 43.
Callery. Scholastic Discover More: Hur-
ricane Katrina. 15.
Calmenson. Ollie’s Class Trip. 79.
Calvin. Leavitt. 207.
Cameron. Forgetting. 567.
Campbell. Dylan the Villain. 346.
Camper. Lowriders to the Center of the 
Earth. 568.
Captain Coconut & the Case of the Miss-
ing Bananas. Ravishankar. 46.
Captive. Grainger. 198.
Carleson. Placebo Junkies. 187.
Carman. Fizzopolis. 347.
Carson, M. Inside Biosphere 2. 138.
Carson, R. Walk on Earth a Stranger. 187.
Carter. My Life With the Liars. 347.
_____. Tumbling. 514.
Case of the Battling Bots. O’Donnell. 320.
Case of the Devil’s Interval. Butler. 137.
Castroman. Blackhearts. 298.
Catanese. Donny’s Inferno. 347.
Catmull. Radiant Road. 348.
Catrow. Fun in the Sun. 16.
Cerrito. Safest Lie. 246.
Chabert. Poptropica. 348.
Chapman. Raised by Wolves. 80.
Charaipotra. Tiny Pretty Things. 16.
Charlie and the Grandmothers. Towell. 
118.
Charlie, Presumed Dead. Heltzel. 27.
Charmed Children of Rookskill Castle. 
Fox. 354.
Chasing Secrets. Choldenko. 81.
Chasing Stars. Douglas. 351.
Cherry. Classy Crooks Club. 299.
_____. Look Both Ways. 568.
Chester. Curiosity House. 158. 
Chibbaro. Into the Dangerous World. 138.
Chicken Followed Me Home! Page. 42.
Chicken Who Had a Toothache. Guettier. 
25.
Child. Absolutely One Thing. 515.
Children of Exile. Haddix. 575.
Childs. Powerless. 80.
614  •  The BulleTin
Chilton. Goblin’s Puzzle. 247.
Chloe in India. Darnton. 300.
Chokshi. Star-Touched Queen. 408.
Choldenko. Chasing Secrets. 81.
_____. Putting the Monkeys to Bed. 17.
Christopher. Dreaded Ogress of the Tun-
dra. 81.
_____. On the Shoulder of a Giant. 82.
Chuck and Woodchuck. Bell. 404.
Chung. Ninja! 459.
Chupeco. Suffering. 188.
Churnin. William Hoy Story. 408.
Circle. Baker. 456.
Circus Mirandus. Beasley. 8.
City of Halves. Inglis. 150.
Clanton. It Came in the Mail. 568.
Clara. McCully. 584.
Clare. Copper Gauntlet. 134.
Classy Crooks Club. Cherry. 299.
Clayton. Tiny Pretty Things. 16.
Cleo Edison Oliver. Frazier. 355.
Click! Ebbeler. 20.
Coakley. Worlds of Ink and Shadow. 247.
Cocca-Leffler. Homemade Together Christ-
mas. 188.
Coco and the Little Black Dress. Van 
Haeringen. 228.
Cody. Peddler’s Road. 139.
Cody and the Mysteries of the Universe. 
Springstubb. 380. 
Cody Harmon, King of Pets. Mills. 534.
Cohen. Inn Between. 299.
Colby. It’s Raining Bats and Frogs. 139.
Cold War on Maplewood Street. Rosen-
gren. 164.
Cole, F. Afterlife Academy. 139.
Cole, H. Somewhat True Adventures of 
Sammy Shine. 409.
Colfer. Forever Man. 189.
_____. Imaginary Fred. 248.
Collins. Until We Meet Again. 189.
Colors. Steggall. 224.
Colossal. Feasts of Fury. 409.
Compass South. Larson. 528.
Con Academy. Schreiber. 111.
Concentr8. Sutcliffe. 275.
Condie. Summerlost. 349.
Confessions of an Imaginary Friend. 
Cuevas. 191.
Connect the Stars. de los Santos. 193.
Connolly. Ravenous. 300.
Connor. All Rise for the Honorable Perry 
T. Cook. 410.
Connors. Gabby Duran and the Unsit-
tables. 4.
_____. Gabby Duran: Troll Control. 293. 
Consent. Ohlin. 215.
Cook. With Malice. 569.
Cooney. No Such Person. 17.
Cooper, A. Sticks & Stones. 569.
Cooper, C. Guile. 349.
Cooper, E. Vanished. 82.
Copper Gauntlet. Black. 134.
Corey. Secret Subway. 399.
Cosimano. Holding Smoke. 515.
Cossanteli. Extincts. 350.
Cotter. Beard in a Box. 460.
Cottrell Boyce. Astounding Broccoli Boy. 
140.
Courage & Defiance. Hopkinson. 93.
Courage Test. Preller. 591.
Court of Fives. Elliott. 85.
Coverly. Night of the Living Worms. 140.
Coy. Game Changer. 189.
Coyle. Vivian Apple Needs a Miracle. 83.
Cranse. All the Major Constellations. 
190.
Creeping. Sirowy. 114.
Crenshaw. Applegate. 184.
Cresswell Plot. Wass. 491.
Crime Biters! Greenwald. 146.
Crimson Skew. Grove. 519.
Cronin. Bloom. 411.
Cronn-Mills. Original Fake. 411.
Cross. Iliad. 141.
Crossan. One. 190.
Crossing Niagara. Tavares. 489.
Crossing the Line. Rogers. 541.
Crow. Hello, Hippo! 460.
Crowder. Nearer Moon. 191.
Crowl. Eden’s Wish. 141.
Crown’s Game. Skye. 485.
Crum. William and the Witch’s Riddle. 
570.
Cuevas. Confessions of an Imaginary 
Friend. 191.
Culbertson. Possibility of Now. 300.
Cure for the Common Universe. Heidicker. 
522.
Curiosity House. Oliver. 158.
july/augusT 2016  •  615
Curious Tale of the In-Between. DeStefano. 
84.
Curious World of Calpurnia Tate. Kelly. 
30.
Curse of the Were-Hyena. Hale. 520.
Cushman. Grayling’s Song. 516.
Cut Both Ways. Mesrobian. 157.
Dagg. Sweet Home Alaska. 350.
Damage Done. Panitch. 107.
Damico. Wax. 570.
Dan versus Nature. Calame. 407.
Dangerous Lies. Fitzpatrick. 196.
Danticat. Untwine. 192.
Dara Palmer’s Major Drama. Shevah. 599.
Dark Energy. Wells. 332.
Dark Missions of Edgar Brim. Peacock. 
537.
Dark Shimmer. Napoli. 105.
Darkest Corners. Thomas. 382.
Darnton. Chloe in India. 300.
Davis, K. Riddle in Ruby. 192.
Davis, T. Peas and Carrots. 412.
Day the Crayons Came Home. Daywalt. 
83.
Daywalt. Day the Crayons Came Home. 
83.
de Fombelle. Prince without a Kingdom. 
142.
de los Santos. Connect the Stars. 193.
Deacon. I Am Henry Finch. 142.
Dead Boy. Gale. 145.
Dead Investigation. Price. 268.
Dead upon a Time. Paulson. 108.
Deadly 7.  Jennings. 422.
Deadly Design. Dockter. 18.
Deadly Flowers. Thomson. 440.
Dear Santa. Peet. 215.
Death and Life of Zebulon Finch. Kraus. 
204.
Death Is Stupid. Higginbotham. 523.
Deebs. Powerless. 80.
Deem. Prisoners of Breendonk. 193.
Defender. McNamee. 427.
DeFranco. After the Red Rain. 99.
Delicate Monsters. Kuehn. 33.
Demon Dentist. Walliams. 331.
dePaola. Andy & Sandy’s Anything Adven-
ture. 461.
Derby. Jump Back, Paul. 194.
DeStefano. Broken Crowns. 351.
_____. Curious Tale of the In-Between. 84.
Detour. Bodeen. 135.
Detweiler. Immaculate. 18.
Devil and the Bluebird. Mason-Black. 533.
Devoted. Mathieu. 100.
Diary of a Haunting. Verano. 119.
DiCamillo. Francine Poulet Meets the 
Ghost Raccoon. 143.
_____. Raymie Nightingale. 412.
Dilloway. Momotaro. 461.
Dime. Frank. 21.
Dinerstein. What Elephants Know. 462.
Dinnison. You and Me and Him. 84.
Dino Files. McAnulty. 316.
Dinosaurs? Prap. 44.
Distance from Me to You. Gessner. 198.
Distance to Home. Bishop. 457.
Dive! Hopkinson. 578.
Dockter. Deadly Design. 18.
Doerrfeld. Believe Your Eyes. 516.
Dog Wearing Shoes. Ko. 204.
Dogs. Stratton. 115.
Dolan. Mystery of the Haunted Farm. 571.
Dominy. Matter of Heart. 19.
Don’t Feed the Geckos! English. 301.
Donnelly. These Shallow Graves. 143.
Donny’s Inferno. Catanese. 347.
Donwerth-Chikamatsu. Somewhere 
Among. 462.
Dooley. Free Verse. 301.
Door by the Staircase. Marsh. 315.
Dorothea’s Eyes. Rosenstock. 436.
Dory and the Real True Friend. Hanlon. 
91.
Douglas. Chasing Stars. 351.
Dowell. Trouble the Water. 463.
Down with the Shine. Quinn. 372.
Downham. Unbecoming. 248.
Doyle. Brilliant. 194.
Dr. Critchlore’s School for Minions. Grau. 
415.
Drag Teen. Self. 484.
Dragons vs. Drones. King. 423.
Drake Equation. King. 474.
Draw the Line. Linn. 424.
Dreaded Ogress of the Tundra. Christo-
pher. 81.
Dream On, Amber. Shevah. 273.
616  •  The BulleTin
Dreamers Often Lie. West. 385.
Dreamland. Anderson. 131.
Dreamology. Keating. 472.
Dreamstrider. Smith. 168.
Drift & Dagger. Kulper. 206.
Drop of Night. Bachmann. 295.
Drowned City. Brown. 77.
Dubuc. Mr. Postmouse’s Rounds. 85.
Ducie. Rig. 195.
Duck, Duck, Porcupine! Yoon. 552.
Duffy. Fable Comics. 144.
Dumas. It Ain’t So Awful, Falafel. 413.
Dumplin’. Murphy. 212.
Dungeoneers. Anderson. 5.
Durango. Leveller. 19.
Durst. Girl Who Could Not Dream. 249.
Duyvis. On the Edge of Gone. 413.
Dylan the Villain. Campbell. 346.
Eagar. Hour of the Bees. 352.
Easton. Seven Second Delay. 20.
Ebbeler. Click! 20.
Ebola. Newman. 214.
Echo Echo. Singer. 379. 
Eden’s Wish. Crowl. 141.
Edgewater. Sheinmel. 112.
Eeny, Meeny, Miney, Mo and Flo! Molk. 
103.
Eggers. This Bridge Will Not Be Gray. 239.
Ehrlich. Willa. 571.
Either the Beginning or the End of the 
World. Farish. 195.
Eland. 5 Times Revenge. 463.
Elephant Journey. 475.
Eleven and Holding. Penney. 481.
Elizabeth Started All the Trouble. Rap-
paport. 373. 
Ella and Penguin. Maynor. 316.
Elliott. Court of Fives. 85.
Elmendorf. South of Sunshine. 464.
Emma and Julia Love Ballet. McClintock. 
426.
Emma Is on the Air: Big News! Siegal. 53.
Emmy & Oliver. Benway. 9.
Emond. Bright Lights, Dark Nights. 86.
Emperor of Any Place. Wynne-Jones. 174.
Enchanted Air. Engle. 144.
Enchanted Egg. George. 305.
Enchantment Lake. Preus. 45.
End of FUN. McGinty. 427.
Ends of the Earth. Hale. 91.
Engle. Enchanted Air. 144.
English. Don’t Feed the Geckos! 301.
Entirely True Story of the Unbelievable 
FIB. Shaughnessy. 167.
Escoffier. Where’s the BaBOOn? 249.
Eshbaugh. Ivory and Bone. 516.
Essential Maps for the Lost. Caletti. 346.
Eureka Key. Thomson. 441.
Eve. Graces. 572.
Everett. Unquiet. 144.
Everland. Spinale. 545.
Every Day Birds. VanDerwater. 384.
Every Exquisite Thing. Quick. 481.
Every Single Second. Springstubb. 601.
Everything, Everything. Yoon. 231.
Executioner’s Daughter. Hardstaff. 26.
Extincts. Cossanteli. 350.
Extraordinary Means. Schneider. 52.
Eye of Midnight. Brumbach. 345.
Faber. Mango & Bambang. 572.
Fable Comics. Duffy. 144.
Faceless. Sheinmel. 223.
Facinelli. After the Red Rain. 99.
Fairy Tales for Mr. Barker. Ahlberg. 400.
Falatko. Snappsy the Alligator Did Not Ask 
to Be in This Book! 352.
Falksen. Transatlantic Conspiracy. 464.
Fall. Preller. 217.
Fall of the House of West. Pope. 160.
Falling into the Dragon’s Mouth. Thomp-
son. 382.
Falling over Sideways. Sonnenblick. 600.
Fan. Night Gardener. 353.
Fantaskey. Isabel Feeney, Star Reporter. 
353.
Fantasy Sports No. 1. Bosma. 13.
Far from Fair. Arnold. 401.
Farish. Either the Beginning or the End of 
the World. 195.
_____. Joseph’s Big Ride. 465.
Farley. Secret Tree Fort. 465.
Farrell. Stop Following Me, Moon! 466.
Fearless Flyer. Lang. 311.
Fearsome Foursome. Ravenswood. 540.
Feasts of Fury. Colossal. 409.
Federle. Great American Whatever. 302.
Félix. Apples and Robins. 414.
Female of the Species. McGinnis. 585.
july/augusT 2016  •  617
Fern. W Is for Webster. 302.
Feuti. King of Kazoo. 517.
Fierce and Subtle Poison. Mabry. 531.
Fifteen Lanes. Laidlaw. 527.
Finders Keepers. Tougas. 226.
Finding Audrey. Kinsella. 31.
Finding Fortune. Ray. 218.
Finding Someplace. Patrick. 108.
Finding Winnie. Mattick. 261.
Finding Wonders. Atkins. 506.
Fine. Impostor Queen. 250.
Fiona. Moore. 429.
Fiore. Thicker Than Water. 250.
Firefly Code. Blakemore. 458.
Firefly Hollow. McGhee. 101.
First Grade Dropout. Vernick. 62.
First Step. Goodman. 252.
First Time She Drowned. Kletter. 360.
Firstlife. Showalter. 437.
Fisher. Secret Destiny of Pixie Piper. 466.
Fitzgerald. Apple Tart of Hope. 354.
Fitzpatrick. Dangerous Lies. 196.
Five Children on the Western Front. Saun-
ders. 596.
Fixes. Matthews. 584.
Fizzopolis. Carman. 347.
Flawed. Ahern. 505.
Fleming, C. Bulldozer’s Big Day. 21.
Fleming, D. Maggie and Michael Get 
Dressed. 517.
Flinkwater Factor. Hautman. 148.
Flip & Fin: Super Sharks to the Rescue! 
Gill. 574.
Floodwaters and Flames. Huey. 470.
Floreen. Willful Machines. 196.
Florian. Pig Is Big on Books. 197.
Flying Cars. Glass. 89.
Flying Frogs and Walking Fish. Jenkins. 
525.
Fogliano. When Green Becomes Tomatoes. 
414.
Follet. Marvin and the Moths. 524.
Forbidden. Bunting. 136.
Forbidden Wish. Khoury. 359.
Ford. Marvelous Thing That Came from a 
Spring. 573.
Foreman. Tortoise and the Soldier. 303.
Forever Man. Colfer. 189.
Forgetting. Cameron. 567.
Forgetting Machine. Hautman. 576.
Forgotten Bones. Huey. 149.
Fortune Falls. Goebel. 251.
Fowley-Doyle. Accident Season. 86.
Fox. Charmed Children of Rookskill 
Castle. 354.
Framed! Ponti. 539.
Francine Poulet Meets the Ghost Raccoon. 
DiCamillo. 143.
Frank. Dime. 21.
Frank and Laverne. Whamond. 493.
Frank and Lucky Get Schooled. Perkins. 
503.
Franklin. I’m an Alien and I Want to Go 
Home! 197.
Frannie and Tru. Hattrup. 522.
Frazier. Cleo Edison Oliver. 355.
Frederick-Frost. Gryphons Aren’t So Great. 
170.
Frederick’s Journey. Rappaport. 269.
Free Verse. Dooley. 301.
Freedman. We Will Not Be Silent. 415.
Freeman. Secret Cookie Club. 22.
French. Most Wonderful Thing in the 
World. 303.
Friday Barnes. Spratt. 273.
Friedman. What Degas Saw. 573.
Friends for Life. Norriss. 106.
Friendship Riddle. Blakemore. 11.
Front Lines. Grant. 306.
Fry. Naughty List. 145.
Fulk. Raising Rufus. 87.
Full of Beans. Holm. 524.
Fun Book of Scary Stuff. Jenkins. 29.
Fun in the Sun. Catrow. 16.
Fun with Ed and Fred. Bolger. 458.
Funny Bones. Tonatiuh. 117.
Furstinger. Mercy. 467.
Fuzzy Mud. Sachar. 50.
Gabby Duran and the Unsittables. Allen. 4.
Gabby Duran: Troll Patrol. Allen. 293.
Gaither. Into the Abyss. 574.
Galactic Hot Dogs. Brallier. 14.
Galante. World from Up Here. 518.
Gale. Dead Boy. 145.
Game Changer. Coy. 189.
Gangsei. Zero Day. 251.
Gantos. Trouble in Me. 87.
Garrett. Last Monster. 467.
618  •  The BulleTin
Garvin. Symptoms of Being Human. 304.
Gathering. Poblocki. 591.
Gauch. Tomb Robber and King Tut. 22.
Gavin. Bear Is Not Tired. 304.
Gayton. Adventures of Lettie Peppercorn. 
305.
Geek’s Guide to Unrequited Love. Tash. 
488.
Gemini. Mukherjee. 588.
Gena/Finn. Moskowitz. 430.
Gensler. Ghostlight. 23.
George, A. Gino. 88.
George, J. Silver in the Blood. 88.
George, K. Enchanted Egg. 305.
Gephart. Lily and Dunkin. 518.
Gerstein. I Am Pan! 467.
_____. Night World. 23.
Gessner. Distance from Me to You. 198.
Get a Hit, Mo! Adler. 292.
Get Out of My Bath! Teckentrup. 116.
Ghostlight. Gensler. 23.
Ghosts. Telgemeier. 603.
Gibney. See No Color. 306.
Gill. Flip & Fin: Super Sharks to the 
Rescue! 574.
Gilmore. We Were Never Here. 519.
Ginny Louise and the School Showdown. 
Sauer. 51.
Gino. George. 88.
Girard. Girl Mans Up. 575.
Girl & Gorilla. Walton. 442.
Girl from Everywhere. Heilig. 307.
Girl in the Tower. Schroeder. 378.
Girl in the Well Is Me. Rivers. 375.
Girl Mans Up. Girard. 575.
Girl Who Could Not Dream. Durst. 249.
Girl Who Fell. Parker. 434.
Glass. Flying Cars. 89.
Glow. Beck. 242.
Goblin’s Puzzle. Chilton. 247.
Godin. How to Dress a Dragon. 355.
Goebel. Fortune Falls. 251.
Going. Pieces of Why. 198.
Going Where It’s Dark. Naylor. 369.
Golden Boys. Hartnett. 468.
Golden Compass, Vol. One. Pullman. 163.
Golden Compass: Vol. Two. Pullman. 592.
Golden Specific. Grove. 90.
Goldfish. Luurtsema. 530.
Goldstein. Becoming Jinn. 24.
Good Night Owl. Pizzoli. 538.
Goodbye Stranger. Stead. 57.
Goodman, S. First Step. 252.
Goodman, W. This Way Home. 212.
Goodnight, Good Dog. Ray. 269.
Grabenstein. Jacky Ha-Ha. 434.
Graces. Eve. 572.
Graff. Lost in the Sun. 24.
Graham. How the Sun Got to Coco’s 
House. 89.
Grainger. Captive. 198.
Granddaddy’s Turn. Bandy. 76.
Grant, J. Little Bird’s Bad Word. 90.
Grant, M. Front Lines. 306.
Gratton. Anatomy of Curiosity. 225.
Grau. Dr. Critchlore’s School for Minions. 
415.
Graudin. Wolf By Wolf. 199.
Gray. Nadia. 575.
Grayling’s Song. Cushman. 516.
Great American Whatever. Federle. 302.
Great Big Cuddle. Rosen. 164.
Great Good Summer. Scanlon. 51.
Great Hunt. Higgins. 307.
Great Pet Escape. Jamieson. 357.
Great White Shark Scientist. Montgomery. 
535.
Greatest Zombie Movie Ever. Strand. 381.
Green Bicycle. Al Mansour. 182.
Greenwald. Crime Biters! 146.
Greenwood. Midnight. 25.
Grey. Space Dog. 252.
Griffin, A. Oona Finds an Egg. 253.
Griffin, P. Adrift. 90.
_____. When Friendship Followed Me 
Home. 468.
Groundhog’s Day Off. Pearlman. 322.
Grove. Crimson Skew. 519.
_____. Golden Specific. 90.
Grunberg. Dream Jumper. 416.
Gryphons Aren’t So Great. Sturm. 170.
Guettier. Chicken Who Had a Toothache. 
25.
Guiberson. Most Amazing Creature in the 
Sea. 26.
Guide to Sisters. Metcalf. 102.
Guile. Cooper. 349.
Hacohen. Who’s Hungry? 146.
july/augusT 2016  •  619
Haddix. Children of Exile. 575.
Hahn, M. Took. 147.
Hahn, R. Shadow behind the Stars. 199.
Hainsworth. Take the Fall. 307.
Hale, B. Curse of the Were-Hyena. 520.
_____. Ends of the Earth. 91.
Hale, K. Nothing Bad Is Going to Happen. 
253.
Half a Creature from the Sea. Almond. 
130.
Hall. Wirewalker. 576.
Halpern. Nightfall. 200.
Hamilton. Rebel of the Sands. 416.
Hammel. Underdogs. Farrar. 416.
Hamster Princess. Vernon. 171.
Handful of Stars. Lord. 35.
Hanlon. Dory and the Real True Friend. 
91.
Hardinge. Lie Tree. 417.
Hardstaff. Executioner’s Daughter. 26.
Hardy. Argos. 417.
Harmon. Stick. 27.
Harmony House. Sheff. 378.
Harrington. Mayday. 520.
Harrison, H. Bernice Gets Carried Away. 
92.
Harrison, Margot. Killer in Me. 521.
Harrison, Michelle. One Wish. 418.
Hartinger. Three Truths and a Lie. 521.
Hartnett. Golden Boys. 468.
Haters. Andrews. 343.
Hatke. Little Robot. 147.
_____. Nobody Likes a Goblin. 453.
Hattemer. Land of 10,000 Madonnas. 418.
Hattrup. Frannie and Tru. 522.
Hautman. Flinkwater Factor. 148.
_____. Forgetting Machine. 576.
Have a Look, Says Book. Jackson. 470.
Hawking’s Hallway. Shusterman. 543.
Haydu. Rules for Stealing Stars. 148.
Head of the Saint. Acioli. 292.
Heapy. Very Little Cinderella. 254.
Heidicker. Cure for the Common Universe. 
522.
Heilig. Girl from Everywhere. 307.
Heir to the Sky. Sun. 547.
Helgeson. Gena/Finn. 430.
Hello, Hippo! Crow. 460.
Heltzel. Charlie, Presumed Dead. 27.
Hendrix. Miracle Man. 356.
Henkes. Waiting. 200.
_____. When Spring Comes. 469.
Henry Cicada’s Extraordinary Elktonium 
Escapade. Teague. 275.
Henry Wants More! Ashman. 294.
Heos. It’s Getting Hot in Here. 356.
Heppermann. Ask Me How I Got Here. 
419.
_____. Backyard Witch. 28.
Here Comes the Tooth Fairy Cat. Under-
wood. 61.
Here Comes Valentine Cat. Underwood. 
329.
Herkert. Sewing Stories. 254.
Hest. My Old Pal. Oscar. 523.
Hicks. Nameless City. 357.
Hidden Oracle. Riordan. 593.
Higginbotham. Death Is Stupid. 523.
Higgins. Great Hunt. 307.
Highly Illogical Behavior. Whaley. 493.
Hillary. Winter. 314.
Hillary Rodham Clinton. Markel. 314.
Hilo: Saving the Whole Wide World. 
Winick. 444.
Hilo: The Boy Who Crashed to Earth. 
Winick. 173.
Hired Girl. Schlitz. 110.
History of Glitter and Blood. Moskowitz. 
40.
Hitchcock, B. Smell of Other People’s 
Houses. 419.
Hitchcock, S. Ruby Lee & Me. 308.
Hodge. Bright Smoke, Cold Fire. 577.
Hogarth. Boy Meets Girl Massacre. 201.
Holder. Rules. 28.
Holding Smoke. Cosimano. 515.
Hole Story of the Doughnut. Miller. 479.
Holm, J. Full of Beans. 524.
_____. Sunny Side Up. 92.
Holm, M. Marvin and the Moths. 524.
Holmes. How It Feels to Fly. 577.
Holt. House Arrest. 149.
Homemade Together Christmas. Cocca-
Leffler. 188.
Honor Girl. Thrash. 170.
Hood. Ada’s Violin. 469.
Hoodoo. Smith. 114.
Hook’s Revenge. Schulz. 165.
620  •  The BulleTin
Hooks. Tiny Stitches. 578.
Hopkinson. Bandit’s Tale. 420.
_____. Courage & Defiance. 93.
_____. Dive! 578.
Horus and the Curse of Everlasting Regret. 
Voskuil. 551.
Hot Pink. Rubin. 109.
Hotel Ruby. Young. 231.
Hour of the Bees. Eagar. 352.
Houran. Next to You. 420.
House Arrest. Holt. 149.
House That Jane Built. Stone. 58. 
House That Zack Built. Murray. 430.
How It Ends. Lo. 583.
How It Feels to Fly. Holmes. 577.
How Jelly Roll Morton Invented Jazz. 
Winter. 65.
How Lunchbox Jones Saved Me From 
Robots. Brown. 78.
How the Sun Got to Coco’s House. Gra-
ham. 89.
How to Avoid Extinction. Acampora. 562.
How to Babysit a Leopard. Lewin. 34.
How to Catch Santa. Reagan. 218.
How to Disappear. Stampler. 546.
How to Dress a Dragon. Godin. 355.
How to Read a Story. Messner. 39.
How to Swallow a Pig. Jenkins. 94.
Howe. Appearance of Annie Van Sinderen. 
201.
Huey. Floodwaters and Flames. 470.
_____. Forgotten Bones. 149.
Human Body. Newquist. 319.
Human Body Theater. Wicks. 229.
Hundred Hours of Night. Woltz. 444.
Hunt. 13 Days of Midnight. 93.
Hunt. Shepherd. 598.
Hutchinson. Violent Ends. 202.
_____. We Are the Ants. 255.
I Am Henry Finch. Deacon. 142.
I Am Pan! Gerstein. 467.
I Am Princess X. Priest. 45.
I Can’t Wait! Schwartz. 272.
I Crawl Through It. King. 95.
I Don’t Live Here Anymore. Kreslehner. 
205.
I Hear a Pickle. Isadora. 308.
I Love Cake! Sauer. 543.
I Really Like Slop! Willems. 230.
I See Reality. Kendall. 257.
I Will Chomp You! John. 94.
I Will Never Get a Star on Mrs. Benson’s 
Blackboard. Mann. 99.
I Will Take a Nap! Willems. 64.
I Woke Up Dead at the Mall. Sheehan. 
326.
I Won a What? Vernick. 490.
I Yam a Donkey! Bell. 9.
I’m an Alien and I Want to Go Home! 
Franklin. 197.
I’m Trying to Love Spiders. Barton. 76.
Ice Cream Summer. Sís. 55.
Idle. Sea Rex. 29.
If I Was Your Girl. Russo. 483.
If I Were You. Margolis. 38.
Ignatow. Mighty Odds. 579.
Iliad. Cross. 141.
Illuminae. Kaufman. 203.
Imaginary Fred. Colfer. 248.
Immaculate. Detweiler. 18.
Imposter. John. 150.
Impostor Queen. Fine. 250.
Improbable Theory of Ana & Zak. Katcher. 
30.
In Real Life. Love. 364.
Incident on the Bridge. McNeal. 428.
Incredible Adventures of Cinnamon Girl. 
Keil. 472.
Infinite in Between. Mackler. 210.
Inglis. City of Halves. 150.
Inheritance of Ashes. Bobet. 134.
Ink and Ashes. Maetani. 37.
Inker’s Shadow. Say. 221.
Inn Between. Cohen. 299.
Insert Coin to Continue. Anderson. 563.
Inside Biosphere 2. Carson. 138.
Inspector Flytrap. Angleberger. 401.
Instructions for the End of the World. 
Kain. 256.
Into the Dangerous World. Chibbaro. 138.
Into the Abyss. Gaither. 574.
Into the Killing Seas. Spradlin. 56.
Invisible Fault Lines. Madonia. 425.
Isabel Feeney, Star Reporter. Fantaskey. 
353.
Isadora. I Hear a Pickle (and Smell, See, 
Touch, and Taste It, Too!). 308.
Isol. Menino. 129.
july/augusT 2016  •  621
It Ain’t So Awful, Falafel. Dumas. 413.
It Came in the Mail. Clanton. 568.
It Girl. Birchall. 565.
It Looks Like This. Mittlefehldt. 587.
It Wasn’t Always Like This. Preble. 435.
It’s All Your Fault. Rudnick. 272.
It’s Getting Hot in Here. Heos. 356.
It’s Raining Bats and Frogs. Colby. 139.
It’s Tough to Lose Your Balloon. Krosoczka. 
96.
Ivory and Bone. Eshbaugh. 516.
Jackrabbit McCabe & the Electric Tele-
graph. Rozier. 220.
Jackson, B. Naughty List. 145.
Jackson, R. Have a Look, Says Book. 470.
Jacky Ha-Ha. Patterson. 434.
Jamieson. Great Pet Escape. 357.
Jarrow. Bubonic Panic. 421.
Jazz Day. Orgill. 432.
Jean. We’ll Never Be Apart. 202.
Jenkins, E. Fun Book of Scary Stuff. 29.
_____. Tiger and Badger. 358.
_____. Toys Meet Snow. 181.
_____. Upside-Down Magic. 211.
Jenkins, S. Flying Frogs and Walking Fish. 
525.
_____. How to Swallow a Pig. 94.
Jennings. Deadly 7.  422.
Jillian Cade. Klein. 153.
Jiménez. Bloodline. 525.
Jinks. Last Bogler. 309.
Jobling. Max Helsing and the Thirteenth 
Curse. 255.
John, A. Imposter. 150.
John, J. I Will Chomp You! 94.
Johnson, Jaleigh. Secrets of Solace. 422.
Johnson, Janet. Last Great Adventure of the 
PB & J Society. 358.
Johnson, S. Alphabet School. 95.
Johnston, E. Thousand Nights. 256.
Johnston, J. Truth. 309.
Jones, C. Time Stoppers. 471.
Jones, G. No True Echo. 151.
Jones, K. Unusual Chickens for the Excep-
tional Poultry Farmer. 29.
Jordan. Reign of Shadows. 310.
Joseph’s Big Ride. Farish. 465.
Josh Baxter Levels Up. Brown. 297.
Juba! Myers. 104.
Jude. May Queen Murders. 422.
Jump Back, Paul. Derby. 194.
Jung. Unidentified Suburban Object. 471.
Just Kill Me. Selzer. 598.
Just My Luck. McGovern. 366.
Kain. Instructions for the End of the 
World. 256.
Kang. That’s (Not) Mine. 151.
Katcher. Improbable Theory of Ana & 
Zak. 30.
Kate Walden Directs. Mata. 38.
Kaufman. Illuminae. 203.
Keating, J. Pink Is for Blobfish. 359.
Keating, L. Dreamology. 472.
Keep Me in Mind. Reed. 482.
Keeper of the Mist. Neumeier. 431.
Keil. Incredible Adventures of Cinnamon 
Girl. 472.
Kelley. Superheroes Don’t Eat Veggie Burg-
ers. 257.
Kelly, E. Land of Forgotten Girls. 473.
Kelly, J. Curious World of Calpurnia Tate. 
30.
Kendall. I See Reality. 257.
Kennedy, A. Ragweed’s Farm Dog Hand-
book. 31.
Kennedy, K. Learning to Swear in America. 
579.
Keplinger. Run. 526.
Kerr. Mister Cleghorn’s Seal. 580.
Kessler. Read Me Like a Book. 526.
Key. Terror at Bottle Creek. 258.
Keyser. V-Word. 258.
Khan. Shadow Magic. 473.
Khorana. Mirror in the Sky. 580.
Khoury. Forbidden Wish. 359.
Kid from Diamond Street. Vernick. 385.
Kidd. Night on Fire. 152.
Kidnap Plot. Butler. 514.
Killer in Me. Harrison. 521.
King, A. I Crawl Through It. 95.
King, B. Drake Equation. 474.
King, W. Dragons vs. Drones. 423.
_____. OCDaniel. 423.
King of Kazoo. Feuti. 517.
Kinsella. Finding Audrey. 31.
Kirby. Taste for Monsters. 581.
Kissing in America. Rabb. 46.
Kitchings. Yard War. 203.
622  •  The BulleTin
Klass. Losers Take All. 152.
Klein. Jillian Cade. 153.
Kletter. First Time She Drowned. 360.
Klickitat. Rock. 375.
Knights of the Borrowed Dark. Rudden. 
595.
Knowles. Still a Work in Progress. 581.
Ko. Dog Wearing Shoes. 204.
Kochalka. Warrior and the Mustache of 
Destiny. 360.
Koehler. Super Jumbo. 424. 
Koertge. Backyard Witch. 28.
Konigsberg. Porcupine of Truth. 96.
Korman. Masterminds, Criminal Destiny. 
310.
Kraus. Death and Life of Zebulon Finch. 
204.
Kreller. You Can’t See the Elephants. 205.
Kreslehner. I Don’t Live Here Anymore. 
205.
Krishnaswami. Bright Sky, Starry City. 32.
Kristoff. Illuminae. 203.
Krosoczka. It’s Tough to Lose Your Balloon. 
96.
Krull. Sacajawea. 33.
Kudlinski. Boy, Were We Wrong About the 
Human Body! 153.
_____. Boy, Were We Wrong about the 
Weather! 97.
Kuehn. Delicate Monsters. 33.
Kuenzler. Princess DisGrace. 474.
Kujawinski. Nightfall. 200.
Kulper. Drift & Dagger. 206.
Kurtagich. And the Trees Crept In. 582.
LaCour. You Know Me Well. 527.
Laidlaw, R. Elephant Journey. 475.
Laidlaw, S. Fifteen Lanes. 527.
Lair of Dreams. Bray. 77.
Lake. Whisper to Me. 475.
Lam. My Little Sister and Me. 528. 
Lanagan. Zeroes. 229.
Land of 10,000 Madonnas. Hattemer. 418.
Land of Forgotten Girls. Kelly. 473.
Landers. Starflight. 311.
Lane. Best Worst Thing. 476.
Lang. Fearless Flyer. 311.
Lange. Rebel, Bully, Geek, Pariah. 312.
Larson, H. Compass South. 528.
Larson, K. Audacity Jones to the Rescue. 
259.
Last Bogler. Jinks. 309.
Last Boy at St. Edith’s. Malone. 313.
Last Execution. Wung-Sung. 387.
Last Great Adventure of the PB & J Soci-
ety. Johnson. 358.
Last in a Long Line of Rebels. Tyre. 227.
Last Kids on Earth. Brallier. 136.
Last Monster. Garrett. 467.
Last Place on Earth. Snow. 327.
Laure. This Raging Light. 361.
Law. Switch. 154.
Lawrence. Skeleton Tree. 259.
Lawson. Nooks & Crannies. 97.
_____. Waiting for Augusta. 529.
Laybourne. Sweet. 34.
Learning to Swear in America. Kennedy. 
579.
Leaver. Sweet Madness. 206.
Leaving. Altebrando. 506.
Leavitt, L. Pages between Us. 361.
Leavitt, M. Calvin. 207.
Lee, J. Shadows of the Dark Crystal. 529.
Lee, M. This Monstrous Thing. 98.
Lee, S. Outrun the Moon. 530.
Lee, T. Messenger. 207.
Lego® Architect. Alphin. 183.
Legrand. Some Kind of Happiness. 476.
Lehrhaupt. Please Open This Book! 208.
Lenny & Lucy. Stead. 274.
Leno. Lost & Found. 582.
Lenzi. Stone Field. 362.
Let’s Play! Tullet. 548.
Leveen. Shackled. 154.
Leveller. Durango. 19.
Levithan. You Know Me Well. 527.
Lewin. How to Babysit a Leopard. 34.
Lewis, J. Andy & Sandy’s Anything Adven-
ture. 461.
_____. When Andy Met Sandy. 461.
Lewis, R. Spinning Starlight. 208.
Lie Tree. Hardinge. 417.
Lifeboat Clique. Parks. 370.
Liggett. Blood and Salt. 155.
Light. Swap! 312.
Lightning Queen. Resau. 219.
Like It Never Happened. Adrian. 74.
Lillian’s Right to Vote. Winter. 76.
Lily and Dunkin. Gephart. 518.
Lim. Astrologer’s Daughter. 35.
Lincoln and Kennedy. Barretta. 507.
july/augusT 2016  •  623
Lincoln’s Spymaster. Seiple. 166.
Lindstrom. Not If I See You First. 260.
Linn. Draw the Line. 424.
Lion Lessons. Agee. 504.
Liss. Randoms. 98.
Little Bird’s Bad Word. Grant. 90.
Little Dee and the Penguin. Baldwin. 343.
Little Robot. Hatke. 147.
Lizard Radio. Schmatz. 222.
Lizzie and the Lost Baby. Blackford. 244.
Lo. How It Ends. 583.
Logan. True Letters from a Fictional Life. 
583.
Lois Lane. Bond. 12.
Lola Levine Is Not Mean! Brown. 186.
Lombardo. Stunt Cat to the Stars. 209.
London. Otters Love to Play. 362.
Lonely Ones. Sutton. 440.
Long, M. Super Happy Magic Forest. 363.
Long, S. Magic Mirror. 530.
Long Dog. Seltzer. 111.
Long Run. Bruchac. 513.
Longo. Up to This Pointe. 341.
Look Both Ways. Cherry. 568.
Look Out for the Fitzgerald-Trouts. Spald-
ing. 485.
Lord, C. Handful of Stars. 35.
Lord, E. When We Collided. 477.
Losers Take All. Klass. 152.
Lost. Wilson. 386.
Lost, Found. Arnold. 241.
Lost & Found. Leno. 582.
Lost in the Sun. Graff. 24.
Lottery Boy. Byrne. 407.
Louise Trapeze Is Totally 100% Fearless. 
Ostow. 106.
Love. In Real Life. 364.
Lowitz. Up from the Sea. 364.
Lowriders to the Center of the Earth. 
Camper. 568.
Lu. Rose Society. 260.
Lubar. Sophomores and Other Oxymorons. 
155.
Lucky Boy. Morfit. 368.
Lucy and Linh. Pung. 592.
Luurtsema. Goldfish. 530.
Lyga. After the Red Rain. 99.
Lynch. Boy Who Fell Off the Mayflower. 
209.
Maberry. Orphan Army. 36.
_____. Scary Out There. 531.
Mabry. Fierce and Subtle Poison. 531.
MacIver. Yak and Gnu. 36.
Mackler. Best Friend Next Door. 37.
_____. Infinite in Between. 210.
Macy. Miss Mary Reporting. 313.
Madness So Discreet. McGinnis. 156.
Madonia. Invisible Fault Lines. 425.
Maetani. Ink and Ashes. 37.
Magaziner. Pilfer Academy. 313. 
Maggie and Michael Get Dressed. Fleming. 
517.
Magic Mirror. Long. 530.
Making Friends with Billy Wong. Scat-
tergood. 597.
Malone. Last Boy at St. Edith’s. 313.
Mama Seeton’s Whistle. Spinelli. 56.
Mango, Abuela, and Me. Medina. 156.
Mango & Bambang. Faber. 572.
Mann, J. Albert. Scar. 426.
Mann, Jennifer. I Will Never Get a Star on 
Mrs. Benson’s Blackboard. 99.
Many Lives of John Stone. Buckley-Archer. 
245.
Manzano. Miracle on 133rd Street. 210.
Manzer. Save Me. Kurt Cobain. 365.
March Grand Prix. Soo. 115.
Marciano. Mischief Season. 365. 
Margolis. If I Were You. 38.
Mark of Cain. Barraclough. 456.
Marked. McCaffrey. 366.
Markel. Hillary Rodham Clinton. 314.
Marks. Og’s Ark. 425.
Marr. Seven Black Diamonds. 315.
Marsh. Door by the Staircase. 315.
MARTians. Woolston. 230.
Martin, D. Shh! Bears Sleeping. 316.
Martin, L. Ark Plan. 479.
Marvelous Thing That Came from a 
Spring. Ford. 573.
Marvels. Selznick. 166.
Marvin and the Moths, M. Holm. 524.
Maschari. Remarkable Journey of Charlie 
Price. 366.
Mason-Black. Devil and the Bluebird. 533.
Mason, C. Watchmen of Port Fayt. 100.
Mason, J. Without Annette. 532.
Mason, S. Running Girl. 532.
624  •  The BulleTin
Masterminds, Criminal Destiny. Korman. 
310.
Mata. Kate Walden Directs. 38.
Mathieu. Devoted. 100.
Matter of Heart. Dominy. 19.
Matthews. Fixes. 584.
Matthies. Two Is Enough. 261.
Mattick. Finding Winnie. 261.
Max and Marla. Boiger. 135.
Max Helsing and the Thirteenth Curse. 
Jobling. 255.
May. Vanishing Throne. 533.
May Queen Murders. Jude. 422.
Maybe a Fox. Appelt. 293.
Mayday. Harrington. 520.
Maynor. Ella and Penguin. 316.
McAnulty. Dino Files. 316.
McCaffrey. Marked. 366.
McCarthy, C. You Were Here. 317.
McCarthy, M. Wildest Race Ever. 317.
McClintock. Emma and Julia Love Ballet. 
426.
McClure. Waiting for High Tide. 477.
McCoola. Baba Yaga’s Assistant. 73.
McCreight. Outliers. 478.
McCullough. School for Sidekicks. 101.
McCully. Clara. 584.
McDonnell. Thank You and Good Night. 
262.
McElligott. Weather Disaster. 585.
McGhee. Firefly Hollow. 101.
_____. Maybe a Fox. 293.
_____. Tell Me a Tattoo Story. 478.
McGinnis. Female of the Species. 585.
_____. Madness So Discreet. 156.
McGinty. End of FUN. 427.
McGovern, C. Just My Luck. 366.
_____. Step Toward Falling. 262.
McGovern, K. Rules for 50/50 Chances. 
263.
McIntosh. Burning Midnight. 318.
McIsaac. Boys of Fire and Ash. 38.
McKay. Binny in Secret. 39.
McLemore. Weight of Feathers. 102.
McNamee. Defender. 427.
McNeal. Incident on the Bridge. 428.
McPhail. Beatrix Potter and Her Paint Box. 
263.
Mead. Soundless. 264.
Mechanical Mind of John Coggin. Teele. 
489.
Medina. Burn Baby Burn. 428.
_____. Mango, Abuela, and Me. 156.
Melchior. Golden Compass: Vol. One. 163.
_____. Golden Compass: Vol. Two. 592.
Mellom. Pages between Us. 361.
Memory of Light. Stork. 274.
Memory Wall. Rosen. 594.
Menino. Isol. 129.
Mercy. Furstinger. 467.
Mesrobian. Cut Both Ways. 157.
Messenger. Lee. 207.
Messner. How to Read a Story. 39.
_____. Seventh Wish. 534.
Metcalf. Guide to Sisters. 102.
Meyer. Winter. 211.
Midnight. Greenwood. 25.
Midnight War of Mateo Martinez. Yardi. 
496.
Mighty Odds. Ignatow. 579.
Miller, P. Hole Story of the Doughnut. 479.
_____. Quickest Kid in Clarksville. 429.
_____. Sophie’s Squash Go to School. 586.
Miller, S. Borden Murders. 206.
Mills. Cody Harmon. King of Pets. 534.
_____. Trouble with Ants. 103.
_____. Trouble with Babies. 586.
Mindwalker. Steiger. 58.
Minrs. Sylvester. 225.
Miracle Man. Hendrix. 356.
Miracle on 133rd Street. Manzano. 210.
Miranda. Safest Lies. 480.
Mirror in the Sky. Khorana. 580.
Mischief Season. Marciano. 365. 
Miss Mary Reporting. Macy. 313.
Miss Paul and the President. Robbins. 594.
Missing Millie Benson. Rubini. 271.
Mission Mumbai. Narsimhan. 368.
Mister Cleghorn’s Seal. Kerr. 580.
Mister Max. Voigt. 120.
Mittlefehldt. It Looks Like This. 587.
Miura. Big Princess. 40.
Mixed-Up Truck. Savage. 597.
Miyares. Bring Me a Rock! 535.
Mlynowski. Upside-Down Magic. 211.
Modesto. Revenge and the Wild. 367.
Molk. Eeny, Meeny, Miney, Mo and Flo! 
103.
july/augusT 2016  •  625
Momotaro. Dilloway. 461.
Monkey. Brown. 14.
Monninger. Whippoorwill. 104.
Monster. Myers. 213.
Montanari. My Dog’s a Chicken. 367.
Montgomery, R. Perijee & Me. 587.
Montgomery, S. Great White Shark Scien-
tist. 535.
Moore, M. Fiona. 429.
Moore, W. This Way Home. 212.
More Happy Than Not. Silvera. 54.
Morfit. Lucky Boy. 368.
Moriarty. Tangle of Gold. 318.
Moskowitz. Gena/Finn. 430.
_____. History of Glitter and Blood. 40.
Most Amazing Creature in the Sea. Guiber-
son. 26.
Most Dangerous. Sheinkin. 167.
Most Important Thing. Avi. 403.
Most Wonderful Thing in the World. 
French. 303.
Mr. Postmouse’s Rounds. Dubuc. 85.
Mukherjee. Gemini. 588.
Mummy Makers of Egypt. Bower. 511.
Murakami. Nichiren. 157.
Murdstone Trilogy. Peet. 216.
Murphy, Jim. Breakthrough! 264.
Murphy, Julie. Dumplin’. 212.
Murray. House That Zack Built. 430.
Mutt’s Promise. Salamon. 377.
My Brother Is a Superhero. Solomons. 56.
My Cousin Momo. OHora. 41.
My Diary from the Edge of the World. 
Anderson. 183.
My Dog Is the Best. Thompson. 59.
My Dog’s a Chicken. Montanari. 367.
My House Is Alive! Ritchie. 374.
My House. Barton. 508.
My Life in Pictures. Zemke.  387.
My Life With the Liars. Carter. 347.
My Little Sister and Me. Lam. 528. 
My Old Pal. Oscar. Hest. 523.
My Pet Human. Surovec. 116.
My Second Life. Bird. 243.
My Seneca Village. Nelson. 265.
Myers. Juba! 104.
_____. Monster. 213.
Myracle. Upside-Down Magic. 211.
_____. Wishing Day. 536.
Mystery of Hollow Places. Podos. 372.
Mystery of the Haunted Farm. Dolan. 571.
Nadia. Gray. 575.
Nameless City. Hicks. 357.
Nannestad. When Mischief Came to Town. 
319.
Napoli. Dark Shimmer. 105.
_____. Treasury of Norse Mythology. 213.
Narsimhan. Mission Mumbai. 368.
Naughty List. Fry. 145.
Naylor. Going Where It’s Dark. 369.
Nearer Moon. Crowder. 191.
Nelson. American Ace. 369.
_____. My Seneca Village. 265.
Neri. Tru & Nelle. 431.
Ness. Rest of Us Just Live Here. 105.
Nest. Oppel. 158.
Neumeier. Keeper of the Mist. 431.
Never Missing Never Found. Panitch. 536.
Newman. Ebola. 214.
Newquist. Human Body. 319.
Newt’s Emerald. Nix. 266.
Next to You. Houran. 420.
Nichiren. Murakami. 157.
Nickerson. Secrets of Blueberries. 41.
Nielsen. Night Divided. 214.
_____. Scourge. 588.
Night Divided. Nielsen. 214.
Night Gardener. Fan. 353.
Night of the Living Worms. Coverly. 140.
Night on Fire. Kidd. 152.
Night World. Gerstein. 23.
Nightfall. Halpern. 200.
Nightstruck. Black. 509.
Nijkamp. This Is Where It Ends. 265.
Nine Lives of Jacob Tibbs. Busby. 406.
Ninja! Chung. 459.
Ninja Timmy. Tamm. 226.
Nix. Newt’s Emerald. 266.
No Such Person. Cooney. 17.
No True Echo. Jones. 151.
Noah Webster. Reef. 163.
Nobody Likes a Goblin. Hatke. 453.
Nooks & Crannies. Lawson. 97.
Norriss. Friends for Life. 106.
Not As We Know It. Avery. 507.
Not If I See You First. Lindstrom. 260.
Nothing Bad Is Going to Happen. Hale. 
253.
626  •  The BulleTin
Noyes. Ten Days a Madwoman. 320.
Nytra. Windmill Dragons. 158.
O’Donnell. Case of the Battling Bots. 320.
O’Hearn. Valkyrie. 370.
Oakes. Queen of Hearts. 432.
OCDaniel. King. 423.
Odds of Getting Even. Turnage. 276.
Og’s Ark. Marks. 425.
Ohlin. Consent. 215.
OHora. My Cousin Momo. 41.
Old Wolf. Avi. 132.
Oliver. Curiosity House. 158.
Ollie’s Class Trip. Calmenson. 79.
Olson. What the Dead Want. 480.
On the Edge of Gone. Duyvis. 413.
On the Shoulder of a Giant. Christopher. 
82.
One. Crossan. 190.
One Wish. Harrison. 418.
Only Girl in School. Standiford. 380.
Only Thing Worse Than Me Is You. Ander-
son. 455. 
Oona Finds an Egg. Griffin. 253.
Oops Pounce Quick Run! Twohy. 441.
Oppel. Nest. 158.
Orbiting Jupiter. Schmidt. 165.
Orgill. Jazz Day. 432.
Original Fake. Cronn-Mills. 411.
Orphan Army. Maberry. 36.
Orpheus in the Underworld. Pommaux. 
44.
Osborne. This Land Is Our Land. 481.
Ostow. Louise Trapeze Is Totally 100% 
Fearless. 106.
Ostrovski. Away We Go. 321.
Otters Love to Play. London. 362.
Out of the Woods. Bond. 3.
Outlaws of Time. Wilson. 495.
Outliers. McCreight. 478.
Outrun the Moon. Lee. 530.
Page. Chicken Followed Me Home! 42.
_____. Flying Frogs and Walking Fish. 
525.
_____. How to Swallow a Pig. 94.
Pages between Us. Leavitt. 361.
Paige. Stealing Snow. 589.
Painchaud. Pretending to Be Erica. 107.
Palacio. Auggie & Me. 159.
Panitch. Damage Done. 107.
_____. Never Missing Never Found. 536.
Papademetriou. Tale of Highly Unusual 
Magic. 159.
Paper Wishes. Sepahban. 325.
Park. Wing & Claw. 433.
_____. Yaks Yak. 433.
Parker, N. Behold the Bones. 321.
Parker, S. Girl Who Fell. 434.
Parks. Lifeboat Clique. 370.
Parr. Adventures with Waffles. 42.
Parry. Turn of the Tide. 371.
Pasadena. Smith. 600.
Passenger. Bracken. 244.
Passion of Dolssa. Berry. 405.
Patent. Call of the Osprey. 43.
Patrick. Finding Someplace. 108.
Patterson. Jacky Ha-Ha. 434.
Paul. Plan. 266.
Paulson. Dead upon a Time. 108.
Pax. Pennypacker. 22.
Payne. Thing about Leftovers. 589.
Peacock. Dark Missions of Edgar Brim. 
537.
Pearlman. Groundhog’s Day Off. 322.
Pear Violin. Bingbo. 565.
Pearsall. Seventh Most Important Thing. 
160.
Peas and Carrots. Davis. 412.
Peck. Best Man. 590.
Peddler’s Road. Cody. 139.
Peet, A. Dear Santa. 215.
Peet, M. Murdstone Trilogy. 216.
Peevyhouse. Where Futures End. 371.
Penney. Eleven and Holding. 481.
Pennypacker. Pax. 322.
Perijee & Me. Montgomery. 587.
Perkins, L. Frank and Lucky Get Schooled. 
503.
Perkins, S. Summer Days and Summer 
Nights. 435.
Petty. Fall of the House of West. 160.
Phelan. Snow White. 590.
Philbrick. Big Dark. 267.
Piece of Home. Watts. 605.
Pieces of Why. Going. 198.
Pig and Pug. Berry. 10.
Pig Is Big on Books. Florian. 197.
Pilfer Academy. Magaziner. 313. 
Pingk. Samurai Santa. 216.
july/augusT 2016  •  627
Pink Is for Blobfish. Keating. 359.
Pinkney. Rhythm Ride. 217.
Pinkwater. Bear and Bunny. 323.
Piper Green and the Fairy Tree. Potter. 161.
Pitcher. Silence Is Goldfish. 538.
Pittman. Red’s Planet. 372.
Pizzoli. Good Night Owl. 538.
_____. Templeton Gets His Wish. 43.
Placebo Junkies. Carleson. 187.
Places No One Knows. Yovanoff. 445.
Plan. Paul. 266.
Please Open This Book! Lehrhaupt. 208.
Poblocki. Gathering. 591.
Pocket Full of Murder. Anderson. 131.
Podos. Mystery of Hollow Places. 372.
Poe Estate. Shulman. 168.
Poison Is Not Polite. Stevens. 486.
Pommaux. Orpheus in the Underworld. 
44.
Ponti. Framed! 539.
Poor Little Guy. Allen. 563.
Pope. Fall of the House of West. 160.
Poptropica. Chabert. 348.
Porcupine of Truth. Konigsberg. 96.
Portis. Wait. 109.
Poskitt. Agatha Parrot and the Odd Street 
School Ghost. 539.
Possibility of Now. Culbertson. 300.
Potter, D. Abe Lincoln and the Selfie That 
Saved the Union. 267.
Potter, E. Piper Green and the Fairy Tree. 
161.
_____. Too Much Good Luck. 161.
Potter, G. This Is My Dollhouse. 540.
Pounder. Witch Wars. 268.
Powerless. Childs. 80.
Prap. Dinosaurs? 44.
Pratchett. Shepherd’s Crown. 162.
Preble. It Wasn’t Always Like This. 435.
Preller. Courage Test. 591.
_____. Fall. 217.
Pretending to Be Erica. Painchaud. 107.
Preus. Bamboo Sword. 162.
_____. Enchantment Lake. 45.
Price. Dead Investigation. 268.
Priest. I Am Princess X. 45.
Prince without a Kingdom. de Fombelle. 
142.
Princess and the Pony. Beaton. 8
Princess DisGrace. Kuenzler. 474.
Prisoners of Breendonk. Deem. 193.
Pugs of the Frozen North. Reeve. 269.
Pullman. Golden Compass: Vol. One. 163.
_____. Golden Compass: Vol. Two. 592.
Pung. Lucy and Linh. 592.
Putting the Monkeys to Bed. Choldenko. 
17.
Pyramid Hunters. Vegas. 550.
Quackers. Wong. 445.
Queen of Hearts. Oakes. 432.
Quick. Every Exquisite Thing. 481.
Quickest Kid in Clarksville. Miller. 429.
Quinn. Down with the Shine. 372.
Rabb. Kissing in America. 46.
Raczka. Wet Cement. 373. 
Radiant Road. Catmull. 348.
Ragweed’s Farm Dog Handbook. Kennedy. 
31.
Raised by Wolves. Chapman. 80.
Raising Rufus. Fulk. 87.
Randoms. Liss. 98.
Rappaport. Elizabeth Started All the 
Trouble. 373. 
_____. Frederick’s Journey. 269.
Rash. Archie the Daredevil Penguin. 218.
Raven King. Stiefvater. 439.
Ravenous. Connolly. 300.
Ravenswood. Fearsome Foursome. 540.
Ravishankar. Captain Coconut & the Case 
of the Missing Bananas. 46.
Ray, D. Finding Fortune. 218.
Ray, M. Goodnight, Good Dog. 269.
Raymie Nightingale. DiCamillo. 412.
Read Me Like a Book. Kessler. 526.
Reagan. How to Catch Santa. 218.
Rebel, Bully, Geek, Pariah. Lange. 312.
Rebel of the Sands. Hamilton. 416.
Red. Shurtliff. 438.
Red’s Planet. Pittman. 372.
Reed. Keep Me in Mind. 482.
Reef. Noah Webster. 163.
Reeve. Cakes in Space. 46.
_____. Pugs of the Frozen North. 269.
Reichardt. Underwater. 374.
Reign of Shadows. Jordan. 310.
Remarkable Journey of Charlie Price. 
Maschari. 366.
Resau. Lightning Queen. 219.
628  •  The BulleTin
Rescue Squad No. 9. Austin. 564.
Rest of Us Just Live Here. Ness. 105.
Reuter. Square Root of Summer. 436.
Revenge and the Wild. Modesto. 367.
Revis. World Without You. 540.
Rex. School’s First Day of School. 593.
Reynolds. As Brave as You. 541.
Rhodes. Bayou Magic. 47.
_____. Towers Falling. 542.
Rhythm Ride. Pinkney. 217.
Ribar. Rocks Fall Everyone Dies. 482.
Richards. Secrets of Valhalla. 270.
Riddle in Ruby. Davis. 192.
Rig. Ducie. 195.
Riordan. Hidden Oracle. 593.
_____. Sword of Summer. 270.
Rise of the Robot Army. Venditti. 550.
Rissi. Anna, Banana, and the Friendship 
Split. 48.
Ritchie. My House Is Alive! 374.
River Runs Deep. Bradbury. 13.
Rivers. Girl in the Well Is Me. 375.
Robinson. Beginner’s Guide to Bear Spot-
ting. 323. 
Robbins. Miss Paul and the President. 594.
Rock. Klickitat. 375.
Rocks Fall Everyone Dies. Ribar. 482.
Rockwell. Bird Is a Bird. 48.
Rogers. Crossing the Line. 541.
Rollins. Burning. 376.
Rosa. When the Slave Esperança Garcia 
Wrote a Letter. 219.
Rose Society. Lu. 260.
Rosemary Spell. Zimmerman. 279.
Rosen, L. Memory Wall. 594.
_____. Woundabout. 49.
Rosen, M. Great Big Cuddle. 164.
_____. Tale of Rescue. 271.
Rosenberg. What James Said. 49.
Rosengren. Cold War on Maplewood 
Street. 164.
Rosenstock. Dorothea’s Eyes. 436.
Rossell. Withering By Sea. 376.
Rozier. Jackrabbit McCabe & the Electric 
Telegraph. 220.
Rubin. Hot Pink. 109.
_____. Sondheim. 220.
Rubini. Missing Millie Benson. 271.
Ruby Lee & Me. Hitchcock. 308.
Rudden. Knights of the Borrowed Dark. 
595.
Rudnick. It’s All Your Fault. 272.
Rules. Holder. 28.
Rules for 50/50 Chances. McGovern. 263.
Rules for Stealing Stars. Haydu. 148.
Run. Keplinger. 526.
Rundell. Wolf Wilder. 50.
Running Girl. Mason. 532.
Russo. If I Was Your Girl. 483.
Rutkoski. Winner’s Kiss. 595.
Sabotage. Bascomb. 509.
Sacajawea. Krull. 33.
Sachar. Fuzzy Mud. 50.
Safest Lie. Cerrito. 246.
Safest Lies. Miranda. 480.
Saga of Gudrid the Far-Traveler. Brown. 78.
Salamon. Mutt’s Promise. 377.
Salisbury. Sleeping Prince. 596.
Salt to the Sea. Sepetys. 326.
Samphire. Secrets of the Dragon Tomb. 
377.
Samurai Rising. Turner. 383.
Samurai Santa. Pingk. 216.
Sands. Blackthorn Key. 221.
Santat. Are We There Yet? 437.
Sarah. Big Friends. 324.
Sauer. Ginny Louise and the School Show-
down. 51.
_____. I Love Cake! 543.
Saunders. Five Children on the Western 
Front. 596.
Savage, K. After the Woods. 324.
Savage, S. Mixed-Up Truck. 597.
_____. Where’s Walrus? And Penguin? 110.
Save Me a Seat. Weeks. 443.
Save Me, Kurt Cobain. Manzer. 365.
Saving Montgomery Sole. Tamaki. 488.
Savit. Anna and the Swallow Man. 291.
Saxon. Almost King. 597.
Say. Inker’s Shadow. 221.
Scanlon. Great Good Summer. 51.
Scar. Mann. 426.
Scarlett Epstein Hates It Here. Breslaw. 
459.
Scary Out There. Maberry. 531.
Scattergood. Making Friends with Billy 
Wong. 597.
Schiffer. Stella Brings the Family. 52.
july/augusT 2016  •  629
Schlitz. Hired Girl. 110.
Schmatz. Lizard Radio. 222.
Schmidt, T. Break Me Like a Promise. 484.
Schmidt, G. Orbiting Jupiter. 165.
Schneider. Extraordinary Means. 52.
Scholastic Discover More: Hurricane 
Katrina. Callery. 15.
School for Sidekicks. McCullough. 101.
School for Unusual Girls. Baldwin. 6.
School of the Dead. Avi.  456.
School’s First Day of School. Rex. 593.
Schreiber. Con Academy. 111.
Schroeder. Girl in the Tower.  378.
Schulz. Hook’s Revenge. 165.
Schwartz. I Can’t Wait! 272.
Scorpion Rules. Bow. 185.
Scott. Titans. 325.
Scourge. Nielsen. 588.
Sea Change. Viva. 490.
Sea Rex. Idle. 29.
Search for Baby Ruby. Shreve. 53.
Secret Agent Man Goes Shopping for 
Shoes. Wynne-Jones. 552.
Secret Coders. Yang. 174.
Secret Cookie Club. Freeman. 22.
Secret Destiny of Pixie Piper. Fisher. 466.
Secret Subway. Corey. 399.
Secret Tree Fort. Farley. 465.
Secrets of Blueberries. Nickerson. 41.
Secrets of Selkie Bay. Thomas. 59.
Secrets of Solace. Johnson. 422.
Secrets of the Dragon Tomb. Samphire. 
377.
Secrets of Valhalla. Richards. 270.
See No Color. Gibney. 306.
Seiple. Lincoln’s Spymaster. 166.
Self. Drag Teen. 484.
Seltzer. Long Dog. 111.
Selzer. Just Kill Me. 598.
Selznick. Marvels. 166.
Senzai. Ticket to India. 222.
Sepahban. Paper Wishes. 325.
Sepetys. Salt to the Sea. 326.
Serafina and the Black Cloak. Beatty. 9.
Serpent King. Zentner. 388.
Seven Black Diamonds. Marr. 315.
Seven Second Delay. Easton. 20.
Seventh Most Important Thing. Pearsall. 
160.
Seventh Wish. Messner. 534.
Sewing Stories. Herkert. 254.
Shackled. Leveen. 154.
Shade Me. Brown. 245.
Shadow behind the Stars. Hahn. 199.
Shadow Magic. Khan. 473.
Shadows of the Dark Crystal. Lee. 529.
Shallow Graves. Wallace. 276.
Shaughnessy. Entirely True Story of the 
Unbelievable FIB. 167.
Shea. Ballet Cat: Dance! Dance! Under-
pants! 378.
_____. Ballet Cat: The Totally Secret 
Secret. 52.
Sheehan. I Woke Up Dead at the Mall. 
326.
Sheff. Harmony House. 378.
Sheinkin. Most Dangerous. 167.
Sheinmel, A. Faceless. 223.
Sheinmel, C. Edgewater. 112.
Sheldon. Truth about My Success. 112.
Shelton. Thirteen Chairs. 113.
Shepherd. Hunt. 598.
Shepherd’s Crown. Pratchett. 162.
Shevah. Dara Palmer’s Major Drama. 599.
_____. Dream On, Amber. 273.
Shh! Bears Sleeping. Martin. 316.
Showalter. Firstlife. 437.
Shreve. Search for Baby Ruby. 53.
Shulman. Poe Estate. 168.
Shurtliff. Red. 438.
Shusterman. Hawking’s Hallway. 543.
Siegal. Emma Is on the Air: Big News! 53.
Silence Is Goldfish. Pitcher. 538.
Silver in the Blood. George. 88.
Silvera. More Happy Than Not. 54.
Silvey. Untamed. 54.
Simpson. Unicorn vs. Goblins. 327. 
Simukka. As Black as Ebony. 113.
Singer. Echo Echo. 379. 
Sirowy. Creeping. 114.
_____. Telling. 544.
Sís. Ice Cream Summer. 55.
Six. Vaughan. 62.
Six Dots . Bryant. 566.
Six Impossible Things. Wood. 173.
Six of Crows. Bardugo. 132.
Siy. Spidermania. 223.
Skeleton Tree. Lawrence. 259.
630  •  The BulleTin
Sky Is Falling! Teague. 116.
Skye. Crown’s Game. 485.
Slasher Girls & Monster Boys. Tucholke. 
119.
Sleeping Prince. Salisbury. 596.
Sliver of Stardust. Burt. 137.
Small Madness. Touchell. 489.
Smelcer. Stealing Indians. 599.
Smell of Other People’s Houses. Hitchcock. 
419.
Smiley. Twenty Yawns. 544.
Smith, A. Way I Used to Be. 438.
Smith, E. All Better Now. 439.
Smith, Lane. There Is a Tribe of Kids. 545.
Smith, Lindsay. Dreamstrider. 168.
Smith, R. Hoodoo. 114.
Smith, S. Pasadena. 600.
_____. Toymaker’s Apprentice. 224.
Snappsy the Alligator Did Not Ask to Be in 
This Book! Falatko. 352.
Snow. Last Place on Earth. 327.
Snow Job. Benoit. 344.
Snow White. Phelan. 590.
Soar. Bauer. 296.
Soar. Wymer. 605.
Solomons. My Brother Is a Superhero. 56.
Solving the Puzzle Under the Sea. Burleigh. 
298.
Some Kind of Happiness. Legrand. 476.
Somewhat True Adventures of Sammy 
Shine. Cole. 409.
Somewhere Among. Donwerth-Chikamat-
su. 462.
Sommerset. Baa Baa Smart Sheep. 328.
Sondheim. Rubin. 220.
Song for Ella Grey. Almond. 130
Sonnenblick. Falling over Sideways. 600.
Sonya’s Chickens. Wahl. 172.
Soo. March Grand Prix. 115.
Sophie Quire and the Last Storyguard. 
Auxier. 402.
Sophomores and Other Oxymorons. Lubar. 
155.
Sophie’s Squash Go to School. Miller. 586.
Sound of Life and Everything. Van Dolzer. 
61.
Soundless. Mead. 264.
South of Sunshine. Elmendorf. 464.
Space Dog. Grey. 252.
Space Dumplins. Thompson. 170.
Spalding. Look Out for the Fitzgerald-
Trouts. 485.
Spidermania. Siy. 223.
Spinale. Everland. 545.
Spinelli. Mama Seeton’s Whistle. 56.
Spinning Starlight. Lewis. 208.
Spirit Week Showdown. Allen. 342.
Splashdance. Starin. 601.
Spotswood. Tyranny of Petticoats. 379.
Spradlin. Into the Killing Seas. 56.
Spratt. Friday Barnes. 273.
Springstubb. Cody and the Mysteries of the 
Universe. 380. 
_____. Every Single Second. 601.
Square Root of Summer. Reuter. 436.
Stampler. How to Disappear. 546.
Standiford. Only Girl in School. 380.
Star-Touched Queen. Chokshi. 408.
Starflight. Landers. 311.
Starin. Splashdance. 601.
Stars Never Rise. Vincent. 63.
State of Grace. Badger. 75.
Staub. Time for Earth School, Dewey Dew. 
602.
Stead, P. Lenny & Lucy. 274.
Stead, R. Goodbye Stranger. 57.
Steep & Thorny Way. Winters. 332.
Stealing Indians. Smelcer. 599.
Stealing Snow. Paige. 589.
Steggall. Colors. 224.
Steiger. Mindwalker. 58.
Stein. Granddaddy’s Turn. 76.
Stella Brings the Family. Schiffer. 52.
Step Toward Falling. McGovern. 262.
Stevens. Poison Is Not Polite. 486.
Steveson. Swing Sideways. 486.
Stick. Harmon. 27.
Stick Cat. Watson. 492.
Sticks & Stones. Cooper. 569.
Stiefvater. Anatomy of Curiosity. 225.
_____. Raven King. 439.
Still a Work in Progress. Knowles. 581.
Sting. Watson. 604.
Stohl. Black Widow. 169.
Stokes. Frank and Laverne. 493.
Stone. House That Jane Built. 58. 
Stone Field. Lenzi. 362.
Stop Following Me, Moon! Farrell. 466.
july/augusT 2016  •  631
Stork. Memory of Light. 274.
Story of Diva and Flea. Willems. 277.
Storyteller. Turk. 603.
Stout. Tiny Piece of Sky. 328.
Strand. Greatest Zombie Movie Ever. 381.
Strange Light Afar. Umezawa. 227.
Strasser. Beast of Cretacea. 169.
Stratton. Dogs. 115.
Street. You’re Pulling My Leg! 487.
Strohmeyer. This Is My Brain on Boys. 
546.
Stunt Cat to the Stars. Lombardo. 209.
Sturm. Gryphons Aren’t So Great. 170.
Suffer Love. Blake. 510.
Suffering. Chupeco. 188.
Suicide Notes from Beautiful Girls. Wein-
garten. 64.
Sullivan. Bitter Side of Sweet. 328.
Summer Days and Summer Nights. Per-
kins. 435.
Summer of Lost and Found. Behrens. 404.
Summerlost. Condie. 349.
Sun. Heir to the Sky. 547.
Sunny Side Up. Holm. 92.
Super Gear. Swanson. 547.
Super Happy Magic Forest. Long. 363.
Super Jumbo. Koehler. 424. 
Superheroes Don’t Eat Veggie Burgers. 
Kelley. 257.
Surovec. My Pet Human. 116.
Survival Strategies of the Almost Brave. 
White. 121.
Sutcliffe. Concentr8. 275.
Sutton. Lonely Ones. 440.
Svingen. Ballad of a Broken Nose. 487.
Swallow. Blue in the Face. 329.
Swanson. Super Gear. 547.
Swap! Light. 312.
Sweaterweather. Varon. 330.
Sweet. Laybourne. 34.
Sweet Home Alaska. Dagg. 350.
Sweet Madness. Leaver. 206.
Swing Sideways. Steveson. 486.
Switch. Law. 154.
Sword of Summer. Riordan. 270.
Sylvander. Battle of the Vegetables. 381.
Sylvester. Minrs. 225.
Symphony for the City of the Dead. 
Anderson. 75.
Symptoms of Being Human. Garvin. 304.
Take the Fall. Hainsworth. 307.
Tale of Highly Unusual Magic. Papademe-
triou. 159.
Tale of Rescue. Rosen. 271.
Tales of Westerford. Womach. 551.
Talking Leaves. Bruchac. 566.
Tamaki. Saving Montgomery Sole. 488.
Tamm. Ninja Timmy. 226.
Tangle of Gold. Moriarty. 318.
Tangled Webs. Bross. 14.
Tash. Geek’s Guide to Unrequited Love. 
488.
Taste for Monsters. Kirby. 581.
Tavares. Crossing Niagara. 489.
Taylor. Thieving Weasels. 602.
Teague, D. Connect the Stars. 193.
_____. Henry Cicada’s Extraordinary 
Elktonium Escapade. 275.
Teague, M. Sky Is Falling! 116.
Teckentrup. Get Out of My Bath! 116.
Teddy Mars: Almost a Winner. Burnham. 
406.
Teele. Mechanical Mind of John Coggin. 
489.
Telgemeier. Ghosts. 603.
Tell Me a Tattoo Story. McGhee. 478.
Tell the Wind and Fire. Brennan. 345.
Telling. Sirowy. 544.
Templeton Gets His Wish. Pizzoli. 43.
Ten Days a Madwoman. Noyes. 320.
Ten Kisses for Sophie! Wells. 492.
Terrible Typhoid Mary. Bartoletti. 7.
Terror at Bottle Creek. Key. 258.
Thank You and Good Night. McDonnell. 
262.
Thanks for the Trouble. Wallach. 330.
That’s (Not) Mine. Kang. 151.
That’s Not Bunny! Barton. 344.
There Is a Tribe of Kids. Smith. 545.
There’s a Giraffe in My Soup. Burach. 297.
These Shallow Graves. Donnelly. 143.
Thicker Than Water. Fiore. 250.
Thickety. White. 277.
Thieving Weasels. Taylor. 602.
Thing about Jellyfish. Benjamin. 184.
Thing about Leftovers. Payne. 589.
Things Too Huge to Fix by Saying Sorry. 
Vaught. 549.
632  •  The BulleTin
Thirteen Chairs. Shelton. 113.
This Bridge Will Not Be Gray. Eggers. 239.
This Is My Brain on Boys. Strohmeyer. 
546.
This Is My Dollhouse. Potter. 540.
This Is My Home, This Is My School. 
Bean. 242.
This Is Where It Ends. Nijkamp. 265.
This Land Is Our Land. Osborne. 481.
This Monstrous Thing. Lee. 98.
This Raging Light. Laure. 361.
This Way Home. Moore. 212.
Thomas, K. Darkest Corners. 382.
Thomas, L. Because You’ll Never Meet Me. 
117.
Thomas, S. Secrets of Selkie Bay. 59.
Thompson, C. Space Dumplins. 170.
Thompson, H. Falling into the Dragon’s 
Mouth. 382.
Thompson, L. My Dog Is the Best. 59.
Thomson. Deadly Flowers. 440.
_____. Eureka Key. 441.
Thousand Nights. Johnston. 256.
Thrash. Honor Girl. 170.
Three Truths and a Lie. Hartinger. 521.
Thunder Boy Jr. Alexie. 505.
Ticket to India. Senzai. 222.
Tiger and Badger. Jenkins. 358.
Time for Earth School, Dewey Dew. Staub. 
602.
Time Stoppers. Jones. 471.
Tiny Piece of Sky. Stout. 328.
Tiny Pretty Things. Charaipotra. 16.
Tiny Stitches. Hooks. 578.
Titans. Scott. 325.
Tolstikova. Year Without Mom. 171.
Tomb Robber and King Tut. Gauch. 22.
Tonatiuh. Funny Bones. 117.
Too Much Good Luck. Potter. 161.
Took. Hahn. 147.
Tortoise and the Soldier. Foreman. 303.
Toten. Beware That Girl. 548.
Touchell. Small Madness. 489.
Tougas. Finders Keepers. 226.
Towell. Charlie and the Grandmothers. 
118.
Towers Falling. Rhodes. 542.
Townley. Bitter Magic. 275.
Toymaker’s Apprentice. 224.
Toys Meet Snow. Jenkins. 181.
Traitor Angels. Blankman. 510.
Transatlantic Conspiracy. Falksen. 464.
Trasler. Bathtime for Chickies. 60.
Treasury of Norse Mythology. Napoli. 213.
Trevayne. Accidental Afterlife of Thomas 
Marsden. 60.
Tromly. Trouble Is a Friend of Mine. 118.
Trouble in Me. Gantos. 87.
Trouble Is a Friend of Mine. Tromly. 118.
Trouble the Water. Dowell. 463.
Trouble with Ants. Mills. 103.
Trouble with Babies. Mills. 586.
Troyer. Dear Santa. 215.
Tru & Nelle. Neri. 431.
True Letters from a Fictional Life. Logan. 
583.
Truth. Johnston. 309.
Truth about My Success. Sheldon. 112.
Tucholke. Slasher Girls & Monster Boys. 
119.
_____. Wink Poppy Midnight. 382.
Tullet. Let’s Play! 548.
Tumbling. Carter. 514.
Turn of the Tide. Parry. 371.
Turnage. Odds of Getting Even. 276.
Turnbloom. Dream Jumper. 415.
Turner. Samurai Rising. 383.
Turk. Storyteller. 603.
Twenty Questions for Gloria. Bedford. 403.
Twenty Yawns. Smiley. 544.
Two for Joy. Amateau. 5.
Two Is Enough. Matthies. 261.
Two White Rabbits. Buitrago. 246.
Twohy. Oops Pounce Quick Run! 441.
Tyranny of Petticoats. Spotswood. 379.
Tyre. Last in a Long Line of Rebels. 227.
Umezawa. Strange Light Afar. 227.
Umminger. American Girls. 604.
Unbecoming. Downham. 248.
Underdogs. Farrar. Hammel. 416.
Undertow. Buckley. 15.
Underwater. Reichardt. 374.
Underwood. Here Comes the Tooth Fairy 
Cat. 61.
_____. Here Comes Valentine Cat. 329.
Unicorn vs. Goblins. Simpson. 327. 
Unidentified Suburban Object. Jung. 471.
Unquiet. Everett. 144.
july/augusT 2016  •  633
Untamed. Silvey. 54.
Until We Meet Again. Collins. 189.
Untwine. Danticat. 192.
Unusual Chickens for the Exceptional 
Poultry Farmer. Jones. 29.
Up from the Sea. Lowitz. 364.
Up to This Pointe. Longo. 341.
Uprooted. Banks. 295.
Upside-Down Magic. Mlynowski. 211.
Urban. Weekends with Max and His Dad. 
549.
V-Word. Keyser. 258.
Valkyrie. O’Hearn. 370.
Valle. 101 Movies to See Before You Grow 
Up. 227.
Van Dolzer. Sound of Life and Everything. 
61.
Van Haeringen. Coco and the Little Black 
Dress. 228.
Vande Velde. 23 Minutes. 384.
VanDerwater. Every Day Birds. 384.
Vanished. Cooper. 82.
Vanishing Throne. May. 533.
Varadarajan. Save Me a Seat. 443.
Varon. Sweaterweather. 330.
Vaughan. Six. 62.
Vaught. Things Too Huge to Fix by Saying 
Sorry. 549.
Vegas. Pyramid Hunters. 550.
Velvet Undercover. Brown. 186.
Venditti. Attack of the Alien Horde. 62.
_____. Rise of the Robot Army. 550.
Verano. Diary of a Haunting. 119.
Vernick. First Grade Dropout. 62.
_____. I Won a What? 490.
_____. Kid from Diamond Street. 385.
Vernon. Hamster Princess. 171.
Very Little Cinderella. Heapy. 254.
Viguie. The Rules. 28.
Vincent. Stars Never Rise. 63.
Violent Ends. Hutchinson. 202.
Viva. Sea Change. 490.
Vivian Apple Needs a Miracle. Coyle. 83.
Voice of Freedom. Weatherford. 172.
Voigt. Mister Max. 120.
Voskuil. Horus and the Curse of Everlast-
ing Regret. 551.
Vrettos. Best Friends For Never. 491.
W Is for Webster. Fern. 302.
Wahl. Sonya’s Chickens. 172.
Wait. Portis. 109.
Waiting. Henkes. 200.
Waiting for Augusta. Lawson. 529.
Waiting for High Tide. McClure. 477.
Walk on Earth a Stranger. Carson. 187.
Wallace. Shallow Graves. 276.
Wallach. Thanks for the Trouble. 330.
Walliams. Demon Dentist. 331.
Wallmark. Ada Byron Lovelace and the 
Thinking Machine. 228.
Walton, R. Girl & Gorilla. 442.
Walton, W. Anything Could Happen. 63.
Ward. Bleeding Earth. 120.
Warman. World Beneath. 442.
Warrior and the Mustache of Destiny. 
Kochalka. 360.
Wass. Cresswell Plot. 491.
Watched. Budhos. 567.
Watchmen of Port Fayt. Mason. 100.
Watson, J. Sting. 604.
Watson, T. Stick Cat. 492.
Watts. Piece of Home. 605.
Wax. Damico. 570.
Way I Used to Be. Smith. 438.
We Are the Ants. Hutchinson. 255.
We Were Never Here. Gilmore. 519.
We Will Not Be Silent. Freedman. 415.
We’ll Never Be Apart. Jean. 202.
Weather Disaster. McElligott. 585.
Weatherford. Voice of Freedom. 172.
_____. You Can Fly. 443.
Weekends with Max and His Dad. Urban. 
549.
Weeks. Save Me a Seat. 443.
Weight of Feathers. McLemore. 102.
Weingarten. Suicide Notes from Beautiful 
Girls. 64.
Wells, D. Bluescreen. 331.
Wells, Robison. Dark Energy. 332.
Wells, Rosemary. Ten Kisses for Sophie! 
492.
West. Dreamers Often Lie. 385.
Westerfeld. Zeroes. 229.
Wet Cement. Raczka. 373. 
Whaley. Highly Illogical Behavior. 493.
Whamond. Frank and Laverne. 493.
What Degas Saw. Friedman. 573.
What Elephants Know. Dinerstein. 462.
634  •  The BulleTin
What James Said. Rosenberg. 49.
What the Dead Want. Olson. 480.
When Friendship Followed Me Home. 
Griffin. 468.
When Green Becomes Tomatoes. Fogliano. 
414.
When Mischief Came to Town. Nannestad. 
319.
When Sophie’s Feelings Are Really, Really 
Hurt. Bang. 241.
When Spring Comes. Henkes. 469.
When the Slave Esperança Garcia Wrote a 
Letter. Rosa. 219.
When We Collided. Lord. 477.
Where Did My Clothes Come From? But-
terworth. 79.
Where Futures End. Peevyhouse. 371.
Where’s the BaBOOn? Escoffier. 249.
Where’s Walrus? And Penguin? Savage. 
110.
Whippoorwill. Monninger. 104.
Whisper to Me. Lake. 475.
White, K. And I Darken. 494.
White, J. A. Thickety. 277.
White, Jen. Survival Strategies of the 
Almost Brave. 121.
Who’s Hungry? Hacohen. 146.
Whoosh! Barton. 508.
Wicks. Human Body Theater. 229.
Wiener Strikes Back. Brallier. 512.
Wild Robot. Brown. 405.
Wildest Race Ever. McCarthy. 317.
Will Wilder. Arroyo. 402.
Willa. Ehrlich. 571.
Willems. I Really Like Slop! 230.
_____. Story of Diva and Flea. 277.
_____. I Will Take a Nap! 64.
Willful Machines. Floreen. 196.
William and the Witch’s Riddle. Crum. 
570.
William Hoy Story. Churnin. 408.
Williamson. Art of Being Normal. 494.
Wilson, J. Lost. 386.
Wilson, N. Outlaws of Time. 495.
Winchell. Been There. Done That. 278.
Windmill Dragons. Nytra. 158.
Wing & Claw. Park. 433.
Winick. Hilo: Saving the Whole Wide 
World. 444.
_____. Hilo: The Boy Who Crashed to 
Earth. 173.
Wink Poppy Midnight. Tucholke. 382.
Winner’s Kiss. Rutkoski. 595.
Winter. Hillary. 314.
_____. How Jelly Roll Morton Invented 
Jazz. 65.
_____. Lillian’s Right to Vote. 76.
_____. You Never Heard of Casey Stengel?! 
386. 
Winter. Meyer. 211.
Winter Place. Yates. 278.
Winters. Steep & Thorny Way. 332.
Wirewalker. Hall. 576.
Wishing Day. Myracle. 536.
Witch Hunter. Boecker. 11.
Witch Wars. Pounder. 268.
With Malice. Cook. 569.
Withering by Sea. Rossell. 376.
Without Annette. Mason. 532.
Wolf by Wolf. Graudin. 199.
Wolf Camp. Zuill. 553.
Wolf Hollow. Wolk. 495.
Wolf Wilder. Rundell. 50.
Wolf’s Boy. Beckhorn. 564.
Wolk. Wolf Hollow. 495.
Woltz. Hundred Hours of Night. 444.
Womach. Tales of Westerford. 551.
Wong. Quackers. 445.
Wood. Six Impossible Things. 173.
Wooden Prince. Bemis. 296.
Woollett. Big Top Burning. 65.
Woolston. MARTians. 230.
World Beneath. Warman. 442.
World from Up Here. Galante. 518.
World Without You. Revis. 540.
Worlds of Ink and Shadow. Coakley. 247.
Worm Loves Worm. Austrian. 294.
Worms for Breakfast. Becker. 457.
Worst Class Trip Ever. Barry. 7.
Woundabout. Rosen. 49.
Wung-Sung. Last Execution. 387.
Wymer. Soar. 605.
Wynne-Jones. Emperor of Any Place. 174.
_____. Secret Agent Man Goes Shopping 
for Shoes. 552.
Yak and Gnu. MacIver. 36.
Yaks Yak. Park. 433.
Yang. Secret Coders. 174.
july/augusT 2016  •  635
Yard War. Kitchings. 203.
Yardi. Midnight War of Mateo Martinez. 
496.
Yates. Winter Place. 278.
Year Without Mom. Tolstikova. 171.
Yoon, N. Everything, Everything. 231.
Yoon, S. Duck, Duck, Porcupine! 552.
You and Me and Him. Dinnison. 84.
You Can Fly. Weatherford. 443.
You Can’t See the Elephants. Kreller. 205.
You Know Me Well. LaCour. 527.
You Never Heard of Casey Stengel?! Win-
ter. 386. 
You Were Here. McCarthy. 317.
You’re Pulling My Leg! Street. 487.
Young. Hotel Ruby. 231.
Yovanoff. Anatomy of Curiosity. 225.
_____. Places No One Knows. 445.
Zahler. Baker’s Magic. 387.
Zemke. My Life in Pictures. 387.
Zentner. Serpent King. 388.
Zero Day. Gangsei. 251.
Zeroes. Westerfeld. 229.
Zimmerman. Rosemary Spell. 279.
Zuill. Wolf Camp. 553.
 
To order
Call 630.571.4520; fax 708.876.5598; e-mail info@childlitassn.
org; visit us online at www.childlitassn.org; or write ChLA at 
1301 W. 22nd St., Suite 202, Oak Brook, IL 60523.
Not  
child’s play.
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief 
Amanda Cockrell, Editor 
Hollins UniversiTy
Encouraging serious scholarship and research, 
Children’s Literature publishes theoretically-based 
articles that address key issues in the field. Each 
volume includes articles, essays, and abstracts 
of dissertations of note. Children’s Literature is 
the annual publication of the Modern Language 
Association Division on Children’s Literature and the 
Children’s Literature Association (ChLA). 
Published annually in May for the Modern Language Association 
Division on Children’s Literature, the Children’s Literature 
Association, and Hollins University. Volume 44 (2016).  
ISSN 0092-8208; E-ISSN 1543-3374.
childreN’s literature
Individual and institutional 
subscription is one of many benefits of 
membership to the ChLA.
Library and Information Science:
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Library Trends ISSN: 0024-2594 / E-ISSN: 1559-0682
Portal: Libraries and the Academy ISSN: 1531-2542 / E-ISSN: 1530-7131
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
To us, the role of libraries and the 
future of information science clicks.
ONLINE REFERENCE RESOURCES
Five outstanding online references from the Johns Hopkins University Press  
deliver seminal works and cutting-edge scholarship to students and researchers.
press.jhu.edu/references
• Flexible search options, powerful results.  Results are ranked and sorted by relevance   
 
or date, with direct links to documents and related materials.
• Intuitive browsing.  Wander through entire volumes without getting lost.
• Reliable usage statistics. COUNTER-compliant usage reports let you track activity  
 
 
according to the most current standard available. Statistics are compiled and ready to  
 
 
download once a month. 
• Always available. Our collections are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week from any   
 
IP-authenticated address. No special hardware or software is required. And we offer full   
 
technical and customer support.
The Early Republic
Critical Editions on the  
Founding of the United States
Primary material documenting the 
actions, debates, and thoughts of the  
First Federal Congress (1789–1791) and 
its members. 
earlyrepublic.press.jhu.edu
Encyclopedia of  
American Studies
Edited by Simon Bronner
Interdisciplinary articles from  
hundreds of scholars cover the history 
and cultures of the United States from  
pre-colonial days to the present.
eas-ref.press.jhu.edu
The Johns Hopkins  
Guide to Literary  
Theory & Criticisim
Edited by Michael Groden,  
Martin Kreiswirth, and Imre Szeman
A comprehensive historical survey of the 
field’s most important figures, schools, 
and movements.
litguide.press.jhu.edu
The Papers of Dwight 
David Eisenhower 
Edited by Louis Galambos, Alfred D.  
Chandler Jr., Daun van Ee, et. al.
Combines the full text of all 21 
volumes—over 14,000 pages—with 
a powerful search engine and 
user-friendly interface.
eisenhower.press.jhu.edu
The World Shakespeare 
Bibliography ONLINE
Edited by Laura Estill and an  
international committee of correspondents
The single largest Shakespeare  
database in the world. 
www.worldshakesbib.org
