ILLINOIS
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
S of Illinois
School of Library and Information Science
1A 
I
il~c;r~
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
October 2004
Vol. 58 No. 2
A LOOK INSIDE
57 
THE BIG PICTURE
So Yesterday by Scott Westerfeld
58 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
67 
* Bucking the Sarge by Christopher Paul Curtis
68 
* Barfburger Baby, I Was Here First by Paula Danziger; illus. by G. Brian
Karas
76 
* The Cats in Krasinski Square by Karen Hesse; illus. by Wendy Watson
83 
* Margaux with an X by Ron Koertge
86 
* Gifts by Ursula Le Guin
105 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
106 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Janice M. Del Negro, Reviewer (MD)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Molly Dolan
Krista Hutley
Hope Morrison
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2004 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Lauren Monchik and John Son from So Yesterday ©2004. Used by permission
of Razorbill/Penguin Young Readers Group.
OCTOBER 2004 
* 57
THE BIG PICTURE
So Yesterday
by Scott Westerfeld
The gleaming, nocturnal urban world of our cover is the milieu of the aptly named
Hunter, who is a teen cool spotter, a consultant paid to advise companies-in-
cluding one well-known sneaker company with a world-famous "swoosh" logo-
on the trendiness of ads and products while always looking for new and exciting
directions ("We have to observe carefully and push and prompt you in ways you
don't notice. . . . It's not like you can just start making your own decisions, after
all"). After he meets up with Jen, a disturbingly original thinker, the two find
themselves drawn into a mystery when Mandy, the consultant who's Hunter's
contact with the shoe company, goes missing, leaving behind only a pile of the
most beautiful, most seductively cool sneakers ever manufactured-which are sport-
ing a challenging anti-logo, the swoosh with a red circle and slash. As Hunter and
Jen search for the apparently abducted Mandy, they uncover further signs of a
brilliant and disruptive plot to infiltrate the glitzy world of cutting-edge marketing
and undermine it with guerrilla action, satire, and parody, to "disrupt the sacred
bond between brand and buyer."
The tale is lively and quick paced, but it's secondary to the social com-
mentary; Westerfeld tackles the merchantry of cool like no other YA author (ex-
cept perhaps M. T. Anderson in Feed, BCCB 11/02, and Anderson's is, at least
nominally, a futuristic vision), offering a witty and provocative investigation of the
surrealistic world of marketing and status. There's food for thought aplenty in
Hunter's crisp assessment of the various roles in the trend-marketing pyramid:
Hunter is a Trendsetter, while Jen is that dangerous thing, an Innovator; there are
also Early Adopters, Consumers, and Laggards ("They bravely tuck in their Kiss
T-shirts and soldier on"). His tortuous analysis of the possibilities of the situation
("Or maybe," he says about the irresistible shoes, "these are supposed to look like
bootlegs when they're not. And after these get too popular, which they will, the
client will absorb the backlash and become cool again. Maybe they're ironic boot-
legs") is absurd yet completely justified, a mad inspiration that may well become
real life in our time. The book further teases its audience by salting the narration
with commercial references but deliberately circumlocuting their instantly identi-
fiable brand names, referring to the shoe manufacturer throughout as "the client"
(and, therefore, to the subversive bootleggers-shoeleggers?-as the "anti-client");
there's also an array of sharply drawn characters plugged into cool from various
directions-or hoping to be.
What's particularly interesting is the book's shimmering ambiguity: there's
cynicism aplenty here, which will appeal to quite a few readers, but there's also an
understanding of the sheer glamour of marketing and the exhilaration of
58 
* 
THE BULLETIN
trendspotting. Jen the free spirit is as obsessed with the anti-client's sneakers as
any mall rat is with the right brand name (she digs frantically through the ashes of
the sneakers' funeral pyre, "looking for lost cool, the hardest thing to find"). The
revolt is coolness itself, even surer than most revolutions to spawn eager confor-
mity with its principles, more obliged than any to keep ahead of those who em-
brace it. Alert readers will also enjoy turning the implied questions on the text
itself (is, for instance, the notion of cool as contrived as the notion of marketing
it?), and there's plenty of diversion and provocation even at the manifest level,
making this an alluring offering for both pursuers and scorners of cool. (Imprint
information appears on p. 103.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
The Improbable Cat; illus. by Peter Bailey. 
Delacorte,
2004 
110p
ISBN 0-385-73186-8 
$9.95 
R Gr. 5-7
It all starts out harmlessly enough: an adorable stray kitten limps into the life of
David Burrell's cheerful, messy family, and the soft-hearted Burrells not only adopt
the little gray cat but become completely besotted with it. David is allergic to cats
in general and deeply suspicious of this one in particular, since it's growing at an
unnatural rate and becoming an obsession with his parents and his little sister;
upon his return from a week's camping, he discovers his family in complete thrall
to the unrecognizably mutated creature, and he realizes that he (with the help of
his friend George) is his family's only hope for release. The book's brevity and
small trim size (as well as Ahlberg's history of easygoing titles such as The Woman
who Won Things, BCCB 6/02) may suggest a pettable middle-grades read, but this
is in fact a dark and intense novella with some genuine menace and rough edges in
language and implications. Ahlberg cunningly keeps the threatening feline an
amorphous figure, making it all the spookier, and his deft hand at friendly domes-
ticity allows for sharp contrast between David's normal boy, best friend, and dog
world and the eerie transformation of his family. The ending doesn't quite live up
to the suspense of the buildup (the preternatural puss gets turned into roadkill by
a passing truck), but the remaining unanswered questions are more enjoyably dis-
comfiting than annoying. Bailey's compact line drawings echo the comfortably
quotidian tone of David's narration while emphasizing the increasing gloom of
the Burrell house with dense hatching and crosshatching, and they'll make this
even more attractive to readers looking for something creepy yet compact. DS
OCTOBER 2004 
* 59
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
The Little Cat Baby; illus. by Fritz Wegner. 
Dial, 2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8037-3012-8 
$10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
When a dapper Edwardian couple decides they want a baby, they head to Nurse
Doodle's Baby Shop, "which was how it was done in those days." They find quite
a selection but settle on a cat baby, who proves precocious and loving. She has a
few mild adventures in her life with her new parents, including getting lost and
found, and winning second prize in a baby show and first in a cat show, but this is
the quieter side of Ahlberg; with no mad chase scenes or cunning capers, the hu-
mor is subtle and warm-hearted. Wegner's black-and-white illustrations with their
spiderweb delicacy shore up the comedy with Edwardian absurdities: a diminu-
tive dog in overalls burying his bone with a shovel, a tree with knothole eyes and a
long branchy nose, men in miner's hats with flashlights playing tennis in the dark
because that "was how it was done in those... nights." The small format, richly
detailed illustrations, and playful text have a fine whimsicality that invites a cuddle-
up session of enjoying Ahlberg's and Wegner's deliciously slant view of the world.
KC
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
For Sure! For Sure!; tr. by Mus White; illus. by Stefan
Czernecki. 
August House, 2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-87483-742-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Streamlined illustrations in a vivid palette, a new English translation, and an infor-
mal font dress up Andersen's fable of a hen whose thoughtless comment instigates
a storm of gossip and a "factual" story in the newspaper. Bold, deep primary and
secondary colors and inset vignettes create visual interest, while the panel layouts-
bracketing the text with illustrations, trailing the text across the page, changing
font size for emphasis-play with the text as an obvious and yet invisible part of
the listener's experience. The large font size and consequently packed paragraphs
may be misleadingly daunting, since they suggest a narrative too lengthy for the
pictures, but in reality the page-by-page verbiage is reasonable. The extended
introduction of characters and plot (which takes four separate full-page, text-heavy
layouts) is, however, a significant obstacle to listener enjoyment, though there's
plenty of action once the story gets moving. Readers with a flair for the dramatic
will be able to use the vibrant illustrations as a framework for an oral retelling, at
first loosely basing it on the translated tale, and using more and more of White's
words as the tale progresses. TC
BARTEK, MARY 
Funerals &Fly Fishing. Holt, 2004 
148p
ISBN 0-8050-7409-0 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
When Brad's mom sends him off to visit her heretofore estranged father at his
home/funeral parlor in Pennsylvania, Brad expects the worst: mean old man,
creepy house, tiny town. At least he'll be far from the hecklers who convert his last
name (Stanislawski) into an insult (Stan-is-lousy) at every opportunity. Little does
he know that his grandfather will turn out to be a soft-spoken fly fisherman, a
connoisseur of local Polish cuisine, and an all-around decent fella who can give
Brad the backup he needs to stand up for himself against bullies of various kinds.
Brad's characterization as a precociously mature preteen remains consistent as he
provides an understated and accessible account of his own emotional growth and
60 
* THE BULLETIN
that of his grandfather and mother as they reestablish family ties. Though the plot
is predictable, Brad's sympathetic voice and the involving action draw the reader
in; while emotional growth is the theme, the narrative emphasizes Brad's concrete
experiences with his grandfather rather than Brad's internal dialogue about those
experiences, thus deftly avoiding an overload of sentimentality. Readers who pre-
fer their fiction without added syrup will find this a satisfyingly savory read. TC
BEARD, DARLEEN BAILEY 
Operation Clean Sweep. 
Farrar, 2004 
15 1p
ISBN 0-374-38034-1 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-6
The women of Oregon attained the right to vote in 1912, eight years prior to the
passage of the Nineteenth Amendment. In the small town of Umatilla, the women
took their political role a step further, and in 1916, a woman was elected
mayor ... over the incumbent, who happened to be her husband. Beard bases her
fictional tale on these factual events, telling the story from the point of view of
Cornelius ("Corn"), the twelve-year old son of the political rivals. The story opens
a week before Election Day, when Corn accidentally overhears his mother and her
sister suffragists plotting to sweep the election, and he is torn between telling his
father and keeping his mother's secret. While the election is the main event, the
homey detailing of Corn's family and of the town fills out the characters and con-
text, and Corn's narration, full of "dandy" and "gee willikers," is extremely good-
natured. His own exploration of how he feels about women in public office ("If
you have a vision for the future, why don't you just let the men handle it?" he
queries his mother) punctuates the tale, making this a useful story for reflecting on
contemporary gender issues in American politics, and his candor in evaluating
each of his parents as potential mayor shows a developing integrity indicative of his
character. The tone of the story suffers a bit for its sense of being ahead of its time,
however, and the subplot of an area pickpocket who hits Umarilla at the Election
Day parade (and is, of course, caught by Corn and his buddy Otis) is slightly
incongruous. Still, this is an entertaining and thoughtful examination of the per-
sonal side of politics. An author's note detailing the historical basis for the tale is
included. HM
BERNIER-GRAND, CARMEN T. 
Cesar: iSf, Se Puede! Yes, We Can!; illus. by David
Diaz. 
Cavendish, 2004 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-7614-5172-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
A sequence of free-verse poems surveys the life and the work of Mexican-American
activist Cesar Chivez. The poems, one to two pages in length, offer a wealth of
detail about Chavez's day-to-day existence, emphasizing his feelings, disappoint-
ments, dreams, and viewpoint even more than the specific achievements of his life.
This doesn't have the resonance of Nelson's biographical poetic sequence in Carver
(BCCB 9/01): while the line and verse-paragraph breaks do emphasize the specific
images carried within each phrase, the poems themselves read with the rhythm and
style of straightforward paragraphs conveniently broken up. The real power of the
text lies in the accessible way it presents information about the life of this influen-
tial figure, who is too often treated in stodgy, hard-to-swallow prose. Stencil-like
illustrations of iconic, richly colored figures surrounded by glowing auras enhance
the adulatory ambience of the enterprise, but the radiant images help lift the social
commentary above the preachy. Source notes, a glossary, a brief biography, a
OCTOBER 2004 
* 61
detailed chronology, an extensive bibliography with Internet sources, and a page
of quotes from Chavez give a solidly factual foundation to the material. TC
BOWEN, ANNE 
When You Visit Grandma & Grandpa; illus. by Tomek
Bogacki. 
Carolrhoda, 2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-57505-610-0 $15.95 
R 3-6 yrs
An older sister offers her new baby brother tutelage in the important matter of
visits to Grandma and Grandpa, explaining the rituals of the trip ("When you visit
Grandma and Grandpa, you ask, 'Are we there yet?' 'Are we there yet?' 'Are we
there yet?' two times, five times, a HUNDRED times, until Mama says, 'Enough!"')
as well as the delights of the visit itself ("When you get to Grandma and Grandpa's
you will have the best time ever!"). The season-connected structure (the child
describes the visits' delectations season by season) fills out the narrative and pro-
vides it with pleasing shape, while the specific details will obligingly evoke audi-
ence recognition of the familiar details and contemplation of their grandparents'
own individual charms. Bogacki's soft, smudgy paints effectively convey the dreamy
limbo that is a long car trip as well as the world of wonders contained by every
grandparents' residence; several scenes float across each spread in cozily contigu-
ous, biomorphically shaped views that, like memories themselves, loosely connect
rather than seamlessly progressing. This gentle and inviting title will be welcomed
by grandparents as well as grandchildren, and for some families it may become as
key an aspect of the travel-to-grandparents ritual as the events it describes. DS
BROWN, DON 
Odd Boy Out: Young Albert Einstein; written and illus. by Don
Brown. 
Houghton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-49298-4 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
It matters not a whit if young listeners have ever heard of the twentieth century's
renowned genius. They will probably feel they've already met this eccentric little
guy somewhere-the introverted kid with the bad temper, the one who'd rather
unknot a puzzle than kick a soccer ball, the student who pulls decent grades but
drives teachers loony with his halting responses. Brown is again at his best as he
zeroes in on those telling traits that trim a larger-than-life figure down to size:
Albert whacks his little sister in the head with a hoe, he is disturbed by the sight of
soldiers on parade, he suffers from homesickness when separated from his family,
and he can't get into college on his first try. As scratchy line-and-watercolor scenes
tail the melancholy loner amid mundane social settings in which he keeps furtively
to himself, the text plumbs the boy's thoughts that go unsuspected by those around
him: "What would it be like to ride a light beam? he wonders"; "Albert's ideas
make a picture of space and time and energy and matter that no one has ever seen
before." As Einstein the father absentmindedly pushes his child's baby carriage
along a Zurich street, the scene segues into a fantasy spread in which the pair are
surrounded by galaxies, atoms, equations, and a clock whose numerals are warped
by ... by what? Brown doesn't demand the audience comprehend the science:
"For scientists, Albert's discoveries mean the photoelectric effect, theories of rela-
tivity, and E=mc&. For the rest of us, his ideas mean automatic door openers,
television, space travel, and atomic energy." An endnote offers more information
on Einstein's Nobel Prize and on his arm's-length relationship to the atomic bomb.
Hmmm-maybe that withdrawn little kid who doesn't concentrate during story-
time is really a genius in the making. EB
62 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
The Dark Pond; illus. by Sally Wern Comport. 
HarperCollins,
2004 
14 2p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052997-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052995-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Armin Katchatorian, known as Armi, is a lonely teenager with a mixed heritage-
Shawnee and Armenian-that strongly influences his view of the world. His par-
ents, high-powered attorneys working for Native American and other displaced
peoples' rights, spend little time with him and send him off to a boarding school in
the Adirondacks. Despite his self-imposed isolation there, Armi makes a true friend,
the generous and comic Devo. Devo is one of the reasons that Armi keeps it to
himself when he feels the pull of the supernatural evil that resides in the dark pond
in the woods nearby the school. Research of local Abenaki legend leads Armi to
believe that the pond is inhabited by some legendary water monster, a belief rein-
forced by Mitch Sabattis, the great-great-grandson of a famous Abenaki guide,
who has come to destroy the monster in the pond. Bruchac uses supernatural
legend to good effect, infusing the atmosphere around the school with an almost
palpable sense of doom. Armi's deadly fascination with the monster in the pond
will equally fascinate readers, who will easily see why he persists even as they recog-
nize the inherent danger. The pace of the narrative sputters, however, in fits and
starts punctuated by intrusive explanations ofArmi's interior life that would be far
more effective if shown through action or dialogue. Characterizations are more
convenient than developed; while Armi's ability to talk to animals explains his
sensitivity to the lure of the pond monster, Sabattis' having the same ability be-
cause he is also of Native American heritage is a stretch. Still, Bruchac knows
where this story is going, and muddy though the path may be, the adrenaline-
inducing climax is worth the wait. JMD
BUCHANAN, JANE 
Goodbye, Charley. Farrar, 2004 
165p
ISBN 0-374-35020-5 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
In the summer of 1943, Celie's dad brings home Charley, a rhesus monkey. No
one in their tiny town has ever had a monkey for a pet, but twelve-year-old Celie
needs something to hold on to-especially now, when the war has begun to take
local boys and men, who return home only when they're damaged or dead. Partial
deafness has kept her father home, but her older brother, Ben, plans to join up
next year when he turns eighteen. When her mother signs on to work in the
factory, filling in for the men gone to fight, Celie needs Charley more than ever.
Her mom, on the other hand, thinks Joey Bentley is a better companion for Celie-
a gentle, well-read boy, thirteen-year-old Joey is staying with his grandmother
while his dad fights in the South Pacific and his mom goes to school to be a me-
chanic. Though initially opposed to friendship with a boy who doesn't know how
to climb a tree, Celie grows to like Joey and even depend on him for help with the
increasingly aggressive Charley. Wartime slogans and billboards-"Hitler smiles
when you waste miles"; "Every time you decide NOT to buy something, you help
win the war"-combined with the regular air-raid drills and rationing (and the
death of Joey's father in battle) help convey the period realities that underpin the
fears Celie has for herself and her family, fears that cause her to cling to Charley.
The societal push for personal sacrifice for the greater good makes poignant Celie's
final decision to give Charley to the local zoo, where he can receive better care than
she can provide. Humorous episodes provided by the monkey's antics and Celie's
OCTOBER 2004 
* 63
sledgehammer-like personality balance the dark themes of wartime danger and
sacrifice, and the combination of animal story and historical novel broadens the
potential readership, making this book a good choice for middle-schoolers ap-
proaching historical fiction for the first time. TC
CARRYL, 
CHARLES EDWARD 
The Camel's Lament; illus. by Charles
Santore. 
Random House, 2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91426-9 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81426-4 
$16.95 
R 4-8 yrs
While an obscure turn-of-the-century poem exulting the enormous flexibility of
the camel doesn't exactly scream out as a storytime delight, Santore's grand com-
positions carry the lilting verse to entirely new levels in this illustrated adaptation.
The poem's rhythmic and closely patterned end and internal rhyme follows a com-
parative format, where certain animal species are identified by their particular hab-
its and tendencies in contrast to the camel who will eat anything/sleep anywhere/
carry anyone, etc. Santore's luminous paintings are richly composed, invoking
both tremendous detail and a fair dose of humor. The featured species range from
the domestic to the barnyard to the swamp variety, and the composition of each
context remains consistently remarkable, with carefully detailed and textured crea-
tures looking out from the clean layout of each spread. The poor underrated
camel, with its crooked smile and droopy eyes, is certain to win the affection and
respect of browsing and storytime audiences. HM
CECIL, RANDY 
One Dark and Dreadful Night: A Wayward Orphans Production;
written and illus. by Randy Cecil. 
Holt, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6779-5 
$16.95 
R 
6-8 yrs
The Snidely Whiplash-like character Maestro Von Haughty attempts to narrate
the theatrical presentation of several darkly interpreted traditional folktales, only
to be foiled by a cast and crew that demands fairy princesses, kittens, and happy
endings. Productions of "A Wolf in the Woods of Woe" ("Little Red Riding
Hood"), "The Beans of Doom" ("Jack and the Beanstalk"), and "Lost in Foggy
Forest" ("Hansel and Gretel") are each disrupted by the confounding approach of
a cast member, and every story ends with an imaginative flourish unintended by
the producer. The action takes place on the stage of the Wayward Orphans The-
atre, with the maestro narrating for the troupe, although the cast has a lot to say
about the maestro's production ("I think somebody has gone a little overboard
with the briars and brambles"). Cecil (illustrator of Lowell's Little Red Cowboy
Hat, BCCB 6/97) provides a text that will work effectively as a theatrical readal-
oud, and his cast asides are pretty funny. The mono-textured surfaces give the
production the flattened look of toy theater, while the palette has enough contrast
to make the images pop. Listeners with a dramatic turn of mind (or classes with a
habit of twisting the traditional) will enjoy this subversively sunny take on somber
stories. JMD
CHENG, ANDREA 
Honeysuckle House. 
Front Street, 2004 
136p
ISBN 1-886910-99-5 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Sarah is devastated by the sudden departure of her best friend, Victoria, from the
house next door, and initially she's in no mood to consider friendship with Tina, a
new student in Sarah's fourth grade. Tina, a new immigrant from China, isn't
64 
* THE BULLETIN
sure about Sarah either, since Sarah's Chinese features seem initially to promise
closeness and familiarity, but several-generations-Americanized Sarah rebuffs Tina.
Their shared longing for absent friends eventually brings them together, however,
and as Tina helps Sarah search for the lost Victoria, the girls begin to develop a
companionship of their own. The text is quietly eloquent in its restrained expres-
sion, and Cheng conveys a considerable amount of nuance through her characters'
apparently straightforward observations. Though Tina's story of adaptation is the
stronger plotline, the alternation between Sarah's and Tina's point of view effec-
tively transforms this into a book about survival of loss and change rather than one
that focuses specifically on immigration, and the gentle exploration of Sarah's ini-
tial resentment of Tina will also offer readers food for thought. This will satisfy
readers not quite ready for An Na's immigrant drama A Step from Heaven (BCCB
7/01), or those simply looking for a different take on the old story of new friend-
ship. DS
CLARK, CATHERINE 
TheAlison Rules. 
HarperTempest, 2004 
26 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-055981-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-055980-2 
$15.99 
R Gr. 6-9
Alison is having what looks like a fairly conventional sophomore year in her small
town; she's hanging out with her best friend, Laurie, avoiding her annoying ex-
boyfriend, and enjoying the platonic friendship of Patrick, a funny new boy whom
Laurie likes. It gradually becomes clear that Alison's apparent normality is actually
a state of frozen grief as she protects herself from the pain of her mother's recent
death by avoiding the subject-and all emotional involvement. Clark manages to
add touches of humor to Alison's narration while leaking hints of her fragility, so
the everyday-life story is credible in its own right, but there's subtle patterning in
her anger at her family and resistance to commitments that underscores the direc-
tion of the narrative. Characters, especially loyal, daring Laurie and heedless, lik-
able Patrick, are vividly drawn; there's therefore considerable emotional impact in
the startling climax-Laurie's accidental drowning-which gives this story a reso-
nance beyond more predictable treatments of adjustment to loss. Between the
genuinely sensitive examination of loss and the four-hankie plot turns, this is sure
to move readers even if their experience of tragedy is limited to the literary. DS
COLLIER, JAMES LINCOLN 
The Empty Mirror. Bloomsbury, 2004 
[192p]
ISBN 1-58234-949-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Nick enjoys a bit of skylarking with his friends, but basically he's a good kid, living
quietly with his uncle Jack, who raised him from a baby after his parents died in
the influenza epidemic of 1918. That skylarking comes back to haunt Nick-
literally-when reports begin to circulate of his various misdeeds, misdeeds that
Nick knows he didn't do; Nick's certain that these events are connected to the
disappearance of his reflection, and he begins to explore the town's history to find
out whose spirit has taken over his image. Collier imbues his ghost story with
measured, effective touches of period and small-town atmosphere, from the village's
uneasiness at any discussion of the past epidemic to the suspicion of the ne'er-do-
well family whose daughter is Nick's only confidante, and Nick's narration is rough-
hewn and easygoing ("There's always somebody around who knows what you
should be grateful for," he observes wryly). His dilemma is carefully crafted, with
OCTOBER 2004 
* 65
trust, an issue of concern to many readers, the key element, so there's as much
suspense about who will believe Nick as there is about what his doppelganger will
do. Readers drawn more to solid storytelling than to special effects will appreciate
Collier's seemingly paradoxical achievement-a down-to-earth ghost story. DS
COLLINS, SUZANNE 
Gregor and the Prophecy ofBane. 
Scholastic, 2004 
[320p]
ISBN 0-439-65075-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Gregor and Boots (from Gregor the Overlander, BCCB 1/04) again descend below
the streets of New York to answer the call of a prophecy, this time crossing the
Waterway to track down a mysterious white rat known as the Bane, around which
the formerly vanquished rat forces are beginning to rally. Peace-loving Gregor,
who is disturbed to discover his unsuspected capacities as a warrior, sets out with
Boots and other questers, battling giant squid and flesh-stripping gnats before the
party is split during an attack by vicious rats and carnivorous plesiosaurs. Con-
vinced that Boots, Underland princess Luxa, and Luxa's bat Aurora have been
drowned and/or eaten, the grief-maddened Gregor and his bat Ares continue the
search for the Bane alone, determined to fulfill the prophecy by killing the cursed
animal on sight. What they find, however, calls their interpretation of the proph-
ecy into question, and their decision regarding the fate of the Bane changes the
balance of power for all the nations of the Underland. Gregor's parents' inability
to care for their children after the return of his father in the first book sets the stage
for this second journey, in which the counsel of adults is well meant but morally
ambiguous and Gregor's own wisdom must carry the day. That continuing real-
ism wraps the mile-a-minute adventure in a satisfyingly complex political and so-
cial network and provides the whole with a compelling emotional foundation.
Throughout, the motivations and growth of individual characters drive the ac-
tion-Gregor's unearthing of his warrior tendencies is an unexpected innovation,
but his discovery is described in sufficient detail to be acceptable to returning
fans-and the reappearance (and disappearance) of old friends, with some plot
ends deliberately left loose, will pull readers right through to the end and set them
clamoring for the third installment in the series. TC
COMAN, CAROLYN 
The Big House; illus. by Rob Shepperson. 
Front Street,
2004 
[224p]
ISBN 1-932425-09-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Ivy and Ray don't quite understand the judicial system, but they know that their
parents have been sent to the "big house" for twenty-five years for embezzling
from charity. They know that they've been sent to a "big house" too, though in
their case it's La Grande Maison, home to elderly Marietta and Lionel (who own
the charity from which the sibs' parents stole). Ivy and Ray decide that justice has
not been served, and they concoct a plan to free their parents by finding evidence
to put Marietta on trial-though for what, they don't know. In their search, they
discover an ominously covered portrait, an eerily preserved wedding cake, a per-
petually weeping maid, and a missing (and, as it turns out, crucial) will. Readers
will perceive more than they see through Ivy's limited viewpoint: they will get that
the parents are crooks (the unrepentant, joyful kind), that Ivy also exhibits some
shifty tendencies, and that only one piece of Ivy's "evidence" has real value. Read-
66 
* THE BULLETIN
ers will also smirk knowingly at her humorous misunderstandings of formal speech
and words of wisdom. Though the resolution is too perfect and the mystery is
disappointing because it cannot be solved by readers without information with-
held until the very end, Coman's combination of one part comedy to three parts
puzzle works well, and the slightly disheveled, wavy lines of the illustrations comple-
ment the enthusiasm and energy of the child protagonists. Ivy and Ray are an
appealing duo that will bring out the evidence-collector in many middle-grades
children and reluctant readers. KH
CORDER, ZIZOU 
Lionboy: The Chase. 
Dial, 2004 
[27 2 p]
ISBN 0-8037-2984-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
When we last saw Cat-speaking Charlie in Lionboy (BCCB 4/04), he and his lions
were safe and sound on a snowed-in train, impromptu guests of Boris, King of
Bulgaria. However, once they arrive in Venice, where Charlie believes his parents
are imprisoned, Boris leaves on business, taking "safe and sound" along. In Boris'
absence, security chief Edward becomes more jailer than friend, and though he
claims to be protecting Charlie, he has another motive as well, one that has to do
with the "miraculous return" of the winged Lion of St. Mark, Venice's symbolic
savior. Though Charlie knows he and the lions must escape, Edward is right-
they aren't safe outside, either. News of their flight from the circus has reached all
the wrong ears, and ringmaster Major Tib, lion-tamer Maccomo, villainous Rafi,
and the police are all on their tail. Meanwhile, Sergei the cat discovers that he sent
Charlie to the wrong place-Charlie's parents are in Vence, France, trapped in a
Gated Village Community, where endless corporate brainwashing and drug-laced
air have rendered them dimwitted. Second in a trilogy, this book continues with
the lion's share of the action; the chapters roam between characters, so readers are
never left wondering what anybody is doing, a technique that not only helps create
suspense, but also keeps the numerous plot threads from feeling cluttered and
disorganized. Though told in a conversational, easygoing manner, the story delves
deeper into the dark side of human nature as the connections among the various
sharply realized plot elements become clear. Secondary stories that give more in-
sight into this future world further reinforce Charlie's painful realization that com-
passion and generosity are often lacking in the world he thought he knew; this
adds a subtle pathos to his growing up without undercutting his enthusiasm or
decency. Corder's second book upholds the strong pace, plotting, atmosphere,
and characterization of the first, promising a roaring conclusion in the upcoming
finale. KH
CUMMINGS, PRISCILLA 
RedKayak. Dutton, 2004 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-525-47317-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
When Brady and his friends see the DiAngelos' red kayak heading down the creek
toward the river on a bad day for boating, they think about yelling a warning but
decide to keep their reservations to themselves. When the kayak later founders in
the cold river, it turns out it was carrying not the athletic Mr. DiAngelo but Mrs.
DiAngelo, who turns up shaken but unharmed, and her three-year-old son, Ben,
who has been Brady's babysitting charge. Though Brady manages to pull Ben
from the waters alive, to much heroic acclaim, the little boy soon succumbs to
OCTOBER 2004 
* 67
hypothermia and pneumonia, leaving Brady racked with guilt and grief. Though
this initially looks to be a rather mild moral dilemma (Brady regrets not having
shouted a warning), Cummings suddenly raises the stakes considerably when Brady
realizes the kayak's sinking was the direct result of the angry sabotage of his two
best friends and that he must decide either to keep his knowledge secret or to
report his lifelong friends for certain and serious prosecution. The book adds
some subtle layers to the central issue: there's a constant undertone of local uneasi-
ness about moneyed new people, such as the DiAngelos, ousting straitened local
families from their land; there are considerable additional strains on Brady's friends'
families (Digger's father is abusive, J.T.'s father awaits a kidney transplant); Brady's
family also lost a child years ago. The book credibly creates Brady's ambivalence
about two kids who've been good and loyal friends but who, in a moment of
anger, did a destructive deed with terrible consequences, and it also believably sets
up Digger's and J.T.'s own variety of responses-from defensiveness to avoidance
to unbearable guilt-about the results. The ethical quandary here is bitterer than
that in Bauer's classic On My Honor (BCCB 10/86), so this would make a particu-
larly effective discussion starter as well as a compelling readaloud or private read.
DS
CURLEE, LYNN 
Parthenon; written and illus. by Lynn Curlee. 
Atheneum,
2004 
36p
ISBN 0-689-84490-5 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Curlee, who has led middle-schoolers on a host of architectural and engineering
explorations, turns his eye to Pericles' Greece and the massive building project
atop the Acropolis, with particular attention to the famed temple to Athena. Al-
though Curlee's signature monumental paintings in icy violets and blues and clean,
succinct diagrams invite browsing, this is a text-intensive affair that opens with a
considerable amount of historical background before alighting on the building
techniques that the author's followers have come to expect. Readers will learn not
only about the temple itself, but about the development of Greek Doric and Ionic
architectural orders and how the temple designers worked within and outside the
rigid system, creatively breaking rules with dual styles in one edifice and brilliantly
introducing "refinements," or curvature in the seemingly straight lines. The evo-
lution of the building's use and its various phases of deterioration and destruction
are discussed, as is controversy over Lord Elgin's problematic usurpation of its
statuary and reliefs. Text is a bit more ponderous than in some of Curlee's recent
outings (e.g. Brooklyn Bridge, BCCB 6/01), but readers interested in ancient civi-
lizations, as well as architecture, should be pleased with the detailed, balanced
account. EB
CURTIS, CHRISTOPHER PAUL 
Bucking the Sarge. 
Lamb, 2004 
2 59p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90159-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32307-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Luther T. Farrell may be living in the downtrodden town of Flint, Michigan and
spending his days caretaking for elderly inhabitants of his mother's nursing home,
but he's nonetheless upbeat: he's got a taste for philosophy, a loyal longtime friend,
and a burgeoning college fund from his mother's payments for his labors. He's
also hoping to win a gold medal at the science fair for the third year in a row,
despite the fact that this means beating out Shayla, the girl he secretly loves. Gradu-
68 
* THE BULLETIN
ally, however, Luther's self-protectively balanced view of the world-and espe-
cially of his demanding, ambitious mother, whom he's nicknamed "the Sarge"-
gives way to a deeper understanding of his life and family: he realizes that not only
has his mother made her entrepreneurial way in the world through masterful fraud
and shady practice but also that Luther's own achievements have been engineered,
and his college fund never realized but only invented in order to ensure his compli-
ance and labor. Luther's amiable, offhand narration is disarming, giving an essen-
tially dark story the tone of a domestic comedy as he struggles to meet the Sarge's
demands and to help his friend Sparky in his various plots to get ahead in a town
where everybody's behind ("Holding your blindfolded best friend's hand in a cage
so he can get bit by a diseased rat isn't as easy to do as it sounds"). Some readers
will doubtless realize before Luther does that his mother's relentlessness makes the
promised college account just too good to be true, but the Sarge, with her blend of
rationalization, brisk pragmatism, and naked self-interest, remains a compelling
and original character, a villain seductive in her sheer power-mongering even as she
ensnares her own son in her self-centered schemes. Without being superficial or
condescending, this manages to be a funny and accessible story about young people
making the best that they can of the limited opportunities their lives are offering.
DS
DANZIGER, PAULA 
Barfburger Baby, I Was Here First; illus. by G. Brian
Karas. 
Putnam, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23204-4 
$16.99 
R 
4-7 yrs
Jonathon is palpably unenthusiastic about his new baby brother, referring to the
interloper as "Barfburger Baby," "Gasburger Baby," and other not-so-affectionate
epithets. He's further irritated by the arrival of other relatives, especially his ob-
streperous cousins, who run riot through his household and taunt him with his
family nickname of "Jonathon Pookie Bear." Jonathon's older cousin, Charlie,
reshapes Jonathon's viewpoint a bit by inducting him into the "Big Brother Club"
and by providing him with a clear ally, and Jonathon makes his own stand by
transferring his beloved Pookie Bear-and his hated sobriquet-to young Daniel.
While Jonathon's transition is a bit convenient, it's not overly sweet (even at the
end, he cheerfully runs a truck over Charlie's foot), and his baby-resentment is one
of the most entertainingly phrased in literature for young people-kids will find
his continued excoriations irresistible and will undoubtedly export them for their
own use. Karas' familiarly styled illustrations, featuring big-headed, stick-legged
people in acrylic and gouache textured with pencil, add insult to injury by making
little Daniel believably adorable even when earning his nicknames, but the illustra-
tions also offer gratifying scenes of Jonathon's imagined interactions with the new
arrival; audiences will especially snicker at the dastardly interpretation of bland
possibilities such as "We can play wagon train" and "We can play darts." Kids
wisely wary of saccharine assurances about the plenitude of familial love will relish
this funny, bracing treatment of becoming a sibling. DS
DAVIES, JACQUELINE 
The Boy who Drew Birds: A Story ofJohn James Audubon;
illus. by Melissa Sweet. 
Houghton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-24343-7 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The Audubon name may be an institution now, but Davies focuses on the man
himself back when he was just an eager young guy new to America and fascinated
OCTOBER 2004 
* 69
with birds, describing his pioneer experiment of banding birds to ascertain their
migratory patterns. Davies relates her story with immediacy, evoking Audubon's
keen curiosity and the lure of the outdoors as she describes his gradual discovery of
some important facts about bird migration. Sweet takes her art in a new direction
here: even her watercolor human figures have a touch of sober introspection, and
elements such as paper collage and carefully arrayed ornithological realia add tex-
ture and evoke Audubon's studies; she evades the problem of Audubon's consider-
able artistic shadow by depicting birds only in his preliminary sketches and in the
landscapes he traverses, rather than trying to mimic his landmark paintings. Un-
fortunately, while the book is elegant in design and prose, it is conceptually less
satisfying than one might hope, since there's insufficient information about
Audubon's life and contributions in general (there's not even an indication of
birth and death dates), and the story of his experiment doesn't pack quite enough
punch to stand on its own. Still, the discovery is clearly described, and the portrait
of a young man thirsty for knowledge (and the point about a careful amateur's
ability to make significant contributions) will appeal to budding naturalists. A
brief note explains a bit more about Audubon's life and discoveries; source notes
(for the illustrations as well as for the text) and a bibliography are included. DS
DODD, QUENTIN 
The Princess ofNeptune. 
Farrar, 2004 
[224p]
ISBN 0-374-36119-3 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Aspiring punk-rock drummer Theora is so busy thinking about her band that she
forgets about her science project and ends up assigned to watch the lake for the
existence of the local legend, Big Phil. She and her younger brother, Verb, instead
meet famous scientist Dr. Obermind, who rises from the depths in a submarine
and promises to help Theora with her project if she agrees not to reveal his own
(capturing the bat species that is attacking circuses, driven wild by their natural
enemy-tarpaulin). Before too long, however, the kids are kidnapped and taken
to restaurant Burger Buckaroo, where Theora is made an offer she can't refuse:
travel to Neptune to enter an intergalactic beauty pageant so that their kidnapper,
a giant cockroach from the moon, can write about it for Thrilling Cockroach Tales
magazine. If this isn't lunatic enough for you yet, don't worry-throw in crazed
pageantry, strange science, a talking fern, a botched Obermind rescue, a pop diva
who mysteriously disappears, a mad plot by Theora's science teacher, and a brawl-
ing Battle of the Bands, and the plot shifts from light speed to ludicrous speed in
just a few pages. Theora's cool, snarky voice keeps readers from overdosing on the
sometimes pained overabundance of silliness, and the geeky science gadgets are
inventive in the best mad-scientist tradition. Full of short, high-energy chapters,
most ending on rising action, and deliciously quirky characters, this would be
appropriate for reluctant readers of either sex or fans of space spoofs by Douglas
Adams or Daniel Pinkwater. KH
DODDS, 
DAYLE ANN 
Henry's Amazing Machine; illus. by Kyrsten
Brooker. 
Kroupa/Farrar, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-374-32953-2 
$16.50 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Even as a baby, Henry has a knack for mechanics, and by the time he's six years
old, he's got an ongoing project: an Amazing Machine. Henry happily enlarges
the machine until it takes up his living space ("He moved into the kitchen, and
70 
* THE BULLETIN
kept on building") and his parents' ("his family had to move out into the backyard
and pitch a tent"). Eventually Henry's machine becomes quite the local feature,
drawing neighbors to view the hoopla and to join in with music, food sales, and
rides. Finally, Henry's parents lay down the law and banish the machine, but
fortunately it finds a new home in the local carnival. Young inventors and
motorheads will revel in the notion of an ever-expanding machine, and the inclu-
sion of a periodic yet varying refrain celebrating the machine's machinations
("Whirling things, twirling things,/ Zipping, zapping, swirling things,/ Clunking
things, thunking things,/ Slipping, sliding, dunking things!") provides a sugges-
tion of the amazing machine's own voice. The story never really gets into gear,
however: the text doesn't rise to the challenge of making a machine that doesn't
do anything an interesting contraption nonetheless, and it's not clear why the
crowds respond with such glee to the machine's relocation to the carnival. Brooker's
mixed-media art celebrates the machine's conglomerative gimcrackery with its own
blithely inclusive nature, drawing on a combination of photographed bits, cloth
textures, cut paper, and thick paints to make its images. The result is narratively
intriguing, but compositions are sometimes unbalanced by the drama of individual
components, and young viewers will probably long for a more complete view of
Henry's creation than the tantalizing partials provided. The Rube-Goldbergian
saga nonetheless may gratify many industrious youngsters, who will doubtless im-
mediately set about creating their own Amazing Machines. DS
DUNREA, OLIVIER 
BooBoo; written and illus. by Olivier Dunrea. 
Houghton,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-35654-1 
$9.95 
R 2-4 yrs
Peedie; written and illus. by Olivier Dunrea. 
Houghton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-35652-5 
$9.95 
R 2-4 yrs
Two new goslings join the gaggle peopled (goosed?) so far by the popular Gossie,
Gertie (from Gossie and Gossie and Gertie, BCCB 12/02), and Ollie (Ollie, 11/03).
Forgetful Peedie and ravenous BooBoo enjoy circular adventures (Peedie misplaces
his headgear; BooBoo suffers an attack of the burps) replete with the repetitive
phrases in which toddlers revel, returning always to a point at which the adventure
can begin again (and again, and again). The boldly colored goslings romp across
the delicate watercolor and ink illustrations, in which the subtle detailing of the
background elements sets off the almost cookie-cutter sameness of the gosling in
each frame, emphasizing both the mildness of this imagined world and the endear-
ing singlemindedness of the avian characters inhabiting it. Plenty of white space
allows small children to zero in on the center-of-the-page action, which they will
do in storytime or laptime-as surely as Peedie loses his cap or BooBoo burps
bubbles. TC
EGAN, TIM 
The Trial of Cardigan Jones; written and illus. by Tim
Egan. 
Houghton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-40237-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Cardigan, the new moose in town, pauses in his walk to smell Mrs. Brown's fresh-
baked apple pie cooling on the windowsill; soon after, he is arrested as a pie thief.
Though he insists he didn't steal the pie, the crumbs on his shirt and the witnesses
who saw him smelling the pie say otherwise. Cardigan is brought to trial by the
suspicious townsfolk, but after his awkward antlers repeatedly knock over objects
OCTOBER 2004 
* 71
in the courtroom, the judge has an idea. With a quick field trip to Mrs. Brown's to
check the evidence, the judge solves the case: Cardigan, more clumsy than crimi-
nal, accidentally knocked the pie off the windowsill with his antlers. Egan's mes-
sage is not subtle, as the abashed community learns that a small town does not
have to be small-minded, but neither is it overpowering, instead operating as a
gentle lesson on overcoming stranger anxiety. The townspeople, dressed in their
conservative best (hats and bowties are common), are appropriately intimidating,
staring at both Cardigan and readers with disapproving seriousness, while Cardigan's
bumbling earnestness and rounded antlers under a creamy yellow hat paint him a
clearly sympathetic figure. The mild palette, soft lines, and bulky but balanced
compositions create a calmness slightly at odds with the fast-paced trial, while the
stiffness of the characters that worked well as part of the joke in Serious Farm
(BCCB 12/03) makes the story's lively courtroom scenes a series of posed artificial
shots. Egan's understated comedy is barely evident in Cardigan's antler casualties,
which may bring only the occasional giggle, but his animal characters still have the
offbeat dignity that makes them special and his portrayal of a moose unfairly blamed
will hit home with young audiences. KH
EHRENHAFT, DANIEL 
TellIt to Naomi. Delacorte, 2004 
200p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90155-0 
$9.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-385-73129-9 
$7.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Dave despairs of ever being able to cross the "unbridgeable chasm" between sopho-
more guy and senior girl to win Celeste, the girl of his dreams, until his sister,
Naomi, comes up with a plan. Using her identity as a cover, Dave begins writing
an advice column for his school paper. He figures it will be a great "alternative to
stalking": Celeste will write in with all her problems, and he will be able to guide
her to himself through his cleverly manipulative advice. Unfortunately, the letters
are anonymous, and he discovers that, while Celeste turns out to be a vapid ditz,
FONY (short for "Frightened of New York"), a frequent advice-seeker, is much
more his type. Meanwhile, his only face-to-face friendship is falling apart, and his
sister is getting entirely too caught up in "her" fame as an advice columnist. The
narrative voice is the star here; it may bother Dave that he doesn't "talk the way
most 'normal' guys do," but his offbeat humor and in-your-face honesty charms
readers, both of his bogus column and of his first-person narration of life among
his not-completely-sane family. The book is a funny, funky, hipster monologue
with witty conversational quips and letters spritzed throughout. Readers will of
course guess FONYs identity long before Dave does, but his cluelessness adds to
his appeal, and the author avoids a schlocky ending by making Dave the goat with
a lot of explaining to do rather than the romantic, sensitive hero who looks and
acts like a boy but understands like your best girlfriend. KC
FISHER, CATHERINE 
Snow-walker. Eos/Greenwillow, 2004 
507p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072475-7 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072474-9 
$17.99 
R Gr. 6-10
The witch Gudrun, a snow-walker from the north, uses her icy magic to control
the Jarl and terrorize into compliance all who follow him. Her overthrow by her
son, Kari, has been foretold, but since Kari is held captive in the mountains and is
rumored to be a hideous monster besides, no one thinks he'll be much help--until
Jessa and her cousin are sent to Kari's prison as punishment for their fathers' dis-
72 
* THE BULLETIN
loyalty to the present Jarl. Kari proves to be a sensitive, psychically gifted boy their
own age, in appearance the mirror of his mother, in character her complete oppo-
site. Kari joins the effort to evict the witch, which succeeds with surprising ease
when Gudrun abandons the Jarl's throne (having already murdered the Jarl), leav-
ing behind only a white snakeskin and a curse for her son: that the people he has
chosen to serve will never love or trust him, but only fear him and his power.
Later, long-distance attacks from the banished queen draw Jessa, Kari, and others
on a life-threatening trek to hunt Gudrun down in her northern lair, the travelers
affirming their loyalty to their people and to each other repeatedly along the way.
Chapter headings gleaned from Norse epic poetry set an exalted tone, nicely bal-
anced by the physicality of the descriptions and the normalcy of the characters'
reactions and observations. While the action is rather widely spaced within the
lengthy, three-part narrative (this single volume first appeared in Britain as a tril-
ogy), the quality of the writing, with its rhythmic prose, and the realism of the
characterization ensures reader satisfaction even in the quieter moments. Although
reminiscent of the folktale of the Snow Queen, the story is in no way derivative-
its icy artistry brings a breath of fresh (if chilly) air to the epic fantasy lineup. TC
FRANK, JOHN 
The Toughest Cowboy, or How the Wild West Was Tamed; illus. by
Zachary Pullen. 
Simon, 2004 
4 4p
ISBN 0-689-83461-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Grizz Brickbottom finds that the leather-tough companionship of his fellow cow-
boys leaves him a-hankering for the finer things in life, such as "Someone with a
lovely smell. Someone who would give him lots of sweet kisses. He needed ... a
dog." Grizz finds himself a dog, but timid Foofy the French poodle with her
daunting requirements (she needs to be sung to sleep at night, she needs to be
groomed, and she needs to have ribbons tied behind her ears) isn't quite what he
and his compatriots had in mind. Soon, however, Foofy's ability to catch flying
tin plates endears her to the men, whose affection for the little pooch eventually
leads them to more civilized ways and lifestyles. Frank's rawboned parody goes for
a surprisingly broad spectrum of comedy, ranging from the gratifyingly vulgar
(Grizz whiles away an evening by scraping gnats out of his nostrils with a spur) to
the wittily allusive (Grizz ends up manufacturing flying plates to toss and catch,
which are marketed as "Grizz-Bs"), so kids will get to snork and feel smart in the
same reading go. Pullen's oils have a crisp and oversized vividness to their head-
heavy portraiture that suggests satire on real-life models (even when cleaned up,
the cowboys' lumpy and bulbous countenances aren't going to be any threat in a
beauty contest); the result parallels the text in its blend of sophistication and un-
ashamedly overt humor. Like Timberlake's dog-'n'-cowboy comedy The Dirty
Cowboy (BCCB 9/03), this will offer middle-graders a sharp twang on the
funnybone. DS
FUNKE, CORNELIA 
Dragon Rider. 
Chicken House/Scholastic, 2004 
[5 2 8p]
Paper over board ed. ISBN 0-439-45695-9 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
The dragon Firedrake lives with others of his kind in an idyllic mountain valley,
until the valley is threatened by humans and he must undertake a dangerous quest
to find the dragons' first fabled home, the Rim of Heaven. Accompanied by a
mushroom-obsessed brownie named Sorrel and an orphan boy named Ben, and
OCTOBER 2004 
* 
73
guided by a map drawn by a rat cartographer, Firedrake is determined to find this
safe haven. Unfortunately, he also awakens an enemy who nearly exterminated all
dragons long ago and has been lying in wait for one to reappear ever since-
Nettlebrand, the Golden One. The questors face many challenges on the way to
the Rim of Heaven, but, unknowingly carrying one of Nettlebrand's spies, they
have no idea they are in danger of betraying the very home for which they are
searching. Despite the somewhat hackneyed insistence that humans are irrespon-
sible and dangerous in their greed and ignorance, Funke still sets them as saviors;
Firedrake's self-determination is therefore undercut by a prophecy tacked on near
the end of the journey involving Ben as a mythical dragon rider "coming to save
his friends the dragons from a terrible enemy." Aside from this conflict of purpose
and the overreliance on coincidental meetings to put characters where they are
needed to advance the plot, this novel (Funke's first, only now imported into the
U.S.) is an attractive combination of tried-and-true fantasy elements and likable
Disneyesque characters, and it will appeal to youngsters as a (lengthy) readaloud
and to older kids as an uplifting readalone. A foldout map will be included in the
bound book. KH
GAY, MARIE-LOUISE 
Stella, Princess ofthe Sky; written and illus. by Marie-Louise
Gay. 
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2004 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-88899-601-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-7 yrs
Siblings Stella and Sam (Stella, Queen of the Snow, BCCB 1/01, Stella, Star of the
Sea, BCCB 5/99) return in Gay's latest entry to ponder the celestial wonders of
sunset ("Stella! Look! The sky is on fire!") and star-filled night sky. Sam's initial
questions about the sun and moon lead to Stella's suggestion that the two camp
out that evening; the story then follows a pattern of Sam's queries (Can the moon
fly? Do raccoons wear masks because they are robbers? Does the sun sleep on a
bed?) being met by Stella's imaginative (if not always scientifically accurate) expla-
nations. Gay has once again perfectly captured the distinct wonder of childhood
in the siblings' banter about the natural world, and young listeners will eagerly
welcome the gently amusing Q and A. Though Stella is clearly the teacher, the
sense of shared awe ("Isn't it beautiful, Sam?") lends intimacy to the dialogue and
underlines Stella's own wonderment. The clean layout restricts text to the bottom
margin with each watercolor illustration spanning the gutter and, as always, Stella's
nest of wild red curls is a focal point in every spread. The wet blues and greens of
nightfall ooze across each double-page spread with penciled details defining nature's
elements in and around the sky. Lashes of tall grass in the foreground offer depth
to each illustration and provide a sense of being deep within the natural world.
Any child who ponders the wonders of the sky will find good company at Stella
and Sam's camp. HM
GILES, GAIL 
Playing in Traffic. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2004 
176p
ISBN 1-59643-005-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 9-12
Matt was the "ghost of school corridors," sliding largely unnoticed through his
days except for his close relationship with his younger sister. Then he catches the
eye of Skye, the school's legendary bad girl famed for provocative appearance,
flagrant misbehavior, and rumors of sexual escapade. She trusts Matt with her
innermost secrets of familial abandonment and abuse, and he's both sexually en-
74 
* THE BULLETIN
raptured with her and determined to save her from the demons that beset her
inside and out-despite increasing indication that some of those demons are fab-
ricated by Skye specifically to snare Matt. The high-school-Hitchcockian premise
is an alluring one, and Giles, author of Shattering Glass (BCCB 5/02) makes Matt
both a sympathetic low-profile teen and a perfect patsy for the seriously troubled
Skye. The contrapuntal story of Matt's turbulent family, which hides from Matt's
sister a secret about her parentage, adds tension and deepens Matt's character. The
ending unfortunately ramps up too quickly to an ending that seems too abrupt to
be dramatically taut or tragic, squandering the dark energy that's been carefully
built up, but the edgy setup and unfolding intrigue will draw in fans of psychologi-
cal chillers. DS
GOLDING, THERESA MARTIN 
The Truth about Twelve. 
Boyds Mills, 2004 
171p
ISBN 1-59078-291-7 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Lindy's family is starting a new life in a posh Philadelphia suburb, and Lindy's
having a very hard time maintaining what she considers to be the necessary facade
at school by keeping secret her tumbledown house, her troubled father's identity
as the local trashpicker, and her family's history ofhomelessness and tragedy. There's
more than a touch of The Great Gilly Hopkins in this story of a girl who uses anger
and aggression to stave off the pain of her past; there are some awkwardnesses (the
hinted-at fate of Lindy's younger sister is too much a dramatic device) and unan-
swered questions (how did the family end up homeless, and what then led them to
this otherwise wealthy town?), but Lindy's fierce and defensive voice rings true and
credible. Golding doesn't overplay her protagonist's character, wisely leaving Lindy
capable of humor and friendship as well as grief and rage, and there's a refreshing
believability in the mixture of responses in other characters, from those who genu-
inely do look down on Lindy for her cheap clothes and straitened family circum-
stances to those who appreciate her strength and loyalty. Lots of kids feel that if
their peers knew the family secret, they'd be immediately cast out of the crowd;
this title will assure them that they're not alone. DS
GREENE, STEPHANIE 
Owen Foote, Mighty Scientist; illus. by Cat Bowman
Smith. 
Clarion, 2004 
[96p]
ISBN 0-618-43016-4 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
It's time for the annual science fair, and Owen's whole future is riding on the
success of his entry. If he and his friend Joseph win, they're sure to be picked for
Mr. Waszak's fourth-grade class, a wonderland of scientific endeavor wherein citi-
zens bask in the glory of a research project on the class's reptilian and amphibian
pets. Never mind that Joseph would rather be in Ms. Holt's class and put on a
play, or that he's repulsed by all of Owen's critter-centered ideas for a project.
Single-minded as ever, Owen (first seen in Owen Foote, Second Grade Strongman,
BCCB 3/96) cajoles his friend into setting up an experiment with tadpoles and
fertilizer, prevaricating slightly about the fertilizer's potential effect on the growing
frogs. The constant jostling for position within Owen's social group provides
ample motivation for his finagling and rationalization, and it infuses the climax (in
which his "healthy" tadpoles die while the "doomed" ones live to swim another
day) with real urgency. The resolution is not only consistent with the plotting and
characterization but also highly imaginative in its own right-a triumph of inno-
OCTOBER 2004 
* 75
vation in the domain of science fairs as well as a welcome addition to the stable of
short chapter books. Final illustrations not seen. TC
GRINDLEY, SALLY 
Spilled Water. Bloomsbury, 2004 
224p
ISBN 1-58234-937-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
When eleven-year old Lu Si-yan's father is killed in a traffic accident in their rural
Chinese village, her family is faced with the tremendous challenge of keeping their
small plot of farmland going, a challenge made all the more difficult by her mother's
poor health and her uncle's harsh treatment of the family. Deciding that two
children is one too many, Uncle Ba sells Lu Si-yan into the service of the Chen
family in a distant urban center. Lu Si-yan's tenure with the Chens becomes all
the more complicated when it is revealed that the family's intent is to train her as
housemaid and then quietly marry her to their mentally retarded son. Lu Si-yan
runs away from the Chens and, left without money or direction, ends up working
in an overcrowded toy factory run by the abusive Mr. Hong. The horrific condi-
tions of the factory eventually send Lu Si-yan to the hospital; there she is reunited
with her deeply regretful uncle, who informs her of her mother's death and takes
her home to their village. Through the course of her adventures, Lu Si-yan meets
a rather typical assortment of the compassionate-Xiong Fei, the Chen's cook, Li
Mei, her fellow factory worker-and the horrible-Mrs. Chen, the evil head of
the Chen household, Zheng Yi, the factory bully-and these supporting charac-
ters add little to what is already a predictable plot (Whelan's ChuJu's House, BCCB
5/04, is a more gracefully composed story on a similar theme). The narrative
comes across as explanatory rather than literary, and the occasional reflective mo-
ments are overly mature for an eleven-year-old voice. Lu Si-yan is an agreeable
protagonist, however, and readers may be intrigued by the well-crafted narration,
which alternates between describing Lu Si-yan's present struggle and her memo-
ries of the past, and the details of her seemingly inescapable fate. HM
HADDIX, MARGARET PETERSON 
The House on the Gulf 
Simon, 2004 
201p
ISBN 0-689-85422-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Britt and her sixteen-year-old brother, Bran, have been keeping
secrets from their mom for as long as Britt can remember; since Mom is working
two jobs, studying in the hope of becoming a doctor, and raising two kids on her
own, no one wants to give her any bad news. This time, though, Bran is keeping
a secret from Britt and Mom-and it has something to do with the housesitting
job which allows the family to live rent-free for the summer in Florida. Britt finds
herself spying on her "perfect" brother, trying to figure out if his secret is some-
thing illegal, and if so, what to do about it. Though the secondary players demon-.
strate little dimensionality and Britt's narration evinces a far greater familiarity
with the dictionary than either her age or her personality supports, readers hooked
on solving the mystery will be unlikely to complain about the characterization or
the vocabulary. Themes of repentance and forgiveness play counterpoint to those
of guilt and condemnation while Britt takes her time learning about her new neigh-
bors and her own family. At first glance, Bran's secret doesn't seem hard to guess,
and Britt's continuing struggle to discover the truth wears the reader's nerves a bit,
but a double plot twist carries the day and spices up the sweetness of the ending.
TC
76 
* THE BULLETIN
HARRIS, ROBIE H. 
Sweet Jasmine, Nice Jackson: What It's Like to Be 2-And to Be
Twins!; illus. by Michael Emberley. 
McElderry, 2004 
32p 
(Growing Up
Stories)
ISBN 0-689-83259-1 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
They've unraveled the mysteries of baby- and toddlerhood (Hello Benny!, BCCB
11/02; Go! Go! Maria!, 10/03), and now Harris and Emberley tackle the twos-
twins at age two. Jasmine and Jackson are African-American tots in a state of
perpetual motion from foot to mouth, following and mimicking their elders, squab-
bling and making up, saying "No!" more often than "Yes," and establishing their
own unfathomable standards of grammar. Again a loosely constructed storyline
follows the children through the year, while generous boxed inserts supply run-
ning commentary on the whys and wherefores of two-year-olds' behavior. In this
entry listeners enjoy the added bonus of twin behavior as well, with Harris empha-
sizing each sibling's uniqueness. Emberley has a field day with the antics ofJ & J,
and the reaction of adults and older children (in thickly outlined, group-sharing
sized paintings) to Jasmine's diaper rebellion, shoe-store tantrum, bedroom-wall
painting, and cribside rappelling is a delight. Amid the chuckles lies solid infor-
mation on the little tykes' word mastery, toilet training, sudden fears, play habits,
and powerful drive to accomplish tasks unassisted. Jasmine and Jackson are so
dang cute that maybe the "terrible twos" have gotten a bad rap. EB
HESSE, KAREN 
The Cats in Krasinski Square; illus. by Wendy Watson. 
Scholastic,
2004 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-439-43540-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
7-10 yrs
Basing her story on an historical account, Hesse has created a fictional explanation
of an event involving "cats outfoxing the Gestapo at the train station in Warsaw
during World War II." The opening illustrations depict the narrator, a young
Jewish girl who has escaped the Warsaw Ghetto to live secretly ("I wear my Polish
look, I walk my Polish walk") with her sister Mira, surrounded by the many cats
left homeless when the Jews were forced to move out of their private homes and
into the Ghetto. The opposition movement, including Mira, concocts a plan to
transport food by train and sneak it to the hungry Jews living behind the walls, a
plan endangered by the Gestapo's intent to await the train with police dogs. The
young narrator comes up with a counterstrategy: to bring the street cats to the
train station and, as the train pulls up, release the felines. When the distracted
dogs lunge after the cats, the food is successfully carried past the Gestapo and into
the Ghetto. This is a poignant and carefully crafted tale, demonstrating the sig-
nificance of even a single individual in a time of crisis and deftly extracting and
developing a specific moment in a much larger picture. Watson's watercolor,
pencil, and ink illustrations capture the smoke and shadows of the urban setting
while maintaining a delicate balance of energy and quiet reverence. The figures
are outlined in thick black ink, and while the faces occasionally take on an air of
caricature, the technique of layering the boldly defined figures against the more
fluid lines of the city is ultimately successful. The opportunity to discuss history in
the context of local and oft-forgotten events is a remarkable one, and Hesse has
created a tale worthy of discussion with young listeners. A detailed historical note,
absolutely mandatory for understanding the context of the tale, is included. HM
OCTOBER 2004 
* 77
HICKS, BETTY 
Busted! Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2004 
168p
ISBN 1-59643-004-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Stuart Ellis is convinced he's the most closely policed and frequently grounded kid
in seventh grade, and it's certainly not due to any particular proclivity toward
misbehavior on his part. No, it's because his widowed mother takes parenting far
too seriously and needs a love life to get her priorities straight. His close friend
Mack heartily agrees and sets up a casual meeting at Stuart's soccer game between
Mrs. Ellis and Mack's uncle Joe, a kind-hearted bald guy whose attentions Mom
seems to enjoy. That's not quite what Stuart had in mind-he'd prefer someone
cooler, like his soccer coach, Chris James. He does his own match-making, and, lo
and behold, the romance actually takes off. Even better, Coach James gradually
gets Mom to loosen up with the punishments, freeing his strong player from house
arrest. Of course, life can't be quite that easy, and soon teammates turn against
Stuart as they suspect that Coach is now playing favorites with his sweetheart's
son, and Mom gets the idea that Coach and Stuart have conspired against her to
keep her kid on the team. Stuart hits just the right tone of beleaguered adoles-
cence, and most readers who review his missteps will readily agree that Mom's
gone over the edge. Hicks spins the plot as tightly as a half-hour sitcom, with a
limited cast and a well-defined problem, and the dangling ending-Stuart's ground-
ing problems are under control but Mom now contends with a surfeit of suitors-
should earn a round of audience applause. EB
HIGHTMAN, JASON 
The Saint ofDragons. Eos/HarperCollins, 2004 
291p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054012-5 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054011-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Simon St. George is about to enter the family business: hunting
dragons, or rather, dragonmen-the humanoid, intelligent, despicably evil rep-
tiles who by their dark magic cause destruction and suffering throughout the world.
Clues lead Simon, his father, and his father's love interest across the world in a
creaky sailboat for a last-ditch attempt to stop the formation of a draconian alli-
ance powerful enough to set the whole world aflame. By turns melodramatic and
farcical, the story is a quick and superficial read, and stock characters (described in
unnecessary depth at chapter beginnings) roam the pages. Nevertheless, there's
plenty here to engage and entertain, between the St. Georges' quest to uncover the
dragonmen's devious conspiracy, Simon's down-to-earth comments and cynical
attitude toward his father's profession, and the plot's constant reversals; this may
therefore capture fans of the Akiko series and other offerings in the comic-book
vein. TC
HIRSCH, ODO 
Yoss. 
Delacorte, 2004 
34 1p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90224-7 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73187-6 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Young teenager Yoss has reached the age at which boys of his village depart on a
traditional journey toward manhood. For most boys, this journey lasts no longer
than one night spent shivering on the mountain slopes, at the end of which they
return to take up apprenticeships. Determined that his journey will be more than
a symbol, Yoss takes a different approach: rather than returning immediately to
the village, he sets off toward the town in the valley below, eager to find wisdom or
78 
* THE BULLETIN
treasure to bring home when he returns as a man. Instead of his hoped-for riches,
however, Yoss instead encounters deceit, lust, avarice, political machinations, and
murder that awaken in him an awareness of the depravity of the world, which later
fits him to become the next wise man in his home village. While this is a darker
story than the similarly imaginative bildungsromans penned by Lloyd Alexander,
the wordcraft here is elegant, the descriptions deft, and the action both arresting
and character driven, making Yoss' exploits a sure hit with readers more attuned to
the story's quality of construction than insistent on an unmitigatedly happy end-
ing. TC
HOBBS, VALERIE 
Letting Go of Bobby James, or How I Found My Self of
Steam. 
Foster/Farrar, 2004 
136p
ISBN 0-374-34384-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Maybe it was her mother's history of abuse at the hands of her husband, or maybe
it was the words of the Willie Nelson song rattling in her head, but sixteen-year old
newlywed Jody Walker knows enough to put some distance between herself and
husband Bobby James, who has just blackened her eye, even if it means being
abandoned at the gas-station ladies' room. Jody grabs a bus to the first Florida
town that feels right, crashes at night in a cineplex, and lands a job as a dishwasher
at a cafe, fully aware that a better life will have to be one of her own making. Her
youth and self-reliance (and her tiny but growing fund of ready cash) attract preg-
nant fifteen-year-old Effaline like a flame lures a moth, and soon the younger girl
is sleeping in Jody's seedy apartment and avoiding the sleazy manager, Kirby, who
may or may not be the baby's father. Jody quickly appreciates that this is a young
woman with worse troubles than her own, and by the time Bobby James reappears
to cajole and/or threaten her back, Jody musters the chutzpah to send him pack-
ing. Hobbs burdens her teen-pleasing plot with stereotypes (Bobby James and
Kirby are woman-punchin' crackers straight from central casting), melodramatic
effects (Jody delivers Effaline's baby in the middle of a hurricane), and a limp
premise in which Jody narrates her adventures in letters to a grocery-chain owner
and coleslaw looms large, but illogically, throughout. This is a far cry from the
gripping dynamics of the author's Tender (BCCB 10/01), but the rags-to-subsis-
tence rise of two resilient teens has enough momentum to sweep readers past the
improbabilities and onto the promise of better times ahead. EB
HOPKINSON, DEBORAH 
Apples to Oregon; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. 
Schwartz/
Atheneum, 2004 
36p
ISBN 0-689-84769-6 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Part tall tale, part fact, this latest illustrated historical tale from Hopkinson and
Carpenter (creators of Fannie in the Kitchen, BCCB 6/01) is based on the real-life
Luelling family, who traveled from Iowa to Oregon with seven hundred fruit trees
planted in the box of their wagon in 1847. The narrator, Delicious, offers a mat-
ter-of-fact recounting of the family's trials, delivered directly to the reader in a
folksy dialect that suggests campfire storytelling. En route the family encounters
all kinds of challenges, from getting the heavy planters over the Platte River on a
raft ("everyone knows young 'uns raised on apples are strong, mighty strong. Be-
fore you could say 'Johnny Appleseed,' we'd kicked ourselves clear to the other
shore"), to hailstorms, desert travel, and cold nights on the plain. Fortunately, the
eight children (depicted more often than not as sixteen gangly legs) are as resource-
OCTOBER 2004 
* 79
ful as their parents, and the fruit trees make it to Portland, where Daddy and
Delicious "planted them in that sweet Oregon dirt at last." Daddy is an exuberant
character, skinny as a lamppost and clear leader of the escapade, and Delicious'
warm devotion to her pa is evident throughout the telling. The folksy oil paint-
ings, rendered in rich shades of gold, blues, and reds, match Delicious' narration,
and the playfulness of Carpenter's brushstrokes adds a zestful energy to the family's
adventure. Hopkinson identifies a 1937 pamphlet about the apple industry in
Oregon and the Luelling-Campbell genealogy as sources of background informa-
tion, and an author's note further describes the historical basis of the tale. HM
HOROWITZ, ANTHONY 
The Falcon's Malteser: A Diamond Brothers
Mystery. 
Philomel, 2004 
[224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-399-24153-1 
$16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-14-240219-2 
$5.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Nick is the thirteen-year-old brother of famous private detective Tim Diamond,
a.k.a. Herbert Timothy Staple, but it's really Nick, not the clueless Herbert, who
delivers the smart solutions and smart remarks that are the private eye's calling
card. When dwarf Naples hires Herbert to look after a package, Nick senses trouble,
and when they unwrap the package to find a box of Maltesers (malted-milk balls),
Nick knows trouble is on its way. Then they find Naples lodged in a motel with a
bullet lodged in his chest. The Maltesers are the key to finding the diamonds
hidden by the international criminal known as the Falcon, now deceased, and
unless Nick can find the connection, he and Tim face a messy death by chocolate.
In this clever spoof, trademark elements of hardboiled fiction and noir film (The
Maltese Falcon is just the beginning) are presented seriously and then forced into
clownish costumes or circumstances: the dames are disreputable, the villains men-
acing, the buildings dilapidated, and the circumstances dire, but never so much
that laughter is in danger. The dynamic between Nick and the adult characters,
who attempt to portray a darker atmosphere but fail without his cooperation, cre-
ates much of the humor. Nick's wry take on matters (on trying to sleep on the
uncomfortable top bunk in jail: "I dropped off around midnight. Then I climbed
back on and tried to get some sleep") and his character descriptions ("They were
both approaching fifty and had spent a lot of money trying to back away again.
Their slightly plastic faces had to be the work of a slight plastic surgeon") are
priceless examples of deadpan, punny wordplay. The intriguing plot, surprise twists,
and high body count are worthwhile investments, but streetwise Nick is the real
treasure here. KH
HORVATH, 
POLLY 
The Pepins and Their Problems; illus. by Marylin
Hafner. 
Farrar, 2004 
179p
ISBN 0-374-35817-6 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-6
The Pepins-Mr. and Mrs. Pepin, their two children, Petunia and Irving, and
their pets, dog Roy and cat Miranda-are a happy family, but they're prone to
peculiar happenings and they're largely bereft of the ability to solve them.
Fortunately, the activist author steps in, seeking reader advice for the solution to
Pepin problems such as a surfeit of toads in the family shoes, the identity of the
strange man who settles down in the Pepin home, and the unsatisfying coldness of
the household hot chocolate. There are echoes of Allan Ahlberg's silly Gaskitt
80 
* 
THE BULLETIN
family here (from The Cat Who Got CarriedAway, BCCB 6/03, etc.), as well as a
distinct descendance from Lucretia Hale's easily perplexed Peterkins; to this tradition
Horvath adds a bossy, interventionist author who delights in obtrusive interference
and a collection of fictional readers (all identified by their source town, as with
letters to the editor) who provide the author with further material for commentary.
The authorial intrusion becomes the story as much as the Pepins do; while the
trope is sometimes played out a bit archly and it occasionally unbalances the plotting
(the Pepins seem rather faded next to the narrator), it's an old-fashioned tendency
made cleverly into a conscious joke, and readerly kids in particular will find it
diverting. Hafner's black-and-white illustrations, which recall the work ofN. M.
Bodecker, have a touch of old-fashioned flair all their own. In addition to being a
diverting readalone, this offers an amiably accepting tone and pleasant
noodleheadedness that render it highly suitable for a chapter-by-chapter readaloud;
indeed, it might be tempting to extract the material into a performed drama ? la
Our Town and give the narrator's directorial impulses center stage. DS
HOVEY, KATE 
Voices of the Trojan War; illus. by Leonid Gore. 
McElderry,
2004 
117p
ISBN 0-689-85768-3 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Having previously taken poetic journeys into Greek mythology (Arachne Speaks,
BCCB 3/01; Ancient Voices, 5/04), Hovey now gives various participants (gods,
men, muses, etc.) in the legendary tale of the fall of Troy a chance to speak their
poetic pieces, providing their points of view in a variety of verse forms. The poems
themselves vary in effectiveness (some have a fresh phrasing that stands alone,
while others require the support of the whole), and the voices are traditional ones,
adding few emotional subtleties to this oft-interpreted tale. The volume also suf-
fers from a pedestrian design that does little to showcase Gore's full-page black-
and-white illustrations, and as a result any compositional drama is lost. Still, Hovey's
distillation of this tragic tale has an inherent fascination that will draw readers to
her ambitious effort. Quotations from Homer, Aeschylus, and other classical writers
introduce some of the poems; an appendix explaining character and place names
and a bibliography are included. JMD
HUGHES, PAT 
The Breaker Boys. 
Farrar, 2004 
247p
ISBN 0-374-30956-6 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
In the spring of 1897, hot-tempered Nate Tanner, son of a wealthy mine-owning
Pennsylvania family, is expelled from boarding school and sent home for what
proves to be a life-changing summer. Friendless and full of anger, Nate sets to
taking long bike rides away from the family estate and meets Johnny, a Polish-
American "breaker boy," who spends his days picking slate and wood from carts
full of coal in one of the Tanner family's properties. Assuming a false identity,
Nate starts playing baseball with Johnny and the other breaker boys, and he soon
discovers the comfort of friendship he had never known. This friendship is, natu-
rally, complicated by the secrecy and class issues underlying Nate's true background,
and when talk of collective action and strike begins to surface among the boys,
Nate is left wondering which side of the story is the more accurate one. His expe-
rience in the Polish slums where his friends live leads to a growing fury at his own
family's treatment of the mine workers, a fury that surfaces in a confrontation with
his grandpa. Basing her story upon the true events of the 1897 Lattimer Massacre,
OCTOBER 2004 
* 
81
where nineteen coal miners were killed at the hands of the police, Hughes has
created a compelling fictional narrative that illustrates the degree to which fact
belongs to the perspective of the teller. Nate is a well-developed character and the
waves of doubt, defensiveness, and self-knowing he experiences over the course of
the summer are well-rooted in the events going on around him. Although the
story is a bit slow going at first (Nate's anger-management issues make him a
rather unlikable protagonist), those readers willing to stick it out will find this a
complex novel, full of personal and class conflict and, ultimately, the violence of
misunderstanding. A note and glossary of Polish terms are included. HM
JACKSON, DONNA M. 
In Your Face: The FACTS about Your Features. Viking,
2004 
42p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-03657-9 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 4-7
"Fish faces. That's pretty much how we began," explains this examination of one
of our most important pieces of anatomy. Jackson discusses the various elements
of the human face, how we read, recognize, and make faces (and what happens to
people who can't), conventions of facial beauty, and facial prosthetics, often focus-
ing her investigations on specific people to make them more vivid. Though there
are some missed opportunities (why not compare an age-projected image with an
actual image of the same child of that age?) and misleading phraseology (the evolu-
tionary selection for lighter skin in more northerly climates is described Lamarckianly
as "skin turn[ing] lighter to drink in more of the sun's rays"), this is more genu-
inely scientific than popular-magazine approaches, touching on matters of physi-
ology, neurology, and culture in accessible yet provocative ways. Photographs are
strategically if not generously placed throughout; extensive end matter includes a
list of books and reading for further exploration, a glossary, source notes, and an
index. DS
JEYAVEERAN, RUTH 
The Road to Mumbai; written and illus. by Ruth
Jeyaveeran. 
Houghton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-43419-4 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Shoba's monkey Fuzzy Patel wakes her in the middle of the night with an unex-
pected declaration: they must leave immediately for Mumbai for a "top-secret"
monkey wedding. Opting to "take the bed" magically in lieu of an airplane ("Air-
planes are so stuffy"), the two soon arrive in the desert far from Mumbai. As they
hastily journey towards the feast, they meet an assortment of characters-a camel
named Ismael, a line of elephants, and a snake charmer, among others-who offer
directions. They do not, however, extend the wedding invitation to those they
meet, for, as the snobby Fuzzy Patel insists, "it would be most improper if the
common riffraff showed up, expecting to be invited." In the end, the poor atten-
dance at the wedding results in a last-minute need for guests, and Shoba and Fuzzy
Patel's helpers (who have been following them throughout) are included in the
festivities. The plotline is predictable and silly; Fuzzy Patel's superiority streak
adds a dose of humor and his creative efforts to exclude others are quite entertain-
ing ("'In case you were wondering,' he called to the elephant, 'this wedding will be
quite dull-no singing, no dancing, and the portions of food will be far too small
for an elephant to enjoy"'). The explosively vibrant illustrations, featuring thickly
applied gouache in fruity citrus, raspberry, and melon shades, are both funky and
fanciful, and the absence of white space lends a boldness to the landscapes. While
82 
* THE BULLETIN
the story overall is notable for enjoyability rather than cultural information, an
illustrated glossary of "Everyday Indian Things" and map of India provide clarifi-
cation on textual references. HM
JOOSSE, BARBARA M. 
Bad Dog School; illus. by Jennifer Plecas. 
Clarion,
2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-13331-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Zippy the dog is indeed zippy, "like a shook-up pop bottle ... ready to explode,"
and that suits his owner, Harris, just fine, since boy and pup share in muddy and
rambunctious pastimes. The rest of Harris' family isn't so thrilled with Zippy's
tendency to swipe food, dig up the garden, and leave muddy footprints on the
white sofa, so they convince Harris to take Zippy to obedience school. Zippy
graduates a star pupil, but his family finds the newly restrained pooch a definite
disappointment; fortunately, a short trip to "bad dog school" restores some of
Zippy's zip and allows him to strike a congenial balance ("He was obedient, but
still fun"). The happy-medium ending is somewhat flat and programmatic, but it
works better when considered as a veiled reassurance about kid manners and the
flexible views thereof. More enjoyable, of course, is the description of Zippy's
(and Harris') troublemaking shenanigans, and Joosse piles on gleeful sound effects
("Harris made waves in the water, blop, blop, while Zippy blasted their enemies.
Kabloosht'), making the problems-and rewards-of Zippy's habits immediately
clear while keeping them completely credible. Plecas' line-and-watercolor illustra-
tions give Zippy fizzy outlines that suit his personality as well as his terrieresque
ancestry; narrow, slightly wavery lines provide the scenes with a precision that
makes Zippy's transgressions (especially those involving exuberant patterns of
muddy pawprints) stand out. This could add some lively interest to a discussion
of good manners or just make a pleasing kennelmate to Alice Provensen's A Day in
the Life ofMurphy (BCCB 6/03). DS
KELLY, JOHN 
The Mystery ofEatum Hall; written and illus. by John Kelly and
Cathy Tincknell. 
Candlewick, 2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7636-2594-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
A gloomy mansion, a cryptic invitation, a naive couple anxious to sample the prom-
ised gracious hospitality, evil intentions, and lurking perils . . . sound familiar?
The classic gothic setup is comically realized in this stylish romp that casts Horace
and Glenda Pork-Fowler, devoted pig and goose spouses, as the would-be victim
guests of Dr. A. Hunter, in reality-egad!-a wolf. Clues to Hunter's evil designs
abound, and the audience can spend multiple viewings ferreting them out-the
gallery of hunting scenes along the staircase, a shifty-eyed portrait of Hunter that
spies on the couple from above the dinner table as they fatten for the kill, a poster
advertising an upcoming pie feast, bookshelves stocked with The Book ofBacon,
Let's Talk Pork, and Get Crackling. But justice waits in the wings for the murder-
ous host, and as the soon-to-be entrees creep closer to their fate under video sur-
veillance by Hunter, his plans unravel. The corpulent pair climb onto a gaily
umbrella'd "bandstand"-actually a pie-making machine-but it sways under their
weight. The wolf crawls in to make repairs, the crust descends, and the villain is
cooked. A busload of wolf Goodfellas gathers in the penultimate spread for the
OCTOBER 2004 
* 83
advertised pie feast, carving the pie and toasting their absent host, and the nary-
the-wiser Pork-Fowlers drive off into the sunset in a closing silhouette. Too often
picture-book noir sendups rely on overly sly references that elude the child audi-
ence, but here the visual clues stand sturdily on their own, while the Pork-Fowlers'
innocent narration counterpoints the dastardly and very, very funny scheme.
Tincknell has a heyday with slick airbrushing, eerie chiaroscuro, and goofily ne-
farious gadgetry that suggests committee work between Berkeley Breathed, Nick
Park (especially in Chicken Run), and Rube Goldberg. Kids who are just inching
past picture books will be delighted to stick around for one more title. EB
KELLY, KATY 
Lucy Rose: Here's the Thing about Me; illus. by Adam
Rex. 
Delacorte, 2004 
137p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90234-4 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73203-1 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Third-grader Lucy Rose isn't happy about her parents' separation and her result-
ing move with Mom to Washington, D.C., but even though she's lonely and misses
her dad, she throws herself into making friends, strategizing against enemies, and
enjoying the time she now has to spend with her maternal grandparents (known as
Madame and Pop), who live nearby. Lucy Rose's letters and phone calls to her
dad, who lives back in Ann Arbor, offer some indication of the anxieties and feel-
ings of loss concomitant with a family breakup, but it is the loneliness and insecu-
rity evident in her occasional anonymous (and amusing) emails to Madame, who
is a columnist specializing in child-rearing questions, that give Lucy Rose's charac-
ter a level of believable complexity. The glossing-over of the repercussions of her
parents' separation leaves a decided gap in Lucy Rose's character, and the email
queries are more a plot device than a genuine exploration of her grief. Neverthe-
less, as a hell-for-leather youngster styled after Eloise and Junie B., Lucy Rose is an
engaging protagonist, and readers will enjoy watching her face down the world.
Rex's pencil drawings sport a quiet tendency towards popeyed exaggeration that
adds to the book's friendly accessibility. TC
KNUTSON, BARBARA, ad. 
Love and Roast Chicken: A Trickster Talefrom theAndes
Mountains; ad. and illus. by Barbara Knutson. 
Carolrhoda, 2004 
32p
ISBN 1-57505-657-7 
$16.95 
R 4-7yrs
High in the green hills under the snow-capped peaks of the Andes, Cuy the Guinea
Pig repeatedly outsmarts Tfo Antonio the Fox, leaving the poor predator tired,
hungry, and humiliated. Moss green, earth brown, jewel blue, and sunset gold
invigorate the heavily textured, woodblock-style spreads, through which Cuy and
his compadres romp along the sweeping lines of mountain slope and valley bowl.
Lean nuggets of rollicking text read equally well before a group or by oneself, and
Cuy's sassy rejoinders make this Brer Rabbit analogue an engaging standout. A
Spanish-vocabulary pronunciation guide and glossary aid monolingual readers,
and an author's note cites print and human sources from Bolivia and Peru for this
traditional folktale and explains the use of a guinea pig as protagonist. TC
KOERTGE, RON 
Margaux with an X 
Candlewick, 2004 
165p
ISBN 0-7636-2401-2 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Margaux is accustomed to sliding through life with elegant and queenly perfec-
tion, quietly despising her amoral gambler father and shallow acquiescent mother
84 
* THE BULLETIN
while openly despising, along with her friend Sara, the lesser beings who fill the
halls at high school. One night she encounters Danny, a nobody from the year
behind her, who's out checking on dogs adopted through his animal shelter; she
aimlessly falls in with his noble espionage and then realizes that she genuinely likes
the company of this smart, good-hearted, unimpressed young man. Soon the
unusual pair are regular companions, with Margaux finding in this relationship a
chance to invent herself according to her desires and not just her defenses. Koertge
has created a compelling character in the outwardly icy Margaux, who's keenly
aware of her persona (when Danny instructs her to act natural, she coolly responds,
"So I should be a haughty bitch?") and her high value in the social marketplace,
but whose penetrating intelligence has made it impossible for her to avoid ques-
tioning the merits of that value. The book's style and tone take their cue from
their protagonist: the third-person, present-tense narration is cool and polished,
shimmering with eloquent vocabulary and creative, condensed imagery; Margaux's
self-conversion from commodity to human is a measured reification rather than a
joyous breakthrough, but it's clear nonetheless that it's a badly needed new start.
Though the honed, watchful edginess here is a change of pace from Koertge's
more witty and plainspoken works, his fans will applaud him all the more for his
flexibility, and they'll be intrigued by this exploration of a kind of character most
people never really get to know. DS
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
A Woman for President: The Story of Victoria Woodhull; illus.
by Jane Dyer. 
Walker, 2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8909-9 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8908-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
7-9 yrs
Nineteenth-century reformer Woodhull makes a timely appearance during this
election season, reminding listeners that it is indeed possible for a woman to run
for the Presidency. Her rags-to-riches story, which would play nicely at a contem-
porary convention, may not have propelled her into the White House, but it has
all the makings of a gripping tale for a twenty-first-century audience-an abusive
father; a kindly patroness; careers as child preacher, spiritualist, stockbroker, news-
paper editor, suffragist; multiple marriages; a gutsy run for the highest office in the
land. Unfortunately it doesn't pack very neatly into the text-intensive picture-
book format, as Krull tosses out juicy family tidbits, then maddeningly leaves them
unexplained. With whom did Victoria travel on the preacher circuit? Was her
first husband responsible for their children's medical problems? How did she
"rescue" her sister Tennessee? How did they meet Cornelius Vanderbilt? Why
and how did her family plot against her? Dyer's watercolors portray Woodhull
with a delicate porcelain face, a backbone of cast iron, and expressive blue eyes that
flash between piercing and pensive, and the meticulously detailed settings, from
Delmonico's to lecture halls, convey the range of milieus in which Woodhull
mingled. As might be expected for a subject rarely featured in children's literature,
Krull's bibliography lists only adult sources; listeners may very well want to know
more, so be prepared to do some supplemental reading. EB
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Blood Secret. HarperCollins, 2004 
24 9p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000065-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000066-X 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
After her mother's disappearance, eight-year-old Jerry de Luna decides to stop
speaking. Six years later, Jerry is sent to live with her great-great aunt Constanza,
OCTOBER 2004 
* 85
a baker in New Mexico. Upon finding an old trunk in the basement ofConstanza's
Albuquerque home, Jerry discovers that she is able to transcend the present and
experience the lives of individuals during the Spanish Inquisition, individuals who
she comes to realize are her own ancestors. Lasky's latest novel is thus part con-
temporary realism, part historical fiction, and part fantasy, with the story unfold-
ing as Jerry visits the cellar and discovers artifacts from the past tucked into the
trunk that had journeyed from Spain to the New World hundreds of years ago.
The historical voices change, moving rapidly through generations, all sharing the
common experience of being Jewish during the Inquisition, of secretly practicing
their faith, of forced baptisms and burnings at the stake. The historical thread is
strong, and the present-day account of Jerry's experiences, as she overcomes her
mutism and tells her aunt about the trunk, is well developed. Attempts to inte-
grate the past and the present in a meaningful way fall short, however, and they'll
likely leave readers flipping rapidly back, looking for the part they missed.
Constanza's total unawareness of her history and her family's Judaism, despite her
possession of the family trunk, isn't credibly explained, and her personal struggle
with the details Jerry relates lacks development, never really substantiating the self-
discovery it implies. Ultimately, the contemporary angle contributes little to an
otherwise absorbing historical tale of the Inquisition, but readers willing to sort
through the voices and shifts in time may find this an enjoyably complex novel. A
family tree is included, along with an author's note providing an overview of the
history and a brief bibliography. HM
LAWRENCE, MICHAEL 
A Crack in the Line. 
Greenwillow, 2004 
323p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072478-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072477-3 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Sixteen-year-old Alaric and Naia are the same person-almost. Because the chances
of their embryo's being male or female were equal, the universe has split into par-
allel realities-one containing the sullen, disagreeable Alaric, the other holding
instead the cheerful, thoughtful Naia. Brought together by a mysterious connec-
tion through a generations-old tree in their backyard, the two teenagers trace the
original crack in the family line that resulted in their distinct worlds. Frequent
visits back and forth reveal that there are countless parallel universes from which
countless more split off daily (including one in which Alaric sees his father as a
thief and a murderer). In just over a week, family mysteries are detected and
resolved piece by piece, while Alaric, whose mother was killed in a train wreck two
years before, must deal with seeing Naia's mother alive and his own life as it might
have been. The various worlds are cleverly written to be recognizable as alternates,
and the 50/50 chances pointed up by the differences between worlds gives the
reader cause to cogitate further on the motivations behind each choice. Though
there are a few glitches in setup and plotting (is the protagonists' final exchange
really permanent, since its mechanism remains accessible?), the superior wordcraft,
thorough world-building, and compassionate characterization make this novel an
attractive choice for teens trying out SF for the first time. TC
LEAVITT, MARTINE 
Heck Superhero. Front Street, 2004 
14 4p
ISBN 1-886910-94-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Heck is a heroic caretaker to his beloved and easily overwhelmed mother, who
periodically sinks into depressions that he categorizes as "hypertime"; he's there-
fore reluctant to seek external help when eviction from their apartment not only
86 
* THE BULLETIN
leaves him with no place to stay but also means he has no idea where his mother
actually is ("Going to the police would be the end of their secret that Everything
Wasn't Necessarily Okay"). At heart a superhero, prone to drawing comics when
his art teacher would rather he devoted time to serious practice of his considerable
artistic talent, Heck is convinced that the way to right this situation is to perform
the ultimate Good Deed, since the "Good Deed was the only way to change the
reality you were in right now, the only way to make everything okay." Leavitt
paints with painful clarity the dilemma of a boy trying not to slide into oblivion
while trying to do the best he can for the parent he adores. The narrative is quietly
eloquent about the sudden evaporation of structure in Heck's life and his brave
but doomed attempts to muster sufficient power to restore it. There's also rich-
ness in the cast of characters he caroms off of, ranging from concerned authorities
to suspicious adults to kids even more troubled than he, as he wanders the streets
in search of his mother; his own character is defined not only by his determination
and creative fantasy but also the loyal affection he's earned from those who know
him, such as his best friend, Spence, and his supportive art teacher. Imaginative
yet sympathetic, this is a telling portrait of a kid whom readers will be glad to see
find his way back into the mainstream. DS
LE GUIN, URSUL 
Gifts. 
Harcourt, 2004 
[288p]
ISBN 0-15-205123-6 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Brantors, or chiefs, of the various clans of the Uplands have powers passed down
through generations, powers to call animals to the hunt, start fires, cast a wasting
disease, or undo the very essence of a life or thing. The clans live isolated from the
inhabitants of the Lowland cities in an uneasy truce, where each people's ambi-
tions are kept at bay by fear of the other's vengeance. Two Upland teenagers, Gry
and Orrec, have grown from childhood friendship into romance and also into a
repudiation of their hereditary powers: Gry refuses to call animals to their deaths,
and Orrec blindfolds himself to harness his wild power to "undo." Rejecting tra-
ditions that bind them to roles unwanted and undesired, Gry and Orrec decide to
leave their homes and seek a freer if less privileged life in the Lowlands. Le Guin's
gentle storytelling subtly provides the family and feudal histories related to the
gifts and their transformation from boon to bondage, and her work has an under-
lying mythic quality that speaks to the land's ecology while it supports the con-
tinuing action. Orrec narrates the story of his people and his family with the
confused, passionate voice of a youngster struggling with powers and emotions he
does not understand and cannot control. The couple's choice to leave their fami-
lies' tradition-bound futures behind is a moral and emotional decision that has a
sincere if quiet resonance, and readers will relate to the rite of separation even as
they're absorbed in the notion of a powerful yet burdensome heritage. JMD
LIMB, SUE 
Girl, 15, Charming but Insane. Delacorte, 2004 
214p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90244-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73214-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Jess is a cheerful and creative girl, though she's working below her potential in
school ("There had never been underachievement like it, apparently. It was al-
most an achievement in itself") and, as far as she's concerned, in the romantic
stakes: she longs for handsome Ben Jones, despite the fact that he seems more in
OCTOBER 2004 
* 87
the league of her perfect friend Flora. It doesn't help that her family life is in
upheaval, with her grandmother moving in with Jess and her mother, and that Jess
has been unintentionally neglecting her longtime buddy, Fred. Limb's ebullient
style and witty lines will delight fans of Rennison's Angus, Thongs, andFull-Frontal
Snogging (BCCB 5/00) who have grown ready for something a little more sophis-
ticated, while events such as Jess' tragic mishap with an emergency pair of pros-
thetic breasts (made from minestrone soup in plastic bags) ensure that sophistication
still takes a backseat to solid comedy. The relationship drama goes through some
familiar dynamics (before Fred and Jess can discover and avow their mutual ro-
mantic interest, they undergo several misunderstandings about who really likes
whom), but the easy banter of the old friends is witty and plausible; the book also
adds a fresh touch to the paradigm by making Ben a really good guy-and smarter
than Jess had thought-who genuinely likes Jess as a friend and who wishes to stay
uncoupled. Readers will relish the heady blend of rueful humor and tantalizingly
uncertain romance. DS
LION, MELISSA 
Swollen. 
Lamb, 2004 
18 3p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90876-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74642-3 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 9-12
Mediocrity has always provided a hedge of protection for Samantha; it allows her
to remain invisible at school, to pursue (or rather, allow) anonymous sexual liaisons
with faceless boys on the beach, and to avoid entanglement in the complicated
adult relationships that surround her. When Farouk arrives at her school and
shows an interest in her, she wishes to be something more, someone who is
fascinating enough to win his love, but this relationship, like all the others, doesn't
last beyond sex. Lion provides enough detail for the reader to realize the pressures
placed on Farouk to succeed and pursue relationships within the Persian community,
but Sam reduces his distancing himself from her to the fact that he's a boy, and all
boys necessarily grow into men like her father-faithless, thoughtless, and irresistible.
Sam's narrative voice is misty and dissolute, annoyingly peppered with conjunctions
that don't join anything, leaving the reader with the persistent feeling of having
missed something. Her philosophy of love is clear enough, however: being a boy's
first love is as good as it gets, and even that isn't very good. She flirts with the idea
that a baby might give you something to hold on to-after all, it worked for her
father's girlfriend, who is the only trustworthy adult in Sam's life, and it worked
for Linda, the girlfriend of the most popular boy in school, whose death by
mysterious circumstances floods Sam with existential quandaries. It's all fairly
gloomy, but readers weary and wary of Dessen- and Cabot-style happily-ever-afters
might feel more at home with Sam's grim acceptance that all relationships are
inherently dysfunctional so that, in the end, the only thing left to do is cope. KC
LUNGE-LARSEN, LISE, ad. 
The Hidden Folk: Stories of Fairies, Dwarves, Selkies,
and Other Secret Beings; illus. by Beth Krommes. 
Houghton, 2004 
72p
ISBN 0-618-17495-8 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
As the source note explains, traditional tales often lack the narrative thrust modern
readers crave, so these bits of folklore have been expanded by the author into short,
highly readable stories introducing the "hidden folk" of northern Europe. Con-
cise descriptions of each class of folk set the stage for the illustrative tales, and
snippets of intriguing trivia dot the pages. The intimate and chatty tone of the
88 
* THE BULLETIN
text, which offers highly desirable secret information on how to interact with the
denizens of Faerie, encourages confidence in the teller's veracity and repeated reading
of the collection. A wide range of clear colors, shaded via ink detailing rather than
through tonal variance, light the illustrations of rounded and stocky people, fair-
ies, and dragons, whose robust linocut lines impress the viewer with their sturdy
physicality. An introduction to the collection provides a cozy overview; a list of
references and a general comment about origins, but no specific sources, are pro-
vided. TC
MACKLER, CAROLYN 
Vegan Virgin Valentine. 
Candlewick, 2004 
228p
ISBN 0-7636-2155-2 
$16.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Mara Valentine is heading surefootedly into the future, planning to graduate high
school as the valedictorian of her class (beating out her ex-boyfriend) and, courtesy
of additional studies, start college as a sophomore in the fall, much to the pleasure
of her fond parents. Into this orderly arrangement comes Mara's rebellious year-
younger niece, Vivienne Vail Valentine, known as V; Mara's parents leap gleefully
into rescuing their errant other daughter's errant daughter, lavishing encourage-
ment and attention on her every move while Mara grits her teeth and tries to
adjust to V's invasion of every aspect of her life. Mackler demonstrates the same
sharp perception as she did in The Earth, My Butt, and Other Round Things (BCCB
10/03) but applies it to a more complicated problem: a girl who's so goal-oriented
that she's lost sight of the journey. Though trusty Mara and wild V learn from
each other and gradually develop a relationship, the book keeps the theme of V's
and Mara's mutual education underplayed, focusing more on Mara's gradual self-
questioning and making her reconsideration of her priorities quietly convincing.
The slowly evolving love story between Mara and her young boss at the coffee
house where she works isn't so much a subplot as a complementary plot, showing
Mara what she's missing and giving her an incentive to loosen the bond with her
overly supervisory parents, to whom she's tethered by a cell phone. The sensitive
and mature romance makes this additionally appealing, but Mara will be a sympa-
thetic heroine to young adults seeking to define their own paths. DS
MARCHETTA, MELINA 
Saving Francesca. Knopf, 2004 
[24 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-98982-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82982-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
Francesca is already discomfited by a school change-she's spending her last two
years of high school at a mostly male, previously all-male institution, while her
best friends from her old school are all finishing up together at a much more wel-
coming place-when her mother suffers a debilitating depression. Lively, opin-
ionated Mia has always been the mainstay of her family, so Francesca's gentle
father is overwhelmed by the incapacity of the woman he adores, while Francesca
and her brother, Luca, struggle along as best as they can with this huge hole in the
part of life that defines them ("My mother won't get out of bed and it's not that I
don't know who she is any more. It's that I don't know who I am"). Francesca's
lonely struggle is eased as she begins to find not just random companionship but
genuine, meaningful friendship of a kind she'd sacrificed for popularity at her old
school, and it's those friendships that give her strength to face, survive, and address
the situation at home. Australian author Marchetta, author of LookingforAlibrandi
(BCCB 4/99), takes what could be a predictable problem novel and turns it into a
OCTOBER 2004 
* 
89
rich exploration of maturation, identity, family, and friendship. There's a deft
contrast and also connection between Francesca's ordinary anxieties about her
mother's influence and her helpless distress about the breakdown that's dissolving
her family, but it's also clear that it's the adversity that has driven Francesca to find
friendships of real value, and even the beginnings of romance. Readers will appre-
ciate Francesca's delicate, gradual appreciation of her mother-and herself-as a
magnetic yet fallible human being. DS
MARK, JAN 
Useful Idiots. Fickling, 2004 
409p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75032-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75023-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Merrick Korda's field of archaeology has fallen into disrepute since the apocalypse,
but he remains committed to it. He uncovers more than he expects, however,
when he assists in the recovery of Parizo Man, an "Aboriginal" (the term for those
English who remain in traditional towns, their traditional ways protected by the
state) buried in a plundered grave uncovered by a storm on a strip of protected
coast. Parizo Man becomes the center of a political maelstrom, and Merrick finds
himself deeply involved with the Aboriginals, who possess unusual bone growths
known as "pearls," which are harvested by the unscrupulous and sold for a great
deal of money to collectors of illegal precious gems. Merrick discovers that the
sting of a particular horsefly is actually the cause of the valuable growths; after he
arranges for the insect to bite him and grows his own pearl, he too becomes a
player in this dangerous intrigue. On the surface the author creates a believable
futuristic world with credible politics: corporations run the world, history has
been rewritten, and ethnic loyalties are passe due to the past wars caused by na-
tionalistic fervor. The archaeologist's intellectual passion is authentically fervent,
and the bureaucratic morass of idealism run amuck is chillingly portrayed. Unfor-
tunately, the contrivances of character and plot, as well as the uneven pacing, im-
pede the storytelling, and Merrick's age (twenty-seven) and absence of personality
mean that he's less than a magnetic protagonist for teen readers. While this isn't
up to the standards of futurist adventures such as Farmer's The House of the Scor-
pion (BCCB 11/02), mature young adult readers with a penchant for scientific
espionage may nonetheless be intrigued by this future shock. JMD
MATTHEWS, L. S. 
Fish. Delacorte, 2004 
183p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90217-4 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73180-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
They stayed through years of drought and a deluge of flood, but when war threat-
ens to get too close to their village, relief workers Mum and Dad tell Tiger that
they have to go to the border where they can get word to their embassy and fly
home. Tiger insists on bringing along a fish that has appeared in a muddy pool left
behind by the heavy rains. Assisted by a native guide, the family encounters sev-
eral life-threatening moments on their journey, including being nearly kidnapped
by rogue soldiers. The fish, heavily freighted with symbolic resonance, gets smaller
and smaller as their hope and water supply dwindle. In fact, the metaphoric grav-
ity rather sours the more concrete appeals of the story. Deliberately hazy details
seem designed to make the story mythic and universal, but any reader with a mo-
dicum of curiosity regarding Tiger's gender or age (never hinted at), the country
they are fleeing (probably somewhere in Africa), and their country of origin (prob-
ably England) will doubtless be frustrated by the author's omission of these things.
90 
* THE BULLETIN
The solid facts of the escape adventure, the taut suspense, and the atmospheric
descriptions make this sufficiently absorbing on the manifest level, though, so readers
may find the storytelling bait worth the allegorical hook. KC
McMULLAN, KATE 
My Travels with Capts. Lewis and Clark, by George Shannon;
illus. by Adrienne Yorinks. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2004 
260p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-008100-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-008099-X 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
George Shannon, the youngest member of the Corps of Discovery, is an attractive
focus for a kids'-eye-view of the famed expedition, and McMullan joins the bicen-
tennial hoopla with another fictionalized journal "penned" by the teenage explorer.
In this iteration Shannon is chosen to accompany the party largely because Lewis'
Newfoundland dog Seaman takes a liking to him. Shannon, of course, does pull
his weight on the crew and, as one would expect, his journal not only details the
sights and travails of the westward journey but also his own maturation in the
company of world-wise men. The journal ends abruptly with the Corps' arrival at
the Pacific coast, and were it not for an appended "letter" from George to his
mother hinting at another journal (very likely a McMullan sequel) to come, read-
ers might feel that the explorers have completed their task and will catch the red-
eye back East. In her concluding note McMullan claims bragging rights to a fam-
ily relationship with Shannon and mentions that he actually presented his mother
with journals, but she stops short of saying she used them for her research. Since
Shannon's character is, then, pretty much left up to authorial imagination, readers
may find that Ambrose's grittier version ofShannon (This Vast Land, BCCB 1/04),
who occasionally joins in with his comrades' drinking and romancing, is consider-
ably livelier than McMullan's somewhat primmer recreation. EB
METZ, MELINDA 
Raven's Point. HarperCollins, 2004 
244p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052372-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052371-9 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Everyone is so elated when Elijah emerges from his year-and-a-half-long coma that
they can't bring themselves to admit the odd changes they note in his personality.
Besides, other strange occurrences are absorbing his friends' attention: Seth is
seeing ghosts, Tavia has acquired power over both domestic and wild animals, and
Jane is having peculiarly real flashbacks. Around their island of Raven's Point,
even more sinister and gruesome things are happening-a mother is testing surgi-
cal implements on her own flesh in order to find the perfect weapon to kill her
daughter, a father is taking bizarre steps to keep "sax and violins" from infecting
his family, and a boy treats half of his father's beer with drain cleaner in a deadly
game of Russian Roulette. It turns out that Elijah has become a living host for an
ancient, disembodied evil that feeds on and accelerates people's deepest and most
repressed hatreds and fears, and it's up to Seth, Tavia, and Jane to use their newly
acquired "gifts" to stop it taking over the town. Both the romance and the gore in
this fast-paced thriller are tinged with suspense; readers will be as interested in who
hooks up as in who kills whom and how. The particular angers and resentments
that fester out-of-control are eerily credible in their motivations, and the climax is
cinematically weird enough to satisfy seasoned phantasmagoria fans. There's even
a plug for doing research in the local library's special collections room, as Tavia,
Seth, and Jane try to figure out how the island's past is linked to their present.
OCTOBER 2004 
* 
91
Read this in broad daylight, and expect a few prickles and "eeeuuws" even then.
KC
MILDE, JEANETTE 
Once upon a Wedding; written and illus. by Jeanette
Milde. 
R&S, 2004 
32p
ISBN 91-29-66048-3 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
In this portrait of connubial chaos, the happy couple wants cherubic children,
much like those they will no doubt have some day, to be in their wedding. What
they get are Agnes, John, and Paul, who delay the ceremony by running off, steal
the bride's shoes at the reception, open the presents, lose a tooth, and, finally, fall
asleep under a table, causing panic among the grownups who can't find the little
darlings. The bride and groom are good sports, however, as is evidenced by their
dazzlingly goofy grins, and all ends happily ever after. Milde's depiction of the two
nonintersecting worlds at the wedding is both frank and funny. While the bride
and groom tear up over their vows, for instance, Agnes and John discuss the neces-
sity of fresh blood on a tooth for the tooth fairy. Then, while the guests toast the
happy couple, the children play a game of "you show me your underwear, I'll
show you mine" under the table. The even width of the marker outlines make the
cleanly drawn figures, with their round white eyes and prominent noses, seem
perpetually good-natured and slightly daffy. Witty details pepper the already comic
illustrations, including thought balloons in the shape of "for sale or trade" ads over
the moms' heads as they try to ready the errant children for their task, sweat drops
popping off the vicar as she worries about the lateness of the bride and groom, and
an audience full of guests not knowing quite which way to look as they too wonder
about the delay. Whimsical endpapers feature a wedding invitation in the front
and a thank-you-for-the-toaster note at the end. Though she may wink at the
adults here, Milde manages to keep a child-centered perspective as she turns wed-
ding hoopla into a site for child's play. KC
MONTANARI, 
EVA 
Tiff, Taff, and Lulu; written and illus. by Eva
Montanari. 
Houghton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-618-40238-1 
$16.00 
R 4-6 yrs
Tiff, Taff, and Lulu are a sibling trio undergoing the tender ministrations of their
beloved mother, who treats her offspring with scrupulous fairness, rotating the
order of attention. That practice means that each kid has to take a turn at being
last, however, resulting each time in the predictable whine of "Why am I always
last?" Rivalrous sibling bickering swells until it finally leads to a scooter mishap
that hurts their mother's leg; they're sufficiently chastened by this outcome to
work together, bandaging Mummy's leg and tucking her up in bed. The saccha-
rine tone of the resolution is undercut by one last unflagging whine (a still-wakeful
Tiff looks at her sleeping family and, of course, wonders why she's always last), and
the rhythmic iteration of the various sibling sequences, punctuated by the repeated
plaintive query, gives the text an effective cadence and tight structure. The sib-
ling-rivalry drama places itself in a vivid fantasyland by making the family into a
chipper collection of little monstrosities with trollish hair and goblinesque teeth
and ears, served by huge, old-fashioned utensils. Deep twilight colors shift palette
from spread to spread, so the little trolls are sometimes a rich pink, sometimes a
mossy green; rumpled or corrugated papers add further textures to mottled con-
federations of color in acrylic and colored pencil, while the trolls themselves stand
out against the backgrounds with near-sculptural relief. While nothing's going to
92 
* THE BULLETIN
put an end to sibling rivalry, the goblin family's quirky demonstration of its occa-
sional absurdity may at least grant anxious siblings a little perspective and harried
parents a little breathing room. DS
MORGAN, NICOLA 
Fleshmarket. Delacorte, 2004 
2 10p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90192-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73154-X 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Robbie Anderson lives with his younger sister, Essie, in the worst of Edinburgh's
early nineteenth-century slums, and he lays his once-prosperous family's downfall
squarely on the shoulders of Dr. Robert Knox, the surgeon who, six years earlier,
had removed a tumor from his mother in an operation from which she never
recovered. Determined to avenge their misfortunes (which readers clearly under-
stand are not of Knox's making), Robbie trails Knox to his home, where he is
apprehended as a thief, and later to his laboratory, where he discovers that the
doctor dissects human cadavers. Robbie becomes entangled with the "resurrec-
tion men" who supply the bodies, and soon the young teen is not only making
money from the grisly trade but also neglecting his sister and heading down the
same path to drunken indigence his absent father has traversed. With some fic-
tionally fortuitous inspiration from a medical student who acts as Essie's protector,
Robbie decides to reform. Getting out of the resurrection trade is harder than
getting in, though, and a life-threatening injury lands Robbie in Dr. Knox's surgi-
cal theater and leads him to a new understanding of the ethical complexities of
medical research and practice in the years before the conquest of pain. Although
the character of the real-life Knox is obviously fictionalized here, Morgan effec-
tively tucks him into the shadowy background of her atmospheric tale; when he
does emerge in direct confrontation with Robbie, the elitist arrogance and single-
minded dedication to advancing anatomical knowledge which reputedly charac-
terized him are neatly realized. A brief concluding note comments on historical
characters who appear in the novel. Readers who like their dank, dark-alley chill-
ers with a touch of historicity should be chillingly pleased. EB
MORRIS, JACKIE 
The Seal Children; written and illus. by Jackie Morris. 
Lincoln,
2004 
24p
ISBN 1-84507-040-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-7yrs
Here the traditional story of the fisherman who captures a selkie bride by stealing
her skin is given a diplomatic spin and a historical tie-in. The selkie comes to land
on the Welsh coast of her own accord, having fallen in love "with the fair-faced,
soft-voiced Huw who sang as he fished." Huw in his turn accepts the transitory
nature of their alliance, and he keeps her sealskin as a freely given "sign of her
love." After presenting Huw with two more signs of her love-children Ffion and
Morlo--the selkie woman returns to her home in the waves. Later, when the local
villagers try to gather funds to emigrate to the New World but cannot raise the
money, Ffion and Morlo enlist their mother's help to dredge up a box of pearls
from beneath the sea, which pay for everyone to sail to the Americas, though Morlo
elects to remain behind as a seal with their mother. The text, loaded with imagery,
reads well aloud, and many of the seascape illustrations, awash with the colors of
the ocean, entice the eye to linger. The figures are less successful-the poses seem
forced, and characters' eyes often stare blankly into space, distancing the viewer
from the emotional import of the scenes. Audiences familiar with the usual ver-
sion of the selkie-wife story, in which the fisherman steals her skin and keeps her
OCTOBER 2004 
* 93
captive for decades, may see this reworking as a too-obvious patch in the fabric of
the tale. However, this rendering still resounds with the theme of personal trans-
formation, and the addition of the motif of family unity may gain the story new
converts. TC
O'MALLEY, KEVIN 
Lucky Leafi written and illus. by Kevin O'Malley. 
Walker,
2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8925-0 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8924-2 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Glazed eyes greet the audience from the droopy-socked armchair potato wielding
his videogame controls on the title page. The next scene pictures him springing to
life as he works his way through level 20, only to be harried outside by the offstage
voice of his mother: "Okay, mister, turn it off. Get outside and play." His retort
of"I am playing!" gets him nowhere but to the door, and he and his frisky pooch
are banished to the glory of a picture-perfect autumn day ("Stupid outside"). His
buddies have been similarly marooned, and as they shuffle through the fallen
foliage, they focus on a single leaf that dangles from a branch: "I heard that last
leaf is lucky." They wait awhile for it to fall, but his pals can't go the distance and
the boy and his dog are left to their lonely vigil. The boy outsmarts his quarry by
hiding in a pile of leaves; the last leaf floats onto his hat and leads him on a chase.
An abrupt segue returns the action to the armchair setting, where the boy gloats,
"Level 20, you're going down, baby!", sporting the russet lucky leaf in his hair.
O'Malley underscores the autumnal crispness with knife-edged borders and a matte
palette that is tawny yet vivid, contrasting the broad swath of blue-green sky with
the deep greens and glowing auburns of the landscape. Fans who are just finding
their feet with the printed word will again appreciate O'Malley's simple, kid-world
dialogue in speech bubbles: "What are you guys doing?" "We got kicked outside."
"Aww nuts, I stepped in a pile." O'Malley comes dangerously close here to deliv-
ering a message-there's fun to be had outdoors as well as in-but since video
never becomes the enemy, the lesson goes down easily. EB
OSWALD, NANCY 
Nothing Here but Stones. 
Holt, 2004 
2 1 5p
ISBN 0-8050-7465-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Refugees from late-nineteenth-century Russia, Emma's family has traveled to
Cotopaxi, Colorado, to form a new Jewish colony on the arid soil. Unscrupulous
loan sharks, prejudiced neighbors, foraging bears, and quixotic Native American
horse thieves (because Emma once gave them food, they generously give back her
horse-once she's tracked it down) complicate a year already loaded with anxiety
and grief: a family already trying to deal with the loss of Emma's mother then
undergoes another tragedy when Emma's little brother dies, and Emma's older
sister longs for a local man who doesn't return her affection and always takes out
her frustrations on Emma. However, the innocent optimism of eleven-year-old
Emma's narration tempers even the dreary prospect of the family's wintertime
starvation-after all, things can't be too bad if she still has her beloved horse.
Emma's perspective remains true to her age and experience throughout the novel,
her eager eyes noticing everything and everyone in the community (to the reader's
entertainment and elucidation), from speculative gossips to devout Sabbath-day
worshippers. The struggles of the settlers are believably drawn against the histori-
cal backdrop of religious prejudice and physical hardship, but their small successes
94 
* THE BULLETIN
and dogged determination to continue their way of life endow the tale with hope.
An author's note gives the historical basis for the novel. TC
PATERSON, JOHN 
Blueberries for the Queen; written by John and Katherine Pater-
son; illus. by Susan Jeffers. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623943-5 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623942-7 
$17.99 
R 6-9 yrs
Though William has rich fantasies of being a wizard who could "turn Hitler into a
loathsome toad" and stop the war, he is frustrated at being too young to do real
war work like his parents and his older brother, Roger. When Queen Wilhelmina
of the Netherlands rents a nearby farm, he and Roger are enchanted by the idea of
having a real live queen living so close, but neither is able to catch a glimpse of her.
As William and his father pick blueberries, they discuss the difference between war
work and peace work-the kind of work you do to help others cope with difficult
circumstances-and William hatches a plan to visit the queen (whom he finds is
"disguised like a grandma") with a gift of fresh-picked berries. An author's note
reveals that the story is based on John Paterson's real-life experience when he was
a boy, and the Patersons vividly capture the frustration and romantic idealism of a
small boy's attempt to make sense of the world in terms that he understands from
his storybook notions of war and service to his sovereign. Jeffers' art effectively
mingles nostalgic, homey images of rural New England farm life and wartime
work with the high flights of William's heraldic fantasies of queens, knights, and
courtiers. The movements between the two are deftly handled, not so much an-
nounced as signaled, offering sufficient context for even the youngest viewers to
understand that William is reshaping reality through his imagination. Text and
illustration work together to create a moving testament to the all-but-lost qualities
of chivalry and grace in turbulent times. KC
PATNEAUDE, DAVID 
Thin Wood Walls. 
Houghton, 2004 
[2 4 0p]
ISBN 0-618-34290-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
With the bombing of Pearl Harbor, eleven-year-old Joseph Hanada's life goes into
freefall-from an accepted, even well-liked neighbor and schoolmate, to a social
pariah or object of pity and charity, depending on the biases of his Washington
townsfolk. His father, a leader in the Japanese-American community, is dragged
off for interrogation by the FBI in the middle of the night, leaving his wife, mother,
and two sons to fend without him throughout the coming years of the war. The
Hanadas are moved to an assembly center in California, then on to a permanent
camp at Tule Lake, where they reunite with former acquaintances and mark time
in their flimsy quarters with mindless rounds of kitchen work, school and ball
games, makeshift handicrafts, and scraping for any reliable information concern-
ing the progress of the war and their own chance to return to their homes. Joseph's
older brother, Mike, celebrates his eighteenth birthday by enlisting with the Japa-
nese-American 442nd Regimental Combat Team, determined to prove his patrio-
tism, and the young man loses his life saving an all-white battalion in Italy. This is
a little short on nuance: Patneaude presents the Hanadas as committed American
flag-wavers who never glance back to their homeland, and a tad more internal
conflict on this issue would have gone a long way to enhance credibility. Dialogue
is often unnaturally bookish: "'You need to start hanging around your own kind,'
OCTOBER 2004 * 95
Mueller said to Ray. 'Joe is my kind,' Ray said." Myriad small humiliations,
erupting prejudices, and gross violations of justice are clearly portrayed, though,
and readers who've paid any attention to nightly news can draw their own parallels
to the imperilment of civil rights in times of national crisis. EB
PEREZ, MARLENE 
UnexpectedDevelopment. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2004 
163p
ISBN 1-59643-006-0 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 7-12
While some girls may long for bigger breasts, Megan is sick of her generous en-
dowment, which brings her physical discomfort and constant harassment, and
she's hoping to undergo surgical breast reduction once she's eighteen. When Jake
Darrow, the boy ofMegan's dreams, starts displaying an interest in her, she's thrilled,
but even as their relationship progresses she can't help wondering if he really sees
her as more than a pair of big boobs. Megan's narration effectively captures the
viewpoint of a young woman who feels her body is controlling her destiny, and the
depiction of the casual teen-and adult-harassment she undergoes rings true.
The book's treatment of the issue is somewhat muddy, however: a character who
resents being cruelly nicknamed for her big butt doesn't get any sympathy, there's
little authorial indication that Megan is wrong in her feeling that she alone is so
victimized, and nobody seems to realize that the boss' harassing actions are actu-
ally illegal as well as offensive. Jake is also more an ideal than a real character, but
there's a sweetness to Megan's blossoming that will make readers happy to join the
fantasy, regardless of their own development. DS
PIERCE, TAMORA 
Trickster's Queen. 
Random House, 2004 
[432p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91467-6 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81467-1 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 6-9
In this sequel to Trickster's Choice (BCCB 11/03), Aly accompanies the Balitang
family back to the capital, Rajmuat, where the stakes are higher, the danger greater,
and the politics more intricate. Chosen by the god, Kyprioth, to ensure that the
raka rebels overthrow the ruling Rittevon line to install a raka queen, Aly is now
the revolution's official spymaster, and she has her work cut out for her. Not only
does she have to remove the boy-king and his power-mad regents, she has to do so
while tiptoeing under the nose of the Crown's spymaster and the captain of the
King's Guard. As the rebellion moves from covert gossip and symbolic attacks to
visible assassination and fighting in the streets, Aly becomes increasingly aware of
the immense personal costs, for all involved, of achieving a revolution. Jumping
back into the thick of this complicated story may be disorienting for some readers,
even with the explanatory prologue, but Pierce continues the momentum from the
first book so well that they will be entertained no matter how long it takes them to
catch up. The shockingly unpredictable plot developments and realistically nu-
anced characters keep the story true to its volatile environment, while Pierce is
careful to keep Aly likable by tempering her calculating ruthlessness with emotion
and empathy (and a continuing romance). Still, Pierce does not pull back from
the hard consequences of political maneuvering, and some of the events orches-
trated by rulers, rebels, and Kyprioth are rightly horrifying. Though the revolu-
tion is ultimately successful, the end leaves events open enough for Aly's return,
and fans will undoubtedly hope for more. KH
96 
* THE BULLETIN
POLACCO, PATRICIA 
John Philip Duck; written and illus. by Patricia
Polacco. 
Philomel, 2004 
4 0p
ISBN 0-399-24262-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
Charmed by the ducks at the Peabody Hotel in Memphis and intrigued by the
story of Edward Pembroke, the first Peabody Duckmaster, Polacco floats an imagi-
native story of young Edward and his rise to fame. She includes the major players
of the public-relations stunt in her tale, but she fictionalizes the account to make it
a story of a young boy who finds an abandoned wild duck on his farm and takes it
to raise. Since he works at the Peabody during the week, he enlists the entire staff
in a conspiracy to keep John Philip Duck (named for Edward's idol, John Philip
Sousa) a secret from the gruff but fair manager, Mr. Schutt. When John Philip
gets mixed up with some live duck decoys who belong to Mr. Schutt's hunting
buddies, Edward has to come clean, and Mr. Schutt decides to give him a month
to train the ducks. He comes in under his deadline, training the ducks to march
from the elevator to the lobby fountain to a Sousa march, stay in the fountain all
day, and march back in the evening. The rest, they say, is history. Or, actually,
not history, as the real story behind the ducks is quite different. In making this
into a children's story, Polacco introduces the formulaic elements of a boy hiding
a beloved pet, working hard to achieve a goal, and becoming world famous in the
process. The events are contrived and somewhat syrupy to boot, but the tale none-
theless works fairly well-it's a strong, inspiring story with a satisfying ending,
even if it isn't true. Polacco's signature illustrations of highly emotive figures in
exaggerated poses (and this includes the ducks) provide the right tone for this
celebratory tale of a quirky, determined kid; while the text goes on too long, there's
enough suspense and genuine interest in the fate of Edward and his ducks to keep
the fidgets at a minimum. KC
PROVOOST, ANNE 
In the Shadow oftheArk; tr. by John Nieuwenhuizen. 
Levine/
Scholastic, 2004 
368p
ISBN 0-439-44234-6 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Flooded marshes threaten the livelihood of Re Jana's fishing family, and they head
east with a guide in search of the enigmatic Builder who is rumored to be con-
structing a huge vessel in the middle of arid land. Re Jana's father cares little at
first for the purpose behind the mysterious vessel; he's happy, like the rest of the
laborers, to have the work, and he even respects the Builder himself: "He was
passionate, he had a plan, it was not surprising he had won a special place in the
heart of his god." As Re Jana catches the eye and secures the love of the Builder's
son, Ham, information begins to spread concerning the prophecy of coming anni-
hilation by flood; nonetheless the workers continue, certain that they will be shel-
tered on the commodious ark. Of course, they are wrong. Ham sneaks Re Jana on
board as his concubine, her father is left to float in the stormy waters in a reed
funeral boat he had built for his wife, and Re Jana is torn between her desire to flee
with her unborn child from this family of zealots or to secure her future on prom-
ised dry land. Provoost's Builder is a cannily crafted amalgam of Scriptural Noah,
with his messy family concerns and his penchant for wine, and Mesopotamian Ut-
napishtim, a master at dissembling to keep the work underway. Although extra-
Biblical episodes aboard the ark are melodramatic-Re Jana's sexual encounters
with all the Builder's sons and Ham's wife, a shipboard fire, the survival of three
persons outside the Builder's family, the suicide of the Builder's wife (clearly not
OCTOBER 2004 
* 97
destined to be the seed sower of legend)-teleological issues at the heart of the
flood story are challenging indeed, and readers will long ponder whether salvation
has been justly awarded to the righteous. 
EB
REES, DOUGLAS 
Grandy Thaxter's Helper; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Atheneum,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83020-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Death has come to carry Grandy Thaxter away, but she's not ready. "I can't go
until I finish my work," she says, and she invites Death to help her with the chores
so that she "can leave sooner." 
Unaware that he's about to be had, Death
agrees... and so begins a losing contest against Grandy's effervescent good hu-
mor and unstoppable drive. After a bone-tiring day of sweeping, dusting, and
washing windows, his hands are too sore to carry off the bright-eyed, bustling old
lady, so he offers to come back for her tomorrow. Another day of hard labor
(making soap, grinding corn, making mush, washing clothes, and scouring dishes)
and the promise of many more such chores convince "Mister Death" that Grandy
is indeed far too busy to be carried away-and too busy she remains, "right to this
very day." Salient details of this original yet folkloric tale are amply supplied in the
concise, content-rich text; those who attempt a readaloud should be aware that ad
libbing through the step-by-step descriptions of Mister Death's tasks will mean
the loss of half the fun. Delicately ornamented gouache, watercolor, and ink illus-
trations, some presented as double-page spreads or full-page images and others
dispensed in tasteful, wry vignettes, bring the nineteenth-century prairie to life
around bandy-legged, crab-mouthed Death, himself dressed in an Abe Lincoln
suit and sporting flyaway hair wisps under his stovepipe hat. Historically accurate
dress, interior decoration, and tools complete the atmosphere of a prim and proper
world in which people do what is expected of them, thus underlining the irony of
watching a virtuous old woman pull a successful con on the Grim Reaper. While
perfectly suited for Halloween reading, this trickster tale will pull its weight year
'round. TC
RYAN, PAM MUrOZ 
Becoming Naomi Ledn. 
Scholastic, 2004 
[256 p]
ISBN 0-439-26969-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
As moms go, Naomi's is the pits: seven years ago, Skyla (nee Terri Lynn) dumped
Naomi and Owen, aged four and one, in Gram's lap and bolted. Now Skyla is on
Gram's doorstep, expecting to be welcomed back into her children's lives. A ma-
nipulative, abusive alcoholic, Naomi's mother plots to take Naomi with her to Las
Vegas (she doesn't want Owen) in order to qualify for the government support
money for poverty-stricken single parents, and when she's thwarted by Gram and
the neighbors, she threatens to take legal action to get custody. In panic, Gram
and the neighbors take the kids to Mexico to find Naomi and Owen's father, who
sends money a couple of times a year without disclosing his address; they're hop-
ing he will show up to the Christmastime radish-carving contest in Oaxaca City, at
which members of his family have competed for the past century. Naomi's inter-
est in soap-carving translates effortlessly into her award-winning idea for an entry
in the annual contest, drawing Naomi and Owen's carver father close symbolically
and literally. Realistic danger from the monstrous Skyla, quick strategizing by
Naomi and Gram, and the incomparable thrill of international travel on the lam
98 
* 
THE BULLETIN
provide a peppery vitality to this carefully crafted story, in which Naomi's expedi-
tion to find her father gives her a chance to grow into her name of Naomi the
Lion-Naomi Le6n. TC
SALLEY, COLEEN 
Why Epossumondas Has No Hair on His Tail; illus. by Janet
Stevens. 
Harcourt, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-15-204935-5 
$16.00 
R 4-6 yrs
Some days it seems like everybody's got a better tail than you do. Skunks, foxes,
and hares all have nifty, fluffy ones, but Epossumondas' tail isn't nifty or fluffy:
it's "just pink and naked and funny looking." Luckily, Mama knows how opos-
sum tails got that way, and she's ready with the story and a warm, comforting lap
for Epossumondas to curl up in while he listens to a tale (apparently original,
though folkloric in structure) told with the same Southern flair and homestyle wit
that define the opossum's first literary adventure in Epossumondas (BCCB 10/02).
The illustrations perfectly complement the dry humor of the text, providing visual
comedy in intensely colored panels packed with exaggerated action and laced with
convincing textures and sheens that invoke viewer credulity even as the images
exult in the impossible. This charismatic pourquoi tale can be told aloud, sans
livre, with great success; however, each illustrated spread is such an eye-pleaser that
to omit use of the book completely would be a crying shame. TC
SAN Souci, ROBERT D., ad. 
The Well at the End of the World; illus. by Rebecca
Walsh. 
Chronicle, 2004 
4 0p
ISBN 1-58717-212-7 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
In this well-documented folktale adaptation, Princess Rosamond journeys to the
end of the world to retrieve the water that will cure her father's illness. Along the
way, she responds willingly to various creatures' pleas for help, thus ensuring that
she will be gifted with healing, riches, and love. Her selfish stepsister gives no such
aid and in her turn is, as audiences will predict, afflicted with trollish ugliness,
swampy scalp, and blimplike buoyancy. Vibrant watercolor and acrylic paintings
in clear hues and jostling patterns fill Rosamond's world with pageantry, while in
the corners of rooms and pockets of gowns wacky cameo performances by frogs,
toads, and chickens provide narrative layering; viewers may, however, be puzzled
by the art's occasional tendency to take off on its own mission (for instance, the
illustrations also suggest that Rosamond receives the gift of beauty along with her
stated rewards). The information-dense text supplies multiple layers of story as
well-besides the traditional theme of goodness triumphant, the tale confirms the
virtues of thriftiness, practicality, and friendship. These multiple themes and the
occasional text-heavy page argue for an audience old enough to maintain focus,
but the interest-loaded illustrations (which draw the eye even from a distance) give
younger listeners plenty to discover during a readaloud. An author's note cites
multiple published sources. TC
SCHWARTZ, AMY 
A Glorious Day; written and illus. by Amy Schwartz. 
Jackson/
Atheneum, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84802-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Schwartz celebrates the quotidian pleasures of the very young in this portrayal of
one day in the life of the four families who live in a small apartment building in the
OCTOBER 2004 
* 
99
midst of a city. Each of the families has either a stay-at-home mom or a work-in
babysitter and a variety of small children-one only child, one set of twin boys,
one set of triplets with a school-age brother, and one baby girl with two school-age
brothers. Round-headed figures of various skin tones with Joan Walsh Anglundish
profiles and pin-dot eyes move in and out of the activities of the day as the kids get
up, get dressed, play, have lunch, nap, go to the playground, have supper around
their family tables, play on their stoop, and go to bed. It's all rather tidy and idyllic
as the moms and sitters focus their full attention on their brood throughout the
day, and nothing more exciting happens than the halfhearted escape of a pet bird.
The white backgrounds that separate the vignettes keep the very busy scenes from
appearing overcrowded, and no detail important to a kid's perspective is over-
looked in either text or illustration. Parents may wince at the disconnect between
the relative serenity of the worlds these orderly people inhabit and their own situ-
ations, but kids will no doubt feel comforted by this utterly non-ironic celebration
of the ordinary. KC
SINGER, MARILYN, ed. 
Face Relations: 11 Stories about Seeing beyond
Color. Simon, 2004 
2 2 4p
ISBN 0-689-85637-7 
$17.95 
R Gr. 7-10
These eleven stories take an unflinchingly honest look at relationships between
teens of different ethnicities. The subtitle is rather unfortunate, as it may connote
to some readers a fantasy of colorblindness, but this is emphatically not the posi-
tion of the writers. Race matters in various ways to the characters as they bravely
position themselves as people who live and love within culturally valued and deval-
ued bodies and seek to build relationships that honor their differences rather than
ignore them. They carry their elders' scars, fears, and hopes close to their hearts,
trying not to, as Asako's Japanese mother tells her in Kyoko Mori's story, "stick
out like an unruly nail waiting to be hammered down" because of their race. In-
stead, they try to believe in the wisdom ofJoseph Bruchac's character Uncle Tommy,
who says that "Whoever you are is real enough. Underneath our skins, everyone's
blood is red." Yet they know that it is never that simple, and that though their
elders might share their skin color, they do not share their world; hence they must
find their own ways to live lives that can no longer be as insular as the worlds their
parents inhabited. In these stories, friendships that were easy in elementary school
become difficult to sustain, parental race and class prejudices interfere with ro-
mances, and September 11th makes the most ordinary interactions between neigh-
bors difficult. Characters "pass" or not, and they try to hold on to heritages even
when they are unsure of what they mean. Though the stories are tinged with
melancholy, none is without soundly realizable hope, grounded in the courage of
the teens themselves. This book will set the stage for many a difficult and neces-
sary conversation about the diverse ways race has come to matter in contemporary
teen life. KC
SKURZYNSKI, GLORIA 
Are WeAlone?: Scientists Searchfor Life in Space. 
National
Geographic, 2004 
92p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-6567-X 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
There's no shortage of material describing Roswell and its seductive ilk, but there
aren't many books for young people that explore the genuine science surrounding
the issue of life outside of the planet Earth. Fortunately, Skurzynski is here to help
100 
* 
THE BULLETIN
plug that gap, with a title that examines the notion from a variety of angles. After
gently debunking popular notions of alien visitation, the book goes on to discuss
projects trying to find evidence of life, such as SETI and other astronomical efforts
to peer into or listen to the depths of space, and research that explores signs of and
kinds of life, even here on Earth, that may lead to an understanding of what kind
of extraterrestrial existence we might encounter. The prose is sometimes a bit dry,
and better use might have been made of images (the often unhelpful captions
don't even distinguish actual photographs from created art), but there's still plenty
of life energy pulsating through the text. Extensive primary research means that
the scientists get to explain their own goals, motivations, and rationales (sidebars
provide brief biographies, with emphasis on the scientists' youth), and this is an
articulate and enthusiastic group of people, deft at explaining the connections be-
tween undersea studies, volcanic examination, dolphin language, etc., and the pos-
sibilities of extraterrestrial life. Even readers familiar with SETI may not have
thought about the ramifications of the other kinds of research covered in the book,
so there's a quiet point made about the breadth of science applicable to the prob-
lem; there's also a tacit invitation to youngsters to jump into science themselves
and contribute to the effort. This will make an easy booktalk and an absorbing
antidote to Close Encounters et al. End matter includes a glossary, source notes, an
index, and a bibliography of books and websites. DS
STEVENSON, JAMES 
No Laughing, No Smiling, No Giggling; written and illus. by
James Stevenson. 
Foster/Farrar, 2004 
3 2p
ISBN 0-374-31829-8 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Mr. Frimdimpny the large reptile (crocogator?) invites youngsters into this book
on the condition that they do not "laugh or smile or giggle" or "do anything you
are told NOT to do." If these rules are broken, the readers must "go all the way
back to the front of the book!" Several opportunities follow for readers and listen-
ers to laugh, smile, giggle, and otherwise disobey these regulations, in collabora-
tion with resistance fighters Freddy Fafnaffer the pig and Wiggly-Worm.
Stevenson's signature watercolored scribbles encourage this rule-breaking attitude,
as colors spread casually into the forbidden territory of white space and lines cross
and disconnect with beguiling abandon. Mercurial changes in visual perspective
and storyline and the final overthrow of the dictatorial Mr. Frimdimpny heighten
a chaotic atmosphere designed to appeal to mulishly independent young listeners.
The irregular structure of the story and the frequent trips back to the front of the
book (as ordered by Mr. Frimdimpny) may backfire on audiences accustomed to
more straightforward tales; nonetheless, exuberant storytime leaders will infuse the
performance with the necessary energy to display this book's charms in full. TC
STRATTON, ALLAN 
Chanda's Secrets. Annick, 2004 
[193p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55037-834-1 
$8.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Just because "everyone is either infected or affected" by HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan
Africa does not mean that the disease is not enshrouded with shame and stigma.
When sixteen-year-old Chanda loses her baby sister to the disease, and her mother's
man, Jonah, shows up writhing in agony, Mrs. Tafa, the local busybody and
Chanda's mother's best friend, calls in a local spirit doctor, who diagnoses witch-
craft plaguing Chanda's house. Her mother must therefore leave to confront her
OCTOBER 2004 
* 
101
sister, who has laid a curse on her. Chanda slowly begins to realize that her mother
has gone away to hide her disease, which means that she is dying far away from her
loved ones. Meanwhile, Chanda's friend Esther has become a prostitute in order
to make enough money to bring her own family back together after their parents'
death. Despite Mrs. Tafa's attempts to keep the stigma of AIDS far from her
neighbors' door, Chanda knows that people matter more than reputation; she
allows the infected Esther to come live with them, and she brings her mother
home to die. This is a searing book on an important subject, but Stratton avoids
didacticism and strain in his storytelling; instead, he creates believable characters
whose circumstances threaten to overwhelm their judgment and their values.
Chanda is as outspoken and honest as she needs to be, and even though she is
sometimes mortified by her own boldness, her bravery (and her cowardice) is al-
ways tinged with the necessity of her horrific situation. Mrs. Tafa, whom Chanda
wants to hate, turns out to be a complex, caring, but flawed human being; she is
chastened by Chanda's unflinching loyalty to her loved ones, and the reader, like
Chanda, is forced to forgive her. Stratton neither overplays nor underplays the
tragedy or the hope here, and there is not a maudlin moment in the novel, just
genuine grief and understanding as the epidemic assumes some of its many human
faces. KC
WAIT, LEA 
Wintering Well. 
McElderry, 2004 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-85646-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year old Will Ames always knew that he would grow up to be a farmer on
his family's Maine farm, but when a tragic accident results in the amputation of
his leg, an angry Will is forced to reassess his future plans. Set in 1819, the year
Maine joined the United States, this historically based novel is told mostly from
the perspective of Cassie, Will's eleven-year-old sister, whose journal entries open
each chapter. As Will is no longer able to help out on the farm, it is decided that
he will spend the summer season with his married sister and her husband in
Wiscasset, the nearby town, with Cassie accompanying as caretaker. The timely
involvement of the compassionate Dr. Theobold opens up vast new opportunities
both for Will, who gets a wooden leg and starts taking his penchant for wood-
working more seriously, and for Cassie, who nurses Dr. Theobold's sick wife and
discovers her own gift for helping the ill. Run-ins with local bullies, Will's attitude
about his condition, and the looming question of whether the two Ames children
will be able to remain in Wiscasset add narrative tension to the tale; the result is a
solidly constructed story that inspires readers to reflect on coping with change and
dreams revised. Cassie's particular struggle with Will's growing independence (and
subsequently lessening dependence on her) is thoughtfully portrayed, and the grow-
ing up the two characters do over the course of the season is well demonstrated in
the plot and dialogue. Historical notes provide background information on
Wiscasset and the state of the medical field at the time of the novel. HM
WARREN, ANDREA 
Escape from Saigon: How a Vietnam War Orphan Became an
American Boy. 
Kroupa/Farrar, 2004 
110p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-374-32224-4 
$17.00 
R Gr. 4-8
More than one million South Vietnamese children were orphaned as a result of the
Vietnam War; woven into this statistic is the story of Operation Babylift, the U.S.
102 
* THE BULLETIN
government's 1975 effort to evacuate orphans that had American families waiting
for them in the States before the fall of Saigon. Warren (author of Orphan Train
Rider, BCCB 9/96), herself an adoptive parent of a Vietnamese child through
Operation Babylift, focuses her exploration on Matt Steiner, who was eight years
old at the time of his arrival in the United States. The single life serves as an
effective lens for viewing the bigger story, as the text offers a compelling and mov-
ing description of one boy's experience in losing his own family, living in a Saigon
orphanage, and, eventually, departing from his homeland to meet his adoptive
family, the Steiners, in Ohio. Matt's memories are effectively reconstructed to
portray his child's-eye perspective, with recollections of playing marbles and learn-
ing to tie his shoes as deep as memories of soldiers and distant gunfire. The exten-
sive minute-by-minute description of the day he leaves Saigon is made all the more
gripping by the shadow of the first Operation Babylift flight, which departed the
previous day and crashed just outside of Saigon. While the story generally main-
tains a political distance from opinions about the war, the text often suggests (with-
out making entirely clear if this viewpoint is Steiner's, Warren's, or both) that the
United States abandoned the South Vietnamese when help was most needed.
Ultimately, though, this is a story not about war itself but those innocent lives
caught in its grip; Warren's text provides ample opportunity for discussion as the
thirty-year anniversary of Operation Babylift approaches. Archived photographs,
both from Steiner's personal collection and public sources, are used throughout
the text; photo credits and an index are included. HM
WEIL, SYLVIE 
My Guardian Angel; tr. by Gillian Rosner. 
Levine/Scholastic,
2004 
[2 2 4p]
ISBN 0-439-57681-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
The Jews of Troyes, France, are frightened by the Crusaders who are camping in
the fields around their community on their way to the Holy Land and who pose an
enormous threat to people of their faith. Twelve-year old Elvina is particularly
aware of their presence, as her grandfather is an important rabbi and teacher in the
town. When she discovers Gauthier, a young Christian boy, hiding from the
Crusaders in an alley in her part of town, a forbidden friendship develops, one that
she must keep hidden from her family. Elvina is certain her sin will lead to de-
struction for her family, but in the end, it is her friendship with Gauthier that saves
her father from persecution by the Crusaders. Elvina is a resourceful character
with a spirited voice and an often amusing take on events. The narration, which
alternates between first and third person, is punctuated by dialogues with her Mazal,
or guardian angel, to whom Elvina turns whenever there is a crisis to avert. Sup-
porting characters offer similarly well-developed personae, from the overeager twin
cousins of Elvira's best friend, to Obadiah, the teacher for whom Elvina secretly
pines. The plot is less successfully developed, especially Elvina's friendship with
Gauthier, which, although key to the story's conclusion, is more often referenced
than demonstrated. Elvina nonetheless provides a candid and often humorous
perspective on everyday life of the period as well as an intriguing take on the expe-
rience of being Jewish in Europe in 1096. An afterword provides factual tie-ins,
and a glossary offers extensive interpretations of Jewish and Hebrew terminology
used throughout the tale. HM
OCTOBER 2004 
* 
103
WESTERFELD, SCOTT 
So Yesterday. 
Razorbill/Penguin, 2004 
[2 5 6 p]
ISBN 1-59514-000-X 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 57, for review.
WILLEMS, Mo 
Knuffle Bunny: A Cautionary Tale; written and illus. by Mo
Willems. 
Hyperion, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-1870-0 
$15.99 
R* 
2-6 yrs
An ordinary trip to the laundromat with Daddy turns catastrophic when young
Trixie notices that Knuffle Bunny, her necessary stuffed rabbit, isn't with them on
the trip home. Unable to speak words that her father understands, Trixie wails
and goes "boneless," but to no avail, since her father just gets irritated. Mom to
the rescue-she immediately grasps the source of Trixie's discontent, and the fam-
ily rushes to the laundromat to retrieve the beloved toy. As with his pigeon books
(BCCB 5/03, BCCB 7/04), Willems' keen sense of illustration and design once
again take center stage in this hilarious microdrama. He juxtaposes cartoon char-
acters reminiscent of old Sunday comics against black-and-white photographic
studies of an urban neighborhood, setting the whole thing on a creamy sage green
background that occasionally breaks the frame to augment the mood of an illustra-
tion. The design is visually original and flawlessly executed, full of deliriously
funny "turn-back-I-wanna-see-that-page-again" moments. Willems is a master
minimalist, evoking emotion with the tilt of a mouth or the set of an eyebrow.
The various neighborhood witnesses to Trixie's meltdown provide wry though
mute commentary with their sidelong glances, Dad is especially heroic in his search
for Knuffle Bunny, and Trixie is truly a toddler scorned when her charades fail to
produce results. Willems definitely scores another home run with this one; bonus
points go to readers/viewers who find the pigeon. KC
WILLEY, MARGARET 
Clever Beatrice and the Best Little Pony; illus. by Heather M.
Solomon. 
Atheneum, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-689-85339-4 
$16.95 
R 4-8 yrs
Beatrice is troubled to find her beloved pony, Treffle, muddy and exhausted in the
morning, as if somebody had ridden him all night. When this phenomenon re-
curs, Beatrice's mother suggests Beatrice seek an explanation from "the village ex-
pert on things not easily explained," the new bread maker. The bread maker
suggests that this may be the work of a lutin, a little man "from the old country,"
and he assures Beatrice that he can help her deal with the invasion; it turns out,
however, that it's really clever Beatrice whose ideas result in the apprehension and
routing of the lutin. Experienced listeners will enjoy recognizing some of the
motifs in this folklore-based tale, and Willey's flavorful and gently rhythmic prose
retains the flow she demonstrated in Beatrice's previous outing, Clever Beatrice
(BCCB 10/01). Audiences will particularly relish not only Beatrice's cleverness
but the story's slyness in demonstrating that wisdom, as Beatrice politely consults
the expert each time only to provide her own solutions in the face of the overhyped
bread maker's continued bafflement. Solomon's illustrations give heft to their
fluid watercolor elements with thicker pigments in acrylic and oils as well as the
occasional touch of collage; the result is a robust and inventively picturesque style
with a concretely imagined world of exaggerated beings and homely countryscapes.
104 
* THE BULLETIN
Give an already appealing heroine a beloved pony and a magical antagonist, and
you've got a well-nigh irresistible picture-book cocktail. A brief note gives no
specific sources but explains the background and behavior of the folkloric lutin.
DS
WOLF, 
ALLAN 
New Found Land: 
Lewis and Clark's Voyage of
Discovery. 
Candlewick, 2004 
500p
ISBN 0-7636-2113-7 
$18.99 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Lewis and Clark hit the literary trail one more time, and now thirteen members of
the considerably fictionalized Corps (dog included) and President Jefferson take a
poetical turn, relating their experiences in free verse. Although some description
of the flora, fauna, and landforms they were mandated to observe is included, the
emphasis is on relationships among the crew and with the indigenous peoples they
encounter. Wolf ascribes to each a sharply distinctive voice: Lewis is hawk-eyed
and morose; George Shannon is acutely aware of his status as the youngster; the
Field brothers surmount every hardship with teasing and kibitzing; Hugh Hall is
forced to abandon his tippling habit; Clark's slave, York, gradually embraces unac-
customed freedom; Seaman, Lewis' Newfoundland, is a long-winded, pedantic
commentator; and Clark cannot leave his gentrified ways back East. The bulk of
the verse is more workmanlike than inspiring, but passages that coordinate thought
and speech with the rhythm of oars or saw blades are startlingly fresh, and multiple
viewpoints of the same events are neatly plaited. Extensive end matter offers fact-
oids about real-life Corps members, glossaries of Indian, French, and nautical terms,
a complete personnel list, and suggestions for further (adult) reading. Approach-
ing the five-hundred-page text is in itself an act of undaunted courage, but in-
trepid readers can be justly proud and satisfied if they complete the journey. EB
YOURGRAU, BARRY 
My Curious Uncle Dudley; illus. by Tony Auth. 
Candlewick,
2004 
211p
ISBN 0-7636-1935-3 
$15.99 
Ad Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Duncan is delighted to be left in the care of his eccentric uncle
Dudley, world traveler, explorer, and all-around fascinating fellow, while his par-
ents go on an extended road trip. A series of incidents related to mail-order po-
tions and powders (Uncle Dudley partially disappears, goblins appear in the kitchen,
a love potion results in amorous confusion) enliven Duncan's and Uncle Dudley's
summer, although nothing ever turns out quite the way uncle or nephew plan.
The incident-strewn plot is peppered with self-conscious prose with little to tie it
all together, and the attempt to make this a learning experience for Uncle Dudley
(who "grows up" when he puts the safety of his nephew before his magical experi-
mentation) puts a little too much freight on what is intended to be light froth.
Still, Auth's black-and-white illustrations have a cartoonily expressive humor, and
Duncan is an enthusiastic narrator. Uncle Dudley's absentminded sorcery has an
offbeat charm, which may be enough to get wizard-happy youngsters reading.
JMD
a
OCTOBER 2004 
* 
105
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
LESTER, JULIUS 
On Writing for Children & Other People. Dial, 2004 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8037-2867-0 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys
At age sixty-five, Lester writes, "As I come to what may be the end of my writing
life, I need to know how and why I became a writer." Fortunately for those into
whose hands this book may fall, he chose to share his exploration with the reading
public. This largely autobiographical volume resounds on multiple levels; Lester
considers the meaning of writing, of storytelling, of imagination, of language, and,
ultimately, of spirit as he travels with ease between conceptual exploration and
intimate reflection on his own life and those of his ancestors. This is not about
writing in the sense of putting pen to paper but a more abstract and deeply per-
sonal examination of how story and soul manifest in a life of writing. Those who
teach or study storytelling, folklore, or literature will find extensive food for thought
within its pages and especially in his recounting of the experience of adapting
folklore; those simply interested in the spiritual side of the writing process will
similarly find plenty upon which to reflect. Told with a fluid, bantering style, this
is a provocative, direct, and remarkably honest self-revelation that deserves exten-
sive readership. HM
SMITH, HENRIETTA, ed. 
The Coretta Scott King Awards: 1970-2004. 3rd
edition. 
American Library Association, 2004 
163p 
illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8389-3540-0 
$35.00
Now in its third edition, this title provides extensive coverage of thirty-five years of
African-American contributions to children's literature. Once again edited by
Henrietta Smith, the text opens with information on the history of the award
(including the 1995 addition of the New Talent Award) and its significance in the
field of children's literature. The body of the text, sectioned into "Author Awards"
and "Illustrator Awards," includes reviews of every winner and honor title as well
as offset excerpts from the books, and sixteen leaves of full-color illustrations fea-
ture some of the artistic highlights from the history of the award. Following the
reviews are more than sixty pages of biographies, including black-and-white pho-
tos of the featured authors and illustrators. Although the book differs little in
format or layout from previous editions, it has been updated to include honorees
through 2004 and promises to continue as a valuable resource for the library's
reference collection. HM
106 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Grindley; Hobbs;
Koertge
Accidents-fiction: Cummings
Actors and acting-stories: Cecil
Adoption: Warren
ADVENTURE: Collins; Dodd;
Fisher; Morgan; Pierce
Africa-fiction: Stratton
African Americans-fiction: Curtis
AIDS-fiction: Stratton
Anger-fiction: Metz
Animals-poetry: Carryl
Animals-stories: Egan; Salley;
Stevenson
Architecture: Curlee
Art and artists: Davies
Art and artists-fiction: Leavitt
Asian Americans-fiction: Cheng;
Patneaude
Aunts-fiction: Lasky; Mackler
Autumn-stories: O'Malley
Babies-stories: Ahlberg Little;
Danziger
Behavior-stories: Joosse
BIBLE STORIES: Provoost
BIOGRAPHIES: Bernier-Grand;
Brown
Biology: Jackson; Skurzynski
Birds: Davies
Birds-stories: Dunrea; Polacco
Brothers-stories: Danziger
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Ehrenhaft; Haddix; Lawrence;
Wait
Brothers and sisters-stories: Gay;
Montanari
Bullies-fiction: Bartek
Camels-poetry: Carryl
Cats-fiction: Ahlberg Improbable;
Corder
Cats-stories: Ahlberg Little; Hesse
Chickens-stories: Andersen
Child development: Harris
China-fiction: Grindley
Consumer education: Westerfeld
Cowboys-fiction: Frank
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Coman; Corder; Giles; Mark;
Morgan; Westerfeld
Crime and criminals-stories: Egan
Crusades-fiction: Weil
DANGER: Metz
Death-fiction: Clark; Cummings;
Rees
Depression-fiction: Marchetta
Disabilities-fiction: Wait
Disasters-fiction: Provoost
Divorce-fiction: Kelly, K.
Dogs-fiction: Frank
Dogs-stories: Joosse
Dragons-fiction: Funke; Hightman
Ducks-stories: Polacco
Elections-fiction: Beard
Elves-stories: Willey
Epidemics-fiction: Stratton
EPISTOLARY FICTION: Hobbs
Ethics and values: Beard; Bernier-
Grand; Cummings; Curtis;
Hirsch; Hughes; Lion; Mackler;
Mark; Pierce; Provoost; San
Souci; Singer; Stratton;
Westerfeld
Explorers and exploring-fiction:
McMullan; Wolf
Families-fiction: Horvath
Families-stories: Schwartz
OCTOBER 2004 
* 107
FANTASY: Collins; Corder; Fisher;
Funke; Hightman; Lawrence; Le
Guin; Metz; Pierce; Yourgrau
Fathers-fiction: Hightman; Ryan
Fish-fiction: Matthews
Fishing-fiction: Bartek
Fishing-stories: Morris
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Andersen; Cecil; Knutson; Lunge-
Larsen; Morris; Rees; Salley; San
Souci; Willey
Food and eating-stories:
Hopkinson; Kelly, J.
Foxes-stories: Knutson
Friends-fiction: Cheng; Clark;
Cummings; Greene; Marchetta
GHOST STORIES: Collier
Grandfathers-fiction: Bartek
Grandmothers-fiction: Rees
Grandparents-fiction: Kelly, K.
Grandparents-stories: Bowen
Grief-fiction: Golding
Growing up-fiction: Hirsch; Limb;
Mackler
HISTORICAL FICTION: Beard;
Buchanan; Collier; Hesse;
Hughes; Lasky; McMullan;
Morgan; Oswald; Patneaude;
Wait; Weil; Wolf
History, U.S.: Krull; McMullan;
Warren; Wolf
History, world: Curlee
Holocaust-stories: Hesse
Homelessness-fiction: Leavitt
HUMOR: Ahlberg Little; Carryl;
Cecil; Coman; Dodd; Dunrea;
Ehrenhaft; Frank; Horowitz;
Horvath; Jeyaveeran; Kelly, J.;
Limb; Mackler; Milde;
Montanari; Rees; Stevenson;
Willems
Identity-fiction: Singer
Illness-fiction: Stratton
Immigrants-fiction: Cheng; Oswald
Immigration: Warren
Jealousy-stories: Danziger
Jews-fiction: Lasky; Oswald; Well
Jews-stories: Hesse
Kidnapping-fiction: Corder; Mark
Labor-fiction: Hughes
Latinos-fiction: Lasky; Ryan
Latinos-poetry: Bernier-Grand
Laughter-stories: Stevenson
Machines-stories: Dodds
Manners-stories: Joosse
Marketing-fiction: Westerfeld
Medicine-fiction: Morgan
Medieval life-fiction: Weil
Mental illness-fiction: Leavitt;
Marchetta
Monkeys-fiction: Buchanan
Monkeys-stories: Jeyaveeran
Mothers-fiction: Clark; Curtis;
Hicks; Leavitt; Marchetta; Ryan
Moving-fiction: Golding
MYSTERIES: Coman; Haddix;
Horowitz; Lawrence
Mythology, classical: Hovey
Native Americans-fiction: Bruchac
Orphans: Warren
Orphans-fiction: Funke
PARODY: Horowitz
Pets-stories: Polacco
POETRY: Bernier-Grand; Hovey
Political science: Beard
Poverty-fiction: Golding
Prejudice-fiction: Grindley; Singer
Prejudice-stories: Egan
Princesses-stories: San Souci
Prophecies-fiction: Collins
Racism-fiction: Patneaude; Singer
Reading aloud: Funke; Horowitz;
Horvath; Limb; Lunge-Larsen
Reading, advanced: Horvath
Reading, easy: Greene; Kelly, K.
Reading, reluctant: Coman; Dodd
Refugees-fiction: Matthews
Relationships-fiction: Ehrenhaft;
Giles; Koertge; Le Guin; Limb;
Lion; Perez; Provoost
ROMANCE: Mackler; Metz; Perez
Royalty-stories: Paterson
School-fiction: Bruchac; Greene
Science: Brown; Davies; Greene;
Jackson; Skurzynski
SCIENCE FICTION: Dodd;
Lawrence; Mark
Seals-stories: Morris
Seasons-stories: Bowen
Secrets-fiction: Haddix
Self-image-fiction: Perez; Singer
108 
* THE BULLETIN
Ships and sailing-fiction: Provoost
SHORT STORIES: Singer
Space: Skurzynski
Spies and spying-fiction: Pierce
SPORTS STORIES: Hicks
Stories-stories: Andersen
Storytelling: Lunge-Larsen; Salley
Storytime: Carryl; Danziger; Gay;
Hopkinson; Kelly, J.; Knutson;
Montanari; O'Malley; Salley;
Stevenson; Willey
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Ahlberg Improbable; Bruchac;
Collier; Le Guin; Morris
SUSPENSE: Giles; Metz
TODDLER BOOKS: Dunrea;
Schwartz; Willems
Toddlers: Harris
Toys-stories: Willems
Twins: Harris
Uncles-fiction: Collier; Yourgrau
Urban life-stories: Schwartz
Vietnam War: Warren
Voyages and travel-fiction: Collins;
Hirsch; Hobbs; Le Guin;
Matthews; McMullan; Provoost;
Ryan; Wolf
Voyages and travel-stories: Bowen;
Hopkinson
War: Warren
War-stories: Paterson
Weddings-stories: Jeyaveeran;
Milde
Witches-fiction: Fisher
Wolves-stories: Kelly, J.
Women's studies: Beard; Krull
Work-fiction: Grindley
World War II-fiction: Buchanan;
Paterson; Patneaude
World War II-stories: Paterson
Writers and writing-fiction:
Ehrenhaft
t 
0
on19 dD
New Storytelling Books
FROM 
A U G U S T HOUSE
PICY HOT COLORS
Sherry Shahan
Illustrated by Paula Barragdn
September
SBN 
0-87483-741-3
16.95
wn hardback binding
i"x 11"
pages; all full color
rs explode off the page in this energetic, jazzy picture
that introduces children to colors in English and
sh. Shahan's rhythmic text echoes Chicka Chicka
Boom and Ecuadoran artist Paula Barrog6n's mixed-
llustrations expand the rhythm of the text and the
of Latino culture.
FOR SURE! FOR SURE!
Hans Christian Andersen
Translated by Mus White
Illustrated by Stefan Czemecki
August * ISBN 
0-87483-742-1
$16.95 * Sewn hardback binding
32 pages, all full color
VIEW & DOWNLOAD THE
ENTIRE FOLKTALE AND
STORYTELLING CATALOG AT
www.augusthouse.com
August House Publishers, Inc.
August House is the
Storytelling Source.
THREE-
MINUTE
TALES
rnnii anniikii
31=U6M FRKUM 
AKUUNI
THE WORLD TO SHAF
WHEN TIME IS SHO
Margaret Read MacDon
ISBN 
0-87483-
Sewn hardback
7' x 10" Staff Resource Title
MacDonald includes stories from Mexico, China, Indonesia, Japan,
Cuba, Turkey, Syria, Native America, Jewish culture, and other
nations and traditions in a
useful volume for parents, 
U U
teachers, librarians, church 
iS
school leaders, and others.
www.augusthouse.com
AUGUST 
HOUSE 
/ P.O. BOX 
3223 / UTTLE 
ROCK, 
AR 72203 / 201 EAST 
MARKHAM 
72201 / 1-800-284-8784 / FAX 
501-372-5579
^--V %r '
FREE
TRIAL ISSUE
of an award-winning
publication!
Visit
www.TeachinqK-8.com
Click on
FREE TRIAL ISSUE
THE
Teaching K-8 is 
filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges
to their students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
WuoN 
To receive your
FREE TRIAL ISSUE visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
* 
Teaching K-8 Magazine
40 Richards Avenue * Norwalk, CT 06854
m
~$3~~
1~25So
U.S~A.
AM~
Unifvityof Wlinois Pres
1325 South Oak Sarmt
Champ 
I61820
U.SA.
AwDE 
SSxvwE 
REIunv
LIS
ru4, IL
1~25So
U.S~A.
AM~
41014,
PERIODICLS
1325 S 
Oak Steer
Champaign IL 61820PAID
U.SA.HAMPAGN, 
IL
ADMs 
SEtnVCE REQUES•ED
0008-9036(200410)58:2;1-1
US
~riUL
111111111111111111111
0008-9036(20041 C
