HO
I LLI NOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Univrsity of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
4~frr
$r
by Nalianiral 3oak AwardFinaisi:~
NAOMI SHIHAB NYE,
-~ ~"A 
lovely, rich collection thatprmssto 
be a
lasting3 comain foryoung wvriter... 
.a keeper"
-Stare 
Raevie I Seol~ Librry u 
m
I~"A wide age range will respond to these deeply fel
pmsabout everyda experincs, whc encourage reae
tleneagerly int thi lives and deight in its passaes
-Stre Reie 
/ALA BooldiL
"tye invi tes girls to wrt just three lines a day so
thtthey can kno wh the are, reeme wha is sinfia
toteand discover the magic in life's small and simple~'
deil...[A] wonderful 
trenrtonlra 
and a er
peilgift to bind retionships."-tre Rve 
~
"Nye begin he newest volum of 72 original poems wi
a wndrflcompact introducio in whc she remeber ii
0wn 'rough years of trasiion... A gem"
-Strrd Review / K~irus Reiw
I\ 
~~Tr 04645S8189-I $1.9 $3.9
Lb 0-06058190- 
$17.89 (P4.89)
Ages! 12 up Gradasrup
j Greenwillow Books
An Imprint of aprclisubibr
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
May 2005
Vol. 58 No. 9
A LOOK INSIDE
369 
THE BIG PICTURE
Traction Man Is Here! written and illus. by Mini Grey
370 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
381 * Understanding the Holy Land: Answering Questions about the Israeli-
Palestinian Conflict by Mitch Frank
389 * Sleepy Cadillac: A Bedtime Drive written and illus. by Thacher Hurd
390 * Conrad's Fate by Diana Wynne Jones
403 * Runny Babbit: A Billy Sook written and illus. by Shel Silverstein
408 * If We Kiss by Rachel Vail
416 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
417 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Hope Morrison, Assistant Editor (HM)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Krista Hutley
Maggie Hommel
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2005 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Mini Grey from Traction Man Is Here!©2005. Used by permission of Alfred
A. Knopf.
MAY 2005 
* 369
THE BIG PICTURE
Traction Man Is Here!
written and illus. by Mini Grey
From the Velveteen Rabbit to Toy Story, stories about toys that come alive attempt
to capture the imaginative nature of children at play. Dollhouse occupants mirror
what happens in the real house, toy soldiers march to real wars, and puppets seek
to escape their strings. In this make-believe world, a molded chunk of painted
plastic in a costume can become a hero. Yet the relationship between a boy and his
action figure isn't all fun and games; there's real work to be done. Ask Traction
Man: he knows.
As soon as Traction Man enters his new home as a gift to a young boy, he
sees the evil that has gone unchecked all over the house. Luckily, he has come
equipped with an outfit for every heroic occasion. Before long he is donning his
Latex Space Suit to fight the Evil Pillows ("'Ow!' they cry, and lumber away") and
switching into his Jungle Pants and Sweaty Bandanna to save the Dollies from
Wicked Professor Spade. The potential for mischief to be done, for helpless toys to
be menaced by evil, looms large, but there is nothing Traction Man cannot ac-
complish with grim-faced determination, his loyal pet Scrubbing Brush, and an
appropriate outfit-until he is forced to wear the all-in-one knitted green romper
suit and matching bonnet the boy's granny made. Traction Man quickly loses his
street cred in this knitted monstrosity; after all, action hero-dom is a "clothes make
the man" profession, and villains and victims alike laugh at this getup. Will this be
the end of Traction Man?
It's the interplay between text and illustrations, which Grey handles with
wit and style, that gives the book its superfunny powers. The text plays it straight,
covering Traction Man's adventures as if they are happening in real time. Pasted
into the illustrations in paper collage, the text mimics comic-book-style blocks,
while the addition of dialogue balloons and sound effects reinforces the imme-
diacy of the narrative. The illustrations, often from the vantage point of the boy's
imagination, wherein Traction Man appears to act on his own, use setting to cre-
ate the boy's inventive playscape-everyday objects become predators and prey.
In the rare instances where readers are allowed to view the boy pulling Traction
Man's strings, so to speak, Grey widens the perspective, maximizing the informa-
tion she can make clear in one spread; the layouts are appealingly haphazard and
cluttered while the focal objects are easily differentiated with thick, black outlines.
Readers will enjoy poring over each family scene and anticipating where Traction
Man will have his next adventure, noting, for example, the opened cereal boxes,
broken eggs, crumbs, and dirty dishes strewn about in the kitchen. They'll be
rewarded for their attention to detail as the overloaded sink turns out to hold an
underwater wreck with sea creatures and a monster that Traction Man must sub-
370 
* THE BULLETIN
due ("Oh no! This Poisonous Dishcloth will envelop Traction Man and suffocate
him!").
Traction Man himself is a square-jawed, beefy figure who projects cool-
headed, tensile readiness in even the direst situations ("Traction Man is guarding
some toast"). Still, he is not implacable: his expressive eyes and eyebrows allow
readers a glimpse of the man beneath the costume. Readers will therefore pity him
when his face falls like a sullen child's upon his being forced into the romper suit
and bonnet, and they will cheer him as he realizes that a true hero doesn't let a
humiliating outfit stop him from his duty.
Finally, Traction Man and Scrubbing Brush relax, basking on a book-
raft floating in the wide Carpet Sea. An action figure's life is a dangerous one,
however, so peace is sure to be short lived (note the scissors swimming, sharklike,
nearby). Readers who notice the boy's letter to Santa on the title page, telling what
befell Traction Man's predecessor (in "the Terrible Parachute Accident"), will re-
alize that the boy has more in store for his hero, but like him, we're sure Traction
Man is "ready for anything." (Imprint information appears on p. 386.)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADA, ALMA FLOR, comp. 
Mamd Goose: A Latino Nursery Treasury/lUn tesoro de
rimas infantiles; comp. by Alma Flor Ada and F. Isabel Campoy; illus. by Maribel
Suarez. 
Hyperion, 2005 
121p
ISBN 0-7868-1953-7 
$19.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
This handsome bilingual collection from the creators of iPlo Peep!: Traditional
Spanish Nursery Rhymes (BCCB 6/03) brings together lullabies, lap and finger games,
jump-rope jingles, riddles, proverbs, songs, and ballads in a carefully organized
volume documenting childhood poems in the Spanish-speaking world. The po-
ems are laid out in a two-column format, Spanish on the left and English on the
right, and the fidelity of the translations generally extends even to the rhythm and
meter of the stanzas. English introductions to each section offer information on
the poems and cultural elements as well as noting some of the frequently used
language in that particular section. The playful and perky watercolor illustrations,
featuring small-eyed assortments of families and friends (both human and ani-
mal), work in harmony with the text, balancing the poems without overtaking the
space. Further, because they are generously sprinkled throughout the pages (while
still maintaining a clean layout), they could also offer literal assistance to those
readers willing to take on the challenge of reading a poem in a foreign language.
MAY 2005 
* 
371
Despite the credentials of the compilers (both prominent figures in Latino litera-
ture studies), no information is given about where they found the poems, not even
the probable country of origin. While this is somewhat mitigated by the text's
introduction, noting how Hispanophone cultures have "coexisted and blended," it
renders the text useless for talking about specific geographic locales or childhood
activities in particular places. Still, those who plan bilingual storytimes will find
extensive transitional material, and kids interested or skilled in the Spanish lan-
guage will find plenty to pore over in this book. Spanish-speaking families, who
can read the poems together and share childhood recollections inspired by the
entries, will particularly benefit from this extensive collection of verse. Spanish
and English indices of titles are included. HM
ADLINGTON, L. J. 
The Diary ofPelly D. 
Greenwillow, 2005 
[288p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-076616-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-076615-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Fourteen-year-old Toni V, part of the crew demolishing the colony of City Five
for rebuilding after the War, finds a diary buried beneath the plaza and is intrigued
by the words "Dig-dig everywhere" on the cover. As he reads about a girl named
Pelly D, he is immediately entranced by her pampered, carefree life, one he is
resigned to never having. Discordant notes soon disrupt Pelly D's perfect future,
however, as two of the colony's three originating gene families-Atsumisi, Mazzini,
and Galrezi-begin to turn on the third. Toni V, cleaning up the aftermath of the
War, can see its beginning through Pelly D's eyes, and the more he reads, the more
he unearths the truth the government is trying to bury: the genocide of the Galrezi.
Strongly evocative of the Holocaust, the War is realistic and terrifying, especially
in its gradual turn from minor discrimination to mass extinction. We never find
out what happened to Pelly D; the diary ends, and both Toni V and the readers are
left with a disquieting sense of responsibility. Adlington never slips from her char-
acters' viewpoints: Pelly D changes from a frivolous snob into a strong-willed,
sympathetic character without losing her sparkle, while hard-working Toni V
struggles with bearing witness to the unknown lives that were lost ("In his dreams
he was digging ... with the crazy idea that all the people he'd ever known were
buried underground. ... He kept finding packages of letters, diaries, and photo-
graphs, but every time he reached into the hole the pages would crumble"). This
science fiction story could enter the curriculum paired with a historical look at the
Holocaust, or perhaps Anne Frank: Diary ofa Young Girl, to explore parallels of
unchecked discrimination and personal testimony. KH
AL, DOMINIC 
Media Madness: An Insider's Guide to Media; illus. by Michael
Cho. 
Kids Can, 2005 
64p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55337-174-7 
$14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55337-175-5 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-10
Young people are spending more time than ever exposed to media that wants some-
thing from them, and Ali provides them with some helpful guidance in becoming
critical consumers. Starting with six basic questions for viewers/readers to ask
themselves (and boiling the message down to "question everything"), the book
then goes on to discuss television, music, magazines, comic books, newspapers,
and videogames and the Internet. Each section provides an overview of the work-
372 
* THE BULLETIN
ings of that industry and some specifics, often with helpful glossaries of jargon,
about the way that medium attracts and sells to its audience in the U.S. and Canada.
The idea is an excellent one and there's lots of solid information and provocative
questioning, but the enterprise is sometimes undercut by flawed execution. The
page layouts are chaotic rather than excitingly high-wattage, and the central car-
toon persona of Max MacLoon (who looks more like an oversized black banty hen
than a loon) is jarringly childish against the savvy message. In an odd omission,
the book fails to turn its skeptical lens on books and especially itself, so its effects
actually depend on the credulity it's arguing against (especially since there's no
bibliography or notes to support its claims). This is nonetheless an engaging and
useful book in the underserved area of consumer education, especially for readers
not quite ready for Graydon's more detailed and thorough Made You Look (BCCB
2/04). A glossary and index are included. DS
AUCH, MARY JANE, ad. 
Chickarella; ad. and illus. with photographs by Mary Jane
and Herm Auch. 
Holiday House, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1804-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The familiar tale heads to the chicken coop in this latest retelling, and, save a few
alternative details (Chickarella leaves a glass egg in lieu of a slipper, she and the
prince start a fashion business instead of getting married) and a whole lot of chicken
humor ("eggsquisite," "eggcellent," and "eggsactly" are used freely), the story fol-
lows the customary narrative line. It is the art that stands out; unlike previous
poultry outings by this husband-and-wife team (Souperchicken, BCCB 6/03, etc.),
the medium here is not digitally manipulated paintings but digitally manipulated
photographs of 3-D dioramas. According to an appended note, Mary Jane sculpted
the chickens out of clay and wire, created the accessories, and sewed all the clothes;
Herm designed the sets and lighting, photographed the scenes, and added special
effects on the computer. 
The results are decidedly unusual and sometimes fun,
and the attention to miniature detail makes the dioramas surprisingly impressive.
Overall, however, the results tend to be garish, with the multitude of textures and
patterns incorporated into the costumes conferring a cluttered feel. Fans of Walter
Wick's ISpy books may nonetheless enjoy seeking out the minute details amid the
chaos, while young patrons longing for new Cinderella stories may get a chuckle
out of this less-than-pretty personification of their beloved heroine. If the chickens
are a huge hit at your library, you can even, believe it or not, contact the publisher
about inviting them for a book signing. HM
BAUER, 
MARION 
DANE 
If Frogs Made Weather; illus. by Dorothy
Donohue. 
Holiday House, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1622-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A young boy wonders poetically what the weather conditions would be if deter-
mined by ten different animals, a menagerie that, it is later revealed, mirrors the
selection of stuffed animals piled up on his bedroom floor. Some connections are
not surprising (polar bears call for snow, a lazy cat for sunshine on the windowsill)
while others seem stretched to offer specific information about the animals (turtles
desire lightning so they can pull into their shells, fog hides the weasel's "slink" so
he may pounce on his breakfast). Confusingly, some verses don't actually address
weather conditions-the bats' desired condition is dusk, when mosquitoes abound,
the geese and robins wish for specific seasons (autumn and spring, respectively).
MAY 2005 
* 373
The conclusion neatly packages all possibilities with the boy's proclamation that
he would have all kinds of weather ("If I made weather, I would call/ the slanting
sun to my bed./ I would tiptoe through the fog./ I would blow the day clear/ with
a mighty wind," etc.). The cut-paper art lacks the imaginative grace of Steve Jenkins'
collage, with animals sometimes awkwardly proportioned. Nonetheless, there's
interest in the textured choppiness, with piled-up triangles resembling fur and
feathers; white lighting and shadows suggest three-dimensional compositions and
add an element of depth to the spreads. Despite the book's weaknesses, there will
be lots of opportunity to integrate this into a lesson or program; follow a reading
with a discussion of favorite weather, predictions on the preferred weather of other
animals, or an exercise in writing conditional verse. HM
BERGSTROM, GUNILLA 
GoodNight, AlfieAtkins; ISBN 91-29-66154-4; Very Tricky,
AlfieAtkins; 91-29-66152-8. 
Each book: written and illus. by Gunilla Bergstr6m;
tr. by Elisabeth Kallick Dyssegaard. 
R&S/Farrar, 2005 
[32p] 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
These two Swedish imports feature the roguish Alfie Atkins, a young mischief-
maker with a talent for sidestepping parental authority. In GoodNight, four-year-
old Alfie has got his dad on the run. After supplying his son with the requested
pre-slumber paraphernalia (a story, toothbrush, drink, etc.), Daddy is pooped,
falling asleep on the floor with his pipe and the assorted artifacts of his errands
scattered around him. Bored, Alfie finally goes to bed, leaving his father snoring
under a blanket by the couch. In Very Tricky, now five-year-old Alfie takes advan-
tage of Daddy's preoccupation with the newspaper to drag out Daddy's toolbox
and to hammer and nail himself inside a wooden box (meant to be a helicopter).
Upon landing in the jungle, Alfie finds that he has to use the saw, despite explicit
parental proscription, to cut himself free in order to escape the approaching lion.
Fortunately, Daddy leaves the paper long enough to save Alfie from the lion-
without using the saw, which is just as well, since Alfie was only faking being
stuck. These translations of Bergstr6m's 1972 Swedish publications feature con-
versational narration that invites the audience to notice and comment upon the
illustrations ("Have a look!") and to eagerly predict Daddy's impending collapse
and Alfie's use of the illicit saw. In the mixed-media illustrations, the characters
sport dumpy bodies and broad faces that, along with their dotted eyebrows, wide
eyes, and sparse hair, give them a flabby, rag-doll softness. Though the scenes are
three-dimensional, their uniformity of color gives them a flatness that increases the
surprise value of the occasional cut-and-pasted photograph of cloth or furniture.
This visual straddling of the imaginary and the real positions Alfie (and his dad) in
an exciting limbo, where four- and five-year-olds can get the upper hand and the
world will still continue as it should. That milieu and the pokerfaced humor will
make these stories appealing to novice readers as well as to picture-book audiences,
who are sure to recognize a kindred spirit in resourceful Alfie. TC
BERNASCONI, PABLO 
Captain Arsenio: Inventions and (Mis)Adventures in Flight;
written and illus. by Pablo Bernasconi. 
Houghton, 2005 
4 0p
ISBN 0-618-50749-3 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-5
In 1782, Captain Arsenio decided to build a flying machine, and now the long-
lost diary of his attempts has been found; his experiments-from the Motocanary
to the Hamstertronic-are reproduced here complete with project descriptions,
374 * THE BULLETIN
flight notes, and inspiring quotations. This mock diary, "second only to Leonardo
da Vinci's," is pure Monty Python in its style and execution. The combination of
Arsenio's naive commentary on his success and the pictures detailing what's really
happening increase the dramatic irony. Bernasconi's chunky, textured collages
call to mind Terry Gilliam's surreal stop-action animation, especially in the flight
diaries that show step-by-step Arsenio's takeoff and eventual crash landing in each
new apparatus. Arsenio's contraptions, illustrated with found objects and stand-
ing in sharp relief against a stark white background, are oddly clever, just the sort
of thing a smart kid would think up: among others, a flock of birds tied together
like balloons, a giant corkscrew, and a hamster running in a wheel combine with
various cogs, screws, wheels, and fans to make outlandish, spectacular failures.
Arsenio himself is full of plucky determination; his daffy, toothy grin never falters,
and his introduction to each new project always ends with "It cannot fail!" Kids
will laugh (hard) at Arsenio, and perhaps they'll also be moved to invent some-
thing better of their own. KH
BESSON, Luc Arthur and the Minimoys; from an original idea by Celine Garcia;
tr. by Ellen Sowchek. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
[240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059624-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059623-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Ten-year-old Arthur and his grandma face eviction from their house by the vindic-
tive businessman Davido if Arthur cannot find the treasure buried in the garden.
In order to obtain the treasure, Arthur follows his absent grandpa's written in-
structions to enter the underground world of the Minimoys, a tiny tribe imported
from Africa by his grandfather. Once he is shrunk to appropriate size, Arthur
bands with the fair Minimoy princess Selenia and her younger brother, Betameche,
to venture into the forbidden city of Necropolis, where the evil Maltazard plots to
overrun their diminutive world. The traditional miniature-people premise of this
European import sets up readers for a pleasurable if predictable adventure, but the
execution is unfortunately pedestrian, with stilted and overexplanatory prose lean-
ing heavily on the cute. There's little characterization, Arthur's immediate roman-
tic infatuation with the Princess Selenia (by photograph, no less) is saccharine
rather than charmingly precocious, and the use of Africa as a homogeneous land
that's the source of generic mysticism is at the very least dated. The actual quest-
ing from Selenia's kingdom to the city of Necropolis proceeds at a rapid pace and
includes slapstick moments young readers may enjoy; however, since that accelera-
tion occurs more than halfway into the book, chances that readers will ever get
there are slim. For a more successful foray into a miniature world, stick to classics
such as Norton's The Borrowers. TC
BILDNER, PHIL 
The Shot Heard 'round the World; illus. by C. F. Payne. 
Simon,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-86273-3 
$16.95 
R 
6-10 yrs
In this month's issue of the Bulletin, the Brooklyn Dodgers appear in a double
header of sorts (see also Uhlberg, below). Bildner leads off here, offering a nostal-
gic look at the 1951 season in which the narrator and his three friends (friends
despite loyalties divided variously among the Dodgers, Yankees, and Giants) wait
in a state of near-palpable anxiety for the outcome of the pennant race that would
MAY 2005 
* 375
send either the Giants or "dem Bums" off to face the Yankees in the World Series.
The outcome is already on the books, so Bildner's tale is largely about atmosphere-
boys watching the game through a gap in the gate, fans glued to the living room
radio, the eerie emptiness of the streets on the day of the big game-and, of course,
about the eternal hope for "next season." Payne, a visual master of baseball blar-
ney (as seen in his illustrations for Thayer's Casey at the Bat, BCCB 2/03) plays it
straight here. Broad caricatures of players give way to photorealistic groups of fans
huddled around the newspaper sports section, and grain-textured mixed-media
pictures are tinted in the restrained brown and olive hues of bittersweet recollec-
tions. Not every young sports enthusiast will want to stroll soberly down Memory
Lane toward a sure loss, but kids who appreciate company for their home team's
misery have come to the right place. EB
BIrrON-JACKSON, LIVIA 
Hello, America. Simon, 2005 
230p
ISBN 0-689-86755-7 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 8-12
Part three of Bitton-Jackson's autobiography (which began in IHave Liveda Thou-
sand Years, BCCB 4/97, and continued in My Bridges ofHope, BCCB 5/99) picks
up where the previous book left off: the boat is pulling into New York harbor, and
new immigrant Elli (the author) is joyfully anticipating her life in America. The
story follows Elli through the delights and tribulations of her first years: seeking
employment, dating an everchanging assortment of eligible men, celebrating holi-
days with her family, searching for ways to continue her education. With the
exception of the occasional italicized flashback, recalling her experience in Aus-
chwitz, the loss of her father, and the countless tragedies experienced by her family
in Europe (and detailed in the earlier books), the story maintains distance from
Elli's past and instead emphasizes the present excitement of being a young woman
in post-World War II New York. Elli's introspective tendencies result in constant
thinking and observing; while this helps the reader to get a sense of her perspective,
the first-person voice falls regularly into paragraph-long strings of wondering di-
rect address or questions ("America, will you be my home? Will you embrace me
as a daughter yearning to belong, an equal among equals, or will I forever remain
a stranger, as on the other side of the ocean?") that are overly dramatic and tire-
some. The memoir format repeatedly fails to contextualize the significance of
characters and events, making this one long undifferentiated stream of occurrence
after occurrence; while the memories recalled may mean a great deal to Bitton-
Jackson herself, they have little impact on the reader since they are not developed
emotionally in the context of the story. Readers are better off turning to Marilyn
Sachs' fictional yet fact-based Lost in America (BCCB 4/05) for a more carefully
composed take on being young and Jewish in 1950s America. HM
BONDOUX, ANNE-LAURE 
The Destiny ofLinus Hoppe; tr. from the French by
Catherine Temerson. 
Delacorte, 2005 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90255-7 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73229-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Fourteen-year-old Linus will soon take his exam with the Great Processor, in which
his social status will be decided. If he does well, his posh, privileged life in Realm
One will stay on its expected course. Scoring too low or being marked as rebel-
lious, however, will have life-altering consequences: students with low scores are
376 
* THE BULLETIN
sent to Realm Two (an urban ghetto) while rebels go to be reeducated in Realm
Three. No one doubts that Linus will score high-the problem is that Linus isn't
sure if he wants to succeed. Why shouldn't he choose his own destiny? The
intersection of choice and destiny is an important concept for young readers to
explore, and the Great Processor's ranking system is a telling extrapolation of our
own economic class structure. However, this French import about kids fighting
the system falls short of real storytelling and settles for making an ideological state-
ment. Linus' motivation for hacking into the Great Processor and switching scores
with a Realm Two student is hard to believe; his vague wish to take charge of his
destiny doesn't explain his malcontent at the life ahead of him, nor encompass
why he would seek such radical change. Despite its reductive take, this may in-
trigue readers with a taste for ethical questioning and even prompt them to con-
sider the inequalities in contemporary society. KH
BONE, IAN 
Sleep Rough Tonight. Dutton, 2005 
24 1p
ISBN 0-525-47373-4 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Alex is the upperclassmen's favorite target for torment at his school, though he's
convinced that by deliberately annoying them (and just about everyone else) and
inviting their attention, he's actually controlling the situation. Secretly, he's terri-
fied of a much greater threat: the return of a juvenile offender known as the
Jockey, who had formerly been Alex's protector, until the older boy was caught by
the police while burgling Alex's father's store-as a result of Alex's relaying the
Jockey's plans. When the Jockey returns, however, he picks up his old protector
role, and he and Alex embark on a weekend in the "wilderness"-in the urban
wilderness, that is, without food or money-wherein the Jockey will teach Alex
the skills of survival. The gritty urban survival story ("This is your hunting ground,
eh? Your territory. You wanna earn respect, you earn it here") is intriguing, and
the underlying tension of Alex's uncertainty adds suspense-is the Jockey setting
Alex up, or is he really trying to help him, and does the Jockey know that Alex is
the one who ratted out his plans? The contrapuntal elements, however, are less
successful: Alex's friendship with the religious Marta, who becomes his support
when things go terribly wrong, isn't as compellingly depicted as the main adven-
ture. Their journey to discover the truth (is Alex complicit in the death of an old
homeless man?) is sometimes confusing, both actually and conceptually, especially
since it's never really clarified whether the Jockey is the hard-edged expert he pre-
sents himself as or the out-of-his-depth poseur that others suggest. Nonetheless,
this Australian import offers a tough-edged scenario that should appeal to fans of
urban survival stories such as Slake's Limbo (BCCB 4/75). DS
BRACKETT, VIRGINIA 
A Home in the Heart: The Story ofSandra Cisneros. Morgan
Reynolds, 2005 
128p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 1-931798-42-7 
$21.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Sandra Cisneros grew up literally between two cultures, traveling back and forth
between Chicago and Mexico, and longing for a stable home of her own. Fortu-
nately for her, her mother did everything she could to safeguard Sandra's reading
and homework time, not only from interruption by her six younger brothers, but
also from the domestic chores that Chicana girls were supposed to take on. Cisneros
thus went to college and graduate school and chose a single life so that she could be
an advocate for the voiceless people for whom she had a special affinity-working-
MAY 2005 
* 377
class folk in menial labor jobs, as well as Latina, particularly Chicana, women. She
fought hard against conservative forces in her swanky San Antonio neighborhood
to keep her house bright purple as a testimony to her Mexican heritage, and she
continues to advocate for greater inclusion of Latino voices in the arts. Students
wanting to get to know the woman behind the activist author will be left rather
cold here: Brackett relies on secondary sources for her information, with no indi-
cation that she herself has ever interviewed Cisneros, and there's a distant and
formal tone to this account; nor is there any discussion of the role Cisneros' spiri-
tual life plays in her life or work-a rather curious omission considering the men-
tions of her holding prayer meetings and her working to rebuild a faith that she
had lost. The biography does, however, detail the critical reception of her work
and helps to situate Cisneros' work into the relevant contexts of her life. Cisneros
is a compelling contemporary figure with significant YA appeal, and this will at
least provide a starting place for interested readers. A chronology, bibliography,
and index are included. KC
COLLINS, PAT LOWERY 
Come Out, Come Out!; illus. by Dee Huxley. 
Philomel,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23977-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Since Hildy's siblings won't let her play, her mom is too busy to listen, and her dad
is too busy to fix her bike, Hildy is going to make her family pay for their various
sins by hiding. The family stops what they've been doing to seek, coax, and cajole
Hildy from her hiding place, to no avail. She won't allow herself to be bribed with
chocolate cake or a bigger bed this time: "This time they are going to be very, very
sorry." All turns out well in the end, when the family discovers her hiding place
and showers her with tickles and kisses and hugs, assuring her that she was always
their favorite. While Hildy's complaints will be familiar to small fry (and bigger
fry, for that matter), and while the author clearly wants listeners' sympathy on
Hildy's side, her pouting comes off as spoiled and self-important, especially as it is
clear that this is a common tactic of Hildy's: "Hildy is hiding again," the story
begins, and each page's text starts with "this time." The rhythmic text is leavened
with silly conjecture, however, and the hyperbolic illustrations of the frantically
searching family act as humorous counterpoint to Hildy's beleaguered and woeful
expression. Vivid, almost garish, chalk pastels from the warm end of the color
spectrum are overdrawn with colored pencils, hazing outlines and making hair on
pets and humans stick-out wispy. The illustrator seems rather fond of bending
characters in half to create exaggerated butt shots; indeed, the figures are remark-
ably supple and rubbery, with giggle-inducing postures throughout. While par-
ents may resist the message of capitulating to and validating Hildy's manipulative
behavior, younger listeners will likely find a kindred spirit in Hildy and enjoy a
laugh at her family's expense. KC
CORBET, ROBERT 
Shelf Life. 
Walker, 2005 
[19 2p]
ISBN 0-8027-8959-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
In this Australian import, a series of vignettes featuring a group of supermarket
employees are loosely arranged around the courtship of Louisa, a first-year college
student in training to be a nurse, and Adam, a high-school senior who, until he
met Louisa, cared about nothing except watching television. The slice-of-life chap-
378 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ters-the book sections are identified by supermarket aisle numbers or depart-
ments-survey outwardly mundane characters whose internal worlds are rich with
conflict and confusion. These chapters, devoted to small incidents juxtaposed
against one another, imagined dialogues, and snatches of conversation, offer in-
sightful characterizations, dexterously presented, of the various characters. From
the teenaged drug dealer with ADHD to the Muslim girl who violates religious
tenet to work in the meat division to the depressed express-lane checkout girl who
experiences her first lesbian encounter, the store employees demonstrate that there
is much more to them than simply smiling faces above their nametags. In fact, it
is this very variety of disposition that makes the book's ending seem overly opti-
mistic-everyone, even Louisa's emotionally disturbed, gambling-addicted mother,
turns out to be a basically decent person or at least aids in the victory of someone
likable. However, that ease of resolution is somewhat cloaked by the concluding
focus on Adam and Louisa as they overcome their differences and allow their simi-
larities to bring them together. This soft-edged glimpse of the problems faced by
otherwise overlooked individuals will attract teens intrigued by what may lie be-
hind the have-a-nice-day-come-again mask. TC
CUNNINGHAM, LAURA SHAINE 
The Midnight Diary ofZoya Blume. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 2005 
163p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072260-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072259-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Zoya's adoptive mother, Mimi, has gone to the hospital for a week for exploratory
surgery. Any twelve-year-old might be distressed by such an event, but Zoya is
particularly upset, since her repressed memories of her Russian birth parents' relin-
quishment of her at age four complicate this current crisis with layer upon layer of
mysterious phobias. Night terrors, a tendency to sleepwalk, and a deeply ingrained
belief in a shapeless, stalking monster made of darkness make Zoya's week without
her mother an overwhelming challenge but also an unparalleled opportunity to
confront her past and her fear of abandonment. Unfortunately, Zoya's first-per-
son narration is told in a dreamlike convolution of imaginary threats and reality
that is often difficult to follow; once examined in the cold light of reality the events
may be poetic, with their striations of secrets, but they're also contrived. Nonethe-
less, the reader ready to for the artistic treatment here will find Cunningham's
insights illuminating and Zoya's anxiety understandable. This is an intriguing
account of a child's longing for security in the face of past and present uncertainty.
TC
DENENBERG, 
BARRY 
Shadow Life: A Portrait of Anne Frank and Her
Family. Scholastic, 2005 
224p
ISBN 0-439-41678-7 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Fascination with the story of Anne Frank is seemingly limitless, as writer after
writer explores new ways to further illuminate her tale for young audiences. This
innovative and powerful work is divided into four sections, each written with a
different objective and in a different style. Part One, "Living," explores the his-
torical context of the Frank family from their years in Frankfurt up to 1942 in a
factual style. Part Two, "Hiding," offers a fictional recreation of Margot's diary,
providing an alternative first-hand description of the events recalled in Anne's
now-famous work. Part Three, "Dying," uses both narrative description and ex-
cerpts of quotes from survivors who crossed paths with the residents of the annex
MAY 2005 
* 379
in various camps and prisons in the months following their arrest. The fourth and
final section, "Surviving," follows Otto Frank, the sole survivor of the group, after
the liberation ofAuschwitz and up to the publication ofAnne's diary. The author's
stated objective is to "reintroduce the story of Anne Frank to a new generation,"
not as one of hope, as is so often construed from her last diary entry, but as one of
horror and violence. Indeed, the book is most successful in the third section,
which picks up where the diary left off and recalls the horrific reality of the camps
through the voices of those who experienced them alongside the Franks. While
the second section is conceptually fascinating, it carries the least weight in provid-
ing new information to the reader (unsurprisingly, since Denenberg's key resource
in developing Margot's character was Anne's diary itself). This remains, however,
an ambitious and exemplary work of research and reconstructed history that will
serve enormously in helping students to better understand the story ofAnne Frank.
There are no specific source notes, but a chronology, bibliographical essay, bibli-
ography, and index are included. HM
DUNKLE, CLARE B. 
By These Ten Bones. 
Holt, 2005 
[240p]
ISBN 0-8050-7496-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
In her tiny village of peat huts, Maddie the weaver's daughter lives with her par-
ents and serves the local lady, who inhabits a ruined castle at the edge of the loch.
Numerous tales of the devious Water Horse keep the villagers wary of the un-
known, but cheerful Maddie views the world with a more affable eye. She be-
friends a traveling woodcarver named Paul, encouraging the reticent young man
to speak and caring for him after a mysterious nocturnal attack leaves him injured
and feverish; however, she soon learns that the fever is a symptom of Paul's posses-
sion by a parasitic spirit known as a werewolf, and his claw-torn wounds are self-
inflicted. Though Maddie begins to love the pale, tortured Paul and even learns to
guard him while he shapeshifts each full moon, her recurring visions of the village
bloodied and desolate warn her that the evil inside him is becoming more rapa-
cious as his love for her grows stronger. In this strong-boned fantasy, the Scotland
of the Middle Ages comes to full and vibrant new life around Maddie, who lives
wholeheartedly within the limited compass afforded her. Pagan and Christian lore
inform the customs of the village, showing Maddie's neighbors to be both brave
and narrow-minded as they defend their families by attempting to kill the lady of
the castle (claiming that she is a witch), and by jailing and then executing Paul's
traveling companion. Paul marks his monthly change from man to monster with
abusive, vicious language, unnerving screams for blood, and manipulative tricks
that chill the reader-in fact, Dunkle's superb treatment of such a violent, desper-
ate character and the straightforward young woman who loves him is what makes
this novel the success it is. Offer this gem to admirers of Price's Sterkarm series or
Klause's Blood and Chocolate (BCCB 7/97). TC
ERIKSSON, EVA 
A Crash CourseforMolly; written and illus. by Eva Eriksson; tr. by
Elisabeth Kallick Dyssegaard. 
R&S/Farrar, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 91-29-66156-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-8 yrs
As a newly independent bicycle rider, little pig Molly (of Molly Goes Shopping,
BCCB 4/03) is still mastering the subtleties of steering. When Grandma shouts,
380 
* 
THE BULLETIN
"Watch out for the pole!" Molly watches out; in fact, she watches so hard that she
inadvertently drives her bike right into the menacing signpost. After another col-
lision, this time with a kindly driving instructor (a dog), the expert sets Molly
straight: one should never look at the thing one is aiming to miss. Now Molly can
ride wherever she chooses, while Grandma-apparently distracted by a salutation
from a friend-is the next to experience ignominy while riding her own bike. This
new Molly adventure from Swedish author Eriksson again succeeds in capturing
that hard-to-find balance between saccharine sweetness and youthful optimism as
it follows Molly through her many ups and downs. The interpolation of two small
bullies (a lamb and a dog) who mock her first shaky attempts at bike riding in-
crease the emotional stakes and set the stage for a gentle payback near the end,
when Molly really isn't aiming her bike at them, but the obnoxious duo turn and
run anyway. The colored-pencil drawings of delicately rounded animals in old-
fashioned aprons, kerchiefs, and plaid suits feature pastel and deeper tones of yel-
low, green, and blue, against which Molly's soft pink piggy skin (with its many
bandages) provides a focal point. The characters' faces rarely change, their ani-
mated body language serving instead to communicate the emotional drama of the
story. Molly is a fine heroine for youngsters, similarly grappling with the challeng-
ing tasks of everyday life, and little ones will quickly embrace this demure but
affirming presentation of skills mastery. TC
FISHER, AILEEN 
The Story Goes On; illus. by Mique Moriuchi. 
Porter/Roaring
Brook, 2005 
32p
ISBN 1-59643-037-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-7yrs
A seed sprouts a leaf, which is eaten by a bug, which is eaten by a frog, which is
eaten by a snake, and so on until the last dead thing decomposes into humus,
which will provide a nourishing matrix for yet another seed in this posthumously
published illustrated poem. The text (which begins on the title page) relies on a
fairly formal poetic vocabulary that requires a bit of a stretch by young listeners,
and the rather grim fates of each element in the food chain (including the hawk,
who is shot by a farmer, who wrecks the symmetry by failing to eat his prey) make
a slightly startling emphasis. There's nonetheless liveliness in the rich imagery and
action words; the rhyming stanzas, quatrains, and sextains are sometimes grouped
together, sometimes spread across several pages, a technique that can increase the
narrative tension (as in "A slither... a snatch ... and the snake is the winner") and
provide visual variety, though occasionally at the expense of textual clarity. The
mixed-media illustrations themselves, drenched in luscious lime, turquoise, and
chocolate, feature a scraped and pasted texture, while the naive figures of bug, frog,
etc., offer a gentle humor that offsets the inescapably somber theme of inevitable
death. Because this is a topic generally dealt with in science books, picture-book
equivalents are hard to find, and this may be a useful addition to the collection; for
those content with nonfiction treatments, Lauber's Who Eats What? (BCCB 5/95)
is a reliable alternative. TC
FLINN, ALEX 
Fade to Black. 
HarperTempest, 2005 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-056841-0 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-056839-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
HIV-positive high-school junior Alex Crusan is attacked one morning in his car
MAY 2005 
* 
381
and ends up in the hospital. Many students in small town Pinedale, FL, had
motive-Alex's HIV status is well known, thanks to an illegal school assembly-
but Clinton Cole seems the likeliest suspect. He's harassed Alex since his first day,
speaking out against him, wearing surgical masks to class, and leaving him threat-
ening notes. The night before the attack he even threw a rock through one of the
Crusans' windows. Still, Clinton is surprised when Daria, a classmate with Down
Syndrome who witnessed the rock-throwing incident and the attack, has mistak-
enly fingered him as the perpetrator in both. Clinton knows he would never go
that far, but no one believes him, and now Alex is the only person who can clear
his name, but why should he? Chapters alternate between Alex, Clinton, and
Daria, fully examining the complicated dynamics of the situation with penetrating
insight into the main characters (although Daria's chapters, written in ineffectual
prose poetry, create a character much too wispy to succeed). Alex's and Clinton's
relationships with their families, other students, and each other are convincingly
portrayed, leading readers to an understanding of the many ways people react to
HIV; Alex's frustration over his mother's self-pity ("She's supposed to be so con-
cerned, but she's not really thinking about what I need. Sometimes I think she
acts that way because it focuses attention on her") is particularly convincing. Flinn's
thoughtful exploration does tend to lead into heavy-handed messages, but overall,
the ultimately hopeful conclusion about moving past fear is one worth hearing.
KH
FLORIAN, DOUGLAS 
Zoo's Who; written and illus. by Douglas Florian. 
Harcourt,
2005 
56p
ISBN 0-15-204639-9 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Florian, reliable provider of witty and accessible animal verse in titles such as the
Gryphon Award winner Bow Wow Meow Meow (BCCB 4/03), returns with a
score of new poems. This time he draws broadly from the animal kingdom, with
plenty of birds, fish, insects, and reptiles joining the more traditional mammals as
subjects in these concise entries. There's not as much inventiveness here as usual
with Florian, and some of the entries are definitely slight. On the other hand,
there is still a generous amount of whimsy, bouncy close-coupled rhyme, and creative
typography, with many entries inviting recitation. The nuanced mixed-media art
(which seems to include just about every kind of material Florian has lying around)
varies from spiky-edged detail to echoes of found material to rippling planes of
watercolor, making the featured animals slightly otherworldly of aspect while still
recognizable. Those collections always eager for another cageful of Florian will
want to add this to their poetic menagerie. DS
FRANK, MITCH 
Understanding the Holy Land: Answering Questions about the Is-
raeli-Palestinian Conflict. Viking, 2005 
152p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-06032-1 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Employing the same question/answer format he used to advantage in Understand-
ing September 11th (BCCB 11/02), Frank intrepidly approaches the Gordian knot
that is Israeli-Palestinian relations. He opens with discussion of Israelis' and Pales-
tinians' historical antecedents to trace their rival claims to land now in dispute,
then turns to the founding of the modern Israeli state, reaction among Arab na-
tions, Palestinian resistance to Israel's territorial expansion, escalation of mutual
hostilities, and finally the frustrating breakdown of peace efforts in the region.
382 
* THE BULLETIN
Even as the unfolding drama grows in complexity and interested nations help stir
the steaming pot to full boil, Frank steadily reminds readers that each party's terri-
torial stake-rooted in ancient, unverifiable religious and cultural history-makes
eminent sense to the claimant, while being justifiably suspect in the eyes of the
adversary. Although this title attempts to bring events up to the minute, the most
recent reference is to George Bush's April 2004 position that "America accepted
that Israel would retain control over parts of the West Bank where there are large
settlements. Until that moment, America's official view of settlements was that
they were 'an obstacle to peace."' Given the fresh impetus for negotiations follow-
ing the death ofYasser Arafat, readers obviously will need more current sources to
keep abreast of developments. One could only wish that so able a commentator as
Frank would offer continuous updates. EB
GARFINKLE, D. L. 
Storky: How ILostMy Nickname and Won the Girl. Putnam,
2005 
[192p]
ISBN 0-399-24284-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Mike starts high school hoping to shed his old nickname of Storky and to win the
romantic heart of his old Scrabble buddy Gina, but things don't look good in
either area, since the moniker "Dorky Storky" is already rippling through his Spanish
class, and Gina has clearly set her sights on a hunky upperclassman. The home-
front isn't looking any better: Mike's divorced father keeps bringing his girlfriend
du jour on his outings with his son, and Mike's mother has embarked on a serious
relationship with, of all people, Mike's geeky dentist. There are a lot of milestones
packed conveniently into one book here, but the outcomes are pleasingly varied-
Mike adjusts to his dentist's becoming his new stepfather, but he also has the
harder task of realizing that both his father and Gina are kind of selfish jerks.
Garfinkle counterpoints the tougher elements effectively with a marked taste for
humor of the bodily type, ranging from Mike's frequent attempts to control Rex
(his wayward penis) to his mother's ill-timed dinner-table fart on her first date.
Many readers will appreciate that lighter mood when dealing with some daunting
aspects of adolescence and familial change. DS
GEORGE, KRISTINE O'CONNELL 
Up!; illus. by Hiroe Nakata. 
Clarion,
2005 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-618-06489-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
This springtime answer to Vestergaard's Hello, Snow! (BCCB 3/05) opens with a
tiny pink-pajamaed girl joyfully announcing, "Up? Up!/ The sun's up./ I'm up./
Is Daddy up?" He'll be up soon, as you may imagine; the gal bounces down the
hall and onto her parents' bed to begin a sunny day spent experiencing all things
up. The perspective is consistently hers and the moments, captured in rhymed
verse, are perfectly in tune with a toddler's take on the details of a day; up is
walking along the stone wall with "airplane arms," pumping legs on the play-
ground swing, flying through the air as Daddy tosses and catches ("Lift me up!/ A
flying feeling./ I can almost/ touch the ceiling"). Though the meter bobbles occa-
sionally, the lapses are buried in the cheerful singsong rhythm and more than
made up for by the exuberant, light-filled watercolors. Touched with energetic
yellows and blues and centered on the delighted grin of the protagonist, Nakata's
MAY 2005 
* 383
illustrations feature her signature domestic energy, which works to great effect in
matching the excitement of the day. Fathers and children everywhere will want to
snuggle up with this enthusiastic take on quality time spent under the springtime
sun. HM
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI 
The Old Country. 
Roaring Brook, 2005 
[14 4p]
ISBN 1-59643-047-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
In a story framed as a contemporary address to an unnamed listener, Great-Grand-
mother Gisella tells of her life in the Old Country, where she lived as a fox until
that bucolic rural existence ended with a great war (a fictitious conflict comparable
to World War I) and her family's emigration. The daily customs of the countryfolk
radiate simplicity and unity with the land, until war between Emperor Ignatz XI
of Norland and Queen Sidnia of Surland ravages both their nations. Two peoples
are uprooted by this disruption: the elves and sprites, whose invisible kingdom is
destroyed by the bombs and engines of war, and the Crags, an oft-persecuted eth-
nic group on whom both Norlanders and Surlanders blame the conflict. Though
the hostilities finally end and the emperor and queen are judged for their crimes,
the country cannot recover from the wastage of life and land. The fairy people
with their magic and the Crags with their secrets and songs find new homelands,
their gifts lost forever to the countries they once called home. The storytelling
voice, strongly oral in nature, imbues the Old Country with a timeless quality,
giving the tale resonance and credibility as it whispers of folk magic and fairies and
the physical hardships that come with war. As an allegory, the story requires of its
readers some familiarity with World War I and the trials of the Jews up to and
during that time. As a mythical tale, however, Gisella's journey reads well aloud or
alone, enticing the audience into a vividly created idyllic world. Whether it's read
for its historical implications or on its literal level, readers will be moved by the
well-crafted story of a beautiful land irreparably ravaged by event. TC
GIFF, PATRICIA REILLY 
Don't Tell the Girls: A Family Memoir. Holiday House,
2005 
131p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1813-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
As the grandchild closest to Nana (maternal grandmother Anna Schaeffer), young
Patricia became the self-appointed repository of the family tales. However, each
facet of the story sparked interest in the untold bits and bobs, and over the years
Giff investigated such mysteries as the girl in an old photo whom Nana claimed
looked just like Patricia, the grandmother whose doll and shawl Patricia inherited,
and the romantic emigration tale of her paternal great-grandparents who were
apparently separated upon arrival in the United States-a tale that a trip back to
Ireland proved to be tragically far from the truth. The methodology of Giffs
research into the past is not developed in enough detail to guide budding genealo-
gists, and the shreds of Reilly family history are generally too fragmentary to stand
sturdily on their own. Unearthing the sad truth about paternal great-grandfather
Michael Mollaghan is the definite highlight of this title, but it's so late in coming
that one suspects many readers won't stay seated for the grand finale. Still, the
bookmaking is appealing (with deckle-edged pages and a gallery of family photos
and documents) and the text is squarely aimed at the same middle-grade reader-
ship as Nory Ryan's Song (BCCB 10/00); children who followed the Irish emi-
384 
* THE BULLETIN
grants westbound may be curious about the author's pilgrimage to the Auld Sod.
EB
GOLDSCHMIDT, JUDY 
The Secret Blog of Raisin Rodriguez. 
Razorbill,
2005 
[2 0 8p]
ISBN 1-59514-018-2 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-8
A cross-country move from California to Philly prompts twelve-year-old Raisin to
start a blog in order to keep in touch with her best friends back home. Like
Harriet the Spy in her secret journal, Raisin writes scathingly honest commentary
about the kids in her posh new school, and like Harriet's, her secret writings are
accidentally exposed to her classmates, and she has to use the school paper in order
to redeem a friendship that she didn't realize mattered to her. Unlike Harriet,
however, Raisin has the advantage of the sympathy of her old friends, and, to her
surprise, she gets taken up by the "alt" kids, who find her crabby about all the right
things and witty to boot. Raisin's wit is indeed too sophisticated to be entirely
credible for her age, but her glib wordcraft and droll sensibilities are certainly more
engaging than a real seventh-grade blog is likely to be, so that's a good thing.
Occasional outbreaks of bawdy humor season the text, as when Raisin attempts to
master the strange mechanics of tampon insertion using a mirror, only to discover
that her vagina resembles the face of a librarian from her former school (the stu-
dents who read her secret blog have a field day with this one). A warm ending that
includes bonding with her blended family, regaining an imperiled friendship, and
learning that the boy she fancies didn't even bother to read the purloined blog
should provide all the satisfying closure readers could want; many readers will
enjoy finding their own seventh-grade experiences picked up and amplified here.
KC
GOOBIE, BETH 
Fixed. Orca, 2005 
[288p]
ISBN 1-55143-374-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 8-12
At the end of the futuristic Flux (BCCB 7/04), twelve-year-old Nellie discovered
that she has a twin sister living in the Interior and, with her friend Deller, resolved
to save her. In Fixed, it's revealed that twin Nellie Joanne (an Advanced Cadet in
the Black Core program) has become a ruthless, obedient killer. Taught to com-
partmentalize her memories while being repeatedly brainwashed, she believes that
she kills heretics for the Goddess, and she does so with a song in her heart. When
Nellie and Deller infiltrate the program, their rescue plan fails: Nellie Joanne kills
Deller and takes Nellie to her superiors. Soon, however, Nellie Joanne's sup-
pressed memories start to surface, and she must decide between what her twin
insists is the truth and what she's always believed. The overall explanation for the
existence and workings of this world's parallel realities continues to be too compli-
cated, the kind you read around rather than read for, and it does eventually detract
from the otherwise taut thriller. It's still a dramatic and compelling read, though,
with the various ways the Advanced Cadets are physically and psychologically
trained, complete with voluntary and involuntary mind manipulation, insidious
in their perfection. Both characters are deceptive, willful fighters, but Nellie is
hotheaded, vulnerable, and compassionate, while her twin is cool and calculating.
The sequel answers many questions raised in Flux, and it's clear from the end that
MAY 2005 
* 385
a third book is forthcoming to answer more; those who enjoyed Flux will be pleased
indeed. KH
GRANT, K.M. 
Blood Red Horse. Walker, 2005 
[288p]
ISBN 0-8027-8960-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
This first entry in the Crusader-era de Granville Trilogy introduces reckless, bully-
ing older brother, Gavin; thoughtful yet courageous younger brother, William;
and their father's ward and the brothers' mutual love interest, Ellie. At the outset
of the novel, William has been given leave to choose a battle horse from his father's
stable and he chooses Hosanna for his grace, speed, and responsiveness rather than
brawn. Gavin soon rides Hosanna past his endurance, and the broken beast is sent
to the monastery as a work horse for the monks. A possible miracle restores Ho-
sanna to full stamina just in time to accompany the brothers and their father on a
Crusade to the Holy Land, where the elder de Granville loses his life, Gavin loses
his sword arm, and (probably most distressing for readers) William loses his horse
to Kamil ad-Din, teenage aide to Saladin. While Kamil tries to avenge his father's
death, plots against Saladin, and receives forgiveness from Saladin, and while Gavin
learns to fight left-handed, and while William tries not to sulk too much over
Hosanna's capture, Ellie back home learns to read, becomes embroiled in a scandal
with one of the monks, and fights off the nefarious attentions of the estate's stew-
ard. Knights die, infidels die, horses die; Hosanna goes into battle in service to
King Richard and nearly dies, but in a Cinemascope-worthy moment, enemies
Kamil and William join forces to nurse the horse back to health. Sure, it all plays
like a sprawling Hollywood epic, but effectively so-the whirlwind pacing and
involving adventure will keep readers turning pages and leave them happily oblivi-
ous of (or cheerfully aware of) the hokeyness. Scrapping brothers, a languishing
maiden, and a Noble Steed-what more could readers ask for, except perhaps a
Trusty Dog? EB
GREENE, STEPHANIE 
Moose's Big Idea; illus. by Joe Mathieu. 
Cavendish,
2005 
[64p]
ISBN 0-7614-5212-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
A moose, a pig, and a hunter don't normally hang out together in the woods, but
in this first installment in the Moose and Hildy series (Moose the moose, Hildy
the pig), that odd combination results in laughs, confusion, and increased self-
esteem for Moose. The seven short chapters follow Moose through the fall, when
the loss of his impressive antlers sinks him into depression, and finish in the spring,
when the arrival on his head of "two tiny stumps covered with a thin skin like
velvet" heralds the growth of a new and awe-inspiring spread. During the winter
months, Moose (with Hildy as companion) discovers he has many strengths be-
sides the ability to grow large protuberances from his head: he can paint, make
scrumptious doughnuts, sell coffee and paintings to hunters looking for moose,
and even dance. Moose's troubles provide a framework for much witty commen-
tary and tongue-in-cheek character development, and the hunter's acquaintance
with Moose as they share an interest in doughnuts, art, and antlers affords several
comedy of errors moments as the two consistently fail to recognize each other and
yet continue to participate in friendly exchanges. In the detailed illustrations,
386 
* THE BULLETIN
Moose's lanky goofiness contrasts pleasingly with Hildy's plump comfortableness
(enhanced with earrings, bracelets, shoes, and seeming lipstick), making them a
cheerful and inviting pair. Designed for transitional readers, this little book by the
author of the Owen Foote chapter series will be enjoyed by readers-alone and
listeners alike. TC
GREENFELD, HOWARD 
A Promise Fulfilled: Theodor Herz, Chaim Weizmann,
David Ben-Gurion, and the Creation of the State of Israel Greenwillow,
2005 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051505-8 
$19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051504-X 
$18.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
In three adulatory biographical sketches, Greenfeld discusses a trio of leaders who
served as intellectual and practical forces behind the secular Zionist movement
and the eventual establishment of Israel as a modern nation. Greenfeld writes with
unapologetic zeal for his subjects, and he's on firmest ground when he focuses on
specific contributions each man made to Israel's nationhood: Herzl's articulation
of the need for a Jewish homeland and his convening of Zionist Congresses;
Weizmann's efforts to reclaim for the Jews their Biblical lands; and Ben-Gurion's
consolidation of political power, particularly in advance of independence. How-
ever, he overplays his hand in attempting even a brief history of Israel through this
narrow biographical focus, and readers will rightly suspect that one can no more
comprehend Israel as the inevitable product ofHerzl, Weizmann, and Ben-Gurion
than one could comprehend the United States as the inevitable product of Tho-
mas Paine, Samuel Adams, and George Washington. Readers who simply want to
meet the Zionist movers and shakers will be well served, but those desiring more
thorough, objective background on Israel's founding should turn to Mitch Frank's
Understanding the Holy Land, above. EB
GREY, MINI 
Traction Man Is Here!; written and illus. by Mini Grey. 
Knopf,
2005 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93191-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83191-6 
$15.95 
R* Gr. 2-4
See this month's Big Picture, p. 369, for review.
GROVER, LORIEANN 
HoldMe Tight. McElderry, 2005 
33 9p
ISBN 0-689-85248-7 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Written in free verse, this novel explores the gamut of emotions that come crash-
ing into the life often-year-old Essie when, within just a few days, her father walks
out on the family and a classmate is kidnapped. The interplay of the relevance of
the two isolated occurrences works to great effect-while one family is searching
madly for their child, Essie feels unwanted by her own father; when the police ask
Essie questions about the missing boy, she asks if they deal with missing fathers as
well. Shortly after these events, Mr. Paul, long a trusted family friend, makes
sexual advances toward Essie; subsequent confusion and disgust add yet another
layer to her already devastated emotional state, a state fortunately countered by her
mother, who believes her and cares for her through the aftermath of the incident.
Each brief, titled poem flows thematically into the next, effectively supporting the
dynamism of Essie's thoughts and feelings in the weeks following the events. Her
MAY 2005 
* 387
voice possesses a careful balance of self-awareness and immaturity that is well suited
to her age and circumstances, and her understandable fears (that her mom will
leave her; that Mr. Paul is lurking around every corner; that she also will be kid-
napped) add a deeply personal tension to the most mundane of moments and
drive the story along. This is ultimately a tale of survival encased in an accessible
format; share it with fans of domestic drama and cerebral first-person fiction. HM
HANNAH, 
JONNY 
Hot Jazz Special; written and illus. by Jonny
Hannah. 
Candlewick, 2005 
[40p]
ISBN 0-7636-2308-3 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
What if dream teams weren't just for sports? What if eight jazz all-stars came
together for one bravura performance, led by Duke Ellington? Hannah brings
them all to the Body and Soul Cafe: Jelly Roll Morton, Django Reinhardt, Walter
Page, Louis Armstrong, Benny Goodman, Gene Krupa, Charlie Parker, and who
else but Billie Holiday on vocals. As each band member is introduced, readers are
assaulted by cool, from the freewheeling rogue rhymes ("the playing gets faster/ as
busy as a one-legged tap dancer"), enough flashy hand-lettering to supply Hannah's
House of Fonts, eye-searing riffs on primary hues, an interlude on proper attire for
jazz clubbin' (from berets to zoot suits), and poster-art-styled caricatures in thick,
fluid strokes and swipes of color. For those who lose the melody line of text that
winds amid the complex, sometimes frenetic visual variations, Hannah repeats his
verse in a final spread. For kids who are anxious to stop reading and start listening,
biographical notes also suggest a classic number or two for each artist. Although
one is loathe to discourage children from patronizing their local library, this title
might be worth home purchase just for the dust jacket that folds out into a red,
white, and blue poster for Duke Ellington and His Hot 8. "Get there by 'A'
Train/ And don't forget your dancing shoes." EB
HANSON, REGINA 
A Season for Mangoes; illus. by Eric Velasquez. 
Clarion,
2005 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-618-15972-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Sareen is attending her first sit-up, a Jamaican tradition that celebrates the life of
someone recently deceased and helps their spirit depart for the next world. She is
nervous, however, because the celebration is for her Nana, and she is expected to
tell stories about how much her Nana meant to her. Encouraged by her mama and
her twin brother, she finds the courage not only to tell her stories, but also to
participate in the leaping dance to knock on heaven's door so that it opens to
receive Nana's spirit. The story treats its protagonist with respect, conveying the
difficult emotions of such a sad time. Unfortunately, the text is choppy and dis-
jointed as it moves through the various elements of the sit-up; explanations are
given for some of the parts, such as the ring games and the humorous stories, but
other aspects, such as why Sareen is the only mourner in traditional costume, are
left unexplained, rendering the experience rather like attending an unfamiliar church
service. The stories are what one might expect at such a gathering--quotidian and
personal memories of a beloved grandmother, mildly interesting but not really
meaningful beyond their context. Velasquez offers crisp foreground images with
hazier figures in the background; his drafting in general lacks fluidity, but he does
388 
* THE BULLETIN
manage to convey the closeness of Sareen to her brother through the brother's
beckoning and comforting gestures. An author's note gives more information
about the multicultural context for the custom of the sit-up; the text offers an
opening for discussing mourning rituals and practicing telling stories of lost loved
ones. KC
HAPTIE, CHARLOTTE 
Otto and the Bird Charmers. Holiday House, 2005 
4 1 6p
ISBN 0-8234-1883-9 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Spring is coming to the great and mysterious City of Trees, and with it the annual
Spring Carnival, but the weather isn't cooperating; instead, the City is freezing
over, even the areas that stay sunny and warm all year. Some of the Citizens are
beginning to think, as they did in Otto and the Flying Twins (BCCB 6/04), that the
magical Karmidee are to blame, and an Ultra-Normalist Faction has begun de-
manding that the Karmidee take the Cure-a potion that destroys magical energy.
Otto Hush and his father, Albert, the King of the Karmidee, are determined to
save their people and their City, but first, they must discover who is behind this
elaborate plot. However, among the costumed crowd of the Spring Carnival is a
foe masquerading as a friend, an enemy disguised as a father, and Otto must quickly
learn that nothing is as it seems if he is to succeed. Haptie's short, often frag-
mented sentences flow at a swift pace during the action but turn to a more mea-
sured grace in slower moments; a great deal of understated wit makes it all the
more appealing. The unusual makeup of the City is just as enchanting as ever:
thieves shrink themselves and pose as cake decorations to avoid capture, a girl
learns the ancient skill of Combat Knitting, and the art of High Frequency screaming
draws massive crowds. Yet within this boisterous energy is an undercurrent of
darkness, tearing apart families and turning healing warmth into killing cold; this
atmosphere of driving tension builds until Otto, the unassuming hero, slowly brings
together everything and everyone into a great tapestry of betrayal and redemption.
The stakes are truly high because the characters and the setting are original and
alive, and readers will find that the pure and heartfelt conclusion makes this vol-
ume even more satisfying than the last. KH
HERSHEY, MARY 
My Big Sister Is So Bossy She Says You Can't Read This
Book. 
Lamb, 2005 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90917-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74681-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
It all started the morning that Effie's big sister, Maxey, bullied her into handing
over the key to the Angel Scouts' cash box so she could borrow twenty bucks; then
Effie discovers an additional $67 was taken and doesn't know whether to rat out
her sister (and submit herself to Maxey's wrath) or stay silent, blaming herself for
being irresponsible with the key. While the story of the missing money feels at
times a weak plot device to explore the sibling conflict, it is Effie's humorous
observations on her relationship with Maxey that carry the tale through the con-
flict all the way to a redemptive (and clearly overdramatic) ending, wherein Effie is
almost struck by lightning and Maxey instantaneously evolves into a protective big
sis. Maxey is in a league of her own in the world of nasty older sisters; more than
bossy, she is deceitful, passive aggressive, and altogether mean. Conversely, Effie is
an affable and entertaining protagonist, chock full of ten-year-old woes and crises
MAY 2005 
* 389
(the most pressing being the need for a new best friend, which is taking a turn for
the better since the promising Aurora Triboni and her best friend "split up last
month at a slumber party"). The first-person narration is alternately laugh-out-
loud funny and bittersweet as Effie deals with the recent loss of her grandpa and
her father's imprisonment for (appropriately enough) illegally spending borrowed
money. Tidy ending aside, this is an energetic first novel full of entertaining char-
acters that is likely to circulate among late elementary circles of friends. HM
HURD, THACHER 
Sleepy Cadillac: A Bedtime Drive; written and illus. by Thacher
Hurd. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-073021-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-073020-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 3-6 yrs
So much for the pretty little horses-today's tired toddler can travel in style in the
Sleepy Cadillac. The text invites the audience to "snuggle in," describing the
lulling sounds of the motoring car ("The steering wheel turns. The tires hum.
The engine purrs") as it soars through the sky over nocturnal city- and country-
scapes, culminating in a dreamy circle dance of all the sleepy cars, after which the
Sleepy Cadillac will deliver its passenger safely to bed. The concept is ingenious,
combining the joy of mechanized (and autonomous) glory with the soporific
rhythms of a night drive. Hurd's compact, simply lyrical text effectively marries
traditional elements of the bedtime book (stars and moon) with mundane realities
of car seats and horn, resulting in a luminous yet homey journey made more im-
mediate by its direct audience address. The book's nightscapes are touched with
retro charm in its tailfinned luxury car and old-fashioned gas pumps, but that adds
an element of exoticism for modern youngsters, many of whom will be breathless
with longing at the protagonist's airborne automotive travels over the nighttime
world they can only imagine. The long blurry strokes of the pastels emphasize
texture over draftsmanship, leaving the faces largely indistinct (the better to project
upon) while the sweeping views have the glimmery reality of dreams. This would
be a cozy companion to Coy's Night Driving (BCCB 12/96), and it would be
especially suitable on long car trips to lull youngsters to sleep in the backseat. DS
JENKINS, STEVE 
ISee a Kookaburra!: DiscoveringAnimal Habitats aroundthe World;
written by Steve Jenkins and Robin Page; illus. by Steve Jenkins. 
Houghton,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-618-50764-7 
$16.00 
R* 
4-8 yrs
The well-known creators of 2004 Caldecott Honor Book What Do You Do with a
Tail Like This? (BCCB 3/03) team up once again to bring young audiences a
survey of the wonders of the natural world. Habitats are the subject under the lens
this time, presented in a seek-and-find format of double-page spreads representing
the various habitats, each labeled with name and location. Within each of these
habitats are hidden eight different animals, some offering the viewer quite a chal-
lenge to find; each such spread, however, is followed by a view wherein the ani-
mals' locations are laid bare by the removal of the camouflaging vegetation and
landscape elements and the animals themselves are identified and briefly anno-
tated. The texture- and color-rich cut-paper collages, displaying each animal in a
characteristic pose, feature several layers of depth, providing young viewers with
the potential for hours of exploration. The animals themselves are best appreci-
390 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ated in the explanatory pages, where the detail and texture of the art can be fully
admired. The final leaves of the book offer an encyclopedic review of all the crea-
tures discussed, complete with descriptions and specifications, a map, and a bibli-
ography for future reading. TC
JONES, DIANA WYNNE 
Conrad's Fate. Greenwillow, 2005 
[38 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-074744-7 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-074743-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
Deep in the English Alps (in a Chrestomancian alternate universe), Conrad is
forced by his uncle to leave school at age twelve to work as a domestic servant for
the aristocrats at Stallery, the grand home up on the mountain. Uncle Alfred
promises that as soon as Conrad fulfills his karma by bumping off some unnamed
nasty at Stallery he can return home and attend school with his friends. Other-
wise, Uncle Alfred sighs, Conrad's Evil Fate is to "die in agony before the year's
out." Packed off to Stallery to fulfill his mission, Conrad finds himself swept into
the rhythms of life on the estate, serving the cantankerous Countess and her son
and daughter, Count Robert and Felice. Random earthquakes that result in mi-
nor reality shifts and the secretive behavior of a fellow footman (a tall, irrepressible
fifteen-year-old who calls himself Christopher Smith) involve Conrad in a whirl-
wind of mystery and magic, which, when calmed, reveals a misuse of power so
great that the integrity of several universes is jeopardized. This latest Chrestomanci
novel is a crackerjack concoction, featuring one of Jones' signature convoluted
plots involving a large cast-touched off with telling characterizations-in a sen-
sory-rich setting packed with idiosyncratic cultural details, the whole of which
envelops the reader in a gratifying maelstrom of images and information. A deft
resolution binds off the various storylines into one neat knot and provides fans of
the Christopher Chant books (Charmed Life, BCCB 3/78, and The Lives ofChris-
topher Chant, 3/88) with a tantalizing glimpse of Christopher's (and Conrad's)
first steps into adulthood. Readers with a penchant for witty fantasy-even those
with no prior Jones experience-will find themselves right at home. TC
KAABERBOL, LENE 
The Shamer's Signet; tr. by Lene Kaaberbol. 
Holt,
2005 
[3 20p]
ISBN 0-8050-7542-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
After fleeing Dunark at the end of The Shamer's Daughter (BCCB 5/04), eleven-
year-old Dina and her mother have been lying low in the Highlands. Since they
are Shamers, people who can reveal a person's most guilty secrets, they are in mor-
tal danger-Draken, the usurping lord of Dunark, has declared death to all Shamers.
When Dina is kidnapped by Valdracu, who governs the town where Draken's war
goods are produced, he uses her as a weapon to punish unproductive or rebellious
workers, who soon come to fear Dina's "Evil Eye." The perversion of her power
makes Dina physically and mentally ill, and eventually, her own shame overtakes
her until she cannot use her power anymore: "Something inside me snapped, like
a string on a lute tuned beyond its breaking point." Meanwhile, Dina's older
brother, Davin, and her friend Rose go in search of her, but once they find her,
will it be too late to undo the damage? Told in chapters alternating between
Dina's and Davin's point of view, this intimate story of their development is an
MAY 2005 
* 391
aside to the large-scale war that looms in the background. Davin is realistic as the
hotheaded teenage brother incensed at his inability to protect his family, while
Dina has developed into a mature and resourceful girl who is beginning to under-
stand the responsibility inherent in her gift. Though uncomfortably akin to rape,
Dina's abuse and her reactions to it are handled with sensitivity, never becoming
too dark for young readers. Between Dina's own determination and the love of
her family and friends, there is plenty of room for hope, and readers will know
Dina's recovery is forthcoming. KH
KARR, KATHLEEN 
WorldsApart. Cavendish, 2005 
196p
ISBN 0-7614-5195-1 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
This fact-based novel describes the friendship of Christopher West, a fifteen-year-
old newcomer to the Carolina Colony in 1670, and Asha-po, a teenaged Sewee
Indian whom he meets upon arrival. Christopher's father, leader of the settle-
ment, commissions him to take advantage of this companionship to learn about
food sources and other useful knowledge. When the friendship begins, the main
emphasis is on the boys' shared love of adventure and survival tricks, giving the
text the feel of an historical Hatchet; as conflicts arise (the arrival of an attacking
Spanish galleon, ambush by the Westo Indian tribe) and loyalties are called into
question, the story takes on a harsher (and less credible) edge. Christopher is a
thoughtful and stubborn boy, and his adolescent point of view on the experience
of colonization and the gradual process of finding his own voice gives the story its
complexity and worth. His growing awareness that the land the English have
settled isn't actually uninhabited lends the text an awakened innocence most clearly
demonstrated in his internal thoughts. The dialogue with Asha-po, designed to
demonstrate how each boy is learning the other's language, is unfortunately strained
(and occasionally frustrating, especially when Christopher starts responding to Asha-
po's broken English in broken English). Still, fans of historical adventure will
embrace this thoughtful and at times exciting account of a complex chapter of
American history. An author's note is included. HM
KOGLER, JENNIFER ANNE 
Ruby Tuesday. HarperCollins, 2005 
[3 2 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-073957-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-073956-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Ruby Tuesday has known her family isn't like the others in her California beach
town, but now that she's thirteen, she begins to realize exactly how different they
are. It's not just that her mother has taken off as a semi-groupie in search of rock
'n' roll glory, it's that her father supports the family with high-stakes gambling-
on the Dodgers win in the 1988 World Series, to the tune of two million dollars.
When Ruby's honorary Uncle Larry, her father's bookie, turns up dead and Ruby's
father is arrested on suspicion of his murder, Ruby has more than her family's
reputation to worry about. In an effort to remove Ruby from the worst of the
publicity and possible darker threats, Ruby's mother spirits her away to Las Vegas,
home of Ruby's grandmother, where Ruby finally gains some understanding of
her family history. Ruby's narrative voice tends toward the adult retrospective
(even some of her dialogue is wise beyond her years), and the polished descrip-
tions, though elegant, sometimes slow the pace; there's also not much help offered
to readers unfamiliar with betting terminology, with which the text is densely
392 
* THE BULLETIN
studded. On the other hand, this is a story of considerable originality, with an
evocative exploration of a strange and intriguing world filled with professional
gamblers, lovers of the game, and other diehard inhabitants of the casino-centered
Vegas world. Kogler has a nice line in catchy chapter openings and wry humor,
and Ruby's dawning respect for her family and, particularly, her previously little-
known mother is convincingly depicted. The joys of a road trip to an unusual
location with colorful company will be sufficient to convince many readers to ride
along. DS
KROSOCZKA, JARRETT J. 
Punk Farm; written and illus. by Jarrett J.
Krosoczka. 
Knopf, 2005 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92429-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82429-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
With a cover that radiates excitement from its starburst of orange and yellow beams
emanating from sunglass-clad farm animals, and collage endpapers that feature
mock head shots of the stars, ticket stubs, and snatches of handwritten lyrics, this
book promises the excitement of a quirky concert. It all starts innocently enough-
a cheerful Farmer Joe, surrounded by perfectly ordinary farm animals, does a hard
day's work and retires to his house. After that, though, the barn starts rockin'
when the animals set up for their show. Animals come in two-by-two to watch the
punk version of "Old MacDonald" ("With a BOOM CRASH here and a BOOM
BOOM there") flashing against a vibrant, jewel-toned light-show that changes the
color of the stage with every page. Unfortunately, the concert consists of only one
song presented in a disappointing and attenuated repetition of verses before the
band shouts, "Thank you, Wisconsin!" Still, the energy and humor of the illustra-
tions continue to kick it, and enterprising readers-aloud could turn this into a
shakin' cacophony. Budding rockers who like to use their mouths in explosive
ways will enjoy the variations, or this could be paired with Jones' Pigs Rock (BCCB
6/03) for a double-decker look at lyrical livestock. KC
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Tumble Bunnies; illus. by Marylin Hafner. 
Candlewick,
2005 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7636-2265-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Big brother rabbit Jefferson is totally psyched for the upcoming Sports Spectacular
at school: "Teams mean everything.... Teams are cool. I'm on the junior varsity
T-ball team." Younger sibling Clyde, however, doubts he'll be picked for any
team at all, and even if he is, he's afraid his gym shorts will slide right down over
his spindly legs. A schoolmate, Rosemary, inspires him with a different view of
sports when she suggests that he try a freestyle event instead, and, after an intro-
duction to the gymnastics coach, Clyde works up a routine to showcase his tum-
bling abilities. Not only does he shine at the school meet, his willingness to forfeit
his place on the roster to help injured Rosemary wins him a sportsmanship award
as well. Lasky's text may run a bit longer than listeners' patience, and Hafner's
busy line-and-watercolor cast often exhibits more raw motion than grace. The
notion of noncompetitive sport may come as an awakening to many youngsters,
though, who will be pleased to learn you can go for the gold without going for the
jugular. EB
MAY 2005 
* 393
LLEWELLYN, SAM 
Little Darlings. Razorbill, 2005 
[2 2 4p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59514-066-2 
$6.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Raised exclusively by nannies since their birth (their mother having disappeared
some years ago), Daisy, Cassian, and Primrose, aged twelve, eleven, and ten, re-
spectively, have internalized all the nanny dictums, such as "Children should be
seen and not heard," and "Speak when you're spoken to." Fortunately for the
story, in the process of this internalization a changeabout has occurred, causing the
youthful trio to become only superficially Nanny's little darlings, while under-
neath evolving into a truly "vicious and villainous and similar" band of nanny
nemeses. Upon the children's accidental abduction by a burglar posing as a nanny,
a whole new world of possibilities is opened to the siblings: the burglar, Nanny
Pete, is one of thousands living on a stolen luxury liner known as the Kleptomanic
and trained to impersonate nannies in order to steal the dispersed limbs of a fa-
mous, once-whole teddy bear known as the Royal Edward. Two other under-
world organizations race to nab the bear's bits, but with Daisy, Cassian, and Primrose
as allies, the burglars stand a greater chance of coming out ahead. This British
import is a gleeful pastiche, relishing every aspect of its outlandish characters and
story. Throughout the story, Daisy's psychological battle against being converted
into pure nanny herself keeps the narrative tension high, while the devious plot-
ting of Cassian and Primrose creates additional suspense and intrigue. Llewellyn's
manic yarn is more imaginative, snappy, and snidely comic than the Snicket books,
and it will keep readers hooked from page one. TC
MACDONALD, MARGARET READ, ad. 
A Hen, a Chick anda String Guitar; illus. by
Sophie Fatus. 
Barefoot, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 1-84148-796-1 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
It all started with Grandpa's generous gift of a "clucking red hen"; before long,
sings the narrator, "that hen/ Gave me a chick./ I had a hen,/ and I had a chick./
Ay! Ay! Ay! Ay! Ay!/ How I love my two little pets!" This cumulative tale follows
a string of animal gifts (the typical barnyard menagerie: duck, sheep, horse, etc.)
and births until the young narrator, clad in a striped blue poncho, has sixteen
animals and a string guitar that he plays to invite his pets close to him. Noted
storyteller MacDonald has executed the seemingly impossible: a thirty-two page
picture book that simultaneously functions as a lesson in colors, animal sounds,
animal baby terms, family member terms, and counting by twos. What's more,
she has set the whole thing to music (a CD is enclosed and guitar tablature is
available online), resulting in a rhythmic storytime jaunt through the Chilean Andes.
Fatus' bold acrylic and pastel paintings effectively capture the effervescence of the
simple plot; the bouncy lyrics are set against the rolling countryside hills, reflecting
the joyful progression of the boy and his pets through the story. Despite the ever-
growing cast of characters, the layout never becomes cluttered; on the contrary,
each figure is carefully composed with thick paintstrokes and tiny, thoughtful de-
tails. Storytellers will respond eagerly to the opportunity to try this one out on a
crowd, and young listeners will likely beg for a second round. A source note,
linking the adaptation to several variants, is included. HM
394 
* THE BULLETIN
MCCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE, ad. 
Perseus. Cricket, 2005 
[128p] 
(Heroes)
ISBN 0-8126-2735-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
In this retelling of Greek myth, fate is the web in which the lives of mortals are
trapped. The fear of his Oracle-foretold death at the hand of his yet unborn grand-
son drives Perseus' grandfather to wall up his virgin daughter in a tower (thus
catching the lustful attention of Zeus, who fathers a child on her) and then to set
his daughter and newborn grandson afloat in a trunk to sink, he hopes, to their
deaths. Perseus and his mother survive, and the youth's varied accomplishments-
including the famous slaying of the Gorgon Medusa-bring him the reputation of
a hero. When he does accidentally kill his grandfather as was foretold, the young
man realizes that, with Fate at the helm, "I'm a puppet dangling on that cord the
Fates are weaving. There's no such thing as a hero-only a man with a destiny."
In the end, however, Perseus finds that some unknown hand has severed "the
threads of fate," setting him and all the world free to create their own futures. As
in her recent Odysseus (BCCB 3/05), McCaughrean's deft prose captures the es-
sential faults and strengths of personality that drive the story (greed, lust, revenge,
loyalty, shame) without overplaying the scenes for the young audience. Perseus'
initial innocence and delight in his accomplishments and later realization of his
true position accentuate the tragedy of lives ruled by careless fate and emphasize
the greatness of the gift of self-determination, however it is won-a reworking of
theme that the ancient Greeks might not appreciate but that will resonate with its
modern audience. TC
McDONALD, 
MEGAN 
Beetle McGrady Eats Bugs!; illus. by Jane
Manning. 
Greenwillow, 2005 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-001355-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-001354-0 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
While filling out food pyramids in second grade, Beetle wonders why bugs don't
have a food group. Her suggestion to include creepy-crawlies on the menu gets
her work group groaning and lands Beetle in hot water, as she rashly promises to
eat an ant at recess. When her bravado flees in the face of eating an actual insect,
Beetle feels humiliated. Later in Food Week, she eats every unfamiliar dish her
teacher offers: falafel, succotash, fish eggs, and bird's-nest soup. Even this derring-
do can't restore Beetle's spirits, but luckily a guest chef supplies Beetle the oppor-
tunity to reclaim her identity as an adventurer by bringing in grasshopper tacos,
tree-worm spaghetti, and cricket pizza. Intoxicated by triumph, "Beetle A-for-
Anteater McGrady" eats it all. The chatty prose features enticingly rhythmic phras-
ing ("The ant was tickly. The ant was creepy. The ant was crawly") that paints
word pictures for listeners while avoiding condescension to emergent readers.
Beetle's desire to distinguish herself will ring true with many listeners, even as the
particulars of her exploits elicit luxurious squirms and cries of"Eeeuuw!" from the
audience. A palette of tan, lime, and violet provides an effective backdrop for focal
points in coral tones, scattered across the pages in quarter-page vignettes or drawn
large in closeups. The schoolchildren's snub noses and wide, mobile faces with
burnished cheeks draw the eye, while Beetle's effervescent dynamism is defined by
strongly colored diagonals and continual personal disarray. The author of the
fervent Insects Are My Life (BCCB 4/95), McDonald has again created a bug buff
whose trials will be enjoyed by boys and girls alike. TC
MAY 2005 
* 395
MCMILLAN, BRUCE 
Going Fishing; written and illus. with photographs by Bruce
McMillan. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-47201-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Frithrik is one lucky kid: each of his grandfathers takes him fishing off the coast of
their Icelandic towns. Grandfather Frithrik, for whom the youngster is named,
takes him out on the Gauti to fish for cod, lowering the lines from mounted reels,
hauling in the catch on multiple baited lures, tossing back the smaller fish and
keeping big ones. The next day Frithrik's off with Grandfather Haddi to check
the nets for lumpfish. The boy sorts out the seaweed while the adults sort the fish,
tossing back the males and gutting the females for their roe; Frithrik then feeds the
remains to the following birds. The text is sometimes stilted, and although
McMillan manages to work in some intriguing information on the cod and
lumpfish, the fulmar gulls ("They spray vomit on you if you bother them on their
nests"), and the two very different methods of fishing, he's rather vague about the
importance of fishing to the two grandparents, both of whom have other steady
employment. Moreover, although final notes enumerate typical and record an-
nual Icelandic catches, no mention is made of fishing limits or fish populations, an
odd omission in light ofoverfishing in Atlantic waters. Still, children whose inter-
est is limited to hauling in the big ones will drool over the crisp color photographs
of guys at sea, and those interested in a broader view of cod fishing can supplement
their reading with Kurlansky's The Cod's Tale (BCCB 10/01). EB
MECHLING, LAUREN 
The Rise and Fall ofa 10th-Grade Social Climber; by Lauren
Mechling and Laura Moser. 
Graphia/Houghton, 2005 
[30 4p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-55519-6 
$7.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-12
Mimi is thrilled to be leaving Houston and her bossy mother behind for Manhat-
tan, where she'll be living with her photographer father and spending her sopho-
more year at the highly alternative yet highly posh Baldwin School. At Baldwin,
Mimi is reunited with her old grade-school friend Sam, but she's skeptical of his
claims about the impermeability of Baldwin's social elite: in fact, she makes a bet
with Sam that she will so successfully infiltrate the Coolies that she'll be invited
along on the special ritual Christmas-break trip. That's a plot that could occasion
some frothy and glitzy fun or some serious soul-searching; unfortunately, this book
seems to want to do both and ends up achieving neither. Characters aren't de-
picted in ways that earn responses to them, so Mimi's claim to friendship with her
father's assistant (who is pretty early foreshadowed as gay, but then so is Mimi's
father, who proves to be straight) seems like a fantasy, her eventual genuine affec-
tion for the largely interchangeable Coolies isn't convincing, and her friend Sam
never really gets indicted for the fact that his public revelation of Mimi's behind-
the-scenes plotting is terribly hurtful to people other than just Mimi. Mimi her-
self is too often the depthless sneermeister to retain much reader sympathy for her
struggling-outsider status; even as the book shines its spotlight on her final emo-
tional rapprochement with the Coolies on her front doorstep, it seems to have
forgotten that she's left abandoned inside her apartment the unpopular friend she
relies on in moments of desperation. Steer readers instead to fresh and sassy chick
lit that's worth the reading, such as Kantor's Confessions of a Not It Girl (BCCB
4/04) or Brian's The V Club (6/04). DS
396 
* THE BULLETIN
MILICH, ZORAN 
City 1 2 3; written and illus. with photographs by Zoran
Milich. 
Kids Can, 2005 
32p
ISBN 1-55337-540-8 
$15.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
Milich scours the city for countable objects of all sorts and numerals emblazoned
on rusty signs, shiny brass, stenciled asphalt, and presents it in a sleek, chic format
that's as much a visual pleasure for adult mathematical guides as it is for counting
trainees. Ebony numerals from one to ten march across each milky white verso,
with the featured number of each spread in red. An appropriate number of red
dots accumulate under the black numerals, and the number's name is printed out
in a third line. All that reinforcement is just dandy, but the real draw here is the
photographed urban scenes on the facing pages. Some are obviously staged: ten
French fries sit on a plate next to order placard 10; four pairs of firemen's boots
pose before truck number 8. Most, though, are an impressive result of a keen eye,
clever cropping, and pure serendipity: the tip-top floors of seven skyscrapers form
a backdrop for the number 7 street light; four green illuminated arrows direct
riders toward four red doors that glide open on the subway car on-you guessed
it-track number 4. At even-numbered intervals, the white-bordered pictures
give way to full-bleed double-page spreads that show the current cumulation: nu-
merals 1 through 6 mark the lanes on a track; an arrow points to floor eight on a
classic brass elevator display. The photo concept book is not a novelty in itself
(Tana Hoban perfected the art some time ago), but Milich's pristine images and
counter-friendly layout rank this title among the best. EB
MILLER, CALVIN CRAIG 
No Easy Answers: Bayard Rustin and the Civil Rights
Movement. 
Morgan Reynolds, 2005 
160p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 1-931798-43-5 
$24.95 
R 
Gr. 6-12
Bayard Rustin languishes in obscurity compared to Martin Luther King, Jr., but
this biography shows what a grave disservice this is to both the man and the history
of the civil rights movement. Talented enough to pursue a career in music, Rustin
chose instead to dedicate himself to a life of activism. As early as the '30s and '40s,
he led protests that brought about an end to racial discrimination in public places
such as restaurants and hotels in states where Jim Crow was fact even if it wasn't
necessarily law. As a member of the Fellowship of Reconciliation, he traveled
widely, advocating for peace as both an agenda and a method; among other signifi-
cant achievements, he was personally responsible for insisting to Martin Luther
King, Jr. and the other leaders in Montgomery that they must employ the prin-
ciples of civil disobedience and nonviolent resistance if their protests were to be
successful. Despite Rustin's profound influence as a civil rights activist, his homo-
sexuality kept him from taking a more prominent public role. Arrested on
several occasions for homosexual encounters, "Rustin had to accept the contradic-
tion of being both an activist and an invisible man," choosing, for instance, to play
the behind-the-scenes role of organizing the 1963 March on Washington. Though
the text has to struggle against stodgy layout, Miller succeeds in painting an inti-
mate and moving portrait of this talented, well-spoken, and ultimately humble
man, interspersing photographs that capture the many moods, faces, and events of
the turbulent times in which Rustin chose to invest himself. Because of Rustin's
centrality to the civil rights movement, his biography also provides a history of its
multiple and intersecting beginnings in the '30s and '40s, as well as the shift,
MAY 2005 
* 397
which Rustin felt necessary, from protest to politics after the turbulent years of the
'60s, making this required reading for any student of recent American history.
Notes, a bibliography, a timeline, and an index are included. KC
MOLONEY, JAMES 
Black Taxi. HarperCollins, 2005 
26 4 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-055938-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-055937-3 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-10
Sure, Rosie's sad that her granddad has to go to jail for six months, especially since
he is taking the rap for her no-good uncle. When Paddy Sinclair gives Rosie the
keys to his classic black Mercedes-Benz 280S and his cell phone to take care of
while he's inside, she can't help it if her sadness becomes all mixed up with the
euphoria that accompanies sudden popularity. A brief chauffeur position with the
A-list girls nets her the attention of Todd--cute, sweet, athletic, but a bit too
much of a mild-mannered gentleman for her rebellious hormones. A trip to Paddy's
favorite gas station turns up Chris-the right guy for the hormones if wrong in all
other important ways. While she's sorting all that out, the cell phone keeps ring-
ing; apparently Paddy ran a busy taxi service for the old folks in town, and Rosie
finds herself escorting elderly ladies and gentlemen to hospitals, doctor's appoint-
ments, craft bazaars, and, to her dismay, adulterous trysts. One caller, however,
sets in motion a dangerous mystery: an expensive ring is missing from a jewelry-
store heist, and the caller has reason to believe that it is hidden in Paddy Sinclair's
Benz. It takes all of Rosie's deductive powers and devious wiles to concoct a plan
that will keep the caller from carrying through on his menacing threats; fortu-
nately, she comes from a long line of criminals and is up to the task. In his first
American outing, Australian author Moloney creates a memorable character: Rosie's
fear and anger render her bold, mouthy, and creative, and her walk on the wild
side with the scorching hot Chris helps her out of more than one tight spot, if
nothing else. A fizzy, feisty heroine caught in a fast-paced and dangerous intrigue,
Rosie maintains a humorous outlook and a fierce wit whether she's facing down
annoying police officers, dealing with murderous thugs, or dismissing inappropri-
ate boyfriends who just don't understand that a girl's place is behind the wheel and
not in the passenger's seat. KC
MONTHEI, BETTY 
Lookingfor Normal. HarperCollins, 2005 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072506-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072505-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Annie's ordinary sixth-grade existence is blasted apart one school day when she's
pulled out of class and informed that her parents are dead-that her abusive father
shot her mother and then himself. The stunned girl and her little brother are
whisked away by her mother's parents, but Grandma and Grandpa are so locked
into their own grief that they're unable to help their bereaved grandchildren;
Grandma, in fact, begins to vent her anger at her son-in-law on his children and
seems incapable of restraining herself. Annie's narrative voice is low key but sensi-
tive, believably somber without turning to melodramatic fireworks; there's au-
thenticity in her blend of protectiveness of and irritation at her little brother. While
the first half of the book follows a fairly predictable plot and emotional trajectory
("But the laughter ended when Mama and Daddy started fighting more and more"),
398 
* THE BULLETIN
the difficulties the kids encounter in the home of their grieving grandparents pro-
vide a credible yet unusual development. Unfortunately, the two halves of the
book don't meld well together, and the comparatively easy resolution to Grandma's
angry violence (after she beats Annie severely enough to require hospitalization,
Grandpa ensures she's hospitalized for treatment, and the family starts over) seems
particularly suspect as a contrast to Annie's father's fate. There's still a poignant
story here, though, and even readers in less tragic circumstances will empathize
with Annie's attempts to keep herself and her family together in the face of terrible
change. DS
MYRACLE, LAUREN 
Rhymes with Witches. Amulet, 2005 
[208p]
ISBN 0-8109-5859-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Like the feral cats that have overrun their high school, the Bitches, a clique consist-
ing of one girl from every grade, are an elusive and potent presence in the lives of
their fellow students. Freshman Jane is drawn to the group, and her need to be
popular wins their approval, since they look for girls so broken (though still ragingly
pretty) that they will do anything to gain A-list status. The Bitches practice a form
of witchcraft that requires that they steal tokens from other girls and present them
as sacrifices to a strange teacher who specializes in ancient religions and goddess
worship. If the sacrifice is accepted, the popularity of the girl whose lip gloss or
barrette was taken is siphoned off and credited to the Bitches' account, making
them irresistible while their unfortunate victim becomes a pariah. When Bitsy,
the junior, becomes obsessed with one victim, Jane realizes that something must
be done; her attempts to stop Bitsy turn on Jane when the victim discovers the
source of their power and seizes it for herself. Myracle spins the mean-girl theme
into dark comedy here, completing the cycle we always winkingly knew existed
between fiercely popular girls and covens (not to mention feral cats). She even
throws in some truly icky imagery regarding the cats, though she leaves many of
the details of the sacrifices and their history up to imaginations she has carefully
and playfully primed. The Bitches' role in school politics is closely aligned to
Cormier's Vigils without the deadly seriousness of that group; the dark humor,
wry wit, and timely subject of this book will catapult it to cult status, at least for a
season or two. KC
O'MALLEY, KEVIN 
Once upon a CoolMotorcycle Dude; illus. by Kevin O'Malley,
Carol Heyer, and Scott Goto. 
Walker, 2005 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8949-8 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8947-1 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
It's tough to find a fairy tale that appeals to both boys and girls, so the boy and girl
in this story decide to make one up for their library assignment. The girl contrib-
utes a princess who loves to play with her ponies and a giant who is stealing them,
wreathing the princess in tears and dismay, and leaving her longing for a protector.
The boy, done in by the cloying sweetness, calls in a muscle dude to guard the last
pony, uglies up the giant, and adds some cosmic chaos to the mix while the prin-
cess sits around spinning straw into gold. This arouses the girl's feminist sensibili-
ties, so she turns the princess into a strong warrior. Reluctant to abandon his
muscle dude, the boy agrees to a compromise-sort of. This battle of the sexes,
which recalls the similar urban legend about writing collaboration gone awry, is
MAY 2005 
* 399
cleverly rendered by three illustrators with three different styles-the princess is a
purple and pink fantasy-art creation, the muscle dude roars onto the scene amidst
garish orange flames and lurid greens, and the kids themselves are rendered in a
classic comics style, complete with stipple for stylized shading. The story does
what fairy tales are supposed to do-the arguing kids project themselves into the
arguing princess and muscle dude and work together to banish the evil assign-
ment-er-giant. The result is canny as well as funny, and it offers inspiration for
a clever, outside-the-box way to attack a pesky group project where the members
of the group don't see eye to eye. KC
PICHON, Liz 
The Very Ugly Bug; written and illus. by Liz Pichon. 
Tiger Tales,
2005 
32p
ISBN 1-58925-048-6 
$15.95 
R 
4-7yrs
The very ugly bug has a very big problem. She doesn't have "teeny tiny" eyes so
she can hide in the berries, camouflage capabilities to disguise her on a leaf, or the
ability to fly away, like her assorted bug friends, and she's afraid that the birds will
eat her right up. A noble effort to add on these desirable features results in a
hilarious disguise (complete with mask, petal wings, a leaf toga, and dangly berry
earrings) that, unfortunately, makes "her stand out even more!" Luckily for the
very ugly bug, the bird that swoops down for its dinner finds her so repulsive that
he flies off, so that her ugliness is in fact her salvation. Although the titular bug
staring out from the cover of this comical tale isn't all that ugly, this is an enter-
taining picture-book take on self-acceptance. The bold palette and cartoonish
characters add to the fun, and the dialogue bubbles, providing commentary from
the cast, are sparingly placed so that readers-aloud don't have to diverge too much
from the tale to include them in the telling. The entrance of Mr. Ugly Bug at
story's end, with the subsequent procreation of countless other ugly bugs (de-
picted in a crowded two-page spread), leaves the tale on just the right note of
humor and sweetness. HM
SAYRE, APRIL PULLEY 
Stars beneath Your Bed: The Surprising Story ofDust; illus.
by Ann Jonas. 
Greenwillow, 2005 
[3 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-057189-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-057188-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
The humble dust mote steps (well, floats) into the spotlight, claiming its well
deserved fifteen minutes of fame. In Sayre's able hands, dust is no longer the
reviled object of periodic household eradication, but stuff that fires the imagina-
tion: "Dust is made in nature when meerkats dig, when zebras roll, when cheetahs
chase gazelles across the land"; "Old dust stays around. Dust that made King Tut
sneeze is still on Earth. It might be on your floor." As Sayre points out the many
unexpected sources of dust, Jonas' watercolors furnish the appropriately hazy vi-
sual accompaniment: brown clouds pouf beneath cheetah paws, sooty grays mush-
room from a volcano, flecks of white salt swirl off breaking waves, light diffuses
through a finely grained sunset sky. Sayre favors a smooth, poetic tone for the text
and then shifts to matter-of-fact science for her closing note, which actually de-
fines dust ("anything smaller than one-sixteenth of a millimeter in diameter"),
expands on dust's provenance, and touches on its role in the water cycle. Having
pondered dust's historic-possibly even noble or cosmic-pedigree, readers and
400 
* THE BULLETIN
listeners may decide to leave it spread proudly across the furniture for the admira-
tion and edification of all. EB
SCHWARTZ, 
HOWARD, ad. 
Before You Were Born; illus. by Kristina
Swarner. 
Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2005 
32p
ISBN 1-59643-028-1 
$16.95 
R 
4-7yrs
Framed by a young child's request for a story about the time before he was born,
this midrash-based tale explores the prebirth existence of children, who are led
from the Treasury of Souls by the angel Lailah and then delivered as seeds to their
mothers. In utero, Lailah instructs the child on "all the secrets in the world," from
the changing of seasons to the languages of animals to countless stories. Just be-
fore birth, Lailah holds a finger to the child's lips, reminding him to keep secret
about this wealth of knowledge and leaving an indentation just above his lip. The
story's payoff lies in the father's closing assertion that the child will have the rest of
his life "to learn all those wondrous secrets again"; this thoughtful commissioning
carries the story beyond a sticky-sweet gift book for new parents and instead allows
it to stand as a quiet tribute the excitement of beginning life. The impressive
linoleum-block prints are touched with watercolor, gouache, and colored pencil,
creating a thick, grainy texture as the black of the printmaking peeks out through
the layers of colors. Characters are round-faced and rosy-cheeked, and Lailah is
definitively earthmotheresque, constantly holding or embracing the child against
her. There is little substance to the story, but the intrigue of life before birth and
the conceptually interesting angle of life's lessons as rediscovery of knowledge-
once-had work to good effect in making this sixteenth-century folktale one worth
revisiting. An author's note offering further details included in the midrashic source
is included. HM
SCHWARZ, RENJE 
Birdhouses; written and illus. by Renee Schwarz and with
photographs. 
Kids Can, 2005 
40p 
(Kids Can Do It)
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55337-549-1 
$12.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55337-550-5 
$6.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Banging, whacking, and pounding are favored forms of childhood entertainment,
and here Schwarz offers nine birdhouse projects that will have novice woodwork-
ers hammering away-constructively. After the introduction of safety tips and
admirably illustrated supplies lists, Schwarz describes the correct approach to a
number of necessary tools, particularly clamps, saws, and drills. Then it's on to the
projects themselves, all of which are described in photographs and clearly num-
bered and diagrammed steps. An airy "robin's delight" starts at the easy end with
two boards and a bit of tacked-on stick fencing, and then the designs increase in
complexity to a stylish "log cabin" with half-round molding "timbers." Schwarz is
encouraging but realistic regarding outcomes, reassuring readers not to worry "if
your first houses are a bit lopsided-the birds won't mind," and many projects
incorporate rustic finishes that hide cosmetic flaws. Although wood is the domi-
nant medium, futuristic "space condos" for purple martins and a "bird boot" for
chickadees require plastic drainage pipe instead. Each set of directions indicates
the type of bird one can expect as residents, but a conversion chart is also appended
to help builders tweak the designs to attract particular birds. This should be a
useful volume in any library with scouts or day campers in the neighborhood. EB
MAY 2005 
* 401
SCOTTON, 
ROB 
Russell the Sheep; written 
and illus. 
by 
Rob
Scotton. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
[4 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059849-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059848-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
Russell can't sleep. Nothing helps-not covering his eyes with his cap, not taking
off his wool (brrr!), not curling up in an abandoned car or even stretching out
along a branch. "WHAT'S A SHEEP TO DO?" wonders Russell. Eventually he
stumbles on the idea of counting sheep, and when he's counted all his flock in-
cluding himself, he finally . . drops . . . off. Russell's quest for slumber is related
in short, straightforward sentences (one or two per page) that deliver bite-sized
chunks of information, many of which are suitable for storyrime chanting aloud
("It was too cramped!. ... That was too creepy!'). A narrative twist has Russell
oversleeping as a result of his nocturnal shenanigans; his absence focuses the viewer
on the comical morning rituals of the rest of the flock, creating a pleasant sense of
daily repetition in the tale. Restful blues and greens predominate in the illustra-
tions, wherein fuzzy, flat-bottomed sheep (like puffy slices of bread), potbellied
birds, and dust-ball bats populate Russell's home field, all with staring pop-eyes
and spindly limbs that give them the ingenuous, floppy air of a favorite stuffed
animal. One memorable image features Russell peering through his legs at the
viewer, the numbers one through four circling the image as he counts his limbs.
Visually humorous and textually engaging, this sleepytime tale will win giggles and
requests for rereadings at storytime. TC
SEGAL, LORE 
More Mole Stories and Little Gopher, Too; illus. by Sergio Ruzzier.
Foster/Farrar, 2005 
40p
ISBN 0-374-35026-4 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Mole (from Why Mole Shouted, BCCB 5/04) returns in four new stories suitable
for cozy reading aloud or enjoyable early reading alone. In the first outing, Mole
can't delay gratification when it comes to dessert; in the second, Mole plays, not
entirely nicely, with the visiting Little Gopher; in the third, he negotiates with his
grandmother on the sharing of a bag of chocolate-covered pretzels; finally, he is
frustrated by Grandmother Mole's absorption with her phone call when in front
of her there's a little mole in obvious need of attention. The connecting thread is
Mole's developmental situation-he's only just starting to realize that desires aren't
automatically entitled to gratification, and he can't yet stand to wait for or share
anything good. This is certainly a position with which young audiences will sym-
pathize, but Grandmother Mole provides another point of contact, emerging as a
character with her own wants ("You're not the only mole in the world who loves
pretzels. They're salty and they crunch and I want some too") and weaknesses (her
partiality to Little Mole leads her to a spat with her friend Grandmother Gopher).
Ruzzier's watercolors retain their peculiar yet charming depiction of anthropo-
morphized animals; rather than fuzzy cuteness, his subjects evince an endearing
awkwardness (though Little Gopher's startling peachy-pink bareness makes geeky
Little Mole seem the model of dapper elegance by comparison). Families, readers,
and readees who relished the cozy storytelling and quirky yet familiar characters of
the first book will definitely want this second helping. DS
402 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SHANNON, GEORGE 
WhiteIs for Blueberry; illus. by Laura Dronzek. 
Greenwillow,
2005 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029276-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029275-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
This picture book encourages viewers to think differently about the colors they
associate with the objects around them, reminding us that leaves are red in the fall
and blueberries are white until they ripen. Utilizing the popular page-turn reveal,
the text and illustrations break each concept into an image with a contradictory
caption ("Orange is for sky ... " beneath a picture of a blue sky), which is then
expanded and explained concisely on the following page ("when the sun has nearly
set," accompanying a painting of a dropping sun against an orange-hued horizon).
The acrylic illustrations feature strong contrasts of hue as well as light and shadow,
the thick brushstrokes and bold colors effecting a naive style that suits the elemen-
tary nature of the narrative. Useful both at home and at school, this visually attrac-
tive, conceptually stimulating book provides a sophisticated twist on an old subject.
TC
SHAUGHNESSY, DAN 
The Legend of the Curse of the Bambino; illus. by C. F.
Payne. 
Wiseman/Simon, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-87235-6 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
Kate's the lucky child to accompany her father to this year's opening game at
Fenway Park, and Dad fills her in on the long, hard run-up (limp-up?) to the 2004
Red Sox World Series championship and the preternatural role Babe Ruth is re-
puted to have played in the feat. Probably most kids who gravitate to this title
already know the story, but the fun is in sharing the lore-Ruth's command of the
field for the Sox, the mercenary trade that signaled the beginning of the team's
downward spiral, the meteoric rise of the Yankees with their goldmine of an in-
vestment. While Shaughnessy offers the facts in italicized text and mock sports-
column clippings, it's Payne who gets to the truth in his comically exaggerated
signature paintings. What really happened in 1946 when "Boston shortstop Johnny
Pesky hesitated with a relay throw from center field?" Witness the larger-than-life
Ruth clinch Pesky's arms. How about the 1986 ground ball that "dribbled be-
tween the legs of Red Sox first baseman Bill Buckner?" There's Ruth, giggling as
he diverts the ball with the toe of his shoe. Happily he relents in October of 2004,
and it's Ruth, the man-in-the-full-moon, who beams over the Red Sox victory.
The framing story may be as flat as stale Cracker Jack, but it's also perfectly ex-
pendable. It's the image of burly Babe, towering over the Green Monster and
wreaking the full measure of Red Sox atonement, that's deeply satisfying. If only
someone could write a triumphant story about the Cubs and the goat ... EB
SHELDON, DYAN 
Sophie Pitt-Turnbull Discovers America. 
Candlewick,
2005 
[192p]
ISBN 0-7636-2740-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
In her cultured and predictable British world, Sophie has become a "dull and
passive" (though likable) teen who loses her boyfriend to her evidently more inter-
esting best friend. Desperate to spend the summer somewhere other than home
(and swayed by visions of glam Fifth Avenue shopping), Sophie accepts a tempo-
MAY 2005 
* 403
rary trade between herself and the eldest daughter of her mother's friend, Jacqueline
Salamanca, who lives in New York. Shocker! Not only does Jacqueline (who goes
by Jake) live in Brooklyn, not Manhattan, she also expects Sophie to act as the
nanny to Gallup and Tampa, her two undisciplined younger children, while Jake
works during the day. The house is a mess, the neighborhood is trashy, and Fifth
Avenue seems heartwrenchingly far... but Sophie's centuries of breeding kick in
just in time, and one vigorously cleaned house, two daring shopping trips, and
many unanticipated friends later, Sophie finds she isn't homesick after all. Sheldon's
sardonic soundbites spring easily from Sophie's lips in the first-person narration-
nearly every page sports one or more guffaw-inducing observations that even those
unfamiliar with the various neighborhoods of New York will appreciate. Sophie's
own growth from an intimidated and overwhelmed newcomer to a bold explorer
(and deceiver of landlords, as she saves Jake from eviction) is marked by small,
unobtrusive choices and hilarious scenes of wastage and triumph. This turnabout
of the author's previous theme of leaving New York for the suburbs (Confessions of
a Teenage Drama Queen, BCCB 12/99) celebrates the big city with style. TC
SHYER, MARLENE FANTA 
Fleabiscuit Sings! Cavendish, 2005 
150p
ISBN 0-7614-5213-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Since his dad died several months ago, twelve-year-old Nicky and his mom and
little sister have been living with his grandmother and uncle in a tiny apartment.
Nicky's mom and the kids supplement their income by performing in Music un-
der New York, a program in which street musicians play at specified stops on the
subway lines. When an ailing neighbor (a retired baker known to the local kids as
Mr. Muffin) asks Nicky to walk his puppy, a profound friendship begins between
Nicky and the lively pooch, who soon demonstrates a rare talent: Fleabiscuit sings
recognizable melodies, often on key. Mr. Muffin's collapse leaves the puppy with-
out a home, and Nicky's grandma's allergies and a musician's purchase of Fleabiscuit
threaten to forever separate boy from dog. Disarming descriptions of Fleabiscuit's
doggy cuteness win animal lover's hearts from the get-go; Nicky's severe emo-
tional distress at losing such a sweet puppy seems a natural reaction to the situa-
tion, which becomes ever more complicated as the story proceeds. A couple of
overly fortuitous events (Nicky catches a thief and outs an international drug smug-
gler) assure a harmonious resolution; happily, Nicky's realistically painted family
struggles and emotional trials supply sufficient complications to make the facility
of such solutions less obtrusive. A feel-good ending, complete with quirky domes-
tic drama, the promise of family economic stability, and the invoked blessing of
Nicky's dad's spirit increases the appeal of this easily readable short novel. TC
SILVERSTEIN, SHEL 
Runny Babbit: A Billy Sook; written and illus. by Shel
Silverstein. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
89p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028404-8 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025653-2 
$17.99 
R Gr. 3-6
This posthumous work from the eminent poet offers over forty poems that spin
feats of phonemic inversion to make the Reverend Spooner een with grenvy. The
hero of the series is a hapless lagomorph known as Runny Babbit, familiarly known
as Runny, who has a series of versical adventures involving friends, family, food,
and messes. The initial reversal sounds like a simple gimmick, but Silverstein
makes it into a delicious sustained game. The poems (all in bouncily metered
rhyme in traditional poetic structures such as ballad meter) are generally conceptu-
404 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ally clever and satisfying in their own right, with punchlines amusing even when
read with the letters in their proper place. The inversions are sometimes a bit of a
visual challenge as well, since the original spelling is retained even when it occa-
sionally miscues pronunciation, but that's part of the fun; an even bigger piece of
the fun is the gloriously strange, oddly meaningful constructions that result (after
Runny sits on wet paint, "his gur is full of foo"), turning even familiar stories
(Cinderella) and rhymes (Yankee Doodle, Jack Be Nimble) into something glee-
fully silly. It's almost impossible not to read these entries aloud, and they've got a
particular advantage there: they're not only great auditory audience-pleasers, they've
got the same built-in expectation of entertaining failure as tongue-twisters, which
reduces the pressure for accurate reading. Illustrations, in Silverstein's familiar
meandering yet determined black lines, often contain additional textual games,
and Runny himself is an expressive-eared yet hapless rabbit, the schlemiel of the
animal world. Whether read aloud by audacious adults or by one giggling kid to
another, Runny Babbit will be a leck of a hot of fun. A title index is included. DS
SITOMER, ALAN LAWRENCE 
The Hoopster. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion,
2005 
218p
ISBN 0-7868-5483-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Andre Anderson is a black teen on the way up. His prowess on the basketball
court is roundly acknowledged, his new romance with luscious Latina Gwen has
hit the floor running, and he's been tapped by the magazine editor with whom he
interns to write a feature on racism. All of which means, of course, he's in for a
predictable fall. First he comes to blows with cousin Cedric over his prize-winning
monologue at a comedy club, which relies too much on racial stereotyping to suit
Andre. Already on edge over Cedric's insensitivity and the pressure of writing his
article, he next has a major falling out with Gwen, who accuses him of bringing
every issue into a racial focus. Finally, after Andre's feature is published to the
acclaim of his boss, a posse of white supremacists assaults him in the parking ga-
rage, brutally mangles his hand, and leaves him hospitalized and emotionally with-
drawn-until, of course, friends and family and Gwen all rally around him again,
he's feted for his bravery at a publishing banquet, and he's back to making magic
on the court, despite hand injuries from which he was never expected to fully
recover. Sitomer pushes his characters a little too briskly through their paces, and
his prose never captures the grit of his subject matter ("Gwen flushed at Andre's
words, never expecting to hear such innuendos coming from Andre's clean mouth.
Then again, she was also a bit excited"). Readers eager to know where Andre goes
next will nonetheless be glad to know that two more volumes are planned. EB
SKYE, OBERT 
Leven Thumps and the Gateway to Foo; illus. by Ben
Sowards. 
Shadow Mountain, 2005 
[38 4p]
ISBN 1-59038-369-9 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
When a disgruntled megalomaniac named Sabine decides to take over the magical
realm of Foo and merge it with our more pedestrian reality, Fooian freedom fight-
ers smuggle a seed, a baby girl, and a sycophant (a twelve-inch-tall furry creature
that can dematerialize) into the United States. As the years pass, the seed grows
into a giant Fantrum tree named Geth, and the baby girl becomes a powerful
magic-user called Winter. Meanwhile, the sycophant, Clover, invisibly guards his
MAY 2005 
* 405
secret assignment-a human boy named Leven Thumps. As the lone descendant
of the only person ever to create a permanent gateway between Foo and our world,
Lev is the resistance's last and best hope: only he can destroy the gateway and
prevent the destruction of Foo, which is certain to happen if Sabine gets his way.
When frighteningly corporeal shadows (minions of Sabine) begin to dog Leven's
steps, Clover reveals his own existence and prepares Lev for the arrival of his allies,
Winter and Geth, and the beginning of their multiple-continent-spanning quest.
Acerbic descriptions of extravagant destruction (in the town of Tin Culvert, Okla-
homa, later known as Burnt Culvert) open the book, setting the emotional stakes
high while establishing a self-aware narrative irony that frames the most fantastical
events in deadpan solemnity. While Lev, Winter, Geth, and Clover develop into
engaging individual characters, each one contributing a unique perspective on their
shared quest, it is candy-munching, hint-dropping, self-serving Clover who irre-
sistibly steals the show as he is separated from the group and must commandeer a
series of vehicles in order to rejoin them in time. This rollicking, suavely told tale
should captivate readers; young admirers of flamboyant fantasy such as Barker's
Abarat (BCCB 3/03) will gladly hitch a ride with Clover and the gang. Reviewed
from an unillustrated galley. TC
SOTO, GARY 
Help Wanted: Stories. Harcourt, 2005 
[2 2 4p]
ISBN 0-15-205201-1 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-8
Ten short stories show young Californian Latinos falling in love, dealing with the
death of a parent, and otherwise facing trials and opportunities of all kinds. While
some of the challenges-understanding class differences within the ethnic group,
finding ways to feel integrated-speak specifically to minority experience, other
tribulations are common to young Americans of all backgrounds. Several of the
stories contain interesting narrative elements: "Paintball in the Wild" protagonist
Miguel finds both danger and safety when he joins a racially and age-mixed group
ofpaintball aficionados; in "Yeah, Right," Javier's skepticism regarding a classmate's
supposed wealth complicates their romance; and "Teenage Chimps," an imagina-
tive animal-based allegory of clique self-selection, offers humorous and poignant
insight into the teen experience. Overall, however, this is a weaker offering than
Soto's well-received Baseball in April (BCCB 4/90); often, the stories are plot driven,
with personae contributing to the development of theme more than to the illumi-
nation of character. Nonetheless, this is a useful addition to Soto's previous out-
ings and a complement to Cofer's anthology An Island Like You (BCCB 4/95), so
collections in need of short stories may use this volume to expand the ranks of
solid Latino offerings. TC
STAHLER, DAVID, JR. 
A Gathering ofShades. 
HarperTempest, 2005 
[30 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052295-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052294-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Soon after the death of his father in a car accident, teenaged suburbanite Aidan
and his mother relocate to a Vermont backwater to live with his grandmother,
Eloise Boisvert (known to all as Memere). On one of his rambles through the
woods, Aidan finds Memere in the middle of an eldritch ceremony in which she
calls the community's ghosts to her and feeds them with a libation of water and
406 
* THE BULLETIN
blood. Spooked, Aidan nonetheless joins Memere when the ghosts reveal his pres-
ence, and he becomes a regular at the evening ritual, which-since the spirits merely
gossip with Memere about her daily activities-seems harmless enough. How-
ever, this constant contact with the dead, combined with Aidan's repeated sight-
ings of a little redheaded boy who looks exactly like his father as a child (and who
disappears if followed) galvanizes Aidan into an all-out search over hill and dale for
what he believes is his father's spirit. The harsh beauty of the landscape, the ath-
letic prettiness of a local girl, and the physical satisfaction Aidan feels as he works
on the farm provide a wholesome foil for the otherworldly temptations offered by
a vampy suicide victim (who wants to feed off Aidan's fresh young blood) and
Aidan's obsession with finding his father. The sinister atmosphere of the story is
finely constructed, from the opening scenes to the final pages, as symbolism, fore-
shadowing, and references to the journeys of Odysseus heighten the immediacy of
the danger to himself and his loved ones that is created by Aidan's mania. The
audience for supernatural suspense fiction will drink this new novel right up. TC
TAYLOR, ALASTAIR 
Mr. Blewitt's Nose; written and illus. by Alastair
Taylor. 
Houghton, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-618-42353-2 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Perky Primrose Pumpkin is determined to be a good citizen when she finds a
mislaid nose on a park bench; her efforts to return it, however, are impeded by the
effects of the stench from her "outrageously smelly dog, Dirk," since no one but
Primrose can stand being in his vicinity. She nonetheless manages to obtain the
information that the errant nose belongs to the suggestively named Mr. Blewitt,
and that he's in the audience at the stadium. Finding him there initially seems
impossible, but then clever Primrose realizes that only a noseless man could stay
put when Dirk's stink strikes, and once the unimpaired folks clear out she readily
identifies the nose's owner. The text rambles on a bit too long, its comic verbosity
sometimes losing its crispness and the climax not quite offering sufficient payoff
for the buildup. Nonetheless, there's a considerable wellspring of humor in the
text's arch tone, the repetition of Dirk's smelliness (each time with a different
enhancing adverb), and the central issue of doggy stench. Taylor's acrylics make
his unusual world slightly toylike (Primrose looks particularly poseable); Primrose's
appropriately pumpkiny hair color (and sometimes even skin tones) stands out
against more muted backgrounds and the noseless Mr. Blewitt resembles an in-
complete, if more human, Mr. Potato Head, while Dirk is a mud-colored and
squatty hairball who looks credibly rank. A particular strength from page to page
is the creativity of the compositions, which employ a cinematic array of perspec-
tival variations peaking in a pair of double-page spreads of the seat-studded sta-
dium rapidly being evacuated by its offended patrons. Use this as a bracing
counterpoint to cute-dog picture books such as the MacDuff series or as a creative
introduction to a unit about the senses. DS
THOMPSON, KATE 
Fourth World. Bloomsbury, 2005 
330p
ISBN 1-58234-650-X 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Thirteen-year-old Christie has yet to make peace with his mother for remarrying,
especially since her new husband brought along his mentally handicapped son,
Danny. Clumsy, slow, and childish, Danny acts like the younger brother, though
he is two years older, and Christie can't help feeling shunted aside. Still, when
MAY 2005 
* 407
Danny runs away to look for his mother, Maggie, Christie can't let him go alone.
The journey from their Irish home to an isolated lab in Scotland called Fourth
World, where Maggie is a scientist, is complicated by additional companions-a
homeless girl and two talking animals from Fourth World-and the escalating oil
crisis that has closed most bus and train stations and supply stores. Even more
challenging for Christie is trying to accept the truth about Danny's connection to
Fourth World and Maggie's part in it. The long journey to Scotland is sometimes
suspenseful and other times dull, but the periods of inaction are enlivened by the
constant edge of panic brought on by the fuel shortage and the battling dynamic of
the group itself. Unlike most science fiction books of this ilk, this one doesn't
trust that Maggie's research is evil; additionally, her work isolating the missing link
that allows humans to develop language is seen through Christie's eyes as
devastatingly important. Also, Christie realizes that Maggie allows Danny to ex-
plore what he is, unlike his father, who forces him to be what he isn't. Still, this
British import doesn't shirk from showing the horror of Maggie's past failures,
leaving readers wondering if Christie makes the right decision to stay at Fourth
World. Readers who want to know what Maggie intends will have to wait for the
next volume in the trilogy. KH
UHLBERG, MYRON 
Dad, Jackie, and Me; illus. by Colin Bootman. 
Peachtree,
2005 
32p
ISBN 1-56145-329-3 
$16.95 
R 
6-8 yrs
The young narrator is a dyed-in-the-wool Dodgers fan, but his deaf father has
never shown the slightest interest in baseball until now, in 1947, when Jackie
Robinson enters the majors. Suddenly Dad's inviting himself in on awkward games
of catch with his son, keeping a copious scrapbook of Robinson clippings, noting
and remarking on every act of hostility and abuse Robinson faces from players,
and dragging his son to the home games. At first the boy is embarrassed by his
father's crowing "AH-GHEE, AH-GHEE, AH-GHEE!," his version of his idol's
name ("He had no way of knowing what the words should sound like"), but Dad's
enthusiasm soon blends in with that of the crowd. In the last game of the season,
Dad's sidewalk practice pays off; when Robinson tosses a ball into the stands, "my
dad did something he had never done before. He reached up and caught the ball
in his bare hand!" Uhlberg, who explains in a closing note that his own father was
deaf (and a Jackie Robinson fan), presents a restrained narrative unencumbered by
any overt parallels between prejudices experienced by Robinson and Dad. Listen-
ers will readily infer, however, that Dad's sudden enthusiasm for baseball springs
directly from his discovery of a kindred spirit in the dignified, determined Robinson.
Although Bootman indulges in a hyperbolized facial expression here and there, his
rich watercolors evoke the deep shadows of summer afternoons at the ballpark and
the easy camaraderie between father and son. Adults seeking "values education"
materials without the ham-fisted approach will welcome this title. EB
UPDALE, 
ELEANOR 
Montmorency on the Rocks: Doctor, Aristocrat,
Murderer? Orchard, 2005 
362p
ISBN 0-439-60676-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-10
In the five years since Scarper, the master thief, created his alter ego Montmorency,
the man about town, he's been aiding Lord George Fox-Selwyn on the covert end
of delicate affairs of state (see Montmorency: Thief, Liar, Gentleman?, BCCB 4/04)
408 
* THE BULLETIN
and keeping his shady origins under wraps. In fact, he's just about ready to re-
nounce forever the pleasure of his old larcenous raids from the London sewer
system when Fox-Selwyn enlists him to help solve a bombing at King's Cross
railway station, an investigation that requires an agent of Montmorency/Scarper's
skill at disguise and disappearing into a crowd. Before Montmorency can be fully
useful to the government, there's the small matter of his drug addiction to kick, so
Fox-Selwyn calls on a trusted physician friend to help-no other than Dr. Farcett,
the surgeon who had once patched near-dead Scarper back to life. The three
unlikely comrades are soon working together so smoothly that one mystery is not
enough, and they also probe a string of infant deaths on a distant Scottish island.
Montmorency was, frankly, a lot more intriguing in his old role of antihero than as
the much stuffier new right arm of Justice, but happily the sewers and narcotics
aren't entirely out of his system yet. With her split-second pacing, her flair for
absurd humor, her nose for danger, and the implied promise of more escapades to
come, Updale spins another yarn that should keep fans loyal. EB
VAIL, RACHEL 
If We Kiss. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
[27 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-056915-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-056914-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
As the best friend of the spirited Tess, ninth-grader Charlie, short for Charlotte,
basically considers herself Tess Lite-like Tess but less than her. When she finally
gets her first kiss, mashed against the brick school wall by Kevin Lazarus, she's so
flustered that she can't manage to share the news with Tess; when she discovers
Tess and Kevin making out at a party, she realizes that this news has become
complicated indeed. And that's only the beginning: Charlie then starts going out
with good-guy George but remains fascinated with Kevin, which becomes a big
problem when Charlie's mother and Kevin's father embark on a serious relation-
ship that keeps bringing Charlie together with her best friend's boyfriend. Vail
demonstrates her usual knack for getting to the heart of a young adolescent's emo-
tional quandary. Charlie is absolutely believable in her mixture of ambivalence
about her first kissing experience ("Maybe I am both a slut and a prude") and
rebellion against her mother ("it's my life and my tongue and I can do whatever I
like with both of them"), and even more so in her overriding concern about her
friendship with Tess. The book's real strength lies in its absence of condescen-
sion-this is a situation with the potential to derail the central relationship of
Charlie's life, which, in fact, it eventually does. Touches of humor, from plaintive
to rueful, lighten the narrative without undercutting the intensity of Charlie's nar-
ration. The ending feels less conclusive than it's apparently intended (Charlie
doesn't seem quite as finished with Kevin as it would suggest), but that may just
make readers hope for a return engagement or at least a continued flirtation. DS
WATTENBERG, JANE, ad. 
Never Cry Woof: A Dog-U-Drama; ad. and illus. with
photographs by Jane Wattenberg. 
Scholastic, 2005 
36p
ISBN 0-439-21675-3 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Boasting the same slick digitally manipulated photography and hip, cadenced dia-
logue as Henny Penny (BCCB 5/00), Wattenberg's latest offering retells the tale of
the boy who cried wolf, casting dogs in the role of sheep protectors. The cautious
Hunky-Dory, a floppy-eared canine in a brown fedora, and the cocky Bix, an
overeager, pointer-esque mutt, are among those selected from a highly competitive
MAY 2005 
* 409
candidate pool to guard sheep from wolves lying in wait. Serious Hunky-Dory
begins his tenure with a careful reading of the "Shepherd's Golden Rules" whereas
Bix jumps brashly into the task-and grows almost immediately bored with the
mundane duty of shepherd ("He knew he shouldn't. He thought he wouldn't.
But what's a lone dog to do?"). The others come running in response to their
friend's woof not once but twice; on the third round, when a wolf is actually on
the scene, Bix's colleagues predictably ignore his howl ("Twice wasn't nice, but a
third is absurd"). Bix is a humorously crafted antihero; his layers of bravado are
carefully piled on only to be shattered by his eventual fall. There's a cool, retro feel
to both the dialogue and the compositions, and the countless small details in the
photographs (including a fabulous assortment of hats) play up the humorous sub-
text of the tale. The shockingly bright green of the grass functions effectively as
background to the front-lit cast, and the animal expressions are almost telling enough
to carry the tale without the dialogue. There's appeal for storytime audiences, dog
lovers or no, and young viewers (who may even catch the wolf lurking nearby in
early spreads) will have plenty to pore over afterwards. HM
WATTS, LEANDER 
Ten Thousand Charms. Houghton, 2005 
[240p]
ISBN 0-618-44897-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
With six years left to go on his apprenticeship in Mr. Queed's rope factory, eleven-
year-old Roddy sees nothing in his future but rope and more rope. Meanwhile, a
deposed Germanic king and his daughters, Mina, Thea, and Nyxie, have settled
just outside Roddy's town of Pharaoh, in York State. Fascinated by the inexpli-
cable-two-headed calves, tales of magic-which he calls "charms," the king ini-
tially delights in the magic-rich surroundings, but soon Scalander, a shape-shifting
creature of the dark woods, claims eleven-year-old Thea for his bride. Roddy and
King Ivars ride to save her, but ultimately it is Thea who vanquishes her captor.
Though Scalander's hot pursuit of Thea comes to an abrupt end and his reasons
for leaving off the chase are weak, this is an alluring story with a strong sense of
place. As in Watts' first two books (Stonecutter, BCCB 11/02, and Wild Ride to
Heaven, 10/03), the imaginary frontier is a mystical place, where magic and reli-
gion find an unhappy balance. Roddy's and Scalander's mutual fascination with
Thea, the only soft and pretty thing they know, underscores the harshness of the
region, while Thea herself acknowledges the powerful beauty of the land around
her. Growth and opportunity come to Roddy through King Ivars' interest in him,
as Roddy learns to appreciate his ability to understand the voices of animals and
plants, a talent long denigrated by his pious parents as a heathen practice. Roddy's
hightailing it to the West in search of other adventures makes for a pleasingly
promising conclusion, and the combination of high action and magic will please
admirers of American fantasy such as Card's Alvin Maker series or gothic fiction
such as Dunkle's Hollow Kingdom trilogy. TC
WHITE, ANDREA 
Surviving Antarctica: Reality TV 2083. Eos/HarperCollins,
2005 
327p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-055455-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-055454-1 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
The year is 2083, and the American government has managed to pacify its down-
trodden underclass with high-stakes reality TV, drawing their attention away from
their inability to afford genuine food, housing, or education. A new series, Antarc-
410 
* 
THE BULLETIN
tic Historical Survivor, is starting, and it's got a twist: the five individuals selected
to recreate the journey of Robert Falcon Scott's doomed polar party of 1912 are all
fourteen-year-old kids. The five participants don't know that there will be no
adult camera operators around to assist them (tiny cameras are secretly inserted
into their corneas) and that the Secretary of Entertainment, indifferent to the wel-
fare of the children, has arranged for dramatic calamities to befall them; the Secre-
tary of Entertainment doesn't know that some of the tech crew have a secret policy
of intervening to keep participants from tragedy. The future vision is fairly hack-
neyed (a touch of 1984and an unlikely retention of many contemporary elements),
as are the characters (there's the tough African-American kid, the spiritual Inupiak
girl, the brainiac, the kid who's only in it for himself, etc.), and the writing is often
pedestrian. The adventure itself is nonetheless fairly compelling (though there's a
bit of irony in the fact that that appeal rests on the same factors that make the
television program exploitative), since there's plenty of adversity, challenge, acri-
mony, and bonding on shipboard and the frozen continent itself, and the reality-
TV idea is likely to prove an effective hook. Fans of such shows may find the
future vision intriguing, and armchair adventurers will enjoy watching their age-
mates fight the elements. DS
WHIrLOCK, DEAN 
Sky Carver. Clarion, 2005 
[256p]
ISBN 0-618-44393-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
The seemingly portentous drop of a magic branch into thirteen-year-old Carver's
hands convinces his small upland village that he is destined to become a mage-
most likely a weather mage, so he can end the drought that endangers the harvest.
In spite of his misgivings (he wants to be a woodcarver, not a mage, and definitely
not a painter, as his vastly talented father was), Carver accepts the charge and
begins his journey downriver to find a mentor. Along the way, he is joined by
Raven, a human girl trapped in raven shape by the death of her teacher mage, and
Fireboy, a mechanically talented bondservant from a river steamboat. Unpleasant
brushes with domineering local authorities keep the trio on the run until they
reach the capital city, where they hope to gain audience with the multitalented
mage Krimm, who lives on an island off the coast. Krimm turns out to be a
megalomaniac obsessed with the synthetic creation of life within inanimate ob-
jects, and Carver's carving genius may be just what he needs to realize his warped
vision. Themes of bonded service and slavery, destiny, and agency emerge as the
central characters work together to overcome obstacles and enemies within this
culturally and physically robust world. Whitlock's prose is smooth and lively, and
his characters are well defined. The quasi-medieval setting and the motifs of op-
pression and liberation will appeal to admirers of Jennings' similarly themed The
Wolving Time (BCCB 2/04). TC
WILLIAMS, KAREN LYNN 
Circles of Hope; illus. by Linda Saport. 
Eerdmans,
2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8028-5276-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Facile plants a mango tree in honor of his new baby sister, Lucia, like his father
planted for him when he was born. Unfortunately, though Facile tries to protect
the seedling, marauding goats, violent storms, and other hazards impede its growth.
MAY 2005 
* 411
In the meantime, his sister becomes ill and must be taken to the city for medical
care. Finally, Facile hits on the right combination of shelters and guards for the
tiny tree, and his offering grows into health in time to welcome his mother and
sister back to the mountainside. Though the narrative line is streamlined and the
text relies on concrete images, it carries layers of information that may appeal more
strongly to older listeners, and the theme of protecting something tender from
dangerous surroundings (developed through Facile's struggle to grow the tree and
through his mother's concern for Lucfa's health) definitely requires an audience
capable of thinking in abstracts. In the illustrations, Facile's stocky, doll-like shape,
bordered in rough black lines, rests against vibrant swathes of tangerine, emerald,
amethyst, and crimson in the charcoal and pastel drawings. This bold style gives
the viewer a sense of the heat and rich beauty of Haiti's countryside and empha-
sizes the small size of the protector and the protected within the threatening world.
The images are rather more simplistic and youthful in approach than the text, but
the gentle story and vivid visuals nonetheless make this book a solid candidate for
inclusion in storytimes about growth or hope. TC
WILLIAMS, LRI AURELIA 
Broken China. Simon, 2005 
265p
ISBN 0-689-86878-2 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Bored one rainy day, twelve-year-olds China and Trip decide to try sex, and though
neither finds it to his or her liking, China gets pregnant. Two years later, she is a
devoted mother, critical of her older friend Yolanda's lackadaisical attitude toward
her own six children. She's having trouble balancing school and parenting, how-
ever, and after a lecture from her principal, she decides to go to class instead of
responding immediately to her daycare provider's call that little Amina's fever
medicine doesn't seem to be working. By the end of the school day, Amina is
dead, and China goes emotionally numb; having already lost her mother, she's
overwhelmed by the loss of her daughter. She decides that the best she can do for
her child is to host an elaborate funeral, which she and her uncle/guardian cannot
afford. The sleazy funeral director agrees to a payment plan, and China decides
that the only way to meet her obligations is to work at Obsidian Queens, a local
strip club. China's emotional responses are plausible and characterization through-
out the novel is well developed, though the situations in which she finds herself
don't meet the same standard of credibility. The real drag on the plot, however, is
the sermonettes that the adults in the book deliver every time they talk to China:
conversations consist of paragraph after paragraph of uplifting messages about how
to be a good mother, how to make people proud of her, how to make something of
herself, and they end with the adult throwing up his or her hands in the face of
China's obstinate determination to do things her way. Through all of her bad
decisions, though, Trip and Uncle Simon remain supportive and loving, and China
herself offers hope to readers that while tragedy may throw you for a bit, you can
still pick yourself up and move forward. KC
WONG, JANET S. Hide & Seek; illus. by Margaret Chodos-Irvine. 
Harcourt,
2005 
40p
ISBN 0-15-204934-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Waiting for the cookies to bake is the perfect time to play a game of hide and seek
with Dad, providing you can get the dog to cooperate. As Dad counts from one to
ten, the little boy and his playful dog seek out clever spots in the yard and around
412 
* THE BULLETIN
the house. The boy remains in charge as he and his pup move from hiding place to
hiding place, assessing the problems of each potential spot along the way and not
letting themselves be found until the cookies are out of the oven. Wong's rhyming
text is a bit bumpy, forcing readers-aloud to adjust their timing in order to make
the rhymes work. Additionally, while some pages have their rhyming pairs grouped
together under a single number, others require turning a page and inserting a new
number into the middle of the rhyming group. Caldecott Honor winner Marga-
ret Chodos-Irvine provides color-blocked images that give the impression of col-
lage. Figures and settings in solid blocks of creamy tangerine, lime, aqua, colonial
blue, and brown are slightly offset on white backgrounds that provide their mini-
mal outlines; though the overall impression is somewhat blandly cheerful, there's
some quiet humor in the body shapes of Dad, boy, and dog, which suggest that
cookie-baking-and-eating are regular activities at their house. This doesn't have
the zing of Ho's Peek! (BCCB 12/04), but collections needing more books that
show boys and dads together in domestic work and play will welcome this offer-
ing. KC
WYNNE-JONES, TIM A Thief in the House of Memory. 
Kroupa/Farrar,
2005 
[2 2 4p]
ISBN 0-374-37478-3 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
After Dec's mother left five years ago, Dec's father literally closed the door on the
past, leaving vacant the ancestral home on the hill. Since then, the family-Dec,
his little sister, Sunny, his father, and his father's girlfriend, Birdie-have been
living down the hill in a new house, keeping the big old house as a sort of time
capsule while ignoring certain aspects of the past that it represents. The past gets
abruptly reawakened, however, when an intruder is found dead in the house, ap-
parently in an accident while executing a burglary there. Dec realizes that not only
had he encountered the dead man prior to the burglary, there's a connection be-
tween the supposed burglar and his departed mother, a connection that speaks to
secrets surrounding his mother's disappearance and arouses Dec's suspicions that
some of those secrets may be dark indeed. The book carefully builds its mood,
accruing layers of unease as the third-person narration flashes back periodically to
Dec's younger self and his comradeship with his flighty mother; suggestions that
Dec's mother may haunt the house add another ominous touch. The atmosphere
is so effectively created, in fact, that the earthbound ending, with its plethora of
tied ends, is rather pedestrian by comparison, but in the meantime the book dances
effectively on the edge between a domestic story of family disruption and a tale of
the past's refusal to stay hidden. Readers who have enjoyed the combination of
edge and cool sophistication of Wynne-Jones' previous works will find this pleas-
ingly unsettling. DS
Yoo, DAVID 
Girlsfor Breakfast. Delacorte, 2005 
[224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90227-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73192-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Nick Park discovers his passion for the opposite sex in third grade, when he be-
comes seriously involved with his neighbor's father's Playboy magazines. Up until
then, his quest had only been about making friends in his new neighborhood,
MAY 2005 
* 413
which is difficult, he thinks, because he is the only Asian kid in the history of his
New England town. He makes fun of his parents' retained Korean practices, and
he loathes the other Korean kids that he meets at the church his parents sometimes
make him attend. As he progresses into middle school and then high school, his
fantasies about women-or, more specifically, white women-become more and
more involved, while his actual experience remains rather seedy and pathetic. Even-
tually he realizes that his fascination with the female has been part of his general
yearning for acceptance, and that he has been what the other Korean kids say he
is-a banana, yellow on the outside and white on the inside. While his tardy
epiphany has the potential for being quite moving, it's not entirely convincing-
there are lots of things to dislike about Nick, including his selfishness, his mean-
ness, and his inability to think of girls as anything more than an assemblage of
body parts, that operate quite independently from his issues of ancestral identity.
The account also tends to meander from episode to episode, struggling to make an
impact under a ton of brand names and period references (the story is apparently
set in the 1980s and '90s). Nonetheless, Nick's narration, with its humorous self-
deprecation and naked, or at least trousers-down, candor, is credible, and astute
readers will take note of the cumulation of racist slings and arrows he encounters
in his lily-white town, making his rejection of his heritage as understandable as it is
futile. Despite Nick's lack of self-awareness, there is something to be said for his
searing honesty-he never tries to sugarcoat his despicableness or pretty up his
motives, making this an instructive, if claustrophobic, portrait of a young man.
KC
YOUMANS, MARLY 
Ingledove. 
Farrar, 2005 
[20 8p]
ISBN 0-374-33599-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Urged by their housekeeper, Danagasta, to journey across the drowned lands to
visit their mother's grave, seventeen-year-old Lang and his younger sister, Ingledove,
take time to wander through the eastern Tennessee hills around the former settle-
ment of Hazel Creek, flooded several years before by the Tennessee Valley Author-
ity. While they travel, they hear a strange singing from the woods, a call that
attracts Lang in spite of Ingledove's efforts to turn their expedition back home.
Soon the pair are deep in the forests of Adantis, a hidden nation of the mixed
descendants of British immigrants and Cherokee and other native tribes. There,
Lang is attacked by a Lamia, a reptilian monster in the guise of a beautiful woman
who poisons his body and who will return night after night until she drains him of
blood. Only the Witchmaster can save Lang, the Adantans tell Ingledove-but
the Witchmaster turns out to be a young man, Jarrett, who can do little other than
guide Ingledove and Lang into the bowels of the earth to obtain healing from the
Uktena, a mythologized serpent with a shining stone in its head. Youmans'
wordcraft is both subtle and expressive ("She was slender, starting to bud, though
no more than that; people often said she had lovely eyes or hair or lips, as if they
could see only a piece of her at a time"). Characterization is convincing--espe-
cially well drawn are the lonely Jarrett and Ingledove herself, whose future love is
prophesied but not immediately possible due to Ingledove's youth. Deft writing
and the unusual yet down-home setting make this an engaging historical fantasy.
An Adantan glossary is included. TC
414 
* THE BULLETIN
YOURGRAU, BARRY 
Nasty Book. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2005 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-057979-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-057978-1 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
A boy's imaginary friend, bored with his duty of shoring up his creator's fragile
ego, decides to strike out on his own, only to be run over by a truck since he is,
after all, invisible. A catfish, charged by a godlike being with saving the world,
swims off on a long and difficult mission, only to be caught by a little girl and her
father out fishing for the first, and unfortunately last, time. So go the dark twists,
spiteful characters, and malicious humor in Yourgrau's collection of forty-three
shorts. While some stories exhibit a cruel sense of justice, most hinge on being
grossly unfair, the only justification being "And that's how things work out some-
times, what can I tell you?" This is not the book to read cover to cover, since the
same game is played in each story, but the stories are inventive when read in bursts
of two or three. Most are "what if?" experiments rather than full-fledged stories,
made effective by the mean, almost transgressive, sense of merriment. Not every-
one will think these stories are funny, but kids who appreciate black humor and
aren't averse to unhappy endings will enjoy these stories, the nastier the better.
KH
ZIEFERT, HARRIET Families Have Together; illus. by Deborah Zemke. 
BlueApple,
2005 
40p
ISBN 1-59354-071-X 
$15.95 
R 
4-7yrs
Revisiting the format that she developed in Schools Have Learn (BCCB 12/04),
Ziefert employs her transitive-verb trickery to explore the nuances of family life,
from morning rituals where "Hair has brush" and "School days have ... RUSH"
to holidays and vacations, where "Families have friends" and "Roads have bends."
The rhymes here don't have quite the inventive freshness of the earlier offering,
and the book suffers from a lack of a strong narrative line, with events and episodes
picked and presented at random. However, moments of familiar family humor
percolate throughout the text, played up by Zemke's angular and expressive line-
and-watercolor caricatures; Mom's blissful expression over her breakfast concoc-
tion ("Pots have cooks") turning to stern admonishment when the kids don't share
her enthusiasm ("Moms have 'eat-your-breakfast' looks"), and a daughter's cheer-
ful explanation of her home haircut ("Stories have tell") is met with outrage by her
horrified parents ("Mommies have YELL! [So do daddies]"). The bouncy rhymes
and unusual sentence formation are once again infectious, and young listeners will
be inspired to play along. KC
ZWEIBEL, ALAN 
Our Tree Named Steve; illus. by David Catrow. 
Putnam,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23722-4 
$14.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
While scouting the building site for their new home, a family finds a tree that
captures their imaginations. The two-year-old names it "Steve" because she can't
pronounce "tree" (though why Steve is easier to pronounce is an open question).
Thus the tree is saved from demolition, and it becomes a member of the family,
performing feats both humble (holding laundry when the dryer breaks) and heroic
(sucking up the muck when the sewer overflows). The book takes the form of a
MAY 2005 
* 415
letter from the parents to the children, which first surveys Steve's place in their
lives and then goes on to explain that Steve is no longer with them, having suc-
cumbed to a violent storm. Though undoubtedly comforting for kids who dislike
change in their environment, the book suffers from an overdose of schmaltz (even
in death, the tree proved a faithful friend by volitionally falling in such a way as to
do no damage) and an ending that will be confusing to young readers: the father
says, "Steve will always be with us. In our hearts, in our thoughts . . . and in a
different tree at the other end of our yard" but doesn't explain the connection
(only the most perceptive viewers will grasp that the new treehouse is made of
Steve). Catrow's signature figures with their oversized heads and tuberous body
shapes add to the twee of this eulogy for a tree, but his rich and riotous color
changes-a new one every page-capture well the many moods of dappled light
that a good tree filters into a yard. Urban and suburban kids may wonder what the
hubbub is all about, but those lucky enough to have a tree for a friend will appre-
ciate the sentiment. KC
416 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
BERG, REBECCA L. 
The Great Depression in Literature for Youth: A Geographical
Study of Families and Young Lives: A Guide and Resource Book. 
Scarecrow,
2004 
(Literature for Youth)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8108-5093-1 
$30.00
This comprehensive bibliography of resources on the Great Depression for young
people is most notable for its broad emphasis; as stated in the introduction, the
compiler's intent was to include works that expanded far beyond the typical stock
images of Dust Bowl families and migrant workers and instead offer titles that
examine the experience of the Great Depression from all regions and perspectives.
Each chapter offers titles of a particular type (reference, nonfiction, biography,
oral history, photography, picture books, fiction) or on a specific topic (Interna-
tional Resources, The WPA Guides, The Federal Theater Project, The Federal
Arts Project, Music from the Depression Era, and Work, Life, and Recreation),
but there is no further sorting within the chapters by either age level or region.
There is, however, an extremely useful geographical index that allows users to lo-
cate information on a particular state. Individual citations include bibliographical
information, age recommendations, and annotations, which range from a single
sentence to a lengthy paragraph and often include usage recommendations (useful
for research/browsing/additional information, etc.). The fiction section is par-
ticularly rich, providing more than 200 citations for fictional accounts of the De-
pression. Those who teach the Great Depression will find plenty of supplementary
material to support their curriculum; fans of historical fiction will similarly find
lots of choices. A subject index, geographical index, and appendices listing muse-
ums and state historical societies are included. HM
MAY 2005 
* 417
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Cunningham
ADVENTURE: Goobie; Grant;
Jones; Llewellyn; McCaughrean;
Moloney; Skye; Updale; Watts;
White
African Americans: Miller
African Americans-fiction: Sitomer;
Williams, L.
Animals: Jenkins
Animals-fiction: Greene
Animals-poetry: Bauer; Florian;
MacDonald
Animals-stories: Krosoczka
Antarctica-fiction: White
Appearance-stories: Pichon
Asian Americans-fiction: Yoo
Aviation-fiction: Bernasconi
Babies-fiction: Williams, L.
Babies-stories: Schwartz
Babysitting-fiction: Sheldon
Baseball-fiction: Shaughnessy
Baseball-stories: Bildner; Uhlberg
BEDTIME STORIES: Bergstrim
Good; Hurd; Scotton
Bicycles-stories: Eriksson
BILINGUAL BOOKS: Ada
BIOGRAPHIES: Bitton-Jackson;
Brackett; Denenberg; Giff;
Greenfeld; Miller
Biology: Fisher
Birds: Schwarz
Blacks-fiction: Hanson
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Kaaberbol; Youmans
Cars-fiction: Moloney
Cars-stories: Hurd
Chickens-stories: Auch
Civil rights movement: Miller
Cliques-fiction: Myracle
Colonial life-fiction: Karr
Colors: Shannon
Communication: Ali
CONCEPT BOOKS: MacDonald;
Shannon
Consumer education: Ali
COUNTING BOOKS: Milich
CRAFT BOOKS: Schwarz
Crafts-fiction: Whitlock
Crime and criminals-fiction: Bone;
Flinn; Llewellyn; Monthei;
Updale
Crusades-fiction: Grant
CUMULATIVE STORIES:
MacDonald
Current events: Frank
Dating-fiction: Corbet
Deafness-stories: Uhlberg
Death-fiction: Hanson; Williams,
L.
Disabilities-fiction: Thompson
Dogs-fiction: Shyer
Dogs-stories: Taylor; Wattenberg
Ecology: Fisher
EPISTOLARY FICTION: Zweibel
Ethics and values: Adlington; Ali;
Bondoux; Bone; Flinn; Hershey;
Karr; Lasky; Sitomer; Thompson
Explorers and exploring-fiction:
White
Families: Giff
Families-fiction: Wynne-Jones
Families-stories: Collins; Ziefert
FANTASY: Besson; Dunkle;
Gerstein; Haptie; Jones;
418 
* THE BULLETIN
Kaaberbol; Myracle; Skye;
Stahr;Watts;Youmas;Yourapu
Father-fiction: Garfinkle; Grover;
Kogler
Fathers-stories: Bergstr6m Good,
Bergstrom Very; George; Uhlberg;
Wong
Fear-fiction: Grover
Fears-fiction: Cunningham
Fishing: McMillan
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Auch; Schwartz; Wattenberg
Food and eating-fiction: Segal
Food and eating-stories: McDonald
Friends-fiction: Garfinkle;
Goldschmidt; Greene; Mechling;
Vail
Future-fiction: Adlington; White
Gambling-fiction: Kogler
Games-stories: Wong
Gays and lesbians: Miller
Genocide-fiction: Adlington
Grandfathers: McMillan
Grandmothers-fiction: Kogler;
Segal; Stahler
Grandmothers-stories: Eriksson
Grandparents-fiction: Monthei
Grief-fiction: Monthei
Growing up-fiction: Yoo
Growth-stories: Williams, K.
Habitat: Jenkins
Haiti-stories: Williams, K.
Heroes-stories: Grey
HISTORICAL FICTION: Bildner;
Grant; Karr; Uhlberg; Updale
History, U.S.: Bitton-Jackson; Miller
History, world: Frank; Greenfeld
Holocaust: Denenberg
Hope-stories: Williams, K.
HUMOR: Auch; Bergstr6m Good;
Bergstr6m Very; Bernasconi;
Goldschmidt; Grey; Llewellyn;
O'Malley; Scotton; Sheldon;
Silverstein; Skye; Taylor;
Wattenberg; Yourgrau
Identity-fiction: Yoo
Illness-fiction: Flinn
Imagination-stories: Bergstr6m Very
Immigrants: Giff
Insects-stories: McDonald; Pichon
Inventors and inventing-fiction:
Bernasconi
Jazz-fiction: Hannah
Jews: Bitton-Jackson; Denenberg;
Greenfeld
Journals-fiction: Denenberg
Kidnapping-fiction: Grover
Language arts: O'Malley;
Silverstein; Ziefert
Latinos: Brackett
Latinos-fiction: Soto
Literature, American: Brackett
Magic-fiction: Haptie; Jones;
Whitlock
Media: Ali
Middle ages-fiction: Grant
Middle East: Frank; Greenfeld
Morning-stories: George
Mothers-fiction: Kogler; Vail;
Wynne-Jones
Music and musicians-fiction:
Hannah; Shyer
Music and musicians-stories:
Krosoczka
MYSTERIES: Moloney; Updale;
Wynne-Jones
Mythology, classical: McCaughrean
Native Americans-fiction: Karr
Nature study: Jenkins; Shannon
NURSERY RHYMES: Ada
Orphans-fiction: Monthei
Photography: Milich
POETRY: Ada; Fisher; Florian;
Silverstein
Popularity-fiction: Myracle
Prejudice-fiction: Flinn; Gerstein
Rabbits-poetry: Silverstein
Racism-fiction: Sitomer
Reading aloud: Florian; Greene;
Segal
Reading, easy: Greene; Grey
Reading, reluctant: Schwarz
Relationships-fiction: Vail
RHYMING STORIES: Ziefert
Romance-fiction: Besson
Royalty-fiction: Watts
School-fiction: Mechling
SCIENCE FICTION: Adlington;
Bondoux; Goobie; Thompson
Science: Jenkins; Sayre
MAY 2005 
* 419
Secrets-fiction: Mechling; Wynne-
Jones
Sex-fiction: Yoo
Sharing-fiction: Segal
Sheep-stories: Scotton
SHORT STORIES: Soto; Yourgrau
Sisters-fiction: Goobie; Hershey
Smell-stories: Taylor
Social studies: Frank
SONGS: MacDonald
Spies and spying-fiction: Updale
SPORTS STORIES: Bildner;
Shaughnessy
Sports-stories: Lasky
Stepfathers-fiction: Garfinkle
Storytime: Collins; George;
Krosoczka; MacDonald; Pichon;
Schwartz; Scotton; Taylor;
Wattenberg; Wong; Williams, K.
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Stahler
SURVIVAL STORIES: Bone
Teen parents-fiction: Williams, L.
Television-fiction: White
Toys-stories: Grey
Trees-stories: Zweibel
Twins-fiction: Goobie
Urban life-fiction: Bone
Voyages and travel-fiction: Besson;
Kogler; Sheldon; White;
Whitlock; Youmans
Voyages and travel-stories: Hurd
War-fiction: Gerstein; Kaaberbol;
Skye
Weather-fiction: Haptie
Weather-poetry: Bauer
Werewolves-fiction: Dunkle
Women's studies: Brackett
Work-fiction: Corbet
Writers and writing: Brackett
Writers and writing-fiction:
Goldschmidt; O'Malley
Congratulations!
Sharon G. Flake
* 2005 Coretta Scott King Honor
* 2005 YALSA Best Books for Young Adults
* 2005 YALSA Quick Picks for Reluctant Readers
* Booklist Starred Review and Editor's Choice
* Kirkus starred review
Teacher's Guide available online at www.jumpatthesun.com
I 
Jmpratt 
k 
in
arWrsnMB 
lmr
"One of Lester's Finest Works"*
Teachers guide
and first chapter
available at
www.lumpathtesun.com
TLR 0-788-8448U-4S$15.L
Agers0 mid
Agril 1085
x "Altogether this novel does a SUPerb job of showing the
inhumanity of slavery. It begs to be read aloud, and it could be used
in sections to produce some stunning reader's theatre."
.School 
rbmrnr 
Journal, Starred Review
S"The personal voices make this a StilTlU text for group
discussion." 
Booklis, Boxed. Starred Review
" 
'POWerful theater and one of LeIster's finest works."
hKikus Reviews, Starred Review *
Jump at the Sun
An Imprint er 
NYperln lBoe 
s 
for Chlldren
FREEE |lm4
TRIAL ISSUE
of an award-winning
publication!
Visit
www.TeachingK-8.comr
on
,L ISSUE
"-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas
hat help teachers present new challenges
learn new concepts and develop new skills.
To receive your
FREE TRIAL ISSUE visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Teaching K-8 Magazine
40 Richards Avenue * Norwalk, CT 06854
AmrrmrwA
Roks mak tratgits but biik-
ing the perfect books for your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Let the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books help you navigate the book-
store wilderness full of shiny new children's
books.
Updated a 
anpaded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books contains
annotations of the best books for giving (and
receiving) and is available as a downloadable
PDF file that you can print out and use for
every holiday, birthday, or other gift-giving
occasion on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Butin reviews from the last three years
and are verified as currently in print. Entries
are divided into age groups and include
author, title, publisher, and the current list
price.
To purchase, go to:
www.Iis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
B
1324Sou
U.S~A.
1324Sou
U.S~A.
University of linois P
1325 South Oak Street
Champ 
, IL 61820
U.S.A.
ADDRES SEICE REQSTT
Sof 
IinoPr 
PODICAL
132 
th Oak Seet
Ch 
gnp IL 61820 
P
SCHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDnESS SERVICE REQUESTED
You may nc
and passwo
The Bulletin
199-004 v
The online w
database by a
To access The
i. Gotohl
SWheniac
scriber
mailing la
word. T1
number t
3. 
After og
passwori
case sens
passwd
scriber m
Remember, 7
vidual print
access, so pie
expand The B
electronic sul
Non-subscrib
Children' B
Please e-mai
m
n:
C
ve
n
he
st
cc
w
la
Tir
·t
'151
rd
is
rd
nr
T
sc
Bii
ul
16
Rol
ii
B
w
'7i
You 
access The Bulletin Online with an individualized useame
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2004 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, tie, age or grade level.
To access The Bulln Online:
I. 
Go 
http//www.prairienet.orgccb
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper le-hand corner of the
mailing abel on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only idi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electron subscription options for individuals and nstitutions
Non-ubscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
hildren's Books at http//wwwlis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bcch/
Please e-ma any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexiais.uiuc.edu.
111111110008-9036(2005
1
0008-9036(200505)58:9;1-V
rw ace~ The ~ 
~line 
~ 
an indlvid~ uoe~L
rd.
Online is ~laMe only to prim subscribers, and includes the
volume ~ 
plus ~ current issues as thsy are published.
nrs-ion al~ 
you to fean;h the current Issue or the eMJre
aud·ror, 
tide, ~ 
or g~ 
level.
he 
~ 
Online:
~a~P'
~tlh~~~ecM
IccesshTg 
The 
~ 
~line 
for 
the 
first 
time, 
use 
the 
sub-
r!urnber 
dwt 
~ 
in 
due 
upper 
~Ond 
eo~of 
the
1~1 
On ~t 
print 
~ 
as 
bodr 
your 
u~ame 
and 
pass-
T)IPs su~rlber 
nurn~ 
win 
usually 
be 
a four 
Or 
fi~ig-if
b~ 
~ 
also 
be 
a fi~~ 
i~rlnumber 
combination.
gglng 
in 
for 
the 
first 
time, 
you 
will 
be 
~uired 
to 
change 
your
rd 
to 
oomed~ing;~ar 
~ 
your 
usr~mel 
This 
pas~rd 
is
r~ 
~ 
~uld 
be 
one 
wend 
Onty: 
~ 
stone 
this 
· ~
rd 
in 
a 
~ 
place. 
Your 
u~nte 
~ch 
it also 
·your 
sub-
nunr~r) 
will 
~ 
cha~
~ 
~ 
Online is not I~sd for public we; on~ indi-
~bscriben and In~onal 
subscribers' ~lre 
g~d
~ 
~ ~ 
~ 
~r 
~ 
c~· 
VVa are working to
~ 
~/lne"s ~c~acrrii~i~ities 
and ~n! 
e~ 
b~er
ubrcri~ ~onr br indidd~ and ~~t
!bers ~ 
I~ 
~ 
~Ut Tlte ~ 
of the ~ 
FK
~ at: h~ulsasr~
ii any ~~k 
Or guc~s 
to: bcc~al~lis;uiuccdu.
us
;NLL
ii·
HHINIIRIIIIIIII
~-~~)ss:s;i-v
