ILLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
tr~~
i 
li;jli 
Il : 
I
--I
f
rlr~R~ 
:
i
::··~i 
:: 
-~:::L
Do You Know
What I'll Do?
By Charlotte Zolotow
Pictures byJavaka Steptoe
-"• 
"New illustrations featuring African-American characters
heighten the text of Zolotow's 1958 classic about a young girl's
tender question-and-answer game with her brother. Collages
beautifully expand the simple, poetic work, shaping in just a
few images the exuberant character of the sister as she dotes,
cherishes, bosses, dazzles, and comforts her younger brother.
Whatever their position in the family lineup, young ones will
find themselves in this spot-on portrayal of loving, creative
siblings." -
Starred review / ALA Booklist
W- "Both author and artist prove they know how to convey a
strong sense of familial love."- Starred review / Publishers Weekly
"Steptoe's artwork is familiar, yet fresh, just as Zolotow's
voice . . . continues to be today."-School Library Journal
Ages 3-7. $15.95 Tr (0-06-027879-X); $15.89 Lb (0-06-027880-3)
M HarperCollins Children'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 . www.harperchildrens.com
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
January 2001
Vol. 54 No. 5
A LOOK INSIDE
175 THE BIG PICTURE
Forgotten Fire by Adam Bagdasarian
176 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
180 * Stella: Queen ofthe Snow written and illus. by Marie-Louise Gay
190 * Blizzard! by Jim Murphy
192 * A Year Down Yonder by Richard Peck
193 * The Amber Spyglass by Philip Pullman
194 * Only Passing Through: The Story ofSojourner Truth by Anne Rockwell;
illus. by Gregory Christie
205 
BULLETI 
BLUE RIBBONS 2000
207 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Jennifer VanWinkle
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin
ofthe Center fr Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. E-mail:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2001 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Liney Li from Forgotten Fire ©2000. Used by permission of Kroupa/DK Ink.
JANUARY 2001 
* 
175
THE BIG PICTURE
Forgotten Fire
by Adam Bagdasarian
Despite determination to the contrary, events in Cambodia and Rwanda suggest
that horror at one genocide doesn't actually prevent another. "Never to forget" is
a worthwhile philosophy, but forgetting is, in fact, shockingly possible, as the con-
temporary obscurity of the Armenian massacre demonstrates. Like David Kherdian
before him (in The Roadfrom Home, BCCB 1/80), Bagdasarian uses the story of a
relative (in Bagdasarian's case, a great-uncle) to pull that part of history back from
oblivion and bring it to vivid and, importantly, memorable life.
"In 1915 I was twelve years old, the youngest child of one of the richest and
most respected Armenians in Turkey," Vahan Kenderian explains at the begin-
ning of his narration; he's also a minority in a country that has previously massa-
cred members of that ethnic minority, a country now engaged in a draining war
that, despite Armenian representation among the military ranks, doesn't seem to
be strengthening unity at home. Soon the abstract, distant threat to Armenians
becomes local and concrete in a sequence of events that erodes Vahan's family to
nothingness: his father is taken away; two of Vahan's older brothers are executed
by gendarmes in the family garden; when the family is captured, his sister Armenouhi
poisons herself rather than become the next rape victim of the Turks; a soldier
smashes in Vahan's grandmother's head on a forced march. His mother and re-
maining sister insist that Vahan and his now only brother escape ("'I cannot watch
them kill you,' my mother said. 'Please'"); when his brother dies of illness in the
street, Vahan is left totally alone.
This panoply of losses is only the beginning of Vahan's odyssey. For two fur-
ther years he struggles for existence, moving from temporary refuge to temporary
refuge. Vahan serves the Turk who seized the Kenderian family's house and acts as
a stableboy in his own residence; he stays twice with an Armenian classmate's
family dealing with their own losses; he hooks up with a group of Turkish refu-
gees, pretending to be deaf and dumb in order to avoid ostracism or worse for
being Armenian; he's placed by an American mission with the Tashjians, another
Armenian family, from where more tragedies drive him; he finally secures sea pas-
sage to Constantinople, where he finds apparent safety.
This is fiction, not biographical history, and the plainspoken, understated nar-
rative focuses more on one individual viewpoint than the larger historical event of
the Armenian massacre, but there is still plenty of information about this early
Holocaust. The book is particularly deft at evoking the disorder and confusion of
the situation (and, by extension, many wartime situations), with Vahan's travels
driven by happenstance and unconscious inclination as much as by plan, since
there's little certainty to plan around. More poignanty, the book also depicts
Vahan's run of tragic connections: desperate for love, for a family, for a place
among people, he repeatedly attaches to someone and loses her, from a fellow
176 
* THE BULLETIN
prisoner of the Turks (who dies after repeatedly being raped), to a girl among the
Turkish refugees (whom he leaves behind after confessing his secret), to the teen-
aged Armenian mistress of the German consul (who dies after giving birth to the
consul's son), to the motherly figure of Mrs. Tashjian (who dies of a stroke). Though
the aggregate loss is stark and realistic, even more chilling is Bagdasarian's depic-
tion of a more complicated relationship: it is through his connection with Selim
Bey, the Turk who occupies Vahan's former home and provides Vahan with pro-
tection, that Vahan learns that acts of goodness do not prove someone incapable of
evil.
Aside from its effective impact as an account of this particular piece of history,
the narrative gives insight into the kind of minority/majority violence and chaos of
a country in upheaval that are, alas, eternal; readers may find that a lot of their own
parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents have similar stories to tell. The
included map is unfortunately misleading and mistaken, but readers will be able to
follow Vahan without it. A foreword gives some historical background, and a final
chapter and epilogue provide more historical information as well as offering clo-
sure-after the war Vahan at last is reunited with his surviving sister. Since that
sister is presumably Bagdasarian's grandmother, perhaps next Bagdasarian will write
her story into literary memory. (Imprint information appears below.)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
BAGDASARIAN, ADAM 
Forgotten Fire. Kroupa/DK Ink, 2000 
273p
ISBN 0-7894-2627-7 
$17.95 
R* Gr. 7-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 175, for review.
BALOUCH, KRISTEN, ad. 
The King &d Three Thieves: A Persian Tale; ad. and illus.
by Kristen Balouch. 
Viking, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-670-88059-0 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
When a flopping fish disturbs the King of Persia's meal, he takes it as a sign that he
should feed his hungry people and goes out, disguised as a poor man, to share his
dinner. He meets three thieves with special powers--one who can whistle people
to sleep, one who can see through walls, and one who can sneeze a door off its
hinges-who are planning to rob the king. Still in disguise, the king accompanies
the thieves to the palace, and he is amazed to watch them easily take valuables from
his treasury. Upon returning to his throne, the king has the thieves arrested, but
rather than punishing them he decides to forgive them and let them live in the
palace, saying, "Power can be used for good or evil.... Together we will use our
powers to make sure that no one in the kingdom ever goes hungry again." Balouch's
retelling is serviceably clear and direct, but her illustrations, consisting of robustly
geometric images in an unusual palette of yellows, purples, and zingy salmon hues,
steal the show. Despite some cluttered compositions, the figures of king, thieves,
JANUARY 2001 
* 
177
and courtiers are sharply defined as clusters of geometric shapes against backgrounds
textured with small, spiky rectangles. Young viewers will enjoy the portraits of the
three thieves and their sneaky royal friend in this tale of larceny rewarded. KM
BANKS, KATE 
Howie Bowles and Uncle Sam; illus. by Isaac Millman. 
Foster/
Farrar, 2000 
85p
ISBN 0-374-35116-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
When third-grader Howie discovers, as a consequence of a math-class assignment,
that he was born on Friday the thirteenth, he's convinced that he's doomed to be
unlucky. His math class performance certainly doesn't suggest good luck, nor does
his mother's refusal to buy him gerbils; the final straw is the news from someplace
called the IRS that he owes $112.15. Howie doesn't have $112.15 or anywhere
near it, so he tries to acquire the money (the bank actually looks fairly promising
for a loan) but eventually resigns himself to imprisonment for nonpayment. Though
the premise is light and jokey, Howie's anxiety is taken seriously, and readers will
empathize with his certainty that there's nothing he personally can do to alter the
dark forces that beset him; the unthreatening early chapter-book format will also
reassure struggling readers. The book loses sight of the bad-luck premise in its
focus on the tax problem, however, and the whole IRS idea is contrived in the
extreme for maximum literary utility (and adult amusement rather than children's).
Millman's friendly black-and-white illustrations give Howie appropriate worried
charm and bring a bit more reality to the situation. DS
BRALLIER, JESS 
No Sweat Projects: Hairy Science; Library ed. ISBN 0-448-44095-
4; Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-44087-3; No SweatProjects: Thumbs Up Science; Library
ed. ISBN 0-448-44094-6; Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-44085-7. 
Each book: illus. by
Bob Staake. 
Planet Dexter, 2001 
6 4p 
Library ed. $13.89; Paper ed. $5.99
R Gr. 3-6
Science project books-the emphasis on science-abound, but few address the
fact that assembling data for a project is often less daunting than organizing it and
injecting enough pizzazz into the presentation to keep teacher and classmates en-
gaged. Here comes a new series with ideas that are intrinsically interesting and lots
of suggestions on how to spit-and-polish the final product. Brallier begins with
concrete reasons why these topics will work, ranging from the comfort level of the
topic ("You know your thumb"), to its economy ("No need to buy, copy, or make
20 or 30 thumbs to hand out to your classmates"), to its teacher-pleasing proper-
ties ("a scientific exploration of the stuff that sits on top of your teacher's head").
Then there are tips on taking and organizing notes-with plenty of samples of
data, all of which could quite handily turn into the report itself. Next come some
truly cool demonstrations and activities, with hints on how to adapt them for
different styles of assignments. Explicit attention is paid to showmanship, using
diving Barbie dolls, for example, to explore the relationship between hair and a
swimmer's speed, or an audience participation "thumbless obstacle course," show-
ing just how nifty an opposable digit really is. Round this out with sections of
reproducible materials, a few jokes to keep the show moving along, and a bibliog-
raphy and Internet research strategies for digging deeper into the topic. These
titles will be terrific classroom resources, but don't be surprised if the teacher co-
opts some of the ideas before students even get the chance. EB
178 
* THE BULLETIN
BROWNLOW, MIKE 
Little Robots; written and illus. by Mike Brownlow. 
Ragged
Bears, 2000 
26p
ISBN 1-929927-05-3 
$13.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
An alluring gallery of robots come together for a party and then bedtime in this
nuts-and-bolts approach to lullabies. The verse bounces along (and admittedly
sometimes jingles along) in solid tetrameter, and while there's a strong reliance on
elliptical connections rather than genuine sentences ("Yellow robot .. , bright and
shiny/ Here's his friend who's really tiny"), the vocabulary and rhythm are lively
enough to keep things entertaining. Brownlow's robots are engagingly anthropo-
morphized (or, in one case, dogomorphized) and their varying characteristics
divertingly depicted. While a few pictures suffer from color overload, the shiny
solidity of the figures (and even the random landscape elements, which are appar-
ently as metallic as the robots) partners well with the cheerful loudness of the back-
ground yellows and blues, and the final spread, with glowing robotic moon and
stars hanging over the sleeping crew, is a triumph of nocturnal engineering. The
merit here lies not in any particular brilliance but in the book's tidy and enjoyable
delivery of exactly the kind of vision very young robot fans dream of. Little ones
who are tired of fuzzy purry bedtime books and wish instead for some satisfying
bedtime "clink clank yawn and bleep bleep bleep" will rejoice at this mechanical
gallery. DS
CHALL, MARSHA WILSON 
Bonaparte; illus. by Wendy Anderson Halperin. 
DK
Ink, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2617-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
The Bonaparte of the tite is a whiskery lop-eared canine, bereft when his owner,
young Jean Claude, goes off to La School d'Excellence for his education. The
faithful pup follows his master's trail, but when he addresses himself to the school,
he's informed that they have a strict anti-dog policy. Refusing to take this pro-
scription lying down, Bonaparte disguises himself variously as Jean Claude's mother,
an entering student, a player in the band, a lunch lady, and a janitor, each time
getting found out as a dog; on his last unmasking, he discovers that Jean Claude is
missing, and the school shifts to support of loyal Bonaparte as he finds their errant
pupil. The high-spirited comedy (kids will particularly appreciate Bonaparte's rea-
soned conversations with the school authorities) offsets the slight preciousness of
the faux-French fillips; the dog-boy friendship and the eventually happily doggy
school (the "No Dogs Allowed" sign changes to "Now Dogs Allowed") are warm
and delightful components. Halperin's art employs its customary borders contain-
ing precise and petite motifs accenting the larger images, which often separate into
sequential panels that support or add action to the central scenes; text is tightly
controlled in boxes that float through the illustrations. Jean Claude and Bonaparte,
both---especially the latter-personable figures, keep the pale intricacy of the visu-
als from becoming chilly and distant, so the result is an inviting and Anno-like
complexity of landscape. Use this to add a little oh-la-la to a doggy readaloud. DS
CoY, JOHN 
Vroomaloom Zoom; illus. by Joe Cepeda. 
Crown, 2000 
25p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-80010-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-80009-8 
$15.95 
R 2-5 yrs
A father, sporting driving goggles and gloves, invites his fuzzy-slippered little girl
JANUARY 2001 
* 179
for a nighttime ride "in the big yellow car. Vroomaloom zoomaloom vroom zoom."
Dad and Carmela drive past barnyards ("cackle lackle"), through the woods ("whoo
whoo"), and to the sea ("splash dash wave CRASH"). No matter where they go,
Carmela won't sleep ("Not yet, Daddy. Keep driving"). This is an uneven, ex-
tended version of the car ride to sleepy-bye, but when it works the sound effects are
snappy and the anticipatory tone is engaging. Cepeda's paints (oil on acrylic) have
an opaque density that gives solidity to his illustrations. The palette is unmuddied
and clean, and the emphatic colors mirror the liveliness of the father-daughter
outing (the exception being the disappointingly drab night-in-the-city scene).
Despite a few bumps in the road, this will make a zippy group readaloud, espe-
cially with noisemakers to add to the enthusiasm. Vroom! JMD
DEGROAT, DIANE 
Annie Pitts, Burger Kid; written and illus. by Diane
deGroat. 
SeaStar, 2000 
76p
ISBN 1-58717-015-9 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Nine-year-old Annie (from Annie Pitts, Artichoke) loves nothing so much as ham-
burgers, especially hamburgers from her local Burger Barn; she's therefore con-
vinced she's the perfect subject for the new Burger Barn publicity poster. First she
has to survive Thanksgiving with her stuck-up older cousin and critical aunt, and
the holiday gets even more irritating when her mother invites her annoying class-
mate, Matthew, and his mother. In a cruel irony, cousin Mercedes (now the rebel
with a shaved head and a nose ring) hits it off with Matthew, while Annie's
frustratedly left out in the cold, and then Matthew, who's merely a tagalong at the
auditions, lands Annie's yearned-for post as Burger Kid. Though it's not quite as
filling as Annie's beloved hamburgers, this is an amiable snack of a book with
satisfyingly bite-sized chapters. Annie is a forceful character, and her exploits bal-
ance their slightly unlikely drama with believable kid impulses and responses.
deGroat's realistic soft pencil art is occasionally on the serious side for the high-
spirited tone of the book, but they give freckle-faced Annie her personable due.
DS
ELYA, SUSAN MIDDLETON 
Eight Animals on the Town; illus. by Lee
Chapman. 
Putnam, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23437-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Eight hungry animals (mouse, cat, dog, bird, frog, horse, cow, and pig) sequen-
tially head to market to buy food: "First comes a mouse. He's a ratdn.// Ntimero
Uno, out on his own./ Off to the market he hurries for cheese./ 'Since I'm a ratdn,
I'd like queso, please.'" Elya's text, though purposive, has a naive humor that is
reflected and enhanced by Chapman's oil paintings. Framed spreads feature ebul-
lient animals indulging their appetites and smiling people tending the market stalls;
the frames themselves include numerals in each corner and keywords in English
and Spanish. Colors are opaque and saturated, from the purple-striped awnings of
the market stalls to the red-tiled roofs of the buildings to the deep blue of the sky;
single and double spreads feature compositions with askew perspectives that add
to the slightly reckless feeling of a celebratory field trip. Problematically, some
Spanish words included English-language verse are undefined until the conclud-
ing glossary, and flipping back and forth between words and definitions is trouble-
some. Still, Elya incorporates Spanish words into her narrative with little strain,
resulting in a good-natured if deliberate vehicle for facilitating Spanish vocabulary
acquisition. JMD
180 
* THE BULLETIN
FLEISCHMAN, SID 
A Carnival ofAnimals; illus. by Marylin Hafner. 
Greenwillow,
2000 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16949-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16948-1 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-5
"A no-account little tornado came twirling like a ballerina across the countryside,"
leaving several mixed-up tall tales, which Fleischman relates in six short chapters.
A young Sidehill Clinger is blown right out of her fur in the first chapter, and the
fur turns up in the last chapter as an uninvited toupee on the head of farmer
Gunnysack Smith. In the third chapter, Emperor Floyd is a local barnyard rooster
whose clock has been scrambled since the tornado; he stuffs himself with lightning
bugs until he shines like a lantern, and Deaf Bob hangs him in a cage on the porch
as his new porch light. Fleischman's gift for tall-tale humor is in fine form in this
collection. His pacing and clever turns of phrase ("J. J. Jones, a 400-pound back-
woods hog, was no prize-winner") convey witty exaggerations with a straight-faced
tone. Although Hafner's literal illustrations lack the dry wit of Fleischman's text,
the cozy menagerie of critters and folks are drawn with laid-back lines and easy
smiles that emphasize the friendly rural environment of Barefoot Mountain. Be-
cause each story presents different people and creatures, this collection lacks the
cohesion of Fleischman's earlier McBroom stories. Young listeners are unlikely to
mind, however, and most will greet these tales with a good old fashioned giggle
jamboree. KM
FRIESEN, GAYLE 
Men ofStone. 
Kids Can, 2000 
216p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55074-781-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Ben is the only man in a house full of women: his father died
when he was five, so Ben has been raised by his mother and three older sisters. The
arrival of elderly Aunt Frieda for an extended visit adds to the overly feminine
atmosphere, but Ben and Frieda develop a relationship based on her love of Ben's
deceased father and the stories she tells him about living in Russia after the Revo-
lution. Aunt Frieda could have been a vehicle for soppy sentimentality, but in-
stead she's a tough old bird, wading into the still-grieving household with deliberate
intent. She refers to Stalin's soldiers as "men of stone," and Ben adopts the term,
using it to describe his peers, young men with empty eyes who see violence as
truth. Former dancer Ben is called "Ballerina Boy" by the sneering Claude and his
cohorts; their harassment escalates to serious physical violence. Furious at being
victimized, Ben steps into the boxing ring to learn how to fight; light on his feet
and with a dancer's agility, he finds he's "a natural." Although the final confron-
tation scene suffers a little from wishful thinking (Ben realizes that to fight like
Claude is to become Claude, and he decides against it), the intensely emotional
Ben is a credible narrator, and the sharp characterizations carry the conclusion.
The psychological complexity of character that Friesen limns with clarity will draw
young adults dealing with their own contradictory self-definitions. JMD
GAY, MARE-LOUISE 
Stella: Queen ofthe Snow; written and illus. by Marie-Louise
Gay. 
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-88899-404-4 
$15.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
The effervescent Stella and her cautious younger brother Sam (from Stella, Star of
the Sea, BCCB 5/99), return in this wintry sequel. The dynamic between the
siblings hasn't changed since the beach: "Isn't it beautiful, Sam?" asks the red-
JANUARY 2001 
* 
181
haired Stella, gazing out the window on a winter wonderland. "It is very white,"
replies Sam, not nearly as certain as his adventurous older sister. Out in the snow,
Stella imparts snowlore to the credulous Sam, telling him polar bears eat snow-
flakes for breakfast, that the fog coming out of his mouth comes from his words
freezing when he speaks, and other such wisdom. Stella is determined to show
Sam the proper way to enjoy a snowy day, and snowman-building, ice skating,
sledding ("'Will we be able to stop?' asked Sam. 'Stop?' said Stella. 'Who wants to
stop? Hop on!' 'I think I'll walk down,' said Sam"), and snow-fort constructing
are on the agenda. Gay's wintry palette is lit by Stella's unrestrained, flaming red
hair, shockingly cheerful against the gray sky and glowing expanse of white snow.
While brother and sister explore the snowy possibilities, the gray sky warms to
daytime cerulean then cools to nighttime cobalt. In the final spread the two make
snow angels while the big, fat snowflakes fall: "'Do snow angels fly?' asked Sam.
'Do snow angels sing?' 'Of course,' said Stella. 'Can't you hear them?' 'Yes!'
whispered Sam." Gay does here for snowfall what she did previously for summer
at the beach; even those unenthusiastic about the chills of winter will be inspired
by Stella and Sam's sense of snowy wonder. JMD
GERSHATOR, PHILLIS, ad. 
Only One Cowry: A Dahomean Tale; illus. by David
Soman. 
Orchard, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33288-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30288-1 
$16.95 
R 
7-10 yrs
The first king of Dahomey, Dada Segbo, is ready to marry, and he is advised by his
people that "to find a wife, the king must give gifts to a young woman's family."
Unwilling to part with his wealth, Dada Segbo offers only one cowry shell for the
acquisition of his future bride. His people protest his stinginess, but a "clever
young fellow named Yo spoke up. 'I will find the king a wife for only one cowry.'"
Yo trades the cowry for a piece of flint, sets a pile of straw on fire, and catches the
grasshoppers fleeing the flames. He trades some grasshoppers for beans, some
beans for fish, some fish for tools, some tools for oil, some oil for bread, and with
these gifts he finds the king a "beautiful wife for only one cowry." The future
bride is clever, too, and before she returns with Yo she requests a feast, calabashes
of palm wine, and a trunk of fine clothes and jewelry, which the king is only too
pleased to provide, so happy is he to have gotten a beautiful wife for only one
cowry shell. Soman's textured paper-collage illustrations feature a smiling, bearded
Yo, who not only pleases his king but even more astutely allies himself with his
future queen. Precise details (added in pencil) result in articulate faces that reflect
the tone of this good-natured story, and the open compositions draw the viewer's
eye. Story and illustrations eschew slapstick for subtlety, resulting in a quietly
clever humorous tale that lends itself easily to reading or telling aloud. A source
note discusses the cultural context of the tale. JMD
GRAHAM, BOB 
Max; written and illus. by Bob Graham. 
Candlewick, 2000 
30p
ISBN 0-7636-1138-7 
$15.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Mom, Dad, Grandma, and Grandad are superheroes from their flowing red capes
to their chic, sleek tights, and they naturally expect new baby Max to follow in the
family trade. Despite their bouncing and bumping and tossing, Max just won't
take flight, and the family cannot entirely conceal their disappointment: "'When
I was his age,' said his grandad, 'I got into trouble for leaving fingerprints on the
182 
* THE BULLETIN
ceiling lamp."' But one morning as the family slumbers, Max spies a baby bird
about to plunge from its nest and, with the quick instincts of a true superhero, he
catches the bird in midair and flies it back to the treetop. The caped clan is a most
engaging bunch-quite prosaic, actually, except for their lightning-bolt house,
cabinets of awards, and propensity to float near the ceiling. While viewers will
hoot over droll comic-book style scenes of superhero life after work hours and
cheer Max's newfound abilities, adult readers can hardly miss the message that
children flex their wings in their own good time. Here's a funny, comforting read
for any child cowed by overachievers, or perhaps a sly gift for an overanxious par-
ent. EB
GREENWALD, SHEILA 
Stucksville. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-7894-2675-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Fourth-grader Emerald Costos is not at all happy in the tiny New York City apart-
ment she refuses to call home, and a school project that requires each student to
describe his or her vision of New York puts Emerald's dissatisfaction in the spot-
light. Inspired by a friend's description of her apartment as a "shoebox," Emerald
takes the term literally and begins a 3-D re-creation of her living space in an ex-
container of cowboy boots. Her artistic approach to the class assignment inspires
two schoolmates, one of whom muscles her way into a kind of friendship with
Emerald while the other, a cute boy, drifts in more naturally. The shoebox apart-
ment also impresses Emerald's folks, but their attempt to resolve the problem brings
new difficulties now that Emerald has become attached to her current neighbor-
hood. By the cheery end of this clearly plotted novel, the issue centers on whether
or not Emerald and her friends' visual "essays" are eligible for the "My New York"
competition, but after some tough teacher talk about rules and some compromise
on Emerald's part (she writes an essay that joins the three apartment models), the
kids are rewarded for their creativity, and Emerald and her folks come to terms.
There are some awkwardly abrupt changes of scene and perspective that slow the
otherwise amiable construction of what one might call a buildings roman. Still,
the third dimension Greenwald adds to the standard "new kid on the block" story
has a crafty appeal that may cross gender lines. FK
HAAHR, BERIT 
The Minstrel's Tale. 
Random House, 2000 
247p
ISBN 
0-385-32713-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In fourteenth-century England, thirteen-year-old Judith of Nesscliffis the unwill-
ing bride in an arranged marriage. A chance conversation with traveling minstrel
Robin inspires her escape: disguised as a boy, Judith becomes Jude, a talented
musician heading for the music school in Eltham to become one of the King's
Minstrels. On the road she shelters with monks, serfs, and nobility, and she sur-
vives cutthroats, thieves, and a marriage-minded young noblewoman. Once in
Eltham and accepted into the school, she is put under Robin's tutelage. The sym-
pathetic minstrel recognizes but does not betray her; her secret is precarious, how-
ever, and Jude resolves to take to the roads. Her traveling is forestalled when
Robin, heir to his recently dead brother's estate, asks her to marry him. The two
ride off into the sunrise, "each assured that a life filled with music and love lay
before them." These picturesque if unlikely adventures are set in a sanitized medi-
JANUARY 2001 
* 183
eval England where the young protagonist encounters a remarkably large number
of charitable folk and a remarkably small number of immoral rogues. Raveled plot
threads are improbably explained away or ignored, and characterizations are color-
ful but shallow. Jude's anachronistic worldview and Robin's modern ideas regard-
ing his soon-to-be wife's musical future ("I swear to you, by Mary's veil, that you
will have all the time you need for music") add to the ahistoricity of the rosy glow
that surrounds the predictable happy ending. Still, historical-fiction lovers inter-
ested in road-trip romance may want to join Judith on her journey. JMD
HEARNE, BETSY 
Who's in the Hall?: A Mystery in Four Chapters; illus. by Christy
Hale. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16262-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16261-4 
$15.95 
Gr. 2-4
[Note: Books by Bulletin staff are given a descriptive annotation rather than a
review and code rating]
Neighbors in an urban apartment building, Lizzy, Rowan, and Ryan (and their
assorted sitters) cope with boredom, missing pets, and the strange disappearance
of the building janitor. Watercolor illustrations both enliven and extend the story.
JMD
HERSCHLER, MILDRED BARGER 
The Darkest Comer. Front Street, 2000 
[24 0p]
ISBN 1-886910-54-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In a story that spans several years, Teddy (short for Theodora) struggles with the
changes civil rights are bringing to Mississippi. She's nine at the book's start,
when she witnesses her father at a lynching with other members of the local Klan.
Horrified by her father's act, she's driven to increasing closeness with her best
friend, Stella, whose father was the victim of the lynching, and with her family
housekeeper, Lizzie, despite their race's making them unworthy in her father's
eyes. Teddy's bond with Stella (and with Stella's neighbor, Tommy) gives her the
moral courage to support and even participate in the black community's protests,
ranging from integrating the local lunch counter to racing off to Selma (deter-
mined to protect her, her friends lead her away from the march and become vic-
tims of assault). Meanwhile, strains within her family become intense as Teddy's
father attempts to forbid her disloyal behavior while her mother is torn between
loyalty to her husband and daughter. This is a detailed depiction of an important
historical change from an unusual viewpoint, and Herschler offers some affecting
insight into the pressures on this small-town white family. Unfortunately, the
didacticism comes at the expense of believability: the black people are beautiful
and saintly, and Teddy's so admirable (and so unaffected by her father's beliefs)
that even her flaws are laudable (she feels disproportionate guilt over her father's
activities); her narrative voice and the dialogue are inconsistent, wavering between
unlikely sophistication and unlikely naivet6 and sounding awkward and scripted.
Readers looking for a more realistic and subtle examination of a daughter's escap-
ing her father's racist strictures should look to Fogelin's CrossingJordan (BCCB 41
00), but this exploration will give young readers a glimpse into the human side of
difficult social change. DS
184 
* THE BULLETIN
JAFFE, NINA, ad. 
Tales for the Seventh Day: A Collection of Sabbath Stories; illus.
by Kelly Stribling Sutherland. 
Scholastic, 2000 
73p
ISBN 0-439-16389-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-8
Seven traditional tales of the Jewish Sabbath range from the mystical to the every-
day and back again. Jaffe sets the thematic scene with the opening story, "The
Most Important Day," which relates an argument amongst the days of the week
about which day is most important. The fluid retellings maintain a reverent tone
throughout, even when veering into the humorous with "Mottke's Chicken," a
story of a foolish boy who, like the English Jack, can't seem to bring home from
the market what his mother sends him to buy ("Mottkele, where have you been all
this time? And where is the chicken?"). The final tale, "Leah's Journey," con-
cludes the collection on a mystical note, telling the story of a young girl who, when
lost in the woods, is rescued by the Sabbath Queen and invited to dine at her
bountiful table along with her other guests, including Abraham, Sarah, Moses,
and other figures from Jewish history. The prophet Elijah then leads Leah back to
her home, and she celebrates the Sabbath again, this time in the warmth of her
family. The book includes detailed source notes as well as a glossary and pronun-
ciation guide, a bibliography, and a list of recommended reading, all of which
make this a volume that is as well researched as it is moving. Sutherland's smudgy
charcoal illustrations, one per story, have a touch of Chagall in their dreamily
fantastical interpretations of Judaica. KM
KAMINSKY, MARTY 
Uncommon Champions: Fifteen Athletes Who Battled
Back. 
Boyds Mills, 2000 
[14 7p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-56397-787-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
If anyone has earned the right to hold forth on overcoming physical and societal
hardships, it is the athletes showcased here. And hold forth they do. In each
formulaic chapter, Kaminsky briefly reviews a sportsperson's career and one or
two event highlights. The main focus, though, is tackling adversity, and lots of
space is given to the athlete's commentary on self-improvement and self-esteem.
The level of exhortative platitude is dangerously high, and many readers who came
for the game will quickly reach their limit of well-meaning adult advice: "Learn to
accept your differences and you can enjoy a normal, happy productive life. I know
I did" (Minnesota Twins' Jim Eisenreich, a Tourette's sufferer); "Above all else,
remember that you must love yourself regardless of what others are saying" (tennis
champ Zina Garrison, a bulimia sufferer). Although many of the names here are
familiar-Michelle Akers, Greg LeMond, Chris Zorich-nearly all peaked in their
athletic careers by the late 1980s or early 1990s, ancient history for middle-grade
sports enthusiasts. A little of this goes a long way, but a judiciously chosen excerpt
read at just the right "teachable moment" may still prove inspirational. EB
KENYON, TONY 
Hyacinth Hop Has the Hic-Hops; written and illus. by Tony
Kenyon. 
Ragged Bears, 2000 
26p
ISBN 1-929927-06-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
Hyacinth Hop, a polka-dot beribboned bunny, eats all the popcorn and gets a bad
case of the hic-hops (hiccups with locomotion), and her stalwart older brother
Henry takes it upon himself to find a cure. Everyone has a suggestion, from a dose
of salts to gorgonzola cheese, and Henry is going to make sure Hyacinth tries them
JANUARY 2001 
* 
185
all. The bunny siblings go shopping, and, once in the store, Hyacinth's hic-hops
propel her into a grocery cart and careening down the aisle into a display of bacon
and baked beans; the shock cures her hic-hops. This is a promising premise that
suffers from over-execution. Kenyon tells the story in sometimes rhyming text, in
sometimes rhyming dialogue balloons, in spot art inserts, and in illustrations from
which the characters occasionally gaze out at the viewer; the hyperkinetic combi-
nation makes the pace choppy and distracts from the main narrative. Illustrations
feature anthropomorphized animal characters in old-fashioned dress, whose ex-
pressive faces add humor and a certain saving sass. Stylistically, the art is similar to
Wallace Tripp's, with a warmer palette and coyer visuals. Ignore the dialogue
balloons and stick to the main storyline, and this will make a funny readaloud,
especially if listeners get to hic-hop along with Hyacinth. JMD
KUKLIN, SUSAN 
Trial. The Inside Story; written and illus. with photographs by
Susan Kuklin. 
Holt, 2001 
[19 4p]
ISBN 0-8050-6457-5 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 8-12
Following a criminal case as it grinds its way through a New York court, Kuklin
reviews the stages of complaint, investigation, arrest, and arraignment and recon-
structs the trial. Defendant Joe Chen (names have been changed) has been charged
with kidnapping and grand larceny in the abduction of two illegal Chinese immi-
grants, and his case is complicated by dubious testimony of persons already con-
victed for their participation in the crime, and by problems associated with
translating both language and cultural mores for the court record and for the jury.
Kuklin does a creditable job of sorting through legal jargon (via sidebar materials
and a glossary), explaining abstruse procedure, and offering glimpses into the ar-
duous preparations each attorney makes on behalf of his or her respective party.
The polished showmanship and posturing by both prosecutor and public defender
as they woo the jury is neatly conveyed, and Kuklin clearly points out often-over-
looked objectives of the American justice system: "Seeking the truth is not the
only purpose of a trial. The most important other purpose is to keep the govern-
ment, with its immense power, from overreaching." Any teen aspiring to a career
as a trial lawyer will want to look long and hard at the enormous pressure on these
attorneys, who show up in court after sleepless nights to undertake a job in which
a misspoken word can swing the trial's outcome. Things look a little harder here
than they do on Law and Order. EB
LESTER, JULIUS 
Albidaro and the Mischievous Dream; illus. by Jerry
Pinkney. 
Fogelman, 2000 
34p
ISBN 0-8-37-1987-6 
$16.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Tired of being ordered about by their parents, children turn to their teddy bears
for comfort ("better than anything and anybody in the world, teddy bears know
how children feel"). The teddy bears send the children a dream, and the dream
goes rogue, telling all children everywhere that "when they awoke, they could do
whatever they wanted, when they wanted, and they would never be punished."
This very bad idea is complicated by Albidaro, "the Guardian of Children," who
gives the same dream to all the animals in the world. The children wake up and
say "no" in a number of languages, and the animals start acting like people. Things
get messy, the children are unhappy, and Albidaro asks his sister Olara (Guardian
186 
* 
THE BULLETIN
of the Animals) to set things right. She does. The people go to sleep and wake
without memory of the strange events, but the teddy bears remember, "and that's
why, to this day, teddy bears look like they have a secret." The narrative is more
dreamlike than linear, but even supposing the singular universe of a somnolent
state, this story is as disjointed as a half-remembered dream related by a sleepy
grownup. Pinkney's paintings have a dramatic sweep that moves the story along;
his animals are especially amusing dressed in tweeds and pretending to be people,
but the human figures are clumsily drafted. The sibling Guardians are appropri-
ately fantastical: Olara holds a mask of night and favors moon and stars, and
Albidaro holds a mask of day and glows with sunlight. Flashes of humor and
lyrical language lighten the lengthy text somewhat, but this is still one meandering
bedtime tale. JMD
LISLE, JANET TAYLOR 
TheArtofKeeping Cool. Jackson/Atheneum, 2000 
207p
ISBN 0-689-83787-9 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Anti-German fever runs high in the coastal town of Sachem's Head, Rhode Island:
residents, narrator Robert and his cousin Elliott among them, line the road to see
the huge naval guns being hauled to the local fort to protect the New England
coast from Nazi attack. The two thirteen-year-old boys and their immediate fami-
lies are staying with Robert's paternal grandparents while Robert's father serves
with the Royal Canadian Air Force and Elliott's parents recover from failed fi-
nances. Elliott, a timid if talented artist, is mentored by eccentric German painter
Abel Hoffman, who, after escaping Nazi persecution, is now living a solitary life in
the nearby woods. Robert observes his cousin's and the expatriate painter's rela-
tionship with justified apprehension: Hoffman comes under unwarranted suspi-
cion of espionage, and the result is patriotism-inspired destruction that mirrors the
artist's experience in Germany. Lisle programmatically sets her characters in their
historical context, quickly establishing time, place, and local sentiment. While the
relationship between Elliott and Robert is fairly complex, it exists in a literary
vacuum, with little reference to anything outside their common experience. Sketchy
motivations weaken the logic of characters' decisions, making their actions more
convenient than credible. Once Hoffman is set up as the obvious choice of spy,
the resultant reaction of the townsfolk is dismayingly predictable (arson destroys
months of the artist's work and Hoffman walks into the flames in order to perish
with his art). Despite these drawbacks, Lisle draws a chilling parallel between Nazi
Germany and the United States, and then sets it in stark relief against the drama of
these events. Readers will find much to ponder in this flawed but gripping novel.
JMD
LUTHARDT, KEVIN 
Mine!; written and illus. by Kevin Luthardt. 
Atheneum,
2000 
26p
ISBN 0-689-83237-0 
$14.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
When a package turns up at their doorstep, a pair of brothers dispute the owner-
ship of the contents, a fetching green dinosaur toy. "Mine!" is the cry of both boys,
but one initially wins out and takes off with Dino; when the other then reclaims
him, a tussle ensues that leaves the toy the worse for wear. After a thoughtful
interlude, the kids turn instead to generous impulses and agree to share the now-
mended dinosaur. The initial battle between the brothers is convincing, and the
minimal text (there are only four words in the book aside from the various noises
JANUARY 2001 
* 
187
of the dog) is effectively employed, with the whole project strongly reminiscent of
Crosby Bonsall's Mine's the Best; the caring-and-sharing conclusion, however, sets
aside reality in favor of didacticism and adult desires. The characters in Luthardt's
oil paintings have the highlit roundness of computer graphics and the toylike so-
lidity of Lois Lenski's art; the colors go beyond toylike to toy store, neon greens
bouncing off of glowing yellow and orange with a vigor that sometimes turns
gleam to glare. Adults may be needed to explain a few details (the address on the
package that makes it clear the toy is for both boys, the difference between speech
balloons and thought bubbles), and since the toy dinosaur is every bit as plumply
endearing as the family dog, viewers may not recover from its wounding as easily
as its co-owners do. Youngsters may nonetheless be drawn by the simple and solid
focus and kid-relevant topic. DS
MACKLER, CAROLYN 
Love and Other Four-Letter Words. Delacorte, 2000 
247p
ISBN 0-385-32743-9 
$14.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Sammie's life is in an uproar: her parents are separating, her father is fleeing to
California, and her mother is moving sixteen-year-old Sammie and herself from
upstate New York to New York City. Once ensconced in their tiny apartment on
the Upper West Side, Sammie is left on her own while her mother has an emo-
tional meltdown, alternating between headache-induced days in bed and feverish
reading of self-help books. Sammie barely speaks to her father when he telephones
(other than to tell him everything is fine), her mother is emotionally unavailable,
and her best friend from back home is so self-absorbed it never even dawns on her
to ask Sammie how she's doing. Sammie lives on cereal and takeout; she finds a
sympathetic friend, Phoebe, at a Central Park dog run; and she develops a tenta-
tive crush on Eli, oldest son of her mom's friend, Shira. The emotional tension
builds until Sammie gets so angry about being left to handle everything alone that
she has her own meltdown, finally triggering some grownup behavior from her
parents. Sammie is a determined character coping with life at an emotional cross-
roads with humor and self-awareness. Her narration is by turns bitingly funny
and sadly bitter, revealing a perceptive and intelligent personality. A lot of the
action here is internal, but Sammie's rapid-fire narration keeps everything moving
right along. This is a well-crafted novel with a personable heroine that will be an
easy sell on the young adult floor. JMD
MARTIN, ANN M. 
The Doll People; by Ann M. Martin and Laura Godwin; illus.
by Brian Selznick. 
Hyperion, 2000 
256p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2372-0 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0361-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Annabelle Doll is eight years old, as she's been for over one hundred years, and
she's starting to find her circumscribed life stifling: she and her family are played
with by Kate (or, without permission, by Kate's little sister, Nora) or they engage
in mild and quiet diversions like singalongs when the humans are out or asleep.
Things have changed, however, with Annabelle's discovery of the diary of her Aunt
Sarah, who disappeared forty-five years ago, and with the arrival of a lively plastic
doll family, the Funcrafts, whose daughter Tiffany becomes Annabelle's bosom
friend. The two doll girls decide to find Annabelle's missing aunt, but on the way
they have to deal with obstacles such as the household cat and the Dolls' long-
simmering family issues that surround Sarah's disappearance. The dolls-come-
188 
* THE BULLETIN
alive plot retains its eternal allure, and Martin and Godwin make particularly en-
tertaining use of the contrast between the dignified, handmade Dolls and the in-
trepid, happy-go-lucky Funcrafts. The plotting doesn't really justify the book's
length, however, since the pacing is slow and indistinct; there's also some contriv-
ance to aspects of the Dolls' life (the chronology doesn't quite account for some
concrete details or family feelings). It's therefore not up to the standard of living-
doll titles such as Waugh's The Mennyms (BCCB 5/94) and Griffiths' Caitlin's
Holiday (10/90), but it's still a cozy and gently imaginative adventure, and its
convenient chapter breaks add to its utility as a readaloud. Selznick's soft pencil
illustrations thickly populate the pages in spot art and full-page views; while there's
more visual similarity between the Dolls and the Funcrafts than readers will ex-
pect, the embracing design is cozy, and readers will particularly appreciate the
inventive endpapers advertising each family of dolls. DS
MCCORMICK, PATRICIA 
Cut. 
Front Street, 2000 
168p
ISBN 1-886910-61-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Callie's in Sea Pines (or Sick Minds, as the residents dub it), a psychiatric facility,
as a result of her propensity for self-mutilation. Initially she's silent there, un-
able-or unwilling-to speak to the other girls dealing with their own problems,
to her visiting family, or to her therapist. Eventually she finds a voice and begins
to explore the reasons for her behavior, examining the effects of her younger brother's
severe asthma, her mother's worry, her father's distance. This is surprisingly old-
fashioned in many ways, with plot curves reminiscent of old favorites such as I
Never Promised You a Rose Garden and Lisa, Bright and Dark; the book also sug-
gests a rather simplistic source for Callie's distress (her brother's first hospitaliza-
tion, for which she feels responsible), and Callie's silence is more dramatic than
emotionally logical. The first-person present-tense narrative voice, however, is
effective in its hushed intensity and fragile distance. Ironically, despite Callie's
repeated address of her narrative to "you," the therapist, the book's strong suit is
her relationship with the other girls, especially her roommate, Sydney, who casu-
ally but affectionately calls Callie "S.T.," for Silent Treatment. McCormick spins
a compelling yarn, programmatic or no, and the drama of illness will be enough to
lure some readers. DS
McCULLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
Mirette & Bellini Cross Niagara Falls; written and il-
lus. by Emily Arnold McCully. 
Putnam, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23348-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
High-wire walkers Mirette and Bellini (from Mirette on the High Wire, BCCB 10/
92 and Starring Mirette and Bellini, 7/97) return, and they're on an American
journey, invited to strut their stuff across Niagara Falls. On the crossing from
Europe they become fond ofJakob, a young Polish boy (who fortunately seems to
speak English) traveling in steerage, and take him along with them when his uncle
fails to meet him at Ellis Island. Once in New York, they discover that they have
a challenger, Mr. Patch, but they don't let that interfere with their plans; Mr.
Patch has other ideas, however, and not only does he cheat by fastening his bicycle
to the wire, he also sabotages the wire on which Mirette and Bellini are making
their crossing. The plot here is somewhat overladen for its lightweight approach,
with Jakob's immigrant drama tenuously grafted onto the story and his heroism
(he alerts the crowd to Patch's malfeasance) disproportionately emphasized; there's
JANUARY 2001 
* 
189
insufficient wonder and explanation to make the best use of the essentially fantas-
tical story. There's still exhilaration in young Mirette's virtuosity, however, and
the art offers picturesque images of turn-of-the-century America and makes the
most of Niagara's shades of azure and turquoise and billows of froth and spume.
This doesn't have the splendor of Mirette's first outing, but her fans will still want
to keep up with her. DS
McGILL, ALICE, comp. 
In the Hollow of Your Hand: Slave Lullabies; illus. by
Michael Cummings. 
Houghton, 2000 
40p
ISBN 0-395-85755-4 
$18.00 
R 4-7 yrs
McGill has compiled lullabies from her family, friends, and neighbors in this in-
vitingly presented slice ofAfrican-American singing tradition. Each lullaby is given
a two-page spread, containing the lyrics, a brief description of the source for each
song, and a fabric-collage illustration. Abstract depictions of African-American
figures borrow lines and shapes from modern art while the crazy-quilted back-
grounds and applique of flowery antique fabrics evoke the historical roots of the
included songs. The clean lines of the quilt edges and the spacious white borders
around the images and lyrics create a visually peaceful presentation, which comple-
ments the lullaby theme. The songs are written in dialect ("Sumtimes I rocks my
baby,/ Sumtimes I sees him cry,/ But we gon' have a good time/ Way bye an'
bye.") with soothing rhymes and repetitions that are characteristic of songs for
young children from many traditions. Although musical notation is appended,
McGill's own vocal renditions of these songs (as well as the stories of their sources)
on the accompanying CD will encourage listeners to learn the songs as they were
once passed along, by ear and by heart. KM
MICHELSON, RICHARD 
Ten Times Better; illus. by Leonard Baskin. 
Cavendish,
2000 
40p
ISBN 0-7614-5070-X 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
In this unusual treatment of magnitude, each animal gets a quatrain to boast about
a characteristic connected with a number. The numbers rise in a staggered fash-
ion: the elephant's paean to his ONE trunk is succeeded by the squid's boast
about its TEN tentacles; then the Bactrian camel gloats about its two humps,
followed by the sage grouse's putting it in the shade with its TWENTY tail feath-
ers, and so on until the TEN fingers and toes of the chimpanzee are trumped by
the ONE HUNDRED bees in the hive. It's an entertaining idea, and despite a
few bobbles Michelson's poetry is generally jaunty, with clever sound rhythms and
divertingly conversational style ("Two bumps? Too bad," sneers the sage grouse to
the camel). The watercolors of the late Leonard Baskin are personable and smudgily
textured in a way that recalls Douglas Florian's zoological excursions (Mammalabilia,
BCCB 3/00, etc.); in fact, the clean layout of poetry and critters on glossy white
recalls the Florian titles in general. Baskin unfortunately shorts his audience on at
least one counting task (the giraffe doesn't have its full complement of seventy
spots), and a brief unsuccessful final section uneasily mixes watered-down math
problems with lopsided natural history. This is still an intriguing and offbeat take
on numbers and animals that will tickle readers (and readees) who've enjoyed
Florian's poetic bestiary. An index and answers to the math problems are in-
cluded. DS
190 
* THE BULLETIN
MUNSON, DEREK 
Enemy Pie; illus. by Tara Calahan King. 
Chronicle,
2000 
34p
ISBN 0-8118-2778-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When a new boy named Jeremy Ross moves into the main character's neighbor-
hood, the nameless young narrator decides that Jeremy is ruining his summer. He
turns to Dad, who offers a recipe for Enemy Pie, which the narrator hopes will
somehow ruin Jeremy's summer in return. Dad bakes the pie and tells his son
that, in order for it to work, he has to spend a day with his enemy. True to the
formula of such tales, Jeremy turns out to be a nice guy, and the day passes quickly.
At dinner time, the boy invites Jeremy home to eat; when Enemy Pie is served, it
turns out to be a regular, delicious pie, and the impulse for retribution is lost (as
the main character says: "I just lost my best enemy"). The pacing drags during the
day spent together, and the flat ending is unsatisfying after the buildup of suspense
about the ingredients of Enemy Pie. Nevertheless, King's illustrations are unusual
and appealing, featuring human characters with oversized heads and widely spaced
eyes atop thin bodies, set in a summer paradise of green lawns, tree houses, bi-
cycles, and boomerangs. The vibrant colors of summer are softened with textures
of colored pencils and pastels. Though weighted down with its predictable mes-
sage, this is a cleanly written tale, and youngsters may appreciate it as a little piece
of summertime pie. KM
MURPHY, JIM Blizzard' Scholastic, 2000 
136p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-67309-2 
$18.95 
R* 
Gr. 5-10
Murphy turns his attention from fire (The Great Fire, BCCB 5/95) to ice with this
riveting account of the storm system that paralyzed much of the Eastern seaboard
in March of 1888. In a masterful piece of storytelling, Murphy regales readers
with tales of the fortitude and foolhardiness of citizens who matched wills with the
blizzard. Ex-senator Conkling boasts of his stamina as he forces his way through
the winds and drifts, only to succumb to weather-related complications within a
month. A farm wife shelters stranded travelers but can only feed them a dinner of
frozen sparrows plucked from the yard. A divinity student is trapped on a snow-
bound train, and a reporter spends seasick days tossed by the waves in a harbor
pilot boat. This title goes well beyond gripping narrative, however, to demon-
strate how the storm exposed the weakest seams in the nineteenth-century urban
fabric-utility companies that ignored ordinances for buried cable; corrupt city
politics that stalled efforts to introduce underground rail service; inadequate hous-
ing for masses of immigrants; a laissez-faire attitude toward snow removal and
sanitation. If sepia-toned period photos and engravings of the buried cities and
environs fail to set viewers' teeth chattering, Murphy's reminder of snowfalls (as
recent as January 2000) that continue to cripple the coast will: "No matter how
many pieces of equipment we develop, no matter how many ways we try to predict
weather patterns, nature always has the potential to surprise and overwhelm us."
EB
MURPHY, RITA 
Night Flying. Delacorte, 2000 
[144p]
ISBN 0-385-32748-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Like all the women in her family, fifteen-year-old Georgia Louisa Hansen can fly.
Georgia lives with her mother, Maeve, her two aunts, and her maternal grand-
JANUARY 2001 
* 
191
mother in her grandmother's house. They have always lived there, on
Grandmother's largesse, under Grandmother's controlling thumb. Two days be-
fore Georgia's formal initiation into the family's aerial pastime, the relative peace
of the household is disturbed by the return of Carmen Hansen, older sister to the
aunts. Carmen thumbs her nose at Grandmother's rules and presents legal docu-
mentation proving that the sisters are actually financially independent, a fact Grand-
mother has seen fit to keep hidden. In a climactic moment at the initiation, Carmen
is revealed as Georgia's biological mother (Maeve took care of her after Carmen
was forced out by Grandmother). Maeve reclaims her birthright (somehow de-
nied by Grandmother) and flies with Georgia on her ceremonial flight; Carmen
joins Georgia briefly for an unsentimental farewell. Murphy has a light touch with
the fantastical elements of her story, and Georgia's uncanny self-possession results
in an intriguing narrative voice. The plot doesn't bear much close examination-
better not to wonder why no one tried to discover how Carmen fared on her own,
or where the lawyers were when the will dividing money and property evenly among
the sisters and their mother was probated-but readers will either surrender disbe-
lief with the novel's first sentence ("The Hansen women have always flown at
night, even in bad weather") or not at all. The style here is reminiscent of a less
humorous, more earnest Patrice Kindl; there is that same kind of calm acceptance
of the odd and unusual found in Owl in Love (BCCB 10/93) and The Woman in
the Wall (BCCB 3/97), but without their sometimes caustic wit. Murphy's voice
will nonetheless draw readers into this credible fantasy world. JMD
OSBORNE, MARY POPE, ad. 
Kate and the Beanstalk; illus. by Giselle
Potter. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2000 
34p
ISBN 0-689-82550-1 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Kate sells the family cow for beans and winds up retrieving hen, gold, and harp
from a dastardly giant and his overextended wife. Osborne's Kate "was a plucky
girl who loved to help," and her helpful nature gets her into the giant's castle at the
top of the beanstalk: she can cook, and the giant's wife is desperate for help cook-
ing the "wagonload of bacon," "mountain of hash," and "sea of soup" that is the
giant's daily fare. Osborne bases her retelling of the familiar boy-and-his-beans
story primarily on Andrew Lang, leaning heavily on the idea that Jack-figure Kate
is retrieving stolen goods that rightfully belong to her and her mother. The text is
slightly wordy and very occasionally precious, but Potter's mixed media (pencil,
ink, gouache, gesso, and watercolor) illustrations correct any drift toward the cute.
Potter has a singularly unique style, and her quirky images and unusual composi-
tions take over the story and bring it happily home to happily ever after. JMD
PATENT, DOROTHY HINSHAW 
The Bald Eagle Returns; illus. with photographs by
William Mufioz. 
Clarion, 2000 
68p
ISBN 0-395-91416-7 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-9
Patent's latest book on bald eagles (see also Where the Bald Eagles Gather, BCCB
6/84) follows the history of the successful efforts to restore the bald eagle from
near extinction to robust numbers and continued life in native habitats. Patent
presents basic information about the species and the causes of the population de-
cline, along with description of revitalization efforts; she concludes with discus-
sion of the bird's symbolic status in several cultures and of places where bald eagles
can be seen today. Mufioz's crisp photographs capture the fine details of the pris-
tine wilderness areas where bald eagles are found along with closeups of eagles
192 
* THE BULLETIN
themselves. Although plenty of material for reports can be found in this volume,
this book begs to be read from beginning to end as a narrative of the decline and
revival of this magnificent species. Eagle buffs and report writers alike will be
delighted with the clearly presented and well-organized information (an index is
included), and even casual browsers will enjoy the sharp photographs of eagles
soaring in the wind. KM
PATTISON, DARCY 
The Wayfinder. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
200p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029157-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17080-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Win is eleven years old when his younger sister, lost in the impenetrable fog called
thefgiz, falls victim to The Rift, a mysterious deep canyon. The grief-stricken boy
withdraws, blaming himself for his sister's deathfall. Prince Reynard and his royal
hound, Lady Kala, come to the Heartland seeking a guide into The Rift. The
prince has the plague, and the contagion is spreading. The people of the Heart-
land will perish without the Water of Life from the fountain on the other side of
the canyon, and Win is destined to retrieve the water or die in the attempt. This is
pretty exciting quest stuff: Win, accompanied by the telepathic Lady Kala, over-
comes his own fear of The Rift, negotiates with a golden eagle, eludes coyotes,
albino alligators, and poisonous worms, and escapes the Wolf Clan in order to
reach the fountain of the Water of Life. Pattison introduces her story with a
celebration that provides a vehicle for an explanation of the Finders (such as Win),
those men and women who can find anything or anyone in the blinding fog.
Elements of this fantasy world are set up easily and without force in the early
chapters, and the appealing characterizations ensure that the loss of Win's sister is
appropriately heart-twisting. Younger fantasy readers will appreciate Win's jour-
ney and the sacrifices he makes along the way. JMD
PECK, RICHARD 
A Year Down Yonder. 
Dial, 2000 
130p
ISBN 0-8037-2518-3 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
In this sequel to A Long Wayfrom Chicago (BCCB 10/98), Mary Alice, now fif-
teen, is exiled to her grandmother's house while her parents ride out a rough year
of the Great Depression. Grandma Dowdel is as irascible as ever, using home-
baked pies and home-brewed glue to wreak vengeance on a Halloween prankster
with designs on her outhouse, shamelessly shaking down the neighbors for dona-
tions to support a widow and her invalid son, exposing family connections be-
tween a snooty member of the local DAR and the illegitimate offspring of the
town "trash," and thwarting the romantic designs of the postmistress-turned-nude-
model on a WPA muralist. Mary Alice proves here to be as engaging a narrator as
her older brother Joey has been, and once again disparate episodes are cunningly
joined together by the adolescent's steady realization that a deep well of tenderness
lies beneath Grandma's formidable exterior ("She knew me through and through.
She had eyes in the back of her heart"). Readers who enjoyed Joey and Mary
Alice's last visit will find this trip equally satisfying. EB
PHILBRICK, RODMAN 
The Last Book in the Universe. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
2000 
223p
ISBN 0-439-08758-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-9
After the Great Shake, the world is a cruel place for the "normals," who reside in
JANUARY 2001 
* 193
gang-dominated Urbs, restricted from the benefits enjoyed by the genetically im-
proved "prooves." Spaz isn't just a normal, he's a "deef," a defective, whose ten-
dency towards seizures excludes him from the addictive recreation of the mindprobe
and who exists as uneasy mascot of the Bangers gang. On a raid for the gang, he
happens on an old man called Ryter, who remembers the old-preprobe days and
who stubbornly clings to storytelling and words on paper; it's to Ryter Spaz turns
when a message comes that his beloved foster sister, Bean, lies near death on the
other side of the Urb and wishes to see him. Spaz and Ryter set out to find Bean,
picking up a five-year-old who's latched onto Spaz on the way and finding a sur-
prising ally in an adventurous proov girl, Lanaya, who calls her own privileged
society into question in order to save Bean. Expanded from a short story that
appeared in Michael Cart's Tomorrowland (BCCB 12/99), this is a fairly effective
if traditional postapocalyptic saga; while the issues and landscape here (especially
the futuristic world of the prooves) are familiar from other sci-fi explorations, both
televisual and literary, the exponentially marginalized Spaz is a compelling charac-
ter and his narration will pull readers into his world. Little Face, the tagalong feral
child, and Lanaya, the girl who looks beyond her own idyllic life, add genuine
richness as well as serving as plot functionaries. This doesn't have quite the origi-
nality of Adam Rapp's The Copper Elephant (BCCB 1/00), but questions pro-
voked will be fresh ones to many teens. DS
PINKNEY, SANDRA L. 
Shades of Black: A Celebration of Our Children; illus. with
photographs by Myles Pinkney. 
Scholastic, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-439-14892-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
Poetic text describes the various skin hues, hair textures, and eye colors of crisply
photographed boys and girls, most of whom are gazing happily out at the viewer.
The refrain "I am Black. I am Unique" is used to divide and connect themes and
pictures. Numerous metaphors describe skin hue ("I am the velvety orange in a
peach/ and the coppery brown in a pretzel"), hair texture ("My hair is the straight
edge/ in a blade of grass/ and the twisted corkscrew/ in a rope"), and eye color
("My eyes are the brilliant flash of blue in a Lapis/ and the shimmering glow of
ebony in an Onyx"). Each spread features varisized photographs of realistically
lively children holding the objects of comparison (peach, grass, stone, etc.) men-
tioned in the text; selected words and phrases are emphasized by changes in text
size. The metaphors are sometimes a stretch (is popcorn really "radiant brassy
yellow"?) and the scansion is often choppy, but the sheer confidence projected by
the personable children and captured by Miles Pinkney's camera will keep viewers
turning the pages. The medium for this worthy message is contrived, but the
attractive package will still ensure that this title sees a lot of use. JMD
PULLMAN, PHILIP 
The Amber Spyglass. 
Knopf, 2000. 
518p
ISBN 0-679-87926-9 
$19.95 
R Gr. 7-10
In this final volume of the "His Dark Materials" trilogy, Lyra and Will join to-
gether to defeat the Authority. Pullman leaps directly into his own raging current
of plot streams and for the first third of the book maintains a breakneck pace: the
origin and purpose of Dust is discovered; opponents' armies mass for one last
decisive battle; Will and Lyra take a dangerous journey to the land of the dead.
Good guys die heroically and bad guys switch allegiances to ensure that Metatron,
regent for the Authority, cannot seize absolute power and institute an eternal In-
194 
* THE BULLETIN
quisition. The pace lags during Dr. Mary Malone's investigation of "Shadows"
(Dust in Will's world) and her adventures in a parallel world inhabited by the
mulefa, kindly sentient beings who come to depend upon her to discover the fate
of the disappearing Dust that sustains them. Lyra and Will's growing love for each
other and their sexual awakening are romantic but somewhat pat, and the theo-
logical implications of their relationship are a bit abstruse. Lyra's distinctly indi-
vidual personality fades, and she becomes a secondary character to Will, losing her
edge along with her heart. The book regains some momentum in the final third,
the numerous plot strands converging in the finale's events: a deadly battle be-
tween divinity and humanity, a life and death struggle at the edge of a physical
(and existential) chasm, and a poignant parting for Lyra and Will. Despite some
philosophical muddiness and the occasional stall in the action, this final volume is
compelling reading, and series fans will not want to miss it. JMD
RINALDI, ANN 
The Education of Mary: A Little Miss of Color, 1832. Jump at
the Sun/Hyperion, 2000 
254p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2463-8 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0532-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Mary Harris, a thirteen-year-old black girl who works at Miss Crandall's Con-
necticut boarding school, is reasonably content with her opportunity to be tutored
by the Quaker schoolmarm in return for her services. Her older sister Sarah, though,
aspires to be a full-fledged student and successfully challenges Miss Crandall to
put her Quaker belief in racial equality into practice by enrolling her in the school.
Not only does Crandall admit Sarah, she dismisses her entire student body of elite
white girls and, with the assistance of William Lloyd Garrison, refashions her school
into an academy for the daughters of "good Negro families." Although Crandall
makes it clear to Garrison that her interest is in education and not in the abolition-
ist cause, narrator Mary quickly senses "matters at play here that were at odds."
Many of the new students, Sarah Harris included, welcome community resistance
and violence in order to expose the racial bigotry of their supposedly liberal-minded
white neighbors, and eventually even Crandall loses sight of her original objectives
amid the sturm und drang of public reaction. The core of Rinaldi's novel is fact-
based, and a pivotal episode in which the community revives an obsolete vagrancy
law and seriously threatens to have students whipped is genuinely chilling. Much
of the tension, however, is dissipated in verbal sparring, and characters generally
fail to materialize beyond the political positions they champion. Still, Rinaldi does
explore a range of antebellum strategies for promoting black rights, and readers
with an interest in the period may find them provocative. EB
ROCKWELL, ANNE Only Passing Through: The Story ofSojourner Truth; illus. by
Gregory Christie. Knopf, 2000 34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99186-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89186-2 $16.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Rockwell's narrative rendition of the life of Sojourner Truth is both conversational
and immediately riveting, opening with a scene on the slave auction block, circa
1806: nine-year-old African slave Isabella is sold to a white farmer along with a
herd of sheep. In 1826 her search for freedom leads her to Marie and Isaac Van
Wagener, a married couple morally opposed to slavery; Isaac buys Isabella and sets
her free. In 1843, Isabella dreams of a voice that says "she was meant to travel
JANUARY 2001 
* 
195
around the country telling of her time in bondage-telling people what it meant
to be a slave." She works her way east, telling "her story to whoever would listen";
she decided "her old name belonged to her old life. From that day on she was
never called Isabella again. Her name was Sojourner Truth." Rockwell ends her
narrative shortly after Sojourner Truth's first big public speaking engagement, ex-
plaining in a note that her focus was on the "one miraculous moment" when
Sojourner Truth recognized her calling. Christie (illustrator ofAdedjouma's po-
etry collection, The Palm ofMy Heart, BCCB 12/96) paints Isabella as a brooding
young adult with discontented eyes, and the adult Sojourner Truth as a formi-
dable woman with large hands and a ferociously intelligent face. Full-page paint-
ings feature a subdued palette of browns, blacks, and tans, with the occasional cool
highlight in blue or green; flaming orange and pulsating red are used for emotional
emphasis. The semi-abstract paintings are inspirational rather than representa-
tional, their authority residing in the presence Christie imparts to this heroine.
(The power of Christie's characterization of Sojourner Truth is startling; she physi-
cally dominates nearly every composition.) Although there are no specific refer-
ences, Rockwell cites her subject's autobiography as being "most helpful," and a
concluding note provides additional information about Sojourner Truth and the
events that occurred during her long life. JMD
ROOT, PHYLLIS 
Kiss the Cow!; illus. by Will Hillenbrand. 
Candlewick,
2000 28p
ISBN 0-7636-0298-1 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Annalisa, the "most curious and stubborn" of Mama May's voluminous brood of
children, is intrigued by her mother's treatment of the family dairy cow, Luella.
Not only does Mama May offer the cow songs of request and gratitude at every
milking, she also kisses Luella "right on the end of her velvety, brown nose."
Annalisa's determined to match her mother's milking feats, and armed with the
proper songs she manages to coax milk out of Luella. Her refusal to kiss the cow,
however, means that a grieving Luella closes the milk bar, with no milk or cheese
to feed Mama May's offspring, until Annalisa finally relents. While there are a few
rough edges to the plot (Annalisa's change of heart isn't sufficiently justified, and
the end's a bit watery), the solid structure and sprinkling of folkloric charm make
this a neat and quirky pleasure; Root's fondness for tasty phraseology (Mama May
uses Luella's milk to make "cheese so fresh it squeaked between their teeth") will
make this a particularly savory readaloud. Hillenbrand's mixed-media illustra-
tions run more than usual to sturdy literalness even as he offers imaginative inter-
pretations of Mama May's Sendakian-featured throng of offspring; Luella is a
long-lashed chocolate charmer who almost outshines carrot-topped Annalisa. It's
a pity that the final milk-mustache-madness scene is compressed to only one page
rather than romping over a double spread, but it'll still inspire youngsters to cre-
ative imbibing along with their cookies. DS
SANTANGELO, COLONY ELLIOTT, ad. 
Brother Wolf of Gubbio: A Legend of Saint
Francis; ad. and illus. by Colony Elliott Santangelo. 
Handprint, 2000 
34p
ISBN 1-929766-07-6 
$15.95 
R 5-8yrs
An old wolf stays behind when his pack moves on and becomes the terror of the
small Italian village of Gubbio: "He was only one wolf, grayhaired and scrawny,
but the people picked up sticks and stones and threw them, shouting
196 
* 
THE BULLETIN
angrily .... From that day the war between the wolf and the people of Gubbio
grew worse.... Soon the townspeople were too fearful to leave their homes." The
baker ventures forth to seek aid from Francis, the holy man of Assisi. Francis
knows the wolf "is only doing what wolves do," and he successfully mediates
peace between beast and townsfolk. Vivid images and decisive action characterize
Santangelo's storytelling, and her narrative will fall easily on the listening ear. Ink
and colored pencil illustrations on bass wood echo Stefano Vitale's art for Zolotow's
When the Wind Stops (BCCB 9/95); these images are less stylized, however, and
more folkloric in nature. Paintings and occasionally text blocks are framed, some-
times asymmetrically, in blue and gold; the human figures consistently appear
foreshortened, but their barrel-like solidity and expressive demeanors lend a visual
harmony to the images. Objects within compositions are outlined in a wash of
black that is vaguely reminiscent of stained glass; endpapers are delicate evocations
of moon, stars, and sun against midnight blue skies. Listeners intrigued by the
ascetic life of this saint can find more standard biographical information in Tomie
dePaola's Francis, the Poor Man ofAssisi (BCCB 4/82). JMD
SCHAAP, MARTINE 
Mop's Backyard Concert; written and illus. by Martine Schaap
and Alex de Wolf. Cricket/McGraw-Hill, 2000 
32p
ISBN 1-57768-892-9 
$12.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
SCHAAP, MARTINE 
Mop's Treasure Hunt; written and illus. by Martine Schaap
and Alex de Wolf. Cricket/McGraw-Hill, 2000 
32p
ISBN 1-57768-891-0 
$12.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Twins Julie and Justin, along with their large sheep dog Mop, take a foray into
picture-book format, having formerly been limited to the scope of children's maga-
zine Ladybug. Though Mop receives mention in each title, the stories are told
from the perspective of Julie and Justin. Mop's Treasure Hunt involves a visit to
Granddad's house, where they discover a trunk filled with artifacts from his sailing
days. Old maps give the kids the idea to hide a fresh plate of cookies from Granddad,
and create their own map to lead him to the "treasure." Astute viewers will enjoy
watching Mop's behind-the-scenes action, and will note who finds the "treasure"
before Granddad. Mop's Backyard Concert finds Mop leading Julie and Justin to a
concert in the park, which inspires them to create their own backyard, kitchen-
utensil band. Both titles are illustrated in a casual cartoon style with watercolor
and pencil wash; each contains activities to extend the books' adventures (making
a treasure map, assembling instruments from household items). The stories tend
to ramble, but the charm of Mop and his owners' relationship survives the excess
verbiage. Though the art is somewhat bland, the players have the visual dash of
Jack Kent's dot-eyed characters, and the situations they're involved in have the
attractiveness of the possible. EAB
SCHOTTER, RONI FIs for Freedom; illus. by C. B. Mordan. 
Kroupa/DK Ink,
2000 
96p
ISBN 0-7894-2641-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Manda Van Dorri is awake, musing over ghost stories in the dark, when noises
draw her outside to investigate some household commotion. As a family of run-
away slaves emerges from grain sacks in a neighbor's wagon, Manda realizes that
her parents are aiding the fugitives, and the impulsive ten-year-old promptly em-
JANUARY 2001 
* 
197
broils herself, much to her parents' discomfort, in their scheming. Charged with
amusing Hannah, the runaways' daughter, Manda unwisely leads the girl to the far
reaches of the family farm where they are vulnerable to discovery by local slave
catchers; she redeems herself after their narrow escape by leading Hannah's family
through a secret tunnel that opens onto the river, their next stop toward freedom.
There is more chatter than action here, and the instant friendships and cozy, feel-
good mood that promise a happy ending undermine any serious tension concern-
ing the fugitives' welfare. Despite the contrivance, the tightly focused plot and
brisk pace make this an undemanding introduction to antebellum historical fic-
tion; pair it with Raymond Bial's The Underground Railroad (BCCB 3/95) for
relevant background. Black-and-white vignettes and a note on the Fugitive Slave
Act are included. EB
SEULING, BARBARA 
Drip! Drop!: How Water Gets to Your Tap; illus. by Nancy
Tobin. 
Holiday House, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1459-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
JoJo and her dog, Willy, accompany readers on this simple introduction to the
water cycle, including a visit to the waterworks. The text directly addresses the
reader ("This water was once part of the ocean. How did it get into your tap?"),
while dialogue and thought balloons feature JoJo's asides on relevant topics and
Willy's running doggy-commentary. A subtext in smaller typeface gives addi-
tional information not included in the main body of text. Tobin's watercolor
cartoons feature pop-eyed characters of a variety of races engaged in a variety of
subject related activities (drinking water, turning off a dripping faucet, taking a
bath, etc.); simple geometric shapes represent natural and architectural forms (cones
for trees, cubes for buildings, etc.). The simplification of the process results in the
occasional misleading turn of phrase (after a brief discussion of the function of
water pipes, Seuling says, "Water pressure pushes water up through the walls") and
there are several questions left unanswered (do scientists personally test all the
water that flows through the waterworks? How do the engineers adjust water
pressure?). Three simple science experiments are appended related to evaporation,
filtering, and making raindrops (condensation, a term unused and undefined in
the text). This is oversimplified but also unthreatening, and it may be useful with
very young scientists; those seeking something a little more refreshing would do
well to look at Walter Wick's A Drop of Water (BCCB 2/97) or Joanna Cole's The
Magic School Bus at the Waterworks. JMD
SINGER, 
MARILYN, 
ed. 
I Believe in 
Water: 
Twelve Brushes with
Religion. HarperCollins, 2000 
280p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028398-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028397-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Author Singer has collected an even dozen tales about young adults and their rela-
tionships with God, organized and unorganized religion, and one another. The
contributor's list is a who's who of popular and critically well-received writers for
young adults-Gregory Maguire, Virginia Euwer Wolf, Kyoko Mori, Jess Mowry,
among others-and the themes range from questing for the spirit to battling dis-
belief to achieving salvation, here, now, and later. The depth of the stories varies,
with Nancy Springer's "The Boy Who Called God She" lighter than M. E. Kerr's
198 
* THE BULLETIN
"Grace," and Naomi Shihab Nye's "What Is the Dickens?" more whimsical than
Joyce Carol Thomas' "Handling Snakes." The collection as a whole takes its audi-
ence seriously even when the individual stories are funny, and the articles of faith
presented in the tales themselves will hold even skeptical readers. Brief biogra-
phies of the authors are appended and some include background on particular
stories included in this thoughtfully compiled volume. JMD
STANLEY, JERRY 
Hurry Freedom: African Americans in Gold Rush
California. Crown, 2000 
85p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-80096-9 
$20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-80096-9 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The number of black participants in the Gold Rush may have been small, but their
tales of personal prosperity are compelling and their influence on the fortunes and
rights of fellow slaves and freemen was powerful indeed. Here Stanley focuses on
the experiences of free Philadelphian Mifflin Gibbs, whose constrained prospects
in the East impelled him to try his hand at the sluice boxes of the West. Like so
many other prospectors, Gibbs found no joy in the gold fields themselves but
secured a profitable livelihood as a merchant to the booming population, and he
rose to a position of prominence within the tight-knit black community and re-
spect among many of his white customers and colleagues. A touch of awkward-
ness mars the beginning of this account, as Stanley toggles unsteadily between
introducing readers to Gibbs and establishing background on the circumstances
which brought slaves (many of whom used their newly mined wealth to purchase
their own freedom and that of family members) to California. Once Gibbs takes
center stage, however, the narrative takes off, and readers are treated not only to a
fascinating biography, but also to a cogent history lesson on free/slave state issues
and the struggle for civil rights in the years leading up to the Civil War. The text
is laced with plenty of photos of San Francisco at the mid nineteenth century, and
a bibliographic note and an index round out the presentation. EB
STEEN, SANDRA Car Wash; by Sandra and Susan Steen; illus. by G. Brian Karas.
Putnam, 2001 32p
ISBN 0-399-23369-5 $15.99 
R* 3-7 yrs
Lunch is the original plan, but when the shiny black car splashes its way through a
huge puddle, the first stop is the car wash. One of the tykes in the back seat closes
the sun roof, and his imagination shifts into overdrive: "Close hatch. Submarine.
Going down. Deep. Dark." Now the car wash transforms into a maritime adven-
ture. A giant red octopus (long cloth strips that swab the roof) swings at the
explorers, seaweed (rotating green strips that clean the sides) hides circling sharks,
a tidal wave (rinse) engulfs the fragile vessel, and the "red-hot breath" of an un-
named monster (dryer) sucks them through its gaping jaws. Back out in the sun-
shine, it's "Drip, drip. Towel dry. Shiny car" and they're ready to roll-through
the burger stand drive-thru and on to a second automotive disaster as a cardboard
tray of fast food overturns in the back seat. Ride-through car washes are rife with
potential for a great self-induced scare, and the Steen/Karas comic-horror treat-
ment is right on the mark. The delighted shivers of the car's cartoon occupants
(whose dot eyes and "0" mouths convey their glee) will resonate with viewers,
while embellishments of buttons, beads, terry cloth strips, starfish, and clear acrylic
JANUARY 2001 
* 
199
blobs provide enough reference to mundane reality to calm the skittish. A good
car wash book is long overdue; take this one out for a spin. EB
STURTEVANT, KATHERINE 
At the Sign ofthe Star. Farrar, 2000 
140p
ISBN 0-374-30449-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The sign of the star is the symbol of the shop owned by Meg's father, a genial
publisher/bookseller. It also refers to the comet that twelve-year-old Meg and her
cousin see in the London sky on a portentous night in 1677. The calamity fore-
told by the heavenly sign turns out to be Meg's father's plan to marry again, which
may turn Meg from acknowledged heir ("Someday all my books will be yours, and
my copyrights.... With such a dowry you need not trouble yourself about mar-
rying an old man nor a sour one. You may choose someone in the trade, if you
like, and be a partner to him as your mother was to me") to dispossessed daughter
if the new wife produces a son. Though many allusions (to "papists," for example)
are not explained, the physical and economic harshness and even the bawdiness of
the place and time in which Meg battles with her father, stepmother, and, eventu-
ally, her own conscience is clearly evoked. The literary milieu is only sketchily
drawn through the names of the literati (John Dryden, Aphra Behn) with whom
Meg's father hobnobs and quotations and chapter titles from period books, and
there's little overall period sensibility despite the details. Still, the characters and
conflicts are satisfyingly complex, and though the focus of the novel is on the
peculiarly difficult situation of women in late seventeenth century England, the
more overt message of the book also offers contemporary readers something to
ponder: "We do not know our futures, though we sometimes think we do.... We
do not know what every comet means." FK
SWEENEY, JOYCE 
Players. Winslow, 2000 
[225p]
ISBN 1-890817-54-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
St. Philip's varsity basketball team should be unstoppable-it's got individual tal-
ent, an effective captain in senior Corey, and that near-mystical team cohesion
that augurs a winning edge. All that's needed is some insurance with a strong
player for the single opening on second string, and, despite his teammates' vague
and unsubstantiated misgivings, Corey is certain that eager transfer student Noah
is their man. The season is barely underway when things begin to happen: an
injury during practice, a player who collapses during pregame intros, another who
quits without offering a reason, girlfriends' betrayals, crumbling friendships, and a
handgun planted in a locker. As St. Philip's first string goes into a collective tail-
spin, Noah not only insinuates himself onto the starting lineup but emerges in the
press first as the "ringer" and then as the only star of a dismally disappointing
team. Perennial nice guy Corey finally realizes the simple truth his teammates
have suspected all along: Noah is evil. Applying the defensive strategy that has
served him well on court, Corey methodically exposes Noah's machinations and
crimes and leads his team to the city championship. Sweeney's device of tucking
Noah coyly into the background while disclosing the results of his actions is effec-
tive and chilling, and although some murmurs are made concerning Noah's rotten
home life, he is allowed to shine here as unapologetically, gratifyingly bad. Part
sports story, part thriller--this one's a winner. EB
200 
* THE BULLETIN
THAYER, ERNEST LAWRENCE 
Casey at the Bat; illus. by Christopher
Bing. 
Handprint, 2000 
30p
ISBN 1-929766-00-9 
$17.95 
R* Gr. 4-8
Bing's inventive reillustration of Thayer's classic poem will delight those who have
long commiserated with Mudville's disheartened fans as well as a new generation
of readers who have yet to be introduced to the overconfident Casey. Imagination
and computer manipulation team up here to recreate a thoroughly convincing
"scrapbook" of period engravings (well, pen and ink on scratchboard), yellowed
newspaper backgrounds (actually "a series of complex operations involving mir-
rored photocopies on acetone"), an L.C. catalog card (complete with bogus bio-
graphic info on Casey), and ads and clippings that slyly comment on the evolution
of baseball and the creature comforts of the fans-all rendered, of course, in the
formal prose of the late nineteenth century. Double spreads from the fictitious
Mudville Sunday Monitor capture the ill-fated game from a variety of angles:
closeups of the swaggering, mustachioed Casey, a balloonist's view of the field, a
peek into the dugout, the prospect from the stands. But there's at least as much
entertainment to be had in close examination of the apocrypha, from stereopticon
scenes to ticket stubs, strewn casually around the pages. Clearly this is a labor of
love for Bing, and it will be a season highlight for enthusiasts of baseball lit. EB
TROUPE, QUINCY 
Take It to the Hoop, Magic Johnson; illus. by Shane W.
Evans. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2446-8 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0510-2 
$15.99 
R 7-10 yrs
Award-winning poet Troupe spins a rhythmic exhortation to legendary basketball
player Magic Johnson, touching briefly on Johnson's high-school career but mostly
focusing on his stylish and virtuoso playing with the Los Angeles Lakers. The
flowing, jazz-influenced lyric tips into the purple at times but maintains an imagi-
native vision and pounding pulse ("shake & glide & ride up in space/ till you
hammer home a clothes-lining deuce off glass now,/ come back down with a
reverse hoodoo gem/ off the spin & stick in sweet, popping/ nets clean from
twenty feet, right side"). Youngsters may not, these days, know who Johnson is
(fewer still will recognize Johnson's teammate Kareem), and there's more mood
than shape or focus to the text, but they'll be tickled to see hoop dreams getting
their poetic due. Evans' art depends on thick, wiry scrawls reminiscent of Jules
Feiffer's lines, with a simplicity that borders on the ungainly but also gives the
figures a monumental air enhanced by clean sweeps color against which the bright
orange jerseys stand out. Though the payoff is less concrete than in Deloris Jordan's
Salt in His Shoes, reviewed last month, this will nonetheless engage kids not quite
up to Charles Smith's Tall Tales (BCCB 5/00). DS
WALTERS, ERIc 
Caged Eagles. Orca, 2000 
256p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55143-182-3 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55143-139-4 
$6.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, fourteen-year-old Tadashi
Fukushima and other Japanese-Canadian neighbors from his village are identified
as "enemy aliens" and transferred to Hastings Park, a Vancouver fairgrounds that
serves as a detention camp. Streetwise Sam Uyeyama, a two-week resident and
self-proclaimed expert on the camp, takes Tadashi under his wing and shows him
JANUARY 2001 
* 201
where to get a quiet night's sleep (in one of the many trucks corralled on the
racetrack infield), how to supplement bland camp fare (cafeteria servers can be
paid to bring in treats), and how to slip under the fence for a jaunt through town.
Scornful of what they regard as a passive, fatalistic attitude among their elders in
the camp, the boys don "I Am Chinese" buttons and risk detection on the city
streets. Inside the camp, though, the "passive" internees plan and stage resistance
activities ranging from randomly announced food strikes, to falsified medical docu-
ments, to a midnight raid on a harbor to scuttle their own confiscated fishing
boats. Walters does a fine job of examining the stresses on the Fukushimas' family
dynamic and setting them within the larger context of camp life. However, his
inclusion of a climactic scene of a prohibited Buddhist cremation within the camp
grounds (which Walters admits in his note has no basis in fact) adds a touch of
melodrama that somewhat undercuts the realism. Readers who followed the story
of U.S. internees in Uchida's Journey to Topaz and other such titles may still want
to compare it with experiences north of the border. EB
WASHINGTON, 
DONNA, ad. 
A Big, Spooky House; illus. by Jacqueline
Rogers. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0349-5 
$15.99 
R 6-9 yrs
This retelling of a traditional story (also known as "Better wait 'til Martin comes")
features a brawny and nameless African-American man who is striding confidently
down the road as a fine day turns into a rainy night. He spots a spooky, crumbling
house on a hill, and, since he is a "not-going-to-be-scared-by-some-spooky-house-
sitting-up-on-a-big-spooky-hill kind of man," he marches inside and falls asleep in
a chair. The clock strikes, the man awakes, and a black cat with glowing eyes asks
"Are you gonna be here when John gets here?" Each time the clock strikes a larger
cat appears until the third time, when a cat the size of a pony strides in the door
and eats the other cats; the man runs away ("He was a BIG man! He was a STRONG
man! He was a GONE man!"), and the illustration depicts only the hindmost foot
of his swiftly departing figure. Washington's text (for which she gives some back-
ground but no specific source note) is well paced and directly written, elegantly
capturing the hubris of the main character in its understated phrases. 
Rogers'
illustrations depict a luxurious antique interior suffused with warm candlelight,
using thin washes of watercolors to create a slightly transparent and ghostly ambi-
ence. The muted palette, from the steely grays of stormy weather to the faded
browns and crimsons of the haunted house-interior, accents the tale's creepy tone,
and though the human figures are sometimes awkwardly drafted, ornate details of
the house's decor cleverly hide feline faces. Young listeners will join in with the
repeated refrain ("He was a BIG man. He was a STRONG man!") right to the
end, where the last page shows the shadow of an even bigger and more ferocious
feline coming to gobble up the pony-sized cat. Save this for a dark and stormy
night. KM
WATSON, KATY Juice. 
Fremantle Arts Centre, 2000 
192p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-86368-304-6 
$13.60 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Fourteen-year-old Jenna "Juice" (as in Rocket Juice) Stewart is a runner, and this
year she has taken on an intensive training program with seniors' coach Wiz to get
to the International Friendly Games in Singapore. Wiz pairs her with Von for
training; an excellent athlete, he's also the boy Jenna pegged with an earful of
202 
* THE BULLETIN
frankfurter and chili sauce a couple years before, but now Jenna finds herself strangely
attracted to the former object of her disgust. Meanwhile, her friend and former
training partner Sam gives her a run for her money, all of a sudden challenging her
hold on the 100M. Though there's an insightful depiction of Juice's relationship
with her parents, the focus is on Juice herself as she navigates new and old relation-
ships (what is she going to do without her spirited gran who took off for Sydney?),
deals with her mother's pregnancy, and experiments with athletic fashion (friend
Celene sports leopard-themed running outfits, complete with killer nails, for the
relay). Watson delivers a heated story, filled with sweat, adrenaline, simmering
hormones, and modern Aussie slang that is sure to have American teens trying out
lingo like "Macca," "mate," and "footy." Athletic girls are still in lamentably short
supply in fiction for young people, and many readers will relish a run with Juice.
EAB
WILDSMITH, BRIAN 
Jesus; written and illus. by Brian Wildsmith. 
Eerdmans,
2000 
34p
ISBN 0-8028-5212-2 
$20.00 
Ad 
5-10 yrs
Wildsmith is a practiced hand at retelling Bible stories, and one might expect this
focus on Jesus would call all his skills into play. Unfortunately, Jesus' life is ren-
dered here as a series of dry observations, faithful to Scripture but lacking cohesion
and grace. Whole episodes are reduced to a few lines, and little effort is made to
underscore their significance: "One day Jesus was out on Peter's fishing boat.
'Throw your net into the water,' said Jesus. 'We've caught nothing all night,' said
Peter. But Peter threw the net into the water, and it came up full of fish." Many
viewers will recognize Wildsmith's style, with its spidery lines, vivid watercolors,
generous gold embellishments, and the ubiquitous parti-colored angels who monitor
each scene. However, even the gold-framed compositions, reminiscent of reli-
gious diptyches, occasionally fall flat against backgrounds ofwashed-out green and
medicinal pink. Many parents and Sunday school teachers will laud this effort to
synthesize Jesus' story into one picture book tide, but those who are comfortable
straying a bit further from the Canon will probably find Marianna Mayer's Young
Jesus ofNazareth (BCCB 11/99) a more satisfying read. EB
WILSON, DIANE LEE 
To Ride the Gods' Own Stallion. Kroupa/DK Ink,
2000 
[2 8 8 p]
ISBN 0-7894-6802-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
In her previous book, I Rode a Horse of Milk White Jade (BCCB 6/98), Wilson
depicted an intrepid young equestrienne riding in the thirteenth-century Mongol
empire; here she's depicting a less intrepid young would-be equestrian in sixth-
century B.C. Assyria. Soulai is a failure in his father's eyes, happier sculpting
horses of cay than protecting the goats, and his father finally sells him as a slave to
pay debts after the family house burns. He ends up a stableboy, property of a
prince, Habasle, just Soulai's age; there he finds the horse of his dreams, Ti. Habasle,
arrogant and foolhardy where Soulai is timid, takes Soulai with him on a lion hunt
that leaves Ti injured, perhaps beyond repair. In nursing and defending Ti, Soulai
finds himself involved in a palace powerplay that teams him with Habasle in an
escape and an attempt to defeat the plot. This doesn't have the compelling center
of IRode a Horse: Soulai's character is poorly defined, and the mysticism behind
JANUARY 2001 
* 203
his veneration of Ti is more romantic than convincing. The politics behind the
adventure are murky and difficult to discern, and the writing is often turgid and
overladen. The fascination with a noble horse is nonetheless convincingly de-
picted, and the two boys' flight offers some genuine adventure. There isn't much
else on offer that explores the Assyrian empire, but this will require harder slogging
than the casually interested will sustain. A frontispiece map lays out the geogra-
phy. DS
WINTER, JONAH 
Once Upon a Time in Chicago: The Story of Benny Goodman;
illus. by Jeanette Winter. 
Hyperion, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2404-2 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0462-9 
$14.99 
R 4-8 yrs
Amid the flurry of recent picture books introducing jazz to the elementary-grade
set, this tite should be particularly successful at connecting with its audience. Winter
portrays Goodman not as an adult musical icon but as a shy, talented kid that
other kids might actually like to know: "Benny liked playing the clarinet more
than he liked talking. For a while, Benny's family couldn't keep him away from
his instrument. His brothers and sisters made him practice on the fire escape."
The very ordinariness of Benny's childhood-particularly his eagerness to pitch
over his classical music training for the new jazz style that was "fun and hot" -will
invite listeners' empathy, even as the "strange life" of his early teens, "playing mu-
sic with grown men" and coming home "at two o'clock in the morning, his pock-
ets stuffed with dollar bills," sets young Goodman beyond the pale. Illustrations
in Jeanette Winter's signature style, jewel-toned with liberal, dramatic dashes of
black, neatly capture both the cramped daylight world of the workaday ghetto
(with figures filling and spilling from tight window frames) and the slightly dan-
gerous midnight world of jazz clubs (neon signs and street lamps casting deep
shadows on long blue sidewalks). An introductory note expands on Goodman's
life, but the concluding lines ("You can still hear his music. On his recordings,
Benny keeps on playing and playing and playing") should be ample invitation for
children to learn more. EB
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
The Wish Master. Holiday House, 2000 
104 p
ISBN 0-8234-1611-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The victim of his parents' attempt to make him "well-rounded," Corby's trying to
leave behind a bad experience at camp, where he was afraid of just about all the
activities he was supposed to enjoy. Now he and his mother are staying with his
grandparents in Wisconsin, where nobody knows his history. He's therefore keen
to establish himself as a nervy guy with his neighbor, brash Buck Miller, and to
prove his worth to his gruff grandfather. His hopes are raised when Buck leads
him to the Wish Master, a huge figure by the river, who seems to grant both boys'
wishes-but will that be enough for Corby to leave his fears behind? This is an
agreeable and accessible little story, with simple language and brief chapters. Though
the plot holds few surprises (the Wish Master is uncovered as just a pile of stones,
Corby finds courage he didn't think he had in order to save his dog, and there's a
rapprochement between him and his grandfather), the clarity of the path it follows
will itself be a reassurance to many youngsters. Anxious little Corby is a sympa-
thetic protagonist, and many readers will understand his attempts to be adventur-
ous despite dry mouth and pounding heart. DS
204 
* THE BULLETIN
ZOLOTOW, CHARLOTTE 
Do You Know What I'll Do?; illus. by Javaka
Steptoe. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027880-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027879-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
In text revised from its original appearance in 1958, Zolotow writes of a young girl
who offers an affectionate series of promises to her little brother ("Do you know
what I'll do when the flowers grow again? I'll pick you a bunch and you'll be
happy. Do you know what I'll do when it snows? I'll make you a snowman")
ending with her assurance that when she grows up and has a baby, she'll bring it
back to her brother to hug just as she hugs him now. The litany of affection is
sweet and its phrasing touched with poetry ("Do you know what I'll do when the
wind blows? I'll put it in a bottle and let it loose when the house is hot"); there's
no plot or tension, however, and the idealized sibling relationship will be far from
most youngsters' experience. Steptoe's collage art uses thick paint on paper and
wood along with decorative ribbons, fuzzy fabric, and other sundry items in relief
against stark white backgrounds; the figures are striking and dramatic, but they're
sculpturally static, and their adult appearance distances them further from the
child audience. The tender bond between siblings will draw many adults, though,
and they might find this useful in bringing perspective to siblings in a less lyrical
place. DS
JANUARY 2001 
* 205
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 2000
In the United States-at county fairs, in spelling bees, in competitive events-the
blue ribbon is the coveted prize, the symbol of the best. The books on the Bulletin
Blue Ribbons list possess an elusive excellence. These are tites that establish their
own aesthetic standards, and every year the Bulletin Blue Ribbons committee
redefines those standards according to the books being discussed. The rigors of
our discussions leave us tired and satisfied, and in possession of a list of Blue Rib-
bon titles we are proud to present to our readers.
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
PICTURE BOOKS:
Casanova, Mary, ad. The Hunter: A Chinese Folktale; illus. by Ed Young. A th -
eneum. (November)
Cole, Brock. Buttons; written and illus. by Brock Cole. Farrar. (March)
Emberley, Rebecca. My Colors/ Mis colores; My Shapes/ Mis formas; written and
illus. by Rebecca Emberley. Little. (December)
Falconer, lan. Olivia; written and illus. by Ian Falconer. Atheneum. (November)
Florian, Douglas. A Pig Is Big; written and illus. by Douglas Florian. Greenwil-
low. (December)
Kimmel, Eric A. Gershon's Monster: A Story for the ewish New Year; illus. by Jon
J Muth. Scholastic. (October)
Lester, Mike. A Is for Salad; written and illus. by Mike Lester. Putnam. (July/
August)
Nolen, Jerdine. BigJabe; illus. by Kadir Nelson. Lothrop. (September)
Speed, Toby. Brave Potatoes; illus. by Barry Root. Putnam. (June)
Thayer, Ernest. Casey at the Bat; illus. by Christopher Bing. Handprint. (January
2001)
Wells, Rosemary. Emily's First 100 Days ofSchool; written and illus. by Rosemary
Wells. Hyperion. (July/August)
Wattenberg, Jane, ad. Henny-Penny; ad. and illus. by Jane Wattenberg. Scholastic.
(May)
EARLY READERS:
Guest, Elissa Haden. Iris and Walter; illus. by Christine Davenier. Gulliver/Har-
court. (December)
Thomas, Shelley Moore. Good Night, Good Knight; illus. by Jennifer Plecas. Dut-
ton. (February)
206 
* THE BULLETIN
FICTION:
Bagdasarian, Adam. Forgotten Fire. Kroupa/DK Ink. (January 2001)
Creech, Sharon. The Wanderer; illus. by David Diaz. Cotler/HarperCollins. (April)
Deuker, Carl. Night Hoops. Houghton. (March)
DiCamillo, Kate. Because of Winn-Dixie. Candlewick. (June)
Freymann-Weyr, Garret. When I Was Older. Houghton. (July/August)
Gantos, Jack. Joey Pigza Loses Control. Farrar. (September)
Lynch, Chris. Gold Dust. HarperCollins. (November)
Turner, Megan Whalen. The Queen ofAttolia. Greenwillow. (June)
White, Ruth. Memories ofSummer. Farrar. (September)
Wittlinger, Ellen. What's in a Name. Simon. (February)
Woodson, Jacqueline. Miracle's Boys. Putnam. (May)
NONFICTION:
Adler, David A. America's Champion Swimmer: Gertrude Ederle; illus. by Terry
Widener. Gulliver/Harcourt. (April)
Aronson, Marc. Sir Walter Ralegh and the Quest for El Dorado. Clarion. (July/
August)
Bausum, Ann. Dragon Bones and Dinosaur Eggs: A Photobiography ofExplorer Roy
Chapman Andrews. National Geographic. (May)
Brown, Don. Uncommon Traveler: Mary Kingsley in Africa; written and illus. by
Don Brown. Houghton. (July/August)
Greenberg, Jan Frank O. Gehry: Outside In; by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan.
DK Ink. (October)
Murphy, Jim. Blizzard! Scholastic. (January 2001)
St. George, Judith. So You Want to Be President?; illus. by David Small. Philomel.
(July/August)
Tchana, Katrin, ad. The Serpent Slayer and Other Stories ofStrong Women; illus. by
Trina Schart Hyman. Little. (November)
Winick, Judd. Pedro and Me: Friendship, Loss, and What I Learned; written and
illus. by Judd Winick. Holt. (September)
JANUARY 2001 
* 207
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Actors and acting-fiction:
Greenwald
African Americans: Rockwell;
Stanley; Troupe
African Americans-fiction:
Herschler; Rinaldi
African Americans-music: McGill
African Americans-stories: Wash-
ington
Animals-fiction: Fleischman
Animals-poetry: Michelson
Animals-stories: Elya; Lester
Art and artists-fiction: Greenwald;
Lisle
Aunts-fiction: Friesen; Murphy, R.
Babysitters-fiction: Hearne
Baseball-poetry: Thayer
Basketball-fiction: Sweeney
Basketball-poetry: Smith; Troupe
BEDTIME STORIES: Brownlow
BILINGUAL BOOKS: Elya
BIOGRAPHIES: Kaminsky;
Rockwell; Stanley; Wildsmith;
Winter
Blizzards: Murphy, J.
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Friesen;
Pattison
Brothers and sisters-stories: Gay;
Kenyon; Schaap; Zolotow
Brothers-stories: Luthardt
Bullies-fiction: Friesen
Cars-stories: Coy; Steen
Cats-stories: Washington
Civics: Kuklin
Civil rights-fiction: Herschler
CONCEPT BOOKS: Elya;
Pinkney
COUNTING BOOKS: Elya
Cousins-fiction: deGroat; Lisle
Cows-stories: Root
Crime and criminals: Kuklin
Crime and criminals-stories:
Balouch
Death and dying-fiction: Pattison
Divorce-fiction: Mackler
Dogs-fiction: Hearne; Pattison
Dogs-stories: Chall; Schaap
Dolls-fiction: Martin
Dreams-stories: Lester
Eagles: Patent
Ecology: Patent
Endangered species: Patent
England-fiction: Haahr
Ethics and values: Friesen;
Herschler; Lisle; Pullman;
Schotter; Singer
Families-fiction: McCormick
Families-stories: Graham; Root
FANTASY: Martin; Murphy, R.;
Pattison; Philbrick; Pullman
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Herschler; Mackler; Sturtevant
Fathers and daughters-stories: Coy
Fathers and sons-fiction: Lisle
Fathers and sons-stories: Munson
Fears-fiction: Wright
Flying-fiction: Murphy, R.
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Balouch; Gershator; Jaffe;
Osborne; Washington
Food and eating-fiction: deGroat
Food and eating-stories: Munson
Friendship-fiction: Greenwald;
Hearne; Mackler
208 
* THE BULLETIN
Friendship-stories: Munson
FUNNY STORIES: Chall; Kenyon;
Washington
Future-fiction: Philbrick
Giants-stories: Osborne
Grandfathers-fiction: Lisle; Wright
Grandfathers-stories: Schaap
Grandmothers-fiction: Murphy, R.;
Peck
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Bagdasarian; Haahr; Herschler;
Lisle; McCully; Peck; Rinaldi;
Schotter; Sturtevant; Walters;
Wilson
History, U.S.: Murphy, J.; Patent;
Rockwell; Stanley; Winter
History, world: Bagdasarian
Horses-fiction: Wilson
Immigrants-fiction: McCully
Japanese Canadians-fiction: Walters
Judaism-folklore: Jaffe
Kings-stories: Balouch; Gershator
Lullabies: McGill
Mental illness-fiction: McCormick
Middle Ages-fiction: Haahr
Mothers-stories: Root
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Mackler; Murphy, R.
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Osborne
Mothers and sons-fiction: Wright
Music and musicians: McGill;
Winter
Numbers-poetry: Michelson
Persia-folklore: Balouch
POETRY: Michelson; Smith;
Thayer; Troupe
Rabbits-stories: Kenyon
Racism-fiction: Herschler
Reading aloud: Fleischman; Martin;
Peck; Smith; Thayer; Troupe
Reading, easy: Banks; deGroat;
Hearne; Wright
Religion-fiction: Pullman
Religious instruction: Jaffe;
Santangelo; Singer; Wildsmith
Robots-stories: Brownlow
Running-fiction: Watson
Saints-stories: Santangelo
SCARY STORIES: Washington
School-fiction: Banks; Friesen;
Greenwald
School-stories: Chall
Science: Brallier; Seuling
Science projects: Brallier
Sharing-stories: Luthardt
SHORT STORIES: Fleischman;
Singer
Sisters-fiction: Murphy, R.; Rinaldi
Slavery: Rockwell; Stanley
Slavery-fiction: Rinaldi; Schotter;
Wilson
Sports: Kaminsky; Troupe; Watson
SPORTS STORIES: Sweeney
Stepmothers-fiction: Sturtevant
Storytelling: Balouch; Jaffe;
Osborne; Washington
Storytime: Coy; Steen; Washington
Superheroes-stories: Graham
TALL TALES: Fleischman
Teddy bears-stories: Lester
Toys-stories: Luthardt
Turkey-fiction: Bagdasarian
Urban life-fiction: Hearne
Voyages and travel-fiction: Haahr
Voyages and travel-stories: Coy
Water: Seuling
Winter-stories: Gay
Wolves-stories: Santangelo
Women's studies: Rockwell
World War II-fiction: Lisle; Walters
Writers and writing-fiction:
Sturtevant
x.,
Teachin g8
The Professional Magazine 
for Teachers
Kp• pn 1T1eachln
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
)on't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
I 
_
"Ab, 
rb*g 
an 
eloqent.
IILD E
:  
"Freymann-Weyr
creates an indelible
portrait of a girl wh
strength is verging
becoming her weak
ness. Sophie'svoice
completely authe
and continually
pelling." -THE
TN, 
starre
review*
"Fast-paced,
yet introspective,
this novel of tran
Republic. A poet and writer at age 12, Ana Rosa records
everything she sees, hears, and imagines. As the novella
proceeds, dark shadows begin to slink through the gentle
days, [especially when] an official informs the villagers that
the government has sold their land. The villagers band
together and her brother Guario becomes their passionate
leader. The heartbreaking result is Guario's death. An
achingly beautiful story that will awaken profound emotions
in the reader." 
-
Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
"" "A coming-of-age story, propelled as much by the joy of
finding the right words and capturing them on paper as by
past or present tragedy." 
-
Starred review / ALA Booklit
"A gem of a novel ... a unique addition to library shelves."
-
School Library Journal
Ages 8-12. $14.95 Tr (0-06-028232-0); $14.89 Lb (0-06-028233-9)
SJoanna Cotler Books Animprnt ofHarperCollinsPubbih 
ers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
TE 
BABY
10i" 
RAF> 
^ 1
~~~d1 
.k 
UU. 
.
BiED
eJdfi[eJ M~§§e
ished in 1963 and long out of
ul story has been reborn in a
1-color] edition. The beebee bird is
h_„ 
b-: b__ b bbb bbi--i-i-:
I tW LU Ult 
LIU U CU I11U 
i5 
S 
11R U 
Long 
lue 
eeUUUUIUUUU
all night long, keeping the other animals awake.
[The next day] they concoct a plan to
ensure nighttime quiet so they can sleep.
The recasting of the original book into this
outsized, raucous rendering retains the appeal and
magnifies the playfulness. Kellogg's familiar style is a
perfect foil for the frolicking turnabout tale. Welcome
back, beebee bird!" -Starred 
review / School Library Journal
"Young listeners will find the invitation to chime in on
the beebee bird's irritating continuo utterly
irresistible." -
Kirkus Reviews
Ages 3-6. $15.95 Tr (0-06-028083-2) $15.89 Lb (0-06-028084-0)
Dark Lord of Derkholm. Set at the poorly managed Wizards'
University, the story follows the exploits of [Wizard Dirk's griffin
daughter Elda and other] students, who manage to create enough
havoc with magic to ensure that the school's problems are eventually
straightened out. With instructors and antics to rival those in the
Harry Potter books, this may help impatient Potter fans cope with
the wait for Harry's next adventure."-Starred review/ALA Booklist
-l- 
"One exuberantly inventive adventure follows the next all the way
to the pleasing conclusion. Great fun."-Starred review/Publishers Weekly 
S
"Readers will enjoy Year of the Griffin without first reading the
previous book, though they will certainly want to backtrack to learn
more about Elda [and] her family."-School Library Journal
Ages 10 up. $15.95 Tr (0-688-17898-7); $15.89 Lb (0-06-029158-3)
Also by Diana Wynne Jones
-Dark 
Lord of Derkholm--
Ages 10 up. $16.95 Tr (0-688-16004-2)
S Greenwillow Books An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(200101)54:5; 1 -Q
··
;; 
~·s 
·i.,rr: 
r;;
;" 
"r 
1: 
, 
:r .
~i·,,, 
--;-r:l· 
· · ~;~~p 
a
"·7~F-1
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
is Online!
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books is now
available to our print subscribers as a searchable online
database. Print subscribers are now able to browse the latest
issue online, look through archived issues beginning with
the 1998 volume year, and search for reviews by title,
author, and reading level. A sample issue of the online
Bulletin is available at:
http://www.prairienet.org/cgi-bin/ccb/bulletin.cgi
The staff of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
cordially invites you to browse through the online version.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
The Best of Tradition and Technology
·-·
·
· ·:-- 
--- 
-~; ·;· 
·
,i·
;r
:
;· 
:;·
:;;~ 
~
,,
.·~.c.
