T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
April 2016
Vol. 69   No. 8
ONLINE REFERENCE RESOURCES
Five outstanding online references from the Johns Hopkins University Press  
deliver seminal works and cutting-edge scholarship to students and researchers.
press.jhu.edu/references
• Flexible search options, powerful results.  Results are ranked and sorted by relevance   
 
or date, with direct links to documents and related materials.
• Intuitive browsing.  Wander through entire volumes without getting lost.
• Reliable usage statistics. COUNTER-compliant usage reports let you track activity  
 
 
according to the most current standard available. Statistics are compiled and ready to  
 
 
download once a month. 
• Always available. Our collections are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week from any   
 
IP-authenticated address. No special hardware or software is required. And we offer full   
 
technical and customer support.
The Early Republic
Critical Editions on the  
Founding of the United States
Primary material documenting the 
actions, debates, and thoughts of the  
First Federal Congress (1789–1791) and 
its members. 
earlyrepublic.press.jhu.edu
Encyclopedia of  
American Studies
Edited by Simon Bronner
Interdisciplinary articles from  
hundreds of scholars cover the history 
and cultures of the United States from  
pre-colonial days to the present.
eas-ref.press.jhu.edu
The Johns Hopkins  
Guide to Literary  
Theory & Criticisim
Edited by Michael Groden,  
Martin Kreiswirth, and Imre Szeman
A comprehensive historical survey of the 
field’s most important figures, schools, 
and movements.
litguide.press.jhu.edu
The Papers of Dwight 
David Eisenhower 
Edited by Louis Galambos, Alfred D.  
Chandler Jr., Daun van Ee, et. al.
Combines the full text of all 21 
volumes—over 14,000 pages—with 
a powerful search engine and 
user-friendly interface.
eisenhower.press.jhu.edu
The World Shakespeare 
Bibliography ONLINE
Edited by Laura Estill and an  
international committee of correspondents
The single largest Shakespeare  
database in the world. 
www.worldshakesbib.org
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
April 2016
Vol. 69 No. 8
399  the BIg PICture
 
 The Secret Subway   by Shana Corey; illus. by Red Nose Studio
400  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
417 • The Lie Tree by Frances Hardinge
428 • Burn Baby Burn  by Meg Medina
432 •  Jazz Day: The Making of a Famous Photograph  by Roxane Orgill; illus. by 
Francis Vallejo
436 •  Dorothea’s Eyes: Dorothea Lange Photographs the Truth  by Barb Rosenstock; 
illus. by Gérard DuBois
439 •  The Raven King by Maggie Stiefvater
446  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
447  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/bulletin_of_the_center_for_childrens_books/pricing.html. Volumes available in microfilm 
from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in micro-
fiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should 
be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2016 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from The Secret Subway © 2016 by Red Nose Studio and used by permission of 
Schwartz & Wade/Random House Children’s Books.
April 2016 • 399
the BIg PICture
The Secret Subway
by Shana Corey; illustrated by Red Nose Studio
 “The Sidewalks of New York” already dripped nostalgia when the song was penned 
in the 1890s, and decades earlier, pedestrians would has been hard-pressed to trip 
the light fantastic on their traffic-tangled, refuse-strewn street system. Alfred Ely 
Beach figured out a solution: move the pedestians below street level, accommodate 
them in comfortable cars, and propel the cars through pneumatic tubes. But then as 
now, a promising idea can run afoul of bureaucracy and politics, and Beach’s clever 
end run around these obstacles goes down in history—and in Corey’s delightful 
picture book—as an example of gleeful “Told you so!” vindication.
The main text traces, and an author’s note explicates, the outline of the 
subway story. Beach’s concept of a pneumatic-powered underground system for 
human passengers was floated and hailed at New York’s American Institute Fair in 
1867, but legal arcana made permission to realize the project unlikely. A smaller 
pneumatic mail tube system could be pushed through, though, and while Beach 
officially worked on the that project, a second clandestine excavation was underway, 
boring far beneath street level from its origin below Devlin’s Clothing Store, to its 
terminus nearly a hundred yards away. By early 1870, Beach’s demo car and station 
were a done deal, and a party of New York A-listers were invited to descend to a 
well-furnished subterranean waiting room to admire, and later board, the ride of 
the future. “All winter, while wagons slipped and slid on the slushy streets above, 
people poured into Devlin’s for the twenty-five cent ride. It looked as though Beach’s 
plan was going to work.” Inarguably, it did work, but pushback from street-level 
merchants (what, no foot traffic?) and the politicians they supported doomed any 
scaled-up expansion; it would be over three decades before New York was officially 
ready to accept an underground transit system. 
Corey’s narration brings plenty of sparkle to a story built on stealth and 
shadows. The account of Beach’s project is shaped to maximize the contrast between 
the sensible solution to a crying need, and the cumbersome and even shady forces 
holding back progress, with Beach solidly cast in the role of trickster hero. The nar-
rative flow—with assist from snippets of imagined public comment and precisely 
deployed upper-case font—is a readaloud tour de force: “From politicians to ped-
dlers, street sweepers to scientists, everyone had ideas. . . . ‘What about building 
double-decker roads?’ ‘Or a railway on stilts?’ But no matter how much everyone 
talk-talk-TALKED, nothing ever seemed to get off the ground.”
Obviously, not every child will race to embrace a historical vignette on 
invention stymied by bureaucracy, but rely on Red Nose Studio’s visual pizzazz 
to lure them through the turnstile. Fans of Jonah Winter and Red Nose’s Here 
400 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
Comes the Garbage Barge! (BCCB 4/10), another wry chronicle of bureaucratic 
ball-dropping, will immediately recognize the medium: photographs of intricately 
staged scenes comprising found and built objects and populated with posable 
mannequins, several of which boast interchangeable baked clay heads that can be 
switched out as facial expression demands. Any kids (or overinvolved parents) who 
have attempted dioramas for school assignments will recognize the gold standard 
here and bow down in the presence of genius. A warm glow illuminates the scene 
in which Beach hatches his idea, turning a crank on a Rube Goldbergian apparatus 
with one hand, while a black ink drawing of a tube-like subway car emerges from 
the crown of his top hat. Most scenes, though, emerge stealthily from eerie light 
in underground shadow, as grubby workers haul away carts of excavation debris 
in the dead of night, and prominent citizens scurry down a darkened stairway for 
the subway debut. 
In a spread on the inside of the dust jacket, Chris Sickel of Red Nose 
Studio shares with readers how he created his artwork from research to construc-
tion, and viewers will enjoy comparing his work-in-progress illustrations with the 
final product. That is . . . if technical services hasn’t tossed out or taped down the 
dust jacket. It might be worth procuring an extra copy for the poster art, or perhaps 
as an inspiration for multi-age library programming. (See p. 410 for publication 
information.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
Ahlberg, JessicA Fairy Tales for Mr. Barker; written and illus. by Jessica Ahl-
berg. Candlewick, 2016 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-8124-1 $15.99  
R 4-6 yrs
A hole in the book’s cover spotlights Mr. Barker, Lucy’s pet dog, and gets the ball 
rolling on the peek-through device that teases upcoming events as the story as it 
traverses multiple fairy tales. Lucy tries to read “Three Billy Goats Gruff” to Mr. 
Barker, but he’s distracted by a butterfly, which he chases out of Lucy’s bedroom 
window (another cutout). When Lucy follows him, they end up in another house, 
in which there are “a broken chair, three bowls of porridge, and a little golden-haired 
girl.” Lucy figures it out quickly (“Oh! I know where we are”), and a page turn 
confirms what audiences will have deduced: the pair has entered the Three Bears’ 
abode. And so begins a guessing game for both Lucy and the viewer: Goldilocks 
April 2016 • 401
leaves with Lucy through the cutout under the bears’ staircase and into . . . one 
of the Three Little Pigs’ houses. This tale-hopping continues until Lucy and Mr. 
Barker are accompanied by not only Goldilocks and the pigs but also Jack and 
Sleeping Beauty, until they all make it back into Lucy’s bedroom. The where-are-
they element is a captivating and effective device, and the die-cut windows provide 
visual links between the various locations. Within the daintily attractive watercolor 
illustrations, numerous referential details (the bears’ oven has three settings: too 
cold, just right, and too hot, and their shopping list includes “batteries for burglar 
alarm”) add to the fun. This is perfectly enjoyable on its own, but its entertainment 
value would be enhanced by pairing it with other, senior Ahlberg family fairy-tale 
favorites, such as The Jolly Postman or Each Peach Pear Plum (BCCB 7/79).  JH
Angleberger, Tom Inspector Flytrap; illus. by Cece Bell. Amulet, 2016 [112p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-0948-8 $14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-0965-8 $5.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 1-3
Flytrap—that’s Inspector Flytrap to you—may be a Venus Flytrap plant, but he 
doesn’t let his lack of mobility prevent him from investigating on behalf of the 
conned and bamboozled. With his trusty skateboard and helpful pushes from 
his goat friend Nina, Flytrap makes his way to the local art museum, where he 
discovers that the yellow blob on an unknown Da Vinci picture is really just an 
age-old booger. He helps a baker determine the origin of the giant, stinky shoe that 
has landed atop the bakery, but he takes off when Nina eats the top-secret cookie 
recipe. His final assignment (at least for this first installment in the series) leads 
to a mountain of trouble but also (possibly) the love of his life. Both the text and 
plentiful illustrations bounce with absurdity that will draw readers right in—the 
book opens with a picture of Flytrap himself, googly eyed, wide smile and teeth 
just sharp enough to be silly, in a portrait, the frame of which Nina is eating. The 
direct storytelling makes the episodic structure engaging but accessible, and the 
repetition both in the narration and the dialogue (“Big deal” is a common utter-
ance, especially by Nina) gives multiple opportunities to practice decoding skills. 
Black and white illustrations can be found on nearly every spread, helpfully giving 
context clues to readers while moving the story along. This will snare transitioning 
readers like Flytrap snags his lunch.  KQG
Arnold, elAnA K. Far from Fair. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-544-60227-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Despite her parents’ and little brother’s enthusiasm, rising seventh-grader Odette 
bitterly resents having to move her entire life into a camper and leave her home 
and friends behind. Even the compensatory dog her father gets her is an infuriating 
disappointment, a little mutt rather than the Labrador she’s longed for. A thousand 
miles of travel don’t really soften Odette’s stance, but when the family makes their 
first big stop, with Odette’s Grandma Sissy in Washington’s San Juan Islands, Odette 
is faced with a much bigger concern: her grandmother’s fatal illness and plan for a 
legal assisted death. Arnold, author of A Question of Miracles (BCCB 2/15), again 
accessibly tackles a challenging subject here. The first part of the book is spot-on 
in its characterization of Odette, who is legitimately upset about the upheaval in 
402 • The BulleTin
her life but hasn’t yet figured out that hanging onto her anger is only hurting her. 
Her grandmother’s passing is handled sensitively yet matter-of-factly, and while 
the shift to the assisted-death plot may initially seem quite a subject change, it’s 
actually an effective complementary exploration of the overall theme of dealing 
with powerlessness. As Grandma Sissy says, “You may feel powerless over what is 
happening to you right now . . . and you are right. You are powerless, sometimes. 
Sometimes things happen, and we can’t stop them from happening.” Odette’s tri-
umph is facing that truth while also recognizing things she does have some power 
to change (like making sure she sees the boy she likes before he leaves the island); 
the book’s triumph is exploring that truth while also acknowledging the adults 
could stand to give Odette a little more power. A tearjerker with a brain, this could 
prompt discussion not only of the right to die issue but also power and fairness.  DS
Arroyo, rAymond Will Wilder: The Relic of Perilous Falls. Crown, 2016 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53960-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53959-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53961-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Will Wilder thinks his summer is ruined when he’s required to 
volunteer in the local church garden. Strange things are aswim in the river that 
borders the church, though, and what starts as a few weeks of landscaping quickly 
turns into the adventure of a lifetime when Will is tricked into stealing the church’s 
prized relic on behalf of a demon. Now evil forces are rising, alligator-like monsters 
are attacking, and the river itself threatens to swallow the town. Desperate to set 
things right, Will turns to his seemingly crazy great-aunt Lucille, who explains his 
family’s legacy as protectors of the world’s religious treasures and Will’s own place in 
an ancient prophecy. This mildly didactic supernatural adventure offers some solid 
entertainment, with plenty of Bible-lore puzzles to solve, evil creatures to defeat, 
and lessons to learn. The plotting and pacing are solid, and the monsters leap from 
the page to please those who like a creepy scare. Unfortunately, Will is shallowly 
and inauthentically drawn, and his friends never rise above tired stereotypes; the 
story is likewise marred by occasionally awkward writing and very heavy-handed 
storytelling. Brumbach’s The Eye of Midnight (BCCB 3/16) is a more engaging family 
legacy saga, but those looking for old-fashioned boy-centered adventure with reli-
gious fervor may appreciate Will’s antics and look forward to planned sequels.  AM
Auxier, JonAThAn 
Sophie Quire and the Last Storyguard. 
Amulet, 
2016 [464p] (A Peter Nimble Adventure)
ISBN 978-1-4197-1747-5 $18.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 4-6
Sophie loves books and appreciates the magic that they can contain, and now she’s 
been handed a truly extraordinary tome that will literally change everything. In 
this sequel to Peter Nimble and His Fantastic Eyes (BCCB 10/11), Peter and the 
fantastic Sir Tode (a human/cat/horse hybrid created by a hag’s curse) continue to 
brazen their way through danger and adventure, and this time they are sent to find 
Sophie, whose book-mending abilities are unmatched. Sophie is already battling 
Inquisitor Prigg, who is obsessed with ridding the town of nonsense, but soon she 
is swept into a truly epic battle to find four hidden books, avenge the murder of her 
April 2016 • 403
mother, battle a terrifying creature, and—of course—save the world. With Auxier’s 
exceptional character development, even minor characters display vulnerability, 
interesting quirks, and depth. The major characters, even the villains, shine, with 
layers revealed through actions and very natural dialogue. While the end is just 
a bit too celebratory about the magical powers of the written word, that’s easily 
forgivable, and it is likely that many readers will be just as fervently adamant about 
the same point.  AS
Avi The Most Important Thing: Stories about Sons, Fathers, and Grandfa-
thers. Candlewick, 2016 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-8111-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
In seven short stories, Avi explores bonds spoken and unspoken among sons, fa-
thers, grandsons, and grandfathers. The collection opens with “Dream Catcher,” 
an examination of how the traumas of war can echo through a family, affecting 
each generation in a different way. Charlie finds his own version of courage but it’s 
one that contradicts his father’s in “Beat Up.” The dynamics between a grandson 
and his grandfather shift in “The Amalfi Duo,” and Ryan approaches his mother’s 
engagement pragmatically, requiring an interview and several references for the man 
who will be his stepfather in “Tighty-Whities or Boxers?” Avi offers a multifaceted 
view of the way boys and men relate to each other, painting neither a perfectly rosy 
nor dreadfully bleak picture, and he gives space for each character’s personality, 
making it clear that the relationships are weighted both with history and the boys’ 
and men’s temperaments. Few of the stories offer complete resolution, instead of-
fering a snapshot of an ongoing and shifting connection.  KQG
bedford, mArTyn Twenty Questions for Gloria. Lamb, 2016 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53940-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53939-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53941-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Gloria hasn’t realized what a rut she was in until Uman walks into her classroom. 
His gentle yet effective way of bending even the most authoritarian teachers to his 
way of thinking intrigues fifteen-year-old Gloria, causing her to downplay the fact 
that their demeanor toward Uman only changes once they’ve consulted their notes 
about him. The real intrigue, however, comes from the fact that he has singled her 
out for his attention over all the prettier and more popular girls, including her best 
friend. Before long she is skipping school with Uman, lying to her parents, and 
finally, running away with him to one of England’s inviting Scilly Isles. The story 
of their relationship emerges through a narrative Gloria constructs for the police 
after she returns without Uman; they and her parents think she was forced to go 
against her will, while she insists that she was in love with him and that all of their 
decisions, except the one to return, were mutual. Gloria’s teenage restlessness and 
longing are iconic, and British author Bedford highlights this by having Gloria and 
Uman draw on Kerouac for inspiration. Their story also has realistic and modern 
elements as the pair encounters racist violence (Uman’s origins are South Asian) 
and the unpleasant choice of having to steal or starve. While Uman’s backstory is 
as compelling as it is horrific, he is ultimately a less developed character, acting as 
404 • The BulleTin
foil and impetus to Gloria’s epiphany that growing up doesn’t have to mean giving 
up but that her choices must be her own.  KC 
behrens, rebeccA Summer of Lost and Found. Aladdin, 2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5896-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5902-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Nell Dare knows there’s something amiss between her parents. Why else has her 
writer father left the country, and her scientist mother taken Nell along on a research 
trip to Roanoke Island, North Carolina? While Nell ponders the domestic mystery, 
she becomes enmeshed in the historical conundrum that surrounds Roanoke Island, 
namely the disappearance of sixteenth-century colonists who left a single tree carv-
ing as a hint to why they abandoned their settlement and where they went. Local 
girl Lila is a pushy know-it-all who tries to enlist Nell as her assistant in looking 
for paranormal traces of colonists; Nell, however, prefers to spend her time with 
Ambrose, a historical reenactor who is trying to solve the disappearance of his own 
father. Readers will figure out long before Nell does that Ambrose is the very ghost 
Lila would give her eye teeth to interview, but that doesn’t diminish the pleasure of 
following Nell’s summer of untangling puzzles in the company of new earthly and 
unearthly acquaintances. Behrens takes some broad liberties in offering fictional 
solutions to some of Roanoke’s mystery, so her audience would be well advised to 
peruse her endnotes and some of her appended resources to sort out factual details. 
For middle-graders finding their own summer vacations less than exciting, Nell’s 
investigation will be a pleasant diversion.  EB
bell, cece Chuck and Woodchuck; written and illus. by Cece Bell. Candlewick, 
2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7524-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
First-grader Caroline and her classmates are so amused by the woodchuck that fel-
low student Chuck brings for show-and-tell that the class and teacher decide that 
Woodchuck should join them every day. When things go wrong for Caroline, it’s 
Woodchuck to the rescue—or is Woodchuck just acting on behalf of shy Chuck? 
After all, it is Chuck’s hat that Woodchuck lends to Caroline when her ears get cold 
at recess, Chuck’s cupcake that Woodchuck gives to Caroline when she drops hers, 
and Chuck’s painting that Woodchuck presents to her when her own painting gets 
ruined. When Caroline forgets her lines in the class play, it’s Chuck to the rescue, 
finally, and it’s Chuck who offers to walk home with her. The gently budding 
friendship (and perhaps a bit of romance?) between Chuck and Caroline has a quiet 
appeal that is balanced nicely with Woodchuck’s amusing antics. Caroline’s casual 
narration is credibly primary-grade (“Woodchuck started playing with some of our 
show-and-tell stuff! It was hilarious!”), as is Chuck’s shyness. The ink and digital 
illustrations are clear and crisply composed, and the heads of the child figures are 
entertainingly geometric: Caroline’s bespectacled head with its brown wedge hairdo 
is triangular, while lanky Chuck’s bullet head sports short ginger fringe on top, and 
another classmate’s buzz cut gives his head a rectangular appearance. Woodchuck is 
the visual star, though, with his rotund brown body, widely spaced eyes, big nose, 
and endearing buckteeth and rosy cheeks. Pull this out to refresh a Groundhog Day 
story session or share it as a sweet-but-not-sticky friendship story.  JH
April 2016 • 405
berry, Julie The Passion of Dolssa. Viking, 2016 [496p]
ISBN 978-0-451-46992-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
By 1241, the Albigensian Crusade is over by decades, but the Church remains 
vigilant in Provensa (now Provence), stamping out any wisp of heresy with swords 
and flames. This threat does not stop eighteen-year-old Dolssa from preaching 
the word of “her beloved . . . Senhor Jhesus” in an effort to heal the minds and 
bodies broken by the Crusade. Meanwhile, Botille and her sisters lead a simple life 
in Bajas, a poor but close-knit seaside town. The two come together when Botille 
finds Dolssa nearly dead after the Inquisitors burned her mother and chased her 
through the countryside. Botille and her sisters refuse to consign Dolssa to her fate 
even after they realize the danger she brings with her. The story is told on several 
levels—introduced by a Dominican historian and then an older Botille, and then 
narrated by Dolssa, Botille, and Lucien, the friar pursuing Dolssa; the multiple 
points of view give completeness to the story, offering context for readers unfamiliar 
with the times. As two people of faith, Lucien and Dolssa offer startlingly similar 
qualities: a devout and fervent belief in their God, the break in their faith when it 
seems to fail them, and an ultimate reconciliation, though Dolssa finds hers through 
peace, and Lucien his through further violence. Botille offers an alternative to such 
faith: she does not know if she believes in God, but she believes in Dolssa and her 
goodness and that is enough for Botille. There’s a fair amount of setup before the 
threads of the story come together, but Botille’s narration immerses the reader in the 
warmth of her family, the beauty the setting, and camaraderie of her community. 
This is a skillfully crafted and tenderly told story of faith and friendship tested. 
An extensive note about the author’s research and a glossary are included.  KQG
brown, PeTer The Wild Robot; written and illus. by Peter Brown. Little, 
2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-38199-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-38201-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Roz has no idea how lucky she is: she is the only robot out of 500 to wash onto an 
island shore intact after a ship sinks, and then she is accidentally activated by ot-
ters playing around her. After some trial and error, Roz determines how to survive 
on the island, and she eventually finds a purpose when her literal misstep means 
a baby goose is left without a family. Roz settles into her role as a helper not only 
of the gosling but also the other (talking) wild animals when a severe winter leaves 
them all unprepared. In return, she also learns to accept help and to realize the 
limitations of self-sufficiency. The gentle pathos, as Roz moves through existing 
to living to loving to sacrificing her freedom (eventually folks come looking for 
their valuable robot) to protect those with whom she has bonded, is compelling 
and poignant. The scenes of goose and robot finding their way to an unbreakable 
bond are sentimental but never treacly, and the moments of Roz completely failing 
to interpret a situation correctly (she is a robot on an uninhabited island, after all, 
and learning animal languages is not part of her core programming) add levity. The 
illustrations from Caldecott honoree Brown are deceptively simple and highly ef-
fective, highlighting emotional or dramatic moments within the text: a scene where 
Roz is a tiny figure perched atop an enormous mountain speaks to her complete 
406 • The BulleTin
isolation as well as words could. This is an unusual book that should be a hit with 
fans of robots, talking animals, or survival stories.  AS
burnhAm, molly b. Teddy Mars: Almost a Winner; illus. by Trevor Spencer. Te-
gen/HarperCollins, 2016 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227813-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227815-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Whether eating copious amounts of marshmallows, breaking eggs with their toes, 
or gobbling down raw garlic (and smelling the aftereffects), earnest Teddy Mars and 
his best friends are indiscriminately intent on setting a new world record. Trying to 
make it into the Guinness Book of World Records helps Teddy carve out a niche for 
himself in his overflowing family, where his five older sisters and younger brother, 
whom he has fittingly nicknamed “The Destructor,” all compete for attention and 
resources. When his fourth-grade class gets in on the record-breaking action, things 
get complicated, and the Guinness Book quest begins to lose its luster; thank goodness 
Teddy has the school’s Inventors’ Fair to focus on. The usual suspects—obnoxious 
siblings, fallings out with friends, a cantankerous, elderly neighbor—are all in the 
mix here, but Teddy’s fresh perspective, aided by spot-on middle-grade humor, 
keeps the story relatable and enjoyable. While (spoiler alert) he may not win the 
Inventors’ Fair, Teddy and friends will win over readers in no time flat—so prepare 
to buy the sequels.  AA
busby, cylin The Nine Lives of Jacob Tibbs; illus. by Gerald Kelley. Knopf, 
2016 263p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51124-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51123-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51125-3 $10.99  
R Gr. 5-7
Yellow tabby cat Jacob Tibbs is born aboard a packet ship in 1847, son of the ship’s 
fixture, Mrs. Tibbs, who is valued by Captain Natick not only for her mousing skill 
but also for her weather-forecasting abilities. When Natick ignores one of Mrs. 
Tibbs’ warnings, the results are dire—a young sailor and Mrs. Tibbs both die at sea, 
and Natick is seriously injured. Young Jacob must then rise to the role of ship’s cat 
amid increasing discord amongst the sailors, until an attempted mutiny results in 
Natick, his second and third mates, the cook, and Jacob being cast adrift. Eventu-
ally, they are rescued by a passing ship, but when that vessel’s duplicitous captain 
hands them over to British authorities as mutineers, Jacob is captured and caged 
by a man who wants to profit by selling him. Jacob’s narration effectively conveys 
the historical period, and realistic elements of life at sea lend credibility to a story 
about peril; the formal language and tone are streamlined and smooth, making this 
accessible to modern readers. Occasional monochromatic illustrations add texture 
and atmosphere to the story, and a brief author’s note explains a bit more about 
ships’ cats. Feline lovers will be drawn into this seaworthy escapade by Jacob, and 
avid adventure and historical fiction readers will also enjoy the voyage.  JH
April 2016 • 407
byrne, michAel Lottery Boy. Candlewick, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7996-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Bully and his devoted dog, Jack, have been living on the London 
streets for months, ever since Bully’s mother died; running away seemed a better 
option than living with his mum’s selfish and abrasive boyfriend. When Bully finds 
a lottery ticket he bought for his mother, which happens to be the big winner, it 
looks like his fortunes are changing. In his eagerness, though, he makes the grave 
mistake of telling some of his street acquaintances that he’s won. From then on, 
it’s a race for Bully to find a way to cash in his ticket before either the claim time 
of five days is up or the nasty local thug, Janks, steals it from him. Bully and Jack 
have some very close calls indeed, but chance encounters with a delivery driver 
and with a kind family eventually lead to his salvation, even if he ultimately will 
have to wait until he’s of age to receive his money. The urgency of Bully’s plight 
(underscored by a frequently appearing countdown of the remaining time before 
the ticket expires) and the suspenseful pursuit by greedy evildoers make this a grip-
ping page-turner. Byrne doesn’t shy away from credibly portraying the multitude 
of hardships faced by a kid on the streets, and lowlife Janks is truly vicious (he not 
only kidnaps Bully but puts the injured Jack into a dogfight). Bully himself is not 
always likable, but it’s clear that it is his heartbreak and his street experiences that 
have made him that way. Fans of Cottrell Boyce’s Millions (BCCB 7/04) may find 
similar, if grittier, appeal in this nail-biter.  JH
cAlAme, don Dan versus Nature. Candlewick, 2016 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7071-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
After watching a string of his mom’s disastrous relationships go down in flames, 
nerdy Dan is distressed to hear that she is engaged to Hank, a dentist and self-
proclaimed outdoorsman. When Dan’s mom arranges a wilderness camping trip 
as a bonding experience for Hank and Dan, Dan’s friend Charlie joins them, and 
the two boys put into play their elaborate plans for relationship sabotage. Armed 
with a computerized baby doll with realistic bodily functions, illegally procured 
ipecac, and doe-in-heat urine among other noxious things, Charlie turns Dan into 
a human Petri dish of offputting grossness, even after Dan has decided that maybe 
Hank isn’t so bad after all; in fact, Dan would rather spend his energy impressing 
Penelope, the pretty girl who has joined the trip with her randy mother. Stomach-
turning hijinks follow, but so also does real danger when the guys get attacked by 
a bear and separated from their guide, a situation that eventually forces honesty 
that could derail the relationship from Hank’s end as well as Dan’s. The heavy-duty 
grossness, bawdy jokes, and the sesquipedalian banter between Charlie and Penelope 
make for a boy-friendly, nerd-friendly comedy that is more than a few notches above 
realism but never tips over into straight-up fantasy. The heartfelt confessions are not 
overly heartfelt, keeping any hint of sentimentalism at bay while acknowledging 
that there are good men out there who are worth a chance. This is thus the next 
step in the developmental sequence that tracks from Captain Underpants through 
the Diary of a Wimpy Kid and Guys Read series.  KC
408 • The BulleTin
choKshi, roshAni The Star-Touched Queen. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-08457-4 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-08548-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Maya’s father, the king of embattled Bharata, comes to seventeen-year-old Maya 
and asks her to promise herself in marriage to one of the rebels and then kill 
herself to save her people. Before she can swallow the poison, however, a strange 
young man bats it away and convinces her to choose him as her husband, and they 
then escape the suddenly besieged palace. Amar is no rebel leader but the ruler of 
Akaran, a land that lies past the Night Bazaar and in the Otherworld—fairy-tale 
places that Maya no longer believes in until she sees them for herself as they travel. 
Amar promises she will rule over the world, but first she must hone magical skills 
she did not know she possessed. Ornate, intricate prose packed with vivid imagery 
immerses readers in the heat of Bharata, the strangeness of the Night Bazaar, and 
the barrenness of Akaran. Chokshi pulls from elements of Indian folklore, and the 
creatures and places, described in precise but poetic detail, are as fascinating as they 
are terrifying. Maya is a formidable and refreshingly ambitious heroine—she doesn’t 
shrink from power but yearns for it, and she marries Amar because he can offer it. 
This epic tale spans from the starry heavens to the depths of the underworld, and 
it offers a grand, Eastern-inspired readalike for fans of Taylor’s Daughter of Smoke 
and Bone (BCCB 9/11).  KQG
churnin, nAncy The William Hoy Story: How a Deaf Baseball Player Changed 
the Game; illus. by Jez Tuya. Whitman, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-9192-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-7 yrs
Despite practice and determination, William Hoy did not make it onto the baseball 
team at the Ohio State School for the Deaf, but the opportunity to play on his local 
team presented itself when a foul ball came flying his way while he was working 
and he hurled it back to the men playing baseball. A little lip reading, some pencil 
and paper communication, and undeniable talent got William a place on that local 
team, followed by a spot in the minor leagues in Oshkosh, Wisconsin in 1886. But 
teammates as well as opponents and fans gave him grief, shielding their lips from 
view and laughing at mistakes made because he couldn’t hear the ump’s calls on 
the field. After he convinced an umpire of the advantage of arm signals and hand 
motions (some based on American Sign Language), everyone seemed to benefit, 
including the fans, who could now follow the calls well before the era of stadium 
loudspeakers. This feel-good story is simply told, and it will be fairly easy to fol-
low even for youngsters unfamiliar with baseball. Unfortunately, relying on Tuya’s 
retro cartoonish artwork to help chart Hoy’s career is another matter. Notes and 
an appended timeline track Hoy’s moves among teams, but the uniforms depicted 
at highlight moments don’t always correlate with the correct team, as, for example, 
when he is shown sliding onto base in the minor league Oshkosh uniform under the 
lines, “In his first year in the majors, he led the National League in stolen bases.” 
Children who don’t notice or can overlook these visual inconsistencies will enjoy 
meeting an old timer worth knowing, and they may even want to work some ASL 
signaling into their own playground activities.  EB
April 2016 • 409
cole, henry The Somewhat True Adventures of Sammy Shine; written and illus. 
by Henry Cole. Peachtree, 2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-56145-866-0 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-3
Sammy’s happy in his cage, living a quiet life as a pet mouse, but if he stayed like 
that it wouldn’t make for much of a book. Instead, readers see him kidnapped by 
his owner’s brother and stuffed into a remote-control plane that crashes, landing 
him out in the wild for the first time in his sheltered life. Sammy at first just wants 
to get home, but he quickly realizes that life offers much more adventure than 
just being fed on a regular schedule, and even if he makes it back, he won’t be the 
same languid little guy. Of course, no mousey can go it alone, so Sammy acquires 
a motley crew of animal allies who want to help him defeat some evil weasels and 
rats and make his way back to his home. It’s clear that Sammy’s never in any real 
danger, given the cheerfully warm illustrations, but there’s still plenty of tension 
to keep young readers in suspense. The cozy drawings, delicate and inviting, add 
much to the text, offering contextual clues that flesh out the story. Kids drawn to 
whimsy and light adventure will find this fills the bill.  AS
colossAl, eric Feasts of Fury; written and illus. by Eric Colossal. Amulet, 
2016 [128p] (Rutabaga the Adventure Chef)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-1658-4 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-1659-1 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Rutabaga (a human) and Pot (an animate pot) return for another round of ridicu-
lous adventures following their first outing in Rutabaga the Adventure Chef (BCCB 
5/15) and travel the seemingly endless land of Colossal’s creation, seeking new 
ingredients and hoping to share amazing food with all they meet. Pot is absurdly 
personable, given that he is a cauldron with no facial features, and he gets more of 
a role in this graphic novel than in the earlier one, sharing adventures while also 
serving as cooking vessel, beloved companion, and hero. Rutabaga, all bluster and 
enthusiasm, is equally endearing, resulting in a duo one can’t help but root for, 
especially when they face dangerous gubblins who can’t be defeated by brawn but 
might be outmatched when it comes to brains. Lively illustrations (which will be 
in color in the bound book), liberal use of exclamation points and font changes 
to emphasize exaggerated points, and manga-style facial expressions keep things 
pitched at high drama, as Rutabaga seems to react to deathly encounters and minor 
disappointments with equal amounts of surprise. As with the earlier novel, there 
are several actual recipes throughout that foodie kids can try, with three specifically 
featured at the end that would be appropriate even for young cooks. While there 
isn’t a lot new added to this second encounter, fans will still enjoy the chance visit 
again with Ru and Pot.  AS
410 • The BulleTin
connor, leslie All Rise for the Honorable Perry T. Cook. Tegen/HarperCollins, 
2016 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-06-233346-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
The Blue River Co-ed Correctional Facility is hardly a place most people (even the 
inmates) would call home, but for Perry T. Cook it’s all he’s known for twelve years, 
and frankly, he doesn’t find it all that horrible. He gets to stay with his mom, Jessica 
(convicted of vehicular manslaughter twelve years ago), hang out with Big Ed in 
the cafeteria where Eggy-Mon serves up rhymes with his rations, and improve his 
running time with Mr. Halsey. He goes to a regular middle school with his best 
friend Zoey; unfortunately, when Tom VanLeer, Zoey’s new(ish) stepdad and lawyer, 
gets wind of the arrangement, he makes it his mission to get Perry out of Blue River 
and into a “real” home (the VanLeers’ in this case) until Jessica’s impending parole 
meeting. Perry’s a quiet, thoughtful kid, and he tries to use Big Ed’s “Win/Win” 
model to get though this awful predicament; he even makes an effort to understand 
VanLeer and his reason for taking Perry away from Big River. Connor certainly 
paints a rosy picture of life on the inside, but Perry’s school project, in which he 
interviews the inmates, portrays a host of people in varying shades of gray as they lay 
out their crimes, their motivations, and their guilt or lack thereof. Perry’s narration 
is heartfelt and spirited, while the interspersed third-person narration focusing on 
Jessica is almost agonizing as she moves from despair to hope to shame and back 
again. Not one of these characters smacks of type or cardboard, and readers will 
long remember the folks of Blue River after its gates have closed.  KQG
corey, shAnA The Secret Subway; illus. by Red Nose Studio. Schwartz & Wade, 
2016 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97071-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87071-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 2-5
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 399.
cronin, doreen Bloom; illus. by David Small. Dlouhy/Atheneum, 2016 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0620-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-6005-7 $10.99  
R 6-8 yrs
The glass fairy kingdom where Bloom lives is beautiful, but its residents are dis-
missive of her messy, muddy approach to magic, so Bloom takes her untidy ways 
(and her magic) elsewhere. After Bloom leaves, though, things fall apart—quite 
literally—until the kingdom is “held together by duct tape, glue, and peasants.” The 
king and queen seek out Bloom for help, only to be perplexed and insulted when 
she presents them with a bucket of mud. They then send meek Genevieve, a maid 
and “ordinary girl,” to do the job. The girl soon catches on to Bloom’s proposed 
solution—using the mud to make bricks with which to rebuild the kingdom—and, 
after some instruction, practice, and reassurance by Bloom, the not-so-ordinary 
Genevieve returns to fix the kingdom: “She knocked on the palace door and shat-
tered it to pieces ‘I am here!’ she shouted.” This is an enjoyable original fairy tale, 
and young listeners will relish the young heroine’s triumph over her royal elders. 
Genevieve’s literal shattering of the glass ceiling (okay, a door) tips slightly toward 
April 2016 • 411
didacticism, but it’s a metaphor worth discussing, and while the ending is abrupt, 
it is also joyful. Small’s detailed ink and watercolor art balances the tidy restraint of 
the kingdom with the casual sprawl of the sprightly Bloom and the natural world. 
The evolving appearance of the auburn-haired Genevieve (she grows muddier and 
less demure in proportion to her increasing skill and confidence) also effectively 
reflects her growing empowerment. Enjoy this as it stands or use it as a complement 
to Munsch’s The Paper Bag Princess.  JH
cronn-mills, KirsTin Original Fake; illus. by E. Eero Johnson. Putnam, 
2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17326-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Introverted, artistic Frankie is the odd one out in his family of performers. Then 
he’s approached by Rory, the object of his longstanding crush, and her cousin, 
David, a skirt-wearing freshman, to help with a clandestine project that requires 
his ride—a delivery truck. Frankie is over the moon to find out that these two are 
the niece and nephew of Uncle Epic, a stealth street artist that Frankie idolizes, and 
he joins them in working for Uncle Epic. Frankie’s life takes off at a dizzying pace 
that is never more than one spiral away from spinning out of control; public art 
becomes his means to find friendship, make a social statement, and exact revenge. 
Both Rory and David seek to combine work with romance, and Stonewall Award-
winner Cronn-Mills takes a cannily normalizing approach to Frankie’s responses 
to the cousins’ flirtations: while he hooks up with Rory even though he knows it 
will lead nowhere good, he also accepts David’s advances with equanimity and a 
mild curiosity. Rory turns out to be the villain of the piece, at once fiercely loyal 
to David and to Frankie and yet possessed of a stunning moral indifference to the 
consequences of her actions. The overall plot is great fun, but additional pleasure 
can be found in the details; both Cronn-Mills’ prose and Johnson’s interspersed 
graphic sequences play up the sense of a life committed to artistic hyperbole. Un-
like the flash robbers who figure in the book, Epic and Frankie stay carefully on 
the misdemeanor side of creating public displays, providing subtle instruction 
for those who will undoubtedly be inspired to go public with their own art.  KC 
dAvis, TAniTA s. Peas and Carrots. Knopf, 2016 279p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51282-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51281-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51283-0 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Dess and Hope are both fifteen, but that’s where the similarities end. Hope is 
African American, the beloved child of strong-minded parents who’ve been taking 
in foster children for years; Dess is white, a veteran of the system, whose violent, 
drug-running father and drug-using mother eventually ended up in prison. Now 
Dess has been placed in Hope’s home, and the bitterly defensive girl immediately 
alienates Hope with her sharp tongue at home and her high achievement and 
popularity at school. This is an interesting slant on the foster-care issue, making 
clear that class can be as or more significant than race in certain situations. The 
complexities of family, with Dess’ biracial little brother long a fixture in Hope’s 
home but also delighted with the company of his beloved big sister, are wisely and 
fully displayed. The narration alternates between Dess’ first person account and 
412 • The BulleTin
third-person focalization through Hope, which rather buries Hope and makes Dess 
by far the more vivid character (unintentionally apt, given that that’s Hope’s fear of 
what Dess is doing to her). In fact, Dess is a little exaggerated, though pleasingly 
stereotype-defying, in her academic excellence and naturally beautiful voice, but it’s 
additionally frustrating when those details get puzzlingly tossed aside in favor of a 
murky and unrewarding subplot about her father’s criminal activities. The gradual 
détente of the girls is gratifyingly realistic, though, and readers will be relieved to 
see Dess landing on her feet.  DS
dicAmillo, KATe Raymie Nightingale. Candlewick, 2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-8117-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
It’s June of 1975, and ten-year-old Raymie Clarke has a plan: she will learn to baton 
twirl so that she can win the Little Miss Central Florida Tire pageant, which will get 
her picture in the paper, which will cause her father to realize he should not have 
run away with his dental hygienist and to return home. Baton twirling lessons fail 
educationally, but they do introduce her to hard-nosed Beverly Tapinski and elfin 
Louisiana Elefante, her fellow twirlers. Soon the three girls are comrades (or, as 
Louisiana insists, “The Three Rancheros”), working together to retrieve the Florence 
Nightingale biography Raymie left at the nursing home (she was going to read aloud 
to the residents until one scared her) and, more daringly, to find Louisiana’s beloved 
cat, who was, according to Louisiana’s grandmother, rehomed at the Very Friendly 
Animal Center. DiCamillo writes with her usual easygoing delicacy; the portray-
als of the girls are swift, telling, and gentle, with elliptical hints at Beverly’s and 
especially Louisiana’s homelife challenges (lack of money clearly limits Louisiana’s 
diet). The blurring of the line between the colorful and the fantastical (the return 
of Louisa’s cat has no earthly explanation) makes the adventures atmospheric, but 
the guiding principle is always the characters’ emotional truth. While DiCamillo 
fans will certainly enjoy reading this on their own, it’s also excellent classroom 
material, encouraging kids to stretch their decoding—and also to realize that even 
if you don’t get the outcome you want, it’s still possible to find closure.  DS
dumAs, firoozeh It Ain’t So Awful, Falafel. Clarion, 2016 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-544-61231-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Zomorod has bounced back and forth between California and her native Iran more 
that a few times by 1978 due to her father’s employment as an engineer consultant in 
the oil industry. On this trip to the U.S. she reinvents herself as “Cindy,” determined 
that middle school will find her Americanized and mainstream. Good luck with 
that, since her parents keep her on a short leash, rising middle school friendships 
seem to have already been solidified, and her one potential pal from the summer 
throws her over as school opens. Things turn around when she makes a real friend 
in Carolyn Williams, who takes a genuine interest in her background, has a warm 
and welcoming family, and is as serious about academic success as Cindy has been 
raised to be. Geopolitics upsets this happy trajectory, though, when Iran’s shah is 
deposed, an Islamic regime comes into power, and American hostages are held in 
the embassy in Iran; back in the U.S., Cindy’s father is suddenly out of work and 
the family regarded as pariahs by some of the community. Cindy’s narration of 
April 2016 • 413
events is self-deprecatingly funny, but it doesn’t mask the very real bigotry suffered 
by her family and the very real fears her family members share about going back to 
an Iran that has officially turned against Western culture and values. Context for 
Iranian internal politics and the hostage crisis are embedded within a few chapters, 
and what these plainspoken inclusions lack in grace, they make up for in utility. 
Even readers who just glance at the trending stories on Facebook will be able to 
supply a contemporary parallel.  EB
duyvis, corinne On the Edge of Gone. Amulet, 2016 [464p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1903-5 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
An approaching comet jeopardizes the Earth, but residents such as sixteen-year-old, 
autistic Denise Lichtveld, her transgender older sister, and their drug-addict mother 
didn’t rate a place on the rockets departing for distant planets. Instead, Denise and 
her mom are grateful for the opportunity to ride out the initial impact in the one 
ship in Amsterdam that hasn’t left yet. Denise pitches in as the passengers work to 
save the ship from debris, tsunamis, and the resulting flood, and she eventually earns 
a place for herself and the sister she feared lost. A happy family reunion brings more 
than she bargained for when her sister pushes for the ship to abandon escape plans 
and instead help earthbound survivors. With its strong post-apocalyptic storyline, 
this novel offers an edge-of-your-seat survival plot and a compelling narrative. It 
subtly raises questions about the value of a human life without didacticism or easy 
answers, and the diverse cast, including a biracial heroine and characters of various 
races, religions, and sexualities, gives the novel real-world authenticity and impact. 
Duyvis deftly balances broader social elements with a powerful family story, as De-
nise navigates fraught relationships with both her mother and sister, and a moving 
coming-of-age story, as she manages not just to survive but to flourish. Denise is 
a sympathetic character, who comes to terms with her limitations without giving 
others room to pity her, and readers will appreciate her snarky attitude toward 
those who seek to define her by her autism. A worthy readalike for North’s Starglass 
(BCCB 10/13), this near-future scifi will gain fans amongst those who want a story 
that is simultaneously heartbreaking and thought-provoking.  AM
félix, lucie Apples and Robins; written and illus. by Lucie Félix; tr. from the 
French. Chronicle, 2016 56p
ISBN 978-1-4521-3264-8 $16.99  
R* 3-6 yrs
In this clever story that layers die-cut pages to make simple graphic images, “the 
apples hang high on my tree, just out of reach.” Fortunately, “all you need for a 
ladder are six rectangles: five short” (a separated stack of small white rectangles on 
a scarlet background) “and one long” (the following white page’s die-cut rectangle, 
which overleaves the red-bordered small rectangles to create a red ladder on a white 
background). And so the art continues to create shapes as a bird takes an interest 
in the worm in the apple, a storm shakes the apples and the bird’s house to the 
ground, and then the apples are collected in a basket and the birdhouse is repaired; 
winter sees a little girl eating the stored apples and watching the robin through 
the window, and spring sees the promise of robin eggs and flowering apple trees. 
The book politely provides some genuine plot momentum, in a folkloric way, even 
though it’s the art that’s really the point. And deservedly so: the die-cut creations 
414 • The BulleTin
are unusually ingenious, playing games both additive and subtractive and switch-
ing foreground and background as they reinterpret prior images. Simple planes of 
digital color, with mostly just one or two elements against a white or contrasting 
background, keep the focus on the patterns. The shapes are abstract enough in this 
French import that U.S. youngsters may not notice that the robin is the very differ-
ent European bird (though the different eggshell color may require some explana-
tion), and they’ll certainly recognize the familiar elements and tropes of apple and 
worm. This could be an intriguing way to talk about geometry as well as art, and 
it’ll also be an entertaining early brain-tickler to share on the lap or in a group.  DS
fogliAno, Julie When Green Becomes Tomatoes: Poems for All Seasons; illus. by 
Julie Morstad. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2016 [56p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-852-1 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Perhaps known best for her picture-book collaboration with Erin Stead (And Then 
It’s Spring, BCCB 3/12), author Fogliano turns here to a longer work of free verse, 
with four seasonal sections sporting a dozen imagery-rich poems apiece. Verses ob-
serve details ranging from flora to food about the seasons in small, delicate entries, 
some only a few lines (“just like a tiny, blue hello/ a crocus blooming/ in the snow”) 
and some longer. The verse gets a little repetitively gauzy at times, but it can also 
rise to the bijou clarity of Valerie Worth (All the Small Poems, BCCB 2/95), and it 
picks up energy in the Fall section’s poems about pumpkins and waddling ducks. 
Morstad’s gouache and pencil crayon art balances soft textures and crisp edges; a 
cast of children, with the main focus on a toasty-skinned, straight-banged girl, 
offers a pleasing combination of contemplation and action as the seasons roll on. 
The poems are utterly suitable to reading aloud as well as alone, and they could be 
used for a lyrical readers theater, perhaps in combination with Sidman’s Red Sings 
from Treetops (BCCB 3/09).  DS
freedmAn, russell We Will Not Be Silent: The White Rose Student Resistance Move-
ment That Defied Adolf Hitler. Clarion, 2016 [112p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-544-22379-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-9
The five children of Robert and Magdalene Scholl, coming of age in Ulm, Germany 
as Hitler rose to power, did not initially share their father’s distaste for the dictator 
and his Reich. Caught up in the allure of youth group activities and a bit of natural 
parental defiance, the elder siblings joined the Hitler Youth organizations with an 
enthusiasm that quickly diminished when the reality of criticism, censorship, and 
conformity kicked in. Although the siblings fulfilled their labor and military obliga-
tions, eldest son Hans focused on medical school and fourth child Sophie set her 
sight on university education. By the time Sophie reached the University of Munich 
in 1942, Europe was engulfed in war, Hans had formed a resistance cell called the 
White Rose, and public criticism of Hitler and his policies was a near-guaranteed 
death sentence. Sophie nonetheless joined her brother in distributing pamphlets 
so incendiary in their critique that the siblings became the target of a government 
manhunt, were captured, and were executed; their martyrdom ultimately incited 
others to join the resistance. Although working in a more traditional nonfiction 
format than Hoose’s interview-based The Boys Who Challenged Hitler (BCCB 7/15), 
April 2016 • 415
Freedman achieves the same goal: to convey to adolescent readers how passion and 
disregard for personal safety, so often critiqued by adults as youthful recklessness, 
put students at the forefront of effective resistance that their elders were loathe to 
undertake. The double-columned text speeds by under Freedman’s compelling 
narration, and the reader-friendly layout features wide leading and one or more 
generously sized photographs on each spread. An index, source notes, and a selected 
bibliography are included.  EB
grAu, sheilA Dr. Critchlore’s School for Minions: Gorilla Tactics; illus. by Joe 
Sutphin. Amulet, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1371-2 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Since earning his spot in the Junior Henchman Training Program (in Dr. Critchlore’s 
School for Minions, BCCB 6/15), Runt has found life more hectic than ever. Aside 
from the opposing school’s trained gorillas, Girl Explorers who devour flesh, and a 
mystery around a Great Library, there’s also . . . a fashion show to put on. Critchlore 
has decided that the best way to save the school is to impress the Sirens, and the 
best way to do that is with fashion. Runt is a fabulous narrator, as his bumbling 
but systematic approach to lining up his problems and trying to resolve them keeps 
readers on track through this endearingly ridiculous plot. He is also amusingly inept 
during key moments, and many readers will sympathize with his failings, as when 
he fills the gift bags with things preteen boys might enjoy but would likely horrify 
adult women. Runt’s still cursed to die soon and still searching for his mysterious 
identity, but he’s keeping busy before he kicks the bucket. It’s a shame that some of 
his best friends get less page space in this sequel, but this continues to be a strongly 
diverse (even though we’re talking magical creatures, there’s a nice mix of cultures, 
skin tones, and personality types represented), clever, and high quality series that 
stands out amid the deluge of middle-school books about monsters. Clever chapter 
headings quoting minion and overlord philosophy and elegant illustrations don’t 
impact the central plot but add effective additional flavor notes. A school map 
provides a handy reference.  AS
grunberg, greg Dream Jumper: Nightmare Escape; by Greg Grunberg and Lucas 
Turnbloom; illus. by Lucas Turnbloom. Graphix/Scholastic, 2016 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82603-7 $24.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82604-4 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Ben’s not sleeping well because his dreams are wild and unpredictable, but his 
worried mother’s idea of sending him to a sleep doctor goes awry. Suddenly, Ben 
is stuck in his dreams, being chased by monsters, discovering abilities he never 
knew he had, and learning all about the Dream Jumpers and Dark Creatures of 
the sleep world. He learns that there is a family tradition of dream jumping, and 
that he’ll be taking on the role of protector against the nightmarish creatures, but 
at least he has some powerful assistance on the dream side and some good friends 
on the awake side to help him through. Although panels are used to orient read-
ers of this graphic novel, illustrations frequently spill over or fill a whole page, 
putting emphasis on particular key moments. Bright colors, zippy drawings that 
keep readers turning pages (there are lots of things flying off the far right side of 
416 • The BulleTin
the page), and short, punchy speech bubbles make this an ideal pick for reluctant 
readers (and, of course, graphic novel fans) who will eagerly await the next round 
of Ben’s dream jumping.  AS
hAmilTon, Alwyn Rebel of the Sands. Viking, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-451-47753-8 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-10
If the best of the Old West and the coolest parts of Arabian Nights had a baby who 
then rebelled by going steampunk, the result would be this gem of a book. Amani 
wants out of her wretched life in the desert, where’s she’s under the thumb of her 
cruel aunt and uncle. She therefore dresses as a boy and enters a sharpshooter contest 
just to get enough prize money to escape. Things fall apart in spectacular ways: 
explosions, armies, horses that emerge out of sand, and Djinn who are being mur-
dered all figure into the plot, along with a juicy detail about Amani’s true identity. 
It all unfolds with narrator Amani catching up on the fly, and she is so brash and 
willing to throw herself headlong into everything that readers will be swept along 
in the incredible adventure. Hamilton doles out the details carefully, and by the 
end all becomes clear, which is quite a feat given how many elements were thrown 
into a genre blender and spun around. The menacing foes have depth, the allies 
are staunch and clever, and Amani is golden, if flawed. The hints of a sequel will 
undoubtedly have readers crossing their fingers.  AS
hAmmel, sArA The Underdogs. Farrar, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30161-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Annabel Harper is as perfect in death as she was in life. When Chelsea watches 
the body of the teenaged “golden goddess” being carried out of their swank tennis 
club, Annabel has not a hair out of place—odd, considering cause of death is later 
ruled to be drowning. Every one else may be in shock, but Chelsea and her pal Evie 
recognize that plenty of the people at the club had a motive to kill Annabel and 
they’re going to find out who did, even if it means going around the lead investigator 
of the crime. Chelsea’s narration moves between chapters set “Before” and “After” 
Annabel’s death. The After sections work as an old-fashioned murder mystery, full 
of shady characters, false leads, and the dogged determination of our heroines in 
tracking down the murderer. The Before sections give the characters backstories—
often heartbreaking ones—and so the jilted lover, the envious friend, the creepy 
admirer from afar become more than just their labels, and their relationships with 
Annabel prove complex and layered. The combination of the two sections gives 
this cozy mystery the emotional heft of a drama, and a subplot following various 
obstacles Chelsea and Evie must overcome in their friendship mirrors the overarch-
ing theme that appearances may be deceiving. Readers may spot the killer early on 
but few will guess the actual twist in the story, and their gasp of surprise will be 
closely followed by a sigh of relief at the happy, though bittersweet, ending.  KQG
April 2016 • 417
hArdinge, frAnces The Lie Tree. Amulet, 2016 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-1895-3 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
Fourteen-year-old Faith Sunderly bears the misfortune of being a girl with a bent 
toward the natural sciences and a fierce intelligence in the nineteenth century, when 
the job of a woman was to be quiet and ornamental. Her father has an impressive 
reputation as the discoverer of a fossil that proves that the Nephilim referred to in 
the Bible were real, a find that many of his admirers latched onto in the wake of the 
recent publication of Darwin’s theories of evolution. However, the Sunderlys have 
had to depart London under a cloud of suspicion that his fossil is a hoax. Faith’s, 
er, faith in her father is unwavering despite his dismissal of her gender, so when 
he asks for her help in relocating a mysterious plant specimen to a cave accessible 
only by a treacherous passage through the sea, she is elated; when he is found dead 
the following morning, she is determined to uncover what drove them to their 
new island home and led to her father’s death. The elements of the mystery are 
masterfully keyed to the concerns of the Victorian time period, and its unfolding 
is handled with a dexterity that never loses sight of the gender problem; the book 
also directs its light onto matters of faith and doubt, and the issue of lies and truth 
in the pursuit of science. The excitement and danger, coupled with Faith’s intrepid 
though morally flawed pursuit of justice, call to mind Hardinge’s Fly by Night 
(BCCB 9/06); give this to readers unafraid to think disquieting thoughts as they 
race through a breathtaking, action-packed adventure.  KC
hArdy, rAlPh Argos: The Story of Odysseus as Told by His Loyal Dog. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2016 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239678-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-239680-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-8
In this odd but compelling story, the tale of the Odyssey is told by Argos, the 
faithful dog Odysseus left behind, who describes what he sees on Ithaka and what 
he hears from other animals over the years. Staying with Odysseus’ wife, Penelope 
and her son Telemachos, Argos longs for twenty years for the return of his master, 
hoping to stay alive long enough to welcome him home. As he waits, he keeps his 
charges safe, tries to keep Penelope’s legendary suitors at bay, and gathers news of 
his master from the animal grapevine. Argos does find enough free time to build 
a family of his own, paving the way for a son to take over the narrative in the final 
section of the book. Argos is fiercely loyal, loving, and protective—all authentic for 
a dog protagonist. Unfortunately, the fact that Odysseus’ mishaps and struggles are 
conveyed at a considerable remove via various animals means much of the urgency, 
passion, strife, and drama of the original story is muted or lost altogether. It’s just 
not the same to hear about the misdeeds of the gods from a dog who is filtering what 
an owl has perceived to have happened. Even so, Argos is a memorable character, 
and the drama that plays out around the suitors who all want to force Penelope into 
an unwanted marriage could have carried the book even without the long passages 
about what Odysseus was doing elsewhere. Canine fans are the likeliest audience, 
as they’ll hone right in on the best parts.  AS
418 • The BulleTin
hArrison, michelle One Wish. Little, 2016 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-33529-4 $17.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-33528-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
In this British import, a prequel to Harrison’s 13 Treasures trilogy (13 Treasures, 
BCCB 9/10, etc.), a twelve-year-old girl gets her first taste of magic and realizes 
it is as much bite and ferocity as it is sugary wonder. When Tanya meets Ratty at 
the Wishing Tree, she realizes he shares her gift of second sight and hopes they can 
become friends, even if he resists the notion. What follows is a fast-paced story 
with some genuinely frightening elements as Tanya learns the lore of the local 
fairies and hags and realizes that there are a startling number of twisted reasons 
to pursue magic. Refreshingly, Ratty and Tanya are not immediate friends, and 
their prickly relationship, made worse by Ratty’s snarky but loyal little fairy friend 
Turpin, makes it all the more satisfying when they become true allies. Readers may 
feel a bit cheated by the conclusion, a necessary plot twist to set up the established 
trilogy, which suggests Tanya’s hard-earned wisdom might not stick; however, new 
fans will be so intrigued by the way in which magic ebbs and flows in this novel 
that they’ll forgive the dip, and Harrison fans will see it coming, given what they’ll 
already know about Tanya and her future adventures.  AS
hATTemer, KATe The Land of 10,000 Madonnas. Knopf, 2016 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39158-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39157-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39159-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Three cousins, a best friend, and a girlfriend constellate around Jesse, whose death 
has left a hole in each of them, and whose bequest to them is a trip to Europe to 
find his mother, Thea. Thea left when Jesse was a baby, and he’s never been able 
to come to terms with the fact that she abandoned him; he thinks, at least until 
the very end of his life, that a similar grief is what’s behind his father’s collection 
of postcards of the Madonna, which have covered nearly all of the walls in their 
house. Focalization shifts between the teens, allowing an intimacy that foregrounds 
the personalities—Ben’s buttoned-down propriety and orderliness, Lillian’s prickli-
ness, Matt’s gentle circumspection, Cal’s drive, and Trevor’s affable way of injecting 
comic relief into tense circumstances. The protagonists careen through a collective 
grieving process, using their formidable intellects to compensate for their credibly 
less mature emotional states. References to familiar children’s books, works of art, 
places in Europe worth seeing, and Trevor’s medical social networking startup add 
texture and also emotional symbolism. What emerges is an uncompromisingly 
honest love letter to youth itself, just as it’s slipping away, with a subtle reminder 
that you can take the best of it with you into the next stage of life. For readers 
who have spent their childhoods immersed in stories of heroes and quests, this 
heartfelt, realistic narrative of love and loss will help them make sense of what all 
those metaphorical quests really meant.  KC
April 2016 • 419
hePPermAnn, chrisTine Ask Me How I Got Here. Greenwillow, 2016 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238795-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238797-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
In this spare verse novel, Addie cheats on her boyfriend, who, as it turns out, has 
been cheating on her. Her new boyfriend, Nick, is much nicer, and he stands by her 
even when she finds out that she is pregnant and decides on an abortion. Afterward, 
however, Addie finds herself emotionally disengaged from the things she once cared 
about, and her thoughts drift often to the Virgin Mary, another unmarried preg-
nant girl that Addie knows a lot about given her Catholic school curriculum. She 
reconnects with her old cross-country teammate Juliana, now in college; eventually 
she finds herself attracted to Juliana, and the two start a relationship that neither 
expected. The verse novel format works for and against the narrative here; charac-
ters are underdeveloped, and Addie’s relationships lack emotional connection and 
motivation. However, the poetry is at times strikingly beautiful, as Addie reflects on 
her identification with Mary, works her way through her “cafeteria Catholicism,” 
and struggles to define her feelings toward the baby she chose not to have and 
the possibility of forgiveness for something she doesn’t believe was wrong. Addie’s 
overall low affect suggests either depression or pragmatism, making her surprising 
kiss with Juliana seem more a desperate recognition of a partner in suffering than 
something joyful, though Juliana’s therapy-earned perspective does appear to help 
Addie reclaim a sense of balance and the possibility of future happiness. This is 
thus a story with space for readers to fill in the gaps with their own interpretations 
and experiences; indeed, it is a necessity that they do so.  KC
hiTchcocK, bonnie-sue The Smell of Other People’s Houses. Lamb, 
2016 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49779-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49778-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49780-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 8-10
It’s Fairbanks, Alaska, in 1970, and four teenagers are leading very different lives. 
Ruth is sent away to a convent when she becomes pregnant; Dora is taking refuge 
from her abusive family with loving friends; Alyce longs to dance ballet, but her 
obligation ties her to helping on her father’s fishing boat; Hank and his brothers 
stow away on a ferry to Canada but encounter a disaster that changes their plans. 
Hitchcock, an Alaskan herself, draws a loving and dimensional portrait of Alaska 
of the era, with relationships among Athabascans, Inupiaq, and whites ranging 
from tension to deep friendship, and with the region’s recent change to statehood 
still vivid and sometimes regretted by residents. The stories touch on poignant 
notes; Dora’s is especially moving, as she wins good fortune in the local lottery but 
struggles to break free of her grasping family. However, there are too many plot 
strands and too many characters, making it sometimes hard to place the names 
and interfering with the story’s momentum, and there’s a fair amount of contriv-
ance in the interweaving of the four stories as well as in some of the melodramatic 
details. Readers fascinated by life outside of the contiguous 48, however, may find 
this a dramatic picture of Alaska in an underdepicted era, and this could be an 
420 • The BulleTin
interesting successor to Dagg’s portrait of a slightly earlier Alaska in Sweet Home 
Alaska (BCCB 3/16).  DS
hoPKinson, deborAh A Bandit’s Tale: The Muddled Misadventures of a Pick-
pocket. Knopf, 2016 [304p] illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75500-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75499-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75501-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
When the Zaccaro family’s fortunes become so dire they must send one of their 
children away from their Italian village, eleven-year-old son Rocco is an easy choice, 
since the family’s well-to-do landlord suspects him of theft. A deal is done in the 
dead of night, and Rocco is led away by a padrone to become a street musician in 
America, with his family to receive twenty dollars a year throughout his indenture. 
Since Rocco is scarred to indicate his affiliation with the padrone, his chances of 
escape are small, so he’s forced to accept favors that indebt him to a gang of juvenile 
thugs. And this is just the beginning of a series of events that will take him to an 
asylum for delinquent children, into the Blizzard of 1888, into the employ of a 
blacksmith with an animal rights activist daughter, back into the mean streets of 
New York with Jacob Riis, and ultimately into a showdown with the gang that still 
holds him in their thrall. The street-urchin story races along at breakneck clip, and 
as a bonus to historical fiction fans who read endnotes, Hopkinson supplies lengthy 
back matter that expands on facets of the novel from its picaresque form to the real-
life players (like Riis) that influence Rocco’s life. Period photos scattered throughout 
add you-are-there realism, and a “How to Talk Like a Thief” glossary may provide 
middle-school literati with a fresh alternative to Talk Like a Pirate Day.  EB
hourAn, lori hAsKins Next to You: A Book of Adorableness; illus. by Sydney 
Hanson. Whitman, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-5600-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-5 yrs
A trip to any chain bookstore or a perusal of a superstore’s picture-book shelves will 
confirm that there are oodles of adulatory odes to the preciousness of childhood; 
here’s a title that breaks free of the mold by being both tongue-in-cheek over the 
top and squeal-inducingly adorable. Softly shaded illustrations of fluffy, doe-eyed 
critters are offered up as a second-rate contrast to the implicit attractiveness of 
the book’s audience: “Next to you, the softest puppy in the world is only kind of 
cute.” What about “A squirrel eating a doughnut with his tiny hands?” Well, it’s 
“adorable, sure. But next to you? Meh. Just OK.” An infant giraffe almost tips the 
balance for the narrator (“Oh, wait. Hang on. I didn’t realize newborn baby giraffes 
were SO. UNBELIEVABLY. SWEET”) but then reason prevails: “And you know 
what? I’m happy to be . . . next to you.” Sure, that ending is cheesy, but little ones 
are going to love all the cute baby animals, and they will relish the implication 
that they themselves are the cutest things ever, while older kiddos and their adults 
will get a kick out of the sassy dismissal of all those fetching furry figures, even as 
they coo over the fuzzy faces. Houran knows how to work her audience, endowing 
kittens, chicks, and piglets alike with widely set, oversized eyes, fluffy fur or feath-
ers, chubby cheeks, and cuddly bodies; it’s like an army of vintage Disney animals 
April 2016 • 421
on cuteness steroids. Add this to a baby animal storytime, share it as a cozy lapsit 
selection, or pass on by that copy of On the Day That You Were Born and tuck this 
into a shower gift instead.  JH
JArrow, gAil Bubonic Panic: When Plague Invaded America. Calkins Creek, 
2016 [196p] illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62091-738-1 $18.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62979-562-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-10
If you associate plague with quaint European woodcuts of scythe-wielding skel-
etons or crowded Asian harbor cities, then shudder and prepare to be schooled in 
plague’s historical migration to the United States and its current residence among 
us. After initial chapters treat plague’s manifestations (bubonic, septicemic, and 
pneumonic), millennia of global outbreaks, and the slow but steady progressive 
efforts at epidemiological control, Jarrow cuts to the chase with the too-close-to-
home detail of its appearance in its probable epicenter of early twentieth-century 
San Francisco Chinatown. In this first wave of infection, epidemiologist Joseph 
Kinyoun ran up against brick walls of anti-Chinese racism and financial anxiety by 
city fathers and business leaders. Politics shifted and better funding was provided to 
Dr. Rupert Blue, who was brought in during the second wave and who managed 
to implement effective strategies for rat control, which in turn began to impede 
flea-borne transmission. But just when San Francisco could breathe a bit easier, 
bubonic and pneumonic outbreaks occurred in Los Angeles in the mid 1920s. And 
today? Vaccines and medications are far better at containing epidemics and easing 
sufferers, but the bacteria are still alive and well among wild animal populations, 
particularly in the American Southwest. Jarrow’s latest disease presentation takes 
a more traditional nonfiction approach than the medical mystery of Red Madness 
(BCCB 4/14) or the personality-focused Fatal Fever (BCCB 4/15), but it is ap-
propriately broad in scope, deft in explanations, and sensitive in handling public 
health issues. A wealth of period and cringeworthy medical illustrations supplement 
the text, and end matter comprises a glossary, timeline, annotated bibliography, 
author and source notes, and index.  EB
Jennings, gArTh The Deadly 7; written and illus. by Garth Jennings. Farrar, 
2016 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-250-05275-9 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Nelson relies on his older sister, Celeste, so when she disappears, the eleven-year-old 
decides he’ll have to rescue her; fortunately, he has the aid of the seven deadly sins, 
who appear as monsters, and whom Nelson accidentally brought into corporeal 
existence. Despite news reports suggesting that Celeste is dead, the sins say she’s 
still alive, so Nelson boards a plane from England to Brazil solo (save for the seven 
invisible monsters) to battle fish monsters and their mistress (his twisted aunt), 
and rescue his beloved sister. Nelson is a quiet, quirky kid who really needs some 
friends, so it is lovely that he finds them in the sins and also finds himself on this 
adventure; additionally, the monsters themselves, drawn Monsters, Inc. style as 
cartoonish, harmless beings who are there to save the day, are endearing. Unfor-
tunately, the overwrought plot is just too much: there are narrative discrepancies 
422 • The BulleTin
that never quite line up, and the addition of a wacky uncle, a magic pendant, and 
poison water is overkill. Seven farting, wisecracking, sister-saving monsters can’t 
help but be good fun, though, so readers willing to wade through the confusing 
elements may still emerge pleased.  AS
Johnson, JAleigh The Secrets of Solace. Delacorte, 2016 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37649-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37648-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37650-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Lina is an archivist in training with a penchant for getting into trouble, mostly 
because she has no respect for the rules and restrictions of the apprentice system. 
While sneaking around, she runs into Ozben, a boy who is being hidden among 
the archivists, since they are a neutral group on Solace, where two royal families are 
waging a fierce war. The two bond over an airship that Lina has found and attempt 
to discover how to get it running again, while they also try to keep Ozben alive 
through multiple assassination attempts. The book nicely balances the firm structure 
of the archivists’ orderly lives with the wild abandon of the protagonist—Lina’s 
defiance of the rules and mores delineates the world as much as the descriptions 
do. While this novel doesn’t quite have the peppy steampunk flair of Johnson’s 
prior title, Mark of the Dragonfly (BCCB 5/14), there is still a significant amount 
of shared, overlapping details, and the lush descriptions in the former novel are 
still very much present in this stand-alone followup. Two simple maps will quickly 
orient readers.  AS
Jude, sArAh The May Queen Murders. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-544-64041-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Residents of Rowan’s Glen live off the land, shunning electricity and modern 
conveniences for a simpler life, and seventeen-year-old Ivy would have her home 
no other way. With the community’s traditions, however, come a host of supersti-
tions; the biggest one is the legend of Birch Markle, a madman who lives in the 
woods and supposedly preys on anyone out in the forest after dark. The legend 
looks to be true when when bloodied, dismembered livestock start showing up at 
the forest’s edge and screams are heard in the night. A curfew is set but Ivy’s best 
friend, Heather, ignores it, and instead continues to sneak out to meet her mystery 
lover—and one night fails to return. A wayward girl and a monster in the woods 
make a familiar tale, but Jude gets it just right, portioning out the precise amount 
of gore, secrets, sex, and deception to make a thrillingly dark murder mystery with 
touches of horror and the supernatural. Ivy is perfect as the ingénue narrator, as 
confused by her friend’s insistent need to leave Rowan’s Glen behind as she is by 
the eventual revelations of the townsfolks’ misdeeds. The ending goes off the rails, 
though, attempting to include nearly every villainous type in Heather’s death, each 
with motivations that are wildly unconvincing. Still, there’s something tempting 
about following that shadowy path into the unknown woods, and readers who do 
so may find a satisfyingly atmospheric tale.  KQG
April 2016 • 423
King, wesley Dragons vs. Drones. Razorbill, 2016 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-797-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-7
Dragons face extinction on a parallel Earth because of military drones that are 
coming through a portal from our own planet. Marcus, searching for his father 
who disappeared eight years earlier, goes through the portal and finds himself 
quickly paired up with Dree, a girl who never backs down from anything. That’s 
a good thing, as Marcus and Dree are pretty much tasked with saving Dracone 
(the parallel world) from the U.S. government’s horrific plot to kill its human and 
dragon inhabitants and then pillage its rich resources. It’s also fortunate that Dree 
has a close relationship with a dragon, a keen eye for building and inventing, and 
a sharp knowledge of the land. The dragon/human relationship is worth the explo-
ration—the mutual wariness that keeps them from fulfilling their great potential 
is troubling, and King offers hints as to how that close relationship devolved over 
time. Unfortunately, the dialogue is heavy and stiff, with banter that reads more 
like clunky sniping. In addition, the ultimate villain is cartoonishly unrealistic, rob-
bing the book of urgency as he explains, in absurd detail, all of his elaborate plans 
to take over the world. Despite those weaknesses, dragon-focused readers may still 
find this an intriguing change of setting and genre.  AS
King, wesley OCDaniel. Wiseman/Simon, 2016 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5531-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5533-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Daniel’s not necessarily strutting through middle school, but he’s pretty sure he’s 
doing okay. He may be a second-string player, but he’s on the football team; he 
doesn’t have a girlfriend, but luscious Raya talks to him; he’s only got one friend, 
Max, but he’s a good one; his older brother’s a jerk, but his parents and sister gener-
ally have his back. He tries not to think too much about the obsessive nighttime 
rituals that keep him counting toothbrush strokes, flicks of the light switch, and 
steps to the bedroom, rendering him sleepless and in tears. Sara, the girl who never 
talks and is always accompanied by a teacher assistant at school, actually speaks to 
him one day, telling him he’s a special Star Child like herself and admitting she’s 
plagued by multiple emotional disorders. She also manages to enlist him in her 
personal quest to prove that her mother’s boyfriend, John, murdered her father. 
As Sara and Daniel stumble their way through a convincingly adolescent game 
of cat and mouse, Sara begins to use her voice and Daniel confronts the fact that 
he’s got a significant problem of his own, but one that’s not beyond help. King’s 
at his best following Daniel’s compulsive behaviors and his ever-weakening efforts 
at denial. The murder mystery, however, isn’t fooling anyone, and it culminates in 
the predictable revelation that John is a good guy after all. Moreover, King leaves 
the budding Daniel/Raya romance up for grabs and never gives much of a hint 
as to where the Daniel/Sara relationship might be headed. Still, Daniel’s a likable 
narrator who may well prompt readers to look around at their ever-so-slightly ec-
centric classmates with a bit more imagination and compassion.  EB
424 • The BulleTin
Koehler, fred Super Jumbo; written and illus. by Fred Koehler. Dial, 
2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3923-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Elephant Little Jumbo, from How to Cheer Up Dad (BCCB 5/14), is back, this 
time as his caped alter ego, Super Jumbo. Super Jumbo’s efforts at heroism are 
often either under-considered (as is his attempt to stop his dad from raiding the 
cookie jar by shooting a plunger at his rear end) or over-executed (his try at “super 
speed” on his scooter nearly flattens a nearby cat), contributing to a general lack 
of appreciation for his efforts to “help.” Super Jumbo perseveres, though, and 
sometimes gets it right, as when he fixes a grateful critter’s broken wagon. Super 
Jumbo’s slightly misguided heroics are humorous in and of themselves, and they’re 
made even more so by his blissful unawareness of his blunders. Adding to the 
amusement is the frequent mismatch between text (“He helped those in need”) and 
the illustrations (he “helps” the same cat he nearly ran over by putting it up into 
a tree where it is then stuck). Koehler’s illustrations (created using digital media, 
pencil, pen, “and lotsa love”) are as endearing as they are funny, and the restrained 
palette helps keep chubby gray Super Jumbo, in his charcoal overalls and gold mask 
and cape, front and center. Small details (a rubber ducky in the fridge, Jumbo’s 
protruding tongue and look of concentration as he lines up his plunger shot) add 
a playful note to the proceedings as well. This would also be a “super” choice for 
superhero- or elephant-themed storytimes, and a pleasing counterpart to Beaty’s 
Doctor Ted (BCCB 4/08).  JH
linn, lAurenT Draw the Line; written and illus. by Laurent Linn. McElderry, 
2016 [528p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5280-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-5282-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Texas teen Adrian wants to blend into the background, so he stays mostly closeted 
at his school, focusing instead on drawing and hanging out with his best pals. When 
a hate crime occurs, it pushes Adrian (and those around him) to realize that there 
are events that merit leaving behind self-imposed walls and protections, and that 
doing so can bring about remarkable change. The plot’s quick pace keeps things 
moving, and the speed is emotionally realistic, given how a single major moment 
can indeed overturn the political or cultural solidity of a high school environ-
ment. While the interspersed illustrations give insight into Adrian’s narration and 
artistic style (important as he references his own work often), they add little to the 
overall book, feeling more like interruptions than enhancements. In addition, the 
characters are flat, which is disappointing given the substantial page length; it is 
hard to deeply connect with or care about anyone, and the stereotypical behaviors 
are predictable. Even with these problems, however, there is a tone of celebratory 
defiance by the end that may inspire teens on the GLBTQ spectrum who are feeling 
stuck or silenced to push their own boundaries just a bit.  AS
April 2016 • 425
mAdoniA, KrisTen-PAige Invisible Fault Lines. Simon, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3071-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3073-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Callie’s life is turned upside down when her father fails to come home from work 
one day. The police find no clues, a so Callie decides to mount her own investiga-
tion. When she sees a picture of a man who looks like her father in a museum 
display of photos from the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, she begins to wonder 
if something supernatural is afoot, even though she doesn’t really believe in time 
travel. Chapters that describe a man who has survived the earthquake but lost his 
memory suggest to readers that she might be on to something. As the narrative 
progresses, however, it becomes more likely that the segments are her elaboration 
of a wish that her father is alive somewhere, and that the earthquake is a metaphor 
for her connection to a ground that has shifted under her feet without any warning. 
As a way of symbolizing sadness and uncertainty in the aftermath of unexpected, 
unexplained loss, the image works well, but the memory flashbacks make the pace 
of the novel leisurely at best, and readers will need a high tolerance for ambiguity to 
appreciate the realistic lack of information regarding her father’s disappearance and 
the lack of distinction between a grieving imagination and a fantasy of time travel. 
However, readers who enjoy drawing inferences from subtle literary fiction may 
appreciate the artful details and the trip through San Francisco past and present.  KC 
mAnn, J. AlberT Scar: A Revolutionary War Tale. Calkins Creek, 2016 [144p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62979-465-5 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62979-559-1 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Sixteen-year-old Noah has always felt that his maimed leg, the result of a farm 
accident, left him with something to prove. His overprotective widowed mother 
uses it as an excuse to keep him close to home and out of the fight for colonial 
independence, even though she doesn’t allow his condition to keep him from 
pulling his weight around the farm. When a British and Mohawk raid of Noah’s 
New Jersey settlement leaves several dead and homes reduced to ashes, Noah joins 
with local militia men and supporters from around the region to track down Jo-
seph Brant, the Mohawk leader who led the raid, and take him and his forces by 
surprise. It’s a matter of historical record that their effort, the Battle of Minisink, 
failed tragically; Mann recreates the raid and the battle through the eyes of a fic-
tional teen who, while dying beside a wounded young Mohawk he dubs “Scar,” 
belatedly comes to understand his mother’s wisdom, the true chaos of war, and 
the reasons the Mohawk might want to ally with the Tories. Readers familiar with 
Spillebeen’s World War I novel Kipling’s Choice (BCCB 6/05) will recognize the 
effective structure, in which a soldier dying moves between feverish reality and 
clear-minded memory as he reviews the decisions that led to imminent demise and 
realizes how it all went wrong. The compact structure, compelling flashbacks, and 
low page count will draw readers who don’t generally gravitate toward historical 
fiction, and the epilogue, bibliography, and thumbnail bios of the real life players 
will please dedicated history fans.  EB
426 • The BulleTin
mArKs, Allison Og’s Ark; by Allison and Wayne Marks; illus. by Martina 
Peluso. Kar-Ben, 2016 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-6149-9 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-6150-5 $7.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-9605-7 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 3-5 yrs
Og the Giant has a tough time getting a good night’s sleep. No bed can hold him, 
sleeping outside puts him at the mercy of the elements, and he’s constantly awak-
ened by the many animals who climb atop him to catch their z’s. His way with the 
animal kingdom attracts the attention of a certain Noah, and soon Og’s leading two 
of each kind of creature aboard an ark in preparation for the coming flood. When 
the water recedes, Og discovers an Og-sized palace complete with an Og-sized bed, 
suggesting God has given him the one thing he really wants: a good night’s sleep. 
The authors have taken the biblical character of Og, King of Bashan and last of 
the giants, who survived the flood by holding on to the roof of the ark, and given 
him a Paul Bunyan-esque backstory and a heart of gold; it’s an interesting take, 
but the telling too often lacks punch, so the story is missing the usual tall-tale joie 
de vivre. Peluso’s full-page illustrations, warm with brown, mustard, and eggplant 
and livened by plenty of green, have a pleasing roundness that imbues the beasts 
with a charming balloon-animal quality, but they don’t provide much compensatory 
energy. This retrofitted folklore doesn’t make the best use of its promising concept, 
but it may find a right-sized home within religious instruction or in the hands of 
lovers of animals—or giants. A brief note explains the source and adaptations.  AA
mcclinTocK, bArbArA Emma and Julia Love Ballet; written and illus. by Barbara 
McClintock. Scholastic, 2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-439-89401-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
This tandem narrative parallels the day of young Emma, a little dancer who loves 
her class and hopes to be a ballerina, with that of the older Julia, who has achieved 
Emma’s dream of dancing professionally with the ballet. They both rise and eat 
breakfast and head off for class; they both have friends that enjoy other kinds of 
dance (Emma’s friend yearns to be on Broadway; Julia’s friend dances there). Come 
evening, Emma excitedly attends the ballet performance in which Julia dances, 
and a backstage visit bonds the two (“Emma and Julia love ballet”). The parallel is 
an appealing way to demonstrate the trajectory from young balletomane to actual 
dancer, and the modest details of grownup life (“Julia takes the bus by herself”) 
may be just as heady for the audience as Julia’s onstage success. McClintock’s trim 
line and watercolor illustrations balance tidy touches of detail (Julia’s flowered 
costume, Emma’s tongue sticking out in concentration as she does her homework) 
with spacious backgrounds and the fluid poses of the dancers. For Emma and the 
viewers, the experience of attending the ballet (the great auditorium with huge 
crystal chandeliers) is even more visually dramatic than dancing in it. There’s di-
versity in both kid groups and adult groups, with African-American Julia a nod to 
the author-illustrator’s love of the legendary Judith Jamison. This would be a lively 
complement to Isadora’s Bea at Ballet or other young dancer tales.  DS
April 2016 • 427
mcginTy, seAn The End of FUN. Hyperion, 2016 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-2211-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
After six years in a medicated fog, sixteen-year-old Aaron decides it’s time to get 
off the meds and live on his own terms. Unfortunately, he ends up nearly broke 
in a “hivehouse” in San Francisco, so when he learns that he can earn ameros, the 
new online currency that is replacing the dollar, by testing the Fully Ubiquitous 
Neuralnet augmented reality program (FUN® for short), he agrees to get chipped 
and lensed. Soon a robot buddy named Homie is living inside his head. Despite 
a few bugs, FUN® makes everything brighter, and Aaron earns ameros for doing 
things like saying the tagline and giving YAY!s to products and services. Unfor-
tunately, he gets addicted to a game and goes into debt, and now he can’t get off 
FUN® unless he earns enough ameros to repay what he owes. Aaron’s experience 
reads like an upgrade to Anderson’s Feed (BCCB 11/02), with similarly imagined 
ethical and environmental questions, a slightly-smarter-than-his-peers protagonist, a 
doomed love interest, and a slick sense of humor; the difference lies in the fact that 
FUN® is not universally embraced in Aaron’s society . . . yet. This allows for more 
diffuse and diverse protests as well as an exploration of how to successfully recover 
and maintain one’s sovereignty over the technology rather than being completely 
subjected to it. Indeed, there is ultimately a strong sense that not all connection to 
other people or appreciation of the natural world will be lost, even if these become 
filtered through an electronic interface. Still, the richly imagined implications are 
disturbing enough to put readers off Candy Crush, if only for a little while.  KC
mcnAmee, grAhAm Defender. Lamb, 2016 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49896-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49895-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49897-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
At six foot six, Tyne (Tiny) Greer casts an intimidating figure on the basketball 
court, but at heart she’s a softie who adores her supportive family and her goofy 
boyfriend, Stick. After an injury benches Tiny, she starts to help her dad with his 
superintendent duties in their building. While cleaning up the basement, she finds 
a decades-old body of a girl sealed up in the basement wall; when her dad he goes 
to check it out, he claims there’s nothing there. The body is indeed gone, but Tiny 
is certain of what she saw, and the prime suspect for moving the girl is now her 
beloved father. With the help of Stick’s sleuthing skills and few questions around 
the neighborhood, Tiny realizes her family’s past is hardly what she been told, and 
their secrets are bringing danger to both Tiny and Stick. Tiny’s happy existence 
turns oppressive and terrifying in the blink of an eye, and when she loses the pic-
ture of her father as a good and just man, it feels like another blow to her identity 
after losing basketball. Endearing Stick is determined to help Tiny, and while his 
CSI-like investigating is obviously convenient to the plot, it also seems to be just 
another quirk in a quirky kid. The loving jabs and smack talk that make up their 
interracial relationship (she’s white, he’s Latino) add a bit of levity to a dramatic 
situation. Red herrings will fake out even the most savvy reader, while the plot 
hustles along with plenty of dialogue and action. The premise and follow-through 
make this a solid win, especially for reluctant readers.  KQG
428 • The BulleTin
mcneAl, lAurA The Incident on the Bridge. Knopf, 2016 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97079-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87079-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97461-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Bookish, quiet Thisbe hasn’t been herself since she was dumped by Clay, the 
well-known player who’s cycled through the girls in their high school. She’s not 
sure what she wants to do when she steals his car and drives it onto Coronado 
Bridge—maybe jump, maybe not? The multi-stranded narrative leaves the reader 
guessing while introducing a succession of a dozen or so characters connected to 
Thisbe’s disappearance: the policewoman called to investigate an abandoned car 
on the bridge; Thisbe’s mom, who believes she might have jumped; her sister, Ted, 
who is sure she didn’t; and Jerome, the boy Thisbe should have been with instead of 
Clay. The shifting perspectives keep the pace lively as the mystery unfolds, as well as 
demonstrating how life goes on around a situation like this rather than lasering in 
on one event. Beyond the pieces coming together, however, there is little thematic 
substance or character development; instead, characters are typed, from Clay’s sex-
as-conquest approach to dating to Thisbe’s smart-girl-succumbs-to-brazen-flattery 
emotional missteps. This is therefore a predictable yet still suspenseful read for those 
who enjoy procedural crime dramas, as well as for those interested in how such an 
investigation touches multiple lives.  KC 
medinA, meg Burn Baby Burn. Candlewick, 2016 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7467-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
It’s the summer of 1977, and seventeen-year-old Nora is trying to enjoy her last 
hurrah with her best friend, Kathleen, and revel in her new relationship with Pablo, 
her hot co-worker at her deli job. Unfortunately, 1977 is a bad time for New York 
City: the Son of Sam serial killer is at large, and the city smolders as multiple ar-
sons torch decrepit buildings. It’s also a bad time for Nora: her immigrant Cuban 
mother loses her job, and Nora’s estranged father, off with a new family, never 
remembers to send money; more worrying, however, is the descent of her younger 
brother, Hector, into drugs, crime, and violence against his mother and sister. Me-
dina steeps her narrator in a period world of wearing Sasson jeans, mourning for 
Freddie Prinze, and screaming at Carrie, but mostly it’s an atmosphere of palpable 
and excruciating tension for Nora as her family drama mirrors the external threat. 
Her feelings are believably complicated: a mixture of regret, hope, and fear toward 
the brother who’s destroying her family, and both resentment and concern for the 
mother who insists it’s Nora’s job to keep her brother in line. It’s telling that Nora’s 
uncertainty about her own future takes a backseat to all this, but it’s also believ-
able and refreshing that she makes tentative plans to attend a community-college 
program that would build her woodworking skills into a construction career. While 
Nora’s milieu may be different, contemporary readers will respond to her doubt 
about the world’s and her own possibilities, and they’ll be glad to see her bravely 
moving forward nonetheless.  DS
April 2016 • 429
miller, PAT zieTlow The Quickest Kid in Clarksville; illus. by Frank Morri-
son. Chronicle, 2016 36p
ISBN 978-1-4521-2936-5 $16.99  
R 5-8 yrs
Narrator Alta admits she’s not the quickest person in Clarksville, Tennessee; that 
title goes to gold medal Olympian Wilma Rudolph, the honoree of the city’s up-
coming parade. Alta does claim, however, to be the fastest running kid, and at least 
according to her, “everyone around here knows it.” Everyone except that new girl 
Charmaine, who introduces herself to Alta with hand-on-hip attitude and the cheeky 
announcement, “Got me some new shoes.” Game on. As Alta and Charmaine race 
to the mailbox and race to the corner, neither is above a bit of accidentally-on-
purpose tripping and rock-kicking to gain advantage. Alta’s resentment smolders 
as she and her two younger buddies make a huge banner for the parade, and she is 
none too happy when Charmaine reappears in her glorious track shoes, elbowing 
in on their banner. But Rudolph worship is one thing they have in common, and 
when Charmaine proposes that the foursome totes the unwieldy banner to the 
parade route in Rudolph relay fashion, it’s clear there’s a friendship in the making. 
Morrison’s watercolor illustrations teem with serio-comic sass, skinny-limbed rivals 
arch eyebrows and whip braids, while Alta’s little sidekicks watch the face-off with 
expressions that vary between amused and impressed. Miller and Morrison are, 
however, a bit vague about the book’s exact time setting: text and author’s note 
strongly suggest that the parade is the Clarksville watershed celebration that marked 
the town’s first integrated event, though the illustration of Rudolph inexplicably 
differs in key details from the included historical photograph. This tale is, however, 
mainly about rivals turning into friends, and paired with Krull’s outstanding Wilma 
Unlimited (BCCB 4/96), it will bring Wilma Rudolph back into the spotlight for 
a new generation.  EB
moore, merediTh Fiona. Razorbill, 2016 [384p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-784-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When Lily Moffat, an old friend of Fiona’s deceased mother, contacted Fiona out 
of the blue to be Lily’s daughter’s au pair in Lily’s castle in the Scottish highlands, 
Fiona seized the opportunity. However, Lily and her husband are killed in an ac-
cident before Fiona arrived, so now Fiona must deal with Poppy, her grief-stricken, 
furious little charge; Mabel, the unwelcoming and suspicious head housekeeper; 
and Charlie, Poppy’s handsome older brother and sudden head of the household. 
If that weren’t enough, Fiona begins to wonder her if she has inherited her mother’s 
schizophrenia when she begins to hear and see strange things. The premise is firmly 
rooted in du Maurier’s Rebecca, and Moore offers plenty of nods to that story in 
small details. More than anything, though, this is a gothic soap opera at its finest: 
a heroine questioning her place and her sanity; the handsome rogue promised to 
another but in love with the heroine; a conveniently creepy but still effective set-
ting; and a completely over-the-top and delicious climax. One can almost here the 
dun dun duuuuuun when Mabel pulls a gun on Fiona and then the swelling violins 
when Fiona and Charlie finally kiss. This will be catnip for older readers who have 
fond memories of sneakily catching up on Days of Our Lives on their sick days in 
elementary school.  KQG
430 • The BulleTin
mosKowiTz, hAnnAh Gena/Finn; by Hannah Moskowitz and Kat Helge-
son. Chronicle, 2016 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-4521-3839-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Eighteen-year-old Gena Goldman is an Ivy League–bound senior eager to cut all 
ties with her former life; twenty-two-year-old Finn Bartlett is a struggling college 
grad who’s recently moved in with her long-term boyfriend. When they bond 
online over their shared love of a TV show, their fandom quickly blossoms into a 
deep friendship. Soon their online attachment is creating offline complications, as 
Finn’s boyfriend grows jealous and Gena starts to wonder if she wants to be more 
than friends. Gena’s also keeping secrets, and as her offline world starts to spin out 
of control, she relies more and more on Finn, until a catastrophe sends her over 
the edge. Shifting seamlessly across a variety of digital forums, including fan sites, 
online journals, and text messages, this heartfelt story reads like Myracle’s TTYL 
(BCCB 6/04) for the mature high-schooler crowd. The respectful and authentic 
portrayal of fandom is likely to be the novel’s initial draw, but its real power stems 
from the complex portrait of friendship and love that it creates. Unfortunately, 
though the storytelling format successfully places the reader in the hearts and minds 
of the characters, it’s sometimes at the expense of plot and pacing; when the story 
goes offline, it loses many of its most valuable interactive elements and becomes 
at times difficult to follow. Still, the novel functions well as a read-next for fans of 
Rowell’s Fangirl (BCCB 11/13), and there’s plenty to love for readers who want 
a story that celebrates the real-life ups and downs of fandom and the realities of 
online relationships.  AM 
murrAy, Alison The House That Zack Built; written and illus. by Alison Mur-
ray. Candlewick, 2016 26p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7844-9 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
Young Zack builds a house of blocks as he plays in the farmyard, in this jaunty, 
rhyming riff on “The House That Jack Built.” When a fly buzzes by (“over the 
house that Zack built”), it sets the wheels in motion, causing a cat to give chase, 
which upsets a pitcher of cream onto a sleeping dog, who then frightens the lambs 
out of their enclosure. Clever Zack “knew what to do. He patted the dog who was 
trusty and true. He collected more cream from Daisy and then . . . he herded the 
lambs back into their pen. With the cat in his arms and the farm like new . . . he 
took a deep breath and BLEW!” With that, Zack shoos the fly off of his house and 
restores tranquility to the farm. This British import is a fresh and engaging take 
on a classic, and the rhythmic retelling is as easy on the ears as the cheerful digital 
artwork is on the eyes. The barnyard setting and the amusing chain of antics will 
appeal to preschool and primary grade audiences, and Murray also provides some 
opportunities for audience participation, such as the repeated references to the 
“BUZZ”-ing of the fly and the pivotal “blowing the fly away” moment. The tidy 
styling and retro palette of softened red, gold, blue, and green balance the animals’ 
bustling action, and scribbly lines are judiciously used to indicate the dog’s shaggy 
fur, Zack’s mussy hair, and the flight trajectory of the busy fly. Add this inviting 
title to a farm- or fly-themed story hour, use it to talk about cause and effect or 
sequence of events, or share it as an updated contrast to the traditional rhyme.  JH
April 2016 • 431
neri, g. Tru & Nelle. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-544-69960-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Tru is young Truman Capote (then Truman Persons) and Nelle is young Harper 
Lee in this fictionalized tale of the two authors’ childhood friendship in Depression-
era Monroeville, Alabama. The book follows the two young outsiders (Tru is a 
primary-school dandy, Nelle a determined tomboy) through their bonding over 
their shared love of reading, their wannabe Holmesian adventures that lead them 
to encounter reclusive teen Sonny Boular (the model for Boo Radley), and their 
troublemaking antics, which included a well-intentioned but disastrous carnival. 
Mostly, though, it’s the story of Tru, with Nelle his occasional companion, as he 
desperately longs for his selfish parents to want him and also desperately longs 
for the loving stability he has found with his relations in Monroeville. The events 
vary from light-hearted hijinks to more serious run-ins with the Klan, and there’s 
entertainment in the depiction of two creative youngsters high-tailing it around 
town without adult supervision or concern; Tru’s underlying sadness is also honestly 
conveyed. The expository prose is sometimes flat, but the dialogue is lively, and 
readers who’ve seen staged versions of A Christmas Memory will enjoy diving more 
deeply into that world. There’s also solid curricular potential here in a historical 
unit or a discussion of writers and writing, and the picture of the talented but 
questioning Tru will resonate with readers who appreciate Kate DiCamillo’s works. 
A substantial note concludes the book, and several additional stories, written as if 
by the young Tru and Nelle, are appended.  DS
neumeier, rAchel The Keeper of the Mist. Knopf, 2016 [400p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50929-8 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50928-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-50930-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Keri is happy with her work as a baker, never dreaming that the death of the ruler 
will impact her, his illegitimate child; however, the land of Nimmira seems to have 
chosen Keri to replace her cruel, selfish father. She pretty much has to comply, since 
the misty boundaries of this lush little realm are all that keeps its inhabitants safe 
from multiple invasions, and those have dropped entirely since her father’s death, 
leaving Nimmira vulnerable. Keri is lucky to have two close allies who agree to serve 
as part of her small cabinet, and one longstanding member who is willing to keep 
his post; these four are up against all of Keri’s jealous siblings, Bear soldiers on one 
side of the borders, and creepy sorcerers on the other, all of whom want her crown 
and possibly all of Nimmira. Keri waffles a bit too often, but that’s understand-
able since until a few days ago her biggest challenge was choosing the flowers to 
decorate a wedding cake. Her clear good intentions and her unshakable loyalty to 
her land are engaging, and readers will likely to pleased to watch the complicated, 
sometimes fumbling, ways in which she and her buds try to save the day and make 
things better for all of Nimmira in the process.  AS
432 • The BulleTin
oAKes, colleen Queen of Hearts. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2016 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-240972-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-240975-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Before she was the despot who threatened Alice’s head, Wonderland’s Queen of 
Hearts was a lonely seventeen-year-old princess, trying desperately to gain the affec-
tion of a tyrannical father, earn the love of a handsome Knave, and navigate perilous 
political terrain on her way to the throne. As the story begins, princess Dinah’s 
routine life of tea parties, croquet matches, and visits with her mad-hatter brother 
is thrown into disarray by the arrival of a half-sister she’s never known. Soon more 
hints at Wonderland’s strange and dangerous secrets begin to emerge, and Dinah 
and her sweetheart Wardley must venture outside the safety of the castle walls and 
into the country’s darkest prison in search of answers. Following clues only lead to 
more questions, though; then a shocking murder for which Dinah is blamed shakes 
her world to its core, and she must flee or face losing her head. Every good villain 
deserves an origin story, and with this first volume of a planned series, Oakes offers 
a fascinating glimpse into the mad queen’s complex and heartbreaking past. The 
novel offers some wonderful reinventions of Carroll’s classic, and fans of Alice’s more 
sinister elements will appreciate Oakes’ macabre touches. The underlying narrative 
provides an engaging fight for power, a predictable but still satisfying romance, 
and plenty of unresolved mystery and intrigue. Dinah moves from petulant and 
miserable to confident and capable and back again with incredible speed, but the 
wariness with which she takes on her adventure lends credibility to her character. 
The story ends with Dinah’s escape, leaving readers caught at the pinnacle of ten-
sion and ready for sequels. Offer this to anyone who loves rooting for the villain, as 
well as fans of Howard’s Splintered (BCCB 3/13) or Maguire’s Wicked series.  AM
orgill, roxAne Jazz Day: The Making of a Famous Photograph; illus. by Francis 
Vallejo. Candlewick, 2016 [64p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6954-6 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-8 
It seemed worth a try—casting a broad invitation to New York’s jazz community 
to show up in front of a designated Harlem brownstone for an Esquire magazine 
photo shoot on a hot August day of 1958. Reporter Art Kane, armed with a bor-
rowed camera, struck gold: a great turnout and a great shot that claimed its place 
in American iconography. Orgill relives the day through twenty-one poems that 
highlight the gamble, the quirkiness, and the musicians. In the opener, “Early,” Kane 
stands alone in the street and worries (“A crazy request/ what if nobody shows”). 
They do show up, but posing them is like herding cats: “no one listens/ musicians/ 
don’t hear/ words of instruction/ only music.” Orgill imagines a pair of siblings 
among the twelve neighborhood boys who made their way into the photo, with 
the starstruck older brother wrangling his little brother, who just doesn’t get the 
momentousness of what’s happening. With all in place, the camera clicks: “click/ 
click/ it has to be perfect/ for Esquire/ Dizzy sticks out his tongue.” Months later, 
the street boy buys himself a copy: “Me, Alfred/ With a patch on my knees/ But 
jeez/ I’m in a magazine.” Kids indifferent to jazz or photography will be swept up 
nonetheless in the novelty of the episode, the idiosyncrasies of the participants, 
April 2016 • 433
and the shoulder-rubbing between the neighborhood kids and the adult celebs. 
Vallejo’s mixed-media illustrations are gems of freewheeling portraiture, drawing 
from the iconic photo itself and other film taken throughout the day. Orgill supplies 
biographical info on Art Kane and the musicians highlighted in her poems, and 
best of all, a double-page photo reproduction folds out at just the right moment 
from an asphalt black page with a single “‹ click.” Perfect.  EB
PArK, lindA sue Wing & Claw: Forest of Wonders; illus. by James Madsen. Harp-
er/HarperCollins, 2016 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232738-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232740-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Raffa has a natural talent for apothecary, and he likes working with 
plants. When an experiment with a powerful and strange plant results in startling 
outcomes (a gravely injured bat not only is healed but also learns to speak), Raffa is 
wisely circumspect about the event, but his ambitious cousin tells all and the word 
gets to the government of Obsidia. Soon Raffa is caught up in an elaborate plan 
to stop the government from conducting horrific experiments in animal control; 
his feelings of guilt and responsibility war with his own curiosity as he grapples 
with the idea that a lucky forest find could bring a permanent change. Raffa is 
a bit too perfect, as even his mistakes are noble and well-intentioned, but he is 
quickly surrounded by three allies, kids from different backgrounds and holding 
drastically different skill sets, who are much more approachable in their flaws and 
character depth. Both adorable and useful for communicating with other animals, 
Echo, the healed bat, is a plus as well. The magic here is measured, doled out in 
single drops, but it is still magical nonetheless, and readers will find plenty to lure 
them back for the rest of the anticipated trilogy. A simple map will orient readers 
to the setting.  AS
PArK, lindA sue Yaks Yak: Animal Word Pairs; illus. by Jennifer Black Rein-
hardt. Clarion, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-544-39101-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-8 yrs
Eighteen lively spreads match nouns to their homograph verbs, from “Yaks yak” 
to “Kids kid,” in entertaining scenes. Pairs range from the logical and related 
(“Rams ram” and “Parrots parrot”) to the coincidentally similar (“Slugs slug slugs” 
and “Steers steer”), with a definition for the verb included in each spread. The 
illustrations are visually delightful: the double-page art gives its figures whiskery 
and characterful linework and dapples the watercolor hues, with text elements (the 
words of the crowing crows, the annoying utterances of the badgering badgers) 
often adding additional interest. Too many of the interpretations aren’t concep-
tually successful, though: the craning cranes and quailing quail look like regular 
cranes and quail, for instance, and it’s not clear if the aping apes are meant to be 
aping humans or each other; the definition given for “flounder” (“to be helpless”) 
is confusing and misleading. It’s still an entertaining concept that could be useful 
to prompt further ideas in a language arts class; sharp-eyed kids may also enjoy 
spotting the subtle connections and callbacks in the illustrations. A concluding 
chart provides the etymology for each noun and verb.  DS
434 • The BulleTin
PArKer, s. m. The Girl Who Fell. Simon Pulse, 2016 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3725-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3726-4 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 10-12
The tumultuous opening scene features Zephyr in fear for her life in her own 
home; the book then flashes back to three months earlier to follow her developing 
romance with Alec, in a contrast that makes clear this relationship will not go well. 
This knowledge tinges with dread every smolderingly sexy minute (and there are 
a lot of them), as Zee blithely follows both heart and heat to the painful realiza-
tion that the broody new hockey star at school is not the stand-up guy he seems. 
In Zee’s defense, Alec’s attentions are at first entirely swoonworthy, and Parker is 
careful to detail the series of events that have left the once pragmatic and driven Zee 
vulnerable. His demands on her time seem like welcome respites from the round 
of parties that remind her of the end of high school, and his care for her effectively 
compensates for the fact that her father, who walked out on the family on Zee’s 
eighteenth birthday, and her best friend are no longer people she can depend on. 
Plus, she is discovering the overwhelming power of sex for the first time. The situ-
ation with her parents confuses her even more—if her mom can forgive her dad’s 
mistakes, shouldn’t she forgive Alec’s? Of course, that way lies a madness that is all 
too understandable, keeping Zephyr, and even Alec, at least until he moves from 
controlling to outright abusive, mostly sympathetic characters; readers will definitely 
relate to the sting of parental rejection and disapproval, the slow-burning grief of 
leaving high school glories behind, and the fear that the wider world won’t find 
them worthy. While Zephyr isn’t yet wise, the book is; behind and in the midst of all 
the intense feels, good and bad, there is a core message that, with help, compassion 
and forgiveness, it’s still possible to survive catastrophic relationship mistakes.  KC 
PATTerson, JAmes Jacky Ha-Ha; by James Patterson and Chris Grabenstein; illus. 
by Kerascoët. Little, 2016 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-26249-1 $13.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-30302-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Seventh-grader Jacky Hart (aka Ha-Ha) manages to rack up twenty detentions in 
the first five days of school with her antics. She doesn’t always crack jokes just to 
make teachers angry, though; she also uses humor to defend her African-American 
friend from taunting, make her ailing grandmother laugh, and assure her mother, 
who’s serving a tour in Iraq during the first Gulf War, that everything is A-OK 
at home. The assistant principal tries to come up with a way to channel Jacky’s 
creative talents outside of class—clearly detentions aren’t working—so maybe a 
place in the school musical and an assignment to the oratorical team will do the 
trick. Both of these options horrify Jacky, since her humor has always been a cover 
for her stutter, and performing in public will certainly make that clear. Much like 
Jamie Grimm from Patterson’s I Funny (BCCB 2/13), Jacky is a genuinely likable 
and funny protagonist; she’s also believable as a kid who uses jokes as a defense of 
her stutter but who’s struggling to figure out when that defense becomes hurtful 
offense (a few of her pranks hit both emotional and physical sore spots in other 
people). Kerascoët’s black and white illustrations, varying from full spreads to spot 
April 2016 • 435
art, are full of verve and energy, as cartoonish Jacky careens her way through life. 
The framing story—the current-day Jackie is writing her daughters a letter on the 
night of receiving an Academy Award—is a bit cheesy, but it also reminds readers 
that being labeled trouble as a student doesn’t necessarily translate to trouble in 
the future.  KQG
PerKins, sTePhAnie, ed. Summer Days and Summer Nights: Twelve Love Sto-
ries. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2016 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-07912-1 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-9175-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Twelve love stories leave behind the winter wonderland of Perkins’ last collection 
(My True Love Gave to Me: Twelve Holiday Stories, BCCB 11/14) for the heat—
sometimes breezy, sometimes scorching—of summer, with witty banter and sweet 
flirtations matched pretty evenly with reflective heartache and aching desire. Jon 
Skovron offers up a clever and droll take on meet-cutes in “Love Is the Last Resort,” 
while Tim Federle takes an equally snappy and humorous tone but applies it to 
a breaking-up-cute, ending the tale on a note of bittersweet optimism. Francesca 
Lia Block contributes her usual fare of sex, drugs, and rock-’n’-roll, while Libba 
Bray’s campy delight “Last Stand at the Cinegore” brings together summer crushes 
and demons, and Veronica Roth gives the confession of love a sci-fi spin. Perkins 
continues her story from the previous volume, following the couple through a 
(literal) rocky patch in “In Ninety Minutes, Turn North.” Both realism and fan-
tasy are represented, and the collection is refreshingly diverse in its characters and 
the orientation of its romances. Summer is perhaps most found in the tales that 
bookend the collection: Leigh Bardugo’s “Head, Scales, Tongue, Tail” captures the 
contradiction that is the season, a host of lazy, luxurious days shadowed by a sense 
of urgency in the knowledge that this time has an end date. Lev Grossman’s “The 
Map of Tiny Perfect Things” shares a similar theme, and it appropriately ends the 
collection with a moment of moving forward. Yep, this one’s a beach read, so throw 
it in in the bag in its well-earned spot between the sunblock and the sandals.  KQG
Preble, Joy It Wasn’t Always Like This. Soho Teen, 2016 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-588-5 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-589-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
One hundred years ago, sweethearts Emma O’Neill and Charlie Ryan accidentally 
drank from the Fountain of Youth, leaving them forever seventeen. Eternal youth 
turns out to be a curse, though, when it draws the attention of dangerous religious 
fanatics and forces the couple to separate to avoid being killed. Now, after several 
lifetimes crisscrossing the country, searching for Charlie and hiding from the de-
scendants of the Church of Light, Emma learns that someone has been poisoning 
teenage girls who look like her and that her longtime pursuers are closer than she 
realized. Soon another young woman has gone missing, and Emma must turn to 
her only friend, a sweet but grumpy police detective, to help her save the innocent 
girl from certain death. Saving a life may cost Emma everything, but it might just 
earn her what she’s always wanted: the freedom to be with Charlie forever. With its 
exciting plot and well-wrought characters, this novel emerges as a suspenseful treat 
436 • The BulleTin
with a gooey romantic center. The narrative alternates between scenes of Emma’s 
distant past with Charlie and her murder-mystery present, building to a final show-
down that is both surprising and satisfying. There’s not much decent explanation 
for the situation, but readers will happily take any needed leaps of faith for the 
pleasure of flying through a fast-paced story with a sigh-worthy happy ending.  AM
reuTer hAPgood, hArrieT The Square Root of Summer. Roaring Brook, 
2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-373-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Last summer, seventeen-year-old math genius Gottie Oppenheimer lost her beloved 
grandfather, her first love shattered her heart, and Gottie turned her back on her 
remaining friends and family. The return of her childhood friend Thomas may just 
help Gottie end her year of self-imposed isolation; if only she weren’t losing hours 
at a time, falling down literal wormholes into her own painful past. Now Gottie 
is determined to regain control of her life, her heart, and spacetime by using her 
intelligence to solve the mystery, until she realizes that the cause might just be 
emotional. As the anniversary of her grandfather’s death nears, Gottie must embrace 
the black hole of her unresolved grief, her unexplored feelings for Thomas, and her 
fears about the future if she’s going to free herself from the gravitational pull of her 
memories. A poignant portrait of a girl struggling with loss and love, this novel is 
equal parts heart and smarts, with a dash of friends-turned-more sweetness. The 
lovely writing captures the character’s confusion, intelligence, and self-protective 
propensities, allowing her to be relatable even as she is strange. Scientific elements, 
including obscure concepts from theoretical physics, are explained well enough for 
even the most unfamiliar reader to follow but are also skimmable for those who aren’t 
interested in the specifics of time travel. The perfect readalike for Bishara’s Relativity 
(BCCB 1/14), it’s also likely to please readers who like a smart-girl romance.  AM
rosensTocK, bArb Dorothea’s Eyes: Dorothea Lange Photographs the Truth; illus. 
by Gérard DuBois. Calkins Creek, 2016 32p
ISBN 978-1-62979-208-8 $16.95  
R Gr. 2-4
Dorothea Lange’s mother might have been surprised by her eighteen-year-old 
daughter’s announcement that she intended to become a photographer, but, ac-
cording to Rosenstock’s picture-book bio of the noted documentary photographer, 
Dorothea had been cultivating a disposition toward this career all throughout 
her childhood. Crippled by polio and abandoned by her father, young Dorothea 
preferred to think of herself as invisible and to focus instead on the faces of those 
around her. Finagling her way into professional studios, she learned technique and 
management, and she eventually started her own portrait studio: “All the richest 
families in California wanted portraits by Dorothea Lange.” But when the Great 
Depression pummeled the country, she left her cozy life to expand her career in a 
new direction—capturing the people hardest hit by the financial crisis. Rosenstock’s 
text features clipped sentences and a thoughtful, poetic tone, well matched by Du-
Bois’ soft-focus acrylic and digital images, with their distressed textures suggestive 
of hard times past. A half-dozen reproductions of Lange’s iconic photos bring the 
brief biography to a satisfying conclusion. Elementary students pursuing biography 
assignments (and who wouldn’t want to dress up with wide-legged cropped pants, a 
April 2016 • 437
neck scarf, a jaunty beret, and a camera prop?) will appreciate the appended notes, 
sources, timeline, and suggestions for where to find online photo collections and 
museums featuring Lange’s works.  EB
sAnTAT, dAn Are We There Yet?; written and illus. by Dan Santat. Little, 
2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-316-19999-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-8 yrs
A kid can go from full-out excitement to abject boredom before the car trip to 
Grandma’s is even underway. “But what happens,” the book asks, “when your brain 
becomes TOO bored?” Viewers turn the book to orient this question as the text 
wraps around the spread, and as time loses its meaning during the mind-numbing 
ride, the family makes its way deeper into the past: alongside a steam locomotive in 
the Wild West, perched on the plank of a pirate ship, at lance-point of an oncom-
ing medieval jouster, parked next to the Egyptian pyramid construction zone, and 
into the age of dinosaurs. The kid in the car, now fully alert and amused, reverses 
the trajectory with a hasty game of dino fetch, propelling the family back to the 
future, but this time a little too far. They arrive at Grandma’s address, but it’s now 
the year 2059 and the house is gone. The parents, however, reassure their son that 
they know what they’re doing, and when he next opens his eyes, Grandma’s birth-
day party gets into full swing—replete with relatives so annoying that it must be 
time to hit the road again: “Can we go now?” Santat digs deep into his stockpile 
of illustrative tricks to manipulate time and space through clever page turns, com-
ics style sequential frames, background fade outs, and a wealth of loony details to 
keep viewers scouring the scenes for giggle-worthy details. In fact there’s so much 
to see (including the bonus QR codes that decipher robot speech) that handing a 
copy to kids on their own road trip just might forestall the dreaded whine “Are we 
there yet?”—at least for a little while.  EB
showAlTer, genA Firstlife. Harlequin Teen, 2016 [480p]
ISBN 978-0-373-21157-9 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Tenley isn’t ready to sign the contract that will bind her loyalty to a particular 
realm, Myriad or Troika, in her Everlife once her Firstlife is done. It doesn’t go 
well for people who won’t commit, so Tenley is suffering in an asylum where staff 
are trying to cajole, demand, and even physically torture her into choosing a side. 
Both realms have their strengths and weaknesses, and fierce, defiant Tenley, with 
her strong moral compass, has characteristics that make her highly desirable to all, 
including the two hunky Laborers, sent to recruit her. Tenley knows that signing 
with neither means her spirit will dispatched to a mystery realm, but she can’t force 
herself to hurry, even if her life is in danger. Tenley’s narration heightens the drama 
and keeps readers guessing about key characters, as they will only have slightly more 
information than she does (readers do get additional insight in snarky emails sent 
by the two guys to their higher-ups). There is of necessity a lot of world-building 
exposition here, leaving the bulk of the action to future volumes, but the setting 
and concept are captivating. Fans of Showalter’s previous books and sci-fi buffs who 
like a solid dose of romance mixed in will likely race through this volume, despite 
the sturdy length, and eagerly anticipate the next.  AS
438 • The BulleTin
shurTliff, liesl Red: The True Story of Red Riding Hood. Knopf, 2016 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75584-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75583-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75585-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Red’s grandmother has given her more than a scarlet cape—she has also passed 
along her magical powers. Red, however, has trouble harnessing her abilities, and 
when, at the tender age of seven, one of her mis-spells nearly kills Granny, Red 
swears off magic forever. But when Granny gets sick, twelve-year old Red sets out 
on a quest for a cure, capturing dwarves, escaping enchanted castles, outsmarting 
a horribly misguided huntsman, and even using her powers—all with the aid of 
her bothersome but well-intentioned neighbor, Goldie, and an ever-present wolf 
with whom Red feels an unlikely kinship. The book suffers for its exhaustive and 
exhausting incorporation of mythical beings and other fractured fairy tales, and it 
strains under its insistence that Red and wolf share a spirit. Still, it’s hard to resist 
a fairy tale retold, and there’s enough cleverness and levity here for moments of 
real enjoyment. The imaginative spells, the twists on conventional plotlines, and 
Red’s determined, independent nature mean that this picnic basket may still worth 
unpacking.  AA
smiTh, Amber The Way I Used to Be. McElderry, 2016 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4935-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4937-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
It’s winter break of Edy’s freshman year when her life changes: her older brother’s 
best friend, Kevin, rapes her in her own bedroom, threatening to kill her if she tells. 
She keeps it to herself, but the event shapes her, and the book traces its influence 
on her self-image and her relationships over the next three years. Those relation-
ships include a serious connection with a sweet senior guy, whom she eventually 
pushes away; a distant platonic friendship with a once-nerdy guy; the party hook-
ups she efficiently finds, beds, and dismisses; and her increasingly strained bond 
with her best friend, Mara. It’s when she has successfully transformed herself into 
a hard-edged, bad-reputation senior that she’s thunderstruck by the news: Kevin 
has been accused of raping a girl at college. This is a poignant advance on the old 
problem-novel version of the story where secrets are quickly revealed and malefac-
tors punished; “I’ve seen enough TV movies to know you’re supposed to tell,” says 
Edy miserably, but the reality of accusing a beloved family friend is believably hard 
to surmount. Edy’s post-victim pattern of changing and armoring herself is cred-
ible, and it blends authentically into normal adolescence. Smith manages to create 
a sympathetic portrait of a girl who’d be an unsympathetic acquaintance, as Edy 
relentlessly punishes herself and her friends in the place of the person who really 
deserves it. While Edy does eventually report the truth, it’s no neat salvation, but 
the experience also demonstrates that her hostility and shame aren’t enough to keep 
people from caring. Edy’s exploration of the meaning of sexuality and intimacy will 
be thought provoking for teen readers of various experience levels, and this title 
is likely to find space alongside Anderson’s Speak (BCCB 10/99) on counseling 
shelves. A brief author’s note includes a relevant hotline number.  DS
April 2016 • 439
smiTh, emily wing All Better Now. Dutton, 2016 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42624-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
“I’ve always known I was the weird girl.” So says YA author Smith (Back When You 
Were Easier to Love, BCCB 4/11) in this memoir of her childhood, where motor 
skill problems and difficulty controlling her temper dogged her days; when she was 
eleven, a serious car accident led doctors to discover she had a large brain tumor. Its 
removal upgraded her publicly to “Thank-God-I-Got-Hit-By-A-Car” girl, but it 
didn’t do much to improve her physical and emotional problems, so Emily found 
her official narrative bitterly ironic as well as tiresome. That’s the really interesting 
thing about Smith’s memoir: it’s not a story of discovery, cure, and redemption, but 
a story of struggle whose watershed moment isn’t really that transforming. Instead, 
Emily clings to the identity that’s remained constant—she is a writer—and finds that 
growing older gives her more opportunities to find her niche and understand who 
she wants to be. That’s a discovery that will resonate with many readers, whether 
they’ve faced physical challenges or not, and Emily’s blossoming will give hope to 
many kids who’ve been “the weird girl” or boy. However, the episodic nature of the 
narrative, with titled chapters of only a few pages leaping from subject to subject, 
makes it hard to gain traction on the overall story; the near-invisibility of Emily’s 
family is strange and unremarked-on, while other secondary figures and significant 
events disappear from view without a word. While there’s some authenticity to the 
jagged fragmentation of experience, it makes for a frustrating read at times and 
impairs connection with Emily. Nonetheless, the account of her journey to a happy 
adulthood may give hope to other struggling kids, and young writers-to-be could 
be heartened by her persistence and success.  DS
sTiefvATer, mAggie The Raven King. Scholastic, 2016 [448p] (The Raven 
Cycle)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-42498-1 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-86035-2 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
The time has finally come for Richard Gansey to meet his king and his fate on 
the ley line that runs through Henrietta, Virginia. As in the prior three books in 
the series, Stiefvater shuffles her characters, bringing minor ones onstage for more 
prominent roles, and sending formerly important ones to the wings, all while 
highlighting the relationships between among her four principals: boarding school 
boys Gansey, Adam, and Ronan, and local girl Blue. In this culminating episode, 
the boys’ classmate Henry Cheng, whose mother is a major player in the traffick-
ing of magical objects, emerges as an ally. This time, however, the magical object 
up for sale is a demon bent on unmaking all of the magic Ronan and his dad have 
conjured. The damage the demon inflicts is serially horrific, placing much of this 
final installment in the horror genre, but the interpersonal relationships hold firm 
and even grow in ways that many readers likely suspected they might. Indeed, this 
is a book that fulfills both prophecies and reader expectations, while happily leav-
ing much room for fanfic to continue the adventures of most of the characters. 
Stiefvater’s humor barks at unexpected times, while the tender moments retain a 
boyish awkwardness that keep both the fantasy and the romance resolutely teen. 
440 • The BulleTin
Admittedly, Blue is diminished in importance throughout this last installment, but 
the fact that it takes all of the players together to put down the demon and remake 
the world foregrounds the power of true friendship that was always at the heart of 
this beautifully imagined series.  KC
suTTon, Kelsey The Lonely Ones. Philomel, 2016 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17289-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Things have fallen apart for Fain: her father has lost his job, and the family has to 
move to a smaller, older house. At night, Fain is visited by friendly monsters who 
entice her to join them on moonlit adventures, filling her imagination with stories 
that she deposits into notebooks during the day. At school, she is solitary until 
Matthew moves to town. He befriends her, appreciating her quiet nature, but she 
misunderstands his attentions. Her humiliation by the mean girls at a party marks 
a turning point for her, though, as one of the girls peels off from the group to be 
her friend, and Fain’s sister recognizes heartbreak when she sees it and responds 
with attention and kindness. Fain must decide whether pursuing relationships in 
the real world, which will be messy and imperfect and sometimes painful, is worth 
losing the imaginary monsters who have sheltered her in her loneliness. While 
readers might not share all of Fain’s problems, they will still respond to the acces-
sible poetry and concrete symbolism of this verse novel. Finely wrought images 
and lyrical language evoke the challenges of dealing with unwelcome change and 
the pain of feeling unseen in the midst of a family’s problems. Though Fain must 
transition from solitude and imaginary monster friends to real relationships with 
people, she clearly benefits from her time alone with her imagination, leaving read-
ers with the understanding that periods of loss and loneliness can provide a fertile 
space in which to cultivate inner strength.  KC
Thomson, sArAh l. Deadly Flowers. Boyds Mills, 2016 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62979-214-9 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62979-563-8 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Ninja-loving readers will rejoice at this clever, dangerous, vivacious book about 
a group rarely mentioned: girl ninjas. Kata was orphaned as a young age, so all 
she knows as home is her place with Madame Chiyome (a real historical figure 
who trained young girls to be ninjas in the 1500s). She works willingly, eager to 
be offered her first mission so that all of her torturous, exhausting, dangerous 
training can be put to the test. She’s stunned to realize, though, that her first job 
is an assassination, of a young boy no less; when she encounters the boy and his 
protective sister, she can’t go through with the deed, and she ultimately helps the 
kids escape and search for their uncle. The siblings are also protecting a pearl that 
has supernatural powers, while trying to evade other assassins, demons, ghostly 
beings, and vengeful family members. It’s a lot, but just as the descriptions and 
social settings start feeling a bit too dense, there’s a great fight scene or a creepy-
cool mention of a double-mouthed woman or trickster spirit to change the tone 
and add excitement. An author’s note offers brief details about female ninjas and 
what is actually known about their history, as well as some additional details on 
Japanese ghosts and demons.  AS
April 2016 • 441
Thomson, sArAh l. The Eureka Key. Bloomsbury, 2016 [240p] (Secrets 
of the Seven)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-731-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-732-0 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-7
Martina and Sam have won a puzzle contest, and now they’re off for their prize of 
an adventure across the country, or so they think. Instead, they quickly become 
wrapped up in the dangerous pursuit of artifacts, following clues left behind by 
the founding fathers while also trying to avoid being murdered. Of course, as 
puzzle buffs, the two are well equipped to stay ahead of their pursuers, but they are 
still only a couple of kids against some clever, gun-toting, financially advantaged 
adults. Puzzle fans will enjoy grappling with the teasers embedded in the text, 
and those who just want to keep reading along won’t lose a bit of the plot by just 
glossing over the puzzles. Unfortunately, Sam and Martina rarely step out of their 
firmly established roles of brash rebel and bossy know-it-all, so neither is terribly 
memorable. In addition, there’s so much setup and such predictable plot twists that 
the story has little mystery or excitement. Nevertheless, history buffs will like the 
cool notion that descendants of important people are still battling it out (George 
Washington and Benedict Arnold family members pop up), and readers who are 
puzzle fans may enjoy being a step ahead of the story.  AS
Twohy, miKe Oops Pounce Quick Run!: An Alphabet Caper; written and illus. by 
Mike Twohy. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2016 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-237700-5 $17.99  
R 4-7 yrs
A mouse is “Asleep” in a recliner within the walls of a human house, when a 
“Ball” comes flying into his abode, and the ball-into-stomach impact forces him 
to “Catch” it. The ball belongs to a “Dog” who puts his “Eye” up to the mouse 
hole and plunges in his “Feet” to retrieve the ball, while growling “Grrrr.” With 
a “Help!” the mouse is on the run, and a chase ensues through both the human 
house and the remainder of the alphabet. Somewhere between T and Y, though, 
the two forge a tentative friendship and settle down for a snooze with a concluding 
“Zzzzz.” A few of the words are shoehorned into the formula (e.g., “Very cool” for 
letter V), but overall this is an amicable abecedary romp. The initial letter of each 
word or phrase is printed in a vivid color, which contrasts with the black type of 
the remaining letters, and the large font ensures that the words will easily be seen 
across the room. The text words are, for the most part, easily decodable, expand-
ing the usefulness to the easy-reader crowd as well. The cartoonish India ink and 
felt-tip pen illustrations are effective in conveying the story beyond the minimal 
text; animated lines and streaks transmit the urgency of the pair’s motion, while 
plentiful white space allows the large words and the two emotive animals to take 
center stage. Primary-grade classrooms and libraries will find plenty of curricular 
use for this, and kids will enjoy the lively story and opportunities for full-voice 
exclamation.  JH
442 • The BulleTin
wAlTon, ricK Girl & Gorilla; illus. by Joe Berger. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2016 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-06-227891-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Girl and Gorilla are best friends, and they’re going off to the park to play. But, 
after Girl crashes her bike, how will they get there? Gorilla is awash in suggestions: 
“We can hopscotch to the park!” (Except after “sky blue” Gorilla is hopping in the 
wrong direction.) “We can jump rope to the park!” (They don’t have a jump rope.) 
“We could use my tail!” says Gorilla. “You don’t have a tail,” points out Girl. They 
“walk and think,” pondering their dilemma, and just as a dejected Gorilla is sure 
there’s no way to get to the promised parkland, they’re there. The friendship here is 
tender as well as funny; Girl is a Christopher Robin figure to the exuberant Gorilla, 
with her sure-to-be-reasonable suggestions getting cut off and her patient remind-
ers that Gorilla has no tail becoming a humorous motif. Inky-black linework gives 
body to the digital illustrations, which focus on only a few sunny colors per page; 
Girl is all trim, composed serenity, her long blonde locks barely ruffling, while the 
four-times-her-size Gorilla is puppylike in his zoom from glee to dejection. Kids 
who couldn’t get enough of the topsy-turvy friendship in OHora’s No Fits, Nilson! 
(BCCB 9/13) will appreciate this best-mate tale.  DS
wArmAn, JAnice The World Beneath. Candlewick, 2016 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7856-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
In 1976, Joshua lives with his mother in Cape Town, South Africa, although 
he’s legally supposed to be living in a black homeland with his grandparents. His 
mother’s employer, Mrs. Malherbe, who’s already dealing with an abusive hus-
band, turns a blind eye to the legal implications and isn’t above taking advantage 
of the extra set of hands. Joshua unknowingly complicates his situation when he 
brings home an injured stranger who is on the run from the police; the fugitive, 
activist Tsumalo, befriends Joshua and tells him about the anti-apartheid cause. 
Unfortunately, Tsumalo is nearby when Mr. Malherbe attacks his wife, and after 
saving her life Tsumalo is blamed for the attack and shot by the police. A raging 
Joshua is whisked away by Tsumalo’s colleague to a rebel training camp in Angola. 
Eventually, Joshua makes his way back to Cape Town to bomb a shopping mall for 
the anti-apartheid forces, and there he wrestles with his conscience over whether 
perpetrating violence makes him as culpable as the bigots he’s fighting. In this slim, 
tightly constructed novel, Warman stays true to the narrow perspective of the naive 
country boy observing an uprising in a city he scarcely knows. For readers who 
lack context for the 1970s South African civil rights struggle, however, the dizzy-
ing speed at which events transpire without explanation may be baffling. Even the 
author’s concluding note, in which she speaks of her experiences as a privileged 
white girl in apartheid South Africa, offers more personal commentary than factual 
background. Middle-schoolers who are intrigued by Joshua’s situation, however, 
should have little difficulty finding material to make sense of this gripping drama. 
A glossary is included.  EB
April 2016 • 443
weATherford, cArole bosTon You Can Fly: The Tuskegee Airmen; illus. by Jef-
fery Weatherford. Atheneum, 2016 [96p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4938-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-4940-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Through thirty-three poems, Weatherford recounts the history of the first black 
U.S. military pilots, who trained on the grounds of the Tuskegee Institute in Ala-
bama in 1940 and were activated just in time for combat when America entered 
World War II. The narrative voice draws readers into the action, addressing them 
directly and inviting them to imagine themselves into this ground-breaking role: 
“Your God-fearing mama writes/ that folks back home are on their knees/ sending 
up timber for you—/ their favorite son./ You vow not to wash out.” The training, 
the black role models and pin-ups, the backward steps of homefront bigotry, the 
boredom, the battle action, and the legacy are all addressed, accompanied by Jeffrey 
Weatherford’s scratchboard illustrations. Stats and specs occasionally break the flow 
of some verses, but their inclusion is nonetheless a boon for readers more interested 
in facts than format. With its timeline, bibliography, and annotated list of primary 
sources available online, this title is particularly well adapted to classroom use, where 
language arts and history students can share common air space.  EB
weeKs, sArAh Save Me a Seat; by Sarah Weeks and Gita Varadarajan. Scholastic, 
2016 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-84660-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-84662-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
For Joe Sylvester, who has been diagnosed with auditory processing disorder, the 
start of fifth grade means more of the same: the same struggle to tame the onslaught 
of noise in the school day, the same breakout sessions with a special needs teacher 
that have branded him a dummy among his peers, and the same bullying by Dillon 
Samreen, autocrat of the fifth grade. For Ravi Suryanarayanan, a whip-smart Indian 
newcomer who’s accustomed to academic success and all its perks back home, the 
start of fifth grade is a rude awakening. Even though he does everything his mother 
and grandmother advise, his teachers just can’t get past his accent to recognize his 
brilliance, Dillon and company can’t get past his nerdy attire and accoutrements 
to recognize his coolness, and his family can’t stop smothering him with outraged 
sympathy. Joe, not one to get too involved in fifth-grade drama, clearly sees the 
hopelessness of Ravi’s situation, but he’s pretty busy with his own problem—his 
overprotective mother is now the lunch room monitor, and she sees just how badly 
her son is being treated. That Joe and Ravi will bond is a foregone conclusion, but 
their back-and-forth narration spanning five uncomfortable days and culminating 
in friendship for them is an absorbing read. Even better, the epically satisfying 
comeuppance for Dillon Samreen will have every misunderstood middle-grader 
fist-pumping with vindictive joy.  EB 
444 • The BulleTin
winicK, Judd Hilo: Saving the Whole Wide World; written and illus. by Judd 
Winick. Random House, 2016 [208p] (Hilo)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38624-1 $16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38623-4 $13.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38625-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 4-6
Hilo is back! He’s bringing enthusiasm enough to be worth the exclamation point, 
and readers who have been eagerly anticipating this moment will share the energy. 
The sharp, impeccably written graphic novel Hilo: The Boy Who Crashed to Earth 
(BCCB 11/15) introduced the titular character, a robot from another dimension 
who played a huge role in saving the world before and has now returned. A glori-
ous twist, hinted at in the first volume, is that Hilo himself isn’t purely good, even 
as his kindness, generosity, and fierce joy suggests he should be, or at least wishes 
he was. Readers will be torn as they watch him struggle against his own past and 
against the impact his presence has on Earth as a whole. He’s surrounded by a 
diverse human cast of characters and a remarkable new addition to the mix—a 
warrior cat from another dimension who spits for emphasis, pursues disgusting 
things to prove her disdain for comfort, and shouts wild declarations with satisfy-
ing frequency. The illustrations reinforce the text, with smart color choices hinting 
at doom or redemption to come. Giant-eyed panic faces and over-the-top sound 
effects effectively carry the tension as the words. The cliffhanger end is just as cruel 
as in the previous volume, leaving audiences to wait another year before learning 
what happens next.  AS 
wolTz, AnnA A Hundred Hours of Night; tr. from the Dutch by Laura Watkin-
son. Levine/Scholastic, 2016 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-84828-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-84830-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Dutch teen Emilia is understandably humiliated by her father’s flirtation with a 
teenager, and she’s outraged that her dreamy, artistic mother doesn’t seem to care, 
so she buckles down the worst of her OCD anxieties and boards a plane filled with 
germs to go stay in New York. Once there, Emilia finds herself without a place to 
live, and she’s lucky to run into a nice teen and his little sister who take her and 
another boy in when they realize Hurricane Sandy is coming fast. What follows 
is a sweet, cozy story of burgeoning friendships, set against the stark, dramatic 
backdrop of a city shut down by weather; Woltz cleverly sets up parallels in terms 
of various external conditions changing people in surprising ways. The book’s 
fierce anti-internet stance is somewhat heavy-handed, but when the focus is on 
these diverse four and their pinballing off one another in a small apartment, this 
is an exceptional book. The descriptions of a small community being built within 
a home within a neighborhood within a massive city, all of which are enduring 
many of the same hardships, are gripping, and they will likely make the aftermath 
of that hurricane much more vivid for teens who were nowhere near the event.  AS
April 2016 • 445
wong, liz Quackers; written and illus. by Liz Wong. Knopf, 2016 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-553-51154-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Lovely little Quackers lives at the duck pond with all the other ducks, “but some-
times he feels like he doesn’t quite fit in.” Audiences will see the problem from 
page one: Quackers is a tiger-striped kitty, making the text’s poker-faced statement 
“Quackers is a duck” hilariously dissonant. When Quackers meets Mittens the 
cat, his eyes are opened to the possibilities of catness; however, he finds he misses 
his time among the friendly waterfowl, so the solution is for him to spend part of 
his time in each place. This will be immediately funny to viewers, who will relish 
being ahead of Quackers about the situation, and they’ll giggle at the downsides 
of each existence—duckweed isn’t very tasty, and feline self-cleaning is tedious 
(“You get used to it,” says Mittens philosophically). The watercolor figures have 
the simplicity of flannelboard, with digital layering piecing in colored speech and 
text balloons; that sparseness doesn’t interfere with the charm, especially of the 
smiling kitties, but it nicely mirrors the spare humor of the prose. Kids amused 
by the species-swapping bear in Hudson’s Bear and Duck (BCCB 7/15) will find 
Quackers equally hilarious.  DS
yovAnoff, brennA Places No One Knows. Delacorte, 2016 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52264-8 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52263-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52265-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
At night, high school junior Waverly Camdenmar runs until her feet bleed, runs 
until exhaustion conquers her insomnia and she can finally sleep. In the morning, 
she covers the dark circles under her eyes with makeup and presents as a strait-
laced, straight-A girl. At night, Marshall Holt—well, Marshall Holt’s nights aren’t 
particularly different from his days, as most go by in a substance-impaired haze. 
One night, however, Waverly somehow lands physically in Marshall’s life while she 
is dreaming—and since the rules of the day don’t apply to the night, secrets are 
told, bodies are explored, and, mostly, emptiness is filled. It is the most clichéd of 
romance clichés—good girl meets bad boy, and love (and usually passionate sex) wins 
the day—but in Yovanoff’s hands, the story becomes an almost scientific character 
study and a heartfelt exploration of human connection. Steely and brittle, Waverly 
has planned her ascent to popularity with Machiavellian precision, and she can be 
ruthlessly indifferent to those around her. Marshall is the walking wounded; there’s 
no cocky shell to hide his brokenness, and his softness is almost pathetic. When 
Waverly’s supernatural wanderings bring her to the very vulnerable Marshall, she 
is viciously cruel until she realizes she’s envious of his range of emotions. Both are 
reluctant to make their relationship public (Waverly, because her world would crack 
open, and Marshall, because he’s still not sure if this is a bad acid trip), but when 
Waverly’s dreams no longer bring her to Marshall, they have to make the simple 
but complicated decision to either be apart or together by choice. Neither one is a 
savior because neither one needs saving; they’re just two kids falling in love because 
of and in spite of who they are.  KQG
446 • The BulleTin
CorreCTion:
In our review of Steve Light’s nautical picture book Swap! in the February issue, we 
identified the resourceful young peg-legged protagonist, whose gender is unstated 
in the text, as a girl; the publisher informs us that the character is actually a boy. 
We regret the error, but we’re also a little wistful about the lost possibility.
reCenTly reCeived:
Plummer, Anne Playful Texts and the Emergent Reader: Developing Metalinguistic 
Awareness. Equinox Publishing, 2016 163p 163p
ISBN 978-1-78179-118-9 $100.00
Plummer, a Montessori teacher, defines “playful texts” as texts that play on words 
and images in the same way children play make believe and encourage young readers 
to reflect on the meaning-making procedures of narrative fiction. The book takes a 
scholarly approach in examining texts that include multiple storylines, unreliable 
narrators, language play and visual games, parodies, and nonsensical lists.  KQG
wAdhAm, Tim Wordplay for Kids: A Sourcebook of Poems, Rhymes, and Read-
Alouds. ALA, 2015  225p 
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8389-1266-9 $50.00
A resource for programs, this pulls from nursery rhymes, poetry, folktales, and fairy 
tales to create interactive storytimes for children between five and twelve years of 
age. Sample programs are provided as well as planning tips for those programs, and 
lists of additional titles. An index is included.  KQG
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
April 2016 • 447
Abortion–fiction: Heppermann
Abuse–fiction: Parker
Adventure: Arroyo; Auxier; 
Busby; Cole; Colossal; Grunberg; 
Hamilton; Jennings; thomson 
Eureka; thomson Deadly
African Americans–fiction: davis
African Americans–poetry: Orgill
African Americans–stories: Mc-
Clintock; Miller
African Americans: Weatherford
Afterlife–fiction: Showalter
Alaska–fiction: Hitchcock
Aliens–fiction: Winick
AlPHABet BOOkS: twohy
Animals–fiction: Brown; Cole
Animals–stories: Houran; Park Yaks; 
twohy
Art and artists–fiction: Cronn-Mills
Autistic people–fiction: duyvis
Ballet–stories: McClintock
Baseball: Churnin
Behavior–fiction: Patterson
BiBle StOrieS: Marks
BiOGrAPHieS: Churnin; rosen-
stock; Smith, e.
Biracial people–fiction: duyvis
Black people–fiction: Warman
Books and reading–fiction: Auxier; 
neri
Brothers and sisters–fiction: thom-
son Deadly
Bullying–fiction: linn; Weeks
Camping–fiction: Calame
Cars–stories: Santat
Castles–fiction: Moore
Cats–fiction: Busby
Cats–stories: Wong
Class–fiction: davis
COnCePt BOOkS: Félix
Contests–fiction: Burnham; diCa-
millo
Crime and criminals–fiction: Byrne; 
Hammel; Hopkinson; Jude; king 
OCDaniel; linn; Medina; Smith, 
A.
dancers and dance–stories: Mc-
Clintock
deafness: Churnin
death–fiction: Arnold; Hattemer
demons–fiction: Arroyo; Stiefvater
depression, the: rosenstock
deteCtive StOrieS: Angle-
berger; Hammel; Preble
disabilities: Churnin
disasters–fiction: duyvis; Madonia; 
Woltz
dogs–fiction: Byrne; Hardy
dragons–fiction: king Dragons
ducks–stories: Wong
elephants–stories: koehler
engineering: Corey
ePiStOlAry nOvelS: Moskow-
itz
Ethics and values: Berry; Connor; 
Cronin; linn; McGinty
Fairies–fiction: Harrison
Fairies–stories: Cronin
Subject and uSe Index
keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
448 • The BulleTin
Faith–fiction: Berry
Families–fiction: Arnold; duyvis; 
Medina
Fans–fiction: Moskowitz
FAntASy: Arroyo; Auxier; Chokshi; 
Cronin; Grunberg; Hamilton; 
Harrison; Jennings; Johnson; 
neumeier; Oakes; Park Wing; 
Preble; reuter Hapgood; Shurtliff; 
Stiefvater; thomson Deadly
Fathers–fiction: Avi; diCamillo; 
Hardinge; Madonia; Mcnamee
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
Shurtliff
Folktales and fairy tales–stories: 
Ahlberg
Food and eating–fiction: Colossal
Foster care–fiction: davis
Friends–fiction: Brown; Calame; Con-
nor; diCamillo; dumas; Hattemer; 
Moskowitz; neri; Sutton; Weeks
Friends–stories: Miller; Walton
Ghosts–fiction: Behrens
Giants–stories: Marks
GlBtQ people–fiction: Hepper-
mann; linn
Gorillas–stories: Walton
GOtHiC FiCtiOn: Moore
Grandparents–fiction: Arnold; Avi
GrAPHiC nOvelS: Colossal; 
Grunberg; Winick
Grief–fiction: Hattemer; reuter 
Hapgood
Health: Jarrow
Helpfulness–stories: Cronin; koehler
HiStOriCAl FiCtiOn: Berry; 
diCamillo; dumas; Hardinge; 
Hitchcock; Hopkinson; Mann; 
Medina; Miller; neri; Orgill; Pat-
terson; Warman
History, European: Freedman
History, U.S.: Corey; Santat; Weath-
erford
HuMOr: Ahlberg; Angleberger; 
Bell; Burnham; Calame; Colossal; 
Grau; Hattemer; Houran; koehler; 
Miller; Murray; Park Yaks; Patter-
son; Santat; Walton; Wong
identity–stories: Wong
illness: Jarrow; Smith, e.
imagination–fiction: Sutton
immigrants–fiction: Hopkinson
immortality–fiction: Preble
indian Americans–fiction: Weeks
Language arts: Park Yaks; twohy; 
Weatherford 
latinos–fiction: Medina
learning disabilities–fiction: Weeks
leGendS: Hardy
lGBtQ people–fiction: Cronn-Mills
libraries and librarians–fiction: 
Johnson
Literature, children’s: Oakes
Literature, classical: Hardy
Literature, English: neri
loneliness–fiction: Sutton
Magic–fiction: Auxier; Chokshi; Grau; 
Harrison; neumeier; Park Wing; 
Shurtliff; Stiefvater
Memory–fiction: reuter Hapgood
Mice–fiction: Cole
Missing persons–fiction: Bedford
Monsters–fiction: Grau; Jennings
Mothers–fiction: Connor; Hattemer
Moving–fiction: Arnold
Music and musicians–poetry: Orgill
Muslims–fiction: dumas
MySterieS: Angleberger; Behrens; 
Hammel; Hardinge; Jude; Ma-
donia; Mcnamee; Mcneal; Preble; 
thomson Eureka
native Americans–fiction: Mann
ninjas–fiction: thomson Deadly
nurSery rHyMeS: Murray
Obsessive-compulsive disorder–fic-
tion: king OCDaniel
Orphans–fiction: Byrne
Photography: rosenstock
Plants–fiction: Park Wing
POetry: Fogliano; Orgill; Weather-
ford
Prison–fiction: Connor
Puzzles–fiction: thomson Eureka
racism–fiction: Warman
Readers theater: Fogliano
Reading aloud: Cole; Fogliano; neri
Reading, beginning: twohy
Reading, easy: Angleberger
April 2016 • 449
Reading, reluctant: Grunberg
relationships–fiction: Bedford; Cal-
ame; Cronn-Mills; Hitchcock; Mc-
neal; Moskowitz; Parker; Smith, 
A.; yovanoff
Religious education: Marks
resistance movements: Freedman
revolutionary War–fiction: Mann
rHyMinG StOrieS: Murray
robots–fiction: Brown; Winick
romance–fiction: Moore; Perkins; 
Preble; reuter Hapgood; Showal-
ter; yovanoff
royalty–fiction: Chokshi; neumeier; 
Oakes
runaways–fiction: Byrne
School–fiction: Burnham; dumas; 
Grau; king OCDaniel; linn; 
Stiefvater
School–stories: Bell
Science: Jarrow
Science and scientists–fiction: 
Hardinge
SCienCe FiCtiOn: duyvis; king 
Dragons; McGinty; Showalter; 
Winick
Seasons–stories: Félix
Seasons–poetry: Fogliano
Secrets–fiction: Jude; Mcnamee
Serial killers–fiction: Medina
Sexual assault–fiction: Smith, A.
Ships and sailing–fiction: Busby
SHOrt StOrieS: Avi; Perkins
Sisters–fiction: Jennings
Sleep–fiction: Grunberg
South Africa–fiction: Warman
SPOrtS StOrieS: Churnin
SteAMPunk: Johnson
Storytime: Ahlberg; Bell; Houran; 
koehler; Murray; twohy
Stuttering–fiction: Patterson
Suicide–fiction: Mcneal
Summer–fiction: Behrens; Perkins
SuPernAturAl StOrieS: Ar-
royo; Harrison; Stiefvater; yovanoff
SurvivAl StOrieS: Brown; Woltz
technology–fiction: McGinty
time travel–fiction: Preble
urban planning: Corey
verSe nOvelS: Heppermann; 
Sutton
voyages and travel–fiction: Arnold; 
Bedford; Hamilton; Hattemer; 
Woltz
War–fiction: king Dragons
Women’s studies: rosenstock
World War ii: Freedman; Weatherford
Writers and writing–fiction: neri
Writers and writing: Smith, e.
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
exploring literature 
for children.
David L. Russell, Ferris state University; Karin E. 
Westman; and Naomi J. Wood, Kansas state University, 
Editors 
The Lion and the Unicorn, an international theme- and 
genre-centered journal, is committed to a serious, 
ongoing discussion of literature for children. The 
journal’s coverage includes the state of the publishing 
industry, regional authors, comparative studies of 
significant books and genres, new developments 
in theory, the art of illustration, the mass media, 
and popular culture. It is especially noted for its 
interviews with authors, editors, and other important 
contributors to the field, as well as its outstanding 
book review section. 
Published three times a year in January, April, and September. 
Volume 40 (2016). ISSN 0147-2593; E-ISSN 1080-6563.
the lion and the unicorn
a critical joUrnal oF children’s literatUre
annUal individUal sUbscriptions
$40.00 (print); $50.00 (online)
annUal institUtional sUbscriptions
$133.00 (print); $148.00 (online);  
$186.00 (print & online)
Library and Information Science:
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Library Trends ISSN: 0024-2594 / E-ISSN: 1559-0682
Portal: Libraries and the Academy ISSN: 1531-2542 / E-ISSN: 1530-7131
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
To us, the role of libraries and the 
future of information science clicks.
New perspectives  
that are anything 
but elementary.
JHU Press scholarly journal offerings in  
Children’s Literature:
Bookbird: A Journal of International Children’s Literature
ISSN: 0006-7377 / E-ISSN: 1918-6983
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books  
ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Children’s Literature ISSN: 0092-8208 / E-ISSN: 1543-3374
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly ISSN: 0885-0429 / E-ISSN: 1553-1201
The Lion and the Unicorn ISSN: 0147-2593 / E-ISSN: 1080-6563
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
