T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
April 2013
Vol. 66   No. 8
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
essential.
Deborah stevenson, Editor
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 66 (2013). 
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $58.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$98.00 (print); $105.00 (online); 
$137.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
April 2013
Vol. 66 No. 8
365  the BIg PICture
    I See the Promised Land: A Life of Martin Luther King Jr.   
by Arthur Flowers; illus. by Manu Chitrakar
366  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
   Reviewed titles include:
385  • Quintana of Charyn  by Melina Marchetta
387  • Requiem  by Lauren Oliver
390  •  Exclamation Mark   by Amy Krouse Rosenthal; illus. by  
Tom Lichtenheld
391  • Diego Rivera: An Artist for the People  by Susan Goldman Rubin
396  • The Center of Everything  by Linda Urban
400  ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2013
404  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $98.00; combined print & electronic $137.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2013 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from I See the Promised Land: A Life of Martin Luther King Jr. ©2013 by Manu Chitra-
kar and used by permission of Groundwood Books/House of Anansi Press.
April 2013 • 365
the BIg PICture
I See the Promised Land:  
A Life of Martin Luther King Jr.
by Arthur Flowers; illus. by Manu Chitrakar
There’s no shortage of Martin Luther King biographies for young readers, but this 
is a truly unusual work: a graphic-novel-styled blend of text by Arthur Flowers, 
professor, writer, and griot, with illustrations by Manu Chitrakar, a Patua scroll art-
ist from Bengal, India, created out of a workshop that brought the story of Martin 
Luther King’s life to village India. The result, a work originally released from Indian 
publisher Tara Books in 2010 and now more readily available in a new edition in 
partnership with Canadian publisher Groundwood, is a compelling biography that 
reawakens a life story readers may feel sure they had already exhausted. 
Flowers employs a vibrant storyteller’s voice, using a blend of colloquial 
grammar (“This what make Martin Luther King special”) and sophisticated vo-
cabulary (“The factions thought they had in King a malleable instrument”) for a 
free-wheeling, deeply contextualized account that frames King’s life as being directed 
by a Dahomean Fa, or destiny. The pulsating and incantatory style of the narrative 
results in phrases that will echo in reader’s heads (Rosa Parks “sat there on the hard 
rock of destiny and found it to her liking”), and the text is outspoken, pithy, and at 
times ruefully witty (“The Great Migration—a mass movement that turn a troubled 
rural folk into an equally troubled urban folk”). The book gives background for 
the civil rights movement and King’s own family traditions and covers the famous 
leader’s involvement in events such as the Birmingham bus boycott, the march on 
Selma, and the Memphis strike. While a couple of historical references are slightly 
misleading, Flowers is refreshingly clear-eyed about his subject, identifying some 
of King’s actions as failures, describing the tension between him and younger, more 
radical activists, and briskly acknowledging his womanizing (“Boy got a weakness for 
the flesh”). Altogether, it’s an impassioned, sympathetic, and dimensional portrait 
of a man more complicated than he’s usually portrayed.
The illustrations, a view of King’s life by an artist who’d never previously 
heard of the man but had his own relevant contexts, have a invigoratingly global 
perspective: Bengali script appears as often as English in signs, the stylized treatment 
lends an otherworldly weirdness to Ku Klux Klan outfits, and the Asian aspect of 
many crowd scenes offers a tacit tribute to King’s inspiration, Gandhi. The strong 
colors in translucent tones, thickly outlined and touched with patterning, recall 
early John Steptoe, and their intensity and clarity of design echo the text’s percus-
sive rhythm. The design is what really brings this work together, interjecting text 
366 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
in crisp outlined boxes that give it poetic beats, breaking into pages and spreads of 
stark white text against inky black for dramatic framing of important quotes, and 
sequencing the scroll images on pages. 
The result is a piece that’s both dramatic and informative, a combination 
of rolling narration and striking visuals that suggests theater and cinema. Its creative 
approach will help veteran readers discover King afresh and draw those resistant 
to more orthodox (and sometimes staid) biographies; additionally, it could inspire 
them to loosen up their own biographical efforts and embark on creative projects. 
The book concludes with a glossary of historical concepts and names mentioned 
in the text, an explanation of the genesis of the book, and a description of Patua 
scroll painting. (See p. 376 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Adler, dAvid A. Harriet Tubman and the Underground Railroad. Holiday 
House, 2013 140p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8234-2365-1 $18.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Tubman has plenty of name recognition among middle-schoolers, many of whom 
know her as the runaway slave who led enslaved family members and strangers out 
of Maryland and Virginia and up as far as Canada via the Underground Railroad. 
Although most children’s biographies do a careful job of covering her early years 
in slavery, her personal flight, and her brave work as a “conductor,” not as many 
books follow through to her tireless and less glamorous work as a cook, laundress, 
unofficial nurse, and occasional Union spy throughout the Civil War, and her years 
of financial and family struggle for long decades after the war’s end. Adler’s narrative 
brings balance to Tubman’s life story, and although daring adventures in the 1850s 
and ’60s are the focus, Adler also pauses to consider puzzles and discrepancies in 
the biographical record (e.g., the extent of her support for John Brown’s raid, or the 
estimated number of slaves she led to freedom), and to suggest how little official 
thanks or support for her efforts she ever received from the federal government for 
her extensive wartime service. Primary-source sidebar material, particularly excerpts 
from African-American newspapers, is interspersed throughout the text, as well 
as period photographs and illustrations. Coordinated timelines for Tubman’s life 
and national events, source notes, bibliography, and index are also included.  EB 
April 2013 • 367
AlexAnder, WilliAm Ghoulish Song. McElderry, 2013 [176p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2729-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2731-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Music and performance have magical qualities in the river city of Zombay, and 
when Kaile accepts a gift of a bone flute from a goblin, the tune the instrument 
plays separates the young girl from her shadow. Kaile’s family, convinced that her 
missing shadow indicates Kaile has lost her soul, bars her from their house and insists 
she is dead. In order to reclaim her life, Kaile must track down the restless soul to 
whom the bone originally belonged, a quest that brings her to the musicmakers 
who hold the city together with their tunes just before the river’s flooding threatens 
all of Zombay. Alexander returns to the world that won him the National Book 
Award with Goblin Secrets (BCCB 4/12), but Kaile’s story has a more whimsical, 
fairy-tale feel than the steampunk-infused earlier volume, focusing on Zombay’s 
magic and legends as opposed to automatons. His storytelling remains compelling, 
and Kaile makes a likable heroine, at times admirably noble and at other times 
understandably frustrated and defiant. Her adventures are just scary enough to 
keep readers on edge without giving anyone nightmares, and the climactic battle 
scene is triumphant with a touch of melancholy as Kaile puts to rest the souls of 
victims of past river floods. Those readers who were intrigued by Zombay in the 
first installment will be pleased to find that the city seems to have secrets enough 
for many more books.  KQG 
Archer, Jennifer The Shadow Girl. HarperTeen, 2013 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-183460-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220300-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
On the morning of Lily’s eighteenth birthday, her life changes when her father 
dies in an accident. As she tries to get to grips with the loss, she’s disturbed by her 
mother’s distracted references to a past Lily doesn’t remember, and she relies more 
on Iris, her secret second self whose voice has always been with her. Exploring her 
father’s locked workshop leads to troubling discoveries, such as a valuable violin 
that Lily can mysteriously play beautifully despite having no training. At the same 
time, Lily is torn between Wyatt, her longtime best friend with whom she recently 
shared a kiss, and Ty, the young man who appeared at the scene of her father’s 
accident. It soon becomes clear that Ty has information about Lily’s past that he’s 
keeping from her, and Lily is stunned when she finds out what it is: Iris was Lily’s 
violin prodigy sister, who died young of leukemia, and from whom Lily was cloned. 
The slow unspooling of family secrets is compelling, and Lily’s distraction by two 
hot guys is both situationally logical and romantically pleasing. However, the book 
tries to do too much by making Iris’ playing a supernatural healing force, leading 
Ty, who has a brother in a coma, to search Lily out in the hopes that she acquired 
Iris’ curative musical ability; additionally, the science is old-horror-movie muddled 
and made-up, with lots of holes in its exploration. This is therefore best suited for 
romance audiences who like a little extranormal twist; they’ll likely forgive the 
scientific bogusness and just enjoy the blend of secrets and pounding hearts.  DS
368 • The BulleTin
ArmisteAd, cAl Being Henry David. Whitman, 2013 [270p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-0615-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Since all he has in his possession is a tattered copy of Walden, our amnesiac teen 
protagonist, who woke up in a New York train station with no memory of who 
he is or how he got there, adopts the name of Henry David, or Hank for short. A 
homeless kid takes Hank under his wing, but the pair almost immediately runs 
into serious trouble, and Hank flees to Concord, hoping to find some clue as to 
who he is and what he’s running from. In Concord, he finds the spirit of Thoreau. 
who encourages him with aphoristic wisdom, and he meets kind people, includ-
ing Thomas, a research librarian who is willing to help him sort out his problem 
without turning him over to the authorities. When he finds himself on the database 
of Missing and Exploited Children, his memories flood back, and he must now 
follow Thoreau to find his answers and come to grips with his past. Hank’s con-
nection to Thoreau is more structural device than thematically relevant content, 
but his travel provides a kind of off-the-grid therapy that many teens would benefit 
from if given the chance, and there is even a bit of romance and danger thrown in 
to spice the stew. Teens who have already discovered Thoreau will appreciate the 
time spent with Hank in his literary and natural world, and those who haven’t may 
have their appetites whetted to read Walden for themselves. Even those with little 
interest in Thoreau will find this a solid psychological mystery about a teen who’s 
made a mistake that he can’t keep running from.  KC 
BAker-smith, GrAhAme FArTHER; written and illus. by Grahame Baker-
Smith. Templar/Candlewick, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6370-4 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 2-4
In this vivid picture-book fancy, a boy lives in an isolated house on a rocky outcrop 
into the sea, where his father is devoted and loving—except when he is possessed 
with the dream of flying and labors in his workshop to find a way to the sky (“Day 
and night, he sewed and stitched and sawed and hammered and trimmed the 
feathers of a thousand hopeful wings”). When the boy becomes a man himself, 
he too is drawn by the dream of flight and actually takes off into the air (“In the 
vast blue sky, I felt my father with me”). When he has his own son, he wonders 
if his father’s dream will visit the child as well. This is a story about dreams and 
visions, steeped in poetry, overlaced with the Icarus myth, and sprinkled with a 
touch of Freudian competitiveness. The story, unfortunately, is more lyrical than 
logical: the father’s flying dreams seem like family-destroying madness, but the son’s 
easy achievement of his father’s vision makes flying a cheerful everyday affair; it’s 
a confusingly inconsistent treatment, and not clear what dreaming there is left to 
do for the new baby boy. Mostly, though, this is a visual experience: Baker-Smith’s 
digitally created illustrations draw on painterly techniques and photography to 
create a fantastically touched reality. Muted blues and taupes predominate in im-
ages of life at the barren sea’s edge, and the lacy golden intricacy of the wings (with 
a touch of steampunk in their shimmering gears) bring a notable delicacy to the 
otherwise cool and unforgiving realm. While the story never really takes off, this 
could be an interesting pairing with an Icarus retelling, and its dreamy art will draw 
visually attuned youngsters.  DS
April 2013 • 369
BerAm, nell Yoko Oko: Collector of Skies; by Nell Beram and Carolyn Boriss-
Krimsky. Amulet/Abrams, 2013 178p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-0444-4 $24.95   
R* Gr. 7-12
This thoughtful biography examines Ono not simply as John Lennon’s wife but as 
an avant-garde artist in her own right and directs the discussion squarely at a teen 
audience that is likely to be unswayed by residual traces of Beatlemania. Here we 
meet a privileged child of Japanese parents, educated in Asian and Western cultural 
traditions, struggling in World War II Japan, anxious to establish a creative life on 
her own terms, and willing to relocate to any city willing to be receptive to her art. 
Beram and Boris-Krimsky are not only sensitive docents for her artwork—e.g., her 
optimistic “instruction” pieces, her enigmatic black bag performances, her contro-
versial “Bottoms” film—but are also empathetic guides to her interior life: Ono’s 
falling back into the shadows of higher-profile husbands, lovers, and artists often 
left her frustrated, depressed, and scrappily determined to push out into her own 
spotlight. Certainly her marriage to Lennon looms large, but it is adroitly recontex-
tualized here as one more significant relation within a long and productive career. 
Clean text space, delicate but legible font, and scads of photographic portraiture 
and art piece reproductions of excellent clarity contribute to an overall book design 
worthy of its subject. A timeline of life events, extensive bibliography, photo credits, 
and index are included. Here’s a rare example of youth-adult recommendation: 
teens may want to consider giving a copy to their Beatle-bitten grandmothers.  EB
Berk, Josh Strike Three, You’re Dead. Knopf, 2013 [256p] (Lenny & the 
Mikes)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97008-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87008-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98736-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7 
Although Lenny, an ardent Phillies fan, lacks the athletic skill for the diamond, he 
does have a big voice that he hopes will make him into a sports announcer one day. 
A local network offers a DIY video contest with an inning at the announcer’s mic 
as the prize, and Lenny and his best pals, Mike and Other Mike, recreate a 1944 
game in which a fluke led to the worst earned run average for a pitcher in baseball 
history. Their video clinches the coveted announcer gig, but Lenny never gets his 
chance in the box: just before Lenny’s debut, a young pitcher keels over dead on 
the mound. Lenny’s cardiologist parents agree that the circumstances of the death 
seem unusual, if not outright suspicious, and that’s all Lenny and his crew need to 
begin the detective work to find the murderer. While the mystery itself won’t be 
too difficult for readers to solve (the motive and opportunity will be evident to any 
reader half awake), the real fun here is hanging out with Lenny and his pals. Berk 
has a great ear for junior-high banter, and the guys are just bright enough, just silly 
enough, and just focused enough to sound realistic, even in an improbable plot. 
Librarian bonus alert: check chapter four for the reference interview. How would 
your skills measure up if Lenny, Mike, and Other Mike turned up at your desk?  EB
370 • The BulleTin
BlAGden, scott Dear Life, You Suck. Harcourt, 2013 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-547-90431-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Cricket is recovering, though most would say badly or perhaps not at all, from a 
traumatic childhood that has left him hostile and suspicious toward adults and God. 
Since he was nine, he has been living in a Catholic boys’ home in northern Maine, 
and now, with eight months to go before his eighteenth birthday, he has important 
life decisions to make. That’s if he can keep out of trouble, though; while he’s able 
to walk away from anyone trying to bully or harass him personally, he can’t allow 
the bullies to push the younger orphans around. After putting a particularly nasty 
thug in the hospital, he is surprised to win the affections of the girl of his dreams, 
who sees through his gruff exterior to his heart, which, if not permanently broken, 
is severely cracked. Cricket conveys his damage through a wildly inventive voice; 
his often profound philosophies and speculations about life, parents, art, sex, and 
God are couched in energetic (an sometimes shockingly profane) imagery that turn 
ordinary language into the verbal equivalent of a Chihuly glass sculpture—colorful, 
twisted, brittle, and arresting. Readers will need a high tolerance for crudeness but 
will have no problem seeing the function behind the form of Cricket’s edgy dic-
tion. Moreover, his indictment of failed adults, as well as his ultimate appreciation 
of those who are trying to get it right, will certainly resonate with fans of Chris 
Crutcher and Frank Portman.  KC 
Blythe, cArolitA Revenge of a Not-So-Pretty Girl. Delacorte, 2013 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99081-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74286-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97845-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Faye is becoming a bitter fourteen-year-old; she is not that pretty, she’s not that 
popular, she’s not that well off, and she’s not that great in school. Her mother, on 
the other hand, is pretty, but she is also moody and mean, whipping Faye with 
an extension cord for breaking her mother’s capricious rules. Her friend Caroline 
convinces Faye to join her in stealing, targeting Evelyn Rider, an elderly former 
movie star; when Faye accidentally knocks the old woman out, she worries that 
she might have killed Evelyn and later returns to the scene of the crime. Finding 
the woman alive but unable to move from where they left her the day before, Faye 
helps her, and the two eventually form a friendship that makes Faye feel worthy 
of being loved for the first time in her life. Faye’s story is deeply embedded in 
the African-American popular culture of Brooklyn in 1984, but she will resonate 
strongly with contemporary readers in any setting as she actively tries to sort out 
her moral values in accordance with her desires, largely without the guidance of a 
caring adult before Evelyn enters her life. As Faye gets to know Evelyn, she learns 
that some mistakes can be corrected while others have the potential to haunt you 
for the rest of your life. Evelyn has her own secrets and self-created heartaches, 
and her experience of misplaced priorities enables her to impart wisdom without 
preaching as well as to introduce a tiny bit of black film history into the mix. Faye 
develops credibly from angry, unlikable teen, who wants to take as much as she 
can get, to someone who wishes to give more forgiveness and understanding than 
she’s received, making this a well-told story of an empowering friendship.  KC
April 2013 • 371
BoudreAu, hélène I Dare You Not to Yawn; illus. by Serge Bloch. Candlewick, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5070-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
“There you are, minding your own business, building the tallest block tower in 
the history of the universe or dressing up the cat when suddenly . . . a yawn pops 
out. Next thing you know, you’re being sent upstairs to get your pj’s on!” Boudreau 
connects the dots for youngsters between an irrepressible yawn and a swift and 
sudden bedtime, elaborating on the difficulties of avoiding yawns when one is 
exposed to them: “Yawns are like colds. They spread!” The joke is that her book, 
by its very nature, will have kids yawning right and left as they follow the narrator 
in his attempts to hold back his yawns, covering his eyes, running (sweating bul-
lets) from yawn-inducing objects, and desperately clamping his hands across his 
mutinous mouth. The closing page, in which the young narrator appears happily 
and sleepily ensconced in his cozy bed, implies that bedtime may be just what was 
needed after all. Boudreau’s text is droll in its straight faced admonitions to the 
audience to stay strong in the face of yawns from every side, and kids who dread 
bedtime will easily relate to our young hero’s dilemma. Bloch’s lively illustrations, 
hand-drawn in ink and colored digitally, have the humorous, cartoonish verve of 
Jules Feiffer, and the ginger-haired, big-headed young narrator is amusing in his 
futile attempts to suppress the traitorous yawns. Muted blues and pinks and lots of 
clean white space provide a peaceful background to the bolder touches of golden 
orange and vivid scarlet that accent the action. This would make a surprisingly 
effective introduction to a primary-grade science lesson on yawning or a good 
bedtime book for encouraging somnolence (if parents can get through it without 
succumbing to slumber themselves).  JH
Boyne, John The Terrible Thing that Happened to Barnaby Brocket; illus. by Oliver 
Jeffers. Knopf, 2013 277p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97763-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97762-5 $16.99 
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97764-9 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Mr. and Mrs. Brocket pride themselves on their exceedingly normal lives, so when 
their third child is born with the peculiar ability to float, they are predictably 
horrified. The Brockets deal with Barnaby’s tomfoolery by leashing him to the 
ground, until he is eight years old and frustration and embarrassment lead his 
mother to literally cut him loose and send him airborne. His subsequent journey 
takes him to nearly all the continents, where he meets other people who have also 
been rejected by their families for not being “normal,” and he begins to realize that 
love and acceptance are actually two very different things. This fable-like story 
balances gentle humor and quiet, poignant moments to get its message across, 
neatly avoiding the pitfalls of sentimentality with a quick joke or location change. 
Clever allusions to Roald Dahl call up James’ journey in his giant peach; there is 
less absurdity and ingenuity here, but the same notions of family, identity, and 
relationships are explored. The episodic structure of Barnaby’s travels makes this a 
prime choice for a family or classroom readaloud, and the themes lend themselves 
easily to discussion. Barnaby’s return to his family and his realization that while 
they love him, they do not accept him is a painful but liberating moment; readers 
372 • The BulleTin
just beginning to question their family dynamics may find it refreshing to find a 
message that values individuality and relationships and honors the struggles that 
it takes to balance the two. Jeffers’ occasional cartoonish pencil illustrations are 
subtly funny, complementing the text’s gentle humor.  KQG
Brody, JessicA Unremembered. Farrar, 2013 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-374-37991-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Found adrift among the wreckage of a fallen aircraft, Sera has no memory of who 
she is, how she got there, and how she survived the crash, and she is whisked away 
by social services to a foster home until they can find out who she is. Once settled, 
she realizes that not only does she have no memories of a personal past, but that 
her experience and understanding of ordinary things, like malls and the internet, 
are missing as well. She also discovers that she is a mathematical genius, knows 
several languages, and is freakishly strong. Her geeky younger foster brother is 
suspicious of her beauty and talent, but she enlists his help in trying to sort out 
who she might be. Between their efforts and the intermittent appearance of a boy 
called Zen, who sparks a physical reaction in Sera whenever they meet, she begins 
to find clues about a company called Diotech, but not before several people with 
clearly malicious intent are on her trail. Zen holds all the keys to unlock her story, 
but he is pulled away from her, so the reveal is parlayed through a cast of characters 
from what turns out to be her future. Pace and premise are the major draws here; 
serial captures and escapes propel the action forward as the story of Sera’s genetically 
engineered existence unfolds along the way. Though the romance between Sera and 
Zen is pretty sappy, love that transcends time, circumstance, and the designs of 
evil scientists has undeniable appeal, as does the speculative treatment of the pos-
sibilities of engineered humanity. Readers who like their science fiction mixed with 
classic romance tropes will want to brave the dangers along with Sera and Zen.  KC 
chArlton-truJillo, e. e. Fat Angie. Candlewick, 2013 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6119-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6373-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Everyone in their small town was shocked when Angie’s sister joined the Air Force 
rather than taking a basketball scholarship to college. When she was captured in 
Iraq and a YouTube video of her torture went viral, Angie was devastated. Angie’s 
very public attempt at suicide has garnered her no sympathy from any quarter; in 
fact, it makes her bully bait at school and at home, where her mother is emotionally 
frozen and both her mother and her brother have become toxically mean. Possible 
salvation comes from KC Romance, a brash, seemingly fearless new girl who is 
attracted to Angie, but who is confused and a little put off by Angie’s fumbling 
responses. While Angie tries to figure out if she is “gay-girl gay,” she is also trying 
to live up to her sister’s legacy by trying out for the basketball team. Her unlikely 
success in that endeavor somewhat threatens the realism here, but it also injects a 
measure of hope in an otherwise bleak story, particularly when Angie discovers that 
KC has deep problems of her own that Angie can’t begin to help solve. The only 
character who isn’t achingly broken is Jake, a neighbor whose life of normalcy and 
social success has left him ill-equipped to help Angie, though he tries. Ultimately, 
April 2013 • 373
though, Angie’s gradual grieving process, which takes her through crushing embar-
rassment as well as bittersweet triumph, will move readers as it takes up multiple 
contemporary issues and processes them with both credibility and considerable 
rhetorical finesse.  KC 
clArk, PlAtte f. Bad Unicorn. Aladdin, 2013 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5012-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5014-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Middle-schooler Max Spencer is your garden variety gaming nerd and social outcast, 
but he also happens to be the only person in the world who can read The Codex 
of Infinite Knowability. Completely unaware of the book’s magical properties, Max 
reads from it while hanging out with pals one afternoon; this transports them all 
to a dystopic version of the future where machines have taken over the world and 
a flesh-eating unicorn has decimated the human population. Meanwhile, back in 
Max’s present-day hometown, the same carnivorous unicorn, Princess the Destroyer, 
has traveled from another dimension in search of the Codex and joins forces with 
Max’s bully tormentor. Max has to figure out how to use the Codex to defeat the 
unicorn both in the future and the present (or the present and the past, depending 
on your perspective), but the book isn’t all that helpful: Max never knows from one 
page turn to the next if he’ll be reading about life-saving magical spells or diatribes 
on the dangers of power-hungry squirrels. This Adam Rex–like combination of 
fantasy, sci-fi, and middle-school angst is infused with absurd humor and wry social 
commentary, and it will elicit more than a few chuckles from readers familiar with 
epic fantasy and pop culture. Clark gently parodies Tolkien and Rowling without 
antagonism and manages to create a wildly diverting world that features golf-
obsessed monks, claustrophobic dwarves, sentient arcade games, and of course, one 
very bad unicorn. Max and his pals are lovable, if a bit one-note, and the narration 
capably guides readers through the various jumps in time and space. The ending 
lays the groundwork for a sequel, so both fans and anti-fans of boy wizards have 
something to look forward to.  KQG 
coley, liz Pretty Girl-13.  Tegen/HarperCollins, 2013 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212737-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212738-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Thirteen-year-old Angie doesn’t scream or struggle when a man abducts her in the 
woods during a Girl Scout campout; instead, she listens to a voice inside her head 
telling her to hide and retreats inside herself. Three years later, she appears on the 
street in front of her old house, convinced that she is simply returning from the 
camping trip the next day like she was supposed to, and she’s therefore surprised 
and horrified to discover that she doesn’t recognize her now sixteen-year-old body. 
At first diagnosed with amnesia, it soon becomes clear that Angie suffers from 
dissociative identity disorder, and she and her therapist uncover four other per-
sonalities. As Angie works through her therapy, she is given the option to undergo 
an experimental surgical treatment, and she has to decide whether to proceed 
with talk therapy that could integrate her alters or surgery that will remove them, 
along with all their memories. This is a fascinating premise, especially as teens are 
374 • The BulleTin
working through their own identity issues and transformations, and Coley couches 
Angie’s disorder in a gripping, ripped-from-the-headlines storyline with plenty of 
suspense, plot twists, and pathos. Given the scarcity of medical consensus about 
the disorder, the portrayal of its effects is open for speculation; we’ve come a long 
way from Sybil, however, and Angie is a likable heroine with admirable survival 
and coping skills, with and without the help of her alters. While readers may not 
agree with all of her decisions about which memories to withhold and which to 
expose, even to herself, they will certainly find themselves emotionally involved in 
her story from beginning to end.  KC
collomore, AnnA The Ruining. Razorbill, 2013 313p
ISBN 978-1-59514-470-6 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 8-12
It’s the opportunity for escape Annie has dreamed of: leaving her abusive Detroit 
household behind for a job as a nanny in California’s golden Marin County while 
she attends college in San Francisco. Libby, her new boss, showers Annie with 
affection and guidance, even assuaging her guilt over the drowning death of her 
younger sister; Annie’s charge, Zoe, is adorable; and next-door neighbor Owen 
turns quickly from a crush to a serious romance. This idyll is soon undermined by 
Libby’s mercurial bouts of savage disapproval, heightened demands on Annie, and 
disturbing behaviors. A shaken Annie begins to doubt her own perceptions, and 
Libby’s escalating campaign—which seems tied to a secret in her past that she fears 
Annie has discovered—eventually results in Annie’s being placed into a psychiatric 
institution. There’s a big shoutout to “The Yellow Wallpaper” in here, but this owes 
much more to the classic film and play Gaslight (and Victorian thrillers such as 
The Woman in White) with its gradual destabilizing of the heroine to cover up the 
villain’s crimes. Readers may guess the underlying facts early on, but Libby’s crazed 
blend of forced teaming and punitive abandonment is hypnotic to watch, and her 
setups for Annie are definitely cinema-ready. Annie falls apart with surprisingly 
little pressure, though (a fact that the book itself acknowledges), so her reactions 
are sometimes disproportionate. More disappointingly, the plot crumples into 
a heap without a satisfying denouement, with Libby’s comeuppance happening 
completely offstage, and Annie’s salvation is entirely passive, merely leaving her 
at the mercy of somebody who’s hopefully more benevolent than Libby. There’s 
still some nightmarish pleasure in watching Annie’s world collapse around her 
and wondering how she’ll make it out, though, and readers keen on psychological 
thrillers may find that satisfying enough.  DS
de lint, chArles The Cats of Tanglewood Forest; illus. by Charles Vess. Little, 
2013 285p
ISBN 978-0-316-05357-0 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
When twelve-year-old Lillian is bitten by a poisonous snake in the woods, the 
mysterious cats who live there use their limited magic to save her, turning her into 
a kitten in the process. Dismayed at being stuck forever in feline form, Lillian seeks 
help from witch Old Mother Possum, who grants Lillian’s wish by creating a reality 
where she was never been bitten by the snake. Unfortunately, there is an unseen 
consequence to her wish: her beloved aunt turns up dead of snakebite instead. A 
horrified Lillian seeks help to unravel the disaster, leading her on a sequence of 
magical encounters with ominous Aunt Nancy, the giant Bear People, and a clever 
fox, until she realizes she must return to Old Mother Possum to try once again to 
April 2013 • 375
set things right. This is an expansion of the picture book A Circle of Cats (BCCB 
9/03), and the elongated narrative is unfortunately long and rambling. Since the 
characters are essentially folkloric archetypes, there’s no depth there to sustain readers 
through the sprawl. The premise and details of the story remain imaginative and 
original, however, and the aspects of Lillian’s world (seemingly early nineteenth 
century) are effectively paired with elements of Native American mythology and 
American and European folklore. Vess’s frequent full-color illustrations, executed 
in pencil and layers of colored ink washes, are striking in their woodsy tones, but 
the drafting of the human figures, particularly Lillian, is at times awkward, and 
scenes are more muddy than shadowy. Nonetheless, there is both a vintage and a 
modern, slightly Disney-esque vibe to the art that makes it engaging. Those willing 
to persevere through the rambling may find folkloric food for thought here.  JH
defelice, cynthiA Nelly May Has Her Say; illus. by Henry Cole. Ferguson/
Farrar, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-374-39899-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Impoverished young Nelly May finds employment as housekeeper and cook for 
the wealthy Lord Ignasius Pinkwinkle, who insists that Nelly call certain things by 
the names he has created, beginning with himself, “Most Excellent of All Masters.” 
Nelly May finds that in Lord Pinkwinkle’s house a bed is a “restful slumberific,” a 
pair of pants are “long-legged limberjohns,” and even the dog is to be referred to 
as a “fur-faced fluffenbarker.” Nelly quickly memorizes the new names, which is 
lucky for her because she needs them all when the dog’s “wigger-wagger” catches 
on “flaming pop-and-sizzle” and the “roof-topped castlelorum” nearly goes up in 
smoke. Nelly quits in frustration after uttering her mouthful of a warning but is 
soon rehired by a sheepish Lord Pinkwinkle, who humbly agrees to be called “Pinky” 
thereafter. This is a lively version of the English folktale “Master of All Masters,” 
and DeFelice’s storytelling is smart and snappy, with the delightfully overblown vo-
cabulary taking center stage. Intrepid Nelly May is an engaging and likable heroine, 
and her dwindling patience with Lord Pinkwinkle is made entirely understandable. 
Cole’s illustrations, line and watercolor textured with colored-pencil hatchwork, 
are amusing, and his petite, ginger-haired Nelly May is a spunky counterpart to 
the large, rotund, and rather foppish Lord Pinkwinkle. The fun here is definitely 
in the wordplay, and this would make a diverting introduction to an activity in 
which kids create their own names for objects à la Lord Pinkwinkle, as well as a 
rollicking readaloud or storytelling selection in its own right.  JH
flood, nAncy Bo Cowboy Up!: Ride the Navajo Rodeo; illus. with photographs 
by Jan Sonnenmair. Wordsong/Boyds Mills, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59078-893-6 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
This blend of poetry, prose, and photography introduces readers to the sport of 
rodeo and its popularity in the Navajo community. Each spread portrays an event at 
or aspect of the rodeo with a vivid color photograph, a few descriptive paragraphs, 
and, intriguingly, a poem, usually from the POV of a young participant. The book 
focuses strongly on the rodeo youngsters, taking a look at such events as the “Woolly 
Rider,” where kids under fifty pounds try to stay on top of skeptical, fast-moving 
sheep, as well as rough-stock events such as bronc and bull-riding, where older 
376 • The BulleTin
kids tackle the same hard-bucking animals as grown cowboys. The book skips a 
few relevant specifics (the setting is only “the West”) and the poetry’s a little prosy, 
but it’s a scenic tour of a way of life unfamiliar to many readers. Flood, who lives 
on a Navajo Nation reservation herself, includes details about turquoise-jeweled 
grandmas in the stands and frybread stalls on the midway to emphasize the Navajo 
aspect of the world. The photos are the main draw, however, as thumb-size kids 
overshadowed by their hats or young teenagers hang determinedly on as the dust 
flies around them against backgrounds of pipe corrals or wide, turbulent skies. The 
text is a little dense for the readers who will be most interested, but sections could 
be excerpted for reading aloud to younger kids, and many will just enjoy poring 
over the visuals. The book concludes with a broad overview of rodeo history and 
a list of resources including books and websites on Native American rodeo and 
rodeo in general.  DS
floWers, Arthur I See the Promised Land: A Life of Martin Luther King Jr; illus. 
by Manu Chitrakar. Groundwood, 2013 156p
ISBN 978-1-55498-328-5 $18.95   
R* Gr. 9 up
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 365, for review.
fusco, kimBerly neWton Beholding Bee. Knopf, 2013 [336p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96836-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86836-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89886-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-8
It’s 1942, and Bee has spent her life traveling with a carnival, working the hot 
dog stand with Pauline, who took Bee in when her parents were killed. Though 
Pauline has tried to teach her to love the world and be happy despite their dismal 
circumstances, Bee’s days are shadowed by the port-wine stain on her face that 
makes customers gawk and say unkind things about her and by their boss’ threats 
to make Bee and her birthmark one of the show’s exhibits. When Pauline leaves to 
work another show, Bee runs away, taking with her a piglet and a stray dog. Finding 
the perfect house, she is invited in by a woman who has mysteriously appeared to 
her numerous times over the course of her life. Mrs. Potter and her friend, Mrs. 
Swift, agree that Bee and her pets may stay with them, but Bee soon finds that her 
guardians are not exactly of this world. At school, Bee’s reluctance to cooperate gets 
her placed in a special-needs class, where she meets a friendly girl, and she starts 
piecing together a life that, unbeknownst to her, was really hers all along, since 
the house she found is the house her mother grew up in and that Bee herself has 
inherited. The magical realism is a charming explanation for the convenience of 
Bee’s finding not just a home but her rightful home, and Bee is refreshingly raw for 
a character at the center of such a sweet story—selfish, grumpy, and mean-spirited 
at times as she gradually learns to feel accepted. Unfortunately, Fusco takes her 
contrivances too far, with Mrs. Potter and Mrs. Swift not only Bee’s ancestors but 
also overly impressive role models (both of them have heroic pasts) for the literally 
shame-faced Bee. The result ends up being more purposive than genuinely inspir-
ing, but the piling on of Bee’s initial misery may be balanced by the piling on of 
redeeming grace.  KC 
April 2013 • 377
GerBer, cArole Seeds, Bees, Butterflies, and More!: Poems for Two Voices; illus. by 
Eugene Yelchin. Holt, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9211-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-5
In this botanical collection of verse, eighteen poems focus on various aspects of 
the ecosystem from their own perspectives. A rabbit faces off with an unsuspecting 
new seedling in “New Shoot”: sunflowers talk about their growth and seeding in 
“Helianthus”; a worm and flower converse about compost in “Bedmates”; a garden 
gives thanks for ladybug’s pest-eating in “Ladybug Hugs.” The verses are somewhat 
literal, but they’re celebratory and gently informative, and their dual-voice structure 
(each voice in a different type color and margin setoff) makes the volume very suit-
able for readaloud and performance. Yelchin’s gouache art, touched with graphite, 
balances crisp linework on the figures against backgrounds softly textured with Van 
Gogh–like brushstrokes. Overall, it’s an appealing blend of classic botanical intri-
cacy, retro design charm, and freewheeling and airy modernity. While the format 
suggests readers of an age to read the verses alone, which would be a lively element 
in a nature study unit, this could also be a basis for an entertaining theater piece 
with younger kids. The book concludes with a brief botanic overview in prose.  DS
Giff, PAtriciA reilly Gingersnap. Lamb, 2013 147p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93891-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83891-0 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98029-8 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
When Janya’s big brother, Rob, leaves to go to war on a Navy destroyer in the 
Pacific, Jayna must go to stay with their landlady, Celine, an arrangement that is 
unsettling for both Jayna and Celine. Even more disturbing is the fact that Jayna 
has started to hear a voice speaking to her and sometimes sees facets of a person: 
a lock of ginger hair that disappears into nothing, a pair of feet, hands wearing 
Jayna’s nail polish. After Jayna receives news that Rob is missing in action, the spirit 
guides Jayna to leave Celine’s and head to Brooklyn to find a woman named Elise, 
who owns a bakery, Gingersnap (also Jayna’s nickname from her dead mother), and 
who may be Jayna’s grandmother. This is an unusual little slice of World War II 
American life that will have wide appeal. Historical-fiction buffs will be intrigued 
by the wartime period details of Jayna’s life while the partial manifestation of the 
ghost girl is intriguing but not too creepy. Jayna’s search for her extended family 
may resonate with kids with foster-care experience, and her yearning for a home 
is an entirely understandable desire, even for kids who have never been displaced 
from their own. The soup recipes (from Jayna’s family cookbook) interspersed 
throughout the text may also inspire readers to do some post-story cooking.  JH
hAnson, WArren It’s Monday, Mrs. Jolly Bones!; illus. by Tricia Tusa. Beach 
Lane/Simon, 2013 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1229-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3621-3 $12.99   
R 4-7 yrs
In this rollicking ballad, Mrs. Jolly Bones is a woman who keeps a serious house-
keeping schedule—in her own peculiar way. Monday is for doing laundry, which 
concludes with throwing all the clothes out the window; Tuesday’s gardening ends 
378 • The BulleTin
with a garden-wrecking dance (“Then polka through the posy patch and make 
those flowers fly!”); Wednesday’s housecleaning culminates in a toilet-bowl bath, 
etc. Finally Sunday comes, and a blissful day of rest comes to a celebratory finale 
(“Then yodel until midnight with a chicken in your lap!”). Hanson writes with 
an appealingly larky joie de vivre; the combination of drudgery and absurdity is 
amusing, and the crisp scansion makes the verse dance. Though the abundance of 
dark-lined elements (offset only by delicate, pale touches of watercolor) overbusies 
some scenes, Tusa’s scrabbly outlining and rich detailing expand on the text’s chaotic 
humor: Mrs. Jolly Bones is gleefully kooky the entire time, sharing her house with 
amiable livestock (who line up politely for their turn as Mrs. Jolly Bones bathes), 
ironing her clothes with the teapot, and creating a humongous birthday cake in 
a wheelbarrow. Kids will adore the transgressive joy of dutiful housekeeping gone 
silly; just don’t ask them to help clean up afterwards.  DS
hArness, cheryl Mary Walker Wears the Pants: The True Story of the Doctor, 
Reformer, and Civil War Hero; illus. by Carlo Molinari. Whitman, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-4990-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M 7-9 yrs
Nineteenth-century women who defied social conventions generally make for pretty 
good reading, and Mary Edwards Walker certainly broke her share of barriers. With 
her experience as a female physician, pants-wearing dress reform advocate, Civil 
War medic and prisoner of war, divorcee, and Medal of Honor recipient, Walker’s 
trailblazing has the components for a riveting biography. Unfortunately, shallow 
coverage and bare patches result in a tantalizing but ultimately unsatisfying portrayal: 
“In 1855, Dr, Mary Edwards Walker, M.D., became one of the very first female 
physicians.” Surely there’s a story behind this fact worth hearing, but nothing is 
added aside from an illustration of trouser-suited Mary sitting in a med-school lec-
ture hall. Then comes the Civil War: “Again and again, Dr. Walker asked to join the 
army as a surgeon. Again and again, Mary was told no.” We see Mary in the field, 
but are never told how she supported herself as a volunteer. Spying for the Union 
landed her in a Richmond jail for several months, but the episode and jail term 
rate only a few lines of text. The most notable takeaway is Walker’s advocacy for 
dress reform, and much is made in text and illustrations of her hand-tailored suits 
and military-style uniforms that she wore from the start of her career through to 
her death in 1920, and of the public criticism she endured for her sartorial bravery. 
The watercolor and colored-pencil illustrations have an appealing period palette and 
some dramatic portraiture, but poses are often stiff and awkward. The dress theme 
could make this a useful companion piece to Rhoda Blumberg’s Bloomers! (BCCB 
9/93), but educators and readers interested in Civil War female heroines will be 
better served by Marissa Moss’ Nurse, Soldier, Spy: The Story of Sarah Edmonds, A 
Civil War Hero (BCCB 5/11). No source references are included.  EB 
hArrison, dAvid l. A Perfect Home for a Family; illus. by Roberta Anga-
ramo. Holiday House, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2338-5 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Papa and Mama Raccoon are about to have twins, but their home in a tree has 
become too noisy (thanks to another round of blue jay chicks) and too crowded (a 
April 2013 • 379
large opossum family has moved in upstairs). The pair head to town and consult 
real estate agent A. J. Squirrel, who shows them a wonderfully spacious attic. After 
negotiating a fair rental price (eight acorns a month), the raccoons move in. To 
their dismay, the residents below—a human family with a dog and a baby—are 
noisy as well: “‘What’s that?’ said Mama. ‘People,’ said Papa, ‘right under our feet.’ 
‘I’m out of here,’ said Mama.” Mama heads for their original home, and to her and 
Papa’s joy they find that the blue jays and opossums have moved out, just in time 
for the birth of the twins. The plot owes much to P. D. Eastman’s classic easy reader 
The Best Nest, but it is still quite enjoyable in its own right. The simple vocabulary 
and laconic narrative (“‘Follow me,’ said Mama. ‘Where to?’ said Papa. ‘Town,’ 
said Mama”) not only keeps the pace effectively brisk but also puts this within 
the abilities of many young readers. Angaramo’s acrylic paintings are cheerful and 
congenial, and the predominant creams, browns, and spring greens are buoyed by 
brighter touches of cherry reds, sunny yellows, and cool teals. Mama and Papa, 
with their almost trapezoidal heads, rotund bodies, and fluffy tails, are winsome 
figures, as are the pudgy blue jay chicks and pink-nosed baby opossums. Paired 
with The Best Nest, this might be used with primary graders to discuss comparing 
and contrasting stories; it could also be used for readers theater.  JH
heAley, kAren When We Wake. Little, 2013 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-316-20076-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 9-12
It’s been 100 years since sixteen-year-old Tegan Oglietti died, so it’s a rough adjust-
ment for her to wake up in a hospital in Melbourne in 2128, the first successful 
revival in a government cryogenics experiment. Now she’s the Living Dead Girl, 
poster child for Operation New Beginning and target of political and religious zealots 
who despise her very existence. As she tries to adjust to this completely different 
world, attending school, making friends, and perhaps finding a little romance, she 
begins to suspect that the government’s cryogenics program may not be what it 
seems. Before she can uncover anything incriminating, she is captured by the Inheri-
tors of the Earth, an anti-government group that threatens her life. A provocative 
blend of bleakness and hope, this is a suspenseful, thought-provoking story of a 
young woman thrust into the heart of her world’s most controversial issues. Healey 
tackles a variety of complicated problems here, including environmental, political, 
and even metaphysical concerns, but she manages to avoid moralizing. Instead, 
Tegan’s unique, emotionally authentic voice makes the global issues feel personal, 
and readers will appreciate her desire to stay out of the conflict even as they root for 
her to change the world. Fans of Revis’ Across the Universe (BCCB 1/11) will enjoy 
this vision of cryogenics before it achieved space-flight, while those who relished 
Healey’s more supernatural novels (The Shattering, BCCB 11/11, etc.) will be glad 
they followed her into the realm of science fiction.  AM 
heAth, JAck Money Run. Scholastic, 2013 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-545-51266-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Daring fifteen-year-old Ash Arthur and her brainiac sidekick Benjamin are the 
latest YA pair of dashing teen criminals in the first volume of this Australian 
thriller series. The Source, which has been providing them with caper leads for 
380 • The BulleTin
some months, has directed them to the office of Hammond Buckland, a billionaire 
who wants to retire from his unfulfilling lifestyle. Buckland is presumed to have 
hidden something worth hundreds of millions on his premises, a prize that Ash is 
determined to find. However, as she’s busy finding imaginative ways to break into 
heavily protected rooms in the office tower, hit man Michael Peavey is equally busy 
trying to off Buckland for the U.S. government, lest the billionaire give away his 
cash before he dies, leaving Uncle Sam with no way to claim the childless man’s 
estate. The plot may be well-worn, but teen thriller aficionados will still relish the 
details of bugged-room break-ins, locked-room escapes, twists with competing 
assassins, a trashed Bugatti Veyron, and some darn creative methods for bumping 
off whomever gets in the way. This is all about the action—Heath doesn’t waste 
much time in character development—and the set-up for further adventures is 
perfunctory but effective. Buckland ultimately lures Ash and Benjamin to the side 
of the angels, but their future of thievery for a good cause should provide readers 
with plenty of silver screen–worthy entertainment.  EB
heos, BridGet Stronger than Steel: Spider Silk DNA and the Quest for Better 
Bulletproof Vests, Sutures, and Parachute Rope; illus. with photographs by Andy 
Comins. Houghton, 2013 [80p] (Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 978-0-547-68126-9 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
Prized for millennia for its superior strength and flexibility, silk holds promise for 
any number of innovations in contemporary culture. The problem is, of course, 
that the critters that produce the silk just can’t keep up with the human demand 
for it. Enter Dr. Randy Lewis and like-minded researchers who see genetic engi-
neering as a promising path toward increased silk production. Here readers look 
at three potential spider silk producers, all of which seem pretty unlikely at first 
glance. Injecting spider silk DNA into certain goats, alfalfa plants, and silkworms 
has resulted in modest initial success in spider silk production under laboratory 
conditions. Heo discusses the basics of how the introduced DNA targets cells in each 
organism to make the silk—produced within the goat’s milk, grown from DNA-
infected alfalfa leaves, or spun as spider silk from silkworms. This is fertile ground 
for debate over genetic modifications in general, and Heos doesn’t shy away from 
some hard truths, including the fact that, under current law, male research goats 
that are not kept for breeding cannot be used for food (or even readily transported 
to other locations, in some cases) and are therefore destroyed. Clear focus, careful 
explanations with occasional repetition of denser information, and a wealth of 
color photographs make this title inviting and accessible; a glossary, index, and list 
of resources will assist report writers; and the kissin’-cute goats should entice quite 
a few readers to explore this project further.  EB
JiAnG, Ji-li  Red Kite, Blue Kite; illus. by Greg Ruth. Disney/Hyperion, 
2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-4231-2753-6 $17.99   
R 6-9 yrs
In this fictional story set during China’s Cultural Revolution, narrator Tai Shan 
recalls a favorite boyhood activity—flying kites with his father from “the tippy-top 
of our triangle roof. We are above but under, neither here nor there. We were free, 
like the kites.” When Tai Shan’s father is arrested and sent to a nearby labor camp, 
April 2013 • 381
father and son stay connected by flying kites, each flying his kite for the other to 
see. Tai Shan is consumed with worry when his father’s kite fails to appear one day, 
but soon Father makes a hasty appearance, on the run from guards who find him 
and take him to another, more distant camp. Tai Shan keeps his kite and his hope 
aloft; when eventually his stubble-bearded, tired, and weakened father does return, 
the village celebrates by flying their own red and blue kites. A hazy backdrop of 
village and mountain scenery, awash in golds and earth tones, contrasts effectively 
with the sharp blue and red of the kites, and the body language of the boy and 
his father is as emotive as their sensitively captured facial expressions. Jiang sup-
plies some historical context, though not as much as questioning kids might wish, 
within the narrative and in a closing note. For older listeners, this could be a useful 
vehicle for opening discussion on political oppression, and for younger children, 
simply a reassuring tale of a father-son bond strong enough to withstand a trying 
period of separation.  EB
Johnson, AlAyA dAWn The Summer Prince. Levine/Scholastic, 2013 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-41779-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-52077-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Nestled in the Bahian bay in what used to be Brazil, Palmares Tres is an electric, 
thriving city fortified against the nuclear waste the covers much of the rest of the 
world. Every year, in a gossip-riddled and lavish ceremony, its residents name a 
male waka, a youth under thirty, to be sacrificed in a year’s time. This year, Enki, 
a boy from the city’s lowest caste, has been given the honor of being the future 
Summer King, and his friends, sixteen-year-old June and her best friend Gil, could 
not be happier: Gil, because he’s in love with Enki and Enki appears to return his 
affection, and June because she sees a fellow artist in Enki and hopes to use his 
celebrity to make a name of her own. What she gets instead is a revolution as Enki 
draws her further in his plans to upend the city’s structure, and June decides it is 
up to her to save Enki, both from himself and the establishment. A set-up that pits 
the younger generation against the old will have immediate teen appeal, but the 
situation is more nuanced than that: as the story unfolds, it becomes clear that this 
is a dystopia with no distinct enemy, just people fighting for what they truly see 
to be the right path for their community. This fact is made painfully clear in the 
brief but emotionally charged moments between June and her mother, and their 
strained but ultimately caring relationship exemplifies the loyalty and love that holds 
Palmares Tres together. The love triangle between June, Gil, and Enki is unusual 
in YA lit for its lack of jealousy, and their shared relationship works to convey the 
various iterations of love as lust, passion, comfort, and trust. The spectacular city 
is an appealingly bizarre mash-up of old-world traditions and futuristic technolo-
gies, echoing the community’s larger conflict. Romantic, imaginative, and thought 
provoking, this is a must have for science-fiction fans and dystopia fiends.  KQG 
kenneAlly, mirAndA Things I Can’t Forget. Sourcebooks, 2013 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-7190-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Kate goes to the same super-strict church that turned against Parker when Parker’s 
mother left to move in with her girlfriend (in Stealing Parker, BCCB 1/13). Now, 
382 • The BulleTin
at eighteen, Kate is experiencing her own crisis of faith: since she helped her friend 
Emily get an abortion, she can’t forgive herself either, and she can’t believe that God 
forgives her. Moreover, she can’t understand how people who ostensibly share her 
beliefs can behave in ways that the Bible says are wrong. When she takes a job as 
a counselor at church camp, she thinks she will find like-minded friends, but she 
discovers that even here, the other counselors have a cavalier attitude toward partying 
and sex before marriage. Matt, for instance, is in a fraternity at his college, but she 
is definitely falling for him and he for her, and their make-out sessions bring her to 
the point where she finally understands how hard it is to resist sexual temptation. 
Kate’s doubt never extends to the principles of her faith itself, but she does grapple 
with pertinent and difficult issues that face teens who are trying to live out their 
beliefs in a culture that finds them quaint at best. She knows, for instance, that 
she has strict rules for herself, but she’s troubled by the charge of judgmentalism 
that her friends have thrown at her; where is the line between supporting your 
friends and standing up for your principles? Kenneally treads this sensitive ground 
with a light but steady step, walking Kate through a potential minefield of faith-
challenging dilemmas, including the revelation that her own father isn’t sure what 
he believes. Alternative perspectives on the personal and sometimes private nature 
of a relationship with God come from Parker, who emerges as a supportive friend, 
and Matt, the best temptation a girl could ask for, as Kate grows into a stronger 
knowledge of herself and how to live what she believes without alienating those 
who see things differently.  KC
krAus, dAniel Scowler. Delacorte, 2013 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99094-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74309-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98087-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 10 up
It’s been nine years since Marvin Burke tortured his wife, Jo Beth, and attempted to 
murder his ten-year-old son, Ry. Marvin was sent to prison, Mom has since healed, 
Ry has wrestled with most of his demons, and his sister, Sarah, has grown from a 
baby into a socially awkward but bright adolescent. Now a freakish meteor strike 
has ripped open the walls of Marvin’s jail, and dear old Dad is on the loose, bent 
on taking revenge against Ry, who had attacked him on that fatal day in self defense 
with the jagged limb of a handmade toy nicknamed Scowler. Marvin reaches the 
family’s farm, cuts off telephone communication, brutally murders a neighbor who 
tries to intervene, and is closing in for the kill when a second meteor lands on the 
farm and the unbalanced man shifts his attention to prying it out of the ground 
and selling it to make his fortune. The stench, heat, and magnetic field around the 
meteorite affects what little reason the family collectively has left, and when Sarah 
fails in her attempt to run for help, father and son meet in a horrifying showdown. 
Connoisseurs of the grotesque have come to the right place, as Kraus’ impeccable 
sense of thriller timing spins out the terror to its culmination in a gruesome 
bloodbath whose horror is only slightly mitigated as Marvin and Ry retreat into 
their alter egos for the climactic battle. Fans of Kraus’s Rotters (BCCB 5/11) have 
come to expect that beneath his darkest literary impulses flow thought-provoking 
undercurrents, and this is no exception. At the edge of the horror is a gripping story 
of a family paralyzed by its own fear, and an examination of the strange places of 
emotional refuge a tortured mind will find.  EB
April 2013 • 383
lArWood, kierAn Freaks. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2013 248p illus. 
and with photographs
ISBN 978-0-545-47424-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8 
After being sold from one abusive freak-show owner to another, Sheba the Wolf 
Girl is pleasantly surprised to find camaraderie amongst her fellow freaks in her 
latest stint with Plumpscuttle’s Peculiars. Despite their abnormalities, Mama Rat, 
Gigantus, Sister Moon, and Monkeyboy all welcome Sheba and she begins to settle 
into the milieu of Victorian London. Soon, though, news reaches the group that 
street children are disappearing down near the river. Putting their peculiar talents 
to good use, Sheba and her friends track down the culprits behind the disappear-
ances, only to discover they may provide a link to Sheba’s mysterious past. This is 
an unromanticized version of Victorian London; in fact, it’s downright rank, as it’s 
described mostly via the findings of Sheba’s keen nose. It’s if anything even more 
atmospheric, however, and the filthy streets, mucky river, and decaying wharfs make 
a perfectly gothic setting. The malodorous milieu makes an excellent backdrop for 
nefarious doings and narrow escapes, both of which make plenty of appearances in 
this fast-paced adventure through the back-alleys of London. A touch of steampunk 
and several allusions to Oliver Twist round the story out nicely, and fans of historical 
fiction, adventure, and even fantasy will find this hard to put down.  KQG 
leWis, J. PAtrick World Rat Day: Poems about Real Holidays You’ve Never Heard 
Of; illus. by Anna Raff. Candlewick, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5402-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 7-10 yrs
Twenty-six poems celebrate twenty-two weird holidays (Limerick Day is represented 
with a collection of five poems), most featuring animals, in brief and whimsical vers-
es. Topics include Dragon Appreciation Day (“Eight Table Manners for Dragons”), 
Worm Day (“What the Worm Knows”), and International Cephalopod Awareness 
Day (“What Are the Cephalop-Odds?”), among others, with each holiday’s date 
displayed along with its name. The best entries are witty as well as silly, using form 
to emphasize their joke: “Bats” offers clever imagery (“Black sacks in the morning/ 
Airmailed at night”), “A Flamingo” is a streamlined concrete poem, “Said the Frog” 
provides a deliciously goofy pile of rhyme (“I was really in a muddle/ looking over a 
mud puddle/ ’cause I didn’t have a paddle”). Some poems are less successful, though, 
with scansion problems and strained wordplay; there’s also no history or source 
given for the holidays, which require quite the generous interpretation of “real” 
(Happy Mew Year for Cats Day and Yell “Fudge” at the Cobras in North America 
Day are both novelty days created for calendar amusement). The illustrations, 
ink wash with drawings assembled digitally, have the translucency of watercolors 
and the crispness of computer art; the busy compositions are sometimes a little 
unfocused, but the absurd and playful touches make them appealing and suitable 
partners for the text. Unofficial as the holidays may be, they’ll provide plenty of 
curricular occasions and some goofy reading aloud, and kids may leap on the no-
tion of creating and celebrating their own invented holidays. A table of contents 
(which includes both the holidays celebrated and the poem titles) is included.  DS
384 • The BulleTin
mAccoll, michAelA Nobody’s Secret.  Chronicle, 2013 [248p]
ISBN 978-1-4521-0860-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Emily Dickinson (yes, that Emily Dickinson) is a mild sort of rebel; 
she loves to escape chores to wander around the fields and forests of Amherst. One 
day she meets a handsome young man who calls himself Mr. Nobody. She imme-
diately senses a kindred spirit, but their story turns into a murder mystery instead 
of a romance when Mr. Nobody is found dead in the Dickinsons’ pond. Emily is 
not content with the constable’s determination that the death was an accidental 
drowning, and she sets out to discover the mystery of the stranger’s identity and 
his untimely death for herself. While Emily Dickinson: Super Sleuth, seems an 
unlikely premise for a novel, MacColl mines the known peculiarities of the poet’s 
personality and interests, the evocative setting of Amherst, nineteenth-century 
pharmaceuticals and plant lore, and Dickinson’s own poetry to craft a perfectly 
plausible story. There’s plenty of intrigue and suspense as our heroine and her 
sister, Vinnie, brave real danger in addition to maternal scolding in their pursuit 
of justice. The excerpted lines from Dickinson’s poems that head each chapter are 
uncannily apt for the subject matter of the mystery, suggesting both the latitude 
of their interpretive possibilities and the fidelity of MacColl’s vision to Dickinson’s 
inner life if not her outer circumstances. Both Emily and Vinnie are believably 
intelligent and quick-witted as they get into and out of tight spots; readers who 
aren’t interested in Dickinson as a poet may well enjoy her as a detective or simply 
as a highly imaginative and sensitive heroine in the tradition of Jo March and Anne 
Shirley. Publicity materials indicate that this is the first in a series of literary figures 
as teen crime solvers; this delightful debut bodes well for the project.  KC
mAcdonAld, mAryAnn Odette’s Secrets. Bloomsbury, 2013 [224p] illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59990-750-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
In this free-verse novel, Macdonald imagines the thoughts of Odette Meyers, a real 
girl who survived the Holocaust by leaving her home in Paris when she was eight 
and posing as a Catholic in the French countryside. Beginning in Paris, the story 
is full of little-girl insights and perspectives on the rapid changes taking place in 
Odette’s neighborhood as hatred of the Jews invades Paris along with the Nazis. 
Her father joins the army and is quickly taken prisoner, while her mother begins 
work with the Resistance. Their landlord, Odette’s beloved godmother, hides Odette 
and her mother when soldiers come to take them away, and eight-year-old Odette 
is sent into the countryside. There she grows to love not only country life but also 
Catholicism. In fact, she is almost disappointed when her mother comes to join her, 
and Odette must hide her affection for the teachings and traditions of the church 
and its loving, protecting God and his saints. Their return to Paris entails a ques-
tion for Odette: is she still Jewish, and does she want to be? Macdonald harvests 
the mundane and everyday for her poetic imagery and imbues these things with 
the significance of history, identity, and healing for Odette, effectively maintaining 
a believably childlike perspective throughout. She also subtly forecasts Odette’s 
adult life as a poet and professor active in the survivor community by showcasing 
incidents that highlight Odette’s compassion and her sensitivity to the healing ef-
April 2013 • 385
fects of poetry. Include this book in the Holocaust curriculum, and young readers 
will be able to readily identify with Odette’s concerns and fears as they come to 
understand the larger contexts. An author’s note, timeline, and pictures of Odette 
and others who featured in the book are included.  KC
mAGoon, scott The Boy Who Cried Bigfoot!; written and illus. by Scott Ma-
goon. Wiseman/Simon, 2013 42p
ISBN 978-1-4424-1257-6 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
A friendly Sasquatch narrates this twist on “The Boy Who Cried Wolf,” relating 
his introduction to young Ben, who has a habit of making up stories about spying 
Bigfoot near the woods. When no Bigfoot ever actually appears, Ben’s believers 
predictably lose faith. As Ben sits dejectedly near the woods one evening, Bigfoot 
makes his presence known and borrows Ben’s bike for a ride, prompting Ben to 
yell, “BIGFOOT! BIGFOOT! BIGFOOT IS STEALING MY BIKE!” No one 
comes, of course, but the benign Bigfoot is a genuinely nice guy and soon brings 
back the bike as well as Ben’s dog, who went along for the ride. Ben learns “the 
importance of always telling the truth,” and the closing pages show him armed 
with camera, tape recorder, and video camera, even more determined to prove 
that Bigfoot is real. This is an amusing take on a well-known tale, and the Bigfoot 
element has great kid appeal. Bigfoot’s narrative voice is endearingly friendly but 
just alien enough to differentiate him from the humans: “I didn’t normally talk to 
a Littlefoot. But there was something about this Ben I liked.” Magoon’s digitally 
created illustrations are skillfully composed, and the expressions and positions of 
his slightly blocky figures are often humorous. Most of the action takes place in 
the same spot, with a change in sky color indicating the passage of time, and the 
repeated setting effectively highlights the interactions of the small, brunette Ben 
and the large, brown, slightly gorilla-like Bigfoot. While educators might want to 
use this in comparison with “The Boy Who Cried Wolf,” it could also be paired 
with Spires’ Larf (BCCB 4/12) for a successful Sasquatch storytime.  JH
mArchettA, melinA Quintana of Charyn. Candlewick, 2013 [528p] (The 
Lumatere Chronicles)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5835-9 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6360-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9 up
The cliffhanger ending of Froi of the Exiles (BCCB 5/12) left an arrow-riddled 
Froi near death and separated from Quintana, his lover and the disputed queen 
of Charyn. Now, in this final book of the trilogy, Quintana narrowly escapes the 
attack by Charyn’s usurper and makes her way to the outskirts of Froi’s homeland, 
Lumatere; there she plans to birth Froi’s child, the prophesied king who will break 
the curse that has left Charyn barren and ruled by despots. Meanwhile, Froi is 
searching for Quintana and amassing an army to support Quintana’s claim to the 
throne, but his efforts are interrupted when his friend Finnikin, the consort to the 
queen of Lumatere, urges him to return to his homeland, forget the enemy king-
dom of Charyn, and leave Quintana behind. Though this will require knowledge 
of Froi or its predecessor, Finnikin of the Rock (BCCB 3/10), to be understand-
able, those who have read the first two volumes of the Lumatere Chronicles will 
find this thrilling conclusion both heartbreaking and utterly satisfying. Yet again, 
386 • The BulleTin
Marchetta seamlessly weaves together the personal and the political, exploring the 
larger societal implications of her characters’ actions while keeping a tight focus on 
their emotional lives. The obstacles in the relationships among her main characters 
mirror the tensions built by prejudices and ignorance throughout their lands, and 
the setbacks they experience as they work toward peace, both as a community and 
as individuals, are painfully authentic. The romances are sweet but tempered by 
reality, the triumphs are great but leave many scars, and even the happy ending 
here is bittersweet in its resolution. It’s a suitably impressive conclusion to an epic 
series.  KQG 
mArshAll, lindA elovitz The Passover Lamb; illus. by Tatjana Mai-Wyss. Ran-
dom House, 2013 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97106-8 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-93177-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98107-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
Young Miriam is excited that it’s her turn to sing the Four Questions at her extended 
family’s Passover seder; the arrival of a newborn lamb on her family’s farm, however, 
threatens to keep everyone home, since the woolly little orphan needs bottle feed-
ing every four hours. As Miriam cares for the lamb, she relates the basic Passover 
story, which gives her an idea: dubbing the lamb “Moses,” she diapers him, places 
him in a basket, and pledges to look after him during the seder. Her plan works 
beautifully, and she is able to participate in the Seder while still looking after little 
Moses, who “sings along” with his bleating. Based on real events that happened 
on the author’s farm, this is a straightforward, warm-hearted take on the Passover 
story that celebrates not only faith but also problem-solving. Readers familiar 
with Passover’s traditions may be glad to see the holiday treated as a mainstream 
backdrop to the story’s events, and even kids who don’t know exactly what a seder 
is will likely be charmed by the idea of a lamb wearing a diaper and hanging out at 
the dinner table. Mai-Wyss’s gouache illustrations capture the chilly hues of early 
springtime; brunette, pigtailed Miriam in her teal knit cap and heart-bedecked 
ski vest and gray, puppy-ish Moses make quite the adorable pair. This would be a 
natural addition to a Passover story lineup, and it would make an enjoyable selec-
tion for a farm- or sheep-themed lesson/storytime as well.  JH
mAssini, sArAh Trixie Ten; written and illus. by Sarah Massini. Holt, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9520-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Trixie TEN, a scribbly-haired, fuchsia thumbprint of a girl, is the youngest of ten 
very noisy siblings. The constant commotion wears on Trixie, and she finally de-
cides to hit the road in search of a bit of peace and quiet. A nearby stream proves 
too lively, though, as it is filled with a family of ten “babbling fish,” and a meadow 
is likewise too busy, inhabited by one hundred rabbit siblings. When she finally 
does find “a big, empty, quiet place,” the silence and solitude are so unfamiliar that 
she soon finds herself wishing for her siblings. Upon her return home, “It is just 
as noisy as usual. ‘But that’s the way we are,’ thinks Trixie. And she drifts happily 
off to sleep.” While the plot is predictable, the need for peaceful alone time will 
April 2013 • 387
resonate with quieter kids from large families or with those overwhelmed by noisy 
classrooms. Trixie, her siblings, and the fish and rabbits are all crafted from color-
ful fingerprints with simple dots and straight and squiggly lines for facial features, 
hair, and appendages. The digital illustrations are stylish, and the jelly-bean-esque 
figures show up well against clear white or mostly neutral-toned backgrounds. Kids 
will enjoy the “I could do that” element of the fingerprint-based art, and, in fact, 
this title would be a great excuse to haul out the Ed Emberley fingerprint books 
and some ink pads for a DIY art session.  JH
moss, mArissA Barbed Wire Baseball; illus. by Yuko Shimizu. Abrams, 
2013 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0521-2 $18.95   
R Gr. 3-5
This picture-book biography focuses on a pivotal episode in the life of Kenichi 
Zenimura, the player, coach, and manager who became known as the father of 
Japanese-American baseball. After a successful career with the Fresno Nisei League, 
playing exhibition games in the U.S. and Japan, Zenimura found himself holed 
up in the Gila River internment camp during World War II. There he built a ball 
field, complete with a leveled, grassed-in diamond and bleachers, to raise the spirits 
and self-esteem of his fellow detainees (“He knew he was still behind a barbed wire 
fence, but he felt completely free, as airy and light as the ball he had sent flying”). 
Though Moss admits to taking some creative liberty with the barbed wire imagery, 
she thoughtfully explains her use: “Although it was later removed at the Gila camp, 
the barbed wire was illustrated in this book to stress that this was a prison to the 
people there.” Shimizu’s Japanese brush and ink illustrations, digitally layered with 
dusty colors suggestive of the arid relocation camp, are a visual feast, from the 
patterned swirls of battleship steam and desert dust, to the series of depictions of 
Zenimura in motion, to the rhythmic composition of the female detainees stitching 
the potato-sack uniforms. Author and artist notes, sources for text and illustrations, 
and an index are included. Children who have been introduced to the internment 
camps via Mochizuki‘s Baseball Saved Us (BCCB 5/93) will want to learn about 
Zenimura and his achievements.  EB
oliver, lAuren Requiem. Harper/HarperCollins, 2013 391p
ISBN 978-0-06-201453-5 $18.99   
R Gr. 8-12
The hotly anticipated conclusion to Oliver’s Delirium trilogy (following Delirium, 
BCCB 2/11, and Pandemonium, BCCB 4/12) finds resistance fighter Lena reunited 
with her first love, Alex, whom she thought was dead, only to realize that battle 
scars and broken hearts may have made their future together impossible. After 
escaping the government-mandated Cure that eradicates a person’s ability to love, 
Lena has been working for the resistance, living in the unregulated Wilds, and 
falling in love with Julian, a newbie to the cause. Now Alex’s return complicates all 
that, requiring the rebels to decide what their next move is and Lena to figure out 
where her heart lies. Meanwhile, her best friend, Hana, has undergone the Cure but 
still seems strangely aware of her feelings, particularly her guilt in regards to Lena’s 
escape. In this title, Oliver calls into question the romantic choice that Lena made 
in the series opener: it is one thing to run off and fight for love when it promises 
you starry nights and lusty sighs, but it is another thing entirely when romance 
leaves you emotionally gutted and threatens to collapse the rebellion into chaos. 
388 • The BulleTin
The love triangle between Lena, Alex, and Julian is dramatic, bringing so much 
pain for all three of them that it almost makes the case for the Cure; the focus shift 
to Lena’s relationship with her mother, her friend, and her cousin reminds readers 
that romantic love is not the only type that is abolished in the Cure’s quest for 
order. The alternating viewpoints between Lena and Hana expand the world, and 
Hana’s experience in particular brings to light the cold, sterile place the Cure has 
created. The battle may be won, but the war and the fates of Lena and Hana are 
far from decided by the book’s close—an ambiguous ending that may not satisfy all 
readers but certainly stays true to the book’s insistence that love and relationships 
are messy, complicated works in progress.  KQG 
Pierson, d. c. Crap Kingdom. Viking, 2013 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01432-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Tom has read enough fantasy novels to know the rules: just when you think your 
crappy life couldn’t get any crappier, you are whisked away to an alternate universe 
where you are the hero of an ancient prophecy and are given special powers to 
fulfill it. Since his ordinary life isn’t all that bad, he’s not really elated to be whisked 
away by a strange man to a kingdom that is entirely composed of people living in 
ramshackle dwellings made from garbage from Earth. He’s even less impressed with 
their king, whose political philosophy consists of keeping everyone’s expectations 
low to avoid the inevitable disappointment of hope. Even the prophecy, a few sen-
tences printed out in 12-point Times New Roman, is disappointing, and since the 
Chosen One doesn’t even get any special powers, Tom declines the position. Later, 
though, when he realizes he’s made a mistake, he’s too late, because they’ve found 
a new Chosen One, who just happens to be his best friend, Kyle. Kyle manages 
things much better, and Tom struggles with jealousy—and also with the idea his 
life has been limited not by lack of opportunity but by his own weaknesses. This 
insight, subtly introduced and even more subtly developed in Tom’s inner reflec-
tions, accounts for the deep and devastating humor that permeates the narrative. 
Tom is in every way ordinary, and part of his ordinariness includes the tendency 
to see his life as a series of disappointments and missed opportunities that could 
have been his if he were, well, just better in every way. The book offers a comic 
send-up both of such teen angst and of the escapism afforded by adventures in 
secondary worlds, but the trick here is that the novel affirms the genre even as it 
parodies it. Tom’s ultimate adventure is in fact video-game worthy, making this a 
quintessential example of the YouTube generation’s fondness for irony about their 
own earnestness.  KC
PinBorouGh, JAn Miss Moore Thought Otherwise: How Anne Carroll Moore Created 
Libraries for Children; illus. by Debby Atwell. Houghton, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-547-47105-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
For most children listening to a story in a public or school library, the library setting 
itself is a pleasant but unremarkable part of life, and book borrowing an equally 
unremarkable entitlement. Pinborough’s picture-book biography of early twentieth-
century librarian Anne Carroll Moore may nudge them out of their complacency, 
describing the children’s literacy advocate’s innovations at a time when free public 
April 2013 • 389
libraries were just coming into their own, and children’s materials and services 
were a pretty radical concept. Although Moore’s story has its points of interest for 
a young audience—studying law, putting her own career plans on hold to help 
raise her nieces, moving off to the big city to learn librarianship—it’s the nascent 
field of children’s librarianship that will command interest. Locked bookcases and 
looming “silence” signs were giving way to more kid-friendly environs, and under 
Moore’s watch, whole children’s departments were designed and supplied, from 
child-scaled furniture to reading clubs and guest readers and entertainers. Atwell’s 
cheery, doll-like figures and joyful colors are a good match for the woman who 
insisted that children’s library space should be vibrant and stimulating. Expect giggles 
when kids spot the black-suited, bun-coifed, finger-wagging old-school harridan 
who “did not let children touch the books, for fear they would smudge their pages 
or break their spines” and hope you don’t hear any unflattering comparisons. A 
historical note and list of sources is included.  EB 
reynolds, AAron Pirates vs. Cowboys; illus. by David Barneda. Knopf, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-375-85874-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
When all the usual treasure hiding spots of pirate Burnt Beard (an octopus-like 
creature who is “the scourge of the seven seas, the four oceans, and several lakes”) 
are at capacity, he and his crew end up inland in Old Cheyenne, home of bison-like 
cowboy Black Bob McKraw, “the terror of the Old West.” Since Burnt Beard can 
only parse in pirate and Black Bob can only communicate in cowboy, a misunder-
standing soon erupts and escalates until the pirate crew and band of rustlers are on 
the verge of a showdown. Enter crocodilian Pegleg Highnoon, “the world’s only 
pirate cowboy,” who finds unexpected common ground between pirates and cow-
boys: their stench. The over-the-top piratical and cowboy vernacular of Reynolds’ 
narration is ripe for reading aloud (“[Black Bob’s] gang of rip-roarin’ rustlers were 
nastier than week-old chili, and twice as gassy”), and the pirates vs. cowboys theme 
will entertain a wide range of readers and listeners. Barneda’s comical acrylic and 
colored pencil illustrations are a natural match for the cleverly absurd story, and 
illustrative details (Black Bob inexplicably has a sneering, potted cactus as one of his 
posse, while one member of Burnt Beard’s crew appears to be a headscarf-wearing 
giant sea slug) provide plenty of visual humor. The dusty, muted tones of the Old 
West setting are attractively accented with the reds of bandannas and scarves. Read 
this one aloud with gusto, me hearties, for a rootin’-tootin’ good time.  JH
rosenBlum, GreGG Revolution 19. HarperTeen, 2013 266p
ISBN 978-0-06-212595-8 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Intent on saving humans from themselves, robots have initiated The Great Interven-
tion, destroying or “re-educating” those who resist. A few people have escaped, eking 
out a meager existence deep in the forests and trying to avoid detection. When their 
encampment is discovered and their friends and family captured, teenage siblings 
Nick, Cass, and Kevin are determined to rescue their parents from their prison 
in the City, where humans live docile, constrained lives under robot control. The 
eldest, Nick, allows himself to be captured to protect the others from detection, 
so Cass and Kevin must carry on without him while Nick finds ways to avoid—or 
390 • The BulleTin
survive—being reprogrammed by the robots. This is absolutely a genre piece, with 
no new ground broken on the topic of human rebellion against robot tyranny; the 
story is also light on characterization, and the three siblings are largely one-note, 
typecast characters who never change or evolve. It’s nonetheless very entertaining, 
with an action-packed story that suggests a cinematic blockbuster. Consistent pacing 
and a focus on plot with bursts of fighting connected by suspense-building scenes 
of hide and seek between the heroes and their robot foes, make it easy to overlook 
the shortcomings, and the writing is engaging enough that timeworn tropes still 
entertain. Readers looking for a lively adventure through a dystopian future that 
isn’t hopelessly bleak may therefore get on board for this revolution and relish its 
obvious set-ups for a sequel.  AM
rosenthAl, Amy krouse Exclamation Mark; illus. by Tom Lichtenheld. Scho-
lastic, 2013 [56p]
ISBN 978-0-545-43679-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Finding it difficult to fit in with his period peers, an exclamation point ponders 
his place in life. A clue comes when a loquacious question mark barrages him 
with questions, finally eliciting his exasperated response of “Stop!” From there, he 
begins to discover his true purpose with further exclamations such as “Howdy!,” 
“Wow!,” and “Way to go!” After demonstrating his abilities to his period pals, “he 
went off . . . to make his mark.” Lichtenheld’s illustrations are the perfect vehicle 
for Rosenthal’s pithy, pun-filled text. The vertical line atop the exclamation mark’s 
simple, round face plays double duty as it coils, droops, or scrunches to express the 
various emotions of our hero. A simple background of cream-colored, blue-lined, 
primary-grade writing paper will immediately resonate with the target audience 
and keeps the spotlight on the boldly drawn, inky-black punctuation marks. The 
standard “be yourself” plotline is cleverly and playfully executed here, and the 
punctuation focus makes it useful for a number of curricular activities. This might 
be paired with Truss’s Eats, Shoots, & Leaves or used on its own as a warm-up to a 
punctuation lesson.  JH
roskos, evAn Dr. Bird’s Advice for Sad Poets. Houghton, 2013 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-547-92853-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Despite his devotion to the celebratory poetry of Walt Whitman, sixteen-year-old 
James suffers from anxiety and depression, and his persistent thoughts of suicide 
lead him to believe that he suffers from more than garden-variety teen angst. His 
parents, however, disagree; exhausted by the constant rebellion of his older sister 
(now kicked out of the house), they categorize James as the normal one, a fantasy 
that he has colluded with to avoid the physical and verbal abuse they heaped upon 
his sister. Now, though, guilt has combined with his anger, depression, and anxiety, 
and he decides he needs more than his imaginary therapist, a human-sized pigeon 
who patiently listens to all of his complaints. James wants two things: to get his 
sister back where he thinks she belongs, in school and at home, and to have a real 
therapist who can help him with his anxiety. James is exuberant, both in his de-
pression and his moments when the depression lifts to reveal a world that he really 
doesn’t want to leave; he is witty in conversation with his friends, and he’s not a 
April 2013 • 391
bad poet in his own right, even though it’s clear that he is channeling Whitman 
whether he’s narrating his stylized inner monologue in poetry or prose. Many teen 
readers will recognize their own mood swings as they are amplified through James’ 
pendulum, and they’ll be enlightened by his revelation that life can be possible and 
rewarding even when it’s really hard.  KC 
ruBin, susAn GoldmAn Diego Rivera: An Artist for the People. Abrams, 
2013 56p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8109-8411-0 $21.95   
R Gr. 5-8
This slim volume presents a balanced introduction of the personal, political, and 
artistic life of the twentieth-century Mexican muralist who earned fame and gener-
ated controversy at home and in the United States. Rubin traces Rivera’s life from 
his emergent boyhood talent, through the formal studio education that left him 
restless and professionally unsatisfied, to realizing his calling to create massive pub-
lic artworks for the common people, celebrating the dignity of their labor. Rubin 
softens but doesn’t skip coverage of Rivera’s womanizing, his occasionally exagger-
ated claims to political activism, and the often critical reactions to his murals by 
viewers and patrons who expected more gentility in art. Clear color reproductions 
of major pieces are included, as well as a few examples of contemporary work for 
comparison (though no specific suggestions are offered tracking down images of 
important Rivera pieces cited within the text). The otherwise excellent end matter 
includes notes on Mexican history, Rivera’s artistic influences, a glossary, a bibliog-
raphy, and source notes, and well as an index that references all the artwork titles 
that interested readers may want to search.  EB
ruzzier, serGio Bear and Bee; written and illus. by Sergio Ruzzier. Disney/
Hyperion, 2013 [48p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-5957-5 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
Hungry little Bear would love some honey, which he’s kindly being offered, but 
he’s afraid of upsetting the dangerous bees. He thinks he knows what bees are: 
they are “terrible monsters. They are big and they have large teeth, and they have 
sharp claws, and they never share their honey!” The kindly critter offering honey 
points out that Bear is the one who’s big, with large teeth and sharp claws (“Poor 
me! I am a bee!” cries Bear), and then reveals himself to be an actual bee—who 
does indeed share his honey. Oversized fears are something kids can definitely relate 
to, and the book gently and tacitly addresses the topic while making an excellent 
layered joke that’s easily within youngsters’ grasp. They’ll enjoy knowing from the 
start what silly Bear doesn’t, and his moment of wrong-headed self-identification is 
preschool comedy gold. Ruzzier’s cozily uneven, very handmade lines are filled with 
opaque planes of soft digital color over full-bleed backgrounds to make a simple but 
warmly welcoming landscape. As usual, he has some subtle otherworldly touches 
(the botanicals are a little Seussian, and the bear’s imagined bee is pretty Martian), 
but those elements are counterpointed by the everydayness of both characters’ 
footwear (Bear in simple sandals, Bee in gym shoes) and their childlike gestures 
(Bee expressively deploys all four arms). This friendship-not-fear tale is a natural for 
storytime or laptime, especially if followed up by a nice honey-touched snack.  DS
392 • The BulleTin
scAnlon, liz GArton Happy Birthday, Bunny!; illus. by Stephanie Grae-
gin. Beach Lane/Simon, 2013 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0287-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4553-6 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
In rhyming verse, a little bunny asks multiple questions about her birthday celebra-
tion (“What are these and what are those?”) and receives answers from her family 
(“Fancy shoes and party clothes!”). There’s more pure sweetness than substance here, 
but this deconstruction of a child’s birthday party may be useful for rehearsing or 
reviewing the events of a little one’s special day, and young children will likely latch 
onto this opportunity to relive the glories of birthday celebrations. Some of the 
parental responses are confusing or pat, but others are helpful in making abstract 
notions more concrete: “What do you mean that time just flies?” is answered by 
“You’re growing up before our eyes,” and accompanied by an adorable, scrapbook-
like spread of faux photos of the rabbit as a newborn, infant, and toddler. The warm, 
soft tones of Graegin’s illustrations, pencil and ink digitally assembled on cream 
pages, evoke coziness and contentment and the little white bunny birthday girl is 
as cute as a button in her golden crown, saffron party dress, and beribboned shoes. 
The comely cast of woodland animals (including beavers, foxes, owls) resemble 
cuddly, plush animals, and youngsters will feel at home with the festive critters 
in their colorful clothing and party hats. This could be a pleasant selection for a 
birthday-themed storytime, a useful title to read pre-party to a birthday boy or 
girl, or as something to tide over kids for whom a whole year seems too long to go 
between birthdays.  JH
sePetys, rutA Out of the Easy. Philomel, 2013 346p
ISBN 978-0-399-25692-9 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Josie has lived for years in New Orleans, where her mother works as a prostitute for 
madam Willie Woodley. Now that it’s 1950 and she’s seventeen, Josie is virtually 
on her own for years, living above a bookstore in a tiny apartment provided by 
the shop owner and now run by his twenty-one-year-old son. Although Josie’s on 
decent terms with Willie and even cleans the brothel in the morning, she knows 
she won’t follow her mother’s career path. She has some money saved for college, 
and a chance meeting with a Smith College student convinces her that she may 
have a shot at admission and scholarship money. Just when it seems her ticket out 
is all but stamped, however, her mother’s involvement with a two-bit criminal 
threatens to dash her plans; she may have to turn tricks to pay her mother’s debt to 
a mafia kingpin and recoup the savings her mother has stolen. Will Josie succumb 
to a fate worse than death? Of course not, and the time-honored theme plays out 
predictably, with a substantially romanticized take on prostitution and a full cast 
of tainted good guys and gals ready to bail our heroine at every turn. Of just such 
fluff, though, are guilty pleasures made, and there’s no denying that readers will 
dog Josie’s every step through the Vieux Carré.  EB 
April 2013 • 393
shukert, rAchel Starstruck. Delacorte, 2013 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98984-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74108-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98425-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Yearning to get out of her stifling existence as a soon-to-be-deb in 1930s Pasadena, 
Margaret Frobisher is thrilled to be offered a screen test at Olympus Studios, 
especially when it gives her a chance to meet her long-time crush, Dane Forrest. 
Suddenly she’s starlet Margo Sterling, hastily cast by the studio into a new movie 
to replace the mysteriously missing actress Diana Chesterfield. She quickly learns 
the dirty truth behind Tinseltown facades as she’s scripted into a fan-mag-ready 
romance with a young hoofer in order to defray (accurate) rumors about his sexual-
ity and she watches a young colleague spiral out of control under studio-prescribed 
medications. Getting to know Dane only draws her closer to him, but she can’t help 
wondering what really happened to Diana Chesterfield, and what Dane knows. 
Shukert has enough historical and contextual knowledge to give satisfying depth to 
the froth in this cinematic sudser. The book is lavish with detail about gowns and 
process and what’s going on at other studios (“that farkakte Civil War movie David 
Selznick claims to be making”), but it also sharply observes the different reactions to 
Hitler’s rise from the conservative Pasadena burghers and from the studio’s German 
Jewish exiles. Histrionics are juicy and scandal suffuses the story at all levels, from 
a B plot about a stunning bit player hiding her sordid previous career to mentions 
of real-life indiscretions by stars such as Clark Gable and Loretta Young. Readers 
who adore the black and white selections in their Netflix queue will eat this up like 
popcorn, and they’ll relish the hints at a secret about Margo’s own past (does the 
gold pin she cherishes link her to the bit player’s former madam?) that suggest an 
explanatory sequel may be forthcoming.  DS
skeAd, roBert Something to Prove: The Great Satchel Paige vs. Rookie Joe DiMag-
gio; illus. by Floyd Cooper. Carolrhoda, 2013 34p
ISBN 978-0-7613-6619-5 $16.95   
Ad 7-10 yrs
The 1936 Yankees weren’t about to sign an untested rookie named Joe DiMaggio 
without some solid demonstration of his abilities under pressure. They also weren’t 
about to hire black players, but the Yankees manager wasn’t above asking Satchel 
Paige to help him test their young prospect. An exhibition game in Oakland Cali-
fornia was the scene of the showdown between the seasoned Paige and his “gang 
of semipro pickup players” and the untried DiMaggio, backed by “a barnstorming 
team with an impressive lineup of major-league stars.” Skead describes the extra-
inning game in workmanlike prose, recounting DiMaggio’s strikeouts, a bad call 
against the black players, and the final DiMaggio hit that brought in the wining 
run. This is overall a fairly tame outing, not up to the mark of recent fabulous 
baseball picture books as Jonah Winter’s takes on Sandy Koufax and Willie Mays 
(You Never Heard of Sandy Koufax?!, BCCB 2/09 and You Never Heard of Willie 
Mays?!, BCCB 2/13); although Floyd Cooper’s grainy, atmospheric illustrations 
get the job done, the compositions themselves are fairly unimaginative. Still, put 
the names Paige and DiMaggio into the same title and you’re going to shake up 
some interest, and Yankees fans will certainly consider this required reading.  EB
394 • The BulleTin
sPinelli, Jerry Hokey Pokey. Knopf, 2013 285p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93198-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83198-0 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97570-6 $9.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Hokey Pokey is a kid’s dream, a land with a giant playground, steed-like bicycles 
that can be roped to ride down one of Pokey’s many huge hills, a twenty-foot screen 
continuously playing cartoons, and not a grownup in sight. Jack, a Big Kid and 
longtime resident of Hokey Pokey, wakes up with the words “it’s time” ringing in 
his ears and discovers that his bike is missing and the tattoo that marks him as kid 
is disappearing; he suddenly knows this will be his last day in Hokey Pokey. Spi-
nelli’s Hokey Pokey is a modernized Neverland, a whimsical version of childhood 
that doesn’t gloss over the shadier sides of being a kid (like bullying, tantrums, and 
bedtime monsters) but instead presents them, with no moral judgment attached, as 
part of an ongoing developmental process. Jack is a likable guy, but he can also be 
selfish, stubborn, and downright mean; young readers will appreciate his complex 
character, particularly as they recognize some of their own faults in him. His remi-
niscing about what he will miss in Hokey Pokey and his bubbly anticipation about 
what is to come will ring true for many youngsters on the brink of adolescence. 
Spinelli’s clever wordplay (“unfunk,” “chuckleducking,” “dropflopping”) manages to 
be both childish and intriguingly exotic, and the vivid, sensory-based descriptions 
of Hokey Pokey’s wonders will entice even the most discipline-minded grownup. 
Although a clichéd final chapter (it turns out Hokey Pokey is literally a kid’s dream, 
Jack’s dream in particular) undermines the book’s resolution, this will still be a hit 
among readers who have recently found themselves in that murky place between 
childhood and adulthood.  KQG 
st. croW, lili Nameless: A Tale of Beauty and Madness. Razorbill, 2013 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-357-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Badly beaten and abandoned in the snow, Camille was rescued by Enrico Vultusino 
when she was just six years old. Ten years later, Camille enjoys a luxurious life 
as the adopted daughter of the head of the most powerful immortal Families in 
New Haven, but she still has no memory of the trauma that left her with multiple 
scars and a stutter. The small sense of security she feels in the Vultusino home is 
increasingly threatened as her hot-tempered stepbrother takes over the Family, 
horrid creatures hunt the streets and girls start disappearing near Camille’s school, 
and a garden boy brings to surface the secrets she thought were long buried. This 
is actually a creative revisioning of “Snow White,” and St. Crow takes her iteration 
of the already dark fairy tale to hellish depths, creating a grotesque and stunningly 
sinister world as a backdrop to an equally disturbing and intricate plot. Camille 
is initially a passive cliché as she waits for stepbrother Nico to continually save 
her from her nightmares, both real and imagined, but her helplessness becomes 
more authentic as the unspeakable acts she suffered come to light. The slow reveal 
of her true origins makes for some nail-biting moments, and the second half is 
as much a psychological thriller as it is a horror story. Camille’s triumph over her 
past is somewhat undercut by her problematic choice to remain with a broody 
guy whose possessiveness teeters perilously close to abuse and manipulation. Her 
story remains compelling, however, and will likely find an audience among fans of 
April 2013 • 395
Twilight, along with readers of darker paranormal stories such as Brenna Yovanoff’s 
The Space Between (BCCB 12/11).  KQG 
stAniszeWski, AnnA My Epic Fairy Tale Fail. Sourcebooks, 2013 [224p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-7930-0 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6 
After discovering that she actually prefers fighting clown monsters and negotiating 
with mermaids to suffering through middle-school politics (in My Very Unfairy 
Tale Life, BCCB 7/12), thirteen-year-old Jenny has finally accepted her fate as an 
Adventurer, a mortal who travels to magical kingdoms, setting right anything that 
has gone awry. Now she’s facing her biggest challenge yet: complete Three Impos-
sible Tasks in the Land of Tales. If she succeeds, she will save the kingdom that is 
the source of all fairy tales from an evil magic-sucking witch; she hopes that she 
will also gain a clue to her parents’ disappearance seven years ago. Fortunately, her 
best pals Trish and Melissa are along for the trip this time, and it’s their support 
that buoys Jenny when she fails at the third task and has to return home empty-
handed—until she tries again. A light-hearted romp through fairy-tale tropes, this 
will be a hit among youngsters past the Disney-princess stage who still secretly cling 
to the hope that mermaids and fairies exist. And they do, at least in Staniszewski’s 
imaginative world, but they tend to be a bit more snarky than one might expect. 
Jenny’s got clever witticisms and preteen sarcasm to spare, and her relationship with 
her gal pals is authentic in both its trivialities and its earnestness: when the chips 
are down (or, in this case, when a flesh-eating troll appears) they are there for one 
another, but it doesn’t mean they aren’t going to occasionally roll their eyes or snap 
at each other. The ending points to another adventure, so readers can expect to be 
charmed by Jenny at least one more time.  KQG 
tAkoudes, GreG When We Wuz Famous. Ottaviano/Holt, 2013 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9452-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Basketball ace and honor-roll student Francisco is thrilled when a scholarship op-
portunity takes him out of his Spanish Harlem high school and lands him in an elite 
boarding school in upstate New York for his senior year. His girlfriend, Reignbow, 
and childhood pal Vincent, however, are understandably less pleased: though Reign 
tries to be supportive, she doubts that their relationship will survive the distance, 
while impulsive, hot-tempered Vincent decides the best way to get Fran back 
home is to get into some trouble so Fran is forced to revive his role as V’s protec-
tor. Defaulting on a payout from the hood’s most lethal loan shark, however, is no 
simple game, and soon Vincent, Fran, and Reign find themselves in circumstances 
increasingly out of their control until a final attempt to repay the loan leaves one 
of them dead. Filmmaker Takoudes adapts his independent film Up with Me with 
mixed results. With its uneven pacing, the book races through swaths of time only 
to linger too long over insignificant moments; the rapid-fire dialogue is quick-witted 
and emotionally authentic, but the prose in between is sometimes clunky (“There 
was an uncomfortable pause between the two old friends”). Despite these flaws, 
the story remains compelling as its characters face up to some heartbreaking truths: 
that the friendships they were certain were lifelong may not survive the transition 
to adulthood, and that, sometimes, bad luck and bad choices simply trump love 
396 • The BulleTin
and loyalty. Teens who have been exposed to the hard side of life will more easily 
relate to these lessons, but even readers who know the mean streets only through 
pop culture will appreciate this closer look at friendship in crisis.  KQG 
urBAn, lindA The Center of Everything. Harcourt, 2013 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-547-76348-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 4-6
Solid, reliable, middle-of-the-pack girl Ruby has a secret guilt: when her beloved 
grandmother, Gigi, lay dying and frantically besought Ruby to “listen,” an alarmed 
Ruby backed away, fleeing the scene. Desperately looking for a do-over to hear Gigi’s 
words, Ruby believes that fate is telling her that she will have just such a chance: 
on her twelfth birthday, she successfully flicked a penny through the hole in the 
bronze doughnut held by her town’s statue of Captain Bunning (a maneuver that 
traditionally grants the coin-tosser a wish), and now she’s won the Bunning Day 
essay contest that means that at the town’s annual ceremonies all ears will be on 
her. Will that be the moment she can finally hear what Gigi wanted her to know? 
Urban does a sci-fi level of world-building here, creating a diverse and colorful small 
New England town (reminiscent of the Gilmore Girls’  Stars Hollow) that’s focused 
on the legend of the founding father’s invention of the doughnut hole and has a 
panoply of plausible rituals built on it. She also compactly, gently addresses some 
common aspects of grief: the isolation (Ruby feels like everyone but her has gotten 
over Gigi’s death), the regrets, the bargaining, and the epistemological questions 
about meaning. One of Ruby’s main tasks is to let go of her belief in an ordered 
universe where events operate as signs and feel her way into a more random and 
unpredictable existence (“What if there is no such thing as ‘supposed to’?”). With 
its compact trim size and easygoing style, this is a terrific first step up for kids who 
are just beginning to explore more complicated novels as well as an intriguing read 
for those who’ve explored the implications of coincidence in Stead’s When You Reach 
Me (BCCB 9/09).  DS
vAnderWAter, Amy ludWiG Forest Has a Song; illus. by Robbin Gourley. Clar-
ion, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-618-84349-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-10 yrs
Twenty-six gentle poems explore the forest and its denizens in this poetic tribute 
to the natural world. Subtly following the progress of the seasons, verses examine 
aspects of the forest milieu such as footprints in the snow (“Forest News”), the 
growing vegetation (“April Waking”), the beauty of a summer evening (“Dusk”), 
and the critters preparing for oncoming winter again (“Squirrel”). There’s a pretty 
delicacy to the poems, and while they lack the verve of Joyce Sidman’s brilliant 
combination of information and evocative vividness (in Swirl by Swirl: Spirals in 
Nature, BCCB 11/11, Red Sings from Treetops: A Year in Colors, 3/09), the simple 
personifications and kid-accessible imagery (“Lichens are graffiti artists”) make 
the verses especially appealing to younger poetry audiences. Gourley’s watercolor 
illustrations, which float on snowy backgrounds to offer a closeup look at a bird 
or branch or stretch more broadly across the page to feature a young girl and her 
dog exploring the woods, have a streamlined designery touch. Though the figures 
are occasionally a little awkward, the verdant botanicals and airy landscapes are 
April 2013 • 397
attractive. The verses are approachable for readers and vivid for readaloud listeners, 
so this is a title with a broad spread of possible use. Even if there’s no nearby forest, 
just have kids close their eyes, listen to the poetry, and imagine that there is.  DS
Weston, roBert PAul Prince Puggly of Spud and the Kingdom of Spiff; illus. by 
Víctor Rivas Villa. Razorbill, 2013 207p
ISBN 978-1-59514-567-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
The citizens of Spiff are a trendy bunch, perched on the cutting edge of fashion 
(“They were always wearing the sassiest styles/ which of course they would sport 
with the smuggest of smiles”). Princess Frannie, the king’s less-than-chic daughter, 
prefers books to clothes, however, and refuses to heed her father’s request that she 
don something other than comfy pajamas to the upcoming ball. Meanwhile, in the 
neighboring and far less ritzy realm of Spud, the recently crowned Prince Puggly 
is feeling hesitant about attending the Spiffian ball himself, certain his Spuddish 
style will only get him mocked and ridiculed. When circumstances bring the two 
neighboring royals together, they concoct a plan to teach the Spiffians a lesson or 
two about true class. Goofy but gentle humor along with some delightfully inven-
tive word play characterize this novel in verse, making it an excellent choice for 
a classroom or family read aloud. The small trim size adds accessibility, creative 
typography and text layout (including intricate chapter headpieces) accentuates 
the fractured fairy-tale feel, and Weston’s rhyming couplets are funny in their form 
and ingenuity (“He heard from below him . . . the tearing of threads!/ The fizzle 
of fabric being ripped into shreds!/ The splitting of seams! The unravel of yarn!/ 
All that King Dandy could say was: ‘Oh, darn’”). Even the mostly predictable les-
son of the book is made humorous with a droll rhyme: “Whether wild or refined, 
whether subtle or brash,/ you can wear it—as long as you don’t get a rash.” Aspiring 
fashionistas and poets would likely agree.  KQG
Winters, cAt In the Shadow of Blackbirds. Amulet/Abrams, 2013 [416p] il-
lus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-0530-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In 1918, “a year the devil designed,” the U.S is engaged in a terrifying new type 
of warfare abroad while its citizens back home are ravaged by the Spanish flu and 
beset with paranoia. Sixteen-year-old Mary Shelley Black has seen these evils up 
close: her father has been unjustly arrested for treason, her sweetheart has been 
killed in Europe, and she dons the white gauze protective mask against the flu as her 
neighbors and loved ones fall ill daily. A near-death experience alters her senses, and 
suddenly she is able to see and talk to Stephen, her beloved, whose strange ramblings 
about poison and blackbirds lead her to believe that he actually died after returning 
home rather than in battle. This engrossing combination of historical fiction, ghost 
story, psychological thriller, and straight-up whodunit moves between genres with 
stunning ease, maximizing the tropes of each to satisfying effect. The selection of 
period black and white photos reflects the horrors of the time: the doctored images 
of “ghosts” are indeed eerie, but it’s the shots of flag-draped caskets and dead-eyed 
flu sufferers that will send chills down readers’ spines. Mary Shelley’s voice is at 
times defiant and other times simply exhausted, and as her situation worsens, her 
reliability as a narrator begins to decline, especially when her hallucinations become 
398 • The BulleTin
violent and incoherent. Readers will appreciate the exploration of the good and evil 
of humanity, and they’ll be pleased to see Mary Shelley get an optimistic ending 
after all she’s been through.  KQG 
WoodWorth, chris Ivy in the Shadows. Farrar, 2013 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-374-33566-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Ivy is none too pleased with her mother as of late: recently divorced, 
Mom has landed a job as a waitress (putting Ivy in charge of her little brother JJ 
for the first time), befriended their church’s single pastor, and agreed to provide 
room and board for Caleb, the son of traveling missionaries. In addition to the 
turmoil brought by her mother’s new job and Caleb’s presence in her home, Ivy is 
also struggling with her best friend, Ellen, who’s beginning to chase the popular 
crowd at Ivy’s expense. When Ivy’s mom’s best friend, “Aunt” Maureen, swoops 
in to help care for Ivy, JJ, and Caleb while Ivy’s mom works, Ivy is both relieved 
and angry at Maureen for usurping Ivy’s newly found familial authority. This is 
pleasantly meaty stuff for a middle-grade novel, and Woodworth’s characters are 
wonderfully and credibly complex, especially the adults. Kids going through their 
own friendship woes will sympathize with Ivy as she wrestles with her relationships 
with Caleb and Ellen; in a refreshing and realistic twist, Ellen doesn’t see the error of 
her ways but in fact chooses mean popular girl Alexa over Ivy. Readers who gravitate 
towards family drama and friendship stories will find plenty to appreciate here.  JH
Woolston, Blythe Black Helicopters. Candlewick, 2013 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6146-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R  Gr. 10-12
With an explosives vest strapped to her chest and two boys as hostages, fifteen-
year-old Valkyrie White is on a mission, one she’s had since childhood. Raised in 
backwoods Montana by her survivalist father, taught to despise Those People and to 
fear their black helicopters, she spent her youth in isolation, preparing for possible 
attack from above. Suddenly, though, her father is gone, and Valley is convinced 
the black helicopters are to blame. Now she and her brother Bo are on their own, 
trying to survive while carrying on their father’s work. They first fall in with Cap-
tain Nichols, who uses Bo in his smuggling operation and uses Valley in far more 
vicious and violent ways. Hoping to protect his sister, Bo turns to fellow survivalist 
Wolf and his family, who give them shelter and provide Valley with a chance to 
carry out the mission her father gave her. The only things standing in her way are 
the boys she’s taken captive. An intense psychological thriller about the evolution 
of a young domestic terrorist, this novel is as compelling as it is bleak. The narra-
tive, in the stark prose that is Valkyrie’s distinctive voice, alternates between her 
devastating past and her violent present, ratcheting up the suspense while exploring 
the path that led her there. Valkyrie herself emerges as a survivor, equal parts savvy 
and ignorance, and the strength of her voice and her determination keep her from 
being simply a victim or a villain. The scarring physical and psychological events of 
Valkyrie’s life (including a shocking sexual violation involving a gun barrel) make 
this an emotionally tough and difficult read, but those readers who persevere will 
find the complex structure and literary style intriguing enough to bring them back 
for a reread.  AM 
April 2013 • 399
yolen, JAne B.U.G. (Big Ugly Guy); by Jane Yolen and Adam Stemple. Dut-
ton, 2013 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42238-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Life gets a little bit better for perpetual bully target Sammy Greenburg when he 
finally makes his first friend in eighth grade. Skinner John Williams, aka Skink, 
is pretty awesome, silencing Sammy’s bullies with a single karate chop to a lunch 
table, introducing Sammy to the girl of his dreams, and even agreeing to start up 
a Klezmer fusion garage band after Sammy introduces Skink to the unique com-
bination of jazz and Jewish folk music. When the bullies beat up Skink, however, 
Sammy decides enough is enough, and, using a formula he finds in his rabbi’s study, 
he creates a golem to take vengeance on his enemies—and fill the missing drum-
mer spot in his new band. Predictably, the golem gets out of hand, and Sammy 
inevitably realizes the important lesson that violence only begets more violence. 
The efforts of Yolen and Stemple to contextualize middle-school bullying within 
a larger tradition of oppression is an interesting, if somewhat variably successful, 
tactic. The inclusion of Sammy’s struggles with his faith and its traditions as well as 
Skink’s being the only black kid in a small, mostly white Midwestern town reminds 
readers that bullying is not something that happens only in the hallways of schools; 
however, several direct comparisons between Sammy’s quandary and the historical 
systematic oppression of Jewish people in general take the parallels too far and only 
succeed in trivializing both. Nonetheless, both Sammy and Skink are likable guys, 
and the relationship that develops out of their shared statuses as outcasts as well as 
their love for music is endearing and funny. The hilariously over-the-top ending 
is either a brilliant parody of an afterschool special or an overly earnest attempt 
at empowerment; either way, readers will close the book with a smile, albeit for 
perhaps different reasons.  KQG 
400 • The BulleTin
ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2012
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Katherine Applegate for The One and Only 
Ivan (HarperCollins). Three Newbery Honor Books also were named: Splendors 
and Glooms, by Laura Amy Schlitz (Candlewick); Bomb: The Race to Build—and 
Steal—the World’s Most Dangerous Weapon, by Steve Sheinkin (Flash Point/Roaring 
Brook); and Three Times Lucky, by Sheila Turnage (Dial).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Jon Klassen for This Is Not My Hat, il-
lustrated and written by Jon Klassen (Candlewick). Five Caldecott Honor Books 
were also named: Creepy Carrots, illustrated by Peter Brown and written by Aaron 
Reynolds (Simon); Extra Yarn, illustrated by Jon Klassen and written by Mac Barnett 
(Balzer + Bray); Green, illustrated and written by Laura Vaccaro Seeger (Porter/
Roaring Brook); One Cool Friend, illustrated by David Small and written by Toni 
Buzzeo (Dial); and Sleep Like a Tiger, illustrated by Pamela Zagarenski and written 
by Mary Logue (Houghton).
The Coretta Scott King Book Award for writing goes to Andrea Davis Pinkney for 
Hand in Hand: Ten Black Men Who Changed America, illustrated by Brian Pinkney 
(Jump at the Sun/Disney). Two King Author Honor Books were selected: Each 
Kindness, written by Jacqueline Woodson, illustrated by E. B. Lewis (Paulsen/
Penguin); and No Crystal Stair: A Documentary Novel of the Life and Work of Lewis 
Michaux, Harlem Bookseller , written by Vaunda Micheaux Nelson, illustrated by 
R. Gregory Christie (Carolrhoda Lab). The Coretta Scott King Book Award for 
illustration goes to Bryan Collier for I, Too, Am America, written by Langston 
Hughes (Simon). Three King Illustrator Honor Book was selected: H.O.R.S.E., 
illustrated and written by Christopher Myers (Egmont); Ellen’s Broom, illustrated by 
Daniel Minter and written by Kelly Starling Lyons (Putnam); and I Have a Dream: 
Martin Luther King, Jr., illustrated by Kadir Nelson and written by Martin Luther 
King, Jr. (Schwartz & Wade). Demetria Tucker is the winner of the Coretta Scott 
King—Virginia Hamilton Practitioner Award for Lifetime Achievement. 
The Pura Belpré Award for writing goes to Benjamin Alire Sáenz for Aristotle and 
Dante Discover the Secrets of the Universe (Simon). One Belpré Author Honor Book 
was named: The Revolution of Evelyn Serrano, written by Sonia Manzano (Scholastic). 
The Pura Belpré Award for illustration goes to Duncan Tonatiuh for Martín de 
Porres: The Rose in the Desert, written by Gary D. Schmidt (Clarion).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most 
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is Dial 
Books, an imprint of the Penguin Group, for Anne C. Voorhoeve’s My Family for 
the War, translated from the German by Tammi Reichel. Two Batchelder Honor 
Books were also selected: A Game for Swallows: To Die, to Leave, to Return, written 
and illustrated by Zeina Abirached, translated from the French by Edward Gauvin 
(Graphic Universe/Lerner); and Son of a Gun, written and translated from the 
Dutch by Anne de Graaf (Eerdmans).
April 2013 • 401
The Michael L. Printz Award for excellence in literature written for young adults 
goes to Nick Lake for In Darkness (Bloomsbury). Four Printz Honor Books also were 
named: Aristotle and Dante Discover the Secrets of the Universe, by Benjamin Alire 
Sáenz (Simon); Code Name Verity, by Elizabeth Wein (Hyperion); Dodger, by Terry 
Pratchett (HaroperCollins); and The White Bicycle, by Beverley Brenna (Red Deer).
The Robert F. Sibert Medal for most distinguished informational book for children 
goes to Bomb: The Race to Build—and Steal—The World’s Most Dangerous Weapon, 
written by Steve Sheinkin (Flash Point/Roaring Brook). Three Sibert Honor Books 
were named: Electric Ben: The Amazing Life and Times of Benjamin Franklin, writ-
ten and illustrated by Robert Byrd (Dial); Moonbird: A Year on the Wind with the 
Great Survivor B95, written by Phillip M. Hoose (Farrar); and Titanic: Voices from 
the Disaster, written by Deborah Hopkinson (Scholastic).
The Theodor Seuss Geisel Award for most distinguished beginning reader book 
goes to Up, Tall and High!, written and illustrated by Ethan Long (Putnam). Three 
Geisel Honor Books were named: Let’s Go for a Drive!, written and illustrated by 
Mo Willems (Hyperion); Pete the Cat and His Four Groovy Buttons, written by Eric 
Litwin and illustrated by James Dean (HarperCollins); and Rabbit & Robot: The 
Sleepover, written and illustrated by Cece Bell (Candlewick).
The Schneider Family Book Award for books that embody an artistic expression 
of the disability experience goes to Back to Front and Upside Down, written and 
illustrated by Claire Alexander (Eerdmans), in the category for young children. 
Sarah Lean is the winner of the middle-school award for A Dog Called Homeless 
(Tegen). Somebody Please Tell Me Who I Am, by Hary Mazer and Peter Lerangis 
(Simon), is the winning book in the teen category.
The Stonewall Children’s and Young Adult Literature Award, for children’s and 
young adult books of exceptional merit relating to the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and 
transgendered experience, was given to Aristotle and Dante Discover the Secrets of 
the Universe, by Benjamin Alire Sáenz (Simon). Four honor books were selected: 
Drama, written and illustrated by Raina Telgemeier (Graphix/Scholastic); Gone, 
Gone, Gone, by Hannah Moskowitz (Simon Pulse); October Mourning: A Song for 
Matthew Shepard, by Lesléa Newman (Candlewick), and Sparks: The Epic, Completely 
True Blue, (Almost) Holy Quest of Debbie, by S. J. Adams (Flux).
The Andrew Carnegie Medal for excellence in children’s video goes to Katja Torne-
man, producer of Anna, Emma and the Condors. 
The Odyssey Award for excellence in audiobook production goes to Brilliance 
Audio for the audiobook The Fault in Our Stars. The book was written by John 
Green and narrated by Kate Rudd. Three Odyssey Honor Recordings were also 
selected: Artemis Fowl: The Last Guardian, produced by Listening Library, writ-
ten by Eoin Colfer, and narrated by Nathaniel Parker; Ghost Night, produced by 
Listening Library, written by Cornelia Funke, and narrated by Elliot Hill; and 
Monstrous Beauty, produced by Macmillan Audio, written by Elizabeth Fama, and 
narrated by Katherine Kellgren.
402 • The BulleTin
The 2012 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by author Andrea 
Davis Pinkney.
The Margaret A. Edwards Award for lifetime achievement in writing for young 
adults goes to Tamora Pierce. 
The William C. Morris Award for a book written by a first-time author for young 
adults goes to Seraphina, by Rachel Hartman (Random House). Four additional 
books were shortlisted: Wonder Show, by Hannah Barnaby (Houghton); Love and 
Other Perishable Items, by Lauren Buzo (Knopf); After the Snow, by S. D. Crockett 
(Feiwel); and The Miseducation of Cameron Post, by Emily M. Danforth (Balzer 
+ Bray).
The YALSA Excellence in Nonfiction Award goes to Bomb: The Race to Build—and 
Steal—the World’s Most Dangerous Weapon, by Steve Sheinkin (Flash Point/Roar-
ing Brook). Four other books were shortlisted for the award: Steve Jobs: The Man 
Who Thought Different, by Karen Blumenthal (Feiwel); Moonbird: A Year on the 
Wind with the Great Survivor B95, by Phillip Hoose (Farrar); Titanic: Voices from 
the Disaster, by Deborah Hopkinson (Scholastic); and We’ve Got a Job: The 1963 
Birmingham Children’s March, by Cynthia Levinson (Peachtree).
The Scott O’Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Louise Erdrich for Chickadee 
(Harper/HarperCollins). 
The Canadian Library Association’s 2012 Book of the Year for Children is The 
Whole Truth, by Kit Pearson (HarperCollins). Two Honor Books are Dragon 
Seer’s Gift, by Janet McNaughton (HarperCollins), and That Boy Red, by Rachna 
Gilmore (HarperCollins). The Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon Illustrator’s 
Award goes to Matthew Forsythe for My Name is Elizabeth! (Kids Can), written 
by Annika Dunklee. Honorable mentions go to Ashley Spires for Small Saul (Kids 
Can), written and illustrated by Ashley Spires; and Isabelle Arsenault for Migrant 
(Groundwood), written by Maxine Trottier. The Young Adult Canadian Book 
Award also goes to Catherine Austen for All Good Children (Orca). Two Honor 
Books are Karma, by Cathy Ostlere (Penguin), and This Dark Endeavor, by Ken-
neth Oppel (HarperCollins).
The Carnegie Medal and the Kate Greenaway Medal were both awarded to A 
Monster Calls, written by Patrick Ness and illustrated by Jim Kay (Candlewick). 
The 2013 NCTE Orbis Pictus Award for outstanding nonfiction for children goes 
to Monsieur Marceau: Actor without Words, written by Leda Schubert and illustrated 
by Gérard DuBois (Roaring Brook). Honor books are: Citizen Scientists: Be a Part 
of Scientific Discovery from Your Own Backyard, written by Loree Griffin Burns 
and illustrated with photographs by Ellen Harasimowicz (Holt); Electric Ben: The 
Amazing Life and Times of Benjamin Franklin, written and illustrated by Robert 
Byrd (Dial); The Mighty Mars Rover: The Incredible Adventures of Spirit and Op-
portunity, by Elizabeth Rusch (Houghton); Those Rebels, John & Tom, written by 
Barbara Kerley and illustrated by Edward Fotheringham (Scholastic); and We’ve Got 
a Job: The 1963 Birmingham Children’s March, by Cynthia Levinson (Peachtree). 
April 2013 • 403
The Center for Children’s Books’ 2013 Gryphon Award goes to Island: A Story 
of Galápagos, written and illustrated by Jason Chin (Porter/Roaring Brook). Two 
honor books were named: Bink & Gollie: Two for One, written by Kate DiCamillo 
and Alison McGhee and illustrated by Tony Fucile (Candlewick); and Little Dog 
Lost: The True Story of a Brave Dog Named Baltic, written and illustrated by Mônica 
Carnesi (Paulsen/Penguin).
404  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Collomore
Actors and acting–fiction: Shukert
Adventure: Clark; Heath
African Americans: Adler; Flowers; 
Skead
African Americans–fiction: Blythe; 
Coley; Yolen
Amnesia–fiction:  Armistead; Brody
Amusement parks–fiction: Spinelli
Animals–stories: Harrison; Scanlon 
Art and artists: Beram; rubin
Baseball: Skead 
Baseball–fiction: Berk
Bears–stories: ruzzier
BedtIMe StOrIeS: Boudreau
Bees–stories: ruzzier
BIOGrAPHIeS: Adler; Beram; 
Flowers; Harness; Moss; Pinbor-
ough; rubin
Birthdays–stories: Scanlon 
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Giff
Bullies–fiction: Charlton-trujillo; 
Yolen
Carnivals–fiction: Fusco
China–stories: Jiang
Civil War: Harness
Cloning–fiction: Archer
Clothing–fiction:  Weston
COnCePt BOOKS: Massini 
Contests–fiction: Berk 
Cowboys: Flood
Cowboys–stories: reynolds
Crime and criminals–fiction: Coley; 
Heath; Kraus; Sepetys; takoudes; 
Woolston
depression–fiction: roskos
disfigurement–fiction: Fusco
dreams–fiction: Spinelli
dreams–stories: Baker-Smith
dystopias–fiction: Johnson; Oliver; 
rosenblum
emotions–fiction: Oliver
epidemics–fiction: Winters
Ethics and values: Blagden; Blythe; 
Boyne; Healey; Kenneally; Mar-
chetta; Oliver; Pierson; takoudes; 
Woolston
FABLeS: Magoon
Faith–fiction:  Macdonald; Ken-
neally
Families–fiction: roskos; Wood-
worth 
Families–stories: Harrison; Massini
FAntASY: Alexander; Boyne; Clark; 
de Lint; Marchetta; Pierson; Spi-
nelli; St. Crow; Staniszewski
Farm life–stories: Marshall
Fathers–fiction: Kraus
Fathers–stories: Baker-Smith; Jiang
Flying–fiction: Boyne
Flying–stories: Baker-Smith
FOLKtALeS And FAIrY tALeS: 
deFelice; Magoon; St. Crow
Freaks–fiction: Larwood
Friends–fiction: Berk; Charlton-tru-
jillo; Heath; Johnson: Kenneally; 
Oliver; Staniszewski; takoudes
Friends–stories: reynolds; ruzzier
Future–fiction: Healey; Johnson
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
April 2013  •  405
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Charlton-
trujillo
Ghosts–fiction: Giff
Grandparents–fiction: urban
GrAPHIC nOveLS: Flowers 
Grief–fiction: Charlton-trujillo; 
urban
Growing up–fiction: Spinelli
HIStOrICAL FICtIOn: Blythe; 
Giff; Larwood; MacColl; Mac-
donald; Sepetys; Shukert; Winters
History, U.S.: Adler; Flowers; Har-
ness
History, world: Jiang
Holidays: Lewis
Holocaust–fiction: Macdonald
Honesty–stories: Magoon
HOrrOr: Kraus; St. Crow
Housework–stories: Hanson 
HuMOr: Boudreau; Clark; deFe-
lice; Hanson; Magoon; Pierson; 
rosenthal; Staniszewski; Weston
Identity–fiction: Coley
Insects–poetry: Gerber
Japanese Americans: Moss 
Jews–fiction: Macdonald; Yolen
Jews–stories: Marshall
Kites–stories: Jiang
Language arts: deFelice; rosenthal
Latinos–fiction: takoudes
Libraries: Pinborough 
Literature, American: Armistead; 
MacColl
Literature, English: roskos
London–fiction: Larwood
Lying–stories: Magoon
Magic–fiction: de Lint; Staniszewski
MAGICAL reALISM: Fusco
Memory–fiction: Coley
Mental illness–fiction: Coley; Col-
lomore
Mothers–fiction: Sepetys; Wood-
worth
Movies–fiction: Shukert
Music and musicians–fiction: Alex-
ander; Archer
MYSterIeS: Berk; Larwood; Mac-
Coll; Winters
Mythical creatures–stories: Magoon
nannies–fiction: Collomore
native Americans: Flood
Nature study: Gerber; Heos; 
vanderwater
noise–stories: Massini
Orphans–fiction:  Blagden; de Lint
Passover–stories: Marshall 
Pirates–stories: reynolds
POetrY: Flood; Gerber; Lewis; 
vanderwater
Prostitution–fiction: Sepetys
raccoons–stories: Harrison 
racism–fiction: Yolen
Readers theater: Gerber; Harrison
Reading aloud: Boyne; Flood; 
vanderwater
Reading, easy: Harrison
relationships–fiction: Blagden; 
Johnson; Oliver; Woodworth 
Religious studies: Marshall 
rHYMInG StOrIeS: Hanson; 
Scanlon; Weston
robots–fiction: rosenblum
romance–fiction: Brody
royalty–fiction: Marchetta; Weston
runaways–fiction: Fusco
Sacrifice–fiction: Johnson
SAtIre: Clark; Pierson
Science: Heos
SCIenCe FICtIOn: Brody; 
Healey
Secrets–fiction: Archer; Armistead; 
urban
Sisters–fiction: Archer; Charlton-
trujillo
Slavery: Adler
Spiders: Heos
SPOrtS StOrIeS: Moss; Skead
SteAMPunK: Larwood
Storytime: deFelice; Hanson; 
ruzzier
Survivalists–fiction: Woolston
SuSPenSe: Brody; Collomore; St. 
Crow
terrorists–fiction: Woolston
underground railroad: Adler
unicorns–fiction: Clark
406  •  The BulleTin
verSe nOveLS: Macdonald
violence–fiction: Blagden; Kraus
voyages and travel–fiction: Alexander; 
Armistead; Boyne; Staniszewski
War–fiction:  Marchetta 
Women’s studies: Adler; Beram; Har-
ness; Pinborough 
World cultures: rubin
World War I–fiction: Winters
World War II: Moss 
World War II–fiction: Giff
Writers and writing–fiction: roskos
Yawns–stories: Boudreau
