I LLIN 
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
Wer
nred
0-* 
"Wemberly, a quiet and introverted mouse, spends all of her time
worrying about big things (will her parents disappear in the middle of
the night?), little things (spilling juice at the table), and things in between
(will she shrink in the bath?). As if she doesn't have enough to stew
about, the anticipated beginning of nursery school opens a whole new
world of woe. Happily, the first-day jitters are soon diminished with the
help of an understanding teacher and a new friend. Henkes once again
puts his finger on the pulse of young children, combining good storytelling,
careful characterization, and wonderfully expressive artwork to create
an entertaining and reassuring picture book."
-Starred review / School Library Journal
-~ "This young heroine speaks to the worrywart in everyone."
-Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
"In many ways, Wemberly is the flip side of Henkes' sassy
Lilly. As much as little ones love Lilly, the 'fraidy cats of the
world will see themselves in this winsome worrywart."
-ALA Booklist
Also by Kevin Henkes
Ages 4 up. 
Lilly's Purple Plastic Purse
$15.95 Tr 0-688-17027-7 
Ages 4 up. $15.95 Tr 0688-12897-1; $14.89 Lb 0-688-12898X
$15.89 Lb 0-688-17028-5
Greenillow Books An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BULLETIN
October 2000
Vol. 54 No. 2
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
A LOOK INSIDE
49 
THE BIG PICTURE
McKendree by Sandra Belton
50 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
55 
* Dream Snow written and illus. by Eric Carle
66 
* Blue Avenger Cracks the Code by Norma Howe
68 
* Silent to the Bone by E. L. Konigsburg
79 
* The Beet Fields: Memories ofa Sixteenth Summer by Gary Paulsen
79 
* It's Raining Pigs & Noodles by Jack Prelutsky; illus. by James Stevenson
81 
* Madlenka written and illus. by Peter Sfs
89 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
90 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Jennifer VanWinkle
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL
61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2000 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Nina Crews from McKendree ©2000. Used by permission of Greenwillow
Books.
OCTOBER 2000 
* 49
THE BIG PICTURE
McKendree
by Sandra Belton
Sandra Belton is a writer of, among other things, historical novels set in mid-
twentieth century America. Her Ernestine and Amanda series (four books to date)
focuses on two girls growing up in a solidly middle-class African-American com-
munity in the 1950s. Belton's light and loving touch in depicting the titular char-
acters' often adversarial relationship provides the emotional core of her books.
That light and loving touch is in strong evidence in her latest work.
This understated novel opens with fourteen-year-old Tilara Haynes tak-
ing the train to see her aunt Cloelle in West Virginia. It is the summer of 1948,
and Tilara is looking forward to the coming weeks, free from the supervision of her
stern, loving minister father. Mr. Morris, the train porter, serves the girl her breakfast
in her roomette, saying, "My special service for every pretty young lady." When
Tilara looks at her reflection in the train window, she can almost believe him:
"Soon the picture-in-picture reflections of the window made it easier to imagine
that she was what Mr. Morris had said: a pretty young lady. But in her heart she
knew better."
The conflict in Belton's novel centers around something known but not
often discussed: that color conflicts are not just interracial, but intraracial. Dark-
skinned and dark-eyed like her father and his sister, her aunt Cloelle, Tilara suffers
from comparisons to her idolized, light-skinned mother. An only child, the pro-
tagonist grew up in a house that is nearly a shrine to her late mother. Belinda
Cross Haynes had "skin the color of cream, hair that hung to her waist in silky
brown curls, and wide eyes the color of gray smoke." Her daughter has grown up
listening to her father "say again and again: 'Lindy was what you call a beautiful
woman. A truly beautiful woman.' Her father's words and the everywhere pic-
tures told Tilara that she could never be pretty."
The novel unfolds slowly, like a hot summer afternoon. Tilara spends
part of her summer days at McKendree, an old-age home for elderly blacks, where
she joins a small group of local teen volunteers. The dynamic among the teenagers
is tense with the additional complications of romantic almost-triangles and hidden
agendas; the dynamic between the teenagers and the elderly residents is a mutually
amicable one, the teenagers listening while the old folks tell stories from their lives.
Belton's omniscient narration shows who's what as well as who's who as
March, the popular, light-skinned leader of the volunteers, makes a calculated play
for Tilara, while Braxton, Tilara's secret crush, has an unexpressed yen for the
light-skinned Georgia. The main body of text is interspersed with italicized sec-
tions describing the inner thoughts and feelings of key characters, a device that
allows the reader to know that March thinks Tilara beautiful even as he methodi-
50 
* 
THE BULLETIN
cally plots his ultimately unsuccessful conquest of her; and that Tilara, mistrusting
March because of his light skin (and her own good sense), admires dark-skinned
Braxton. Elderly Miss Alpha, former dancer at the Cotton Club, is unaware of her
own prejudice when she favors the light-skinned Georgia over the darker girls.
Mr. Reese, Miss Alpha's longtime beau, accepts the notion that light-skinned is
better as well: "I wanted that same kind of girl for myself. The same kind of girl
the white boys had. The kind of girl white boys been sayin' is the most beautiful in
the world. They was even sayin' that to us by the kind of gals they picked to be in
the house with them down on the plantation!" The juxtaposition of the elderly
residents and young volunteers permits unselfconscious commentary on the value
of light skin over dark, "good" hair over kinky, as the disparate generations find
the places they overlap as well as the places they divide.
Belton's characters stand at different stages in their life journeys. The
elders, their values fixed, look back; the teenagers, their values forming, look for-
ward. The middle-aged caretakers of both old and young are aware of the values of
the past even as they try to influence the values of the future. The heroine's sum-
mer journey has clarified her own values, changing her from a shy girl struggling
with personal doubt into an increasingly confident young woman sure of her own
worth. The memorable closing image is Tilara triumphant, "a vision in red,"
waiting with her father and aunt for the train that will take her home: "It was clear
they were members of one family-one man, one woman, one girl in red. Their
words and laughter floated around them. The girl tossed her head back as she
laughed. It was music." (Imprint information appears on p. 53.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALPHIN, ELAINE MARIE 
Counterfeit Son. 
Harcourt, 2000 
[192p]
ISBN 0-15-202645-2 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9 up
Cameron Miller's life up to the start of the narrative has been a horror story: his
father, Hank Miller, is a serial killer and sexual predator who kidnaps, abuses, and
kills young boys. Fourteen when Hank is arrested, Cameron decides to tell the
police that he is not Hank's child, but instead the Lacey family's long-lost son,
Neil, who went missing six years ago when he was eight. The premise is riveting,
and Alphin's writing sustains breathtaking suspense about the discovery of
Cameron's deception. Infant toe prints are unavailable and dental records are
inconclusive, but meanwhile the Lacey parents have swept Cameron into their
family, wholeheartedly believing him to be their Neil returned. Alphin subtly
shifts Cameron's language, so that he begins to call the Lacey parents Mom and
Dad, but his acceptance into the family does not end his troubles. One investiga-
tor remains unconvinced that he is Neil Lacey, and one of Hank's old friends
shows up and pressures Cameron to steal things from the Laceys in exchange for
his silence about his true identity. The final plot twist is so wrenching that it
almost breaks credibility: Cameron actually is Neil, suffering profound amnesia
OCTOBER 2000 
* 51
from years of sexual and emotional torment inflicted by Hank. Hank killed his
own son, kidnapping Neil as a replacement so that authorities would not investi-
gate the boy's absence, and this is confirmed when the body of the real Cameron
Miller is found buried under the floor of Hank Miller's basement. Although this
is not a narrative for the thin-skinned, young adults who have been captivated by
stories of serial killers will be riveted by this story of a serial killer's counterfeit son.
KM
ALVAREZ, JULIA 
The Secret Footprints; illus. by Fabian Negrin. 
Knopf,
2000 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99309-6 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89309-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The ciguapas are the secret people who live beneath the sea, coming on land "to
hunt for food only at night because they were so fearful of humans"; since their
feet are on backwards, their footprints mislead curious land-dwellers. Young Guapa
has none of her people's shyness, however, and her bold exploits on land eventu-
ally lead her into fascination with a human family. She makes more contact than
she plans, however, when she stumbles into their picnic and can't run away; when
the family seeks help for the girl with the poor twisted ankles, her fellow ciguapas
spirit her away, but they give the family special status thereafter. The legendary
ciguapas (an author's note gives some background on the history of the relevant
Dominican folklore) are an alluring body of beings, with their underwater and
secretive existence, and the story is the more appealing for being told from their
point of view rather than from the humans'. There's an oddity in the plot, how-
ever: as far as we know the human family never realizes that Guapa is a ciguapa, so
their kindness to her doesn't actually disprove the queen ciguapa's fears about
human treatment of legendary creatures, despite the fact that the ciguapas seem to
feel it might. Negrin's mixed-media art has a dense texture and a tropical richness
reminiscent of Gauguin, especially in the lustrous greens of the vegetation and
browns of the people. There's a dreamy detachment to both humans and ciguapas,
which adds to the mystical flavor; though the figures are sometimes stiff (and at
least one image has some confusing results in its attempt to depict the ciguapas'
reversed feet), they people a suitably legendary world. This will be a new legend to
many youngsters, and it should make a splash with lovers of mermaids and other
exotic sea-peoples. DS
ANDERSON, LAURIE HALSE 
Fever 1793. 
Simon, 2000 
252p
ISBN 0-689-83858-1 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
As yellow fever invades the young nation's capital at Philadelphia, Mattie Cook
and her family soon discover that their coffeehouse's distance from the city dock is
no protection from the disease. Widow Cook is stricken, and although Mattie and
her grandfather try their best to nurse her, they realize it is best to leave her to the
dubious care of the doctor and make their way to the healthful countryside. They
never reach safety, though; Mattie falls to the fever along the way, and after the girl
recovers in a makeshift hospital (well-administered by French doctors who under-
stand the disease better than the famed Dr. Rush and his colleagues), they return
home to find the premises deserted and the city in chaos. Determined not only to
survive but also to rebuild the family business, Mattie faces food shortages, looters,
52 
* THE BULLETIN
the death of her beloved grandfather, and anxiety over her mother's fate. Readers
may detect a trace of glibness, resonant of an era closer to their own, in narrator
Mattie's voice, but they will likely forgive and forget this small gaffe as they follow
the teenager's travails in a devastated city. Those who have worked their way through
Ann Rinaldi's offerings will welcome Anderson's take on a gripping episode of
American history. EB
ANTLE, NANCY 
Sam's Wild West Christmas; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Dial,
2000 
40p 
(Easy-to-Read)
ISBN 0-8037-2199-4 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Sam (of Sam's Wild West Show, BCCB 4/95) and his Wild West Show have re-
turned, and they've happened on a heap of holiday trouble: some rascally varmints
have robbed a train and taken everybody's Christmas presents. Sam and Rodeo
Rosie track the villains to their hideout and discover they've also got Santa tied up
inside. Some fruitcake-bowling and Christmas-ribbon lassoing apprehend the
outlaws, and presents, holiday spirits, and Santa's deliveries ("Sam and Rosie flew
off in the hot-air balloon to help a man in a red suit who had gotten a little behind
in his work") are restored. This is a lollapalooza of a beginning reader-Antle's
incorporation of seasonal phrases ("That sound is sadder than a partridge without
a pear tree") allows for amusing riffs while also providing helpful reading clues for
some of the more difficult vocabulary. The lighthearted outlaw-pursuit provides
some satisfactory adventure without ever really endangering Christmas or St. Nick.
Schindler's line-and-watercolor art relies on pale wintry lavender accented with
ochre (there's a lot of buckskin about), with some loud color touches for the tour-
ing troupe. The protagonists are cheerful and robust, and the robbers-even bet-
ter, the robbers' horses-are entertainingly caricatured, with grungy looks and dental
problems across the board. Christmas rarely gets its fair share of rootin' and tootin',
and Antle does a lively job of redressing the deficit. DS
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
Spirit of Endurance; illus. by William Maughan and with
photographs. 
Crown, 2000 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-80092-6 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-80091-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Once a rare topic in children's literature, the adventures of Shackleton's Endurance
expedition are now a popular subject, and the Antarctic seas are becoming well-
sailed. Armstrong, author of Shipwreck at the Bottom ofthe World (BCCB 2/99),
returns to the theme in a different format; a condensed account of the adventure
appears in a vertical column occupying half of a page, with the remainder of the
spread devoted to visuals. The chronicle capably covers all the major points-the
freezing of the Endurance into the Antarctic ice, the long wait until the launching
of the open boats, the treacherous journey first to Elephant Island and then, for the
single boat, on to South Georgia. The narrative suffers somewhat from compres-
sion, however, appearing rushed and superficial as a result. The illustrations mix
period photographs with panoramic oils, the generous trim size allowing them a
dramatic sweep. The paintings are particularly evocative of the grandeur and im-
placability of the landscape; the humans are less impressive and the scenes are rather
emotionally distant, but it's still an intriguing look into aspects of the journey that
weren't photographed. Overall, this isn't as effective as Kostyal's Trial by Ice (BCCB
OCTOBER 2000 
* 53
12/99), a similar approach for the same reading level, but it's got enough artistic
appeal (and readaloud potential) that many libraries will still want to add it to their
expanding polar collections. A resource guide and index are included. DS
Avi 
The Christmas Rat. Atheneum, 2000 
[144p]
ISBN 0-689-83842-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Eric has to hang out in his family's Manhattan apartment during Christmas vaca-
tion, and with his parents working long hours during the Christmas rush, his best
friends unavailable, and a cold snap that makes the Arctic Circle look balmy, he is
fretting for something to do. When uncanny exterminator Anjela Gabrail asks
him to help kill a rat discovered in the basement, Eric acquiesces out of despera-
tion born of boredom but soon finds himself horrified by the exterminator's blood-
thirsty attitude. For reasons even he can't articulate, Eric determines to save the
rat and subsequently finds himself being hunted in its place. As a weird holiday
mystery, this title is partially successful: the sense of creepy menace from Anjela
Gabrail is palpable and pervasive, and Eric faces some scary moments down in the
dark basement. As a Christmas fantasy, the novel dilutes its punch with obvious
metaphors and pedestrian narration, and Eric's appreciation of the glory of the
season has a shallow, tacked-on feeling. Either way, the conclusion is, if not flat, at
least puzzling. While this title lacks spark, it is still offbeat enough to hold readers;
be ready, though, because they're going to ask you what it all means when they're
all done. JMD
BELTON, SANDRA 
McKendree. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
262p
ISBN 0-688-15950-8 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 49, for review.
BLACKWOOD, GARY 
Shakespeare's Scribe. 
Dutton, 2000 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-525-46444-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Readers of The Shakespeare Stealer (BCCB 6/98) will remember Widge, the young
apprentice, whose skill at "charactery" (shorthand) involved him in the Tudor
theater by way of a plot to steal Shakespeare's plays. Now a happy member of The
Lord Chamberlain's Men, Widge is looking forward to the prospect of a provin-
cial tour (necessitated by the closing of the London theaters in the face of rising
plague deaths); he's disturbed when his dear friend Sander chooses to stay behind,
however, and he's uneasy about the competition offered him by a gifted new ap-
prentice. The trip provides drama of its own, too: Mr. Shakespeare breaks his
arm, requiring Widge to transcribe the ongoing work ofAll's Well That Ends Well,
and Widge finds Jamie Redwall, his father (or is he?), who joins up with the troupe.
As in the previous book, Blackwood creates an amiably atmospheric world of rogues
and players, villainy and virtue; there are entertaining contrivances and accessible
Shakespearean jokes aplenty but also an acknowledgment of the seriousness of the
poverty, prejudice, and illness that shapes-and sometimes ends--the lives ofWidge
and his contemporaries. Blackwood also adds some effective tension around the
enigmatic character of Jamie Redwall, whom many of the company members sus-
pect in connection with ongoing misdeeds, and whose relationship with Widge
54 
* THE BULLETIN
blends opportunism with kindness. This is a lively period excursion for readers of
the first book or any teen intrigued by the old-fashioned theatrical life. DS
BoNNERs, SUSAN 
Edwina Victorious; written and illus. by Susan Bonners. 
Farrar,
2000 
131p
ISBN 0-374-31968-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
When Edwina's independent-minded great-grandaunt, also named Edwina, moves
into a care facility after a hip-breaking accident, Edwina the younger is intrigued
to find a box of her relative's old letters. In them, Edwina the elder sternly takes
various public officials to task for bobbles in municipal maintenance; looking around
her town, Eddy begins to think that such a campaign has its merits and uses her
aunt's old typewriter and their shared name to fire off missives about current com-
munity difficulties. The new mayor, familiar with the legendary name and willing
to overlook some of Eddy's juvenile misspellings as the prerogative of the aged,
considers action a political necessity in the face of possible contributions, and Eddy
finds her slightly fraudulent power inspiring and a little uncomfortable. The plot's
rather dreamily unlikely (even in Aunt Edwina's possession of her own original
fifty-year-old letters rather than carbons), and the final showdown, wherein Eddy
comes clean at a mayoral presentation and slapstick hijinks ensue, is a bit sitcomish.
The book offers an unusual premise and an invigoratingly civic-minded slant, how-
ever, and Eddy's achievements (aided by her friend Roger, who strategically mails
the letters in order to give them the proper postmark) are impressive and under-
standably addictive. It's a brisk and cheerful read, and the idea practically begs for
followup class projects; heaven help the local politicos. Black-and-white illustra-
tions are bland and inoffensive, but they offer little beyond literal interpretation of
the text. DS
BRETT, JAN 
Hedgie's Surprise; written and illus. by Jan Brett. 
Putnam,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23477-2 
$16.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
This tale of "a speckled hen who laid an egg every day, only to have it taken by a
little Tomten every morning" pits the hen and a helpful hedgehog against a hun-
gry elvish thief. The animal pals fool the Tomten into taking first an acorn, then
a strawberry, a mushroom, and finally a potato instead of the egg, at which point
the Tomten threatens to eat the hen if not her egg. However, instead of the egg, he
finds Hedgie in the nest the next morning, "all closed up in a tight round ball of
needle-sharp prickles." This development sends the yowling Tomten back home
with a new appreciation for his mother's porridge and leaves Henny and Hedgie
free to enjoy the five baby chicks saved from the Tomten's pot. Unfortunately,
this folklorish plot has neither action nor tension enough to distract readers from
the twee child-speak of the pedestrian text and the logical lapses embedded in it:
why, for example, does the "smooth round potato, even bigger than an egg" leave
the Tomten "only half full"? The book also offers no help to young readers who
might want to know more about who or what a Tomten is. Fans of Brett's expres-
sive characters, flat backgrounds, and complex frames (here in faux-stitchery de-
sign) will, however, find the depth and visual interest they have come to expect.
Viewers who pay close attention to pictures set into the frames surrounding the
single- and (mostly) double-page spreads will be rewarded with additional story
information, while more needle-pointillist details of the homey frames reinforce or
OCTOBER 2000 
* 55
foreshadow events. Though not Brett's best work, this has some of the features
that make her deservedly popular with close readers of visual texts. FK
BUNTING, EVE 
Who Was Born This Special Day?; illus. by Leonid
Gore. 
Atheneum, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82302-9 
$16.00 
R 
2-4 yrs
Well before the Nativity story becomes meaningful to them, toddlers and pre-
schoolers know in their bones that the approaching Christmas season, with its
array of recurrent images, is important and exciting. Bunting offers here a true
"first book" that will be welcomed by Christian parents trying to sort out the
sacred and secular for the youngest offspring. Through a narrow focus on those
most inviting denizens of the creche scene, baby animals surrounding the manger,
she engages the audience in a gentle question-and-answer game: "Who was born
this special day?// Was it you, little lamb?// 'I was born back in early May/ when
the breezes of spring chased winter away.'/ It was not the lamb." As each character
states the circumstances of its birth, Bunting steadily guides listeners toward the
central figure, "The child who lies in the manger bed,/ the shine of the star high
overhead." There is no Biblical citation or theological reference here, only a ten-
der demonstration that the baby is the most important element in this crowded
scene. Gore's acrylic paintings are lavishly sweet and greeting-card romantic, with
moist-eyed, plush-toy-styled animals luminously moon-bathed against a royal and
deep turquoise blue night sky. Soothing and cozy, this could be a perfect bedtime
choice for the weeks leading up to the Big Day. EB
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
Redhanded. Viking, 2000 
135p
ISBN 0-670-88775-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Steven's an ambitious young boxer, trying to muster up credentials-and fees-to
make it to the West Coast Golden Gloves. His energetic and slightly slippery
sidekick, Raymond, is eager for Steven to meet Chad, a new friend with shady
connections; a combination of boxing-earned arrogance, disappointment in his
personal life (a breakup with his girlfriend and increasing discordance between his
separated parents), and curiosity leads Steven into association with Chad. Chad's
plans for a robbery seem Steven's only chance for his needed cash, but soon it
becomes clear that the ringleader and the situation are out of control. Cadnum's
usual taut, dark style is in evidence here, and the understatement of emotion pro-
vides an effective bleakness. It also, however, results in a certain opacity that makes
the ending abrupt and the trajectory of the final scenes (wherein Steven's ethics
rise to the fore, but not in time to prevent the victimization of a stranded motorist)
disproportionately steep (though the climax offers a provocative discussion point).
The hard edges of the dangerous enterprise interestingly parallel the hard edges of
the sweet science, however, and there's an absorbing view of both worlds that will
suit fans of Cormier and Crutcher as well as Cadnum. DS
CARLE, ERIC 
Dream Snow; written and illus. by Eric Carle. 
Philomel, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23579-5 
$21.99 
R 3-6 yrs
This is a simple, well-told story about a simple farmer, the kind of guy who names
his five animals "One," "Two," "Three," "Four," and, yes, "Five." From the splotchy
snowflakes on the transparent dust jacket to the interior plastic overlays that cover
the napping farmer and each of his animals in white blankets of dream snow that
56 
* THE BULLETIN
kids can lift off to see the farmer and his horse, cow, sheep, pig, and rooster actu-
ally "safe and fast asleep" indoors, this book is built to attract children. But wait,
there's more. When the farmer wakes, he dons his red snow suit to go outside into
the snow, where the audience and all five animals watch him decorate a tree with
colorful balls, silver streamers, and wrapped presents. There's also a battery-pow-
ered button that encourages readers to "PUSH HERE" to play a brief tinkling of
bells designed to capture the magic of the season this Santa Claus-ish figure intro-
duces when he shouts "Merry Christmas to all!" Carle's characteristic cut-paper
collages have a textured intensity and heightened contrast that keeps the energy
level high, and they combine well with the doodads to offer a satisfyingly cohesive
experience for young audiences. Some viewers will be able to master the straight-
forward text in addition to the well-integrated visual and manipulative aspects of
this enticing holiday package, and all of them will want to get their hands on it.
FK
CHEANEY, J. B. 
The Playmaker. Knopf, 2000 
[256p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90577-4 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80577-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old orphan Richard Malory may be temporarily reduced to dock
drudge for a firm of London wine merchants, but with his honest upbringing and
the best education his rural Lincolnshire town could provide he proudly boasts,
"No need to assume that I would have to toss kegs forever . . . God willing I
would rise; I was an Englishman." Although rising through the company ranks
looks probable, a street riot and subsequent theft (staged by enemies Richard doesn't
even know he has) force him to seek other employment, and he puts his declamatory
skills to use as an actor apprentice with the Lord Chamberlain's Men (also the
company of Gary Blackwood's Widge, in Shakespeare's Scribe, reviewed above),
where shelter and disguise are more valuable job perks than salary. Although the
boy shows glimmers of true ability on stage, there's little safety here either, for
Richard is unwittingly involved, through family relations, in a Catholic plot to
overthrow Elizabeth I, and he cannot discern friend from foe among his many
pursuers. Richard recounts his adventures with wit, grace, and vivid insight into
the conventions of stage and court: "[Elizabeth] played her part no less than I
played mine, except that she never came off stage. ... 
A necessary business, for
she held the pride and fortunes of a nation in those fine white hands, and those
artful poses she struck." This is a thriller replete with enough dank alleys, shrouded
identities, arsonists and insurrectionists to please action-hungry groundlings, and
it's polished with Shakespearean theatrical trappings to satisfy middle-school lite-
rati in the gallery. EB
CLINTON, CATHERINE 
The Black Soldier: 1492 to the Present. Houghton,
2000 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-67722-X 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-8
In this ambitious overview Clinton traces the history of black experience in the
military from American colonization to the present, focusing on the racial dis-
crimination that dogged the soldiers despite their proven abilities and heroism.
Opening chapters, which include information about slave uprisings as well as black
OCTOBER 2000 
* 
57
participation in military campaigns, set a sluggish pace; with the paucity of infor-
mation on individual soldiers, these discussions serve as little more than reminders
that the earliest invasions and conflicts were multiracial affairs. Later, better docu-
mented periods facilitate a welcome shift from generalities to specifics, and the
pioneering military careers of Henry O. Flipper, Charles Young, and the father
and son Benjamin Davises make especially compelling reading. Clinton does not
consistently discriminate between hardships endemic to military life in general
and those peculiar to black soldiering. For example, Buffalo Soldier Frank Puller's
observations about the harsh Montana climate were surely shared by white sol-
diers, and Clinton's own comment, "Ironically, it was wartime that created the
opportunity for accelerated advancement of black soldiers," overlooks the fact that
wartime creates opportunities for advancement among all soldiers. Her thesis that
black military accomplishments went unrecognized by a white majority is, how-
ever, undeniably valid and amply demonstrated, and this long view may lead
readers to more focused treatments such as Clinton Cox's The Forgotten Heroes:
The Story of the Buffalo Soldiers (BCCB 12/93) or Michael Cooper's Hell Fighters
(2/97). Period photos and an index are included. EB
COLLINGTON, PETER 
Clever Cat; written and illus. by Peter Collington. 
Knopf,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-375-80477-3 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Meddaugh's Martha (Martha Speaks, BCCB 11/92) is a clever dog, and now this
British import offers Martha's feline counterpart in Tibs, the clever cat. Tibs gets
tired of always waiting for his food and deftly wields the can-opener for indepen-
dent access; his family, pleased with Tibs' accomplishment, gives him a door key
(to save them letting him in and out) and a cash card (so he can go shopping for his
own cat food). When Tibs gets a little excessive with the cash card, his family
insists he get a job to repay his debts and to start paying rent. Soon Tibs realizes
that his wonderful capabilities are providing him with a considerably more miser-
able existence than previously, and he returns to cat-level achievement and cat-life
indolence. It's a change to see text in a Collington book (though the amazing Tibs
remains drolly wordless), but the narrative is pithy and poker-faced, never overbal-
ancing the art. The illustrations keep the colors subtle, with ginger Tibs the main
focus. Position and detail carry a lot of impact (Tibs marches about determinedly
on his hind legs as more knowing cats loll lazily about the neighborhood); there's
a distance and restraint to the players (especially the humans, who have a some-
what doughy and doll-like look) that make the proceedings particularly amusing.
This will confirm many cat lovers' secret suspicions about kitty capability. DS
CRUZ, BARBARA C. 
Separate Sexes, Separate Schools: A Pro/Con Issue. Enslow,
2000 
64p 
illus. with photographs 
(Hot Pro/Con Issues)
ISBN 0-7660-1366-9 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Among the topics discussed within this series, the single-sex/coed school debate
arguably has the most direct impact on middle-school readers, virtually all of whom
(save, perhaps, home-schoolers) are enrolled in an educational institution of one
variety or the other. Cruz divides her text into half a dozen chapters covering the
highlights of the controversy, a cursory history of single-sex education in the U. S.,
cases for and against all-girls schools, and cases for and against all-boys schools.
She reviews salient arguments regarding legality (in the public sector), academic
58 
* THE BULLETIN
outcomes, and social outcomes of single-gender education in kid-accessible terms
and introduces related issues of privilege, affirmative action, and racial stereotyp-
ing as they figure into the debate. Although each point of view receives a fair
hearing, the authority of supporting evidence varies wildly, and it is incumbent on
the reader to weigh the relative value ofAAUW and JournalofEducationalPsychol-
ogy reports against popular surveys in the Washington Post and on the Web. To
further muddy these murky waters, Cruz tends to generalize single-gender institu-
tions without specific indication of income level, public or private status, or even
grade level. Despite these shortcomings, this topic should generate considerable
heat straight across a range of economic, religious, and racial academic popula-
tions and invite all students to weigh in with an opinion. EB
DASH, JOAN 
The Longitude Prize; illus. by Dusan Petricic. 
Foster/Farrar,
2000 [208p]
ISBN 0-374-34636-4 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
As the prestige of the eighteenth-century British merchant and naval fleets was
threatened by an unfortunate propensity to run aground for lack of accurate charts
and position reckoning, a Board of Longitude was established which authorized a
£20,000 reward for the inventor of a system or device that could calculate longi-
tude with precision. Rural English clockmaker John Harrison produced and re-
fined just such a device, a seaworthy clock that could help calculate distance from
a point of known longitude on land, and his decades-long battle to prove its effec-
tiveness to a Board that openly favored a lunar calculation system is the subject of
Dash's work. She navigates readers through the complexities of the rival systems
with reasonable ease and does a good job of conveying the years of frustration and
tedium that marked Harrison's dealings with the Board-too good a job, perhaps,
since some of that tedium occasionally (unavoidably?) spills into her narration,
and not all readers will share the redoubtable Harrison's determination to see this
pursuit through. Petricic's black-and-white illustrations, particularly the inven-
tive initial vignettes that open each chapter, puff some wind into the sails when the
momentum slows, though, and a glossary, timeline, and index assist researchers
pursuing this bittersweet tale of justice denied. EB
DESSEN, SARAH 
Dreamland. Viking, 2000 
250p
ISBN 0-670-89122-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Caitlin is devastated when her older sister, Cass, leaves home without warning and
severs contact with the family, going to live with her boyfriend in New York in-
stead of starting school at Yale. In the absence of her trailblazer and the family star,
Caitlin becomes unsure of her place in the scheme of things and tries to squirm
away from becoming just Cass' replacement. Joining the cheerleading team isn't
as effective as she'd hoped, but she does find significance in her relationship with
enticing and offbeat Rogerson Biscoe. Soon Rogerson has all her attention and
energy, taking her away from family, friends, and school; this absorption isn't just
because of her love for him, but because he's taken to physically abusing her when
she deviates from his wishes. Dessen creates a poignant portrait of a family stunned
by forced change, and her depiction of Caitlin's increasing understanding of her
sister (Caitlin finds that being the center ofher mother's world isn't as delightful as
she'd thought) is deft and authentic. The relationship with Rogerson is less effec-
OCTOBER 2000 
* 59
tively examined, though; the initial connection is never really credible, seeming
only a necessity for the drama of the abusive relationship. The shift from love to
abuse, however, is sadly believable in its speed, and Caitlin's numbed narration
makes her inaction plausible. The familial and relationship plots don't mesh as
well narratively as they do in Caitlin's viewpoint and counseling sessions, but this
is a thoughtful exploration (subtler than Gloria Miklowitz' Past Forgiving, BCCB
9/95) of a situation that's easy to get into and hard to get out of. DS
DEXTER, CATHERINE 
Driving Lessons. 
Candlewick, 2000 
152p
ISBN 0-7636-0515-8 $16.99 
R Gr. 7-10
Since Mattie's mother needs the summer to finish her thesis, Mattie returns to her
South Dakota roots, staying with an old family friend and working at her great-
grandmother's house, now being turned into a historical museum. Mattie's long
been the constrained good girl ("My mother always wants me to be happy, and if
I'm not, she gets unhappy. So then I have to pretend I've started to feel better so
that she'll feel better, and it all spirals on like that"), and she's tired of it. She's also
increasingly discomfited with her subtle but persistent status as outsider in her
own life: her mother refuses to talk about Mattie's father, who died when Mattie
was only four, so Mattie's excluded from her own family memories; she's restricted
to being a day worker in the ancestral home where she spent much of her child-
hood; and her mother may soon be unbalancing the family equation further by
remarrying. Mattie begins to form a friendship with Lester Prentiss (seventeen to
her fourteen years), also a summer exile (as a consequence of some criminal mis-
chief), who takes her out along the back roads for driving, making out, and rebel-
lion. Dexter writes Mattie's narration with exquisite yet plainspoken perception
as the teen begins to question the pattern of her family relationships and explore
the possibility of shaking them up. There's nothing programmatic about Mattie's
flirtation with being a bad girl: it's completely understandable in context, and the
drifting into new ways defies easy categorization. The book captures the clean
reality of the moment, depicting Mattie's malfeasance (in an echo of Lester's joy-
riding, she steals a car and parks it in a barn miles away; finding that blame falls on
Lester, she owns up) with understanding rather than didacticism. Readers push-
ing against their own limits will appreciate this insightful and nonjudgmental story.
DS
DURRANT, LYNDA 
Betsy Zane: The Rose ofFort Henry. 
Clarion, 2000 
198p
ISBN 0-395-97899-8 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Sent to be raised by Great-Aunt Elizabeth following the death of her parents, Betsy
now returns from the relative gentility of 1780s Philadelphia to the "Virginia wil-
derness" (now West Virginia) to rejoin her brothers at Zane Station. The journey
is an eye-opener for the teenager, who is first accompanied by a family of Scots
who have run away from the laird who bound them to service in his mines, and
then chaperoned downriver by an old family acquaintance who is a half-mad In-
dian killer. She receives a lukewarm welcome from the brothers; although they are
happy to see Betsy alive and well, they are also angry that she has freed family slaves
and turned family heirlooms over to the safe keeping of a German minister. More-
over, she has arrived just as European-Indian relations have taken a decided turn
for the worse and the brothers-all of whom have been held captive and come to
respect native ways, and one of whom has married a Wyandot woman-struggle
60 
* 
THE BULLETIN
to decide where their allegiance lies. Durrant bases her novel on the life of the real
Betsy Zane, whose moment of fame involved a heroic dash for gunpowder to de-
fend Fort Henry from British/Indian attack. Betsy's tale begins as a mild frontier
road trip, but once issues of Indian and white relations emerge, the pace accelerates
and provocative questions emerge concerning the actions that earned "patriots"
like Betsy the title of hero. An afterword reviews historic background and Zane
family history, and source notes are included. EB
FAGAN, CARY 
The Market Wedding; ad. from a story by Abraham Cahan; illus. by
Regolo Ricci. 
Tundra, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88776-492-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
Morris and Minnie hawk their respective wares (fish and hats) at stands in the
market across the way from each other, until one day their street calls get mixed up
("'Fresh hats!' Morris cried. 'Right out of the lake!"') and they fall in love. Despite
Minnie's protests, Morris plans to spend all his money on a glamorous wedding,
thinking that when their friends hear about the magnificent fete, they will send
only the finest gifts and thereby make them rich. Unfortunately, when the big day
arrives, no guests come to the opulent wedding and reception. As Minnie and
Morris walk dejectedly to their new home, they see all their friends, who explain
that they were ashamed to come to such a fine wedding without clothes and gifts
fine enough for the occasion, and a more humble party ensues at the newly rented
flat. There is some heavy-handed exposition, and the narrative is adult-oriented,
but overall the text flows smoothly. Blocks of text are framed in decorative borders
in the style of the Arts and Crafts movement, which fits the time period depicted in
the illustrations. Despite some awkwardly drafted figures, Ricci captures the crowded
but homey atmosphere of early 1900s city life, with the tawny sepia tones evoking
old photographs. Some young readers may be entertained by Morris' foolishness
and engaged by the satisfyingly folkloric outcome of this tale of marriage and friend-
ship. KM
FERRIS, JEAN 
Eight Seconds. 
Harcourt, 2000 
[192p]
ISBN 0-15-202367-4 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Eighteen-year-old John is thrilled at the chance to attend rodeo camp with his
oldest friend, Bobby; there he discovers in himself a burning desire to ride bulls
and finds a new friend in the thoughtful Kit, a boy whose bullriding talent brings
him admiration and envy. Looking forward to remaining friends with Kit after
camp, John is shocked to discover that his new buddy is gay, and he's disturbed to
find himself still attracted to Kit's magnetic personality-and maybe more. As the
only male child in a family determined that he be a man's man, John finds it a
struggle to sort out his feelings on the matter, and the situation gets even tenser
when a spiteful classmate starts the predictable rumors about John and Kit's friend-
ship. The bullriding plot never really takes off in its own right, and Kit's generally
a predictable paragon. Ferris does offer some original touches, however: Bobby is
untroubled by Kit's sexuality but uneasy at the notion that his friend from child-
hood might be gay, and rather than offering a happy romantic ending, the book
makes it clear that John's misplaced anger towards Kit has destroyed the friendship
completely, regardless of John's dawning realization about his similarity to Kit.
OCTOBER 2000 
* 61
John's soul-searching and his fond but noncomprehending family are both cred-
ibly portrayed, and though the story is programmatic, there's enough real angst
and consequences to evoke reader interest and sympathy. DS
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
Lost!: A Story in String; illus. by C. B. Mordan. 
Holt,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5583-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
When the lights go out during a lightning storm, a grandmother calms her ner-
vous granddaughter with the story of a young mountain girl who sets out one
winter day to find her missing dog. The girl counts on her footprints in the snow
to lead her home, but "before she backtracked a mile, that snow had filled in her
prints and the dog's. She was lost." The enterprising girl knows her woodlore,
however, and she builds a lean-to for the night, finds hazelnuts to eat in the morn-
ing, and even makes herself a pair of snowshoes from "two thick slabs of bark off a
pine tree." Suffice it to say the intrepid heroine finds her dog and gets home safely.
Mordan's ink on clayboard illustrations (black lines against cream-colored paper)
have a formal, engraving-like quality that suits the understated tone of the text.
The grandmother illustrates her storytelling with plot-related string figures, dia-
grams of which are ably presented in small inserts showing the finished figure.
Addenda include a brief history of string figures, instructions for making the fig-
ures used in the story, and a short list of "Other Books and Information" on this
pastime. Kids with time (and string) on their hands are going to think this is the
cat's... cradle. JMD
FLEMING, DENISE 
The Everything Book; written and illus. by Denise
Fleming. 
Holt, 2000 
64p
ISBN 0-8050-6292-0 
$18.95 
Ad 
1-3 yrs
As the title implies, Fleming here offers a little bit of everything for very young
viewers: there are nursery rhymes and poems, and spreads treating concepts such
as seasons, counting, shapes, the alphabet, and a multitude of other topics. As an
added bonus, Fleming has scattered 119 ladybugs throughout the already vivid
spreads, and a key at the back shows the number of ladybugs to be found (and
counted) on each page. The illustrations are executed in Fleming's characteristic
style, using a cotton fiber method that gives textural depth and intriguing color
variations while creating easily identifiable creatures and objects defined by clean
edges of color and strong, simple lines. Although there's often little connection
between one concept and the next, browsing toddlers are unlikely to mind, and
caretakers will be grateful for a book that offers such readable and entertaining
variety. Concepts vary enough in difficulty that children at the right age for some
of the book will be too old or too young for other segments. Nevertheless, Fleming
has created a hard-to-resist browsing book, and children just learning to manipu-
late paper pages will find a treat at every turn. KM
FREEDMAN, RUSSELL 
Give Me Liberty!: The Story of the Declaration of
Independence. Holiday House, 2000 
96p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1448-5 
$24.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Many middle schoolers can use a reminder that American independence did not
follow a simple path from colonial outrage, to proclamation of freedom, to war-
fare, but rather escalated through a love-hate relationship with the mother coun-
62 
* THE BULLETIN
try, small acts of boycott and rebellion, bloody skirmishes, and a soul-wrenching
debate on whether to sever all ties with England. The greater part of this title
retraces the colonies' evolving identity as a people distinct from the English, acts
by the Crown to raise colonial revenue and contain America within the empire's
fold, and acts of resistance by Americans with differing views on the necessity of
independence. The narrative's abrupt halt at the signing and announcement of
the Declaration, and final chapters examining it as a "living" document and object
of national pride, support the subtitular claim that this book is primarily about the
creation of the document itself. Curiously, though, Freedman focuses only a single
chapter on lengthy debates within the Continental Congress, the extensive editing
of Jefferson's draft (only the slavery issue warrants any detail), and the enormous
personal risk staked by the signers, all of whom instantly became traitors to the
Crown. As a thorough exploration of the Declaration itself, this treatment leaves
something to be desired; as a smooth retelling of the milestone events at the open-
ing of the Revolution, however, the title will nonetheless have considerable collec-
tion value. A plethora of color and black-and-white illustrations, a chronology,
bibliography, and index are included. EB
GALLOWAY, PRISCILLA, comp. 
Too Young to Fight: Memories from Our Youth
During World War II. Stoddart, 2000 
207p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7737-31903 
$22.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Galloway and eleven other Canadian authors share memories of childhood on the
home front, offering a panoply of experiences that expand U.S. readers' under-
standing of how their northern neighbor's ties to England brought the war to their
doorsteps well before Pearl Harbor drew the States into the fray. There are pi-
quant, often comic recollections of applying leg makeup and tasting chocolates
stored for years in mothballs, of a timid air-raid warden's fright in the local grave-
yard and a cigarette company's information card (now so blatantly ironic) on how
to wear a gas mask. There are recurrent themes such as the "war guests" (English
children sent to Canada for protection), wartime privations, changes of address
and employment forced upon families by the war, and the powerful allure of
Veronica Lake. Most compelling, though, is the thread of guilt that surfaces so
often through these accounts, as authors acknowledge how the dual accidents of
geography and youth itself sheltered them from the worst of the war: "I've some-
times wondered how I managed to wander through those years so blinkered against
all the horrors ... the only girls' magazine in those days, CallingAll Girls, certainly
had little in it about the war, just articles about fashions and hair styles and how to
talk to boys." It is this thoughtful candor that will resonate with adolescent read-
ers and raise the compilation's value beyond mere reminiscence to a primary his-
tory source. Black-and-white photos and an index are included. EB
GIFF, PATRICIA REILLY 
Nory Ryan's Song. Delacorte, 2000 
[176p]
ISBN 0-385-32141-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
This compelling historical fiction about the Irish potato famine shows how quickly
personal health and societal structures break down when nature won't provide and
neither you nor your neighbors have an economic safety net. Nory Ryan, the
appealing twelve-year-old narrator, has to draw on her strength (a believable and
poignant bravery) and acknowledge her faults ("I didn't think") while dealing with
OCTOBER 2000 
* 63
an increasingly desperate situation. A process of attrition leaves her responsible for
her youngest brother, Patch, and eventually finds her alone with Anna, an old
woman she initially fears but who turns out to be a source of support. The story
ends on a high note, with Nory setting out to join the rest of her family in Galway
prior to their emigration to America. Giff does justice to the historical milieu and
places Nory's individual story of maturation firmly within it, providing episodes
and images that touch the reader across time: the package from America that
remains in the post office for over a year because Nory's family does not have the
money to pay even the minuscule postage due is particularly powerful. Readers
will agree with Anna that it's a lucky house to have Nory Ryan in it. FK
GREENBERG, JAN 
Frank O. Gehry: Outside In; by Jan Greenberg and Sandra
Jordan. 
DK Ink, 2000 
48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7894-2677-3 
$19.95 
R* 
Gr. 4-8
How can Greenberg and Jordan follow up their much-lauded achievement Chuck
Close: Up Close (BCCB 5/98)? With an equally riveting introduction to the work
of controversial architect Gehry, whose playful heaps and sweeps of gleaming,
undulating metal and surprise packages of giant binoculars, copper domes, and
wasp-waisted glass towers bear testimony to the author's assessment that "at heart
he's a big kid with the best set of Legos in the world." Not only will readers, most
of whom have undoubtedly never heard of Gehry, be mesmerized by outstand-
ingly reproduced photos of his landmark buildings (many captured from a variety
of angles), but they will also be intrigued by the outrage that often met Gehry's
efforts and his risky policy of "refusing projects that required him to compro-
mise." The authors seamlessly integrate relevant biographical details, tracing the
artistic and business choices that paved the route to Gehry's renown and early life
experiences that influenced imagery recurrent in his work. The architecture itself
ultimately steals the show, and Greenberg and Jordan again prove themselves to be
most engaging teachers, guiding readers through Gehry's career development with
well-placed questions and pointers for interpreting the edifices as artistic state-
ments. Gehry's work is a perfect vehicle for introducing children to the delight
and power of contemporary architecture, and this presentation is worthy of its
subject. EB
GREENE, STEPHANIE 
Owen Foote, Money Man; illus. by Martha Weston. 
Clarion,
2000 
[9 6p]
ISBN 0-618-02369-0 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Owen Foote (of Owen Foote, Soccer Star, BCCB 5/98, etc.) has returned, and he's
got a new ambition: "When he was in kindergarten, all he had wanted to be was a
paleontologist. Now that he was in the third grade, all he wanted to be was rich."
The riches are desired largely with an eye to acquiring such indispensable items as
plastic vomit and whoopee cushions, but mere desire isn't moving him towards his
goal. Labor isn't Owen's favorite thing either, though, and his entrepreneurial
plans-a fishing video and a dog-walking service-aren't the gold mines he'd been
expecting; it's only when he helps a neighbor with a most pleasurable session of
pond-building that he realizes it's possible for financially rewarding work to be
really enjoyable. The lessons here are sufficiently restrained and effective to keep
characters and story foremost (there's also a spirited and amusing flavor to his
travails that makes them entertaining rather than didactic). The characters have
64 
* THE BULLETIN
plenty of character: Owen's greed is both typical and believable, as is his frustra-
tion with the linkage between labor and profit; his semi-hapless friend Joseph makes
an obliging sidekick as well as an appropriate recipient of Owen's generosity (Owen
buys Joseph, a pet-loving kid with a pet-wary mother, a turtle). The topic is an
unusual one in literature despite its commonality in life, and kids trying to make
their fortune will empathize with Owen's financial dreams. Line-and-wash art has
the same sturdy cheerfulness as the text. DS
GRINDLEY, SALLY 
Who Is It?; illus. by Rosalind Beardshaw. 
Peachtree,
2000 
[2 6p]
ISBN 1-56145-224-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-4 yrs
This British import offers a series of gentle peekaboo-style guessing games for en-
try-level aficionados of folklore. Bits of Goldilocks peek from behind the bears'
furniture as the text points out that "someone's eating Mr. Bear's porridge.
Someone's sitting in Mrs. Bear's chair. Someone's sleeping in Baby Bear's bed.
Who is it?" "It's Goldilocks!" the book triumphantly announces after a page turn,
letting viewers see the bears and Goldy encounter each other. Other "someones"
are Red Riding Hood's wolf, the troll under the bridge (waiting for Billy Goats
Gruff), and Jack (of beanstalk fame); then a final someone (Mommy) watches the
youngster read the book and play-pounces. (The "reading" idea is rather a flatter-
ing conceit for young viewers, who more than readers are the book's real audi-
ence.) This playful page-turn puzzle is frisky and effective, with pleasing repetition
and restrainedly rowdy payoffs. Layered oils in Easter-bonnet colors run to but-
ton-nosed cuteness, but the oversized pages have real energy as well, with googly
eyes and silly faces keeping any alarm at bay. This is eminently suitable for a cozy
junior storytime or as a lively excuse for some bedtime giggles. DS
HAAS, JESSIE 
Will You, Won't You? 
Greenwillow, 2000 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029197-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029196-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Mad (short for Madison) has decided that staying as invisible as possible is her
ticket to social survival. Her outgoing mother is horrified, and she enlists Mad's
grandmother in an attempt to change Mad's ways. This means that Mad's peace-
ful summer at Gam's expands from "riding, reading, and rotting" to social interac-
tion, initially through Scottish Country Dance and then through politics (Gam is
a state senator involved in a political battle over a timber bill). Mad's gradual
change in self-image is effectively depicted (dancing encourages her grace and skill,
and her grandmother, also afflicted with shyness, demonstrates the rewards of get-
ting beyond discomfort); she's also realistically surprised by her own ability to
meet and surmount obstacles. There are so many disparate elements that the
point is sometimes obscured beneath the manifestations, however: in addition to
the dance and politics, Mad struggles with her horse's response to the change of
scene, her distant friend's blooming friendship with a popular girl, and her thoughts
about her father, who deserted her before birth (and whose heroic fate is more
dramatic than believable). Despite the book's multidirectionality, the characters
here are compelling, and readers will support Mad's learning of new steps. DS
OCTOBER 2000 
* 65
HESSE, KAREN 
Stowaway; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. 
McElderry,
2000 
[3 52p]
ISBN 0-689-83987-1 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Nicholas Young, true-life stowaway on Captain James Cook's Endeavour, appears
here as fictionalized recorder of the ship's three-year circumnavigation, which ex-
panded the scientific catalog of flora and fauna, charted dimly understood regions
of the Pacific, and, not coincidentally, claimed new lands for the British Crown.
In his "journal," Young observes the "Gentlemen" as they collect and describe
species unknown to Europeans, Cook as he navigates treacherous seas and equally
perilous coastlines, and his crew mates who, with varying degrees of good and ill
will, teach him the ropes and aid his rise to official crew member. The restrained
tone and understated detail of Young's entries convincingly recreate a seafarer's
notes, although an occasional liberal-minded comment seems inserted to soothe
twenty-first century sensibilities rather than reflect contemporary mores: "The
men found heapings of rock at a sacred burial site and thought it ideal ballast. ...
How would they feel if the Natives hauled off grave markers from an English
cemetery?" In the tradition of a tersely worded log book, most of the high drama
here is only implied. It therefore seems likely that a junior-high reader seeking an
authentic voice might rather sling a hammock with Richard Henry Dana aboard
the Pilgrim, while one who craves hundreds of pages of fictionalized adventure will
find the Indefatigable of C. S. Forester's Midshipman Hornblower a happier ship.
EB
HITE, SID 
Stick and Whittle. 
Scholastic, 2000 
[208p]
ISBN 0-439-09828-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
At a Texas fishing hole in 1872, Melvin Fitchett, 27, meets Melvin Smyte, 16. Big
Melvin (whom Smyte nicknames "Stick") is fleeing memories of the Battle of the
Wilderness, and he hopes to find his long lost love, Evelyn; Little Melvin (whom
Fitchett nicknames "Whittle") is fleeing from burned-out Chicago, and he hopes
to find a purpose in life. For now, being the partner and bodyguard Stick doesn't
realize he needs suits Whittle just fine. A ride to Kansas attunes the men to each
other's foibles and temperament, and by the time they reach Wichita City they are
committed partners ready to take on the cutthroats who, Stick learns, have ab-
ducted Evelyn (now a governess, and happily for Stick still unmarried) and her
wealthy charge, Adeline. Hite packs a saddlebag full of timeless plot elements,
from an exquisitely crafted rescue to the satisfying fruition of love at first sight, and
freshens these tried and true devices with dead-on pacing and a strong sense of
place. This is solid pa'dners-on-a-mission stuff, and the gruff affection between
the endearingly mismatched pair of wanderers is a credit to the genre. EB
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT, ed. 
My America: A Poetry Atlas of the United States;
illus. by Stephen Alcorn. 
Simon, 2000 
83p
ISBN 0-689-81247-7 
$19.95 
R Gr. 3-6
This anthology of fifty poems treats the country regionally, dividing the states and
the District of Columbia into eight sections for practical purposes; each section
opens with a spread containing a map and some almanac-type facts about the
66 
* THE BULLETIN
states, then poems address various aspects of the featured region (though not nec-
essarily on a state-by-state basis). While the poems' regional assignments are some-
times arbitrary, and some of the verses have a textbooky stiltedness to them, there's
nonetheless an evocative array of American images here. Some entries are explic-
itly associated with a locality (a selection from Carl Sandburg's "Crossing Ohio
When Poppies Bloom in Ashtabula"), and some get their regional relevance from
context (Douglas Florian's "The Hawk"); poets old and new appear together (twenty
of the included verses were commissioned for this project). Alcorn's casein art
makes use of strong contrasts between slightly shaded colors; layers of pigment
give darker undertones that keep violet and ochre, olive and aquamarine from
clashing, while stiff-brushed spatterwork softens the outlines. The art runs from
style to style-there's a playful cubism in some images, and others are infused with
echoes of Thomas Hart Benton, WPA murals, and other Depression-era Ameri-
can techniques (though Alcorn's line is clean and abstracted where those had a
rippling plasticity). This has curricular utility written all over it, and it could
spawn any number of assignments; it's also just an enjoyable and vivid poetic tour
of America. DS
HOWE, NORMA 
Blue Avenger Cracks the Code. Holt, 2000 
[29 6p]
ISBN 0-8050-6372-2 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Such resounding triumphs as Weepless Lemon Meringue Pie and the solution to
Oakland, California's Second Amendment problems (The Adventures of Blue
Avenger, BCCB 3/99) are hard to follow, and Blue finds himself in an unexpected
slump. Moreover his true love, Omaha Nebraska Brown, has had her faith in male
fidelity shaken to the core (thanks to Blue's misguided arrangement of a meeting
between Omaha and her estranged father) and has left Blue rapidly boiling on the
back burner of her affections. But an avenger-worthy intellectual challenge meets
Blue where he (like many teens) least expects it-in his English class, where Dr.
Wood steps boldly out of the anti-Stratfordist closet and announces to his stu-
dents that Edward De Vere, Earl of Oxford was most probably the true author of
Shakespeare's plays. As readers of Howe's first title well know, however, Destiny
toys with us mortals, and everything from the plagiary of a friend's computer game
program to a lusty dog's amorous designs on Blue's grandmother's leg will impel
or impede his quest for the evidence to vindicate the Oxfordian cause. Howe
doesn't knit her many plot strands into quite the awesomely intricate pattern of
Blue's first outing, but her narrative voice, dense with irony, ably carries the tale.
Again, she shoots her verbal arrows right back at outrageous fortune itself, never at
her stout-hearted characters, whom she draws with tender affection. EB
JOSEPH, LYNN 
The Color ofMy Words. Cotler/HarperCollins, 2000 
[14 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028233-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028232-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Ana Rosa lives in the Dominican Republic, and short-story-like
chapters interspersed with poems tell of her life there. It's a dramatic and impor-
tant year for her: her far-from-rich family begins to support her writing ambi-
tions; she discovers that another man, not her Papi, is really her father; she develops
a passionate crush on her brother's best friend; finally and most tragically, she
OCTOBER 2000 
* 
67
nearly stops writing forever after her beloved brother is killed in a standoff with
local police when the village is slated for commercial development. This is an
unusual setting, and Joseph offers a vivid picture of Ana Rosa's world, her island
life, and her struggling family. There's a self-conscious writerliness to the style,
however, that sometimes makes the prose stilted and the events distant, and the
local-color vignettes don't combine well with the serious events ofAna Rosa's life.
Nonetheless, this is an evocative look at a girl finding the importance of her voice
in the face of loss. DS
KERNER, CHARLOTTE 
Blueprint; tr. from the German by Elizabeth D.
Crawford. 
Lerner, 2000 
[192p]
ISBN 0-8225-0080-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
"We clones are like little atom bombs. In interpersonal relationships, we explode
much of what you have held near and dear since the beginning of human thought
and what appeared unalterable, yes, even eternal." So says Siri, the first human
clone in history, daughter of composer Iris Sellin. Upon discovering that multiple
sclerosis was going to rob her of her music and eventually her life, Iris determines
to create a second her who can carry on in her place. Though initially an adoring
daughter-twin, Siri eventually resents Iris' control and the apparent predestination
of her life and seeks her own identity. This import from Germany offers a satisfy-
ing and traditional sci-fi take on new possibilities. The shifting between first per-
son and third person is a little confusing, and Kerner bobbles a bit on her science
(wrongly claiming, for instance, that genetic identicality creates identical finger-
prints), but she hits the social and personal implications dead on. Particularly
resonant is her depiction of Siri emulating Iris' negative traits (as selfish as Iris, she
sees no need to let Iris be the arbiter of that self) and of her growing competition
with Iris (including a play for Iris' boyfriend) as Iris sickens. The book also cred-
ibly creates a world attempting to figure out the place of cloning and the eternal
problem of a technology that presents us with new moral choices. It therefore
explores some of the same issues as Dickinson's Eva (BCCB 5/89), and readers
drawn to both that title's ideological exploration and personal impact will find
much the same satisfaction here. DS
KETCHUM, LIZA 
Into a New Country: Eight Remarkable Women ofthe West. 
Little,
2000 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-316-49597-2 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Rather than attempt to typify the experiences of women who settled the American
West, Ketchum spotlights those who broke the mold of farmer's or rancher's or
shopkeeper's wife. Representing a range of cultures and periods and places of
settlement, their stories vary in intrinsic interest to young readers. Biddy Mason's
journey from slave to Los Angeles philanthropist begins with considerable tension
in her court battle to win freedom but loses steam in discussion of her real-estate
dealing. On the other hand, Lotta Crabtree's rise from child performer to noted
national stage personality has the appeal of a bio in a teen celebrity magazine, with
the requisite elements of a pushy stage mom, career setbacks, and audience-pleas-
ing defiance of ladylike proprieties. Ketchum is constant in her adulation, lavish-
ing equal approbation on the LaFlesche sisters when they reclaim the Omaha
68 
* 
THE BULLETIN
customs they abandoned at Indian boarding school, and on Chinese immigrant
Mary McGladery Tape as she embraces a thoroughly Caucasian-American lifestyle
and demands the same under law for her Chinese children. Occasional inconsis-
tencies contribute some confusion (McGladery was "brought" to California by
missionaries, yet seems to have been stranded there and "taken up" by a relief
society), but readers who suspect there's more to the Western women than calico
and covered wagons can find evidence of it here. EB
KIMMEL, ERIC A. 
Gershon's Monster: A Story for the Jewish New Year; illus. by Jon
J Muth. 
Scholastic, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-10839-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 3-6
Gershon saves up all his mistakes for Rosh Hashanah, the Day of Atonement;
when that day comes, he gathers up his misdeeds (personified in the illustrations as
shadow imps with wicked, laughing eyes), stuffs them in a sack, and, unrepentant,
tosses them into the sea. Sure as the tide, Gershon's unconsidered acts came back
to haunt him, "rising from the sea" in the form of a serpent-like monster "covered
with scales like iron plates. On each scale was written one of Gershon's misdeeds."
An act of bravery and repentance saves Gershon from the consequences of his
deeds, and the monster's scales "melted into raindrops that fell like a summer
shower, cleansing the sea." Kimmel's crisp but lyrical retelling of this early Hasidic
legend has a steady pace and mounting tension that makes this a text certain to
receive heavy use as a readaloud or told story, but it is as a readalone that this title
will have the greatest impact. Muth's watercolors add a powerful emotional sub-
text to this already moving tale. The visual characterization of Gershon, in prayer
shawl and yarmulke, sweeping his impish misdeeds into the cellar has both pathos
and humor; the subtle palette (pale blue, sandy brown, creamy yellow) is clean and
evocative, providing a peaceful background against which the protagonist, dressed
in black, contrasts with a solid power. The compositions are elegantly arranged,
whether featuring close-ups of Gershon's emotional reactions or showing his small
figure in black coat and hat dragging a huge sackful of sins to the sea. The mon-
strous result of Gershon's negligence is appropriately horrific (some readers may
be reminded of Brinton Turkle's nightmare in Do Not Open, BCCB 12/81) as it
looms over the beach, blotting out the light of the blue summer sky. Muth's
illustrations for Come On, Rain! (BCCB 4/99) revealed him to be an artist of ex-
ceptional skill at visual interpretation of text; this title will ensure that reputation.
An author's note gives background on the story and the Jewish traditions from
which it comes. JMD
KONIGSBURG, E. L. 
Silent to the Bone. 
Karl/Atheneum, 2000 
261p
ISBN 0-689-83601-5 
$16.00 
R* Gr. 7-10
Thirteen-year-old Connor Kane seems to be the only hope of his best friend,
Branwell: after his baby half-sister suffers a severe head injury, Branwell refuses to
defend himself against the claim that he harmed Nikki and waits mutely in the
Behavior Center while legal and familial drama swirls around him. Determined to
peel away the layers of his friend's silence in order to find the truth and save him,
Connor begins to communicate with Branwell nonvocally-through expression
and through cards with the alphabet (and, later, key words and names) on them.
In sorting out the situation Connor plunges himself into the delicate balance of
OCTOBER 2000 
* 69
expectations and interpersonal relationships that makes up Branwell's and even his
own life: Branwell's late mother's parents, his father and stepmother; Connor's
adult half-sister (and Branwell's old babysitter), Margaret; a pizza delivery guy;
and, most significantly, Nikki's au pair Vivian play significant roles in the story
Connor pieces together. Konigsburg pieces her story together even more deftly
than Connor does Branwell's: while the Louise Woodward overtones will tip readers
off that the British au pair is to blame for Nikki's predicament, the exploration of
the human mosaic that makes up Branwell's life and causes Branwell's silence re-
tains a hypnotic fascination of its own. Connor's independent closeness with Mar-
garet is an original and effectively depicted relationship that not only provides his
search with aid and credibility but also gives him a window into the patterns of
human hurt that have affected both families; it's Connor's personal knowledge of
Branwell and his similar susceptibilities, however, that give him insight into the
thrall in which Vivian held him and the anguish it caused. In the end, Connor not
only excavates Branwell from his voicelessness (and bit by bit nails the real culprit)
but also understands the power and necessity of that silence. The Kerr-edged
complexity of design is played out with crystalline clarity, and readers will be fasci-
nated by the intricate lives we all lead. DS
LADEN, NINA 
BadDog; written and illus. by Nina Laden. 
Walker, 2000 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8748-7 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8747-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Our narrator starts out just a regular dog looking for a good time; inspired by a
postcard depicting free-range chickens ("'Hallelujah!' I howled, 'Farm fowls for
free!'"), he and his friend Butch hit the road. After evading pursuers they find the
farm, but chicken acquisition proves to be challenging. In the meantime, the cops
have caught up with them, and despite an attempt to make a break for it, the pair
are apprehended ("Then they threw the book at me. They took the chickens too.
I heard someone say 'they were going to fry'"). The lengthy plot is less important
than the delivery. Laden acknowledges Jack Kerouac (the narrator sports the obliga-
tory turtleneck and beret) and Jack London, but Mickey Spillane is another echo
here: machine-gun sentences (a ragged right margin emphasizes the clipped phrases)
and a cynical edge make an effective springboard for the humor. The laughs come
not just from parody but from a relentless barrage of wordplay, with puns ("We
showed them we weren't chicken. That's when things turned foul"), twists on
idiom ("Butch was beside himself, and I was beside Butch,") and doggy jokes ("So
they say I'm a bad dog. I know I'm no Saint Bernard"), making the story funny on
several different notes at once. Unfortunately the art isn't up to the story: the
draftsmanship goes beyond new-wavy to stiff and amateurish, and the colors jostle
for attention with a loudness unsuited to the tongue-in-cheek text. Many viewers
may nonetheless think that it's hard to beat Beat pooches on the road. DS
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Lucille's Snowsuit; illus. by Marylin Hafner. 
Crown,
2000 
[2 8p]
ISBN 0-517-80037-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
It's a snow day, which means Lucille's older brother and sister are out of school
and ready to play in the snow. Lucille (who doesn't go to school in the first place)
70 
* THE BULLETIN
is excited to join them, but she encounters a sartorial obstacle: the dreaded snowsuit
("She couldn't get her boots through the legs, and she couldn't pull them out to
start over again. She was really stuck"). Mighty labors leave Lucille sweaty but
only half-snowsuited, and by the time her mother completes the garbing, Lucille is
almost too tired to go play. Fortunately, her siblings rise to the occasion, and she
gets taken out into the snow and has a prolongedly grand time while her
unsnowsuited siblings need to pop back in for periodic warmups. The ending is
somewhat flat, but this is still an upbeat treatment of the bane of many children's
winter. Lasky has an experienced eye for the realistic details of the clothing battle
and a preschooler's weaponry therein-Lucille flops and whines and reiterates in
an authentic and recognizable way. Hafner's watercolor and colored-pencil illus-
trations show Lucille and family as a happy collection of flop-eared pigs (with
sufficiently human-shaped feet that boots remain troublesome); spot art of an ex-
pressive Lucille gives full dues to the rigors of dressing, and her contrasty orange
snowsuit provides a jolly accent to the snowy landscape when she finally does
make it outdoors. Adjust readaloud tempo to get over a few slow bits and provide
a snowball finale all your own, and this will suit young piglets down to their chilly
booted toes. DS
LATTIMORE, DEBORAH NOURSE 
Medusa; written and illus. by Deborah Nourse
Lattimore. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2000 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027905-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027904-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
This sensational myth needs little embellishment: the beautiful Medusa is trans-
formed by a vengeful goddess into a snake-coiffed creature whose visage is so ter-
rible it turns the unwary into stone. Lattimore's competent storytelling is
accompanied by visuals that combine classic fairy-tale images (castles, scenery, wavy-
tressed women) and a roiling phantasmagoria of nearly psychedelic compositions.
The proportions of the figures are often unwieldy, and the scenes in the royal court
are darkly muddy and sometimes hard to see. The cover, however, will easily pull
in readers with its image of a golden-haired, green-eyed (or is it snake-haired and
reptilian-eyed?) Medusa. Lattimore's note gives background on the myth, but no
specific sources are included. Monsters have a guaranteed audience, so dust off the
rest of the picture book myths and plan a monstrously popular display. JMD
LAWRENCE, IAIN 
Ghost Boy. 
Delacorte, 2000 
[336p]
ISBN 0-385-32739-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Harold (Ghost Boy) Kline's post-World-War-II small town shows little compas-
sion for anything outre, so the albino teen follows a time-honored path of escape
and joins the circus. On the road to meet up with the center ring acts, Harold is
befriended by several of the sideshow freaks, who take him under their wing and
offer him the first real friendship he's ever known. When they join the rest of the
troupe, though, Harold begins to realize that he is not nearly as freakish as diminu-
tive Princess Minikin, the unsightly ape man, or acerbic Gypsy Magda. In fact, he
is not relegated to the sideshow at all, but begins to train the elephants to play
baseball in the hope that the novelty act will revive the circus's drooping reputa-
tion. Beautiful equestrienne Flip even flirts with Harold during her boyfriend's
OCTOBER 2000 
* 
71
absence, and it isn't until the Ghost has his heart broken and weathers a tragedy
that he finds the strength to return home and rebuild life on his own terms. At
first glance this novel seems to hold little in common, either thematically or stylis-
tically, with Lawrence's rousing The Wreckers and The Smugglers (BCCB 6/98, 7/
99). However, the author's innate skill as a yarn spinner and keen eye for the
telling details that breathe life into the most improbable characters are again in
evidence. The cast of tenderhearted circus freaks are as sharply drawn as the black-
hearted villains of his previous works, and although breakneck speed gives way
here to the measured pace of a Bildungsroman, Harold's inexorable movement
toward self-discovery carries its own quiet tension. EB
LEWIS, J. PATRICK 
IsabellaAbnormella and the Very, Very Finicky Queen of Trouble;
illus. by Kyrsten Brooker. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2605-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The town of Trouble has its own monarchy, apparently, and its monarchy has its
own trouble in the queen's insomnia: "It's impossible to find/ A mattress to im-
press Her Lady's/ Delicate behind!" After much agonizing, the king seeks the
advice of his subjects on the matter ("Shall I sleep her in a casket?/ Or the gardener's
wheelbarrow?"). The Keeper of the Royal Cat, little Isabella Abnormella Pinkerton
McPugh, offers the solution of a queen-sized waterbed, the queen's nights are
saved, and Isabella gets adopted by the king and queen in recompense for her
wonderful solution. The conceit is an entertaining one (vaguely reminiscent of
Milne's "The King's Breakfast"), and the whimsy is generally kept within work-
able bounds. The scansion sometimes trips over itself and it will take unwary
readers-aloud with it if they're not careful, but practice will ensure that the tetram-
eter rolls off the tongue. The illustrations make the town-kingdom of Trouble
into a fascinating and original world: Brooker uses oils and collage, splicing to-
gether painted sections in a mosaic effect for large items and layering bits of pho-
tography on top of and alongside the hand-drawn features (the border on the
queen's coverlet switches cheerfully from paint to borrowed collage bit and back to
paint again). Colors run to warm Tuscan buff and stone, punctuated by royal
purples and shiny decorative touches (such as the delicious bits of pattern in the
royal costume), and the wide-eyed and pliable faces, whose lines recall the work of
Will Hillenbrand, have a wonderfully comic joie de vivre. This would work both
as an antic daytime pleasure and an offbeat bedtime windup. DS
LOURIE, PETER 
Mississippi River: A Journey Down the Father of Waters; written
and illus. with photographs by Peter Lourie. 
Boyds Mills, 2000 
[48p]
ISBN 1-56397-756-7 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Lourie again incorporates geography, history, regional lore, and traveler's adven-
tures into a breezily readable armchair tour of a recent trek-this time down the
Mississippi by canoe, foot, collapsible bicycle, barge, and yes, a few cheater's jaunts
in motorized vehicles. He begins at Lake Itasca in Minnesota, briefly losing his
way by canoe among the false channels leading from the lake, then picks up speed
making his way through locks that dwarf the tiny craft. Frequent stops and side
trips find him examining the last remaining wooden-hulled steamboat, exploring a
makeshift Union Army canal, chatting with a river pilot, visiting the cemetery at
72 
* THE BULLETIN
Vicksburg, and arriving in New Orleans just in time to greet an approaching hur-
ricane. Like any vacationer with pictures to show, Lourie offers many tiny and
cramped photos (featuring, of course, the traveler himself in studiedly natural poses);
but some-like the full-spread barge tow or the close-up of a rickety houseboat-
are impressive indeed, and they're intelligently mixed with black and white period
photos of the same stretch of river in days gone by. Although Lourie can only stop
long enough for the briefest descriptions of sights along the way, he ably conveys
the romance of the journey itself and his intense enthusiasm for regional explora-
tion. EB
LYONS, MARY E. Dear Ellen Bee: A Civil War Scrapbook of Two Union Spies; by
Mary E. Lyons and Muriel M. Branch. 
Atheneum, 2000 
[17 6p] 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-689-82379-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
When antebellum Richmond socialite Miss Bet Van Lew frees her slaves, she is
delicately avoided or openly shunned by her peers, and the near-obsessive affection
she lavishes on young ex-slave Liza-sending her to school in Philadelphia and
minutely planning the child's future as a teacher for black children-strains her
society's most generous definition of eccentricity. Liza, however, is not as trac-
table as Miss Bet could wish, resisting and thwarting this master plan at every turn.
But when the Civil War breaks out and teenage Liza and her new husband are
stranded behind Confederate lines, Liza joins Miss Bet in a pro-Union espionage
conspiracy, posing as a slave in the Jefferson Davis household and feeding infor-
mation under the moniker Ellen Bee, a code name for correspondence between
her and Miss Bet. Lyons and Branch employ the now-ubiquitous journal format
here with some justification; portions of the real Bet Van Lew's diary are extant,
and there is evidence Liza may have kept a book as well. It is Liza's voice, though,
that makes this fictionalized account particularly compelling. This is no humble
freedman grateful for the largesse of an enlightened owner but a single-minded
adolescent with a clear conviction that freedom is not a gift but a right. She har-
bors a prickly affection for Miss Bet-one she is often loathe to admit much less
indulge-but she doggedly, even rebelliously enters into an early marriage and
arranges her life squarely on her own terms. The strained, often hurtful relation-
ship between the two women provides a fascinating counterpoint to their commit-
ment and cunning as spies. EB
MACCARONE, GRACE 
A Child Was Born: A First Nativity Book; illus. by Sam
Williams. 
Scholastic, 2000 
[26p]
ISBN 0-439-18296-4 
$10.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
In an effort to make the Christmas story accessible to a very young audience,
Maccarone's rhymed retelling strips the tale down to its thinnest possible outline.
Verses tend to be choppy and strained: "Tired and worn,/ they went to the inn-
/ no room for her,/ no room for him./ Instead,/ they slept in a shed-/ straw for a
bed." Williams' grainily outlined watercolors present a fairly credible (albeit very
spacious) Bethlehem, although frisky mice, cuddly tubby sheep, and a grinning
pet dog exude their cuteness at the expense of authenticity. Still, Williams renders
a Mary and Joseph who seem truly delighted with their baby, and Magi who are
OCTOBER 2000 
* 
73
thoroughly charmed by the unswaddled, wiggly-toed little King who reaches for
proffered treasure with the innocent covetousness of Everykid. This easy, natural
warmth may be enough, in the end, to carry the day. EB
MARTIN, RAFE 
The Language of Birds; illus. by Susan Gaber. 
Philomel,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22925-6 $15.99 
R 6-9yrs
Two brothers set out to seek their fortunes taking gifts of golden coins provided by
their father. The eldest son, Vasilii, "took his coins, went to the fair, and spent his
money on every pleasure, eating and drinking until the gold was gone"; the younger
brother, Ivan, goes into the woods, and after saving a baby bird fallen from a nest
he is taught the language of birds by the fledgling's grateful mother. The brothers
go adventuring together, and it is only Ivan's ability to understand the language of
birds that saves them from disaster. There is no real villain here and that under-
mines the dramatic tension; still, Vasilii is an engaging rascal, and honest Ivan
merits his ultimate reward (marriage to the czar's daughter and half the kingdom).
Despite occasionally choppy dialogue ("'Father,' said the princess, stepping for-
ward. 'Do free Vasilii. He must attend the wedding. For tomorrow I shall marry
Ivan. My mind is made up'"), the text maintains a rolling pace and lends itself
easily to reading aloud or storytelling. Acrylic paintings echo Russian folk art,
with borders of birds, feathers, and bird feet running around the edges of the full-
and double-page images; inserts stylistically similar to lacquered brooches decorate
pages of text. The compositions give some unique perspectives on the action:
bird's-eye views are rivetingly dramatic and thematically appropriate, and the sea-
scapes are particularly effective. This is an unusually robust, inviting folktale set-
ting and Martin peoples it with amiable characters headed for an even more amiable
conclusion. JMD
MASTERMAN-SMITH, VIRGINIA 
FirstMate Tate. 
Cavendish, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-7614-5075-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
First Mate (real and never-used name Emily) is only in eighth grade, but she's the
mainstay of her family: her father's a compulsive gambler who shakes his kids
down for money and has lost all vestige of reliablity, and her ineffectual mother
merely chases after her father. In addition to taking emotional charge of her five
younger brothers and sisters, First Mate is also determined to take financial charge,
not only throwing herself into a paper route that helps support her family but also
forming the Tate Bank, an enterprise of dubious legality that provides loans to
classmates at lucrative-and usurious-rates. Her real ambition is to accrue prof-
its sufficient to enable her to buy back her father's boatyard, which was sold to
cover his gambling debts, but the increasing familial dysfunction (First Mate real-
izes that her mother has joined her father in gambling) makes even her more mod-
est goals problematic. Masterman-Smith writes with a rough energy and vigor
suitable to the scruffy and determined First Mate, and her subject matter and
setting are unusual and convincing. Unfortunately, the abrupt shifts of topic and
tone become disorienting, and the didactic turn and problem-novel ending (the
family gets help, and the final scene takes place at a Gambler's Anonymous meet-
ing) are a disappointment after the book's early vigor. The portrait of youthful
loan shark First Mate is a vivid one, however, and she'll evoke the sympathies of
kids aware of the myriad burdens adults can thrust upon youth. DS
74 
* THE BULLETIN
McCARTY, PETER 
Baby Steps; written and illus. by Peter McCarty. 
Holt,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-5953-9 
$16.00 
R 4-6 yrs
This spare, descriptive picture book chronicles the life of the author's daughter,
Suki, from one day to one year old. The text has more gentle gravity than plot, but
there are some fresh touches ("With her fat cheeks and pink pajamas, she looks like
a flying piglet") and offhand acknowledgments of reality (" . .. and for the mo-
ment, she is quiet"). The softly shaded black-and-white pencil drawings have a
breathtakingly expressive photorealism: square portraits are infused with light,
and the deft yet delicate modeling of Suki's face and limbs has a near-tactile fidel-
ity. The result is affecting and elegant, but those affected are most likely to be
adults, more able than youngsters to appreciate the subtle visuals and pared-down
text. The children fascinated with babies, however, will consider this riveting, and
kids expecting a new sibling may well find this a quietly comforting explanation of
the changes of the first year. DS
MCNEIL, FLORENCE 
SailAway; illus. by David McPhail. 
Orca, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 1-55143-147-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
While the opening credits and dedications roll, a pirate-costumed boy drags a
basket of stuffed animals and a boxed pirate ship model to the foot of the bathtub;
a turn of the title page finds the boy in his full-blown fantasy as he and his now
large-as-life crew ready their vessel for their adventures. The preparations are ar-
duous and specific: "After you scrape the bottom/ paint the hull .... " Captain and
giraffe shear away the barnacles with toy swords, and rabbit dangles from the bow-
sprit with paint brush in hand ("You step the mast"). Giraffe head-butts the tim-
ber toward the hole in the decking, while bear, parrot, and crocodile heave on the
rope and tackle. Cream bordered line-and-watercolor illustrations, in rich hues
subtly suggestive of handtinting from bygone days, clearly convey how each order
is executed. Better still, they're really very funny, and it won't take long for viewers
to note buccaneer allusions in the rabbit's black eyepatch (and he invariably raises
his telescope to his patched eye), crocodile's peg leg, and elephant's tattooed trib-
ute to "Mom." A "Sailor Talk" glossary provides a kid-friendly recap ("bail the
bilge-take all the water out of the inside of the boat") and assures the audience a
grasp of nautical esoterica with which to amaze parents and peers. EB
MCNICHOLS, ANN 
Falling From Grace. Walker, 2000 
[192p]
ISBN 0-8027-8750-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
The small town of Prosper, Arkansas between the world wars is a remarkably eventful
place for thirteen-year-old Cassie. First, Cassie's older sister (whose boyfriend had
recently committed suicide) runs away from home, then Cassie finds out that her
father is having an affair with the new preacher's young wife, then Cassie's oldest
brother elopes and her fourteen-year-old brother's best friend dies after drinking
bootleg liquor made with wood alcohol. At the same time, Cassie has to cope with
the disloyalty of her own former best friend and the romantic attentions of a young
Hungarian immigrant who returns the unkindness he receives from the Klan-ish
locals with a dignified generosity that is, as Cassie herself admits at one point, "too
good to be true." Characters such as Cassie's Sunday school nemesis Marylou are
OCTOBER 2000 
* 75
similarly overdrawn, while still others, like her unsympathetic father, resolve their
problems with unrealistic abruptness. Still, though the emotional and practical
implications of the novel's varied events are not always fully played out, Cassie's
voice-sometimes naive, but often perceptive-delivers insights into the complexi-
ties of family life ("I guess there is always one of us they are going to be more
worried about than another") and the damage done by small-town gossips like her
Aunt Opal, whose stories make "the people listening feel as if they have been through
the experience themselves and are like to die from it." Readers of Cassie's story, on
the other hand, should suffer no such ill effects from her more objectively told tale.
FK
MILLER, WILLIAM 
The Piano; illus. by Susan Keeter. 
Lee & Low, 2000 
32p
ISBN 1-880000-98-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
While her mother and brothers are at work in the cotton mill, Tia searches the
streets of her town for music. Her exploration takes her to the "white" side of
town, where she discovers a different kind of music than she had ever heard before
coming from a large house: "The melody drifted lazily across the wide, green
lawn. It made Tia think of castles, mountains, and deep new snow. The music
took her far away from the hot, dry town." She takes a tip from the hired boy,
showing up to work as a maid for Miss Hartwell, an aging white lady, to get closer
to the music. Once inside, Tia discovers the piano, "bigger than any she had ever
seen. The black wood shone brighter than a new pair of Sunday shoes." Preco-
cious Tia offers her wages in exchange for piano lessons. Miss Hartwell agrees to
teach Tia but will not accept the wages as payment. The two begin lessons, with
Miss Hartwell playing through her own pain of arthritis. Keeter's earthen-toned
oils complement the warmth of the text, creating energy through varied perspec-
tives on the piano and its players; however, awkwardly drafted figures detract from
the overall effectiveness of the paintings. The idealized characters (the poor black
child who is not lured by higher wages down the street, and the wealthy white
woman who does not mind her hired help playing her piano) allow for predictable
moments of reconciliation (Tia rubs Miss Hartwell's arthritic hands with warm
water and salt, and Miss Hartwell shares the same kindness when Tia's hands hurt
from extra work she has attempted). Stilted language slows the story's already
leisurely pace, and the historical setting is nostalgically generic. Nevertheless, Miller's
story of interracial, intergenerational friendship may strike a chord with some lis-
teners. EAB
MILLS, CLAUDIA 
Lizzie at Last. Farrar, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-374-34659-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Readers of Losers, Inc. (BCCB 4/97) and You're a Brave Man, Julius Zimmerman
(9/99) may recall Lizzie Archer as the diminutive math nerd with a crush on Julius'
best friend Ethan. Here she gets a book of her own, in which she embarks on her
seventh-grade year. Between the encouragement of her visiting aunt and the barbs
of an influential classmate, Lizzie decides to find a new, more mainstream persona,
relegating her romantic white poetess dress to the back of her closet and adopting
tank tops, strategic giggles, and learned helplessness. Her shoving the pendulum
in the other direction has some genuinely beneficial effects-she finds a real friend
and discovers some new capabilities in herself-but she also struggles with being a
76 
* THE BULLETIN
copy of popular Marcia. Consequently, she finds herself putting up with things
she dislikes, abjuring activities she genuinely enjoys, and jeopardizing her grades
and relationship with Ethan when, in an effort to shed the nerdy appellation of
"always right," she makes deliberate errors on their shared math work. Reminis-
cent of Susan Shreve's Goodbye, Amanda the Good (BCCB 2/00) but more credibly
equivocal, this is a perceptive account of a girl's adolescent encounter with the
possibilities of self-definition. Mills is particularly deft at depicting intelligent
Lizzie's novice attempts at applying that intelligence to social relationships, quan-
tifying the rules as she has so successfully for math ("Lizzie got the message: green
top, yes; being good at math, no"). The book also sensitively avoids the one-note
"be true to yourself" message, instead investigating Lizzie's ability to discover new
parts of herself and to assess the difference between those new parts and problem-
atic pretense. Readers will find it reassuring to see Lizzie bravely and successfully
negotiate the dangerous waters of junior high. DS
MONTES, MARISA 
Something Wicked'sin Those Woods. 
Harcourt, 2000 
[224p]
ISBN 0-15-202391-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Javier (Javi) and Nico have been uprooted from their Puerto Rican home after
their parents' death; now they're trying to adjust to life with their aunt Amparo in
California. Little Nico settles in quickly, but eleven-year-old Javi chafes at en-
forced English and misses his family's homey ways. He's even more upset when he
realizes that Nico's imaginary friend, a source of Nico's contentment in his new
home, may actually be a ghost. Aided by the girl next door, Willo, Javi investigates
the matter. Soon manifestations increase, and it becomes clear that Nico's little
ghost friend is not the only source of supernatural disturbances. The set-up is
promising and the ghost (a child kidnapped in the 1930s and never found) is a
well-conceived one in the "shades with unfinished business" category. The plot
gets way out of hand, however, with discovery not only of a second ghost but Javi's
clairvoyant and psychokinetic powers, plus there are threads about Javi's adjust-
ment and an unpleasant librarian, yet the story still skips some elements (most
ghost story aficionados, for instance, would link the kidnapped boy's ghost to the
possibility of solving the mystery of his disappearance, but the solution here is
happenstance). Dialogue and character are also often stilted; the depiction of
Amparo, a psychologist, leaves her a martyr to the exigencies of plot as her stern-
ness with Javi on his supernatural claims makes her unsympathetic and unbeliev-
able. Spooks still retain their lure, however, and kids who'll follow ghosts anywhere
may wish to follow them here. DS
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Beast. Atheneum, 2000 
[272p]
ISBN 0-689-83589-2 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 8 up
Like Robin McKinley's second novel based on "Beauty and the Beast," Rose Daughter
(BCCB 10/97), this is a complex development of the fairy tale into a long fictional
account. Napoli draws on elements of Charles Lamb's 1811 version, and the Beast
himself tells the story. Born Orasmyn, prince of Persia and lover of rose gardens,
he is cursed by apari (fairy) for violating an Islamic ritual. His transformation into
a lion means that his father, the Shah, will hunt him down, so he wanders first to
India in an attempt to find a place as king of beasts, then across Europe to France,
OCTOBER 2000 
* 77
famous for its roses. Part Four, which comprises the second half of the book,
becomes an elaboration of the fairy tale, set in an isolated castle to which the Beast
has retreated. (Not surprisingly, this section exerts charismatic appeal and evokes
Napoli's most powerful writing.) The first part of the book is sometimes slow and
full of Persian words which Orasmyn explains in English, a somewhat unnatural
narrative device. On the other hand, every scene is fully imagined, and readers
drawn to romantic fantasy or familiar with Napoli's earlier work, including her
Rapunzel novel Zel (BCCB 7/96), will experience Orasmyn's long journey as an-
ticipation of a delicately nuanced, transformative relationship. BH
NOBIssO, JOSEPHINE John Blair and the Great Hinckley Fire; illus. by Ted
Rose. 
Houghton, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-618-01560-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Halfway through a nerve-wracking journey through forest fires from Duluth to St.
Paul on September 1, 1894, the crew and 150 passengers of The Limited, Train
No. 4, were stopped by an equal number of refugees from a fire in Hinckley,
Minnesota and informed that the railroad bridge was out, so there was no escape
south past the fires. After taking on these frantic men, women, and children, the
engineer made a decision that saved the lives of more than three hundred people:
he decided to return the train to Skunk Lake so everyone could take refuge in its
"shallow, putrid water." This detailed account does not focus the bulk of its atten-
tion on Engineer Jim Root, however, though his actions and those of the train's
conductor get their due; this history-based picture book focuses instead on the
increasingly heroic efforts of John Wesley Blair, an African-American porter, to
aid and comfort the passengers under his care. The intimacy of this perspective
(emphasized by the questionable decision to refer to Blair as "John") is somewhat
undermined by the external perspective of the narration, which in attempting to
do justice to the whole story generally eschews dialogue and finally offers few in-
sights into Blair's motivations. Similarly, the sooty haze overlaying the dramatic
watercolor illustrations effectively conveys the overwhelming heat and horror of
the landscape through which the train and passengers passed, but this same
smudginess makes the characters-with the exception of Blair-blotchy and in-
distinct, often leaving significant features of the social landscape (including race)
ambiguous. An epilogue offers more information about Blair and the fire, but the
lack of bibliographic information may frustrate young researchers. However, for
many readers the information and images provided will make this a powerful one-
stop introduction to a little-known historical event. FK
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB 
Come With Me: Poems for a Journey; illus. by Dan
Yaccarino. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15947-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15946-X 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Sixteen poems depict different aspects of going places: subjects include imaginary
voyages, the pace of travel, arrival in new places, the trajectory of words, and per-
sonal journeys of growth. There's a cool musing to some of these ("Once/ by
mistake/ she tore a map/ in half./ She taped it back,/ but crookedly./ Now all the
roads/ ended in water"-"Torn Map") that recalls Elizabeth Bishop's poetry of
travel and place, but there's also some fantastical voyaging ("I got mad at my mother/
so I flew to the moon"-"Mad") and journeys of growth ("First grade takes twenty
78 
* THE BULLETIN
years to get through/ But second grade takes only ten"-"Spinning"). Nye uses
sophisticated metaphor and oblique evocations of emotion in simple and concrete
phraseology, making the poems conceptually challenging yet literarily accessible.
The visuals are bold and dramatic, making excellent use of collage and mixed
media (maps are cleverly used not only in the design-a tiny piece of San Fran-
cisco pops up in various corners-but sometimes also the figures themselves).
Slightly blurred spatterwork silhouettes are simultaneously solid and shadowy un-
der paint and collage clouds, and some reverse silhouettes balance out the cast;
speedy, approximate brushstrokes provide features and outlines. The result is an
elegant but not entirely happy marriage: the strong, simple design punctuated
with primary colors has a youthful look that will arouse suspicion in kids old enough
to understand the poetry, but primary graders drawn by the art will find much of
the poetry flying over their heads. Some of the easier poems will make effective
readalouds, however, and older readers may find an interest in design and poetic
explication sufficient motivation for enjoyment here. DS
OBERMAN, SHELDON, ad. 
The Wisdom Bird: A Tale of Solomon and Sheba; illus.
by Neil Waldman. 
Boyds Mills, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-816-4 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The Queen of Sheba travels a great distance and brings many gifts to meet the wise
King Solomon, and she makes one request of the king: that he teach her "some-
thing worth all these gifts and all my time and trouble." When he tries and fails,
the queen makes another request: "Build a palace out of bird beaks." Birds flock
to the palace, giving King Solomon their beaks, but the hoopoe bird is missing.
When the little bird is found, it asks the king three questions; the answers to these
questions point to the cruelty of taking the beaks from the birds, and King Solomon
relents. Although he expects the Queen of Sheba to be displeased, she is not,
instead asking him to reward the hoopoe bird for its wisdom. Framed scenes
appear against backgrounds of geometric patterns in horizontal lines, reminiscent
of tapestries, in a palette of cool sky blues and desert taupes. Although the figures
are somewhat static, the overall formality of the illustrations works well with
Oberman's retelling, which uses repeated refrains of memorable phrases to punc-
tuate the story. A detailed source note is included. While too stately for storytime,
this tale will be effective when shared one on one, and it may also find a place in
religious settings and in classroom discussions of character and wisdom. KM
PALATINI, MARTHA 
Bedhead; illus. by Jack E. Davis. 
Simon, 2000 
34p
ISBN 0-689-82397-5 
$16.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
Oliver gets up in the morning and goes to the bathroom. He "gave his front teeth
a passable brushing. And then. . . In a gunkless corner of the soapy silver soap
dish ... in a fogless smidgen of his father's foggy shaving mirror ... right there on
the hot water faucet, for heaven's sake ... he saw it! It was BIG. It was BAD. It
was . .. BEDHEAD!" His agonized howl brings Mom, Dad, and sister Emily
careening into the bathroom, where they all attempt to tame Oliver's unruly mane
with water, gel, mousse, hairpins-but to no avail. Stuffing Oliver's red hair into
his "faithful, old, battered, but true-blue baseball cap" is a temporary solution, at
least until Oliver gets to school and finds out that it's class picture day. Bad hair is
obviously a growing problem, because Oliver is not alone in his predicament (see
OCTOBER 2000 
* 79
Stewart's Harriet's Horrible Hair Day, BCCB 2/2000). Palatini sets up each slap-
stick moment with deadpan dialogue exchanges that point out the absurdity of
poor Oliver's situation. With pacing similar to an ILove Lucy episode, Bedhead is
prime fodder for group readalouds or story theater. Davis' caricatured characters
have mobile faces with emphatic features that enthusiastically enhance the emo-
tional action. The motion of Oliver's swirling red hair is picked up by the pin-
wheel-patterned wallpaper, and the strong curves of heads, hair, and bodies result
in a giggle-provoking compositional maelstrom. Rosy skin tones, orange hair, and
pink-tipped noses contrast with the cool green of the bathroom tiles and pick up
answering pink tints strategically placed in the pink soap, pink washcloth, and
even the pink toy tugboat floating in the sink. Davis fills every bit of space, placing
players' reactions at center stage and making his characters stand out as if spotlit
against low-key background colors. This doesn't have quite the fizz of Palatini and
Davis' first pairing (Mary Louise Loses Her Manners, BCCB 5/99) but it's a hair-
raising trip to the absurd just the same. JMD
PAULSEN, GARY 
The Beet Fields: Memories of a Sixteenth Summer. Delacorte,
2000 
[1 9 2p]
ISBN 0-385-32647-5 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9 up
Paulsen's novels often have elements of fictionalized autobiography, but the author's
note to this latest title clearly identifies it as memoir. Identified only as "the boy,"
the protagonist has fled abusive, drunken parents in an unnamed city. On the
run, he finds work in the beet fields of North Dakota, where he earns money and
becomes a temporary part of the community of Mexican migrant workers. The
boy moves on to other farm work, and is robbed of his earnings by a larcenous
deputy sheriff. After hitching a ride with an unfortunate driver (who is killed in a
bizarre auto accident), the boy is picked up by the elderly Hazel, who puts him to
work as her hired hand. A trip to the county fair results in the boy becoming a
carny at a traveling carnival, handling the Tilt-A-Whirl ride, and shilling for the
"Wild Man from Borneo" and for Ruby, a seductive kootch dancer. Paulsen's
prose is packed with images that elicit a sense of portentous passage. The language
is sensually concrete, the descriptions of the farms, the heat, even the food giving
the reader a clear picture of the physical environment and the boy's place within it.
The protagonist's carnal yearnings are a driving force throughout, finally assuaged
by his deflowering by the earthy, voracious Ruby. Paulsen's coming-of-age mem-
oir is nearly Steinbeckian in its unadorned but effective prose, and the events of
the author's young life have a universality that will draw in readers heading for
their own rites of passage. JMD
PRELUTSKY, 
JACK 
It's Raining Pigs & Noodles; illus. by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029195-8 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029194-X 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Here's a multitude of new poems (along with a couple previously published else-
where) from one of children's literature's most reliable poets, accompanied by il-
lustrations from his usual partner in diverting crime. Prelutsky fans will recognize
the appealing absurdity ("It's raining pigs and noodles,/ It's pouring frogs and
80 
* THE BULLETIN
hats"-"It's Raining Pigs and Noodles"), mythical creatures ("There's a Blopp in
My Room!"), wordplay ("My underdog is overweight,/ he has an underbite"-
"My Underdog Is Overweight"), and printplay (there's maze-shaped poetry, shrink-
ing poems, and boustrophedonic poems). This isn't the top of this poet's line, as
there's a hasty air to a fair amount of the scansion, and some of the word games
lack their customary precision. Prelutsky short of great is still superior to most
poets' best, however, especially combined with Stevenson's high-spirited and ir-
reverent line-and-wash art. With inviting possibilities for readalone, readaloud,
chorus, and performance, this one will offer welcome expansion to your poetry
shelf. DS
PRICE, REYNOLDS 
A Perfect Friend. Atheneum, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-689-83029-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Ben misses his late mother terribly, and his quiet solitary life with
his father is leavened only by his goofy friend Dunk and his beloved cousin, Robin.
New prospects appear in the form of a small family circus coming to town, a circus
that claims, much to Ben's delight, to have an elephant. Elephant-crazy Ben bonds
with Sal the pachyderm (who is herself mourning the loss of family), finding a
communicative rapport with her that brings his own problems and challenges into
sharper focus. The book's pace is somewhat ponderous, and young readers may
get lost in the occasional contemplation of the ineffable. Adult novelist Price
excels at the concrete details, however, with Ben's pachyderm passion and the
wonders of the large creatures evocatively depicted ("Just holding the serious weight
of the trunk seemed to Ben like a privilege-the thick dry skin and the hundreds
of delicate muscles that made a trunk even more useful than any hand"). There's
also a thoughtfulness and reverence permeating the story that makes it more satis-
fying than the comic tale of elephantine hijinks it might have become. Young
people fascinated by the animal world will appreciate this empathetic account. DS
SAN SOUCI, ROBERT D. 
Cinderella Skeleton; illus. by David Catrow. 
Silver
Whistle/Harcourt, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202003-9 
$16.00 
R 6-9 yrs
We've had Korean Cinderellas, Algonquin Cinderellas, and Egyptian Cinderellas,
but no dead Cinderellas-until now. San Souci's heroine is the "foulest in the
land," and thus, of course, the envy of her skeletal stepsisters, Bony-Jane and
Gristlene. Her drudgery of hanging cobwebs and streaking windows isn't going to
keep her from going to Prince Charnel's Halloween Ball, however, and she at-
tends, dances, and falls in love with the host. Departing in haste, she leaves not a
shoe but a foot ("Then off her foot came with a snap!"), which the prince uses to
find his true love (eligible bachelorettes are hopefully dismembering themselves
throughout the land, but only Cinderella's dainty tibia offers a perfect match).
The verse stumbles occasionally and rambles on a bit, but San Souci offers some
inspired and ghoulish touches that will have young listeners howling (after Cin-
derella flees the ball, the disappointed prince has "in his hand, a foot-in his throat,
a lump"). Catrow's compositions sometimes diffuse their energy with overbusy
compositions and colors (plenty of hot pinks and mustard yellows keeps things far
from somber), but the art is endearingly ghastly: Cinderella's limpid eye sockets
balance out rosebud vestiges of a mouth, and she's charmingly demure in her
OCTOBER 2000 
* 
81
flounces of cobwebby rags. Audiences sick of mushy fairy-tale stuff will want to
join this Cinderella at her danse macabre. DS
SCHAEFER, CAROLE LEXA 
Snow Pumpkin; illus. by Pierr Morgan. 
Crown,
2000 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-517-80015-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Gram can't believe it's snowing: "'Too early,' she said. 'It's still October."' Lily,
granddaughter and young narrator, takes advantage of the unseasonable weather
and with her friend, Jesse, builds a "snow pumpkin" (a snowman with a pumpkin
head) in the park. Gram comes the next day to see it, but the snowman has
melted; the children rescue the pumpkin head and take it home, where it sits
smiling on the windowsill in paper-snowflake-decorated state on Halloween night.
Schaefer's text has economy without sacrificing warm accessibility; her story fol-
lows the Asian-American Lily from apartment to park, where she and African-
American Jesse join the neighborhood children in snow angels, snowball fights,
sledding, and other winter frolics in a natural unfolding of the pleasures of a winter
afternoon. Morgan's acrylics on sand-colored, fibrous paper have an opaque bright-
ness that lights the simple, balanced compositions. The snow is the appropriate
standout, resting like white icing on roofs, steps, and tree branches. The charac-
ters' expressions are clumsily articulated but their energy is inescapable, whether
Lily is dancing up the snowy steps or Jesse is dancing rings around the snow pump-
kin. Set in a nurturing, multicultural urban environment, this tale is a welcome
change from the usual trick-or-treat oriented October stories, and readers-aloud
are going to get a lot of ideas for follow-up activities from their snow-rapt listeners.
JMD
SIERRA, JUDY 
There's a Zoo in Room 22; illus. by Barney Saltzberg. 
Gulliver/
Harcourt, 2000 
40p
ISBN 0-15-202033-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Miss Darling responds a bit overenthusiastically to her students' request for a class-
room pet, and Sierra describes the resultant alphabetical menagerie in twenty-six
verses. Most go straight for the giggles ("Please don't ask to feel/ Our electric eel,/
Because if you bug him,/ We cannot unplug him"), but a few attempt to slip in
some rudimentary information as well ("Xenia the x-ray fish/ Swims serenely in a
dish./ We like to sit and watch her dinner/ When it is already in her"). Not all
poems are equally pithy, and sometimes the exigencies of rhyme win out over wit
("Our iguana, feeling sleepy,/ Made Meg's hair into a tepee,/ And her head is now
his bed!"). Still, this is a pleasant classroom visit, with Saltzberg supplying a car-
toon cast that regards the antics of their faunal classmates with only the mildest
deadpan surprise, and Miss Darling and "Mister Smoot, the substitute" employ
enough creative teaching strategies to make Howard Gardner applaud. EB
Sfs, PETER 
Madlenka; written and illus. by Peter Sfs. 
Foster/Farrar, 2000 
42p
ISBN 0-374-39969-7 
$17.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Madlenka is a little girl living "in the universe, on a planet, on a continent, in a
country, in a city, on a block, in a house" or, alternatively, in New York. When
she discovers that her tooth is loose, she rushes to tell all her friends: Mr. Gaston,
the French baker, Mr. Singh, the newsstall vendor from India, Mr. Ciao, the ice-
82 
* THE BULLETIN
cream seller from Italy, Ms. Grimm from Germany, and so on. All respectively
rejoice with Mad, adapting her name to their own idioms and celebrating in ways
that evoke their own heritage, until eventually she returns home, having gone
"around the world" and having lost her tooth. There's an old-fashioned flavor to
the story (the blithe parallel of "Asia" and "Latin America" with country names as
places of origin is datedly sweeping), with the obligingly representative adult friends
offering a gentle global exploration with Madlenka at the center of the world. The
visual depiction is, as usual with Sis, what lifts this above the ordinary. Madlenka
lives inside a city square, built of black engraving-like hatch and crosshatch with
her pink and gold presence the only color. She travels the outside of the square to
tell her friends, and die-cut squares echo the city block but let her into various
fantastical distant lands, whether it be a darkened collage of Paris, a green world of
German folklore (wherein the hatching changes to white-line), or a sun-bleached
expanse of African savannah. The artwork is elegant and its marvels child-acces-
sible, especially in its eloquent visual evocation of the universe-expands-out-from-
me philosophy. There's an urban flair to the milieu that will make this appealing
to city kids and appealingly exotic to kids in different town plans, but all kinds will
appreciate Madlenka's dentally inspired fantastic global voyage. A map is included.
DS
STANLEY, 
DIANE 
Michelangelo; written 
and 
illus. 
by 
Diane
Stanley. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15086-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15085-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Stanley returns to the Italian Renaissance (Leonardo da Vinci, BCCB 9/96) with
this illustrated biography of painter and sculptor Michelangelo. The author con-
trols her adulation for her subject through a nearly dry recitation of facts, the tone
reinforced by the severity of line in her mixed-media (watercolor, colored pencil,
gouache) illustrations. The author looks closely at Michelangelo's long life, point-
ing out his often unrewarded service to the Roman Catholic Church, his difficul-
ties with patrons, his troubled relationship with his family, his ego, his genius. She
is careful to place the artist within his historical context, explaining the city states
of Italy, the political turmoil and religious upheaval, and the intercity warfare that
served as background to the Italian Renaissance. This is a portrait of a man con-
sumed by his passion for his art, a man who saw little reward (Michelangelo sent
most of the money he made home to his family in Florence to support his father
and brothers) for his life of artistic toil and creative genius. The full-page paintings
and small inserts feature crisp lines and a subdued palette (brown, black, gray)
with touches of purple and red to emphasize hats and clothing, and white high-
lights that contrast starkly with darker textiles and mosaics. Images of Michelangelo's
art are photo-based and computer manipulated, and they're seamlessly integrated
into the compositions. Stanley spends little space on speculation, preferring what
she can know to what she can imagine; still, she manages to provide an in-depth
picture of Michelangelo that reflects a complex, quixotic, difficult personality with-
out sacrificing pathos or sympathy. JMD
STEIG, WILLIAM 
Wizzil; illus. by Quentin Blake. 
Farrar, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-374-38466-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A bored Wizzil the witch is out to "make somebody suffer" when she disguises
herself as a housefly and "zizzed on over to Frimp Farm to check it out incognito."
OCTOBER 2000 
* 
83
DeWitt Frimp, ace flyswatter, nearly puts an end to the wicked witch ("that bald-
headed fuddy-dud with his crazy swatter darn near did me in!"), but Wizzil zooms
to freedom while plotting revenge. Her vengeance (and Wizzil herself) takes the
form of a left-handed work glove for DeWitt that is loaded with bad luck. After a
series of unexplained catastrophes that affect the whole Frimp family, DeWitt
wises up to the glove's penchant for mischief and reluctantly throws it in the river:
"Wizzle the glove began squirming and stretching, and, right there in the water,
began turning into the hateful hag she had always been." DeWitt jumps in to save
her and finds that instead of a witch he has saved a sweet old lady: "Wizzil had
been so thoroughly cleansed by the crystal-clear water that all her vicious nastiness
was whirled away downstream." Steig's story contains folkloric elements without
the logic of traditional structure. The opening, conclusion, and main body of the
story are three distinct, disparate parts that never come together as a whole. Still,
Steig's humor is pretty irresistible, and listeners will probably be able to suspend
their disbelief long enough to get to the rescue scene. Blake's line and watercolor
illustrations have more than his usual energy here, the scribbly lines and broken
curves giving the compositions a sense of kinetic motion. That aw, shucks light in
DeWitt's eye as he gazes at the redeemed Wizzil is pretty cute; maybe youngsters
will appreciate the notions that it's never too late to change and it's never too late
for love. JMD
STRASSER, TODD 
Give a Boy a Gun. 
Simon, 2000 
14 6p
ISBN 0-689-81112-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
One protagonist's stepsister collects quotes from participants, transcripts of
chatroom chat, and other entries to tell the story of two students' revenge: heavily
armed, they take their classmates hostage at a dance, planning to kill them all.
Echoes of recent infamous school shootings are clear and deliberate: Gary and
Brendan are unsuited to the school's sports-centered scheme of popularity, scorned
by jocks, and disenfranchised by school administration. Their elaborate plan of
revenge founders when Gary's girlfriend turns up unexpectedly at the dance and
Gary's resolve crumbles in the face of concrete reality, but the result is merely a
different kind of tragedy from the one they'd intended. Strasser gives voice to
multiple opinions but definitely sides with particular viewpoints: this is essentially
a call-from-arms, with footnotes quoting figures and statements (unfortunately
poorly cited) about the impact of firearms on U.S. society; there's also a sure-to-be
controversial implication that the situation that made the boys so angry bears cul-
pability perhaps even greater than the action itself. The moral advocacy is at times
ham-fisted, and the characters' comments are very conveniently shaped, but this is
much more engaging and emotional than the similarly multivocal Making Up
Megaboy (BCCB 5/98). Teens will take passionate sides in reading this one; use
that to start a discussion, or pair this title with Myers' Monster (BCCB 5/99) for an
examination of the morality of crime and punishment. DS
TOMPERT, ANN 
Saint Nicholas; illus. by Michael Garland. 
Boyds Mills,
2000 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-844-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Relegating the Santa connection to introductory and concluding notes, Tompert
recounts what has come to be known about the popular saint from "legends that
have come down through the ages." The best-known stories of his gift of three
84 
* THE BULLETIN
dowries, rescue of a ship at sea, and resurrection of three dead school boys are told
with simple reverence rather than breathless embellishment, and they're therefore
smoothly woven into the context of a mundane (and therefore quite credible)
priestly life of good works. Garland's mixed-media illustrations, which simulate
tiny chips of tile for text borders and full spreads, must be viewed up close to catch
the mosaic effect; a group audience is more likely to miss the fine-line detail and
notice instead soft contours, doe-eyed figures, and a flower-petal palette. Although
less successful visually than Robert Sabuda's Saint Valentine, this title shares its
spirit and approach, and like Valentine, merits attention on more than a single
feast day per year. EB
URBAN, BETSY 
Waiting for Deliverance. Orchard, 2000 
[19 2 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33310-8 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30310-1 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Livy and cousin Eph suddenly become charity cases after the drowning death of
their family, and it is with equal reluctance and relief that the authorities accept
the low bid for their upkeep from mysterious frontiersman Gideon Gunn, who
signs his "X" and leads the children off into the woods. On the outskirts of late
eighteenth-century civilization the children find they've been relatively fortunate;
Gunn and his pretty young wife are decent, kindly farmers who work their charges
hard but fairly. However, Gunn's status as a Seneca adoptee draws his entire
household into a complex web of relationships with his Seneca village and white
settlers; as direct consequences, Gunn is betrayed by Eph and mauled by a venge-
ful logger, the homestead is burned, and Livy finds romance with Gunn's brother,
Rising Hawk. Urban illuminates the legacy of suspicion and revenge left by the
Revolutionary War and handily captures the patterns of frontier and Indian village
life through richly developed episodes. Livy's incipient love affair with Rising
Hawk is the stuff of another genre, though, as the pair spins anachronistic conver-
sations around whether they should have sex (Livy is justifiably terrified of dying
in childbirth). Her cinematic rush to Rising Hawk's arms at the novel's close may
provide the hoped-for ending, but it leaves the reader suspecting that all the care-
fully crafted historical fiction is merely in service of aB romance. EB
VISCONTI, GUIDO 
The Genius ofLeonardo; tr. by Mark Roberts; illus. by Bimba
Landmann. 
Barefoot, 2000 
[4 0p]
ISBN 1-84148-301-X 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
Visconti and Landmann, author and illustrator ofA Boy Named Giotto (BCCB 1/
00), here turn their attention to the great genius from Vinci. Using excerpts from
Leonardo's own journals, according to jacket copy, the book focuses on his young
apprentice, Giacomo, and his experience with Leonardo. Visconti describes
Leonardo's labors on The Last Supper and the Mona Lisa as well as his participation
in the war effort when the French attacked Milan, but the emphasis is really on
Leonardo's visionary brilliance and limitless curiosity. There's a quiet (occasion-
ally hagiographic) reverence to the treatment that the book does a good job of
justifying; it's clear that Giacomo's master is deserving of his celebrity. However,
the progression seems rather aimless (and the text stodgily crammed into its space),
with some segues abrupt and disconcerting; the book also rearranges history to suit
OCTOBER 2000 
* 85
its narrative, with nearly thirty years compressed into young Giacomo's tenure,
the Mona Lisa (here a painting of the woman of the same name) painted before
The Last Supper, and Leonardo's move to France seemingly happening in the midst
of Leonardo's participation in the fight against France. Landmann's art has a
serene elegance; faces echo the Italian modernism of Modigliani and Brancusi,
while the rich earth pigments that dominate the spreads lend an appropriately
Renaissance flavor. Opening and closing spreads offer brief sequences illustrated
with facsimiles of Leonardo's notebooks; they provide a succinct and inviting sum-
mary in their own right. For biographies, you're better off with Diane Stanley's
Leonardo da Vinci (BCCB 9/96), but this is an imaginative evocation of one of
history's great minds. DS
WALLNER, ALEXANDRA 
Sergio and the Hurricane; written and illus. by Alexandra
Wallner. 
Holt, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-8050-6203-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
This child's-eye view of a tropical hurricane is set in San Juan, Puerto Rico. Sergio
"was too young to remember the last big hurricane . . . so he was excited," in
contrast to the adults, who point out that "a hurricane is a very serious thing." The
story moves at a measured pace, providing a manageable level of detail to depict
the family's preparations for the storm (including their shopping list), the dark
and stormy night itself (including the crackling sounds of the radio, urging people
to stay indoors), and the sobering aftermath of the one hundred seventy mile-per-
hour winds, which toppled ancient trees and sandblasted the paint off Sergio's
house, creating a lot of work for those-including young Sergio-who help clean
up. The muted brights of the gouache illustrations also make their point about the
hurricane's power without overwhelming the viewer, but the stolid demeanor of
the human figures is static, and it offers little contrast to the stylized ocean and sky.
A note at the end provides a fairly abstract explanation and a few facts about hur-
ricanes, but no indication that this book is based on any particular historic event.
Still, this remains an accessible and well-pitched look at how people respond to
natural disasters.. FK
WARE, CHERYL 
Venola in Love; illus. by Kristin Sorra. 
Orchard, 2000 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33306-X $16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30306-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Seventh-grader Venola Mae Cutright begins the second-half of her seventh-grade
year by recording the events of her life in a $15.99 (plus tax) diary she purchased in
lieu of a new pair of jeans. The diary pages, at times alternating with copies of
emails (written to her most-of-the-time best friend Sally, a teacher, and the advice
column for Young and Stylish magazine), reveal the sometimes funny and some-
times excruciating rites of passage for Venola. Worried at first she will have noth-
ing to write about, her fears are soon allayed with the arrival of handsome new boy
Nathan at school, the announcement that her mother is going to have another
baby, and peer pressure from acquaintances with sticky fingers. Though unre-
quited, her enthusiasm for Nathan remains strong, while she struggles to make
choices she can live with when some friends begin shoplifting ("No, tell them I
won't tell. But I'm not going in the drugstore (or any stores) with them again"),
and she (one of two girls in the Cutright clan) researches baby names for her sixth
86 
* THE BULLETIN
sibling ("I'M NOT EVEN GOING TO LOOK FOR A BABY BROTHER'S
NAME. IF IT'S A BOY, MAYBE MAMA CAN TRADE WITH SOMEONE
AT THE HOSPITAL... OR SEND IT BACK TO BE EXCHANGED"). Un-
fortunately, the writing is sometimes clumsy, and Venola's voice is too self-con-
sciously aware. Ware nonetheless manages to reveal the life of a seventh grader,
including some steps toward growth, while remaining reasonably realistic. Fans
who enjoyed meeting Venola Mae in Catty-Cornered will not be disappointed.
EAB
WELCH, SHEILA KELLY 
The Shadowed Unicorn. Front Street/Cricket,
2000 
185p
ISBN 0-8126-2895-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
After a freak bicycling accident kills their father, Brendan, Nick, and Ami leave
New York City with their mother to live rent-free in an inherited family home in
the Pennsylvania countryside. While twelve-year-old twins Brendan and Nick
have each other to work through their grief, fourteen-year-old Ami turns to her
fantasy world of unicorns. Ami doesn't stop with simply collecting and writing
about unicorns but insists on combing the forest as Maid Amelia, building lures to
capture one: "It is necessary that we gather the proper rocks. They should be
approximately this big.... And the color must be as dark as possible." Brendan,
searching for his own footing, finds himself drawn into Ami's fantasy, at first par-
ticipating as if it was one of their father's imaginative adventures, but then finding
himself eager to catch a glimpse of a unicorn, as well. Ami's adventure leads them
to Old Man Johansson's house, where she is certain they will find the black uni-
corn. Welch's writing is rich with detail, including Ami's trancelike obsession
with capturing a unicorn to deal with her father's death ("I think it's got to be real,
because if it's real, then I can believe in other things") and Brendan's search for
identity ("It was as if he himself had changed during the night"). However, Ami's
trancelike behavior and Brendan's only partially sympathetic point-of-view dis-
tance the reader from the heart of the story, which is Ami's guilt over what were to
be her last words to her father: "I hate you!" For a more empathetic look at the
grieving process after the loss of a family member, try Suzanne Freeman's The
Cuckoo's Child(BCCB 3/96) or Couloumbis's GettingNear to Baby (11/98). EAB
WILLIAMS, CAROL LYNCH 
Carolina Autumn. 
Delacorte, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-385-32716-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Carolina has been barely hanging on since the death of her fa-
ther and older sister, Madelaine, in a plane crash; she and her mother have been
polite but distant, masking grief and anger as well as they can. Carolina's friends
have been her source of strength, but now that ninth grade is starting it looks like
there's a heartbreaking complication there as well: her flirtatious friend, Mara, has
apparently set her sight on Carolina's boyfriend, Garret. Williams plausibly paints
Carolina's despondent fatalism about her relationship with Garret; because of her
overwhelming losses, she makes the loss of Garret all the likelier by treating it as
inevitable. Unfortunately, the playing out of this plot thread turns more to conve-
nience than believability in Garret's quick and easy final choice of Carolina over
Mara. Though the retrospective depiction of the two sisters forming a secure
connection to anchor them in their troubled family is compelling, there are prob-
OCTOBER 2000 
* 
87
lems with that plot as well: the revelation of the family problems (the girls' par-
ents were getting divorced and their mother had relinquished Madelaine) is some-
what predictable and the interpolated notes to Madelaine are more disruptive than
plot-enhancing. Williams still writes evocatively of the disorientation and suffer-
ing of bereavement, however, and this is likely to attract fans of her earlier treat-
ments of the subject (Kelly andMe, BCCB 3/94, Christmas in Heaven, 5/00, etc.).
DS
WILLIAMS, LAURA ELLEN 
ABC Kids; written and illustrated with photographs by
Laura Ellen Williams. 
Philomel, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23370-9 
$15.99 
R 
1-4 yrs
What this alpha-photo book has going for it is a jazzy layout, saturated Crayola
colors, and photographic images of a bunch of bright, shiny kid faces. "A apple"
(capital letter "A," "apple" in lower case letters) features the top of a dark-haired
girl's face, from nose on up, peering upward toward the shiny red apple balanced
precariously on her head; the utensil in "S spoon" is hanging from a smiling
toddler's nose. Each letter gets its own page and its own enthusiastic kid(s) hap-
pily participating in the moment (the little girl in "D dirt" is obviously gleeful
about the muddy state of self and clothing). The children are a variety of races,
ages, and demeanors, but their smiling faces are the faces of children everywhere.
Williams' images have an unposed air, and they capture a fleeting, seemingly spon-
taneous moment and freeze it in photographic time. The glossy pages give the
pictures extra dash, and the simplicity of the text works in the book's favor. Adults
will take to this title because it provides so many teachable moments, but babies
will take to it because of all the cheerful children's faces with features they can
recognize, point to, and imitate. Make room on the alphabet book shelf for this
classy concept book. JMD
WILLIS, JEANNE 
Susan Laughs; illus. by Tony Ross. 
Holt, 2000 
28p
ISBN 0-8050-6501-6 
$15.00 
M 
4-7 yrs
Susan, a carrot-topped moppet, exhibits a wide range of moods ("Susan's shy,
Susan's loud, Susan's angry, Susan's proud"), each one illustrated by an energetic
pencil and crayon picture. The text is a singsong collection of not always related
actions and emotions leading up to the final illustration of the redheaded protago-
nist in a wheelchair: "That is Susan, through and through-just like me, just like
you." Astute viewers may note that Susan is never standing or walking on her own
in the previous illustrations; still, that final revelation is a surprise. While this
surprise is intentional, it robs the story of spontaneity and turns it into a well-
meaning litany deliberately designed to set up the viewer for the hammer-headed
message. Ross' illustrations focus on the perky protagonist, showing Susan en-
gaged in a wide variety of kid-pleasing activities, her red head of hair acting as the
focal point for the simple compositions. Both text and pictures deliberately en-
courage readers to see Susan as a child like themselves before revealing her physical
limitations, but Susan's disability is not just underplayed, it is purposely hidden.
There is no indication of wheelchair, crutches, or any other assistive devices that
would be a normal part of this child's everyday world, an artistic choice that sug-
gests such devices keep a child from being "just like you" and unfortunately under-
mines the book's usefulness as an educational tool. JMD
88 
* THE BULLETIN
WISHINSKY, FRIEDA 
Nothing Scares Us; illus. by Neal Layton. 
Carolrhoda,
2000 
[26p]
ISBN 1-57505-490-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Fearless best friends Lucy and Lenny conquer imaginary monsters, fight imaginary
aliens, and otherwise do everything together, until Lenny's new favorite TV show,
the CREATURE, comes between them. Despite her fears, Lucy goes over to Lenny's
house to watch the CREATURE, because she is more afraid of Lenny's disdain
than the TV monster. In a climactic (and cleverly rendered) spread, readers are
lead to believe that the CREATURE has emerged from the TV screen and cap-
tured Lenny, until a turn of the page reveals that Lenny has jumped up onto the
couch, terrified of a spider crawling on the popcorn bowl. Lucy quickly rescues
Lenny by throwing the spider out the window. When Lenny admires her courage,
Lucy admits that she is afraid of scary TV shows, and the two friends return to
exploits that they both enjoy, conquering monsters as the "Fearless Two." Layton
uses the scribbled look of childhood drawings for the expressive figures of Lucy
and Lenny, setting their tastefully vibrant colors (Lucy's in an eye-popping purple
and red top) against equally tasteful and intense backgrounds. The message that
everyone is afraid of something is direct but not didactic, and storytime partici-
pants will chant "We are the Fearless Two! Nothing and no one scares us!" all the
way home. KM
WISLER, G. CLIFTON 
Run the Blockade. HarperCollins, 2000 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029208-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16538-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Henry Severn's older cousin Robert proves an invaluable friend to the family after
the drowning death of Henry's seafaring father. First, he secures positions for his
aunt and cousins in the household and business of his own employers, Liverpool
merchants, and later he arranges for Henry to accompany him as cabin boy on
what promises to be a lucrative venture smuggling cargo through the Union block-
ade of Confederate ports. Henry's first tour at sea nets him wealth beyond the
wildest dreams of a formerly impoverished Irish boy with limited education, but it
also lands him in a New York prison, faced with the choice of rotting in a filthy,
overcrowded cell or signing on with the Union Navy. Wisler loosely bases his tale
on the memoirs of Thomas Taylor (on whom the character Robert is modeled),
crew on the actual steamer Banshee, but shifts the focus here to fictional teen nar-
rator Henry. Henry pays relatively scant attention to reader-pleasing details of
shipboard life, and has even less to say about his time in prison. Moreover, poten-
tial subplots involving his family back home and his recurrent encounters with the
nosy niece of the U.S. Consul in Nassau lead up blind alleys. Still, Henry's ex-
ploits illuminate a shadowy corner of the Civil War-the fortunes made from
supporting cotton/textile trade between Britain and the South-and demonstrate
the mortal risks and moral compromises inherent in wartime profiteering. EB
ANNOUNCEMENT: 
Penguin Putnam informs us that Carol Diggory Shields' new
book, reviewed in the September Bulletin as Lucky Pennies and Hot Chocolate with
Grandpa, will actually be titled Lucky Pennies and Hot Chocolate.
OCTOBER 2000 
* 89
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Children's Literature 28. Ed. Elizabeth Lennox Keyser and Julie Pfeiffer. Yale,
2000. Library ed. ISBN 0-300-08234-7; $40.00. Paper ed. ISBN 0-300-08235-
5; $18.00. 291p.
This year's annual offers a particularly interesting debate on the nature of the genre
of children's literature, headed by Perry Nodelman's "Pleasure and Genre: Specu-
lations on the Characteristics of Children's Fiction" with responses from Roderick
McGillis, Thomas Travisano, and Margaret Higonnet and rejoinder from
Nodelman. Also noteworthy is a collection of memorial pieces in honor of the late
Francelia Butler, plus the usual suspects of book reviews and "varia." DS
Volz, Bridget Dealy. Junior Genreflecting: A Guide to Good Reads and Series Fic-
tion for Children; by Bridget Dealy Volz, Cheryl Perkins Scheer, and Lynda
Blackburn Welborn. Libraries Unlimited, 2000. ISBN 1-56308-556-9; $28.00.
187p.
Those familiar with the Genreflecting and Teen Genreflecting titles will probably
have seen this one coming and welcomed its approach: the authors have focused
on books for third through eighth graders, dividing them into six genres (adven-
ture, animal stories, contemporary life stories, fantasy and science fiction, histori-
cal fiction, and mysteries) and offering subdivisions within those. Selected titles
were all published in the last ten years; recommendation in a review periodical or
appearance on a Notables or Best Books for Young Adults list was a prerequisite
for inclusion. The annotations are concise, and in addition to publication infor-
mation, awards and sequels are included where appropriate; there's also a special
designation for picture books suitable for older readers and for titles especially
suitable for readers in grades 6-8 (no grade levels are otherwise suggested). Genre
specialists (and specialist texts) will be able to go well beyond the representatives
here, of course (and the approach limits some genres, such as science fiction), but
this will help many professionals fill in the blanks on less-known areas. The inclu-
sion of paperback series is particularly useful, and readers will doubtless find the
authors' picks for their favorites in each genre provocative. Subject and author/
title indices are included. DS
,•_• 
l--.
J•___. 
l<
,
90 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Alphin; Dessen
Actors and acting-fiction:
Blackwood; Cheaney
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Armstrong
African Americans: Clinton;
Nobisso
African Americans-fiction: Belton
African Americans-stories: Miller
Alaska-fiction: Hill
ALPHABET BOOKS: Sierra;
Williams, L.
American Indians-fiction: Durrant;
Urban
Animals-stories: Brett; Bunting;
Sierra
Architecture: Greenberg'
Art and artists: Greenberg; Stanley;
Visconti
Aunts-fiction: Belton; Bonners;
Montes
Babies: McCarty
Baths-stories: McNeil
BEDTIME STORIES: Lewis;
McNeil
BIBLE STORIES: Maccarone
BIOGRAPHIES: Greenberg;
Ketchum; Stanley; Visconti
Birds-stories: Martin
Boxing-fiction: Cadnum
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Durrant; Joseph; Konigsburg;
Ware; Welch
Brothers and sisters-stories: Lasky
Brothers-fiction: Montes
Brothers-stories: Martin
Canada: Galloway
Carnivals-fiction: Paulsen
Cats-stories: Collington
Christmas: Bunting; Carle;
Maccarone; Tompert
Christmas-fiction: Antle; Avi
Circuses-fiction: Lawrence; Price
Civil War-fiction: Wisler
Clothing-stories: Lasky
CONCEPT BOOKS: Fleming
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Alphin; Antle; Cadnum;
Cheaney; Dessen; Hite;
Konigsburg; Strasser; Wisler
Dating-fiction: Dexter
Death and dying-fiction: Anderson;
Williams, C.
Disabilities-stories: Willis
Disasters-stories: Wallner
Disease-fiction: Anderson
Dogs-stories: Laden
Dominican Republic-fiction:
Joseph
Driving-fiction: Dexter
Education: Cruz
Elephants-fiction: Price
Ethics and values: Belton; Durrant;
Ferris; Kerner; Strasser
Explorers and exploring: Armstrong
Families-fiction: Dessen; Joseph;
Konigsburg; Masterman-Smith;
McNichols
FANTASY: Napoli
Farms-stories: Steig
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Belton; Masterman-Smith
Fear-stories: Wishinsky
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Alvarez; Grindley; Kimmel;
OCTOBER 2000 
* 
91
Martin; Napoli; Oberman; San
Souci
Friendship-fiction: Ferris; Greene;
Konigsburg; Mills; Price
Friendship-stories: Wishinsky
FUNNY STORIES: Collington;
Palatini; Steig
Gambling-fiction: Masterman-
Smith
Geography: Lourie
GHOST STORIES: Montes
Grandfathers-fiction: Anderson
Grandmothers-fiction: Fleischman;
Haas
Grandmothers-stories: Schaefer
Guns-fiction: Strasser
Hair-stories: Palatini
Halloween-stories: San Souci;
Schaefer
HISTORICAL FICTION: Ander-
son; Belton; Blackwood;
Cheaney; Durrant; Fagan; Giff;
Hesse; Hill; Hite; Lyons;
McNichols; Miller; Urban;
Wisler
History, U.S.: Clinton; Freedman;
Lourie; Nobisso; Urban
History, world: Dash; Galloway;
Stanley; Visconti
Homosexuality-fiction: Ferris
Horses-fiction: Haas
Hurricanes-stories: Wallner
Inventors and inventing: Dash
Ireland-fiction: Giff
Kidnapping-fiction: Alphin; Hite
Latinos-stories: Wallner
Money-fiction: Greene
Monsters-fiction: Lattimore
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Dexter; Kerner; Williams, C.
Music and musicians-stories: Miller
MYSTERIES: Alphin; Avi
MYTHS: Lattimore
Orphans-fiction: Montes; Urban
Pirates-stories: McNeil
POETRY: Hopkins; Nye; Prelutsky
Politics-fiction: Bonners
Prejudice-fiction: Belton; Lawrence
Puerto Rico-stories: Wallner
Queens-stories: Lewis
Racism: Clinton
Reading aloud: Greene; Hopkins;
Lattimore; Nye; Prelutsky
Reading, beginning: Antle
Reading, easy: Antle; Greene
Religious education: Kimmel;
Oberman
RHYMING STORIES: Bunting;
Lewis; Sierra
Rivers: Lourie
Romance-fiction: Paulsen
Rosh Hashanah: Kimmel
Runaways-fiction: Paulsen
Russia-folklore: Martin
Saints-stories: Tompert
School-fiction: Howe; Mills; Ware
School-stories: Palatini; Sierra
Schools: Cruz
SCIENCE FICTION: Kerner
Sisters-fiction: Dessen; Williams, C.
Skeletons-stories: San Souci
Slavery-fiction: Lyons
Snow-stories: Carle; Lasky; Schaefer
SPORTS STORIES: Cadnum
Storytelling: Lattimore; Martin
Storytime: Grindley; Lewis; McNeil;
Sierra; Sfs; Wishinsky
Teachers-fiction: Hill
Teeth-stories: Sfs
Theater-fiction: Blackwood;
Cheaney
Trains: Nobisso
Transportation-poetry: Nye
United States-poetry: Hopkins
Urban life-stories: Sfs
Voyages and travel: Armstrong;
Dash; Lourie
Voyages and travel-fiction: Hesse;
Hite; Wisler
Voyages and travel-poetry: Nye
Weather-stories: Fleischman; Lasky
Weddings-fiction: Fagan
West, the: Ketchum
West, the-fiction: Antle; Hite
Witches-stories: Steig
Women's studies: Ketchum
Work-fiction: Greene
World cultures-stories: Sis
World War II: Galloway
Writers and writing-fiction: Howe;
Joseph
KePn i n 
eachimnRK
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
ýu
77, 
-
5PECIAL OFF!
,bsc,
issussue 
only $1
Lon5mr-year
*()utside US 0dd $10 Pos
Cove 
50
over p ice $4
i 
·- ·- ·
• .... 
• i
From Newbery Medalist Betsy Byars
01
-' 
"After Dorothy beats out rival Dwayne for the role of Tarzan in
the class play, she discovers that her already-stunning yell gets
louder every time she rehearses it. It's a genuinely primal
scream too land] at the performance brings the animals from a
nearby circus bursting into the school auditorium ... Byars will
have young readers enthusiastically pounding their own chests
with this hilarious tale.... Great fun, a champion candidate for
reading aloud."-Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
"Byars does a great parody in this chapter book that combines
wild farce with deadpan realism."-ALA Booklist
Ages 7-10. $14.95 Tr (0-06-028706-3); $14.89 Lb (0-06-028707-1)
9% 
HaprolnIIlýesok
130Aeneo 
il 
r.i 
e 
Yok NY 10019
wwwharerhilres- 
cr6
rýr
Ljý_
,ed review ,;. 
A
by Peter Sis
Ir- "A wordless picture book that takes readers on a wild
adventure of the imagination. A boy and his toy dinosaur are in
the tub when a larger dinosaur appears, and then another ...
The culmination is a three-page spread revealing a full-color herd
of dinosaurs racing across the page. Then, magically, the
oversized creatures disappear, [leaving only] the boy and his bath
toy and his mother, who appears with a towel. The story, with
wonderful endpapers naming the creatures, [is] right on the
j 
mark for this audience."
-Starred 
review / School Library Journal
"Sis shows a pitch-perfect understanding of the blur between the
real and the imagined in child's play." -ALA 
Booklist
Ages 2-4. $14.95 Tr (0-688-17049-8)
55, 
L5,. 
@„„5 
@U 
r ..
5 
.
D1- 
c
Ship Ahoy! $14.95 Tr (0-688-1664
Trucks Trucks Trucks $14.951
Fire Truck $15.95 Tr (0-688-15878-
M Greenwillow Books
An imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 100
www.harperchildrens.com
A Star-
'WL14W4 
Vt 
Mif.C
io You Want 
:-:to B:"e 
~;P
yJJ~dii~ 
St. Geor
h~t~edsmall:
l's delight-
ons, usually droll
children to
review)
serv
tinfor the
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(200010)54:2; 1 -Y
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
A tale of loyalty for all people and all times
THE YELLOW STAR
The Legend of King
Christian X of Denmark
Written by
Carmen Agra Deedy
Illustrated by
Henri Sorensen
1-56145-208-4 / $16.95
Available August 2000
PEACHTREE PUBLISHERS, LTD.
494 Armour Circle, NE
Atlanta, GA 30324
phone: 800-241-0113
fax: 800-875-8909
··
-; ·;·- 
·-
:Ir'
,i_
