ILL INI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
university ot minois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
i
·, 
, 
I
01
I·
iiS: 
r
·"
i"' Kirkus Reviews and School Library Journal star
ONE LIGHTHOUSE,
ONE MOON
by ANITA LOBEL
V ' "Beautiful paintings are the heart of this concept book divided
into three 'chapters' The first shows a different pair of shoes in
a different color for each day of the week. The middle section
introduces the months of the year via the antics of a cat named
Nini. The final section is a seaside counting exercise from 'ONE
lighthouse' to'TEN trees bent back in the wind. And ONE
HUNDRED stars and ONE moon lit up in the sky' This fresh
approach to the concepts covered has great visual appeal."
-Starred review/School Library Journal
^ 
'"A perfect concept book" -Starred review/Kirkus Reviews
Ages 4 up.
$15.95 Tr (0-688-15539-1)
$15.89 Lb (0-688-15540-5)
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
July/August 2000
Vol. 53 No. 11
A LOOK INSIDE
387 THE BIG PICTURE
So You Want to Be President? by Judith St. George; illus. by David Small
388 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
388 * Sir Walter Ralegh and the Quest for El Dorado by Marc Aronson
392 * Uncommon Traveler: Mary Kingsley in Africa written and illus. by
Don Brown
406 * Days Like This: A Collection ofSmall Poems comp. and illus. by Simon
James
412 * Sitting Bull and His World by Albert Marrin
419 * Emily's First 100 Days ofSchool written and illus. by Rosemary Wells
422 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
424 ANNUAL AUTHOR AND TITLE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Anita Beaman
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2000 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by David Small from So You Want to Be President? ©2000. Used by permission of
Philomel Books.
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 387
THE BIG PICTURE
So You Want to Be President?
by Judith St. George; illustrated by David Small
While accounts of particular presidents abound, rarely are they as entertaining as
this collective biography of chief executives. St. George interweaves facts and an-
ecdotes in a breezily informative style in this tongue-in-cheek guide, which gains
additional appeal by directly addressing the reader ("You probably weren't born in
a log cabin. That's too bad. People are crazy about log-cabin Presidents"). Politi-
cal accounts of presidencies are found elsewhere; this is primarily a personal his-
tory, presenting a cleverly arranged array of the most entertaining characteristics
and habits of commanders-in-chief throughout American history.
Eschewing chronological order, St. George chooses instead to survey the
presidents as a group of people with certain commonalities and distinctions. Top-
ics include common first names for presidents ("If you want to be President, it
might help if your name is James"), as well as the great variety of presidential
stature (from 5'4" James Madison to 6'4" Abraham Lincoln) and girth (from 100
lb. James Madison to over 300 lb. William Howard Taft). Such facts are inter-
spersed with intriguing and pithy anecdotes about presidential personalities ("Our
first President did a mean minuet"), as well as most embarrassing moments ("Once
when [John Quincy Adams] was skinny-dipping in the Potomac River, a woman
reporter snatched his clothes and sat on them until he gave her an interview").
Small's line-and-watercolor illustrations draw from the tradition of po-
litical cartooning, showing caricatured figures with enlarged heads and exagger-
ated features; these illustrations complement the jaunty text with kid-appealing
images of some of the most outrageous presidential behaviors described, such as
Andrew Jackson's fourteen duels, brawls, fights, and shootings, the victims of which
are shown sprawled out into the distance behind a fist-swinging Jackson. Illustra-
tions are also chock-full of jokes for adults, as in one scene showing Richard Nixon
bowling a strike in the White House bowling alley, hands raised in victory signs,
with Pat Nixon and Henry Kissinger clapping politely in the background while
Gerald Ford steps up to bowl next.
While most of the tone is humorous, St. George and Small do not ne-
glect darker moments in the history of American presidents. In a smooth segue
from a discussion of presidential looks, St. George writes about the contrast be-
tween Warren Harding's physical attractiveness and his severe shortcomings as
president, while Small's illustration shows a royally robed Harding strolling alone
down a fashion-show runway. In the most somber spread in the book, St. George
emphasizes the necessity for honesty as chief executive while the artwork depicts
Clinton and Nixon walking down the shadowy steps of the Lincoln Memorial,
their heads bowed in shame as Lincoln stares searchingly after them.
388 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Since presidents from various time periods appear together (often hu-
morously) in the illustrations, a presidential identification key appears in the back,
along with a bibliography and a chronology including dates and major events of
each presidency. Although St. George's approach tends to emphasize the diversity
of presidential personae, she does not neglect to note that the group has been
unleavened by variation in gender, race, and creed ("No woman has been Presi-
dent. No person of color has been President. No person who wasn't a Protestant
or Roman Catholic has been President"). Despite a slightly rambling conclusion,
St. George's final pages sum up inspiringly with the president's oath of office ("Only
thirty-five words!") and the affirmation that most presidents, "tall, short, fat, thin,
talkative, quiet, vain, humble, lawyer, teacher, or soldier," have done their best to
follow that oath, working to "faithfully execute the office of President of the United
States." Future presidents in classrooms and libraries everywhere will giggle at and
then applaud the quirkily inspiring individuals who have served as president of the
United States. (Imprint information appears on p. 417.)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ARONSON, MARC 
Sir Walter Ralegh and the Quest for El Dorado. Clarion,
2000 
222p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-84827-X 
$20.00 
R 
Gr. 7-12
In this closely argued essay on Ralegh and the Elizabethan court, Aronson explores
several facets of Doradism (the fascination with the mythical golden city) embod-
ied in the "upstart" courtier and his contemporaries. Of immediate importance
are Ralegh's dual quests-for the kingdom of the "golden man" in present-day
Colombia, and for the equally coveted prize of Elizabeth's patronage, and possibly
her love. Aronson also presents a convincing case that Ralegh's pursuits (and his
deeply conflicted attitudes toward them) mirror Britain's ambivalence toward the
golden promise of far-flung colonies: were they innocent Edens to be held in awe
and left inviolate, as a Virgin Queen? Or were they lodes of hidden treasure to be
mined and exploited, as court favors? Aronson assumes that his readers bring
some basic familiarity with European history to the text (certainly an introductory
World History class should provide adequate background) but offers plenty of
aids to brush up on facts-notably maps, a "Cast of Characters," and a four-topic
timeline chart. Incorporating critical examinations of period art and poetry as well
as standard historical documentary evidence and pausing frequently to review and
explicitly support its thesis, this title is at once lively, accessible, and challenging.
Period illustrations, an index, and fastidiously annotated endnotes and bibliogra-
phy are included. EB
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 
389
Avi 
Ereth's Birthday; illus. by Brian Floca. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
180p
ISBN 0-380-97734-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Ereth, a crotchety old porcupine, is so disappointed when his friends seemingly
forget his birthday that he trundles off into the winter woods in search of solace (in
his case, a block of salt). Unbeknownst to Ereth, he is being stalked by fisher
Marty, a weasel-like creature with porcupinicidal intent. Marty's plan for the
prickly protagonist's demise is foiled when Ereth discovers a fox caught in a hunter's
trap and promises to find her three kits and care for them until they can survive on
their own. Not being the maternal sort, Ereth unwillingly seeks out the kits and
appoints himself unofficial guardian. Avi's animal fantasy, the latest in his Dimwood
Forest series (Ragweed, BCCB 10/99, etc.) balances between anthropomorphism
and natural history: the animals have emotions and feelings, but they are also true
to their physical natures (i.e., the foxes are meat eaters, the porcupine isn't). The
plot is reminiscent of many an old-fashioned melodrama in which winsome or-
phans win over a grouchy guardian; the players are set characters (reluctant or-
phan, friendly orphan, ne'er-do-well father, evil villain) and their actions are
predictable. Be that as it may, Avi has skillfully combined recognizable elements
into an animal fantasy that rings an emotional carillon sure to please Avi devotees,
newcomers to the series, and adults looking for a substantive readaloud. Floca's
expressive pencil illustrations provide respite from what could be daunting amounts
of text. JMD
BANKS, KATE 
The Night Worker; illus. by Georg Hallensleben. 
Foster/Farrar,
2000 
[3 4p]
ISBN 0-374-35520-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Alex's papa is an engineer at a downtown construction project, a position which
dictates he work while Alex is asleep. One memorable night, he claps a hardhat on
his son: "And while Mama sleeps, Alex and Papa head quietly into the night." At
the site Alex watches his father in action, directing the workers and checking plans
as the huge earth-moving machinery reshapes the land under the beams of the stars
and artificial lights. The climax of Alex's adventure comes when Papa lifts him
onto the lap of the loader driver, who guides the boy's hands as he works the levers.
It's an awfully long, exciting night for a little guy: "'I'm tired,' says Alex. And they
head back into the night." Banks imparts the peculiar mystery nighttime lends to
commonplace jobs: "An excavator rumbles and turns. . . . Then it sinks its teeth
into the earth and lets out a groan like a giant rolling over in bed." Hallensleben's
artwork is a worthy complement, featuring bedrock-solid shapes illuminated to
jewel brilliance against the midnight sky. Listeners are bound to envy Alex's noc-
turnal field trip and wish for their own "Take Your Child to Work" night. EB
BARASCH, LYNNE 
Radio Rescue; written and illus. by Lynn Barasch. 
Foster/Far-
rar, 2000 
[3 4p]
ISBN 0-374-36166-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
"The boy in this book is actually my father, and the story is based on his experi-
ences as a young amateur radio operator, the youngest to be licensed in the United
States at the time" (circa 1923). Barasch delivers on her tacit opening promise of
veracity with a carefully constructed tale of a boy's long journey from wireless
390 
* THE BULLETIN
radio eavesdropper, to ham radio operator, to quiet hero and local celebrity. As the
unnamed narrator relates, just memorizing Morse code is no mean undertaking,
and the added requirements of building speed and learning abbreviated codes are a
monumental challenge. However, with the help of a teenage mentor, the boy
manages to obtain his license on the second try ("I studied and practiced until even
my dreams were in Morse code"), set up a transmitting station in his New York
City apartment bedroom, and become proficient enough to monitor distress sig-
nals in a Florida hurricane and help direct rescue operations (albeit by breaking the
law). Despite the picture-book format, with its chipper line-and-watercolor pic-
tures, this is a realistically detailed account of the hurdles to be leapt on the way to
becoming a hero. Readers with a technical bent will appreciate Barasch's simple
explanations of how the boy's radio was rigged, while everyone can revel in the
excitement of the culminating rescue. A chart of Morse code and ample textual
references to ham jargon may just add another dimension to notes passed in class.
EB
BARRETT, JUDI 
I Knew Two Who Said Moo: A Counting and Rhyming Book; illus.
by Daniel Moreton. 
Atheneum, 2000 
28p
ISBN 0-689-82104-2 
$16.00 
Ad 4-6 yrs
In this playful book of rhyming and counting silliness, Barrett presents the num-
bers one through ten in nonsensical rhyming text. Each spread features a series of
phrases ending with words (printed in a different color from the rest of the text)
that rhyme with the featured number: "I watched five arrive/ and saw them dive/
off their hive/ onto the drive./ They're all still alive/ and I know they'll survive/
and most certainly thrive." Many of the rhymes are effective, particularly those
that exclusively use one-syllable words. There's a lack of discernible rhythm, how-
ever, and some of the multisyllabic words require emphasis on the wrong syllable,
which may lay snares for the unprepared reader. The illustrations faithfully repro-
duce every bit of nonsense in the rhymes: though there's a slickness and homoge-
neousness to the art, the computer-generated style-neon colors, clean lines, and
sharp shadows-incorporates funny details such as flying feathers and splashing
raindrops that prevent the cleanliness of form from becoming overly sterile. The
zany scenes often expand beyond a single page and onto the facing page, in a more
active version of spot art that encroaches gleefully into text territory. Despite the
glitches in rhythm, children will enjoy the language and pore over the detailed
illustrations, looking for each "barbecue/ given by the kangaroo/ and the ewe/ at
the zoo." KM
BAUER, STEVEN 
A Cat of a Different Color; illus. by Tim Raglin. 
Delacorte,
2000 
[208p]
ISBN 0-385-32710-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-4
Ulwazzer's two siblings are regular cats, while he's endowed with fur that changes
colors and a penchant for wandering. After Ulwazzer wanders away from Felicity-
by-the-Lake, the small town of his birth, the villainous mayor, Mr. Hoytie, begins
to implement a series of proclamations that leave the villagers unable to go out at
night or enjoy their lake. Mr. and Mrs. Hoytie have the charge (and endless house-
hold help) of an orphan girl, Daria Smart, who gradually emerges from the sea of
less relevant characters as the main human protagonist. Ulwazzer returns, and,
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 391
despite the malevolent intentions of his cat siblings (who are smugly invested in
the status quo), he and Daria save the town together. The charm of this story
wears thin with the thickness of the book, and most children who are young enough
to be taken with this simple story and its flatly functional characters are unlikely to
make it through the unwieldy number of pages. Detailed black-and-white illus-
trations forefront images of pop-eyed village dwellers, adding some liveliness but
also contributing to the overall impression of undifferentiated characterization.
Despite the drawbacks, this small-town story of good vs. evil (and its not-so-subtle
moral lesson about the danger of complacency) may appeal to some young people's
developing sense of justice. KM
BORDEN, LOUISE 
Sleds on Boston Common: A Story from theAmerican Revolution;
illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. 
McElderry, 2000 
40p
ISBN 0-689-82812-8 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Narrator Henry Price recalls an event on the eve of the Revolutionary War when,
under orders from King George, General Thomas Gage closed Boston Harbor and
quartered his troops on the Common ("Most of us didn't like General Gage's
troops in our town. Most of them didn't like us either"). On the morning of his
December birthday, Henry receives a lovingly crafted sled from his father and is
anxious to try it out with his siblings over lunch break from school; the best run on
the Common, though, is occupied by lobsterbacks. Inspired by the courage of the
adult Patriots of his acquaintance, Henry confronts Gage with his grievances and
finds that the person he regards as an enemy is actually a respectful listener and a
man of his word. In concluding notes, Borden observes the discrepancy between
the date attributed to this Boston legend and the date of Gage's presence in the
colony; she chooses to retain Gage as the central figure and shift the date back
from 1775 to 1774. Parker's boxed full-page pictures and unbordered double-
spread bleeds evoke the hazily defined edges of a memory drawn into focus-black
ink lines are laid down in a hasty but disciplined scrawl and filled with roughly
brushed watercolors in Redcoat crimson, homespun brown, and icy winter blue.
The prose is simple, graceful, and accessible, and the encounter between a child
deprived of his right to play and a sympathetic soldier under royal orders brings
the epic conflict well within the grasp of an elementary-school audience. EB
BOWLER, TIM 
River Boy. 
McElderry, 2000 
155p
ISBN 0-689-82908-6 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Jess is the apple of her grandfather's eye, his muse for his painting, his confidant in
a way that his son, Jess' father, has never been. She's unsure of what to do, how-
ever, when Grandpa refuses to allow his serious heart attack to keep him from the
family vacation back near his childhood home, where he plans to finish his final
painting, River Boy. Natural swimmer Jess is also drawn to the river her grandfa-
ther lovingly paints, where she meets a strange boy whom she comes to think of as
the "river boy" himself; it's the river boy who suggests that Jess be her grandfather's
hands and enable him to finish the painting before he dies. Bowler, author of
Midget (BCCB 11/95), creates quite a different familial world in this Carnegie-
winning novel: Jess and her grandfather are close without being sentimentally so,
possessing a bantering rapport that many young people will covet, and even the
gap between Jess' father and grandfather isn't an unbreachable one. The restrained
magic of the Tom's Midnight Garden plot is effective without being overly subtle
392 
* THE BULLETIN
or heavy-handed (some readers will doubtless pick up the clues and realize before
Jess does that the river boy is her youthful grandfather and the painting a self-
portrait, but those who take longer to catch on will enjoy going back and looking
for hints). The dynamics and emotions are sometimes overexplained, but the
physical realities (especially the compelling setting of the river, which provides a
murmurous background throughout the story) are expressively depicted. This is a
lyrical and imaginative treatment of the connections between youth and old age
both in one person's life and across the generations. DS
BROWN, CALEF 
Dutch Sneakers and Flea-Keepers: 14 More Stories; written and
illus. by Calef Brown. 
Houghton, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-618-05183-X 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
The stories are actually story poems, some more narrative than others, ranging in
topic from shoes ("My Dutch Wooden Sneakers from Holland,/ the grooviest
shoes on the block"-"Dutch Sneakers") to unusual knights ("Here we've got/ Sir
Dance-a-lot. He's really quite a charmer./ With metal pants/ come watch him
dance/ all night in shining armor"-"Sir Dance-a-lot") to bugs on a doughnut
("Donut Beetles/ very slowly/ crossing Sugar Beach"-"Sugar Beach"). Brown
has some diverting ideas and approaches, but unfortunately the variable verse forms
and wandering scansion (which make reading aloud unnecessarily challenging)
undercut the sharp organization that's needed to give absurd verse its punch. The
illustrations offer an entertaining collection of spiky-lined creatures, but Brown
mutes the strong colors with a dark undertone that gives a dingy look to the pal-
ette; the compositions are often unbalanced, with too many small details detract-
ing from the main images. There are nonetheless some amusing conceits here that
may tickle youthful fans of silliness. DS
BROWN, DON 
Uncommon Traveler: Mary Kingsley in Africa; written and illus. by
Don Brown. 
Houghton, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-00273-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 7-10 yrs
Born in 1862, Mary Kingsley grew up as the dutiful daughter of a self-absorbed,
often absent father and an ailing mother and, despite a gloomy childhood, man-
aged to prepare herself for the larger life that opened to her upon her parents'
deaths. "Her world, once cramped and dark, was now as big as the globe," and so,
at age thirty, Kingsley set off to explore West Africa, heedless of social strictures
and warnings that it "was not a place for a single woman to visit." Always garbed
with Victorian propriety, Kingsley crossed ravines and braved rapids, slid down
hills and into animal traps, endured steaming heat and tormenting lice, and sto-
ically encountered enormous insects, hippos, and crocodiles as she pushed her way
deeper into the continent. The book lavishes enough attention on its subject's
constrained childhood to make her sudden release into the wide, wide world all
the more startling, and although the picture-book format allows only brief glimpses
of her many adventures, Brown brings each detail to life through vivid imagery
("sun-cooked swamps of ink-black slime") and frequent quotes from Kingsley's
own writings ("I scratched [the hippo] behind the ear with my umbrella and we
parted on good terms"). Brown blends his watercolors to the texture of fine suede
and delicately defines shapes with a few gossamer-thin ink lines, creating lush Af-
rican landscapes in which prim, heavy-skirted Kingsley is a gentle but insistent
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 393
reminder of the ubiquitous British imperial presence. A note on Kingsley's travels
and a brief bibliography are included. EB
BUNTING, EVE 
Swan in Love; illus. byJo Ellen McAllister Stammen. 
Atheneum,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82080-1 
$16.00 
M 
5-8 yrs
Talk about unrequited love: "On the lake was a boat shaped like a swan. Her
name, Dora, was printed in black on her sparkling paint. Swan loved her." Swan
follows the object of his passion around the lake as she ferries folks about, and,
despite the muttering of the other swans ("He makes us look stupid. Doesn't he
know she's not one of us?"), his love is true. He is encouraged by a voice "from the
sky, or the lake, or the air itself" that tells him "don't ever stop loving," "you have
found the answer," and similar platitudes. When the inevitable occurs (Dora springs
a leak and is destined for kindling), Swan is desolate; then he hears the voice say
"Love makes magic," and suddenly he and Dora are (apparently) transformed into
"two water lilies resting quietly on the lake, nothing between them but the floating
moon." This sentimental offering is visually depicted in misty pastel illustrations
that, while technically competent and often beautifully composed, do little to miti-
gate the sheer affectedness of this fable. The message is murky, the conclusion
unresolved, and the audience unidentifiable. Children seeking swan stories should
be steered instead to the Pinkney-illustrated The Ugly Duckling (BCCB 3/99).
JMD
BURGESS, MELVIN 
The Copper Treasure; illus. by Richard Williams. 
Holt,
2000 
104p
ISBN 0-8050-6381-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Jamie is more fortunate than Davies and Ten Tons; he has a home and parents,
while his orphaned friends live in a derelict boat, scraping a daily living from what-
ever they can find or steal on and around the London docks. While scavenging on
board an empty vessel, the boys witness a fortune in copper sheeting crashing
through the ship's rail and sinking into the river. Ten Tons devises a scheme to
float the copper and redeem it for enough money to buy them all a place on a ship,
the first step toward becoming licensed seamen and escaping from the grinding
poverty that surrounds them. All the elements of a great adventure novel are
here-excitement, danger, the exotic locale of Victorian England; what the story
lacks is a player sympathetic enough to elicit an emotional response from the reader.
The characterizations fall short of even genre-fiction archetypes, and the stilted
dialogue detracts from the bang-up plot. Still, the novel is brief and action-packed,
and the accessible format is attractive. Full-page black-and-white illustrations have
the old-fashioned look of an R. L. Stevenson adventure; a glossary is included.
JMD
CHRISTIAN, PEGGY 
If You Find a Rock; illus. with photographs by Barbara Hirsch
Lember. 
Harcourt, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-15-239339-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
This meditative inquiry into kinds of rocks and their childhood significance em-
ploys an unusual second-person address ("If you find a rock, a nice flat, rounded
rock, that sits just right in the crook of your finger .. .") and examines a rather
impressive array of rocks (skipping stones, chalk rocks, writing rocks, wishing rocks,
394 
* 
THE BULLETIN
splashing rocks, etc.). Christian's quiet, lyrical tone (the text's ragged right mar-
gins suggest free verse) and lucid specificity ("and as you sit down you feel the cool
moss squush beneath you") provide mood and texture that will help slow listeners
down to the rhythm of the narrative and the task of contemplation. It's still an
awful lot about rocks, however, and the emphasis on thoughtful possibility rather
than action will appeal to adults while leaving a lot of child audience by the side of
the path. The hand-tinted photographs have some of the same problems: well-
suited to the text and undeniably lovely in their stony tones, they're nonetheless
more likely to draw adults enamored of their tastefulness than kids interested in
rocks. The craftsmanship of text and art is solid, however, and this might offer a
quiet way in to nature study. DS
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
Circus Family Dog; illus. by Sue Truesdell. 
Clarion,
2000. 
32p
ISBN 0-395-78648-7 $15.00 
R 3-7yrs
Grumps is an old circus dog with just one trick: he lies down in the center ring in
front of a flaming hoop with his feet in the air and resists the efforts of the clowns
to get him to jump through it ("The children loved it"). Then a new dog is added
to the show, and the cheers that greet Sparks for jumping over Grumps and through
the hoop motivate Grumps to try to learn a new trick. The sketchy, slightly elon-
gated figures of Truesdell's line-and-watercolor illustrations capture the humor
and integrity of Grumps' dogged efforts, the perkiness of the puppy, and the cheerful
warmth of the circus "family" that decides to make sure Grumps gets his "fair
share of the smiles and the cheers." The well-paced text complements the clean,
varied layouts of the illustrations, and together they flesh out the homely message
that frames the story: "The circus is like a family, and old Grumps was the family
dog." This should have genuine appeal for a broad range of readers and readees,
whether they relate most to the aching bones of the old dog or the innocent energy
of the young one. FK
COWELL, CRESSIDA 
Hiccup the Seasick Viking; written and illus. by Cressida
Cowell. 
Orchard, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-531-30278-4 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Hiccup is an oddity in the Viking world: his age-mates are marauding around on
their junior pillages while he's "tiny, thoughtful, and polite"; worse, he's afraid of
going to sea. His father, Stoick the Vast ("Wherever Stoick walked, the ground
trembled, flowers wilted, and bunnies fainted"), insists that Vikings are never afraid,
so Hiccup's in a bit of a quandary. His first sea outing brings not only fear but also
seasickness-happily, not just to Hiccup, but to the rampaging Viking crew when
the storm hits, whereupon Hiccup takes charge and overcomes his fear. The ocean
voyage with its feel-good message isn't quite as fresh as the story of the little Viking
out of water, but the sweetly absurd set up (which has a grounded lunacy reminis-
cent of Babette Cole's work) is a hard act to follow. The whole thing has enough
breezy, tongue-in-cheek energy (Stoick's Viking song is particularly ripe for dra-
matic performance) to make this not only one of the more invigorating accounts
of dealing with fear but also a humorously offbeat swashbuckler. Cowell's art has
a Cole-esque flavor too in its speedy comic lines and informal feel, but the Vikings
are solid individuals; the seascapes, with their palette of sea-blues and greens and
generous helpings of spume, suggest that Hiccup's fear is a reasonable response.
This neatly turned adventure is a Viking saga with a difference. DS
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 
395
COWLEY, JOY 
Starbright and the Dream Eater. HarperCollins, 2000 
[14 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028420-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028419-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
"Spindle sickness" causes its victims to have a series of progressively more terrify-
ing nightmares; drained and shaken, the victims finally fall into a coma and die.
Conventional wisdom says that the disease is a mutant virus, but in reality it is an
alien being, the Dream Eater, that lives on the psychic energy of its victims. Ms.
Tietz, the nurse who delivers Starbright from her mentally challenged mother,
Esther, knows that Starbright is the child named in an interstellar message from
the future as the world's only hope for survival. Starbright does not believe the
prophecy at first but slowly comes to the realization that all she loves is doomed if
she cannot find a way to defeat the Dream Eater. There is action and immediacy
to the plot, and the characterizations, while not deep, are strong. Starbright is a
daring heroine, who acts on her impulses and faces the resultant trials squarely and
bravely. The tension between what is revealed and what remains hidden is held
taut until the climax, and the story retains its power despite a somewhat simplistic
conclusion. The plot leaves something to be desired in terms of logic, however,
and there are many questions unanswered: is Starbright's father an alien? Why is
she the chosen savior? How, exactly, does Starbright send the extraterrestrial psy-
chic piranha back to the stars? Cowley's pace leaves little time for reflection, though,
and budding science fiction fans will probably take these queries in stride. JMD
CUMMINGS, PAT 
Angel Baby; written and illus. by Pat Cummings. 
Lothrop,
2000 
[2 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14822-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14821-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
"'Amanda Lynne,' said her mother/ 'Come help me feed your baby brother./ Grab
that towel and Mr. Bear./ Oops! There's oatmeal in his hair./ Wipe off his face.
Now look, you see/ What an angel he can be."' Amanda Lynne obeys her mother's
unrelenting rhymed imperatives, but she is too busy to really appreciate her ram-
bunctious toddler brother's angelic appearance until he is asleep. The rhyme is
sing-songy, but its steady lilting rhythm suits the resigned cheerfulness of school-
aged Amanda Lynne. Large uncomplicated blocks of color in gouache, water-
color, and colored pencil are loud and glitzily unsubtle, but careful composition
keeps the layouts from being as busy as the siblings. Cummings' African-Ameri-
can family handles their lively preschooler with encouraging capability that will
bolster exhausted young caretakers of similar little angels. FK
DALY, JUDE, ad. 
Fair, Brown 6' Trembling: An Irish Cinderella Story; ad. and
illus. by Jude Daly. 
Farrar, 2000 
[27p]
ISBN 0-374-32247-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Trembling is forced to stay home when her two sisters go to church; they tell her
that they need her to do the housework, but in fact they keep her home because
Trembling is very beautiful and her sisters don't want the competition. In classical
Cinderella fashion, Trembling's fairy henwife appears, summons a magical gar-
ment for her to wear and horse for her to ride, and sends her off to church, where
396 
* THE BULLETIN
she attracts the attention of several princes. Three Sundays she goes to church,
with each Sunday's dress more exquisite than the last (illustrations show the other
two sisters sporting comically poor copies of Trembling's magical finery). On the
third Sunday a prince grabs her shoe as she is riding away, and the quest for the
foot that fits (and its attached beautiful maiden) is launched. The artwork sug-
gests medieval portraiture and friezework, showing expansive and softly textured
backgrounds that occasionally dwarf the expressively delicate and elongated hu-
man figures. The costumed suitors for Trembling's hand, however, include ste-
reotyped representatives of China, Spain, and Africa, who are jarringly out of place
in a sea of Irish visages and dress. Despite these unfortunate images, the text reads
smoothly, with the charming lilt of a well-told fairy tale, and many libraries will
want to purchase a copy to add to their collection of Cinderella tales from around
the world. A note cites both sources and tale types. KM
DATLOW, ELLEN, comp. 
A Wolf at the Door; comp. by Ellen Datlow and Terri
Windling. 
Simon, 2000 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-82138-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Datlow and Windling have already established themselves as connoisseurs of the
modern fairy-tale retelling with their story selections for such adult anthologies as
Snow White, Blood Red and The Year's Best Fantasy and Horror annuals. They are
branching out for a YA audience with an on-the-money selection of thirteen tales
compiled from a variety of authors. Delia Sherman sets "The Months of Manhat-
tan" (a takeoff on "The Month Brothers") in a deserted New York City museum
gallery; Michael Cadnum features the giant's point of view in "Mrs. Big: 'Jack and
the Beanstalk' Retold"; Neil Gaiman gives free verse "Instructions" on how to
traverse the land of folk and fairy tales and successfully return; and Garth Nix
brings "Hansel and Gretel" into the present with a very creepy retelling called
"Hansel's Eyes." The tonal variety of these short stories makes the collection an
intriguing one: in "Cinder Elephant" Yolen takes amusing liberties with the physical
appearance of traditional characters (Cinderella's stepsisters have "hearts so thin,
you could read a magazine through them") and does a riff on pesky singing birds
("Fairy tale birds always sing like this. It's annoying to everyone except the hero-
ine"); Nancy Farmer acerbically retells the story of the Goose Girl and her horse,
Falada; and Kathe Koja's "Becoming Charise" is a subtle, evocative retelling of
Andersen's "The Ugly Duckling" set in a modern high school. While a certain
familiarity with more traditional versions of these tales wouldn't hurt, the possi-
bilities for textual comparisons and creative writing leaps should make YAs and
their adults read happily ever after. JMD
DENSLOW, 
SHARON PHILLIPS 
Big Wolf and Little Wolf; illus. by Cathie
Felstead. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16174-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16174-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
Little Wolf asks his father, Big Wolf, to sing him a good-night song, so Big Wolf
does: "I'm a wolf. I'm a wolf. I'm a big gray wolf./ I sleep all day, I sing all night,/
I snap my teeth in an overbite! I'm a wolf. I'm a wolf. I'm a big gray wolf./ I like
to chew, I like to eat,/ I use my nose to smell my feet." Big Wolf's silly song goes
on until "Suddenly... there was a rustling and a growling in the bushes behind
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 
397
them .... Something was in the bushes!" It turns out to be Mama Wolf, having
fun ("I scare silly wolves, I make them run"), and the three wolves settle down for
the night-but not before singing one last good-night song: "Our sleep is deep,/
Our snores are long,/ and in our dreams/ there is one more song./ AARROOOO!/
ARRROOOOOOOOO!/ AAARRROOOOOOOOOOOO!/ Good night!"
Denslow's plot moves rapidly, the rhymes are funny (and worth repeating), and
the conclusion is satisfying. Felstead's line-and-watercolor illustrations have a Sun-
day funnies quality (down to the frames that house each picture and text block)
that suits the story's humorous tone, and the depictions of the wolves and their
environs echo a more laid back Frank Asch. With its momentum, suspense, and
giggles, this bedtime story in wolf's clothing will surely be a howling success. JMD
DORROS, ARTHUR 
The Fungus That Ate My School; illus. by David
Catrow. 
Scholastic, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-590-47704-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
Despite the science teacher's assurance that their experiments would be safe in the
lab over spring break, children return from a particularly rainy vacation to find
that the fungus has in fact run amok. Each room of the school brings fresh disas-
ter-fungus is devouring the library books, fungus is dishing out lunch in the
cafeteria, fungus is taking phone messages in the principal's office. Help is promptly
summoned, and Professor Macadamia arrives with the Fungus Unit (a "special
branch of the Sanitation Department") and scrubs the school back into order.
This bit of lunacy doesn't quite fit the mold of lighthearted science, as there is
precious little to be learned here about fungus except its propensity to grow in
damp, enclosed places; nor is there any real plot beyond a tour of the besieged
building. The fun is strictly limited to Catrow's bug-eyed trio of students (two
with heads like inverted pears on spindly bodies, the third shaped like an onion)
and the floor-to-ceiling fungal monsters (slime green, charmingly accented in purple
and magenta) that gleefully run the school. That might be just enough fun, though,
for students who cling desperately to any hope for a school cancellation. EB
DOWNEY, LYNN 
The Flea's Sneeze; illus. by Karla Firehammer. 
Holt, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-6103-7 
$17.00 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
With strong echoes of Don and Audrey Wood's The Napping House (BCCB 9/
84), Downey and Firehammer imagine the effect of a sneeze on slumbering barn
animals: "On a dark, dark night/ On an old, old farm/ In a rickety, crickety/
Tumbledown barn,/ Everyone slept peacefully-/ A rat, a cat, a black-eyed bat;/ A
cow, an owl,/ A feathered fowl;/ A dog, a hog,/ An old barn frog./ Everyone slept
peacefully-/ But not the flea." The catalogued creatures continue to slumber,
oblivious to the flea's coughing, sniffling, and final request for a tissue ("Does
eddybody hab a tissue for be?"), before the insect finally awakens everyone with a
gigantic "Ah-CHOO!" The hog unwittingly receives the brunt of the sneeze
("Eeeeeeww!"), foreshadowing another disruption soon to come: "Everyone slept
just like a log-/ Except the hog ... / No one heard his garbled wheeze,/ 'I think
I'b godda sdeeze.'" Warm acrylics illustrate this sleepytime book: though the
colors are so well-modulated as to be sometimes insufficiently differentiating, the
world of toylike barnyard critters is an inviting one. While children will enjoy
hunting for the flea, and waiting for the anticipated disruption, some inconsisten-
cies (animals shift locations without explanation, the backdrop suffers some inex-
plicable alteration) may confuse observant viewers. Even the most enthusiastic
398 
* THE BULLETIN
listeners may waver at the description of the sleepy barn (and it's a pity more use
isn't made of the cumulation), but children will enjoy the repetitive phrases, the
antisocial sneezing, and the ensuing havoc. EAB
EHLERT, LOIS 
Market Day: A Story Told with Folk Art; written and illus. by Lois
Ehlert. 
Harcourt, 2000 
[36p]
ISBN 0-15-202158-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A simple rhyme delineates a farm family's preparations for and trip to market ("We're
all going to market. It's in the town square. To buy and to sell-that's why we go
there"). Although the text is predictable both in rhyme scheme and content, it
flows fairly well when read aloud, and the wordplay is moderately diverting and
inviting. The narrative largely serves, however, as a background on which to hang
the folk art pieces featured in the illustrations. These pieces-clay and cloth hu-
man figures, basketry, samples of embroidery, painted wooden animals, and vari-
ous textiles-are combined in blazingly colorful photo-compositions to reflect the
action of the rhyme. While this is an interesting idea, the execution is muddied;
the compositions are crowded and hard to see, and it is difficult to extract meaning
from the visuals. Still, adults with a fancy for folk art may appreciate this ap-
proach. A key to the folk art pieces used in the text is provided. JMD
ETCHEMENDY, NANCY 
The Power ofUn. 
Front Street/Cricket, 2000 
14 8p
ISBN 0-8126-2850-0 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Chaos theory gets an age-appropriate exploration when a middle-school boy is
given the opportunity to undo the myriad interconnected events preceding the
accident that left his impulsive six-year-old sister comatose. Gib Finney tells his
own story in a voice that is down-to-earth, sophisticated, and funny, explaining
that "stories used to be easier to start before I found out about the innermost
workings of the universe and all that stuff," before "the power of Un changed
everything." Using the "unner" given him by a mysterious old man who "smelled
like hot metal or lightning," Gib is able to rewind his life but goes a bit too far due
to a math error ("Everybody, including my teachers, keeps telling me I'd be great
[at math] if I'd just be more careful") and has to renegotiate a bigger hunk of his
past than he had planned. This leads to interesting developments and, eventually,
to some fairly substantial philosophizing about what we can learn from the bad
things that happen, suggesting both a religious explanation (in which God is char-
acterized as a "Big Teacher" with "Major Lesson Plans") and a more secular point
that the bad things help us recognize and appreciate the good things. Though the
willfulness of the little sister on which the plot revolves seems forced, her brother's
new appreciation of her as more than "a set of problems to get around" rings true.
This absorbing story about a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day-and a more
suspenseful but happier rerun of it-has something to offer even kids who don't
normally like sci-fi. FK
EVANS, DOUGLAS 
The Elevator Family. Delacorte, 2000 
87p
ISBN 0-385-32723-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
This uplifting (and unusually tall) novella chronicles a vacation spent by the clue-
less but cheerfully hospitable Wilson family in a San Francisco hotel elevator, which
they appreciate as "a mobile room" with "extras" like "a full-length mirror, a tele-
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 399
phone, wall-to-wall carpeting" and "soft marimba music." Their ability to make
themselves-and the guests who pass through-feel at home endears them to a
lonely traveling salesman who specializes in trendy merchandise, the exhausted
members of the rock band "What," assorted tourists, and Mrs. Goldengate, a busy
socialite whose late husband's name adorns the local bridge. By the end of their
stay, the Wilsons have helped the socialite slow down, brought together the bell-
boy and the salesgirl he adores, rescued a kidnapped heiress, and inspired the sales-
man to create a new fad: "We could sell Elevator Family dolls and Elevator Family
books." The writing skitters along on the surface and readers of this mild, amus-
ing tome will probably not clamor for an Elevator Family lunchbox, but they may
appreciate the treehouse appeal of its premise, its benign, accessible satire, and the
insouciance of these kinder, gentler Stupids. FK
FITZPATRICK, MARIE-LOUISE 
Lizzy and Skunk; written and illus. by Marie-Louise
Fitzpatrick. 
DK Ink, 2000 
[26p]
ISBN 0-7894-6163-3 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Lizzy is a flyaway-haired little charmer who gets through life with the assistance of
Skunk, her skunk hand puppet ("Lizzy was afraid of shadows in the dark ... but
Skunk wasn't. Lizzy was afraid of falling down ... but Skunk wasn't"). Veterans
of the genre will easily predict that something's going to interfere with this idyllic
partnership, and they'll be right: Skunk goes missing, and Lizzy is devastated.
When he turns up in a tree (thanks to the tender ministrations of the family cat),
Lizzy musters her own courage to rescue him, and girl and skunk are together
again. The classic story is effectively told (though many plot-savvy kids are going
to expect the tree from which Skunk is rescued to be part of the "dark, scary woods"
feared by both Lizzy and Skunk), with deft employment of simple rhythms and
pared-down, unassuming text. Fitzpatrick's effervescent watercolors add a perky
and unforced energy to the proceedings: dot-eyed Lizzy whizzes by in her blue
overalls across a cream background, and the conquering Skunk, his arms out-
stretched like a superhero, is a bolstering presence. Particularly effective are some
interesting perspectives-we look through the scary spider's web and past the loom-
ing arachnid to a triumphant Skunk on Lizzy's outthrust arm, or over the heads of
appreciative stuffed animals at Lizzy's back and the wall beyond her as she and
Skunk make shadow art in the glow of the lamp. This is a satisfying treatment of
a venerable topic that will be enjoyed by loyal puppets and stuffed animals as well
as their owners. DS
FREYMANN, SAXTON 
One Lonely Sea Horse; written and illus. by Saxton Freymann
and Joost Elffers. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-439-11014-9 
$15.95 
Ad 4-7yrs
After finding herself on her own in the ocean, the sea horse of the title bewails her
solitude ("In all the cold and salty sea/ I'm all alone-there's only me") until other
deep-sea denizens (two crabs, then three puffer fish, then four lobsters, five turtles,
and so on) come forth to explain she's among a multitude of friends, whereupon
Bea the sea horse is cheered indeed. The text never rises above innocuous: the
rhyming verses are stilted, the counting component is superfluous, and the warm
and fuzzy message is better intentioned than executed. This is a classic example of
an illustration-driven title, however, and the art is sufficiently cleverly executed to
400 
* THE BULLETIN
offer some redemption. Like others in the Play With Your Food series, this creates
its characters from strategically altered and posed produce: the sea horse is an
assembly ofchioggia beets, bananas make splendid dolphins and even better octo-
puses, and lumpy hands of ginger become convincing lobsters (the sea floor is
largely mushroom rocks and chive or fava bean seaweed); set against an intense
blue-green background, the creatures are brought vividly to life. Food fun has an
undeniable "let me try that" appeal that will get the young audience poking around
in their produce drawer. The concept is sophisticated enough to interest some-
what older kids than will be able to tolerate the chirpy rhyme; if you can cover up
the verses you might be able to extend the age range for some entertaining-and
maybe even edible-art projects. DS
FREYMANN-WEYR, GARRET 
When I Was Older. 
Houghton, 2000 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-618-05545-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-10
Sophie was twelve when her brother, Erhart, died of leukemia; she's now fifteen,
and her family is still struggling to recover from the blow. Sophie is perhaps the
most affected: she engages in two "on-purpose memories" of Erhart every day, she
refuses to forgive her father for having an affair and leaving the family during
Erhart's illness, and she brings a grim focus to her daily life that leaves no time for
the frivolity of boys and friends ("It seems to me that love always needs to be
regulated"). This begins to change when she meets Francis, the seventeen-year-old
son of her mother's new boyfriend. Having also known loss (he wears a teardrop
tattoo in memory of his late mother), Francis understands Sophie's anguish and
admires her drive, but he also sees the price she and those around her pay for her
severity with her fellow humans. Freymann-Weyr creates an indelible portrait of a
girl whose strength is verging on becoming her weakness. Sophie's voice is com-
pletely authentic and continually compelling, and the picture of her family rela-
tionships is compassionate yet sharply insightful: her father has been a jerk and
will always have his limitations, but Sophie's been so superbly punitive that the
distance between them is hardly all his responsibility. Her gradual softening to-
wards her father ("He tells me to sleep well and hangs up just in time for me to tell
the dial tone I love it. And then, since I have its complete and undivided atten-
tion, I add that I don't think it gave Erhart cancer") and friends and her embarka-
tion on a relationship with Francis are realistically hesitant and tentative. Ultimately,
this is an absorbing and eloquent account of a girl learning young how to balance
loyalty to the dead with connection to the living. DS
FRIEDMAN, ROBIN 
How I Survived My Summer Vacation and Lived to Write the
Story. 
Front Street/Cricket, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8126-2738-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Jackie is the junk-food-eating son of health-food-eating parents (who publish New
Age books for a living), and he is striving for normalcy. Determined to write the
"Great American Novel" during the summer before entering high school, he even
has the opening sentence for his opus-in fact, he has a bunch of opening sen-
tences, all representing different genres of popular literature. Jackie's writer's block
is complicated by his crush on beautiful (but shallow) Kelly, who just happens to
be the daughter of his tough new swimming coach. Confusion appears to be
Jackie's natural state: his best friend, Mallory, has got herself a beau and Jackie is
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 401
reacting with all sorts of conflicting emotions; his friends Nick (the would-be
heartthrob) and Garus (an affected Anglophile) have all sorts of reasons why Jackie
should hang with them instead of staying cooped up in his room with his type-
writer. The plot revolves around all the things Jackie does to distract himself from
his unsuccessful writing attempts: car-painting, sewer-exploring, swimming, dat-
ing, etc. While the dialogue is funny in spots, the pace lags, and characterizations
are strictly one-note. Jackie's naivete is overdrawn to the point of unbelievability,
which is particularly problematic since he's the narrator. Jackie's summer winds
up being amusing and relatively painless, which is also a good way to sum up this
book. JMD
GHERMAN, BEVERLY 
Norman Rockwell: Storyteller with a Brush. Atheneum,
2000 
58p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-82001-1 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
If you have to pick a definitive American artist, it's probably Rockwell; even young
people who don't know who he is will likely recognize some of his art. Gherman
examines his life and art together, tracing his artistic talent from his youthful en-
deavors to his study and work for the army and then to the pivotal connection
with the Saturday Evening Post. Unfortunately, the writing is choppy and awk-
ward ("Norman was no different. But he wasn't going to depend on luck. He
intended to work hard and make it happen") and sometimes ungrammatical ("With
an axe in one hand on his way to split logs and a book in the other, Norman
portrays Lincoln as well as himself"), and some events and references are
underexplained (contemporary youngsters are unlikely to be familiar with
Dictaphones). There is still quite a collection of interesting information here,
though, with details about Rockwell's methodology (he embraced photographic
assistance after initially rejecting it) and successes and failures (a Post cover that
depicted a child's discovery about the truth of Santa Claus upset people whose
myth-believing children happened upon it). The page layout is attractively airy,
and the art reproduced to good effect; Rockwell is well represented by pictures that
demonstrate the range of his capabilities and not just the images that have suffered
from overexposure. Despite the textual weaknesses, this is a serviceable introduc-
tion to an American icon. Endnotes, a bibliography, and an index are included.
DS
GRIMM, EDWARD 
The Doorman; illus. by Ted Lewin. 
Orchard, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33280-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30280-6 
$16.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
With a cup of coffee and a last-minute adjustment to his navy blue uniform, Afri-
can-American doorman John begins another day of greeting tenants as they come
and go, handling deliveries and mail, and overseeing the building "as if he were the
captain of a ship." But this is to be John's last day on the job-Bill, his evening
replacement, sadly informs the residents the next morning that John passed away
in the night ("'It's a shame that John had such a bad heart,' Bill said to Nellie. 'He
did not,' she said, stamping her foot. 'He had a good heart'"). The best intentions
and sincerest sentiment (Grimm offers this in memory of his own "beloved door-
man, John") cannot mitigate the fact that John's duties, however important to his
tenants' security, will hold little interest for a child audience. Moreover, the opti-
mistic promise that John's memory "stayed as fresh as the wind after a springtime
shower" seems unwarranted, given the residents' condescending and/or thought-
402 
* THE BULLETIN
less behavior evidenced throughout his last day. (Most barely respond to his small
talk, and it's doubtful John takes much pleasure in the children's trick of "breath-
ing on the front doors he had just cleaned.") Lewin imparts a near-photographic
realism to his watercolor cast, but the constrained lobby setting quickly becomes
monotonous. There are good intentions and attractive visuals here, but there's
also an absence of genuine connection (for the building residents and for the audi-
ence) with the title figure and too much adult-oriented sentiment. EB
HADDIX, MARGARET PETERSON 
Turnabout. Simon, 2000 
[240p]
ISBN 0-689-82187-5 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 6-9
Melly and Anny Beth are teenagers in the year 2085, but the progress of time
hasn't provided a solution to their dilemma: subjects of an age-reduction experi-
ment in the year 2000, when they were centenarians, they have yearly grown younger
ever since. Datelined chapters switch between accounts of the initial undergoing
of the process at the nursing home that was essentially an unethical laboratory,
excursions into previous moments in the girls' second life, and explorations of
their current quandary as they plan for the time when they're no longer able to live
independently. Determined to avoid a return to the "Agency," the scientific bu-
reaucracy that monitors the subjects of the secret experiment, they're nonetheless
conflicted when it looks like a reporter is hot on their trail-has their secret been
discovered? Haddix doesn't pull her details together as credibly as the plot re-
quires (the device of the girls' evaporating memory of their upward lives, for ex-
ample, is a good idea weakly executed), the conception of the future isn't particularly
imaginative (it's a lot like now only higher-tech), and the writing's on the pedes-
trian side. The premise, however, is gripping indeed, with the additional appeal of
relying on teenagers with more experience than any adult can hope to match. The
eternal conflict between scientific capability and individual ethics is accessibly played
out, with the personal cost of this particular scientific advance dramatically dem-
onstrated (most of the other subjects found the results less bearable than the death
they escaped). The solution to the problem (the reporter turns out to be a descen-
dent of Melly's, who sought her for familial rather than journalistic reasons and
who will take care of the girls) is convenient, but the book doesn't turn it into an
overall happy ending. This is digestible sci-fi-lite that will draw readers just start-
ing to grapple with some classic philosophical issues. DS
HARRISON, MICHAEL 
Facing the Dark. Holiday House, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-8234-1491-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Simon's father is accused of murder, Simon goes to the scene of the crime to
investigate. He sees a girl bringing flowers to the same site and realizes that she
must be the victim's daughter. Though the girl, Charley, is initially hostile, she
eventually believes that Simon's father is innocent and joins Simon in his investi-
gation. Simon and Charley narrate in alternating chapters as they try to identify
the real culprits. Their fathers each owned small cab companies, and clues point
towards "Uncle" John, a friend of Charley's mother who is now trying to convince
her to sell him the family business so that he can expand his own cab company.
Harrison sustains suspense throughout, introducing close escapes and thrills at an
involving pace. Unfortunately, events often strain credibility (Simon himself says,
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 403
"No one could believe this or take it seriously. No one. I couldn't") and the
identity of the culprits is never satisfyingly revealed (they are only known as own-
ers of another hostile cab company). Nevertheless, Charley and Simon are likeable
characters in an unusual investigative partnership, and the classic appeal of the
premise, teens outwitting all the adults in the county, will have readers ripping
through this suspenseful page-turner. KM
HAUSMAN, 
GERALD 
Tom Cringle: Battle on the High Seas; illus. by Tad
Hills. 
Simon, 2000 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-689-82810-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
With a bit of help from an admiral uncle, thirteen-year-old Tom Cringle slings his
hammock as a midshipman in the English navy and sails off toward Jamaica on a
mission to control the piracy rampant in the Caribbean waters of 1812. The
Bream is swamped at sea, and Tom is one of only three survivors (not counting
Sneezer, the faithful dog who saves his life). Obediah Glasgow, a charming free-
man whom the boy correctly suspects is a pirate, offers them passage on his Black-
bird; leery of Obed's activities, Tom makes his escape, but not before cultivating a
genuine admiration for the pirate. When he is later recaptured and forced into
service against the British, Tom finds himself torn between his regard for Obed
and his sworn allegiance to his country. Neither seasickness, open warfare, storms,
shipwreck, earthquake, kidnapping, or pirate raids keep Tom from recording his
adventures carefully and completely in a most personable journal, which is con-
vincingly cast in a slightly archaic (but very readable) tone reminiscent of Richard
Henry Dana's nautical memoirs (the book is in fact based on a popular historical
novel from 1834). However, without a well-defined, truly black-hearted villain
anywhere in sight (pirate Obed is a pretty nice guy at heart, and Tom isn't aboard
the Bream long enough to delight in the pursuit of Napoleon or his allies), Tom's
travails ultimately hit the doldrums for want of a worthy adversary. 
Reviewed
from an unillustrated galley. EB
HAYES, JOE, ad. 
Little Gold Star: A Cinderella Cuento/ Estrellita de Oro; illus. by
Gloria Osuna Perez and Lucia Angela Perez. 
Cinco Puntos, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-938317-49-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Adapted from a cuento popular in the mountain communities of New Mexico, this
tale of politeness and good hearts rewarded will sound a familiar chime with young
listeners. Arcia, the Cinderella character, encounters a hawk when out washing
wool to weave her father a blanket. The hawk swoops down and steals the wool,
but when Arcia politely requests its return, the hawk drops a star on her forehead
and clean, already woven wool cloth into her hands. Needless to say, Arcia's step-
sisters want stars, too, and they attempt to repeat her encounter with the hawk;
being impolite, bad-natured girls, they end up with a donkey's ear and cow's horn
on their foreheads instead of stars. As in many familiar variants of this tale, all ends
well, with Arcia married to the prince and her stepsisters chastened. The text is
serviceable, but it lacks the vibrancy necessary to mitigate the predictability of the
plot. The paintings (a joint effort between mother and daughter) have a folk-art
feel to them, with flat backdrops and simple perspectives. The setting is more
modern than timeless, which gives an unusual air of currency to this traditional
404 
* THE BULLETIN
tale and clashes with explicit statements in the text. The intense palette features
deep blues, pinks, and yellows, in compositions that emphasize the players and not
their setting. Although the faces of the characters tend toward a sameness of ex-
pression, they still have a certain controlled energy. The text is in both English
and Spanish, and an extensive source note is appended. JMD
HEYNEN, JIM 
Cosmos Coyote and William the Nice. 
Holt, 2000 
[19 2 p]
ISBN 0-8050-6434-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Cosmos has gotten into trouble once too often, and now he's
faced with the choice of either juvenile detention back home in Washington or a
year with his religious aunt and uncle in an Iowa farming community and a strict
Christian school. Choosing the second, he becomes William the Nice, trying to
avoid suspicion and painlessly get through the day in the squeaky-clean, insular
Dutch community that his father fled when he was about Cosmos' age. There are
some complications, however: Cosmos is the immediate suspect in a school theft,
and, much more importantly, he falls in love with the beautiful and devout Cherlyn,
pillar of the community. Heynen's portrait of the small farming community is
credible without being either adulatory or overly condemnatory; everybody Cos-
mos meets has Dutch surnames, everybody knows (and to some extent polices)
one another, and violent crime is a thing of elsewhere. The book's sincere and in-
depth treatment of Cherlyn's faith is unusual and refreshing, and there's sympathy
and insight in the depiction of her negotiation of boundaries on sex (her "no clothes
off" rule doesn't preclude some very sexy encounters) and on filial obedience (see-
ing Cosmos without breaking her disapproving father's restrictions on their con-
tact). The narrative is slow and talky, however (Cosmos' song lyrics are included),
and the characters never really move beyond mouthpieces to full personalities:
Cherlyn's a neoChristian ideal and Cosmos is mostly reactive, so it's not clear what
draws Cherlyn to him; it's also not clear what the book makes of Cosmos' Wash-
ington life as a wannabe rocker and small-time vandal with his laissez-faire dad,
since the picture it paints is considerably bleaker than Cosmos' view of it. Still,
this is an effective portrait of change, adjustment, and widening horizons. DS
HOOBLER, DOROTHY 
The First Decade: Curtain Going Up; by Dorothy and Tom
Hoobler. 
Millbrook, 2000 
160p 
illus. with photographs 
(The Century
Kids)
ISBN 0-7613-1600-0 
$21.90 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
The Second Decade: Voyages; by Dorothy and Tom Hoobler. 
Millbrook,
2000 
159p 
illus. with photographs 
(The Century Kids)
ISBN 0-7613-1601-9 
$21.90 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
In the first entries of a proposed series of ten novels, the Hooblers revisit some
landmark events of the twentieth century through the adventures of a fictional
theatrical family, the Aldriches. Perhaps "adventures" is an overstatement, for
although some of their experiences do incorporate a strong dramatic element (the
automobile/horse grudge race in Curtain, and the loss of relatives aboard the Ti-
tanic in Voyages), no single episode is cast with genuine suspense or explored in
history-revealing detail. The Aldrich family's illustrious career (three extant gen-
erations literally share the stage) allows a parade of notables to march through their
lives, including Theodore Roosevelt, who becomes a house guest, and Lionel
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 405
Barrymore, who encourages some of the younger Aldriches in their thespian ambi-
tions. If the thinly drawn characters are less than memorable, their "portraits"
(which have been culled and cleverly assembled from period photo collections) are
fascinating; a family tree of cameo images is appended to each novel, and as the
younger characters age, so, most convincingly, do their pictures. Historical notes
relating to the narrative and a timeline of the featured decade's notable events are
also included. While The Century Kids doesn't yet hold promise as an engrossing
family saga, it should prove an amiable, undemanding read for middle graders
who settle comfortably into series fiction. EB
HOPKINS, JACKIE MIMS, ad. 
The Horned Toad Prince; illus. by Michael
Austin. 
Peachtree, 2000 
32p
ISBN 1-56145-195-9 
$15.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
This fractured Frog Prince set in the American West features a courtly horned
toad as the amphibious hero and a red-headed cowgirl as his undependable prin-
cess of the plains. Hopkins' retelling has a fast pace and colloquial style that will
pull in both listeners and readers: the gardens of the palace have been replaced by
desert flora and fauna, the spoiled princess by lasso-twirling, range-riding Reba Jo,
and the castle dinner dainties by a bowl of hot chili. There is a sly cleverness to the
toad that adds both humor and tension to the plot, and Reba Jo is a spunky anti-
dote to the passive princess stereotype. The horned frog turns out to be a bespelled
Spanish caballero (which explains the sprinkling of Spanish throughout his con-
versations with Reba Jo), and, although RebaJo does kiss and release him from the
spell, he claims not to be bound to marry her. (It is clear by the last picture of Reba
Jo's lasso flying through the air, however, that Reba Jo has other ideas.) Austin's
illustrations combine David Catrow's warp-and-morph style and Kevin O'Malley's
turn-them-upside-down perspectives in slickly finished, framed compositions that
have the gloss and detail of airbrushed paintings, and bits of spot art throughout
extend the desert motifs. Readers-aloud and listeners who have a hankering for
the Wild West are going to bust their britches when they get a look at Reba Jo and
her heroic toad. JMD
HUNTER, RYAN ANN 
Take Off; illus. by Edward Miller. 
Holiday House,
2000 
26p
ISBN 0-8234-1466-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This brief survey of aeronautics traces flight from wing-flapping and balloons
through Kitty Hawk and the twentieth-century flying boom, then examines the
breadth of current aviation and some future possibilities. The text is unthreatening
and digestible; though it's fairly superficial, it doesn't need to do much more than
link the facts and images together. Unfortunately, the art isn't really up to taking
the center stage. The apparently computer-generated images are clean and clear,
but the colors are diagram-unsubtle, there's little creativity in approach (the old
and comparatively rare 707 appears repeatedly as a sample jet), and the captions
are sketchy and confusing (successful and unsuccessful flight attempts are depicted
together with no indication as to which is which; the 707-100 series is mislead-
ingly labeled with its colloquial name of 701). This won't hold up for a transat-
lantic voyage, but it'll serve to fire up the propellers for a quick flight. A page
offers guidelines for paper-airplane construction, and endpapers provide a labeled
gallery of aircraft. DS
406 
* 
THE BULLETIN
JAMES, SIMON, comp. 
Days Like This: A Collection of Small Poems; comp. and
illus. by Simon James. 
Candlewick, 2000 
45p
ISBN 0-7636-0812-2 
$17.99 
R Gr. 2-5
James, author-illustrator of Leon and Bob (BCCB 3/97) here compiles nineteen
short offerings from poets such as Aileen Fisher, Eve Merriam, Ogden Nash, Char-
lotte Zolotow, the ubiquitous "Traditional," and James himself. Simple rhyme
schemes, homey topics, and a musing sense of wonder contribute to the accessibil-
ity of the verses. The poems are brief and child-centered, their cheerful tone rein-
forced by James' light-infused line-and-watercolor illustrations. A meld of the
styles of Quentin Blake and James Stevenson, James' pictures have an inviting
airiness that gives the impression of breezy, wide-open spaces. Each poem gets its
own spread and its own setting, from stepping stones across a river ("Stepping
Stones," a traditional verse) to a snowy hillside (Wendy Elizabeth Johnson's "Sled-
ding") to a busy city street (Eve Merriam's "A Lazy Thought"), and always the
implied speaker is the observing child commenting on the viewed action. Poems
(and children) sweep across the uncluttered compositions, the poems in a large
font with generous leading that makes this a good choice for beginning readers as
well as reading aloud. JMD
JEPPSON, ANN-SOFIE 
Here Comes Pontus!; tr. by Frances Corry; illus. by Catarina
Kruusval. 
R & S Books, 2000 
30p
ISBN 91-29-64561-1 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Pontus (billed as "the naughtiest pony in the stables") tells his own story: he's
moving to a new home, where he'll be trained by "a little girl with a long yellow
mane." He's excited by the novelty and eager to meet up with his brother, who's
also at his new stable; once there, Pontus undergoes some training and a few ad-
ventures (he befriends a kitten secreted in his stall and survives a minor barn fire).
The events are cheerful but mild, and there's not a lot of cohesion or even sense in
the narrative (he's ostensibly there to be trained, but nobody seems to be interested
in actually training him); there's also some confusing and incorrect information,
some of which is doubtless due to translation/importation issues (the use of the
term "pace" for the gait of the Icelandic horse) and some of which is incorrect
anywhere (the suggestion that there's no moment in the trot when all four feet are
off the ground). The plethora of horsey details is the real attraction here, and the
illustrations offer lots of thumbnail sketches with explanations of equipment (there's
a laudable emphasis on safety gear) that young equiphiles will graze on with relish.
The line-and-watercolor art presents Pontus himself as round and perky, with
some slightly anthropomorphic expressions (but we're talking a pony who narrates
a book, after all) that make him all the more endearing. The eminent browsability
is going to be the main draw here, especially for youngsters who are intimidated by
the harder edge of the nonfiction treatments and who really just want to gallop
along with the ponies. An index is included. DS
JOHNSON, D. B. 
Henry Hikes to Fitchburg; written and illus. by D. B.
Johnson. 
Houghton, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-395-96867-4 
$15.00 
Ad 6-9 yrs
Henry and his friend, anthropomorphized bears, make a bet about who can get to
the town of Fitchburg first: Henry walking, or his friend working for the money
for a train ticket. Alternating pages depict the activities of the two characters:
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 
407
Henry's friend fills "the woodbox in Mrs. Alcott's kitchen" while Henry hops
"from rock to rock across the Sudbury River"; Henry's friend pulls "the weeds in
Mr. Hawthorne's garden" while Henry presses ferns and flowers in a book. Even-
tually, the two reach Fitchburg; Henry's friend is first, because Henry has stopped
to fill a pail with blackberries. Johnson has based his first picture book on an
excerpt from Thoreau's Walden, in which Thoreau discusses wasting a day earning
money for train travel vs. walking and having the day be all his own. The narrative
is full of little clues as to Henry's identity (the names of his friends, for example:
Alcott, Emerson, Hawthorne, etc.) as are the colored pencil and paint illustrations,
which set the characters in the bucolic Concord, Massachusetts of Thoreau's day.
The cluttered compositions do not always show Johnson's cubist figures to best
advantage, however, and the predominantly verdant hues lack variety. It is un-
likely that any child is going to understand the literary allusions without the inter-
vention of a motivated adult, and the very subtle humor is sure to go over younger
heads. Still, teachers and other adults seeking an entree to Transcendentalist phi-
losophy for primary graders can end their search here. JMD
JOHNSON, PAUL BRETT 
Mr. Persnickety and Cat Lady; written and illus. by Paul
Brett Johnson. 
Orchard, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33283-7 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30283-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The titular Mr. Persnickety and Cat Lady are mutually irritating neighbors: Cat
Lady has thirty-seven cats, while Mr. Persnickety thinks that even one is too many;
his lawn is green and manicured, while hers is full of dandelions (and cats). Mr.
Persnickety dislikes cats so much that he plays "a tape recording of a hundred
barking dogs" and points the speakers towards Cat Lady's house. Neighborly
tensions escalate, with participants using tactics that will be familiar from elemen-
tary school clashes, until Cat Lady comes up with an ingenious plan, infesting Mr.
Persnickety's house with mice. Eventually, he comes to her house and asks to
borrow her cats to get rid of the infestation. The black outlines of the illustrations
give the figures a lively solidity while softly mottled textures add depth and visual
interest, and both the balding Mr. Persnickety and the plump Cat Lady are de-
picted as appealingly flawed. The real stars here are the cats, however, who are
shown purring, rolling, stretching, and generally lolling about Cat Lady until they
are called upon to save Mr. Persnickety from the mice. This hasn't got quite the
originality of Lisa Campbell Ernst's Miss Penny andMr. Grubb (BCCB 4/91), but
it does have both wit and sympathy. In the end, the two neighbors have learned to
get along, "for the most part," and child readers with conflicts of their own will
appreciate the honest depiction of an incompletely resolved neighborly tiff. KM
LAMARCHE, JIM 
The Raft; written and illus. by Jim LaMarche. 
HarperCollins,
2000 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13978-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13977-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Nicky is (very unwillingly) spending the summer with his artist grandmother at
her cabin in the Wisconsin woods. The boy's discovery of an old raft floating on
the river by the dock helps change his attitude; his grandmother makes sure he has
a life jacket and a pole to push the raft, and Nicky spends his days (and even some
nights) exploring the river and its wildlife. A gift of a sketchpad and drawing
utensils gives the boy additional focus, and he sets about recording his summer in
408 
* THE BULLETIN
pictures. By summer's end Nicky and his grandmother, as well as Nicky and the
river, are close friends. LaMarche's illustrations have the grain of oil pastels on
textured paper. His treatment of light-from the view of a smoggy city through a
car window to the dappled treatment of the sunlight on the river-is gently allur-
ing and stylistically reminiscent of Barbara Cooney, though with a warmer palette.
Woodland vistas stretch across double-page spreads, and the horizontal composi-
tions add to the sense of unrestrained space. The problem here is one of intended
audience. LaMarche's story is lengthy and his point of view adult, and, while the
story and the illustrations are lovely and nostalgic, they are distant from the listen-
ing or reading child's point of view. Still, the variety of capably drafted fauna may
be enough to keep animal-loving youngsters attentive. JMD
LANGTON, JANE 
The Time Bike; illus. by Erik Blegvad. 
HarperCollins,
2000 
176p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028438-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028437-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Langton continues her saga of the Hall family, last seen in The Fledgling (BCCB 7/
80). Eddie's brand-new bike is stolen the day after his birthday, so when a crate
arrives containing another bicycle his hopes are high. The present is not the mod-
ern bicycle he hoped for, however, but an old-fashioned vehicle that he hides away
under the stairs, mentally christening it "the stupid bike." He quickly discovers
that this bicycle has an unusual quality: it's a time machine, and Eddie conjures
great expectations for it, from witnessing Caesar's triumphal march into Rome to
avoiding a week of final exams to discovering who stole his birthday bike. Eddie's
best-laid plans go awry, however: in a confusing development, he rides the bike
past final exam week to avoid studying, only to flunk the exams because he didn't
study; his attempt to return to Ancient Rome nearly strands him in prehistoric
America; and his discovery of the bicycle thief (bully Hunkey Poole) does him
little good. The lack of logic regarding Eddie's employment of time travel is puz-
zling (why doesn't Eddie just ride the bike back before exam week and avoid flunk-
ing?); two sources of conflict, a vengeful banker and the bicycle thief, are
disappointingly handled, the banker by the highly coincidental recovery of a long-
lost deed and the bully by being left to enjoy his spoils. The plot relies largely on
coincidence and happenstance, resulting in a lightweight fantasy snack that will
only whet fans' appetites for a more substantial read. JMD
LAWLOR, LAURIE 
Wind on the River: A Story ofthe Civil War. Jamestown Pub-
lishers, 2000 
156p 
illus. with photographs 
(Jamestown's American Portraits)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8092-0582-3 
$9.94
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8092-0624-2 
$5.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
WISLER, G. CLIFTON 
All for Texas: A Story of Texas Liberation. Jamestown
Publishers, 2000 
140p 
(Jamestown's American Portraits)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8092-0588-2 
$9.94
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8092-0629-3 
$5.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Lest any publisher miss the boat (or wagon train or iron horse) and find itself
stranded without an American historical fiction series, Jamestown's American Por-
traits now joins the posse. Texas gets off to a sluggish start, with teen narrator Jeff's
intimate, down-homey voice pleasantly delivering a thinly disguised spate of back-
ground information concerning the tangled politics of American and Mexican
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 409
claims on Texas soil leading up to armed confrontations in the 1830s. Once Jeff
and a friend join their fathers at Fort Defiance and the bullets begin to fly, though,
there's action aplenty-and a balanced examination of the naive idealism and greedy
land-grabbing of various American "liberators," as well as the ruthless offense of
Santa Anna and the ambivalent stance of many Tejano ranchers throughout the
war-torn area. Lawlor's tale begins better, with a sharply-drawn portrayal of op-
portunistic Reb Griff, who signs on with the Yankees in order to win release from
a prison camp. Stationed in the Dakota Territory to protect American interests
from Indian marauders, Griff keeps an eye open for an opportunity to escape to
gold fields rumored to be nearly. Lawlor's take on the Native Americans' struggle
to retain their land, however, is pure B-Western matinee fare, with the Indians
often undifferentiated by tribe and subject to the most shopworn stereotyping
("Lakota women and men in their finery wore fringe, beads, feathers, buffalo robes-
anything that hung, shone, and fluttered"; "The ravine swarmed with half-naked,
yipping, barking, fantastically painted warriors"). There is little here to lure an
audience away from Dear America, and only the most voracious devotees of his-
torical fiction series will be enticed. EB
LEE, TANITH 
Wolf Tower. 
Dutton, 2000 
[24 0p] 
(The Claidi Journals)
ISBN 0-525-46394-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Claidi aids the escape of imprisoned handsome stranger Nemian and then jour-
neys with him outside the protected walls of the House, where she is a slave, and
into the Waste. Her encounters with a wide variety of cultural groups open her
eyes to the limits and lies of the House and to the varied possibilities now available
to her, including, she believes, a life with Nemian. Nemian, however, is revealed
as a deceiver (he is already married, and he woos Claidi only to gain her confi-
dence, fulfill the Law, and save his own skin), and Claidi finds herself trapped in
the Wolf Tower of the title. Lee is a remarkable fantasy writer with a long history
of interesting plots and complex female characters; unfortunately, this title has
neither. Claidi's story is related through her journal, in which she directly ad-
dresses an imaginary reader, and while this adds a certain immediacy to the narra-
tive, the journal entries are clumsily handled. The action takes place in a
post-apocalyptic world where slavery is commonplace and blind adherence to law
and ritual rule day-to-day activities. The events that make up the plot are indi-
vidually intriguing, but they never coalesce into a unified whole. Claidi has possi-
bilities for growth, especially in situations where she is endangered, but those
possibilities remain unexplored in favor of her being saved by a dashing desert
bandit. (These last-minute rescues hearken back to images of helpless maidens
that modern fantasy has so long abjured.) The conclusion is simplistic and far-
fetched, even given the flexible parameters of fantasy. Lee obviously knows how to
put words together, but in this case the elements they depict remain discrete and
undeveloped. JMD
LESTER, MIKE 
A Isfor Salad; written and illus. by Mike Lester. 
Putnam,
2000 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23388-1 
$9.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
The alphabet's been a vehicle for a lot of artistic ventures of late, but Lester man-
ages both to take the alphabet book in a new direction and to keep it well within
410 
* 
THE BULLETIN
the kid-appealing range. The text is simple, if rather perplexing in isolation: "A is
for salad. B is for Viking. C is for hot dog." What makes this a rib-tickler,
however, is the game played out between the text and the pictures: no, A isn't for
salad, it's for the Alligator in the picture who's stuffing the greens into his face; B
shows a Beaver looking slightly oppressed by his horned Viking helmet; C offers a
striped Cat chowing down on a ball-park special. The absurdity continues with
some occasional textual variations ("H is for pizza ... I think") and one of the
most original approaches to X ever seen ("X and Y are not important letters. Never
use them"). Lester's artwork takes the joke and runs: the "examples" are colored
linocuts, with black lines that run to the vigor of woodcuts and the delicacy of dry-
brush technique, and intense colors leavened by extensive white space and big
print in friendly informal type. The subject critters (they're all critters) have a
beady-eyed and offbeat anthropomorphism reminiscent of "The Far Side," and
Lester often gets even more playful with artistic details (the horse that's really for
H is eating the pizza, and its Appaloosa spots appear in the shape of mushroom
and pepperoni). The closing endpapers provide a key to the real subjects ("A is
also for alligator," it says demurely), but the occasional guessing game just adds
additional entertainment. You might want to tip the joke from the start for some
audiences if you think the book's initial poker face will confuse them, but the joys
of "I know better than you" correction and of sheer loopiness combine to make
this a winning crazy-salad abecedary. DS
LOBEL, ANITA 
One Lighthouse, One Moon; written and illus. by Anita
Lobel. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15540-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15539-1 
$15.95 
R 
3-7 yrs
The three "chapters" of this picture book, each tackling a different concept, are
connected by way of a rather disaffected-looking cat, Nini, who appears in the
background of the first story ("All Week Long") and the title story, and is the focus
of the middle story ("Nini's Year"). Cumulatively, these pieces reinforce colors,
days of the week, numbers, and seasons with clear, original examples ("Black shoes
on Monday. Red shoes on Tuesday. Blue shoes on Wednesday... "). Lobel's
watercolor and gouache illustrations have a Van Gogh-ish energy even in the near-
monochromatic illustrations of color concepts; each of these striking scenes fo-
cuses the viewer's eye on key items, like the red shoes worn on Tuesday in "All
Week Long" or the six pelicans dozing in "One Lighthouse, One Moon." The
combination of visual variety and effective patterns (leavened by some free-asso-
ciative logic) should make this popular with preschoolers and those who read with
them. FK
LOVE, D. ANNE 
A Year without Rain. 
Holiday House, 2000 
118p
ISBN 0-8234-1488-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The year 1896 brings a terrible drought to the Dakota territory, but twelve-year-
old Rachel is still reluctant to leave her widowed father and accompany her little
brother, John Wesley, on a visit to her aunt in Savannah. Savannah has its revela-
tions, however, including paintings by and letters from Rachel's late mother, which
give Rachel more understanding of her family; a more startling revelation comes
when her father arrives to take his children home and announces that he's getting
remarried. Rachel was fond of Miss Burke as a teacher, but she's adamantly op-
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 411
posed to her becoming a part of the family. To ensure that doesn't happen, Rachel
sets her father's fiancee to the dirtiest, most dangerous, and hopefully most dis-
couraging farm tasks-until a near-tragedy moves Rachel from self-centeredness
to repentance. The characters here are stock historical fiction denizens (there's the
kind but feisty schoolmarm, the urbane suffragette aunt, and even the devoted
Irish servants), and the story's development is predictable. There's nonetheless a
cozy security in the formula and an easy readability to Love's style, and the evoca-
tion of Dakota farm life will appeal to would-be sons and daughters of the prairie.
DS
MAITLAND, BARBARA 
Moo in the Morning; illus. by Andrew Kulman. 
Farrar,
2000 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-374-35038-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
3-6 yrs
Mom has had her fill of"buses going BBLSH! and cars going VROOM!" and all
the "whirring, crunching, screeching" city sounds that assault them early in the
morning, so she and her child narrator are off to visit Uncle Jack out in the coun-
try. There they promptly discover that the cacophony of livestock, rumbling trac-
tors, and the "banging" and "slamming" of these early-rising farmers rivals the
worst noise the city has to offer: out here it's "tweety, and quacky, and clucky, and
MOOEY early in the morning." With suitcases piled in the back of the car, they're
back on the road to home, sweet home in "the big, bright, busy, quiet city." The
wealth of onomatopoeic delights that fairly command listeners to chirp along lend
fresh charm to this rollicking spin on the Country Mouse, City Mouse dilemma;
Kulman's sleek country- and cityscapes slyly suggest that the boxy, heavy-bot-
tomed high-rise apartments of the opening and closing spreads are havens of sta-
bility and peace from dizzying undulation of both urban streets and pastoral hills.
Bedtime stories are a dime a dozen-try this as a wake-me-up instead. EB
MANY, PAUL 
My Life, Take Two. 
Walker, 2000 
[192p]
ISBN 0-8027-8708-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Neal Thackeray is so conditioned to the belief that his future
path includes an MBA and a two-salary marriage with longtime girlfriend Emily
that he can't even conceive of an alternative. He doesn't consciously realize he's
boxed in; all he feels is a vague sense of unease, a dread for his predestined (at least
according to Emily) future. A documentary filmmaking class stirs the embers of
Neal's grief at his father's death six years ago, and a serendipitous encounter with a
childhood acquaintance, Claire, and her artist mother brings back forgotten memo-
ries and presents him with an alternative to his foregone future. Narrator Neal is
a classic underachiever: 
creative, introspective, and sensitive, he blocks out the
world simply by not engaging with it. His policy of non-engagement frustrates his
mother and girlfriend, but his emotional wall is breached by Claire and her mat-
ter-of-fact belief that the artistic life is one worth living. Text from Neal's story-
boards for his film project is scattered throughout, and the directions provide a
vivid sense of place that pervades the novel. Many's insights into the creative
process of one lonely, misunderstood teenager are poignant; unfortunately, char-
acterization is flat. Neal is credible as a confused and unencouraged artist in search
of an outlet, but secondary characters-Emily, Claire, Neal's boss-have little depth,
412 
* 
THE BULLETIN
acting merely as mile-markers on Neal's journey of discovery. His realization that
he can pursue a life as an artist/filmmaker is lengthily detailed in the final fourth of
the book, and in the final pages it is unfortunately told more than shown. While
this title lacks the humor of the author's previous work (TheseAre the Rules, BCCB
4/97), readers will still applaud Neal's taking control of his own future. JMD
MARRIN, ALBERT 
Sitting Bull and His World. Dutton, 2000 
246p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-525-45944-8 
$27.50 
R Gr. 6 up
Historian Marrin turns his hand to a biography of Sitting Bull, chief and hero of
the Hunkpapa. Marrin is careful to explain the difficulties of extracting truth
from context, and he gives a sense of the cultural mindset, both of the white man
and the Indian, that influenced the decisions and events of Sitting Bull's life. This
is not just a thoughtful biography of a legendary warrior, however; this is a record
of the genocidal intent of the American government toward the "Indian problem."
Sitting Bull's life spans nearly two-thirds of the nineteenth century (1831-1890)
and covers a time of enormous conflict and transition in American history. The
book does not stint on the details of Indian violence against white settlers and
soldiers, but it is evident that broken treaties and other provocations are acts of war
that require a response. Descriptions of battles, massacres, and tragedies point out
the overwhelming number of government forces and the dwindling might of the
Indian nations. The sad inevitability of the Indians' fate is obvious throughout: a
people dependent on the promises of an ever-expanding government motivated by
land-lust is doomed. Captioned hotos (often sans dates or credits), extensive notes,
and a lengthy bibliography are included. JMD
MEISTER, CARI 
Tiny Goes to the Library; illus. by Rich Davis. 
Viking,
2000 
32p 
(Viking Easy-to-Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-670-88556-8 
$13.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-14-130488-X 
$3.99 
R Gr. K-2
Fans of Tiny's Bath (BCCB 4/99), beware ... it is time for humongous pooch
Tiny to take a trip to the library. After gathering the necessary materials (library
card, wagon), Tiny and his owner take off for their destination, only to find that
Tiny is not allowed inside. Of what use is Tiny now? Readers find out when
Tiny's brute strength is necessary to haul the young narrator's choices back home.
Davis' vibrant, clear illustrations complement Meister's short, simple sentences,
allowing beginning readers to use picture clues to decode meaning. As with the
author's other installments in the Tiny series, this offers new readers an amusing
visual joke in Tiny's size and an appealingly close relationship between dog and
boy. Though Meister's story misses the opportunity for dramatic tension (just
what kind of mischief might Tiny get into unattended outside the library?), fans of
the previous books will want to check this one out. EAB
NIXON, JOAN LOWERY 
Nobody's There. 
Delacorte, 2000 
200p
ISBN 0-385-32567-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In this mystery/problem novel, teen Abbie Thompson acts out her feelings about
her father's desertion of the family by throwing a rock through his girlfriend's
window and finds herself sentenced by a well-meaning judge to community ser-
vice in the form of regular after-school visits with a senior citizen. However, in-
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 413
stead of the docile granny Abbie assumed she'd be drinking tea with, her Mrs.
Merkel turns out to be a stubborn, cynical, intelligent woman who has decided to
take a bite out of crime and who treats Abbie as her chauffeur, taking her on
outings that turn into stakeouts. Inevitably Abbie ends by trying to figure out
which of the shady citizens of Buckler conked old Mrs. Merkel on the head and
stole a couple of valuable antiques. Unfortunately, this series-worthy pair of detec-
tives is surrounded by cardboard characters out of an old-style Stratemeyer syndi-
cate mystery, including cops who say things like "We have to catch some mean,
no-good crooks who are victimizing people in Buckler." Attempts to bring the
plot up to date (as when Abbie and a friend discuss "an Internet review of a new
film they both wanted to see") are unconvincing; the pop psychologizing is more
plausible but too constant. However, fans of series mysteries and the lesser Judy
Blumes may appreciate this hybrid; others will join the crooks in asking, "Just who
are you supposed to be? Nancy Drew?" FK
OPPEL, KENNETH 
Peg and the Whale; illus. by Terry Widener. 
Simon,
2000 
[3 4 p]
ISBN 0-689-82423-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
By the ripe old age of seven, Peg has so far mastered the art of angling that the only
fish left to catch is a whale. Undeterred by her father's argument that a whale is a
mammal ("If it swims and spends more time in the water than out, it's a fish. And
I'm going to catch me one"), she signs onto the whaler Viper and heads off to
Labrador with a mean crew under first mate Bart Maxwell, who could "curse and
spit better than all the others put together." Bart's jealous to boot, and when Peg
hooks a whale and ties herself to the mast to reel the big one in, Bart cuts her ropes
and sends her off on a Nantucket sleigh ride that lands her in the belly of the beast.
Undaunted by a little darkness and slime, Peg complacently makes herself at home,
feasting on the whale's undigested dinner, fashioning a ladder of broken spars and
pirate bones to climb out the blowhole, and riding her catch back to her parents.
Widener's acrylics perfectly complement Oppel's deadpan humor. Round, doll-
like Peg is dwarfed by the Viper's crew with their bulging muscles and evil slit-eyes
and reduced to little more than a dot on the whale's massive ebony bulk, but she
nonetheless dominates each spread with her fear-naught expression, resolute stance,
and yellow rain slicker as bright as optimism itself. Gather up your tall-tale lovers-
this one's bound to make a splash. EB
OUGHTON, JERRIE 
Perfect Family. 
Houghton, 2000 
199p
ISBN 0-395-98668-0 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
This is a story about coming of age in a small southern town in the 1950s, where,
according to Welcome O'Neal, "gossip worked inside us teenagers, making us
fear, according to the old adage, but for the grace of God, there we went." And so
she goes, and lives to tell the tale. Welcome's retrospective narration takes a look
back to the prom at the end of her sophomore year, and through the summer that
she meets and falls in love with Nicholas Canton, a sweet-talking college boy with
a football scholarship. After breaking up with Nicholas and then seeing him again
at a game, Welcome becomes pregnant, briefly considers having an abortion, and
then moves downstate to stay with relatives until the baby comes. Period atmo-
sphere is created largely through allusions to fads like roller-skating waitresses;
414 
* 
THE BULLETIN
newsmakers like Elvis, James Dean, and Rosa Parks; and the story of a woman
who was a POW in the Philippines during World War II. This last woman (who
bore twins during her incarceration) is one of an unlikely but inspiring string of
female role models-black and white-who support and inspire Welcome, who
has vague dreams of following in the footsteps of her own female pediatrician.
However, the gap between the end of Part II of the novel (when Welcome decides
it would be best for her to go back to school and leave her baby with her childless
aunt and uncle) and Part III (which consists of an invitation to Welcome's gradu-
ation from medical school) is hard to bridge given the social attitudes documented
by the novel and the financial situation of Welcome's family. Although this un-
even novel's desire to inspire sometimes overpowers its realism, readers will come
away with some sense of how this age-old dilemma played out at a specific point in
time. FK
ROCKWELL, ANNE, ad. 
The Boy Who Wouldn't Obey: A Mayan Legend; ad. and
illus. by Anne Rockwell. 
Greenwillow, 2000 
24p
ISBN 0-688-14881-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In this adaptation of a tale from Bierhorst's The Monkey's Haircut and Other Stories
(BCCB 3/86), Chac, "the great lord who made rain," decides he needs a servant.
He dives down to the forest to kidnap one, but "Chac didn't know that the boy
he'd stolen rarely did what he was told." The boy is more trouble than help: he
digs a hole in the sky, cuts down Chac's prize corn stalk, and mistakenly chases
away his master's dinner guests. When the boy steals the god's magical tools, the
theft results in a terrible storm, and Chac is so irritated that he sends the boy back
home. Rockwell's retelling is wordy and overexplanatory, resulting in a slow pace
that doesn't suit the trickster-like nature of the tale. The line-and-watercolor illus-
trations feature smooth geometric shapes, candy colors, and stylized figures that
bear more resemblance to Tomie dePaola than to Mayan art. The compositions
are sometimes cluttered, and the kewpie-doll expressions of the boy and Peter
Max-ian demeanor of the rain god are disconcertingly modern. Rockwell's open-
ing note explains the nature of Mayan "chacs," her interest in Mayan culture, and
her artistic adaptation of Mayan motifs. A short list of references and a source note
are included. Despite some drawbacks, this is an accessible portal to Mayan my-
thology, and a capable reader-aloud should be able to bring it to reasonable life.
JMD
ROOP, PETER 
An Eye for an Eye: A Story of the Revolutionary War; by Peter and
Connie Roop. 
Jamestown Publishers, 2000 
168p 
(Jamestown's American
Portraits)
Library ed. ISBN 0-8092-0587-4 
$9.94
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8092-0628-5 
$5.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Against the backdrop of revolutionary activity near colonial Williamsburg, four-
teen-year-old Samantha "Sam" Byrd leads her own revolution against convention
with her refusal to enjoy domestic tasks over hunting or navigating and her insis-
tence on wearing breeches instead of dresses. When Samantha's spirit of adven-
ture inadvertently puts her brother Henry in the hands of the British, she secretly
joins a privateering effort to rescue him, under the guise of her identical twin,
timid brother James. Despite their characters' anachronistic sensibilities, the Roops
spin a readable series yarn (see also reviews under Lawlor, above) full of historical
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 415
detail and moral dilemmas. Readers may, however, be confused at the dissonance
between Samantha's tendency toward pacific thoughts ("If only we could get along,
she thought") and her violent actions ("In her anger she had raised her gun against
someone"). Nevertheless, Sam's fiery temper and passionate loyalty to her family
will provoke discussion over anger, justice, and guns. EAB
RUBY, Lois 
Soon Be Free. Simon, 2000 
[320p]
ISBN 0-689-83266-4 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
, 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Dana Shannon has scarcely recovered from the thrilling shock of finding the bones
of runaway slave Lizbet Charles behind the wall of the house her parents renovated
for a bed-and-breakfast (StealAway Home, BCCB 2/95); now she again enlists the
help of her junior-high friends-notably her possible love interest, Mike-to help
solve a second related mystery concerning the house's architect, James Baylor
Weaver, and his relationship to the runaway. Dana's narration of her encounters
with nefarious guests bent on discovering a secret about Weaver's life alternates
with chapters following Weaver's experiences as, at thirteen, he ventures into Ken-
tucky to spirit Miz Lizbet's relatives North to freedom. As the tales converge, it
gradually becomes clear that they are linked not only through Miz Lizbet, but also
through a lost treaty that returns land to the Delaware Indians. Much of Dana's
adventure relies on the oft-used let's-not-tell-the-adults-just-yet premise, and the
sassy junior-high levity of her contemporary voice occasionally interferes with the
more serious historic plot. Weaver's trek is launched with a lack of planning that
defies credibility, and the sudden decision of his friend to accompany him adds
little to an already overloaded storyline. Ruby does have a remarkable knack for
keeping the two tales in delicate balance, though, and the tension never eases until
the slaves get their freedom, the Delaware get their restitution, Weaver gets his
career, and Dana gets Mike. Readers who enjoyed StealAway Home will definitely
stick around for this happy ending. EB
SEVERANCE, JOHN B. 
Skyscrapers: How America Grew Up. 
Holiday House,
2000 
112p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1492-2 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Adaptation of construction materials, innovations in access to building services,
and stylistic swings are explored in this survey of nineteenth and twentieth-cen-
tury highrise architecture. Severance narrows his focus to a few of Chicago and
New York's most prestigious innovators and architectural firms, stressing that the
developments that made modern skyscrapers possible involved teams of inventors,
engineers, financiers, material handlers, and laborers, not just the visionary at the
drawing board. As in any survey, many "favorites" are overlooked; in this case, so
are virtually all buildings beyond Severance's designated urban hot spots, until a
few international buildings are examined in the last chapter. Also missing is dis-
cussion of economic pressures to build "up" rather than "out." (Architect Philip
Johnson's provocative quote, "There is no economic need to build skyscrapers
anywhere" opens the book but never receives serious support or challenge.) Crisp
black-and-white photos of the giants, often captured at gloriously dizzying angles,
are well selected, but they too frequently appear on pages removed from textual
discussion. Despite these drawbacks, readers who train their eyes on the sidewalks
rather than the skies may well be induced to look up and ponder the complexity of
416 
* 
THE BULLETIN
design which produced skylines we now take for granted. Index, notes, and bib-
liography are appended. EB
SMITH, CYNTHIA LEITICH 
Jingle Dancer; illus. by Cornelius Van Wright and Ying-
Hwa Hu. 
Morrow, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16242-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16241-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Jenna dreams about jingle dancing at the upcoming pow-wow, but she doesn't
have enough jingles (tin cones that "sing" with each bounce-step) for her dress.
Visits to her female friends and relations solve her problem, as the women lend
Jenna the necessary jingles from their own regalia. Unable to dance at the pow-
wow, each woman requests that Jenna dance for her, and Jenna does: "for Great-
aunt Sis, whose legs ached, ... for Mrs. Scott, who sold fry bread, ... for Elizabeth,
who worked on her big case,.. . and for Grandma Wolfe, who warmed like Sun."
This gently messagey family story is structured along the lines of a traditional tale,
with Jenna as hero traveling to the four directions to gain her prize. The language,
however, is stilted and somewhat formal, slowing the already deliberate pace.
Watercolor illustrations show a modern Jenna and her loving circle of women in
typical middle-class American housing, occasionally accented with a variety of
American Indian art, such as baskets, moccasins, and the dance regalia itself. The
human figures are disproportional (which is especially disappointing in the con-
cluding images of Jenna dancing) and the compositions are somewhat static; still,
the faces of the characters are often expressive and Jenna herself is a winning per-
sonality. Smith explains the importance of traditional dance regalia in an exten-
sive author's note. A short glossary is included. JMD
SORTLAND, BJORN 
The Story of the Search for the Story; tr. by James Anderson;
illus. by Lars Elling. 
Carolrhoda, 2000 
[40p]
ISBN 1-57505-375-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Henry begins his usual nighttime readaloud to his Uncle Richard, but he finds
that the book, The Story ofthe Search for the Story, is largely blank. The next day,
Henry goes in search of the book, finding first an ad for a main character (whom
he seems to become) and then various authors (and one character) who waylay
him on his trip to the library; once at the library (supervised by Shakespeare, Ibsen,
and Cervantes), Henry discovers that the story (and his world) have gone blank
because the censors are trying to end it. With the help of Franz Kafka and Salman
Rushdie, Henry finds his way back and prepares to give his story life by telling it to
his uncle. This is more a lengthy adult fable than a children's story: the hero and
narration are too youthful for young readers familiar with the writers in question,
and the plot doesn't offer much to those that aren't; the inclusion of the character
of Pippi Longstocking among the authors seems a bit odd as well. Though it's
purposive, the censorship plot thread is more effective, giving the story drama and
a point that readers will understand. There's a dark smokiness and an expression-
istic flavor to the artwork, with its velvet-textured dabs of paint, that renders the
scenery otherworldly while giving a certain sharp-edged caricature to the figures
(Isak Dinesen, clearly represented in her skeletal final years, is downright spooky).
Possessed of little audience appeal despite an abundance of good intentions, this
could nonetheless be employed to useful effect in a larger curricular context. Biog-
raphies of the authors appearing in the story are appended. DS
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 417
SPLEAR, ELSIE LEE 
Growing Seasons; illus. by Ken Stark. 
Putnam, 2000 
33p
ISBN 0-399-23460-8 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-5
Splear, who grew up in a tenant farming family in the early 1900s, recalls the cycle
of activities and responsibilities that marked the seasons of the agricultural year.
Each double spread focuses on a particular task, item, or event-potato planting,
the kitchen stove, threshing day-that is depicted in an impressionistic casein paint-
ing and described in a few brief paragraphs on the facing page. The prose is quiet
and informal ("My sisters and I were unhappy when butchering time came around
in the late fall. We hated to think of the pigs and chickens being killed, even
though we knew all along that they were being raised for food"), but somewhat
slow-moving. Stark's handsome illustrations and spot art are as sun-dappled (and
probably romanticized) as a happy memory, but they nonetheless provide as much
information as the accompanying text. Readers with a keenly developed interest
in the "good old days" may enjoy meandering through Splear's account in a single
sitting; more casual browsers will prefer to select favorite scenes and learn the fam-
ily history behind them. EB
ST. GEORGE, JUDITH 
So You Want to Be President?; illus. by David
Small. 
Philomel, 2000 
53p
ISBN 0-399-23407-1 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
See this month's Big Picture, p. 387, for review.
STOJIC, MANYA 
Rain; written and illus. by Manya Stojic. 
Crown, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-80086-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-80085-3 
$15.95 
R 
3-5 yrs
Hold on to your umbrellas as you prepare for a downpour with Stojic's sensory
tribute to the arrival of rain in an arid climate. The text begins with the earth's cry
for rain ("It was hot. Everything was hot and dry. The red soil was hot and dry
and cracked") and moves onto the animals' anticipation of its arrival ("A porcu-
pine sniffed around. 'It's time,' she whispered. 'The rain is coming! I can smell it.
I must tell the zebras'"). As clues to the coming storm (lightning, thunder, rain-
drops) accumulate, each animal uses a different sense-sight, sound, touch, or
taste-to detect the coming water. Hot reds and yellows dominate the pages until
the dark storm clouds fill the clear sky; the rhythmic blue strokes are most effective
as the storm reaches its height ("It rained and it rained and it rained. It rained
until every river gushed and gurgled. It rained until every water hole was full")
with the text placement conveying the strength of the storm. Broad swathes of
color bleed off the paper, adding to the drama. Though Stojic's lack of attention
to fine detail occasionally detracts from the overall dramatic effect of the book,
with animals sometimes appearing two-dimensional and awkward, the broad sweep-
ing style supports the tenor of her story. This evocation of precipitation will elicit
creative responses and rambunctious antics from the storytime crowd. EAB
UHLBERG, MYRON 
Mad Dog McGraw; illus. by Lydia Monks. 
Putnam,
2000 
[26p]
ISBN 0-399-23308-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
"I hate Mad Dog McGraw!" exclaims the young narrator about the scourge of the
neighborhood, and he's got good reason: "He barks like crazy, and he chases
418 
* THE BULLETIN
me. ... He is one mean dog." Our protagonist tries to avoid trouble, but walking
on stilts only works till he falls ("Mad Dog McGraw chases me home. I think I
hear him laughing in between his barks"), the umbrella-powered flight fails when
the wind quits ("Mad Dog McGraw chases me home. I'm pretty sure he's laugh-
ing again"), and the hastily acquired cat, named Bait, has the temerity to make
friends with Mad Dog ("This time I know he's laughing"). While it's no surprise
that all Mad Dog really wants is a little affection and he turns into the narrator's
friend, Uhlberg's text hits just the right notes: it's fanciful enough to be funny but
also rueful enough to be recognizable as a perennial kid dilemma. The careful
structure, with repetition and variation in the plainspoken sentences, will pull lis-
teners right into the story. The mixed-media illustrations are sharp-edged and hip
while remaining upbeat and viewer-friendly: tropical-hued backgrounds provide
color while the cloth and paper collage that compose the figures offer contrasting
textures and lively patterns. The protagonist is an offbeat cutie, with airplane-
wing ears and a bristly red crewcut represented by a few strands sticking straight
up; McGraw is a gimlet-eyed mutt bristling with spiky hair and teeth who turns it
all into a rough-and-tumble charm when rapprochement is achieved. Real-life
canine threats may not be so easily tamed, but this fictional resolution is as satisfy-
ing as a good belly rub. DS
VALGARDSON, W. D. 
Frances. Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2000 
190p
ISBN 0-88899-386-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Frances' businesslike mother has little time for the past and other idle fancies,
focusing her energies instead on the concrete gains of the future. This means that
when Frances finds her great-great-grandmother's diary, written in Icelandic, she
knows better than to turn to her mother; when her grandmother admits defeat as
well, Frances turns to the home for the aged in their small Icelandic-Canadian
community, where she finds a longtime resident, Mr. Johansson, who's prepared
to translate. As Frances gets further into the diary, she's more aware of some
mysteries about her own past-what really did happen to her father, who suppos-
edly disappeared on a camping trip before she was born?-and also more aware of
the lingering of some ghosts and spirits from her own and Iceland's history. This
gently unfolds in a pace that's a bit slow but appropriate to the lakefront summer
languor, and Valgardson evocatively depicts the small Manitoba town where ev-
erybody knows everybody's history. The conclusion is a little uneven, with the
revelation about Frances' father somewhat obvious (her mother lied to cover up
her out-of-wedlock pregnancy) and her ancestor's life slightly confusing. The al-
lure of Frances' search for secreted bits of the diary is undeniable, however, and
Valgardson subtly but effectively weaves in the supernatural element, with idons of
Icelandic legend playing a significant part in the story. DS
WALLACE, 
BARBARA BROOKS 
Ghosts in the Gallery. Karl/Atheneum,
2000 
[144p]
ISBN 0-689-83175-7 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Orphaned Jenny Graymark Bekins travels all the way from China to "the eastern
shore of America" to Graymark House, home of the grandfather she's never met.
Her Uncle Winston doesn't believe her claim to be a Graymark, however, and
instead of being welcomed like the long-lost relative she is, she is relegated to a
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 419
cellar room and life as an unpaid drudge. Jenny weeps over her lot, makes a friend
in Jingle (wicked Uncle Winston's "valley"), and manages to meet her invalid
grandfather. All ends well with the villains revealed and Jenny restored to her
proper place as a Graymark granddaughter. Wallace has a flair for physical detail
that places the reader squarely in the midst of the nineteenth-century action, whether
describing a crowded coach ride, a shadowy hall, or a manor-house kitchen. Char-
acters are somewhat stock, but even so they are capably drawn. Jenny's plight is a
compelling one; unfortunately she is a character more acted upon than acting, and
this makes her a rather uninteresting and passive heroine. The standard gothic
plot involves greed, deception, and attempted murder, and it should lend itself to
an exciting climax; instead, wicked Uncle Winston (who is not so wicked, and
who has discovered the plot against both his niece and his father) explains all in the
last two chapters, a la Hercule Poirot, robbing the denouement of any tension.
Still, fans of the genre will happily follow Jenny's travails. JMD
WAUGH, SYLVIA 
Space Race. 
Delacorte, 2000 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-32766-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
To his neighbor and schoolmates in his British village of Belthrop, Thomas Derwent
is a normal eleven-year-old boy who lives with his normal father, Patrick. Secretly,
however, Thomas and Patrick are on an information-gathering mission from the
planet Ormingat, but when the news comes that it's time to return to Ormingat
and leave the home he's known for five years (and forgo his part of the youngest
shepherd in the Christmas play), Thomas is sad and angry. Things go downhill
from there: an accident separates Thomas and Patrick, sending Thomas into a
hospital with his bridges burned in Belthrop, no idea of Patrick's whereabouts,
and the knowledge that the spaceship is getting ready to leave shortly with or
without his presence; all he can do is utter the few Ormingat words he knows in
the hopes that they will bring the attention of someone who can put the situation
right. The book starts off promisingly, with Waugh reprising the resonant "strangers
among us" theme she employed in The Mennyms (BCCB 5/94) but with a differ-
ent approach; the suspense is effective and the general absence of villainy warming.
The plot does too much veering for too little reason, however. Patrick's reduction
to spaceship-tiny size at the accident seems to happen only to separate him from
his son (and there's even less explanation for his return to normal size), and the
narrative can't seem to decide if it truly wants Thomas to stay or to go (his father's
thought that "this was not a world he wished his son to grow up in. Ormingat
was, in every meaning of the world, a much, much fairer place" is a particular
surprise, especially in light of the book's silence about life on Ormingat). None-
theless, the premise is unusual enough to attract those with a taste for softer-edged
sci-fi. DS
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Emily's First 100 Days of School; written and illus. by Rose-
mary Wells. 
Hyperion, 2000 
[56p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2443-3 
$17.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0507-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Emily Bunny relates details about her first one hundred days at school, including
learning new "number friends" every day, meeting new people, and participating
420 
* THE BULLETIN
in a multitude of activities. The title is a tad misleading, as much of what Emily
relates has to do with events outside of school, but no matter-her play-by-play
commentary is amusing and child-centered. The brief text for each day is a mini-
story, often containing both humor and pathos, and, while not equally successful
in communicating the numeric concept, they all have a ring of childlike truth to
them. Ink and watercolor illustrations evince Wells' signature style: a bright pal-
ette, expressive, anthropomorphized characters, and a cleanly designed but varied
layout that keeps the eye from boredom. Rectangular boxes in various sizes and
colors against white pages contain assorted images of Emily, her school, home,
family, friends, etc. along with Emily's running commentary. Full-page bleeds
and compositions with thematically related borders (e.g., day 52 features Emily
and Granny playing Hearts, with a border of fifty-two playing cards) add versatil-
ity to the layout and keep each spread unique. Nearly every number, most of
which are set in a different colored box than the background, is presented in two
ways: as the numeral itself (23) and as words (twenty-three). A stunning array of
animal personalities, saturated colors, and just plain nifty stuff fills the pages with
the sorts of particulars that youngsters will pore over with delight. This is not a
counting book, exactly, but more of a fun-with-numbers book that should attract
even math-phobic children. The story of Emily's one hundred days is wholesome
and heartening, and a strong sense of family and community is indicated unobtru-
sively but effectively. JMD
WISLER, G. CLIFTON 
All for Texas: A Story of Texas Liberation.
See Lawlor, p. 408, for review.
WINTER, JEANETTE, ad. 
The House that Jack Built; ad. and illus. by Jeanette
Winter. 
Dial, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2524-8 
$13.99 
R 
3-7 yrs
In this reimagining of the familiar nursery rhyme, Winter uses her ability for cre-
ating and combining winning visual elements to excellent effect. The text (with
rebus illustrations taking the place of important nouns) is on the verso page while
Jack's house is on the recto; cutaway views of the house allow the viewer to see
inside and to keep track of the ongoing action. While the familiar text is repetitive
and has distinct dullness possibilities, Winters' acrylic interpretation adds new life
to this old rhyme with a refreshing palette and a jolly tone. Her expressive charac-
ters act out the plot for the benefit of the viewer and give a sense of theater to the
compositions (Jack looks over his shoulder at the viewer from the very first page,
thus drawing the viewer effortlessly into the mise en scene). Storytimes and begin-
ning readers will benefit from Winter's slightly askew view of this old tale. JMD
WONG, JANET S. 
Buzz; illus. by Margaret Chodos-Irvine. 
Harcourt,
2000 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-15-201923-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
A little boy comments on the busy morning minutes when he and his parents are
getting ready for their day. The boy is the first one awake, and he notes that
outside his window "a bee eats breakfast in a big red flower," while his parents'
alarm clock ("BUZZZbuzzzBUZZZbuzzz Mommy and Daddy snore") announces
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 421
that it's morning. From the buzzing of "Daddy's silver razor" to the buzzing of the
gardener, who "mows grass across the street," to the buzz of the blender as it whips
up a banana shake, the little boy contentedly organizes his day around familiar
morning sounds. The end circles back to the beginning as the boy kisses Grandma
hello and Mommy goodbye "so she can fly BUZZ outside like a busy bee." Chodos-
Irvine's use of various print-making techniques results in illustrations that are
strongly geometric and graphically clean, in springtime colors that suit the cheer-
ful tone of the text. The humor in both text and pictures contributes to the light-
hearted atmosphere, and the gentle predictability of the chronology of events is
reassuring. Participatory buzzing is optional. JMD
YOLEN, JANE 
Queen's Own Fool: A Novel ofMary Queen of Scots; by Jane Yolen
and Robert J. Harris. 
Philomel, 2000 
390p
ISBN 0-399-23380-6 
$19.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Nicola is traveling with her uncle's troupe of entertainers when she comes to the
attention of the young queen of France (known to history as Mary, Queen of
Scots), who takes the girl into her service as a jester. Though enchanted by the
queen and royal life, Nicola struggles with the onerous demands of court etiquette
and the politics that drive the French court (and the religious civil war that leaves
Huguenots dead in the castle courtyard). Upon the early death of King Francis,
Nicola accompanies Mary to Scotland and assists her through her queenly travails
there-the struggle to survive John Knox's disapproval, the terrible marriage with
Darnley, the murder of Mary's secretary David Riccio (a favored friend of Nicola),
the alliance with Bothwell, abdication, imprisonment and escape, ending when
Mary sends Nicola back to France as she herself travels to England. Nicola is a
serviceable character and a useful storytelling device, since her distance and unfa-
miliarity with custom allow for plausible explanation and outsider perspective.
The real heroine here, however, is Mary: Yolen and Harris paint a full-blooded
and admiring portrait of a high-spirited and charismatic woman; their decision to
treat her as largely innocent of the plots that involved her gives her character moral
rectitude but at the expense of statesmanship and perspicacity, which makes her a
bit on the lightweight side as a queen but a compelling and romantic figure. Six-
teenth-century court and political life is well evoked without losing the story in the
framework (readers familiar with the background will have an easier time, but
there's also drama enough to keep novices involved), and the events will provide
all the pageantry and emotion that royal-watchers require. Brief authors' notes
testify to Nicola's reality and provide a precis of Mary's imprisonment and execu-
tion in England, but readers looking to discover the fates of the other characters
will have to search on their own. DS
422 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Burgess
African Americans-stories:
Cummings; Grimm
Aging-fiction: Haddix
Airplanes: Hunter
Aliens-fiction: Cowley; Waugh
ALPHABET BOOKS: Lester
American Indians: Marrin
American Indians-fiction: Ruby
American Indians-stories: Smith
Animals-fiction: Avi; Bauer;
LaMarche
Animals-stories: Barrett; Denslow;
Downey; Maitland; Stojic
Architecture: Severance
Arithmetic: Wells
Art: Ehlert; Freymann
Art and artists: Gherman
Art and artists-fiction: Bowler;
Many
Aunts-fiction: Love
Aunts and uncles-fiction: Heynen
Aviation: Hunter
BIOGRAPHIES: Aronson; Barasch;
Brown, D.; Gherman; Marrin
Birthdays-fiction: Borden
Bravery-stories: Cowell; Fitzpatrick
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Etchemendy; Roop
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Cummings
Cats-fiction: Bauer
Cats-stories: Lobel; Johnson, P.
Circuses-stories: Clements
City life: Severance
City life-stories: Grimm; Maitland
Civil War-fiction: Lawlor
Clowns-stories: Clements
Colors: Lobel
Communication: Barasch
CONCEPT BOOKS: Lobel
Construction-stories: Banks
COUNTING BOOKS: Barrett;
Freymann
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Harrison; Heynen; Nixon;
Wallace
Dancers and dancing-stories: Smith
Death and dying-fiction: Bowler;
Freymann-Weyr; Harrison; Many
Death and dying-stories: Grimm
Dogs-fiction: Meister
Dogs-stories: Clements; Uhlberg
Ethics and values: Etchemendy;
Haddix; Heynen; Oughton;
Smith
Explorers and exploring: Aronson;
Brown, D.
FABLES: Sortland
Families-fiction: Hoobler
Families-stories: Denslow; Smith;
Wong
FANTASY: Avi; Bauer; Bowler;
Langton; Lee; Valgardson
Farm life: Splear
Farm life-stories: Downey;
Maitland
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Freymann-Weyr; Love; Nixon
Fathers and sons-fiction: Clements;
Waugh
Fathers and sons-stories: Banks;
Cowell
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 423
Fear-stories: Cowell; Fitzpatrick;
Uhlberg
Films and filmmaking-fiction:
Many
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Daly; Datlow; Hayes; Hopkins;
Rockwell
Friendship-fiction: Burgess;
Freymann-Weyr; Friedman;
Harrison
Friendship-stories: Smith
FUNNY STORIES: Dorros; Evans
Grandfathers-fiction: Bowler;
Wallace
Grandmothers-fiction: LaMarche
HISTORICAL FICTION: Borden;
Burgess; Hausman; Hoobler;
Lawlor; Love; Oughton; Roop;
Wallace; Wisler; Yolen
History, U.S.: Gherman; Lawlor;
Love; Marrin; Splear; St. George;
Wisler
History, world: Aronson
Horses-fiction: Jeppson
Language arts: Lester
Latinos-folklore: Hayes
Literature, world: Sortland
Mayas-folklore: Rockwell
Mornings-stories: Wong
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Cowley; Valgardson
MYSTERIES: Harrison; Nixon;
Ruby
Nature study: Christian
Neighbors-stories: Johnson, P.
Numbers: Lobel; Wells
NURSERY RHYMES: Winter
Pirates-fiction: Hausman
POETRY: Brown, C.; James
Pregnancy-fiction: Oughton
Presidents: St. George
Princesses-stories: Daly
Puppets-stories: Fitzpatrick
Queens-fiction: Yolen
Reading aloud: Borden; James
Reading, beginning: Meister
Reading, easy: Barasch; James;
Jeppson; Winter
Reading, reluctant: Avi; Barasch;
Borden; Brown, C.
Revolutionary war-fiction: Borden;
Roop
RHYMING STORIES: Cummings;
Ehlert
Rocks: Christian
School-stories: Dorros; Wells
SCIENCE FICTION: Cowley;
Etchemendy; Haddix; Waugh
Seasons: Lobel
SHORT STORIES: Datlow
Sisters-fiction: Freymann-Weyr
Slavery-fiction: Lee; Ruby
Social studies: St. George
Sounds-stories: Maitland; Wong
Storytelling: Daly; Hayes; Hopkins;
Rockwell
Storytime: Denslow; Downey;
Fitzpatrick; Lester; Maitland;
Oppel; Stojic; Uhlberg; Wong
Summer-fiction: Friedman;
LaMarche
Swans-stories: Bunting
Teachers-stories: Dorros
Theater-fiction: Hoobler
Time travel-fiction: Langton
Transportation: Hunter
Voyages and travel: Aronson; Brown,
D.
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Hausman
Voyages and travel-stories: Cowell;
Johnson, D.; Oppel
Weather-stories: Stojic
West, the-stories: Hopkins
Whales-stories: Oppel
Wolves-stories: Denslow
Women's studies: Brown, D.
Writers and writing-fiction: Fried-
man; Sortland
i- ^ ®
424 
* 
THE BULLETIN
THE
BULLET
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
AUTHOR/TITLE INDEX, VOLUME 53
SEPTEMBER, 1999-JULY/AUGUST, 2000
100th Day Worries. Cuyler. 206.
123 Pop! Isadora. 359.
145th Street. Myers. 250.
A Is for... ? Horenstein. 95.
A Is for AARRGH! Brooke. 85.
A Is for Salad. Lester. 409.
A to Z Do You Ever Feel Like Me? Hausman.
172.
Aardema. Koi and the Kola Nuts. 162.
Aaseng. Construction. 268.
Abel's Moon. Hughes. 96.
Abelove. Saying It Out Loud. 44.
About Face. Wood. 111.
Absolutely Lucy. Cooper. 311.
Accept No Substitutes! Mierau. 367.
Adaline Falling Star. Osborne. 251.
Adler, C. Winning. 45.
Adler, D. America's Champion Swimmer. 269.
. How Tall, How Short, How Faraway.
4.
Adoff. Basket Counts. 236.
. Touch the Poem. 201.
Aesop's Fox. Sogabe. 108.
Agee. Elvis Lives! 236.
Ahlberg. Bravest Ever Bear. 350.
Airfield. Ingold. 174.
Alderson. Tale of the Turnip. 82.
Alexander. Do You Remember the Color Blue?
237.
Alice in Wonderland. Carroll. 125.
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. Carroll. 125.
Alida's Song. Paulsen. 26.
All Alone in the Universe. Perkins. 65.
All for Texas. Wisler. 408.
All the Answers. Lemieux. 213.
Almond. Kit's Wilderness. 163.
Alone at Ninety Foot. Holubitsky. 132.
Alternative American Religions. Stein. 257.
Altman. Death. 304.
Amazing Life of Benjamin Franklin. Giblin.
209.
America's Champion Swimmer. Adler. 269.
Anderson, L. Speak. 45.
Anderson, M. Burger Wuss. 4.
Angel Baby. Cummings. 395.
Angels of Mercy. Kuhn. 138.
Angus, Thongs and Full-Frontal Snogging.
Rennison. 329.
Anne Frank. Pressler. 290.
Ann's Story. Nixon. 218.
Another Important Book. Brown. 167.
Antle. Playing Solitaire. 201.
Appelt. Kissing Tennessee. 305.
Are We There Yet, Daddy? Walters. 152.
Armstrong. In My Hands. 64.
Arnold, C. Easter Island. 269.
Arnold, M. Bravest of Us All. 350.
Aronson. Sir Walter Ralegh and the Quest for
El Dorado. 388.
Arthur Yorinks's The Flying Latke. Yorinks.
112.
Ashabranner. New African Americans. 120.
Ashbe. What's Inside? 351.
Asphalt Angels. Holtwijk. 17.
Atkins. When Jeff Comes Home. 83.
Auch. Road to Home. 351.
Aunt Clara Brown. Lowery. 140.
Aunt Pitty Patty's Piggy. Aylesworth. 121.
Auntie Claus. Primavera. 147.
Avi. Ereth's Birthday. 389.
.Midnight Magic. 121.
.Ragweed. 46.
.Second Sight. 83.
Axtell. We're Going on a Lion Hunt. 305.
Aylesworth. Aunt Pitty Patty's Piggy. 121.
.Full-Belly Bowl. 122.
Babe Didrikson Zaharias. Freedman. 52.
Baby Born in Bethlehem. Hickman. 95.
Bacho. Boxing in Black and White. 163.
Bachrach. Nazi Olympics. 237.
Bad Beginning. Snicket. 32
IN
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 425
Bad Dreams. Fine. 356.
Ballard. Tonight and Tomorrow. 305.
Banks. Howie Bowles, Secret Agent. 122.
.Night Worker. 389.
Barasch. Radio Rescue. 389.
Bark, George. Feiffer. 91.
Barn Burner. Willis. 341.
Barnyard Prayers. Godwin. 317.
Barrett. I Knew Two Who Said Moo. 390.
Bartholomew. White Dove. 306.
Bartoletti. Kids on Strike! 123.
Basket Counts. Adoff. 236.
Basket Moon. Ray. 27.
Bats! Pringle. 291.
Batten. Winking, Blinking Sea. 352.
Battle Dress. Efaw. 315.
Battle-Lavert. Music in Derrick's Heart. 238.
. Shaking Bag. 269.
Bauer, C. Harley Like a Person. 306.
Bauer, M. Early Winter. 46.
Bauer, S. Cat of a Different Color. 390.
Bausum. Dragon Bones and Dinosaur Eggs.
307.
Be Blest. Owens. 103.
Be First in the Universe. Spinner. 223.
Bear's Day. Ernst. 277.
Bearhide and Crow. Johnson. 322.
Beautiful Butterfly. Sierra. 332.
Bebe's Bad Dream. Karas. 361.
Because of Winn-Dixie. DiCamillo. 354.
Behind the Wheel. Wong. 190.
Being with Henry. Brooks. 309.
Bell, A. Anne Frank. 290.
Bell, H. Songs of Power. 270.
Beller. Confederate Ladies of Richmond. 164.
Bembo's Zoo. de Vicq de Cumptich. 313.
Beneduce. Jack and the Beanstalk. 123.
Bennett. Zink. 83.
Berg. Opening Moves. 238.
Best. Three Cheers for Catherine the Great! 164.
Best Place. Meddaugh. 142.
Beyond Mayfield. Nelson. 102.
Beyond Paradise. Hertenstein. 15.
Bial. Handful of Dirt. 307.
. One-Room School. 46.
Bierhorst. People with Five Fingers. 239.
Big Box. Morrison. 216.
Big Cheese for the White House. Fleming. 11.
Big Numbers. Packard. 251.
Big Talk. Fleischman. 277.
Big Wide-Mouthed Frog. 84.
Big Wolf and Little Wolf. Denslow. 396.
Big YAWN. Faulkner. 128.
Billingsley. Folk Keeper. 47.
Birthday Room. Henkes. 15
Bishop, N. Digging for Bird-Dinosaurs. 308.
Bishop, R. Wonders. 217.
Bisson. Be First in the Universe. 223.
Black Hands, White Sails. McKissack. 100.
Blackberry Booties. Gardella. 279.
Blackwater. Bunting. 7.
Blackwood. Moonshine. 84.
Blake. Zagazoo. 123.
Blakeslee. Summer Battles. 239.
Bliss. Littlest Matryoshka. 165.
Block. Violet & Claire. 5.
Bloor. Crusader. 124.
Blue Willow. Conrad. 126.
Blues of Flats Brown. Myers. 217.
Bluish. Hamilton. 54.
Blume. Places I Never Meant to Be. 5.
Bo. Edge. 165.
Bob and 6 More Christmas Stories. Boynton.
124.
Bodkin. Ghost of the Southern Belle. 47.
Body of Christopher Creed. Plum-Ucci. 290.
Boeke. Asphalt Angel. 17.
Bogacki. My First Garden. 202.
Boltzmon! Sleator. 150.
Bond. Just Like a Baby. 6.
Boock. Dare Truth or Promise. 47.
Book of Flies Real or Otherwise. Michelson. 23.
Book of the Lion. Cadnum. 203.
Borden. Sleds on Boston Common. 391.
Borrowed Light. Fienberg. 355.
Both Sides Now. Pennebaker. 370.
Bouncing Time. Hubbell. 320.
Bow Wow. Murphy. 24.
Bowdish. Brooklyn, Bugsy, and Me. 270.
Bowler. River Boy. 391.
Boxing in Black and White. Bacho. 163.
Boy Named Giotto. Guarnieri. 171.
Boy Who Wouldn't Obey. Rockwell. 414.
Boynton. Bob. 124.
Bradby. Momma, Where Are You From? 240.
Bradley. One-of-a-Kind Mallie. 6.
Brandford. Fated Sky. 166.
Brave Potatoes. Speed. 374.
Bravest Ever Bear. Ahlberg. 350.
Bravest of Us All. Arnold. 350.
Braybrooks. Plenty of Pockets. 352.
Bridges. Through My Eyes. 166.
Brooke, P. Jake's Orphan. 270.
Brooke, W. A Is for AARRGH! 85.
Brooklyn, Bugsy, and Me. Bowdish. 270.
Brooks, B. Throwing Smoke. 308.
Brooks, M. Being with Henry. 309.
Brother Sun, Sister Moon. Mayo. 250.
Brothers Gruesome. Elgar. 276.
Brown, C. Dutch Sneakers and Flea Keepers.
392.
Brown, D. Rare Treasure. 166.
.Uncommon Traveler. 392.
Brown, M. Another Important Book. 167.
Bruchac. Pushing Up the Sky. 202.
. Sacajawea. 271.
426 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Bryan. Jump Back, Honey. 169.
Buchholz. Collector of Moments. 202.
Buckaroo. Traylor. 34.
Bud. O'Malley. 368.
Bud, Not Buddy. Curtis. 89.
Budiansky. World According to Horses. 309.
Building the Book. Macaulay. 141.
Bullfrog Pops! Walton. 110.
Bunting. Blackwater. 7.
.Rudi's Pond. 167.
.Swan in Love. 393.
.Wanna Buy an Alien? 352.
Burger Wuss. Anderson. 4.
Burgess. Copper Treasure. 393.
.Kite. 353.
Burleigh. Hercules. 85.
Burton. Whale Comedian. 86.
"Bury Me Not in a Land of Slaves." Hansen.
357.
Butterfly. Polacco. 371.
Buttons. Cole. 240.
Butts. Eugenie Clark. 203.
Buzz. Wong. 420.
Byars. Me Tarzan. 353.
Bynum. Otis. 309.
Cabrera. Over in the Meadow. 310.
Cadnum. Book of the Lion. 203.
Caldwell. Ocean Within. 167.
Calhoun. Firegold. 7.
Callan. Dirt on Their Skirts. 220.
Calvert. Michael, Wait for Me. 271.
Cameron. Gloria's Way. 204.
Camp. Why? 8.
Can You Feel the Thunder? McElfresh. 22.
Cannibal in the Mirror. Fleischman. 315.
Carbone. Sarah and the Naked Truth. 204.
Care Factor Zero. Clark. 274.
Carey. Molly's Fire. 272.
Carle. Does a Kangaroo Have a Mother, Too?
272.
Carlson. You're On! 8.
Carmi. Samir and Yonatan. 273.
Carrick. Upside-Down Cake. 125.
Carroll. Alice in Wonderland. 125.
.Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. 125.
Cart. Tomorrowland. 126.
Carter, A. Crescent Moon. 168.
Carter, D. Elements of Pop-Up. 168.
Caseley. Praying to A.L. 273.
Casey Jones's Fireman. Farmer. 170.
Castle Diary. Platt. 147.
Cat of a Different Color. Bauer. 390.
Cat's Play. Ernst. 277.
Cazet. Minnie and Moo Go to Paris. 48.
_ . Minnie and Moo Save the Earth. 48.
Cello of Mr. O. Cutler. 127.
Century That Was. Giblin. 281.
Chameleon Wore Chartreuse. Hale. 357.
Charlie's Run. Hobbs. 245.
Charlip. Sleepytime Rhyme. 48.
Child's Calendar. Updike. 257.
Chinese Book of Animal Powers. Huang. 133.
Chinese Cinderella. Mah. 98.
Christian. If You Find a Rock. 393.
Christmas in Heaven. Williams. 340.
Cinderella 2000. Jukes. 175.
Circle of Three. Farber. 207.
Circle Opens: First Steps. Pierce. 253.
Circus Family Dog. Clements. 394.
Clark, M. Care Factor Zero. 274.
Clarke, J. Lost Day. 86.
.Night Train. 310.
Cleary. Ramona's World. 9.
Clements. Circus Family Dog. 394.
Clemesha. My Dog Toby. 381.
Cleopatra VII. Gregory. 130.
Climo. Magic & Mischief. 49.
Cline-Ransome. Satchel Paige. 205.
Cockroach Cooties. Yep. 379.
Coffin Quilt. Rinaldi. 182.
Cohen. Impeachment of William Jefferson
Clinton. 311.
Cold Little Duck, Duck, Duck. Peters. 327.
Cole. Buttons. 240.
Collector of Moments. Buchholz. 202.
Collins. Signs & Wonders. 87.
Colman. Girls. 205.
Colors of Us. Katz. 136.
Comes a Wind. White. 258.
Confederate Ladies of Richmond. Beller. 164.
Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen.
Sheldon. 149.
Conly. What Happened on Planet Kid. 274.
Conrad. Blue Willow. 126.
Construction. Aaseng. 268.
Cookie Company. Venokur. 226.
Cooney. Tune in Anytime. 87.
.What Janie Found. 241.
Cooper, I. Absolutely Lucy. 311.
Cooper, S. King of Shadows. 126.
Copper Elephant. Rapp. 181.
Copper Treasure. Burgess. 393.
Corey. You Forgot Your Skirt, Amelia Bloomer!
205.
Cormier. Frenchtown Summer. 88.
Corry. Here Comes Pontus! 406.
Cosmo and the Robot. Pinkney. 328.
Cosmos Coyote and William the Nice. Heynen.
404.
Couloumbis. Getting Near to Baby. 88.
Cowell. Hiccup the Seasick Viking. 394.
Cowley. Starbright and the Dream Eater. 395.
Cox. Mean, Mean Maureen Green. 206.
.Weird Stories from the Lonesome Cafe.
275.
Crazy Jack. Napoli. 144.
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 427
Creative Life. Leuzzi. 176.
Creech. Wanderer. 275.
Crescent Moon. Carter. 168.
Crimi. Don't Need Friends. 169.
Crooked. McNeal. 179.
Cross. Tightrope. 127.
Crossing Jordan. Fogelin. 278.
Crossing the Trestle. Slate. 150.
Crowe. Waiting for Dolphins. 276.
Crusader. Bloor. 124.
Crystal Pool. McCaughrean. 22.
Cuba. Wolf. 189.
Cummings. Angel Baby. 395.
Curlee. Liberty. 311.
Curry. Stolen Life. 88.
Curtis. Bud, Not Buddy. 89.
Cutler. Cello of Mr. 0. 127.
. 'Gator Aid. 9.
Cuyler. 100th Day Worries. 206.
Dadey. King of the Kooties. 89.
Dahling, if You Luv Me, Would You Please,
Please Smile. Khan. 137.
Daisy and the Beastie. Simmons. 255.
Daisy Says Coo! Simmons. 294.
Daisy's Day Out. Simmons. 294.
Daisy's Favorite Things. Simmons. 150
Daldry. Teenage Guy's Survival Guide. 10.
Daly. Fair, Brown & Trembling. 395.
Dance for Three. Plummer. 219.
Dancer. Hewett. 16.
Dancing Pig. Sierra. 107.
Dancing with an Alien. Logue. 248.
Danziger. Snail Mail No More. 276.
Dare Truth or Promise. Boock. 47.
Datlow. Wolf at the Door. 396.
Daughter. Moore. 143.
Dave at Night. Levine. 20.
David Goes to School. Shannon. 184.
David v. God. Pearson. 289.
David. Land of Hungry Armadillos. 312.
Day, a Dog. Vincent. 294.
Days Like This. James. 406.
de Vicq de Cumptich. Bembo's Zoo. 313.
Dear Daisy, Get Well Soon. Smith. 222.
Dear Juno. Pak. 180.
Dear Mrs. Ryan, You're Ruining My Life. Jones.
284.
Death. Altman. 304.
Deep in the Jungle. Yaccarino. 260.
Define "Normal." Peters. 252.
Delacre. Salsa Stories. 312.
Demas. Disappearing Island. 313.
. If Ever I Return Again. 354.
Denslow. Big Wolf and Little Wolf. 396.
Dessen. Keeping the Moon. 49.
Deuker. Night Hoops. 241.
Devil and His Boy. Horowitz. 246.
Diary of Melanie Martin. Weston. 378.
Diaz. Elements of Pop-Up. 168.
DiCamillo. Because of Winn-Dixie. 354.
Digging for Bird-Dinosaurs. Bishop. 308.
Ding Dong Ding Dong. Palatini. 145.
Dinosaur! Sis. 374.
Dinosaurs at the Ends of the Earth. Floca. 242.
Dinosaur's New Clothes. Goode. 129.
Dirt Boy. Slangerup. 332.
Dirt on Their Skirts. Rappaport. 220.
Disappearing Island. Demas. 313.
DiTerlizzi. Jimmy Zangwow's Out-of-This-
World Moon Pie Adventure. 314.
Dive. Griffin. 130.
Divorced Kids Club. Valgardson. 186.
Do Donkeys Dance? Walsh. 294.
Do You Remember the Color Blue? Alexander.
237.
Does a Kangaroo Have a Mother, Too? Carle.
272.
DogBreath Victorious. Henry. 211.
Dogs Have the Strangest Friends. Masson. 365.
Don't Call It Paradise. Pearson. 146.
Don't Need Friends. Crimi. 169.
Don't Tell Anyone. Kehret. 322.
Doorman. Grimm. 401.
Dork in Disguise. Gorman. 12.
Darrie. Lottie's Princess Dress. 90.
Dorros. Fungus That Ate My School. 397.
Dove Song. Franklin. 91.
Dovey Coe. Dowell. 355.
Dowell. Dovey Coe. 355.
Down the Winding Road. Johnson. 246.
Down to the Sea with Mr. Magee. Van Dusen.
336.
Downey. Flea's Sneeze. 397.
Downsiders. Shusterman. 31.
Dragon Bones and Dinosaur Eggs. Bausum.
307.
Drawing Lessons from a Bear. McPhail. 249.
Drawing Lessons. Mack. 249.
Dreaming. Greenstein. 318.
Duffy. Turning Point Inventions: The Clock.
314.
Dunbar. Jump Back, Honey. 169.
Duncan. I Walk at Night. 207.
Dust from Old Bones. Forrester. 51.
Dutch Sneakers and Flea Keepers. Brown. 392.
Earthly Astonishments. Jocelyn. 212.
Early Winter. Bauer. 46.
Easter Island. Arnold. 269.
Eat Your Words. Jones. 19.
Ebb and Flo and the New Friend. Simmons.
107.
Edge. Bo. 165.
Edgett. Touchdown Mars! 379.
Edwards, J. Little Bo. 242.
Edwards, P. Worrywarts. 90.
Eensy-Weensy Spider. Hoberman. 245.
428 
* THE BULLETIN
Efaw. Battle Dress. 315.
Ehlert. Market Day. 398.
Einstein. Severance. 30.
Eleanor Hill. Kline. 176.
Elements of Pop-Up. Carter. 168.
Elevator Family. Evans. 398.
Elffers. One Lonely Sea Horse. 399.
Elgar. Brothers Gruesome. 276.
Elizabeth I. Lasky 138.
Elske. Voigt. 152.
Elvis Lives! Agee. 236.
Elympics. Kennedy. 175.
Emily's First 100 Days of School. Wells. 419.
Emma and the Coyote. Ruurs. 148.
Emperor's Egg. Jenkins. 174.
Enchanted Runner. Little. 20.
English. Francie. 50.
Ereth's Birthday. Avi. 389.
Ernst. Bear's Day. 277.
. Cat's Play. 277.
. Goldilocks Returns. 315.
Escape to the Forest. Radin. 253.
Estrellita de Oro. Hayes. 403.
Etchemendy. Power of Un. 398.
Eugenie Clark. Butts. 203.
Evans. Elevator Family. 398.
Everything I Know about Pirates. Lichtenheld.
286.
Exchange Student. Gilmore. 53.
Executioner's Daughter. Williams. 340.
Eye for an Eye. Roop. 414.
Face in Every Window. Nolan. 144.
Facing the Dark. Harrison. 402.
Fair, Brown & Trembling. Daly. 395.
Fairies' Ring. Yolen. 191.
Family Trait. Martin. 99.
Faraway Home. Kurtz. 323.
Farber. Circle of Three. 207.
Farmer. Casey Jones's Fireman. 170.
Fast Company. Smith. 69.
Fated Sky. Brandford. 166.
Faulkner. Big YAWN. 128.
Fearnley. Mr. Wolfs Pancakes. 207.
Feiffer. Bark, George. 91.
Ferrie. World Turned Upside Down. 170.
Fienberg. Borrowed Light. 355.
Figuring Out Frances. Willner-Pardo. 74.
Fine. Bad Dreams. 356.
Finkelstein. Way Things Never Were. 10.
Firegold. Calhoun. 7.
Firework-Maker's Daughter. Pullman. 181.
First Decade: Curtain Going Up. Hoobler. 404.
First Horse I See. Keehn. 19.
Fitzpatrick. Lizzy and Skunk. 399.
Flea's Sneeze. Downey. 397.
Fleischman. Big Talk. 277.
_ 
Cannibal in the Mirror. 315.
.___ Mind's Eye. 50.
Fleming. Big Cheese for the White House. 11.
Floca. Dinosaurs at the Ends of the Earth. 242.
Florian. Mammalabilia. 242.
.Winter Eyes. 91.
Fogelin. Crossing Jordan. 278.
Folk Keeper. Billingsley. 47.
Fool Reversed. Whitcher. 227.
Forrester. Dust from Old Bones. 51.
Fox. Harriet, You'll Drive Me Wild! 356.
Fradin. Ida B. Wells. 278.
. Is There Life on Mars? 170.
Frances. Valgardson. 418.
Francie. English. 50.
Frank, E. Life Is Funny. 316.
Frank, L. Oy, Joy! 51.
Frankenfrog. Kennedy. 57.
Franklin. Dove Song. 91.
Fraser. Vicksburg. 171.
Fredeen. Nellie Bly. 208.
Freedman. Babe Didrikson Zaharias. 52.
Freeman. Trouble with Cats. 279.
Frenchtown Summer. Cormier. 88.
Freymann. One Lonely Sea Horse. 399.
Freymann-Weyr. When I Was Older. 400.
Friedman. How I Survived My Summer Vaca-
tion. 400.
Friends and Enemies. Gaeddert. 208.
Fritz. Why Not, Lafayette? 128.
Froggie Went A-Courting. Priceman. 329.
Full-Belly Bowl. Aylesworth. 122.
Fungus That Ate My School. Dorros. 397.
Gaeddert. Friends and Enemies. 208.
Galassi. Boy Named Giotto. 171.
Gallo. Time Capsule. 92.
Gammell. Twigboy. 316.
Gantos. Jack on the Tracks. 11.
Gardella. Blackberry Booties. 279.
Garden of Eden Motel. Hamilton. 95.
Garden. Year They Burned the Books. 11.
Gargoyle on the Roof. Prelutsky. 66.
Gaskins. What Are You? 52.
'Gator Aid. Cutler. 9.
Geeslin. How Nanita Learned to Make Flan.
92.
Geography of Hope. Haskins. 172.
George. How to Talk to Your Cat. 279.
. How to Talk to Your Dog. 280.
Gershator. Tiny and Bigman. 129.
Gerstein. Queen Esther, the Morning Star. 209.
Getting Near to Baby. Couloumbis. 88.
Gherman. Norman Rockwell. 401.
Ghost Cats. Shreve. 149.
Ghost in the Tokaido Inn. Hoobler. 17.
Ghost of Lizard Light. Woodruff. 191.
Ghost of the Southern Belle. Bodkin. 47.
Ghost Stallion. Williams. 189.
Ghosts in the Gallery. Wallace. 418.
Gib and the Gray Ghost. Snyder. 222.
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 
429
Gibbons. My Baseball Book. 280.
. My Soccer Book. 280.
. Rabbits, Rabbits & More Rabbits! 243.
. Santa Who? 53.
Giblin. Amazing Life of Benjamin Franklin.
209.
. Century That Was. 281.
Gift for Ampato. Vande Griek. 186.
Gift. Keselman. 175.
Gilliland. House of Wisdom. 14.
.Steamboat! 243.
Gilmore. Exchange Student. 53.
Girl Who Struck Out Babe Ruth. Patrick. 369.
Girls. Colman. 205.
Girls. Koss. 362.
Girls Think of Everything. Thimmesh. 335.
Glenn. Split Image. 356.
Gloria's Way. Cameron. 204.
Glover. Savion. 210.
Go to Sleep, Daisy. Simmons. 150.
Godwin. Barnyard Prayers. 317.
Gold. Special Fate. 317.
Goldilocks Returns. Ernst. 315.
Good as Goldie. Palatini. 251.
Good Luck Cat. Harjo. 281.
Good Night, Good Knight. Thomas. 225.
Good Night, Maman. Mazer. 141.
Good Sports. Kauchak. 136.
Good-bye for Today. Roop. 292.
Goodbye, Amanda the Good. Shreve. 221.
Goode. Dinosaur's New Clothes. 129.
Goodman. Peregrine. 318.
Gorman. Dork in Disguise. 12.
Gotta Go! Gotta Go! Swope. 334.
Gottesman. Play Like a Girl. 59.
Gourley. Welcome to Felicity's World, 1774.
12.
Govenar. Osceola. 244.
Gralley. Hogula. 54.
Grandmother Winter. Root. 66.
Granfield. High Flight. 129.
Grannyman. Schachner. 184.
Gray. When Uncle Took the Fiddle. 93.
Great Escape from City Zoo. Riddle. 28.
Greene. Little Golden Lamb. 318.
Greenstein. Dreaming. 318.
Greenwood. Pioneer Thanksgiving. 93
Gregory. Cleopatra VII. 130.
Griffin. Dive. 130.
Griffith. How Many Candles? 13.
Grimm. Doorman. 401.
Grizz! Kimmel. 247.
Grooming of Alice. Naylor. 326.
Grove. Starplace. 13.
Growing Seasons. Splear. 417.
Guarnieri. Boy Named Giotto. 171.
Guy Time. Weeks. 338.
Haddix. Just Ella. 93.
.Turnabout. 402.
Hahn. Promises to the Dead. 319.
Hale. Chameleon Wore Chartreuse. 357.
Hallensleben. Pauline. 94.
Halloween Hoots and Howls. Horton. 18.
Halloween Pie. Tunnell. 35.
Halloween Showdown. Ross. 68.
Hamanaka. I Look like a Girl. 94.
Hamilton, M. Garden of Eden Motel. 95.
Hamilton, V. Bluish. 54.
Handful of Dirt. Bial. 307.
Hansen. "Bury Me Not in a Land of Slaves."
357.
Happy to Be Nappy. hooks. 173.
Harjo. Good Luck Cat. 281.
Harley Like a Person. Bauer. 306.
Harlow. Star in the Storm. 244.
Harriet, You'll Drive Me Wild! Fox. 356.
Harriet's Horrible Hair Day. Stewart. 223.
Harris, Robert. Queen's Own Fool. 421.
Harris, Robie. It's So Amazing! 210.
Harrison, B. Theo. 131.
Harrison, M. Facing the Dark. 402.
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets.
Rowling. 28.
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban.
Rowling. 68.
Hartwick. Hurry! 319.
Haskins. Geography of Hope. 172.
Hats Off for the Fourth of July! Ziefert. 380.
Haunting at Black Water Cove. Lehr. 364.
Hausman, B. A to Z Do You Ever Feel Like
Me? 172.
Hausman, G. Tom Cringle. 403.
Hayes. Little Gold Star. 403.
Head above Water. Rottman. 183.
Hegedus. Shooting Hoops and Skating Loops.
172.
Heidbreder. I Wished for a Unicorn. 320.
Heide. House of Wisdom. 14.
Heisel. Precious Gold, Precious Jade. 282.
Heller. Ogres! Ogres! Ogres! 14.
Henkes. Birthday Room. 15
. Oh! 54.
Henny-Penny. Wattenberg. 337.
Henry. DogBreath Victorious. 211.
Henry Hikes to Fitchburg. Johnson. 406.
Hercules. Burleigh. 85.
Here Comes Mother Goose. Opie. 145.
Here Comes Pontus! Jeppson. 406.
Herman. Just Like Mike. 244.
Herrera. Upside Down Boy. 282.
Hertenstein. Beyond Paradise. 15.
Hewett. Dancer. 16.
Heynen. Cosmos Coyote and William the Nice.
404.
Hiccup the Seasick Viking. Cowell. 394.
Hickman. Baby Born in Bethlehem. 95.
430 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Higyilmaz. Smiling for Strangers. 283.
High Flight. Granfield. 129.
History of Counting. Schmandt-Besserat. 106.
Hobbie. Toot & Puddle: You Are My Sunshine.
16.
Hobbs. Charlie's Run. 245.
Hoberman. Eensy-Weensy Spider. 245.
Hodges. Joan of Arc. 131.
Hogula. Gralley. 54.
Holland. Paperboy. 55.
Hollow Tree. Lunn. 364
Hollyhock Wall. Waddell. 73.
Holm. Our Only May Amelia. 16.
Holt. When Zachary Beaver Came to Town.
132.
Holtwijk. Asphalt Angels. 17.
Holubitsky. Alone at Ninety Foot. 132.
Homeless Bird. Whelan. 338.
Honest-to-Goodness Truth. McKissack. 215.
Hoobler. First Decade: Curtain Going Up. 404.
. Ghost in the Tokaido Inn. 17.
. Real American Girls Tell Their Own
Stories. 133.
. Second Decade: Voyages. 404.
. Vanity Rules. 283.
hooks. Happy to Be Nappy. 173.
Hopkins. Horned Toad Prince. 405.
Hopkinson. Maria's Comet. 173.
Horenstein. A Is for... ? 95.
Horned Toad Prince. Hopkins. 405.
Horowitz. Devil and His Boy. 246.
Hort. Seals on the Bus. 320.
.Tie Your Socks and Clap Your Feet. 358.
Horton. Halloween Hoots and Howls. 18.
Hostage. Roberts. 221.
House of Wisdom. Heide. 14.
House that Jack Built. Winter. 420.
How Do Dinosaurs Say Good Night? Yolen.
380.
How I Survived My Summer Vacation. Fried-
man. 400.
How Many Candles? Griffith. 13.
How Nanita Learned to Make Flan. Geeslin.
92.
How Tall, How Short, How Faraway. Adler. 4.
How to Talk to Your Cat. George. 279.
How to Talk to Your Dog. George. 280.
Howard. Virgie Goes to School with Us Boys.
211.
._ When Will Sarah Come? 55.
Howie Bowles, Secret Agent. Banks. 122.
Huang. Chinese Book of Animal Powers. 133.
Hubbard. Trick or Treat Countdown. 56.
Hubbell. Bouncing Time. 320.
Huckabuck Family. Sandburg. 29.
Hughes, S. Abel's Moon. 96.
Hughes, T. Mermaid's Purse. 358.
Hulme. Through the Open Door. 358.
Hunter. Take Offl 405.
Hurry! Hartwick. 319.
Hush, Little Baby. 134.
I Hate Weddings. Petersen. 252.
I Knew Two Who Said Moo. Barrett. 390.
I Look like a Girl. Hamanaka. 94.
I Walk at Night. Duncan. 207.
I Was a Rat! Pullman. 220.
I Wished for a Unicorn. Heidbreder. 320.
I'm Sorry, Almira Ann. Kurtz. 138.
I, Crocodile. Marcellino. 177.
Ibbotson. Which Witch? 18.
Ichord. Toothworms & Spider Juice. 212.
Ida B. Wells. Fradin. 278.
If a Bus Could Talk. Ringgold. 182.
If Ever I Return Again. Demas. 354.
If That Breathes Fire, We're Toast! Stewart. 32.
If You Ever Get Lost. Porte. 328.
If You Find a Rock. Christian. 393.
If You Hopped Like a Frog. Schwartz. 148.
Impeachment of William Jefferson Clinton.
Cohen. 311.
In My Hands. Opdyke. 64.
In the Line of Fire. St. George. 185.
In the Quiet. Ross. 292.
In the Rainfield. Olaleye. 219.
Ingold. Airfield. 174.
Into the Candlelit Room. McKean. 61.
Irving. Rip Van Winkle. 134.
Is Everyone Moonburned but Me? Pevsner. 370.
Is There Life on Mars? Fradin. 170.
Isaacs. Torn Thread. 321.
Isabel. Meyer. 363.
Isadora. 123 Pop! 359.
Island Summer. Stock. 33.
It's a Woman's World. Philip. 289.
It's Panama's Canal! Markun. 178.
It's So Amazing! Harris. 210.
Jack and the Beanstalk. Beneduce. 123.
Jack and the Beanstalk. Walker. 152.
Jack on the Tracks. Gantos. 11.
Jackson. Mrs. Piccolo's Easy Chair. 96.
Jade Green. Naylor. 217.
Jake's Orphan. Brooke. 270.
Jam. Stoneboat. 134.
James, B. Tadpoles. 56.
James, S. Days Like This. 406.
Janeczko. Stone Bench in an Empty Park. 359.
Jarzyna. Slump. 19.
Jay. Picture This. 360.
Jenkins. Emperor's Egg. 174.
Jennings, L. Nine Naughty Kittens. 174.
Jennings, P. Putnam & Pennyroyal. 135.
Jeppson. Here Comes Pontus! 406.
Jerome. Taylor. 224.
Jimmy Zangwow's Out-of-This-World Moon
Pie Adventure. DiTerlizzi. 314.
Jingle Dancer. Smith. 416.
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 431
Joan of Arc. Hodges. 131.
Jocelyn. Earthly Astonishments. 212.
John Riley's Daughter. Matthews. 365.
Johnson, A. Down the Winding Road. 246.
Johnson, D. B. Henry Hikes to Fitchburg. 406.
Johnson, Dave. Movin'. 321.
Johnson, P. Bearhide and Crow. 322.
. Mr. Persnickety and Cat Lady. 407.
Johnson, S. Mapping the World. 97.
Johnston. Old Shell. 56.
Jones, C. Eat Your Words. 19.
Jones, Jennifer. Dear Mrs. Ryan, You're Ruin-
ing My Life. 284.
Jones, Joy. Tambourine Moon. 135.
Joseph Had a Little Overcoat. Taback. 257.
Journal of Scott Pendleton Collins. Myers. 25.
Joyce. Rolie Polie Olie. 57.
Judy Moody. McDonald. 324.
Jukes. Cinderella 2000. 175.
Jump Back, Honey. Dunbar 169.
Jump Rope Magic. Scruggs. 373.
Just Ella. Haddix. 93.
Just Like a Baby. Bond. 6.
Just Like Mike. Herman. 244.
Kacer. Secret of Gabi's Dresser. 360.
Kaplan. Waiting to Sing. 247.
Karas. Bebe's Bad Dream. 361.
Karr. Man of the Family. 97.
. Skullduggery. 284.
Katcher. My Heroes, My People. 180.
Katie and the Mona Lisa. Mayhew. 21.
Katz. Colors of Us. 136.
Kauchak. Good Sports. 136.
Keehn. First Horse I See. 19.
Keeping the Moon. Dessen. 49.
Kehret. Don't Tell Anyone. 322.
Kennedy, K. Frankenfrog. 57.
Kennedy, X. Elympics. 175.
Kerr. What Became of Her. 285.
Keselman. Gift. 175.
Kessler. No Condition Is Permanent. 212.
Ketchum. Orphan Journey Home. 361.
Khan. Dahling, if You Luv Me, Would You
Please, Please Smile. 137.
Kids Dance. Varriale. 187.
Kids on Strike! Bartoletti. 123.
Kimmel, Elizabeth. Visiting Miss Caples. 285.
Kimmel, Eric. Grizz! 247.
. Rooster's Antlers. 58.
King of Shadows. Cooper. 126.
King of the Kooties. Dadey. 89.
Kissing Tennessee. Appelt. 305.
Kit's Wilderness. Almond 163.
Kitamura. Me and My Cat? 323.
Kite. Burgess. 353.
Kite Fighters. Park. 369
Kline. Eleanor Hill. 176.
Koi and the Kola Nuts. Aardema. 162.
Koscielniak. Story of the Incredible Orchestra.
362.
Koss. Girls. 362.
Kostyal. Trial by Ice. 137.
Kuhn. Angels of Mercy. 138.
Kurtz. Faraway Home. 323.
.I'm Sorry, Almira Ann. 138.
.River Friendly, River Wild. 213.
Lacome. Ruthie's Big Old Coat. 363.
LaFaye. Nissa's Place. 58.
LaMarche. Raft. 407.
Land of Hungry Armadillos. David. 312.
Langton. Time Bike. 408.
Lasky. Elizabeth I. 138.
.Marie Antoinette. 363.
Lauber. Tiger Has a Toothache. 139.
.What You Never Knew about Fingers,
Forks, & Chopsticks. 139.
Lawlor. Wind on the River. 408.
Lee. Wolf Tower. 409.
Lefty Carmichael Has a Fit. Trembath. 225.
Lehr. Haunting at Black Water Cove. 364.
Lemieux. All the Answers. 213.
Leola and the Honeybears. Rosales. 67.
Lester, J. Pharaoh's Daughter. 323.
Lester, M. A Is for Salad. 409.
Leuzzi. Creative Life. 176.
Levine, A. Running on Eggs. 98.
Levine, G. Dave at Night. 20.
.Princess Sonora and the Long Sleep. 59.
.Wish. 324.
Levy. Seventh Grade Tango. 248.
Lewis, C. Postcards to Father Abraham. 214.
Lewis, M. Morgy Makes His Move. 59.
Liberty. Curlee. 311.
Lichtenheld. Everything I Know about Pirates.
286.
Life Is Funny. Frank. 316.
Likes of Me. Platt. 290.
Lillegard. Wake Up House! 214.
Lithgow. Remarkable Farkle McBride. 364.
Little Bo. Edwards. 242.
Little Bunny on the Move. McCarty. 100.
Little Gold Star. Hayes. 403.
Little Golden Lamb. Greene. 318.
Little Red Hen (Makes a Pizza). Sturges. 224.
Little White Duck. Whippo. 339.
Little. Enchanted Runner. 20.
Littlest Matryoshka. Bliss. 165.
Lizard Man of Crabtree County. Nolan. 63.
Lizard Meets Ivana the Terrible. Scott. 184.
Lizzy and Skunk. Fitzpatrick. 399.
Lloyd. Polly Molly Woof Woof. 286.
Lobel. One Lighthouse, One Moon. 410.
Locked Inside. Werlin. 226.
Logue. Dancing with an Alien. 248.
London. Snuggle Wuggle. 286.
. Who Bop? 177.
432 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Lonely Scarecrow. Preston. 104.
Long. Sylvia Long's Mother Goose. 144.
Look-AlikesTM Jr. Steiner. 71.
Lost Day. Clarke. 86.
Lost Treasure of the Inca. Lourie. 98.
Lotan. Samir and Yonatan. 273.
Lottie Project. Wilson. 154.
Lottie's Princess Dress. Dorrie. 90.
Lourie. Lost Treasure of the Inca. 98.
Love. Year without Rain. 410.
Love One Another. Thompson. 225.
Lowery. Aunt Clara Brown. 140.
Lowry. Zooman Sam. 21.
Lucky Lady. Saunders. 330.
Lunge-Larsen. Troll with No Heart in His Body.
177.
Lunn. Hollow Tree. 364.
Lynch. Penguins! 140.
Lyon. One Lucky Girl. 248.
Macaulay. Building the Book. 141.
Mack. Drawing Lessons. 249.
Macy. Play Like a Girl. 59.
Mad Dog McGraw. Uhlberg. 417.
Magic & Mischief. Climo. 49.
Magic Paintbrush. Yep. 295.
Mah. Chinese Cinderella. 98.
Maitland. Moo in the Morning. 411.
Malcolm X. Myers. 288.
Mama Talks Too Much. Russo. 28.
Mammalabilia. Florian. 242.
Man of the Family. Karr. 97.
Many. My Life, Take Two. 411.
Mapping the World. Johnson. 97.
Marcellino. I, Crocodile. 177.
Maria's Comet. Hopkinson. 173.
Marie Antoinette. Lasky. 363.
Market Day. Ehlert. 398.
Markun. It's Panami's Canal! 178.
Marrin. Sitting Bull and His World. 412.
Martin, A. Snail Mail No More. 276.
Martin, T. Family Trait. 99.
Mary Celeste. Yolen. 111.
Mary, Bloody Mary. Meyer. 62.
Masson. Dogs Have the Strangest Friends. 365.
Matthews. John Riley's Daughter. 365.
Mayer. Women Warriors. 60.
.Young Jesus of Nazareth. 99.
Mayhew. Katie and the Mona Lisa. 21.
Maynard, B. Pondfire. 249.
.Quiet, Wyatt! 60.
Maynard, T. Working with Wildlife. 178.
Mayo. Brother Sun, Sister Moon. 250.
Mazer. Good Night, Maman. 141.
McCarty. Little Bunny on the Move. 100.
McCaughrean. Crystal Pool. 22.
.Stones Are Hatching. 366.
McClaren. Waiting for Odysseus. 215.
McCully. Hurry! 319.
McDonald. Judy Moody. 324.
McDonnell. Splash! 22.
McElfresh. Can You Feel the Thunder? 22.
McGill. Miles' Song. 287.
.Molly Bannaky. 61.
McGrory. Mouton's Impossible Dream. 287.
McKay. Pirates Ahoy! 366.
McKean. Into the Candlelit Room. 61.
McKenna. Gift. 175.
McKinley. Spindle's End. 288.
McKissack, F. Black Hands, White Sails. 100.
McKissack, P. Black Hands, White Sails. 100.
. Honest-to-Goodness Truth. 215.
McNaughton. Wish You Were Here (And I
Wasn't). 325.
_ .Yum! 101.
McNeal. Crooked. 179.
McPhail. Drawing Lessons from a Bear. 249.
McPherson. Sisters against Slavery. 179.
Me and My Cat? Kitamura. 323.
Me and Rupert Goody. O'Connor. 64.
Me Tarzan. Byars. 353.
Mead. Soldier Mom. 142.
Mean, Mean Maureen Green. Cox. 206.
Meddaugh. Best Place. 142.
Meister. Tiny Goes to the Library. 412.
Meltzer. Witches and Witch-hunts. 62.
Mermaid's Purse. Hughes. 358.
Meyer. Isabel. 363.
. Mary, Bloody Mary. 62.
Michael, Wait for Me. Calvert. 271.
Michelson. Book of Flies Real or Otherwise. 23.
Midnight Magic. Avi. 121.
Midnight Train Home. Tamar. 334.
Mierau. Accept No Substitutes! 367.
Mighty Boy. Sonenklar. 185.
Mighty Skink. Shipton. 331.
Miles' Song. McGill. 287.
Mills. You're a Brave Man, Julius Zimmerman.
23.
Mind's Eye. Fleischman. 50.
Minnie and Moo Go to Paris. Cazet. 48.
Minnie and Moo Save the Earth. Cazet. 48.
Miracle's Boys. Woodson. 342.
Mission Ziffoid. Rosen. 104.
Mitchell. Nobody Rides the Unicorn. 216.
Mmm, Cookies! Munsch. 367.
Mollel. My Rows and Piles of Coins. 63.
.Subira Subira. 325.
Molly Bannaky. McGill. 61.
Molly's Fire. Carey. 272.
Momma, Where Are You From? Bradby. 240.
Monceaux. My Heroes, My People. 180.
Moo in the Morning. Maitland. 411.
Moon. Spying Game. 63.
Moonlight Man. Wright. 259.
Moonshine. Blackwood. 84.
Moore. Daughter. 143.
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 433
Moosey Moose. Raschka. 254.
Mora. Rainbow Tulip. 143.
Morgy Makes His Move. Lewis. 59.
Morris. Savage Damsel and the Dwarf. 326.
Morrison. Big Box. 216.
Mother Goose. Sylvia Long's Mother Goose.
144.
Mouse's First Christmas. Thompson. 109.
Mouton's Impossible Dream. McGrory. 287.
Movin'. Johnson. 321.
Mr. Persnickety and Cat Lady. Johnson. 407.
Mr. Wolfs Pancakes. Fearnley. 207.
Mrs. Piccolo's Easy Chair. Jackson. 96.
Muller. While You're Waiting for the Food to
Come. 24.
Munsch. Mmm, Cookies! 367.
. We Share Everything! 101.
Murphy. Bow Wow. 24.
Music in Derrick's Heart. Battle-Lavert. 238.
My Baseball Book. Gibbons. 280.
My Dog Toby. Zimmerman. 381.
My First Garden. Bogacki. 202.
My Heroes, My People. Monceaux. 180.
My Life, Take Two. Many. 411.
My Rows and Piles of Coins. Mollel. 63.
My Secret Camera. Smith. 333.
My Soccer Book. Gibbons. 280.
Myers. 145th Street. 250.
. Blues of Flats Brown. 217.
.Journal of Scott Pendleton Collins. 25.
. Malcolm X. 288.
Name Me Nobody. Yamanaka. 154.
Napoli. Crazy Jack. 144.
. Spinners. 25.
Narahashi. Two Girls Can! 368.
Nature Art with Chiura Obata. Ross. 255.
Naylor. Grooming of Alice. 326.
.Jade Green. 217.
. Walker's Crossing. 101.
Nazi Olympics. Bachrach. 237.
Nellie Bly. Fredeen. 208.
Nelson. Beyond Mayfield. 102.
Nerdlandia. Soto. 108.
Neumeyer. Collector of Moments. 202.
New African Americans. Ashabranner. 120.
Newsome. Wonders. 217.
Night Garden. Wong. 190.
Night Hoops. Deuker. 241.
Night Lights. Schnur. 373.
Night Shift Daddy. Spinelli. 375.
Night Train. Clarke. 310.
Night Worker. Banks. 389.
Nine Naughty Kittens. Jennings. 174.
Nissa's Place. LaFaye. 58.
Nixon. Ann's Story. 218.
.Nobody's There. 412.
No Condition Is Permanent. Kessler. 212.
No Dinner! Souhami. 256.
Nobody Rides the Unicorn. Mitchell. 216.
Nobody's There. Nixon. 412.
Nolan, H. Face in Every Window. 144.
Nolan, L. Lizard Man of Crabtree County. 63.
Norman. Trickster and the Fainting Birds. 180.
Norman Rockwell. Gherman. 401.
Not One Damsel in Distress. Yolen. 296.
November Ever After. Torres. 186.
Nunn. Pet or Not? 31.
. Pocket Pets. 293.
O'Brien. Toward the Setting Sun. 218.
O'Connor. Me and Rupert Goody. 64.
O'Malley. Bud. 368.
Ocean Within. Caldwell. 167.
Off We Go! Yolen. 260.
Ogres! Ogres! Ogres! Heller. 14.
Oh! Henkes. 54.
Okimoto. To JayKae: Life Stinx. 219.
Olaleye. In the Rainfield. 219.
Ola's Wake. Stone. 375.
Old Pirate of Central Park. Priest. 27.
Old Shell. Johnston. 56.
On the Same Day in March. Singer. 256.
On the Trail of Elder Brother. RunningWolf.
372.
One Halloween Night. Teague. 33.
One Lighthouse, One Moon. Lobel. 410.
One Lonely Sea Horse. Freymann. 399.
One Lucky Girl. Lyon. 248.
One Thing I'm Good At. Williams. 153.
One-of-a-Kind Mallie. Bradley. 6.
One-Room School. Bial. 46.
Opdyke. In My Hands. 64.
Opening Moves. Berg. 238.
Opie. Here Comes Mother Goose. 145.
Oppel. Peg and the Whale. 413.
.Sunwing. 327.
Ordinary Miracles. Tolan. 72.
Orgel. We Goddesses. 102.
Orphan Journey Home. Ketchum. 361.
Osborne. Adaline Falling Star. 251.
Osceola. Govenar. 244.
Other Ones. Thesman. 34.
Otis. Bynum. 309.
Otto. Pioneer Church. 145.
Oughton. Perfect Family. 413.
Our Only May Amelia. Holm. 16.
Over in the Meadow. Cabrera. 310.
Over the Wall. Ritter. 330.
Overend. Welcome with Love. 368.
Owens. Be Blest. 103.
Oxford First Book of Art. Wolfe. 190.
Oy, Joy! Frank. 51.
Packard. Big Numbers. 251.
Pain Tree. Watson. 295.
Pak. Dear Juno. 180.
Palatini. Ding Dong Ding Dong. 145.
.Good as Goldie. 251.
434 
* THE BULLETIN
Paperboy. Holland. 55.
Park. Kite Fighters. 369.
. Seesaw Girl. 146.
Paterson. Preacher's Boy. 65.
Patrick. Girl Who Struck Out Babe Ruth. 369.
Patschke. Spooky Book. 26.
Patty's Pumpkin Patch. Sloat. 68.
Pauline. Hallensleben. 94.
Paulsen. Alida's Song. 26.
Pearson, G. Don't Call It Paradise. 146.
Pearson, M. David v. God. 289.
Peg and the Whale. Oppel. 413.
Penguins! Lynch. 140.
Pennebaker. Both Sides Now. 370.
People with Five Fingers. Bierhorst. 239.
Peregrine. Goodman. 318.
Perfect Family. Oughton. 413.
Perkins. All Alone in the Universe. 65.
Pet or Not? Silverstein. 31.
Peters, J. Define "Normal." 252.
Peters, L. Cold Little Duck, Duck, Duck. 327.
Petersen. I Hate Weddings. 252.
Pevsner. Is Everyone Moonburned but Me? 370.
Pharaoh's Daughter. Lester. 323.
Philbrick. REM World. 371.
Philip. It's a Woman's World. 289.
Picture This. Jay. 360.
Pierce. Circle Opens: Magic Steps. 253.
Pig and the Shrink. Todd. 109.
Pilkey. Ricky Ricotta's Giant Robot. 327.
Pinkney, A. Jump Back, Honey. 169.
Pinkney, B. Cosmo and the Robot. 328.
Pioneer Church. Otto. 145.
Pioneer Thanksgiving. Greenwood. 93
Pirates Ahoy! McKay. 366.
Places I Never Meant to Be. Blume. 5.
Platt, Randall. Likes of Me. 290.
Platt, Richard. Castle Diary. 147.
Play Like a Girl. Macy. 59.
Playing Solitaire. Antle. 201.
Please, Mr. Crocodile! Strickland. 151.
Plenty of Pockets. Braybrooks. 352.
Plum-Ucci. Body of Christopher Creed. 290.
Plummer. Dance for Three. 219.
Pocket Pets. Silverstein. 293.
Polacco. Butterfly. 371.
._ Welcome Comfort. 103.
Polly Molly Woof Woof. Lloyd. 286.
Pondfire. Maynard. 249.
Porte. If You Ever Get Lost. 328.
Postcards to Father Abraham. Lewis. 214.
Power ofUn. Etchemendy. 398.
Prairie Fire. Reynolds. 104.
Praying to A.L. Caseley. 273.
Preacher's Boy. Paterson. 65.
Precious Gold, Precious Jade. Heisel. 282.
Prelutsky. Gargoyle on the Roof. 66.
Pressler. Anne Frank. 290.
Preston. Lonely Scarecrow. 104.
Priceman. Froggie Went A-Courting. 329.
Priest. Old Pirate of Central Park. 27.
Primavera. Auntie Claus. 147.
Princess Sonora and the Long Sleep. Levine. 59.
Pringle. Bats! 291.
Promises to the Dead. Hahn. 319.
Pullman. Firework-Maker's Daughter. 181.
_ I Was a Rat! 220.
Pushing Up the Sky. Bruchac. 202.
Pushkin Minds the Bundle. Ziefert. 342.
Putnam & Pennyroyal. Jennings. 135.
Queen Esther, the Morning Star. Gerstein. 209.
Queen of Attolia. Turner. 377.
Queen's Own Fool. Yolen. 421.
Quiet, Wyatt! Maynard. 60.
Rabbits, Rabbits & More Rabbits! Gibbons.
243.
Radin. Escape to the Forest. 253.
Radio Rescue. Barasch. 389.
Raft. LaMarche. 407.
Ragweed. Avi. 46.
Rain. Stojic. 417.
Rainbow Tulip. Mora. 143.
Rainey. Shooting Hoops and Skating Loops.
172.
Ramona's World. Cleary. 9.
Rapp. Copper Elephant. 181.
Rappaport. Dirt on Their Skirts. 220.
Rare Treasure. Brown. 166.
Raschka. Moosey Moose. 254.
. Ring! Yo? 291.
. Sluggy Slug. 254.
. Whaley Whale. 254.
. Wormy Worm. 254.
Ray. Basket Moon. 27.
Real American Girls Tell Their Own Stories.
Hoobler. 133.
Rebel. Whitesel. 339.
REM World. Philbrick. 371
Remarkable Farkle McBride. Lithgow. 364.
Rennison. Angus, Thongs and Full-Frontal
Snogging. 329.
Reptile Room. Snicket. 32.
Reynolds. Prairie Fire. 104.
Richie. Weapons. 268.
Ricky Ricotta's Giant Robot. Pilkey. 327.
Riddle. Great Escape from City Zoo. 28.
Rinaldi. Coffin Quilt. 182.
Ring! Yo? Raschka. 291.
Ringgold. If a Bus Could Talk. 182.
Rip Van Winkle. Irving. 134.
Ritter. Over the Wall. 330.
River Boy. Bowler. 391.
River Friendly, River Wild. Kurtz. 213.
Road to Home. Auch. 351.
Robbins. Trucks. 148.
Roberts. Hostage. 221.
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 435
Robinet. Walking to the Bus-Rider Blues. 330.
Rocheleau. Shaker's Dozen. 151.
Rockwell. Boy Who Wouldn't Obey. 414.
Rodowsky. Spindrift. 254.
Rolie Polie Olie. Joyce. 57.
Roop. Eye for an Eye. 414.
. Good-bye for Today. 292.
Rooster's Antlers. Kimmel. 58.
Root. Grandmother Winter. 66.
Rosales. Leola and the Honeybears. 67.
Rosen. Mission Ziffoid 104.
.Thanksgiving Wish. 67.
Ross, A. In the Quiet. 292.
Ross, E. Halloween Showdown. 68.
Ross, M. Nature Art with Chiura Obata. 255.
Roth. Ten Clean Pigs. 105.
.Ten Dirty Pigs. 105.
Rottman. Head above Water. 183.
Roughing It on the Oregon Trail. Stanley. 375.
Rowling. Harry Potter and the Chamber of Se-
crets. 28.
____. 
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of
Azkaban. 68.
Rubalcaba. Wadjet Eye. 372.
Ruby. Soon Be Free. 415.
Rudi's Pond. Bunting. 167.
Rumford. Seeker of Knowledge. 293.
Running on Eggs. Levine. 98.
RunningWolf. On the Trail of Elder Brother.
372.
Russell. Taker's Stone. 105.
Russo. Mama Talks Too Much. 28.
Ruthie's Big Old Coat. Lacome. 363.
Ruurs. Emma and the Coyote. 148.
"S.S." Gigantic Across the Atlantic. Selgin. 30.
Sacajawea. Bruchac. 271.
Salsa Stories. Delacre. 312.
Saltzberg. Soccer Mom from Outer Space. 373.
Samir and Yonatan. Carmi. 273.
Sammy and the Dinosaurs. Whybrow. 36.
San Souci. Secret of the Stones. 183.
.Tarzan. 29.
Sandburg. Huckabuck Family. 29.
Sansevere. Circle of Three. 207.
Santa Who? Gibbons. 53.
Sarah and the Naked Truth. Carbone. 204.
Satchel Paige. Cline-Ransome. 205.
Saunders. Lucky Lady. 330.
Savage Damsel and the Dwarf. Morris. 326.
Savion. Glover. 210.
Saying It Out Loud. Abelove. 44.
Scarlette Beane. Wallace. 258.
Schachner. Grannyman. 184.
Schaefer. This Is the Sunflower. 331.
Schmandt-Besserat. History of Counting. 106.
Schnur. Night Lights. 373.
Schuch. Symphony of Whales. 106.
Schwartz, D. If You Hopped Like a Frog. 148.
Schwartz, J. Eugenie Clark. 203.
Scott. Lizard Meets Ivana the Terrible. 184.
Scotty and the Gypsy Bandit. Winkler. 341.
Scruggs. Jump Rope Magic. 373.
Seals on the Bus. Hort. 320.
Second Decade: Voyages. Hoobler. 404.
Second Sight. Avi. 83.
Secret of Gabi's Dresser. Kacer. 360
Secret of the Stones. San Souci. 183.
Sector 7. Wiesner. 188.
Seeker of Knowledge. Rumford. 293.
Seesaw Girl. Park. 146.
Selgin. "S.S." Gigantic Across the Atlantic. 30.
Serefina under the Circumstances. Theroux. 71.
Seventh Grade Tango. Levy. 248.
Severance. Einstein. 30.
. Skyscrapers. 415.
Shadow Story. Willard. 110.
Shaker's Dozen. Thorne-Thomsen. 151.
Shaking Bag. Battle-Lavert. 269.
Shannon. David Goes to School. 184.
Sheldon. Confessions of a Teenage Drama
Queen. 149.
Ship Ahoy! Sfs. 107.
Shipton. Mighty Skink. 331.
Shooting Hoops and Skating Loops. Hegedus.
172.
Shreve. Ghost Cats. 149.
. Goodbye, Amanda the Good. 221.
Shusterman. Downsiders. 31.
Sierra. Beautiful Butterfly. 332.
. Dancing Pig. 107.
Signs & Wonders. Collins. 87.
Silverstein. Pet or Not? 31.
. Pocket Pets. 293.
Simmons. Daisy and the Beastie. 255.
. Daisy Says Coo! 294.
. Daisy's Day Out. 294.
. Daisy's Favorite Things. 150
. Ebb and Flo and the New Friend. 107.
. Go to Sleep, Daisy. 150.
Sindbad. Zeman. 228.
Singer. On the Same Day in March. 256.
Sir Walter Ralegh and the Quest for El Dorado.
Aronson. 388.
Sfs. Dinosaur! 374.
SShip Ahoy! 107.
Sisters against Slavery. McPherson. 179.
Sitting Bull and His World. Marrin. 412.
Skullduggery. Karr. 284.
Sky Rider. Springer. 70.
Skyscrapers. Severance. 415.
Slangerup. Dirt Boy. 332.
Slate. Crossing the Trestle. 150.
Sleator. Boltzmon! 150.
Sleds on Boston Common. Borden. 391.
Sleepytime Rhyme. Charlip. 48.
Sloat. Patty's Pumpkin Patch. 68.
436 
* THE BULLETIN
Sluggy Slug. Raschka. 254.
Slump. Jarzyna. 19.
Small Change. Talbert. 376.
Smiling for Strangers. Higyilmaz. 283.
Smith, Charles. Tall Tales. 332.
Smith, Cynthia. Jingle Dancer. 416.
Smith, D. Fast Company. 69.
Smith, F. My Secret Camera. 333.
Smith, M. Dear Daisy, Get Well Soon. 222.
Smith, P. On the Trail of Elder Brother. 372.
Snail Mail No More. Danziger. 276.
Snicket. Bad Beginning. 32
.Reptile Room. 32.
Snuggle Wuggle. London. 286.
Snyder. Gib and the Gray Ghost. 222.
So You Want to Be President? St. George. 417.
Sogabe. Aesop's Fox. 108.
Soldier Mom. Mead. 142.
Sonenklar. Mighty Boy. 185.
Sones. Stop Pretending. 69.
Songs of Power. Bell. 270.
Soon Be Free. Ruby. 415.
Sortland. Story of the Search for the Story. 416.
Soto. Nerdlandia. 108.
Souhami. No Dinner! 256.
Sound that Jazz Makes. Weatherford. 337.
Space Race. Waugh. 419.
Speak. Anderson. 45.
Special Fate. Gold. 317.
Speed. Brave Potatoes. 374.
Spider Storch's Desperate Deal. Willner-Pardo.
153.
Spindle's End. McKinley. 288.
Spindrift. Rodowsky. 254.
Spinelli. Night Shift Daddy. 375.
Spinner. Be First in the Universe. 223.
Spinners. Napoli. 25.
Splash! McDonnell. 22.
Splear. Growing Seasons. 417.
Split Image. Glenn. 356.
Spooky Book. Patschke. 26.
Springer. Sky Rider. 70.
Spying Game. Moon. 63.
St. George. In the Line of Fire. 185.
.So You Want to Be President? 417.
Stanley. Roughing It on the Oregon Trail. 375.
.Time Apart. 70.
Star in the Storm. Harlow. 244.
Starbright and the Dream Eater. Cowley. 395.
Starplace. Grove. 13.
Starry Night. Waldman. 187.
Steamboat! Gilliland. 243.
Stein. Alternative American Religions. 257.
Steiner. Look-AlikesTM Jr. 71.
Stemple. Mary Celeste. 111.
Stewart, D. Harriet's Horrible Hair Day. 223.
Stewart, J. If That Breathes Fire, We're Toast!
32.
Stock. Island Summer. 33.
Stojic. Rain. 417.
Stolen Life. Curry. 88.
Stone Bench in an Empty Park. Janeczko. 359.
Stone. Ola's Wake. 375.
Stoneboat. Jam. 134.
Stones Are Hatching. McCaughrean. 366.
Stop Pretending. Sones. 69.
Story of the Incredible Orchestra. Koscielniak.
362.
Story of the Search for the Story. Sortland. 416.
Strickland, B. When Mack Came Back. 333.
Strickland, T. Please, Mr. Crocodile! 151.
Stuck in Neutral. Trueman. 377.
Sturges. Little Red Hen (Makes a Pizza). 224.
Subira Subira. Mollel. 325.
Suitcase. Walter. 73.
Summer Battles. Blakeslee. 239.
Sunwing. Oppel. 327.
Swan in Love. Bunting. 393.
Swinburne. Unbeatable Beaks. 109.
Swope. Gotta Go! Gotta Go! 334.
Sylvia Long's Mother Goose. Mother Goose.
144.
Symphony of Whales. Schuch. 106.
Taback. Joseph Had a Little Overcoat. 257.
Tadpoles. James. 56.
Take Offi Hunter. 405.
Taker's Stone. Russell. 105.
Talbert. Small Change. 376.
. Trap. 71.
Tale of the Turnip. Alderson. 82.
Tall Tales. Smith. 332.
Tamar. Midnight Train Home. 334.
Tambourine Moon. Jones. 135.
Tarzan. San Souci. 29.
Tavares. Zachary's Ball. 335.
Taylor. Jerome. 224.
Tchen. Spinners. 25.
Teague. One Halloween Night. 33.
Teenage Guy's Survival Guide. Daldry. 10.
Ten Clean Pigs. Roth. 105.
Ten Dirty Pigs. Roth. 105.
Thanksgiving Wish. Rosen. 67.
Theo. Harrison. 131.
There's a Dead Person Following My Sister
Around. Vande Velde. 72.
Theroux. Serefina under the Circumstances. 71.
Thesman. Other Ones. 34.
Thimmesh. Girls Think of Everything. 335.
This Is the Sunflower. Schaefer. 331.
Thomas, F. What If 34.
Thomas, S. Good Night, Good Knight. 225.
Thompson, C. Unknown. 335.
Thompson, K. Wild Blood. 376.
Thompson, L. Love One Another. 225.
.Mouse's First Christmas. 109.
Thorne-Thomsen. Shaker's Dozen. 151.
JULY/AUGUST 2000 
* 437
Three Cheers for Catherine the Great! Best. 164.
Three on Three. Walters. 378.
Through My Eyes. Bridges. 166.
Through the Open Door. Hulme. 358.
Throwing Smoke. Brooks. 308.
Tie Your Socks and Clap Your Feet. Hort. 358.
Tiger Has a Toothache. Lauber. 139.
Tightrope. Cross 127.
Time Apart. Stanley. 70.
Time Bike. Langton. 408.
Time Capsule. Gallo. 92.
Tiny and Bigman. Gershator. 129.
Tiny Goes to the Library. Meister. 412.
To JayKae: Life Stinx. Okimoto. 219.
Tom Cringle. Hausman. 403.
Todd, M. Pain Tree. 295.
Todd, P. Pig and the Shrink. 109.
Tolan. Ordinary Miracles. 72.
Tomorrowland. Cart. 126.
Tonight and Tomorrow. Ballard. 305.
Toot & Puddle: You Are My Sunshine. Hobbie.
16.
Toothworms & Spider Juice. Ichord. 212.
Torn Thread. Isaacs. 321.
Torres. November Ever After. 186.
Totally Confidential. Warner. 336.
Touch the Poem. Adoff. 201.
Touchdown Mars! Wethered. 379.
Toward the Setting Sun. O'Brien. 218.
Toys! Wulffson. 379.
Trap. Talbert. 71.
Traylor. Buckaroo. 34.
Trembath. Lefty Carmichael Has a Fit. 225.
Trial by Ice. Kostyal. 137.
Trick or Treat Countdown. Hubbard. 56.
Trickster and the Fainting Birds. Norman. 180.
Troll with No Heart in His Body. Lunge-Larsen.
177.
Trouble with Cats. Freeman. 279.
Trucks. Robbins. 148.
Trueman. Stuck in Neutral. 377.
Tseng. White Tiger, Blue Serpent. 35.
Tune in Anytime. Cooney. 87.
Tunnell. Halloween Pie. 35.
Turner. Queen of Attolia. 377.
Turning Point Inventions: The Clock. Duffy.
314.
Twigboy. Gammell. 316.
Two Girls Can! Narahashi. 368.
Turnabout. Haddix. 402.
Uhlberg. Mad Dog McGraw. 417.
Unbeatable Beaks. Swinburne. 109.
Uncle Sam and Old Glory. West. 188.
Uncommon Traveler. Brown. 392.
Unknown. Thompson. 335.
Updike. Child's Calendar. 257.
Upside Down Boy. Herrera. 282.
Upside-Down Cake. Carrick. 125.
Valgardson. Divorced Kids Club. 186.
. Frances. 418.
Van Dusen. Down to the Sea with Mr. Magee.
336.
Vande Griek. Gift for Ampato. 186.
Vande Velde. There's a Dead Person Following
My Sister Around. 72.
Vanity Rules. Hoobler. 283.
Varriale. Kids Dance. 187.
Venokur. Cookie Company. 226.
Vicksburg. Fraser. 171.
Video. Young. 191.
Vincent. Day, a Dog. 294.
Violet & Claire. Block. 5.
Virgie Goes to School with Us Boys. Howard.
211.
Visiting Miss Caples. Kimmel. 285.
Voigt. Elske. 152.
Waddell. Hollyhock Wall. 73.
Wadjet Eye. Rubalcaba. 372.
Waiting for Dolphins. Crowe. 276.
Waiting for Odysseus. McClaren. 215.
Waiting to Sing. Kaplan. 247.
Wake Up House! Lillegard. 214.
Waldman. Starry Night. 187.
Walker. Jack and the Beanstalk. 152.
Walker's Crossing. Naylor. 101.
Walking to the Bus-Rider Blues. Robinet. 330.
Wallace, B. Ghosts in the Gallery. 418.
Wallace, K. Scarlette Beane. 258.
Walsh. Do Donkeys Dance? 294.
Walter. Suitcase. 73.
Walters, E. Three on Three. 378.
Walters, V. Are We There Yet, Daddy? 152.
Walton. Bullfrog Pops! 110.
Wanderer. Creech. 275.
Wanna Buy an Alien? Bunting. 352.
Warner. Totally Confidential. 336.
Watson. Pain Tree. 295.
Wattenberg. Henny-Penny. 337.
Waugh. Space Race. 419.
Way Things Never Were. Finkelstein. 10.
We Goddesses. Orgel. 102.
We Share Everything! Munsch. 101.
We're Going on a Lion Hunt. Axtell. 305.
Weapons. Richie. 268.
Weatherford. Sound that Jazz Makes. 337.
Weber. Savion. 210.
Weeks. Guy Time. 338.
Weird Stories from the Lonesome Cafd. Cox.
275.
Welcome Comfort. Polacco. 103.
Welcome to Felicity's World, 1774. Gourley.
12.
Welcome with Love. Overend. 368.
Wells. Emily's First 100 Days of School. 419.
Werlin. Locked Inside. 226.
West. Uncle Sam and Old Glory. 188.
438 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Weston. Diary of Melanie Martin. 378.
Wethered. Touchdown Mars! 379.
Whale Comedian. Burton. 86.
Whaley Whale. Raschka. 254.
What Are You? Gaskins. 52.
What Became of Her. Kerr. 285.
What Happened on Planet Kid. Conly. 274.
What If Thomas. 34.
What Janie Found. Cooney. 241.
What You Never Knew about Fingers, Forks,
& Chopsticks. Lauber. 139.
What's in a Name. Wittlinger. 227.
What's Inside? Ashbd. 351.
Whelan. Homeless Bird. 338.
When I Was Older. Freymann-Weyr. 400.
When Jeff Comes Home. Atkins. 83.
When Kambia Elaine Flew in from Neptune.
Williams. 340.
When Mack Came Back. Strickland. 333.
When Uncle Took the Fiddle. Gray. 93.
When Will Sarah Come? Howard. 55.
When Zachary Beaver Came to Town. Holt.
132.
Which Witch? Ibbotson. 18.
While You're Waiting for the Food to Come.
Muller. 24.
Whippo. Little White Duck. 339.
Whitcher. Fool Reversed. 227.
White Dove. Bartholomew. 306.
White Tiger, Blue Serpent. Tseng. 35.
White. Comes a Wind. 258.
Whitesel. Rebel. 339.
Who Bop? London. 177.
Why? Camp. 8.
Why Not? Wormell. 259.
Why Not, Lafayette? Fritz. 128.
Whybrow. Sammy and the Dinosaurs. 36.
Wiesner. Sector 7. 188.
Wild Blood. Thompson. 376.
Willard. Shadow Story. 110.
Williams, C. Christmas in Heaven. 340.
Williams, K. One Thing I'm Good At. 153.
Williams, Laura. Executioner's Daughter. 340.
. Ghost Stallion. 189.
Williams, Lori. When Kambia Elaine Flew in
from Neptune. 340.
Willis. Barn Burner. 341.
Willner-Pardo. Figuring Out Frances. 74.
. Spider Storch's Desperate Deal. 153.
Wilson. Lottie Project. 154.
Wind on the River. Lawlor. 408.
Windling. Wolf at the Door. 396.
Winking, Blinking Sea. Batten. 352.
Winkler. Scotty and the Gypsy Bandit. 341.
Winning. Adler. 45.
Winter. House that Jack Built. 420.
Winter Eyes. Florian. 91.
Wish You Were Here (And I Wasn't).
McNaughton. 325.
Wish. Levine. 324.
Wisler. All for Texas. 408.
Witches and Witch-hunts. Meltzer. 62.
Wittlinger. What's in a Name. 227.
Wolf. Cuba. 189.
Wolf at the Door. Datlow. 396.
Wolf Tower. Lee. 409.
Wolfe. Oxford First Book of Art. 190.
Women Warriors. Mayer. 60.
Wonders. Newsome. 217.
Wong. Behind the Wheel. 190.
. Buzz. 420.
. Night Garden. 190.
Wood. About Face. 111.
Woodruff. Ghost of Lizard Light. 191.
Woodson. Miracle's Boys. 342.
Working with Wildlife. Maynard. 178.
World According to Horses. Budiansky. 309.
World Turned Upside Down. Ferrie. 170.
Wormell. Why Not? 259.
Wormy Worm. Raschka. 254.
Worrywarts. Edwards. 90.
Wright. Moonlight Man. 259.
Wulffson. Toys! 379.
Yaccarino. Deep in the Jungle. 260.
Yamanaka. Name Me Nobody. 154.
Year They Burned the Books. Garden. 11.
Year without Rain. Love. 410.
Yep. Cockroach Cooties. 379.
. Magic Paintbrush. 295.
Yolen. Fairies' Ring. 191.
. How Do Dinosaurs Say Good Night?
380.
.Mary Celeste. 111.
.Not One Damsel in Distress. 296.
.Off We Go! 260.
.Queen's Own Fool. 421.
Yorinks. Arthur Yorinks's The Flying Latke.
112.
You Forgot Your Skirt, Amelia Bloomer! Corey.
205.
You're a Brave Man, Julius Zimmerman. Mills.
23.
You're On! Carlson. 8.
Young Jesus of Nazareth. Mayer. 99.
Young. Video. 191.
Yum! McNaughton. 101.
Zachary's Ball. Tavares. 335.
Zagazoo. Blake. 123.
Zeman. Sindbad. 228.
Ziefert. Hats Off for the Fourth of July! 380.
__ . Pushkin Minds the Bundle. 342.
Zimmerman. My Dog Toby. 381.
Zink. Bennett. 83.
Zooman Sam. Lowry. 21.
-
Starred in Kirkus Reviews
CORNFLAKES
Poems and full-color pictures
by James Stevel
--
"Picking up where Candy Corn left off, Stevenson gives
wry and gently sentimental twists to 25 more everyday
sights: fathers and sons in the park; his wastebasket...
a mountainous hamburger. Tailor-made for sharing in
class or on a lap." -Starred 
review/Kirkus Reviews
"[In this fourth] collection of poems with snap, crackle
and plenty of pop appeal, Stevenson again disarms readers
with his choice of subjects, his offhand art and wryly
comic verse. Crammed with surprises and happy bursts
of recognition, this volume will invigorate kids' abilities
to enjoy the world around them" -Publishers Weekly
Ages 8 up. $14.95 Tr (0-688-16781-7)
Other poetry books by James Stevenson
POPCORN 
SWEET CORN 
CANDY CORN
Ages 8 up. $14.95 
Ages 8 up. $5.95 Pb 
Ages 8 up. $15.00
Tr (0-688-15261-9) 
(0-688-17304-7) 
Tr (0-688-15837-4)
SGreenwillow Books
An Imprint of HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
Kppn In nfachimsR
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
I
; 1~"~--··-··--- 
--------·---
-U·-··l~i
5PECTi;AL oFFEP'
a
One-year subscription*
(8 issues) only $19-77*
$10 P.".9,
Us add $10 postage
-outside 
ad
F 
c.ver price 54 51.
"4 perfectly magical offering.I*
The Secret of the
Stone
written by Robert San Souci, illustrated by James Ransom
+"...an artful blend of magic and courage in a
cheering tale that is stunningly depicted in
Ransome's resplendent artwork."
-Kirkus Rvie 
t
(pointer reviev
"San Souci's retelling of a
story from both African
n•nA Africn-AmPrirn
4
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
SIll0008-9036
I1 -A
0008-9036(200007/08)53:11; 1-A
-
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
is online!
It is our great pleasure to announce that, beginning with the
1999-2000 volume year, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books will be available to our print subscribers as a searchable
online database. Print subscribers will be able to browse the
latest issue online, look through issues from the 1998-99 volume
year, and search for reviews by title, author, and reading level.
The staff of The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
cordially invites you to browse through the September 1998
sample issue at:
http://www.prairienet.org/cgi-bin/ccb/bulletin.cgi
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
The Best of Tradition and Technology
#1
°Ik
4r.
