ILLIN
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
a
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
9 
-
f
* 
*
r "Well-written prose
and exquisite art'"
A POSSIBLE TREE
By Josephine Haskell Aldridge
llustrated in full color by Daniel San Souci
"As fall turns to winter, the forest animals gather in a small tree
to find comfort and solace....When the townspeople gather
around it on Christmas Eve, the animals are settled in its
branches, with the snow falling gently all around. San
Souci's full-page water color illustrations imbue the
animals and trees with their own special personality
as each creature stares out from its perch."
-* School Library Journal
"San Souci's gorgeously lit watercolors don't
show us the tree until the very end, when
the humans, intrigued by reports of a tree
Sthat 'looks like Christmas wreaths all over,'
go to investigate. They find a veritable
peaceable kingdom snuggled in the
tree's limbs."-Publishers Weekly
"An interesting Christmas-tree story
and good read-aloud for young
chidren."-Booklist
$14.95 RSBE
0-02-700407-4/Ages 5-8
E indat a side-sewn
-
reinforced hardco'er edition.
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 1993
Vol.47 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
113 THE BIG PICTURE
The Last Christmas Present by Matt Novak
114 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
115 * Missing AngelJuan by Francesca Lia Block
121 * Be Seated: A Book about Chairs by James Cross Giblin
125 * Drat These Brats! by X. J. Kennedy; illustrated by James Watts
129 * The Amazing Felix by Emily Arnold McCully
133 * More Rootabagas by Carl Sandburg; illustrated by Paul O. Zelinsky
138 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
140 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Carol Fox, Reviewer (CF)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1993 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Matt Novak, from The Last Christmas Present ©1993 by Matt Novak and
used by permission of Orchard Books.
DECEMBER 1993 
* 113
THE BIG PICTURE
The Last Christmas Present
written and illustrated by Matt Novak
Christmas seems to bring out the biggest, if not the best, in publishers: with pop-
ups, fold-outs, punch-outs, books that squeak and sing and ho-ho-ho, and over-
sized glamorized picture books, it's good to find a book that can still find simple
pleasure in the holiday. In Matt Novak's The Last Christmas Present, Irwin, the
youngest and smallest of Santa's elves, is pushed around by the others, who leave
to him the hardest tasks while they take extended milk breaks. Even when Irwin
finds a present that Santa accidentally left behind, the other elves can't be bothered
("Just go to bed, chucklehead"), and Irwin, with his faithful sled-pup Blitz, has to
deliver the present himself.
Kids love to see the little guy prevail, and this little guy (with his little
dog) successfully makes a hazardous trip across the "unexplored territory" between
the North Pole and Snowville, where he must deliver the present to 10 Main St.
With pluck and ingenuity, Irwin and Blitz survive wolves, an avalanche ("Rumble"),
a snow-monster ("Grrr"), thin ice ("Uh-oh"), and sharks ("Double uh-oh") to
reach their destination, where they meet Santa befuddledly searching his bag ("Now,
where did I put that thing?"). Irwin holds out the present: "Hi, big guy."
Novak's cozy cartooned panels, brief narrative descriptors, and deadpan
ballooned dialogue faithfully follow Irwin through his pilgrimage. When so much
children's book illustration seems to be following the dictum that more is more,
Novak keeps things small and clean and tidy. Irwin is a tough little dumpling,
Blitz a half-sized variation; their lines and postures are funny, solid, and brave. As
well, when many holiday books plume and flourish with nostalgic Victorian excess
in both words and pictures, Novak's book recalls the unpretentious animated TV
specials from the 'sixties where Rudolph and Frosty made their own courageous
Christmas journeys in the cool blue night while Burl Ives cheered them on.
We know that featuring this Christmas special in the December issue of
The Bulletin means subscribers won't be able to get it until after-maybe long
after-the season is finished. The first robin might be singing when Irwin and
Blitz finally make their way to your library; but first, it's worth the wait, and sec-
ond, kids won't care. When I was working as a children's librarian, I despaired of
ever having the new Christmas books in time for the big day. Then I noticed that
the best ones, the authentically child-sized ones that kept the magic of the season
and told a good story, were checked out all year 'round. So don't hold this book
back until next Christmas approaches. Helped by Irwin, Blitz, and Santa, kids can
count the days.
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor
114 
* 
THE BULLETIN
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANCONA, GEORGE 
Pablo Remembers: The Fiesta of the Day of the Dead; Spanish
ed. Pablo Recuerda: La Fiesta del Dia De Los Muertos; written and illus. with pho-
tographs by George Ancona. 
Lothrop, 1993 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11250-1 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11249-8 
$15.00
Spanish ed. ISBN 0-688-12894-7 
$15.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
Published in Spanish and English editions, Ancona's latest photodocumentary fol-
lows one Mexican family through the three-day festival of the Day of the Dead, a
celebration and commemoration of passed-on relatives that encompasses what we
in this country call Halloween, All Saints Day, and All Souls Day. As Ancona
explains in an afterword, el Dia de Los Muertos is a syncretic combination of Aztec
and Catholic beliefs; the elaborate family altars constructed for the holiday include
candy skulls, tamales, flowers, and other "special things that their dead relatives
enjoyed during their lifetimes." The book is handsomely designed with a judi-
cious use of color borders; full-color photographs begin with Pablo and his sister
and mother going to the market in Oaxaca for the special holiday foods and take
the family through the various stages of the holiday, ending with the All Souls Day
celebration in the cemetery where families go to tidy and decorate their relatives'
tombs and graves. The photography has the intimacy of high-quality family snap-
shots, and the tone of the text is clear and natural. RS
ANDERSON, 
JOAN 
Earth Keepers; illus. with photographs by George
Ancona. 
Gulliver Green/Harcourt, 1993 
96p
ISBN 0-15-242199-8 $17.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Anderson begins her book with a question: "How many of us today truly feel part
of the land on which we live?" Following an introductory discussion of how dis-
connected most urban dwellers are from the natural world, she describes, with the
help ofAncona's onsite black-and-white photographs, three environmental projects
established to reconnect us. The first is the sloop Clearwater, dedicated to helping
clean up the Hudson River and to educating people on the dangers of pollution;
the second is an inner city garden area leased in four-by-eight-foot plots at twelve
dollars a year for cultivation by neighbors who want to get their hands in the dirt;
and the last is Lynn Rogers' lifelong tracking of bears for the study of wildlife
habitat. Says Rogers at the end of an engaging encounter with one of the animals
he has moved to a safer area, "We're doing all this work for the web of life. It is our
hope that everyone who lives on this earth will realize the interconnection before
it's too late." (See Laurence Pringle's Bearman, BCCB 11/89, for a fuller account
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
115
of Rogers' work.) Anderson and Ancona's book will contribute by involving kids
in specific ways they can help; the garden section, especially, makes a reader realize
that the first step is your own back yard--or an empty lot filled with garbage, if it's
the only thing available. While some of the work clearly depends on specialists,
the women who started the garden were simply downhome determined to replace
something dead and ugly with something growing and beautiful. The help they
got from volunteers was encouraging and will start kids thinking in all the right
directions. As a photodocumentary, this achieves its self-avowedly useful goal
through a clean, working complement of text and illustration. BH
BJORK, CHRISTINA 
The Other Alice: The Story ofAlice Liddell and Alice in Won-
derland; tr. by Joan Sandin; illus. by Inga-Karin Eriksson and with
photographs. 
R&S/Farrar, 1993 
93p
ISBN 91-29-62242-5 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 5-7
A blend of fictionalized biography, travelogue, and reader's companion, The Other
Alice tells the story of the little girl who prompted the Alice books and her friend-
ship with their author. The prose is lively and engaging as it tells of Alice Liddell's
growing-and finally ebbing-friendship with the otherwise shy Mr. Dodgson;
while Bj6rk treats the friendship as innocent if peculiar, she also makes it clear that
Mrs. Liddell was at times uneasy with the connection. The book's real appeal lies
in its successful evocation of the world where Alice arose, an Oxonian world of wit
and nonsense, zoo visits and boat trips. The format, double columns of print with
photos, original Tenniel and Carroll drawings, and somewhat unimaginative illus-
trations, has a cheerfully haphazard appearance, ideal for a quick peek that turns
into a longer browse. More friendly than scholarly (a reading list-as well as
maps, historical information, and biographical details-is appended, but there are
no citations for the quotes or biographical information), with a definitely English
flavor, this book nonetheless succeeds in doing what many works about Carroll
and the Alice books do not: conveying the appeal of Alice's original friendship as
well as engendering appreciation of the books it elicited. DS
BLOCK, FRANCESCA LA 
MissingAngelJuan. HarperCollins, 1993 
138p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023007-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023004-5 
$14.00 
R Gr. 9 up
Distraught because Angel Juan has left her and gone to New York, Witch Baby
(BCCB 10/91) decides to go after him and with her "almost-Mom" Weetzie Bat's
blessings, stays in the long-dead Charlie Bat's apartment there. As Witch Baby
searches the city for Angel Juan, readers get a glorious tour of New York, envi-
sioned by the author as a place of dark magic, "all these sparkling electric treasures
and all these strange scary things that shouldn't have been let out but they all
were." Witch Baby is helped in her mission by a couple of gay ghostbusters, the
ghost of Charlie Bat, and a postcard from Angel Juan she hopes will eventually
bring them together again. The writing is controlled and elegiac, the story an
adroit blend of gothic and romantic elements as Witch Baby's quest takes her into
the bleak heart of the city to find her beloved. Which she does: "Then I feel Angel
Juan's lips on mine like all the sunsets and caresses and music and feasty-feasts I
have ever known." This new entry in an offbeat series makes a moody contrast to
the author's L.A. fables, and fans will be relieved to follow Witch Baby back home,
even while Angel Juan remains behind. RS
116 
* THE BULLETIN
BROOKS, BRUCE 
Boys WillBe. 
Holt, 1993 
132p
ISBN 0-8050-2420-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
From bullies to baseball caps, books to body odor, winning to losing, and moms to
dads, Brooks covers the bases of boyhood in this frisky collection of essays. Sex,
interestingly, isn't mentioned (although even Brooks' fictional prototype, eleven-
year-old Jason LaAntoine Gonzales-Wong, must have thought about it a time or
two), putting the interest level of the book somewhat at odds with Brooks' ever-
fresh but often sophisticated style. In a slightly disingenuous introduction, Brooks
explains to boys that some of the essays might seem to be directed toward adults,
but that "this whole book is intended foryou to read," and invites readers to "eaves-
drop" on those passages that seem adult. Maybe. In any case, much of the book
speaks with an immediacy ("What to Do about Bullies: Punch them in the nose")
that boys will appreciate, and while some boys might feel left out (those who don't
wear sports caps; those who do have girls for best friends), they can still enjoy the
wit of the collection's best essays, such as "Eight Reasons Why Ice Hockey Kicks
Football's Tutu" and "Stink." The tone is a little presumptuous (as are the facts-
girl dogs sniff poop, too) and some of the pieces are too long, but the book is
always lively, confidently mixing up the erudite and colloquial in a way that dem-
onstrates the respect for boys that is asked for by the text. RS
BROWN, DON 
Ruth Law Thrills a Nation; written and illus. by Don
Brown. 
Ticknor & Fields, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-395-66404-7 
$13.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Ruth Law is hardly a household word today, but she received her fifteen minutes of
fame in 1916, when she attempted to become the first person to fly from Chicago
to New York in one day. She didn't quite succeed, but she nonetheless got recog-
nition, a military band, and this picture book featuring her exploit. Brown's style,
both literary and illustrative, is matter-of-fact and engaging, including details such
as the fact that Ruth wore a skirt over her two woolen suits and two leather suits
because "in 1916, a polite lady always wore a skirt." The droll, spidery lines of the
artwork make distinctive characters of the dramatis personae, and the landscape
scenes as Ruth rises up through the dawn or hovers precariously over the interven-
ing terrain are tenderly washed with hues of pinks, blues, and greens. This is a
cozily adventurous piece of history, and a great way to get a woman other than
Amelia Earhart into a school unit on transportation. DS
BURKE, TIMOTHY R. 
Tugboats in Action; written and illus. with photographs by
Timothy R. Burke. 
Whitman, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-8112-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. K-3
In a morning's sail up the river from a Great Lakes harbor, the tugboat Kansas and
her crew guide a fully loaded freighter around several sharp bends, under a lift
bridge, and past a docked ferryboat to bring the ship safely to mooring beside a
grain elevator. It's not glamorous work, but it requires skill and teamwork. Cap-
tain Burke not only sails the tug, he also tells the story of his morning's work with
crisp, full-color photographs and a brief but descriptive text. The photos match
the text for the most part; only one picture causes confusion: the first picture of
the ship to be towed presents a different ship from the one the tug tows in all of the
following pictures. (And, strangely, the tug's crew members change their shirts a
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
117
lot.) An afterward and a glossary give more detail about tugs and shipping on the
Great Lakes. In all, a prosaic but genuine account of a tugboat trip. CF
CAZET, DENYS 
Born in the Gravy; written and illus. by Denys Cazet. 
Jackson/
Orchard, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08638-0 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05488-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
As they enjoy their cones at the ice cream store, Margarita tells Papa about her first
day of kindergarten-saying goodbye to tearful Mama, getting cubbies and lunch
chips, singing, pledging allegiance, taking the teacher's notes to the office, drawing
a dead bug, getting teased by first graders at recess, sitting in a circle, watching
Juan Alberto's allergic reaction to beans and then seeing fire trucks arrive to bring
down the principal who went up to retrieve Archie, doing math, listening to a
story, witnessing Fernando blowing beans out of his nose across the room, and
singing the "Good-bye Song." It's a mouthful, some of it in Spanish and some in
English, and it's entertaining, too, though Cazet indulges in adult jokes (many of
them in the conversation balloons angled cleverly into the format) that will whizz
past the heads of the young audience: "You're just in time.... We were about to
discuss crime and punishment"; or later, "I pledge allegiance to the flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republicans for which it... ." The fragmen-
tary nature of Margarita's narrative to her father is confusing, as well. Fortunately
the squiggly crayon drawings will reclaim any stray attention with a joviality that's
exaggerated but not too far from the humorous reality of classroom rookies, who
will enjoy the view ex post facto-like on the second day of kindergarten. BH
CHETWIN, GRACE 
The Chimes ofAlyafaleyn. 
Bradbury, 1993 
23 4p
ISBN 0-02-718222-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Chetwin has developed a unique fantasy world in which the people possess golden
spheres called "heynim" that float in clusters above their heads. Adolescents pass
into adulthood when they are able to mentally snag their own heynim as the spheres
float by. Each heyn emits its own musical chime, and powerful healers are able to
tune their heynim harmoniously in order to cure sick people. In a small village on
this world, Tamborel seems to be an ordinary little boy who senses something
special about Caidy, his friend's baby sister. Caidy's exceptional abilities become
apparent to everyone when, at her second birthday party, she snags the heynim of
everyone present. The villagers' fear of Caidy's uncontrollable power results in her
persecution, leaving Caidy a bitter young woman. Yet Tamborel lovingly sup-
ports Caidy, even when she endangers their world. The psychological twists to the
plot are not always clearly developed, but Chetwin's original setting and smooth
writing make for a fantasy worth reading. KJ
COERR, ELEANOR 
Sadako; illus. by Ed Young. 
Putnam, 1993 
48p
ISBN 0-399-21771-1 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Sadako was two years old when the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima,
where she lived. Ten years later this lively, energetic child developed leukemia. "If
a sick person folds one thousand paper cranes, the gods will grant her wish and
make her well again," her friend Chizuko told her, and from that moment on
Sadako made paper cranes. She died before she was able to make one thousand,
118 
* THE BULLETIN
but her classmates finished them for her. Today, a statue of Sadako stands in
Hiroshima Peace Park. Sadako's story was told with moving simplicity by Eleanor
Coerr in Sadako and the Thousand Paper Cranes (BCCB 7/77); here the author has
recaptured the exuberance and optimism of Sadako's personality while softening
the sadness of the story to make it appropriate for younger children. The story
retains all of its poignancy and is enhanced in a striking manner by Ed Young's
pastels, which express the emotions delicately depicted in this story, and are based
on his images for a video version of the original book. Sadako and her family are
surrounded by the rich green of joy, the muted blue and purple of sadness, the
golden glow of hope, the deep black of loss. The shape of the paper crane remains
the shape of hope throughout the book, even at the saddest moment. Though
blurred by time, Sadako's message is as meaningful as ever: "This is our cry, this is
our prayer: Peace in the world." CF
COLMAN, 
PENNY 
A Woman Unafraid: The Achievements of Frances
Perkins. Atheneum, 1993 
[128p]
ISBN 0-689-31853-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
As Secretary of Labor, Frances Perkins was the architect of many of the significant
achievements of the Roosevelt administration; she was also the first woman to
hold a cabinet position. Colman traces Perkins' achievements from her early days
as a social worker and her service in the government of the state of New York
through her twelve-year stint in the cabinet (including her impeachment by the
House Un-American Activities Committee in 1939), with some small discussion
of the intensely private woman's personal life with her daughter and mentally ill
husband. The writing is occasionally disjointed ("A star debater, Perkins was al-
most five foot five inches tall") and naive ("a variety of bigoted individuals and
groups ... were very nasty"), and the period inclusion of irrelevant contemporary
information is more distracting than scene-setting. Perkins' fire, stern integrity,
and landmark accomplishments shine through, however, and this is a worthwhile
biography to complement accounts of presidents' wives. DS
Cox, CLINTON 
The Forgotten Heroes: The Story ofthe Buffalo Soldiers. Scholastic,
1993 
[180p]
ISBN 0-590-45121-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Clinton Cox, author of Undying Glory (BCCB 1/92), here focuses on another
group of African Americans in the 19th century military: the men of the 9th and
10th cavalry, nicknamed "buffalo soldiers" by the Indians they fought. The book
chronicles the exploits of these units from their formation shortly after the Civil
War through Wounded Knee in 1890, titling each chapter with the name of the
Indian month in which the important events took place. Cox is mindful of the
irony of the situation where "men of two outcast races met in battle . .. while a
government that hated them both imposed white domination over them and their
people," and some of the most poignant stories are those of the black soldiers beset
by their own side, whether verbally by white commanders or physically by Texas
Rangers. The choppy writing (many paragraphs are only one sentence long) and
undifferentiated flow of information make the narrative rather monotonous, un-
fortunately, and we never really get to know any of the soldiers individually in a
way that might engage the audience; there are also no notes for any of the histori-
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
119
cal quotes. This is therefore more of a specialized textbook than the inspiriting
read it could have been, but it's a good survey of an underexamined episode in
U.S. history. An index, bibliography, and list of "Black Congressional Medal of
Honor Winners in the West" are included. DS
DE FELICE, CYNTHIA 
The Light on Hogback Hill. Macmillan, 1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-02-726453-X 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
When Hadley tells new-to-town Josh the local legend of the hag of Hogback Hill,
he's enthralled and convinces a reluctant Hadley that they should find out the
truth behind the story. Often left alone at night by her mother, who works long
hours at a restaurant, Hadley is scared of the hill, and she knows there is something
on it because, from her bedroom window, she can see a flickering light atop its
rocky, desolate summit. Lured by invitingly eerie cover art, fans of Mary Down-
ing Hahn and other spooky-story writers will quickly get caught up in Hadley and
Josh's determination to uncover the secret, and even the discovery that the "hag" is
an entirely human-and nice-old woman leads to further mysteries still. It's
good to have a pair of sixth-grade, opposite-sex protagonists who really are just
friends, and De Felice easily weaves into the mystery a strand of home-front real-
ism as Hadley seeks a way to bring her hardworking, reclusive mother back from
the loneliness that hasn't left her since Hadley's father deserted them years before.
De Felice is not afraid to use motifs familiar from long tradition in children's
fiction, and she clearly knows the hold that an old house, a mysterious stranger,
and a story will have on kids. RS
DEPAOLA, TOMIE 
Strega Nona Meets Her Match; written and illus. by Tomie
dePaola. 
Putnam, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22421-1 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Strega Amelia, whom Strega Nona visited some years back, returns the visit and
decides to set up her own shop of personal services for the people of Calabria.
Since the curious and easily impressed townspeople are lured away by technologi-
cal advancements and generous giveaways, it looks bad for Strega Nona, so bad
that her apprentice Bambolona and her hapless assistant Big Anthony have to find
new jobs. But Strega Nona knows what Bambolona has not yet learned, what Big
Anthony will probably never figure out, and what Strega Amelia has apparently
forgotten: magic is not in machines; magic is in the mind. The wise and percep-
tive Strega Nona allows human nature to do what it will do, and Big Anthony
unwittingly helps Strega Nona reclaim her place as Calabria's strega of choice.
dePaola has created another gentle story about this knowing old woman, and while
his cartoonlike drawings have less shading and depth than in the previous Strega
Nona books, the watercolors are as brightly hued and cheerful as ever. Here is a
civil and generous account of business competition with the unshaken belief that
goodness and business can coincide; both Sesame Street and Wall Street could
benefit. CF
DUGIN, ANDREJ, ad. 
Dragon Feathers; ad. and illus. by Andrej Dugin and Olga
Dugina. 
Thomasson-Grant, 1993 
26p
ISBN 1-56566-047-1 
$14.95 
R 
7-10 yrs
Henry, the son of a poor woodcutter, wants to marry the rich innkeeper's daugh-
120 
* THE BULLETIN
ter, but the innkeeper tells the lad, "The only way you can win my Lucy's hand is
to go to the dragon of the forest, pull out three of his golden feathers, and bring
them back to me." Brave Henry beards the dragon in his castle, and with the help
of the dragon's wife acquires not only the three feathers but also the advice sought
by those Henry has encountered on his journey, so he ends up wealthy and happily
marries the girl of his dreams. The tale, similar to "The Devil and the Three
Golden Hairs," is quietly, even flatly, told, but the real reason for this book is the
illustrations, which are strongly reminiscent of the work of Hieronymus Bosch.
Green-tinted, painstakingly detailed scenes appear at first to depict a rustic and
gemiitlich existence, but a closer look reveals strange half-animal, half-machine
creatures roaming the pages, rocks with keys and holes, and a camel-based centaur
who appears to be giving birth to a boar. The dragon's Escheresque, recursively
geometric castle is almost a relief although he himself is snaky-necked and night-
marish. It's a pity the tale isn't pitched to appeal to the older audience that will
appreciate the pictures, although youngsters with an early taste for high fantasy
may well enjoy this thoughtful visual expression of some complex motifs. DS
DUNCAN, Lois 
The Circus Comes Home: When the Greatest Show on Earth Rode
the Rails; illus. with photographs by Joseph Janney Steinmetz. 
Doubleday,
1993 
64p
ISBN 0-385-30689-X 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
"The first time my father saw a clown he fell in love with the circus," says the
author, whose text explicates her father's photographs of The Ringling Bros. and
Barnum & Bailey Circus at its winter home in Florida. All the colorful panoply of
that famed circus is here, albeit in black and white, as Duncan provides informa-
tion about high-wire artists, fat ladies and midgets, animal acts, and clowns; and
Steinmetz' pictures show fabled artists such as Emmett Kelly happy in their natu-
ral circus habitat. (The book doesn't shy away from tragedy, though, and tells
about high-wire accidents and big-top conflagrations as well.) There's no particu-
lar progression to the narrative, but circus life, as illustrated by the historical pho-
tos and by anecdotes and as described in the photographic captions, has its appeal.
Youngsters accustomed to the flashy and multihued allure of contemporary circus
images will get a different slant on big top life with this unusual look at a time and
tradition now all but vanished. DS
FEIFFER, JULES 
The Man in the Ceiling; written and illus. by Jules
Feiffer. 
di Capua/HarperCollins, 1993 
186p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205036-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205035-4 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Jimmy is a ten-year-old would-be cartoonist, hoping to earn respect with his draw-
ing. Unfortunately his busy father, whom he most wants to please, finds his son's
artistic proclivities dismaying. The magnificent Charley Beemer, school hero, ad-
mires Jimmy's comics but only because he can manipulate Jimmy into drawing
what he, Charley, wants-blood, gore, and violence. With the help of his sister
Lisi and his Uncle Lester, Jimmy eventually finds the confidence to draw what he
wants and to persist in his art. The story rambles a bit, much of it is adult-oriented
(many of the scenes dealing with Father's life-crisis and Uncle Lester's musical, for
instance), and the authorial asides are tiresomely coy, although brief. The cartooning
is an unusual topic, however, and Jimmy's insecurities will be familiar to young
readers; the scenes with king Charley Beemer and toady Jimmy are authentic and
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
121
originally written. Ink and wash, grizzly-lined Feiffer drawings appear through-
out; even more appealing to kids will be Jimmy's smudgy penciled comics depict-
ing the adventures of Mini-Man, Bullethead, and so forth. DS
GIBLIN, JAMES CROSS 
Be Seated: A Book about Chairs. HarperCollins,
1993 
136p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021538-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021537-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
"You probably have a favorite chair," begins Giblin as he settles readers into this
smooth and polished history of the chair. From three-legged stools and mortise-
and-tenon joined chairs of the ancient Egyptians, to the lavish throne of King
Solomon and the graceful klismos of the ancient Greeks, the famous chairs of
Sheridan and the Shakers, and a chair in the form of the ubiquitous Mickey Mouse,
Giblin effortlessly steers his narrative through time and across cultures. Focusing
on the essentials of stylistic development, Giblin explains the relationship of the
chair not just to the desire to sit down but also to domestic habit and develop-
ment, social custom, politics, art, and, in the case of the African Ashantis' golden
stool, to cultural symbolism. Details are judiciously chosen to give young readers
a careful history without overwhelming them, and the black-and-white photo-
graphs are expertly selected to amplify descriptions. Giblin's style is as inviting
and gracious as a comfortable chair itself; the bibliography, source notes, and de-
tailed index are as carefully crafted as the main text. In the hands of a fine author
such as Giblin, the simple chair becomes the focal point for a brief history of
human culture. CF
GOLDSTEIN, BOBBYE S., comp. 
Birthday Rhymes, Special Times; illus. by Jose Aruego
and Ariane Dewey. 
Doubleday, 1993 
48p
ISBN 0-385-30419-6 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A birthday is a day filled with anticipation, excitement, and pure rapture when
everything goes right. Right? Well, not always. While Karla Kuskin's "The Rose
on My Cake" describes the happy recollections of a childhood birthday party and
Jack Prelutsky's poem "Happy Birthday, Dear Dragon" entertains kids with inge-
nious perverseness, John Ciardi's "What Someone Said When He Was Spanked
on the Day Before His Birthday" and Lois Lenski's "Birthday Cake" about a child
who drops his birthday cake on the way to the party remind us we can live through
bad moments even on our birthdays. The authors range from Rachel Field to Shel
Silverstein, but the poetry is sometimes jingly and cliched. Public libraries will
nevertheless find it useful for the subject and the illustrations. Each poem has a
page with exuberant pictures of animals in a birthday mood. The porcupines
holding lighted candles on the ends of their quills and the blue and white skunk
wearing a pink hat with a sash wrapped jauntily around its tail capture a feeling of
celebratory joy. CF
GONEN, RIKA 
Charge! Weapons and Warfare in Ancient Times. 
Runestone,
1993 
72p 
illus. with photographs 
(Buried Worlds)
ISBN 0-8225-3201-8 
$17.21 
M 
Gr. 3-6
Charge! is the result of a facelift for the 1976 Lerner publication Weapons and
Warfare in Ancient Time: a new format, additional pictures, larger type, fewer
pages, and a better layout. No notice of the previous publication is provided in the
122 
* THE BULLETIN
credits, and, unfortunately, significant editing has left the text without some of the
necessary clues to help readers interpret meanings correctly. Most introductory
material telling readers what they are going to read has been removed, along with
many examples amplifying the points made. What happens is that the specificity
so important in archaeology is deleted here, leaving only a vague sense of when or
where some weapon was introduced or used. In addition, the book reverses the
definitions for "ballista" and "catapult" given in the earlier edition. While this
volume is more visually appealing, the information has been reduced to such an
extent that meaning is compromised, and the original volume is still the superior
choice. A pronunciation guide, glossary, and index are appended. CF
GORDON, RUTH 
Feathers; illus. by Lydia Dabcovich. 
Macmillan, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-02-736511-5 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-6
The fine people ofChelm are captured without their wits once again in this charming
addition to the tales of wise fools and foolish wisemen who have been popularized
by I. B. Singer. Gordon reviews the original cause for the Chelmites' numbskillery
before launching into the story of their need for a new bathhouse and of the way
they set about getting one. Local problem-solving skills being what they are, the
intrepid entrepreneurs send their bravest citizens on a journey where they gather
enough money to build their bathhouse, then exchange the money for feathers.
These they release into the air in the direction of Chelm so they won't have to lug
them back. The story ends (or doesn't end at all) with the good folk, a composite
of faith and folly, waiting forever for the feathers to come down. Lydia Dabcovich's
colored-pencil and felt-tip-marker drawings make an apt rough-hewn, scratchy
accompaniment to this tale. Drawn with a sketchlike rapidity, the townsfolk are
appropriately dressed in coarse, patched fabrics and the houses are suitably ill-
made. Both text and art capture the contradiction essential to Chelm stories. CF
GREENE, ELUN 
The Legend of the Cranberry: A Paleo-Indian Tale; illus. by Brad
Sneed. 
Simon, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-671-75975-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-5
In a time so long ago that we have no record of it, the People came to this country
and walked its length and breadth, living off the land. Aiding the People were all
of the animals, especially the mastodons, or Yah-qua-whee, who helped the People
in their quest to reach the sea. Once there, the Yah-qua-whee became destructive.
Their belligerence caused an intervention by the Great Spirit, a fierce battle, a
blood-soaked battleground, destruction of the Yah-qua-whee, and finally the gift
of the cranberry from the Great Spirit as a symbol of peace. The violence and
suffering of the mastodons' defeat is tempered by the charity of the Great Spirit's
gift, a simple blood-red berry that brings healing, food, and brilliant color into the
People's lives. Vigorous, full- and double-page watercolor illustrations capture the
earth tones of a people living from the land, while Greene's retelling, based on a
specifically cited source, has the stylized smoothness of a story steeped in antiquity
but spanning the ages. CF
GRIMM, JAKOB LUDWIG KARL 
Iron Hans; illus. by Marilee Heyer. 
Viking,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-670-81741-4 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Fathers who follow in the path of Robert Bly will be happy to start acculturating
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
123
their sons properly with this picture book version of "Iron John." Others, as well,
will relish the patterned suspense of an unusually complex fairy tale, in which a
king captures a wild man who has dragged hunters to their doom in a lake; the
king's son frees the wild man and then runs away with him for fear of punishment;
the boy fails the wild man's tests to guard a magic spring but gains his promise of
help in times of trouble; finally, the boy wins his way in the court of another king
and claims the princess as his own. Heyer's illustrations, which elaborately frame
the text or burst into double-spread compositions, have a lavish Renaissance mien
with occasional touches of Gothic. They're a bit overcrowded with motifs, but so
is the story-it's an ornamental combination and one that will prove a trendy
choice in bookstores or public library collections. BH
HISER, CONSTANCE 
The Missing Doll; illus. by Marcy Ramsey. 
Holiday House,
1993 
104p
ISBN 0-8234-1046-3 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
The Ghost Witch; illus. by Ellen Eagle. 
Holiday House,
1993 
103p
ISBN 0-8234-1036-6 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Each of these easy chapter books features minimal characterization, a flat writing
style devoid of nuance or individuality, and predictable plotting. There's a big
however, however. Both books also have the considerable advantage of immensely
appealing premises, lots of action, and the kind of straightforward storytelling that's
just right for younger kids moving beyond beginning-readers. Hiser's Missing
Doll talks-and gives fourth-graders Abby and Heather mysterious rhyming clues
when one of their classmates disappears. In Wright's book, Jenny meets the Ghost
Witch, a prank-playing manifestation of a long-dead witch, when she and her
mother are preparing to move into the spooky house left to them by a neighbor.
You won't be convinced by either story for a minute, but then they weren't written
for you, and the target audience will have a good time. Big print, large margins,
and pencil drawings add to the accessibility guaranteed by the fiction. RS
JACKSON, ELLEN 
The Tree of Life: The Wonders of Evolution; illus. by Judeanne
Winter. 
Prometheus, 1993 
40p
ISBN 0-87975-819-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
As the author points out in a prefatory note, there are plenty of picture books
retelling Biblical (or other mythological) stories of creation, but there isn't much
about evolution for the same audience. Her book is a mostly successful attempt to
explain the complex theory, beginning before life began, when "lightning and thun-
der crashed from the cloudy sky, but there were no ears to hear it." When a
"special" synthesis of elements occurred (ignited by a lightning flash, according to
the illustration) the first organism appeared, subsequently dividing and reproduc-
ing and mutating and adapting. The language is kept simple (although if you're
going to explain mutation and adaptation, you might as well name them) and the
progression is logical (except for one illustrative glitch showing humans and vari-
ous animals before their evolution is discussed). While the book outlines evolu-
tion from the simplest life forms through the development of humans, it doesn't
clearly show how a "tiny, almost alive thing" "copying and reproducing" itself
leads to different kinds of life forms, not just "better" versions of the same thing.
Teachers and parents could easily extrapolate from the text, but bone up on the
124 
* 
THE BULLETIN
topic and be prepared for some tough questions. Unrelievedly purple watercolor
illustrations are crudely drawn but serviceable. RS
JAFFE, NINA, ad. 
While Standing on One Foot: Puzzle Stories and Wisdom Tales
from the Jewish Tradition; ad. by Nina Jaffe and Steve Zeitlin; illus. by John
Segal. 
Holt, 1993 
120p
ISBN 0-8050-2594-4 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Each of seventeen tales is divided into two sections: the first poses a dilemma for
the main character; the second describes the clever solution. A court jester, for
instance, is offered an option to choose the manner of his death after he offends
some soldiers. His choice? Old age. While many of the life-or-death situations
have an ironic edge, there's a broad tonal range. A fox whose heart Leviathan plans
to eat claims, mid-ocean, that he must return to shore for it ("We foxes never
travel with our hearts"). A woman forced to divorce and leave her home is allowed
to take her most precious possession-and selects her husband. A number of these
are common folkloric motifs, but others are uniquely Jewish, including a contem-
porary family narrative, "On the Streets of the Lower East Side." The entire col-
lection is of general interest because of the solve-it-yourself aspect ("Can you guess
how this clever traveler escaped his fate?") and the suspense or humor of the diffi-
culties. Occasionally the language slips into anachronistic slang ("Just fire away,
Your Highness, you know it always gives me pleasure to solve your problems"),
but kids will enjoy the informality. Wash drawings in black and white are whim-
sically stylized with figures that have a humorous, paper-doll quality. Thorough
notes identify sources, variations, and adapted elements for every tale; a glossary,
bibliography, and list of organizations devoted to Jewish folklore and culture are
appended. BH
JOHN, LAURIE 
College Girls. Bantam, 1993 
235p 
(Sweet Valley University
#1)
Paper ed. ISBN 0-553-56308-4 
$3.50 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Back to the future. After experiencing high school (BCCB 1/84), middle school
(10/86) and second grade (10/89), the Wakefield twins are now off to Sweet Val-
ley University, a mere two-hour drive across the county. More melodramatic and
slightly sexier than SVH (Todd removes Elizabeth's bra, much to her excitement-
and dismay), this is basically the same sibling stuff that drives the other series, with
Elizabeth, predictably, enthusiastic about getting an education, and Jessica equally
enthusiastic about meeting new boys. Oh, and there's a psycho-killer supposedly
loose on campus. Less self-contained than entries in the other series, this book
leaves a number of threads dangling, mostly having to do with Elizabeth, who's
having a hard time. Todd dumps her. Enid dumps her. Jessica dumps her. Will
you? RS
KENAH, KATHARINE 
Eggs Over Easy; illus. by Maxie Chambliss. 
Dutton,
1993 
84p
ISBN 0-525-45071-8 
$13.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Sam has been feeling abandoned and angry since his father left home over a year
ago. When he discovers that the mallard eggs he and his friend Rowen had been
watching in the park have been abandoned, it strikes an emotional chord and he
begins an almost obsessive attempt to save the eggs. Sam worries that the building
superintendent will be angry because the eggs are hatching in the boiler room and
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
125
thinks up a number of pranks requiring the super's attention elsewhere, including
unscrewing light bulbs and placing inflated balloons in the mail chute. Fortu-
nately for Sam, the super is a candidate for sainthood and doesn't mind much.
The ducklings hatch and Sam learns a lesson about loving from a distance. Nearly
new readers will fly through this little book on the wings of its sprightly dialogue.
Some of the things Sam does may stretch the bounds of acceptability to adults, but
the kids won't notice; what they will notice are the lively individual characters and
fast-paced story. Although the book has a potential lesson to learn about life on
nearly every page, Sam appears to learn only one lesson at a time-let's hope more
books come along to keep him going. CF
KENNEDY, X. J. 
Drat These Brats!; illus. by James Watts. 
McElderry,
1993 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-689-50589-2 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-5
"On a factory tour, Will Gossage,/ Watching folks make bratwurst sausage,/ Jumped
into the meat feet-first.// Brats are bad, but Will's the wurst." X. J. Kennedy
himself must have a touch of rapscallion to keep serving up such fresh helpings of
bratverse, but these are just as spicy as the first and second volumes (BCCB 7/86
and 3/90). Here kids can recognize their own mischievous intent or laugh at
others' ("Snooping round the clinic, Craig/ Stole a whole bubonic plague/ That
some scientist had bottled-// CRASH!/ Craig, why so pale and mottled?") or
simply sigh that there but for the grace of Godgo I. Whatever their degree of iden-
tification, they'll certainly enlarge their vocabularies in the most painless way, since
the poet uses unusual words with natural aplomb: "From crag to crag he springs,
but misses/ And finds out all about abysses." To combine a knack for unforced
rhymes with a gift for cameo narrative is uncommon, but Kennedy keeps doing it
with engaging consistency: "Playing beaver, busy Keith/ Tackled with his two
front teeth/ A redwood trunk. How hard he tried!-/ Not knowing it was petri-
fied." Watts' black-and-white drawings, too, manage to be cartoonishly funny
without becoming cliched. Easy reading, and even easier listening. BH
KHERDIAN, DAVID 
Asking the River; illus. by Nonny Hogrogian. 
Orchard,
1993 
106p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08633-X 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05483-7 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Stepan, who has flunked the second grade once and the fifth
grade twice, wants desperately to get out of an elementary school that degrades
him for being Armenian. Trapped between two cultures and belonging fully to
neither, he dwells on his anger in a first-person narrative that tells more than it
shows. Plot and transitions are vague: "The first week of school was over," begins
one chapter; "Another horrible year of school had come to an end," begins a later
one, with few incidents between; "It was the first day of school. Sixth grade,"
starts another, too soon. The most powerful scenes focus on the relationship be-
tween Stepan and his mother; these two-in contrast with his father-come close
to arguing their way across the generational bridge that splits their family; yet the
momentum dissipates with the fragmentation of this focus. As a sequence of de-
scriptions and dialogues centering on a central theme, this may very likely hold the
attention of readers caught up in a similar multi-cultural quandary. As a story, it
depends too much on the protagonist's traversing his Racine, Wisconsin, neigh-
126 
* THE BULLETIN
borhood and expressing his feelings to characters who promise to be fascinating if
only we could get to know them through consistent action instead of brief conver-
sational encounters. BH
KIMMEL, ERIC A. 
Asher and the Capmakers: A Hanukkah Story; illus. by Will
Hillenbrand. 
Holiday House, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1031-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
The author's fifth Hanukkah story, first published in Cricket magazine, is marked
by a mixture of traditions, which he acknowledges here to be Irish, English, and
Eastern European. The settings include the Carpathian Mountains, where young
Asher sets out to borrow an egg from a neighbor for his family's Hanukkah latkes,
and Jerusalem, to which he flies with the help of a magic cap from the kapelyushniki,
or Jewish fairies. There he temporarily loses his cap, is caught disrupting the Pasha's
feast, and recovers his magic just in the nick of time-which turns out to be seven
years later in real time. Kimmel writes with a strong sense of pace and humor
("'Any last requests?' the hangman asked. 'May I borrow an egg?' Asher replied"),
while Hillenbrand meets him more than halfway with individualistic paintings
that are suspenseful-almost Munchian-in their heavy line, brooding color, and
swirling composition. Some listeners' expectations may be jarred by the ethnic
composite: a spirit fox, for instance, can be either disastrous or advantageous,
depending on the culture from which a story is drawn, and here we have no pat-
tern to help us judge the significance ofAsher's freeing and following a fox. While
there's a certain overload of disparate elements, kids caught up in the action of
story and pictures will be no more concerned about narrative pattern than Jewish
non-traditionalists will be concerned by a Hanukkah tale with overtones of a Hal-
loween witch-ride. BH
KNUDSON, R. R. 
The WonderfulPen ofMay Swenson. 
Macmillan, 1993 
[128p]
ISBN 0-02-750915-X 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
"May welcomed fame," the beginning of this biography refreshingly states. "One
reason she had been writing all her life was to be noticed by readers." Since the
book only covers the first part of the poet's long and productive life (a second
volume is planned), the fame comes only towards the end here. Knudson, the
poet's close friend and literary executor, covers Swenson's early years growing up
in Utah amid a large Mormon family and her struggles to keep body and soul
together after her move to New York during the Depression. The picture of May
Swenson that emerges here--careful, sensitive, observant, resolute, and loyal to
her friends (who included Elizabeth Bishop)-is, appropriately enough, drawn in
large part by her own poetry, which appears throughout, allowing students to
encounter "The Centaur" or "Her Management" in a different context than usual
or simply for the very first time. "Read me. Read my mind," the inscription at her
gravesite quotes one of her poems, and this near-anthology gives readers a straight-
forward and pleasurable opportunity to do just that. DS
KNUTSON, BARBARA, ad. 
Sungura and Leopard: A Swahili Trickster Tale; ad. and
illus. by Barbara Knutson. 
Little, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-316-50010-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
Unbeknownst to one another, Leopard and Sungura the hare select the same site
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
127
on which to build a house. As they gather construction materials and proceed with
the work, each believes that the progress accomplished by the other represents
ancestral help. It comes as a surprise, then, when the two wake up in the finished
hut and must discontentedly divide it. Resentful Leopard begins to eye Sungura's
children so hungrily that the hare family must trick him into leaving with a shout
loud enough to be overheard: "'Ai! Those children of ours!' cried Sungura. 'I
suppose I'll have to get them some leopard meat today, or we'll never have peace.'"
This has less striking simplicity of narrative and artistic composition than the au-
thor-artist's first picture book, How the Guinea Fowl Got Her Spots (BCCB 7/90),
but it maintains the same kind of brisk storytelling pace and capable drafting. The
ink and watercolor scratchboard paintings are thickly textured and, except for an
arresting contrast of one scene in midnight blue, resonant with the golden-brown
hues that color both animals. An introductory note discusses the general back-
ground of the story without naming a specific source. BH
KREIKEMEIER, GREGORY SCOTT 
Come with Me to Africa: A Photographic Journey;
written and illus. with photographs by Gregory Scott Kreikemeier. 
Golden,
1993 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-307-15660-5 
$10.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
This oversized album contains many beautiful photographs taken by Kreikemeier
while on an ambitious, six-month road trip from Morocco to Zimbabwe, passing
through the countries of Algeria, Niger, Nigeria, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Zaire, Burundi, Tanzania, Malawi, Zambia, and Botswana. The picto-
rial emphasis is on dramatic landscapes, exotic animals, and people in traditional
dress; Kreikemeier explains that the trip deliberately avoided cities in favor of "the
best and most beautiful." While this is a tourist's vision of a complex continent,
it's still wide-ranging, and the country-by-country sequence will give readers a
good sense of how the continent changes from north to south as well as the dis-
tinctions between nations themselves, a differentiation often lacking in books that
treat Africa as a single country. There's an index, and interesting prefatory mate-
rial includes a map, a cutaway diagram of the expedition vehicle, and an itemized
list of Kreikemeier's supplies and trip clothing-all the glorious specifics upon
which wish-fulfillment armchair fantasies are based. RS
LILLIE, PATRICIA 
When This Box Is Full; illus. by Donald Crews. 
Greenwillow,
1993 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12017-2 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12016-4 
$14.00 
R 3-6 yrs
Using an empty wooden box and twelve familiar items representing the months of
the year, Lillie and Crews have created an opportunity for an experiential feast for
young children. As the pages turn, the box fills with such memory- and speech-
evoking items as a snowman's scarf, a red foil heart, and a robin's feather. The
photographic cut-out pictures are placed on the pastel pages in collage effect to
look as if they are falling into the box. Names of the months cumulate in bold
print on the left page of each double-page spread, and the uncluttered page design
allows the viewer to concentrate on the items and the box. Teachers and librarians
will relish this book for all of the concepts that can be developed with it, including
empty and full, inside and outside, collecting, counting, sharing, remembering,
128 
* THE BULLETIN
and the passage of time. This book invites children to share their own experiences
and ideas; adults and children will reach into it again and again. CF
LIPTAK, KAREN 
Endangered Peoples. Watts, 1993 
16 0p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Impact Books)
ISBN 0-531-10987-9 
$13.40 
R Gr. 7-12
Focusing on the Amazon-dwelling Yanomami, the San people of the Kalahari
Desert, the Mabuti people of the Ituri forest, Australian aborigines, and the Arctic
Inuit, Liptak takes a wise and reasoned look at tribal peoples faced with the de-
mands of the modern world. Each chapter cogently describes the history and
traditional lifestyle of the group in question and then discusses the changes each
group is experiencing due to encroaching agricultural cultivation, mineral explora-
tion and mining, a newly cash economy, or other encounters with a technological,
sometimes prejudicial, society. Stating that "it would be naive to expect the
Yanomami, the San, and any other tribal group to remain static," Liptak is no
nouveau Rousseau idealizing traditional "ways" mowed down by "progress"; in-
stead, she calls for a balance that will allow indigenous peoples to embrace the
benefits of the modern age while holding onto their identities. Black-and-white
photos give faces to the survey; notes, a directory, bibliography, index, and glos-
sary add to the reference value. RS
LYONS, MARY E. 
Stitching Stars: The Story Quilts ofHarriet Powers. Scribner's,
1993 
42p 
illus. with photographs 
(African-American Artists and Artisans)
ISBN 0-684-19576-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Harriet Powers was born in slavery and lived in poverty, with few records of her
life except her richly imaginative story quilts. In this brief artistic biography, Lyons
openly surmises or fictionalizes where the bitter obscurity of slavery and poverty
has resulted in an absence of records, but Harriet speaks eloquently through her
handiwork depicting Bible stories and natural phenomena. Lyons explains how a
young white schoolteacher became enamored of Harriet's quilts, bought them,
and exhibited them, as well as taking down Harriet's explanation of the stories
depicted thereupon, and she also describes the history and importance of quilting
in the African-American community. The colors of the quilts (shown in many
color and black-and-white photos) have faded, but their narrative power remains
evident and fascinating; Lyons' lively writing stitches concepts together with smooth-
ness and clarity. In an attractively accessible format, this is both an unusual take
on history and a reminder of the democratic possibilities of art. A list of selected
sources and an index are included. DS
MCCANTS, WILLIAM D. Anything Can Happen in High School (and it usually
does). 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1993 
24 5p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-276604-9 
$10.95
Papered. ISBN 0-15-276605-7 
$3.95 
R 
Gr. 8-10
An affable California comedy in the Ron Koertge mode, this first novel follows the
travails of sophomore T.J., who's trying to win back the heart of teen-queen Janet,
who's dumped him for student body president David Whitworth. Hoping to
impress Janet with his school spirit, T.J., along with his friends Alex and Vivian,
starts a new service club, the Radical Wave, but Whitworth sees through the sub-
terfuge and does everything he can to make the Wave go under. The high school
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
129
setting is rambunctiously real, as is the repartee ("'Oh, yeah?' I said. 'Well, your
birth certificate was a written apology from a condom factory'"). There's nothing
exceptionally deep here, but the writing is both stylish and easy to read, and the
burgeoning romance between T.J. and smart, sexy, and aggressive Vivian adds
some real sparks. RS
McCULLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
TheAmazing Felix; written and illus. by Emily Arnold
McCully. 
Putnam, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22428-9 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
In this companion volume to Mirette on the High Wire (BCCB 10/92), Felix is
another young prodigy whose talent saves the day. Felix starts out in trouble,
however; his famous concert pianist father wants Felix and his sister Fanny to
follow in his musical footsteps, but Felix hates scales and sitting still. Felix finds a
magician who teaches the boy his secrets of prestidigitation, and Felix practices
magic in addition to-and sometimes during-piano-playing. Felix's magic saves
the day when his father must temporarily abandon an audience, and to Felix's
delight not only is the crowd enchanted by his sleight-of-hand, his father is im-
pressed too. The plush 1920s atmosphere (complete with a splendidly ritzy ocean
voyage) is freely evoked in luxuriously intense watercolors and casually daubed
shapes. This has the same child-as-conqueror appeal as Mirette, if a slightly more
contrived plot, and youngsters will relish the turnabout of young Felix sternly
instructing his father to "practice, practice, practice!" DS
MCMULLAN, KATE 
Nutcracker Noel; illus. by Jim McMullan. 
di Capua/
HarperCollins, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205040-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205039-7 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Noel is thrilled to get a part in a real ballet, but she's not so pleased with the role
assignments: she's a tree. She is at first jealous of her classmates, who get to be
cookie dolls and mice and other livelier things, but then her teacher Miss Olga
infuses her with botanical passion ("All the way home Noel tried to imagine how it
might feel to be green and prickly") and Noel is suffused with tree-ness at home as
well as in class. Then, when the costumes appear, Noel gets a glamorous frosty
gown while the cookie-doll is encased in identity-hiding dough. The story is heartfelt
but humorous, complete with funny touches such as the cookie-doll's stage mother
in mink and Miss Olga's reminiscence of her ballet debut as a toadstool ("No one
who saw me has ever forgotten the way I fluttered my cap"). The illustrations
show angular Modigliani-esque little dancers, confined to their pink tights and
black leotards until the ballet liberates them into the airy blue firmament. A nicely
gutsy alternative to prettified twirling-in-tulle ballet stories, this is a cheerful tale
about the rewards of doing one's small part well; young team players of all kinds,
but especially young toe-shoe aspirants, will enjoy it. DS
MARTIN, JANE READ 
Now Everybody Really Hates Me; written by Jane Read Mar-
tin and Patricia Marx; illus. by Roz Chast. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021294-2 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021293-4 
$14.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Patty Jane is in the snit of all snits, and she's cozily ensconced in her well-stocked
bedroom while planning the appropriate punishment for the family that has so
130 
* 
THE BULLETIN
unjustly sentenced her to confinement there. Her parents say she hit her brother
Theodore and called him a dumbbell at his own birthday party, but Patty Jane is
quick with her defense: "I did not hit Theodore. I touched him hard. I did not
call him a dumbbell. I called him a dumb head." She imagines a wild life staying
in her room until she's old and refusing to interact with any family members ex-
cept the dog. Or perhaps escape is the best idea (she can dig a tunnel with her
"pointy dress-up shoes"), but she cuts short her fantasy to succumb to her parents'
entreaties and come out for a little ice cream and cake. Children and adults will
both find this funny, if not always in quite the same way; while adults will admire
the droll "childishness," kids are likelier to appreciate the intensity of Patty Jane's
fervor and the inventiveness of her vision of martyrdom and revenge. New Yorker
perennial Roz Chast's illustrations amplify the thoroughness of our heroine's plan-
ning while caricaturing it enough for comic distance; the busily scrawling lines,
touched with pale watercolor, offer Patty's fantasies up in balloons (the weeping of
all her family and associates), panels (her tunnelling out) or proscenium-curtained
stages (alternatives for her last meal), keeping the look varied and exciting. An
entertaining tour de sulk, the book doesn't yield even on the final page, when
Patty Jane's parents are carrying her down bodily while her loyal dog all but ap-
plauds. DS
MILLS, CLAUDIA 
Dinah in Love. 
Macmillan, 1993 
14 3p
ISBN 0-02-766998-X 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
"A boy doesn't throw a bra at a girl's head unless he likes her," wisely pronounces
Suzanne, best friend of Dinah Seabrooke (heroine of Dynamite Dinah, BCCB 4/
90, and Dinah for President, 4/92). If Suzanne is right, then Nick Tribble likes
Dinah: he teases her in class, bothers her at her father's store (the locus of the bra-
flinging incident), tangles with her at play auditions, and, finally, faces offwith her
in a teacher-assigned debate. Readers will be less surprised than Dinah to find that
she's developed liking and respect for Nick along the way, so she finally does invite
him to the sixth-grade sock hop. It's predictable, sure, but so were Tracy and
Hepburn, and the inevitability of the end won't keep youngsters from enjoying
Dinah's ebullient and strong-willed grade-school courtship. It's also nice to see
Mrs. Briscoe, first appearing in Dinah for President, back in her role as adult friend
and occasional adviser to Dinah. She clearly enjoys theatrical Dinah's company,
and so will readers, especially fans of previous Dinah adventures who will relish
seeing Dinah pair up with somebody in her own inimitable style. DS
NOVAK, MATT 
The Last Christmas Present; written and illus. by Matt
Novak. Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08645-3 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05495-0 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 113.
PETERSEN, PALLE 
Inunguak: 
The Little Greenlander; illus. by Jens
Rosing. 
Lothrop, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09877-0 
$13.95
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09876-2 
$14.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Inunguak, jeered by the other boys because of his ineptness at hunting and
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
131
dogsledding, finds comfort in his grandfather and Grandfather's stories, ancient
creation myths of the Inuit. When Europeans appear for the first time in Inunguak's
village, Grandfather is scared and wary, and warns the villagers that trading their
"best furs and blubber for sharp knives and bright cloth" will only bring misfor-
tune. The prophecy comes true the next winter, when there is not enough food
and the old people, including Grandfather, "die in order to spare food for the
young." It is Inunguak, filled with the wisdom of the stories, who finds a way to
save the village. While the story seems a bit grim for the picture book audience, it
is true to the culture it portrays, infusing the traditional weakest-will-prevail tale
with a world-view that's consistent with Inuit culture. The pictures, too, are dis-
mally toned, sometimes awkward in the postures of people and animals, but con-
vincingly Arctic in their muddled tones of blue and gray. On the whole, the book
speaks with an honest immediacy and without the preaching that characterizes so
many of the recent native-people-ecological-wonder-tales. RS
PIENKOWSKI, JAN 
ABC Dinosaurs and Other Prehistoric Creatures; written and il-
lus. by Jan Pienkowski. 
Lodestar, 1993 
10p
ISBN 0-525-67468-3 
$18.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
From allosaurus to zephyrosaurus, twenty-six prehistoric creatures fly and flop and
wriggle and chomp their way across Pienkowski's splashy pop-up double-spreads.
There might be three or four animals per spread; readers can match the creature to
the appropriate name via the letter-patterning in each dino's design. While kids
will love the extravagant beasts and enjoy the tongue-twisting pronunciation (pro-
vided) of the various names, not to mention the fun pulling the tab that makes the
stegosaurus leap at the tyrannosaurus rex eating its tail, this is stronger as an alpha-
bet book than as a dinosaur book. As a tiny note indicates, "creatures listed on the
same page did not necessarily live at the same time," so the picture of gallimius
chowing down on some hypsilophodon eggs might be pure fantasy. And did baby
hypsilophodons really look so much like Sesame Street's Grover? While you don't
want to lay too much pedantry on one innocent book, it seems a mistake to rein-
force one concept (the alphabet) at the expense of another (natural history). RS
PRYOR, BONNIE 
Birthday Blizzard; illus. by Molly Delaney. 
Morrow,
1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09424-4 
$14.95
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09423-6 
$15.00 
R 5-8 yrs
Jamie's upset when a blizzard snows in her family on her birthday, thus depriving
her of her eagerly anticipated party. The snowstorm proves to be an exciting
adventure, however, as elderly neighbors, a young couple and their new baby,
family friends, and a snowplow driver all turn up at Jamie's house to shelter from
the drifts and celebrate Jamie's birthday. The romance and pleasurable inconve-
nience of the snowbound state are well captured in this softly cheerful book, and
the quietly cumulative pattern of one set of rescued travelers after another will
draw young readers in. The illustrations, gentle and sometimes goofy line and
watercolor, show the snow as a soft blanket, all-encompassing without being scary,
and it's a great background for the cozy electricity-free house cum burrow. This is
a nice frosty readaloud-it might be fun to offer it as a popsicle substitute in
midsummer. DS
132 
* THE BULLETIN
RINALDI, ANN 
The Fifth of March: A Story of the Boston Massacre. Gulliver/
Harcourt, 1993 
333p 
(Great Episodes)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200343-6 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-227517-7 
$3.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
In a novel about the Boston Massacre, Rinaldi uses an historical but little-known
teenage girl as her narrator. Rachel Marsh was an indentured servant and nurse-
maid to the children of John and Abigail Adams during the early days of the
American Revolution. Because John Adams was an important lawyer in 1770,
Rachel lived in one of Boston's political centers. Rinaldi's Rachel does more than
stay at home and watch the children, however; she visits Henry Knox's bookstore
and gets educated, she "walks out" on Sundays with a young British soldier, and
she sometimes has advance knowledge of riots from her activist friend, Jane. It is
Rachel's involvement with the British soldier that leads the Adamses to find her a
place in another home away from Boston. For readers interested in American
history, this novel serves as a telescope for the events surrounding the Boston Mas-
sacre. Unfortunately, Rinaldi is so preoccupied with historical accuracy that the
plot moves slowly and the dialogue gets very long-winded. Rachel's final act of
leaving her beautiful dowry at the Adamses seems heavily contrived to show her
newly acquired independence. A note and bibliography give helpful background.
KJ
Roop, PETER AND CONNIE, eds. 
Capturing Nature: The Writings andArt ofJohn
JamesAudubon; illus. by Rick Farley and with photographs. 
Walker, 1993 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8205-1 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8204-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
The Roops have carefully selected from the writings of John Audubon for a fo-
cused account of Audubon's development as an artist and author. From his de-
scriptions of his childhood and his relationships with his father and stepmother to
his persistent interest in drawing birds and his own admission that he must fall
back upon his artistic talent after business failures, Audubon's voice is remarkably
fresh. His personality emerges as that of a somewhat brash yet respectful young
man who has both humility and confidence. The book is well-designed, including
marbled book jacket and eggshell-patterned endpapers, with full-color, full-page
reproductions of some of Audubon's most famous drawings. Farley's drawings of
some of the scenes Audubon describes are somewhat useful, but it is Audubon
himself and his drawings that shine here. The whole is woven together deftly to
make an engaging narrative both approachable and extremely readable for chil-
dren. CF
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
The Dreamer; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
1993 32p
ISBN 0-590-47341-7 
$14.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
Where Jackson and Winter, above, explain creation from the evolutionary point
of view, Rylant and Moser go the other way around to construct an extended
metaphor about a "young artist" who decides to transform his daydreams into
reality: "So he made a star." And then, "shyly pleased with himself," he makes
more stars, an Earth, water, trees, animals and finally new artists-that's us, folks-
"in his own image." Flattering the reader can sometimes get you everywhere, but,
like the young artist, this book is a bit shyly-and hubristically-pleased with
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
133
itself, with prose that works too hard at being hushed and paintings that are some-
times inkily beautiful but too contented with cliched images of the starry cosmos,
the animal kingdom, and the Family of Man. Allegory is generally wasted upon
the young, and face it, the rest of us prefer stories, too. RS
SANDBURG, 
CARL 
More Rootabagas; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. 
Knopf,
1993 
94p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-90070-5 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-80070-0 
$18.00 
R 6-10 yrs
The three volumes of Rootabaga stories published during Carl Sandburg's lifetime
are all distinguished by bountiful wordplay, though structure varies widely from
sequential description ("The Wedding Procession of the Rag Doll and the Broom
Handle and Who Was In It") to plots with a beginning, middle, and end ("The
Huckabuck Family and How They Raised Popcorn in Nebraska and Quit and
Came Back"). Like its predecessors, this collection features wordplay in fabulous
proportion to incident, with wildly inventive images and lyrical repetition build-
ing a sense of poetic free association: "And these sleepy songs of the birds in the
evening made Burnt Chestnuts feel how it is the birds go to sleep high in the
sycamores, high in the oaks and cottonwoods, or snuggled alone in hiding places
in the tough wire grass. She murmured to herself, 'I believe I know how they wink
and blink and shut their eyes and stick their heads under their wings and fall with
fine thin feathers into sleep.'" Rootabaga fans will recognize the crazily named
characters and the ball-to-bat dialogue rocketing through these ten previously un-
published stories, from "A Girl Named Silver Pitchers Tells a Story About Egypt,
Jesse James and Spanish Onions" at the book's beginning to "How the Fairies
Went Away ... and Who Took Their Places" at the end. It is the cumulative
rhythm that produces suspense here: language lovers young and old will sit still in
wonder, although action addicts will probably wiggle away. Zelinsky's illustra-
tions create a drama of their own, weaving in and out of the text or demarcating
sections of it with skillfully controlled exuberance. Contrasting hues appear subtle
by virtue of softly blended color-pencil textures, the drawing itself is fluid, and the
interchange between verbal and graphic images results in bookmaking with un-
usual impact. This is vintage Sandburg, knowledgeably edited, dynamically illus-
trated. BH
SCHEFFLER, URSEL 
The Return ofRinaldo, the Sly Fox; tr. by J. Alison James; illus.
by Iskender Gider. 
North-South, 1993 
60p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-228-2 $13.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-227-4 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
WAAS, ULI 
Where's Molly?; written and illus. by Uli Waas; tr. by Rosemary
Lanning. 
North-South, 1993 
44p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-230-4 
$12.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-229-0 
$12.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Filling the bill between easy-readers and longer fiction, these two Swiss imports are
crisply formatted, tidily illustrated, and fun to read. Rinaldo is a trickster fox in
the James Marshall tradition; after outwitting the police and various other gullible
animals, the trickster's tricked by a glamorous feline adventuress. Where's Molly?is
a realistic story about a Jack Russell terrier puppy named Molly who, frightened by
the New Year's fireworks, runs away from home and is rescued by a dog-loving
134 
* THE BULLETIN
woman who takes her to the local animal shelter, where her family finds her. The
pictures for Rinaldo have an appropriately raffish cartoon flair while Molly is drawn
and colored with an equally fitting tender affection. Rinaldo is at a slightly higher
reading level than Molly; both are sturdy additions to the transitional-reader shelf.
RS
SHARMAT, MARJORIE WEINMAN 
Nate the Great and the Pillowcase; written by
Marjorie Weinman Sharmat and Rosalind Weinman; illus. by Marc
Simont. 
Delacorte, 1993 
48p
ISBN 0-385-31051-X 
$12.95 
R Gr. 1-3
Late one night, Nate's awakened by his friend Rosamond, who has discovered that
one of her four cats' favorite raggedy pillowcase is missing. Could Annie, who
brought her dog Fang over to Rosamond's earlier to play dog dress-up, have the
case? Could it be at the diner, where Annie and Fang stopped on the way home?
When during the course of his investigation Nate stops at the diner, he becomes
convinced that the counterman's rag is the pillowcase. But no: "I pulled it out of
his pocket. I spread it out. I tried to open it up. It was not a pillowcase. It was just
a rag. I stuffed it back into the man's pocket. It was time to leave." Sam Spade
meets Sam Beckett in this minimalist mystery, which is eventually solved via an
analogy unwittingly provided by Nate's dog Sludge, and everybody goes back to
sleep. The repetitive, cadenced prose is drily funny, and, of course, just the ticket
for struggling new readers. Simont's watercolor cartoons punctuate the action
with flexible and affectionate line. RS
SHETTERLY, WILL 
Nevernever. Yolen/Harcourt, 1993 
226p
ISBN 0-15-257022-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9 up
The Nevernever is the wilderness boundary between Faerie and the World: the
strange creatures that live there are occasionally monstrous and usually dangerous.
When Ron periodically leaves Bordertown, a town in the World, to explore the
Nevernever, he isn't frightened because he fits into the neighborhood. At the end
of Elsewhere (BCCB 11/91), he was permanently changed into a werewolf known
to his friends as Wolfboy. The events of this book pick up where Elsewhere left
off-Ron's adjusting to his new form while continuing to protect Florida, the elf
waif who's heir to Faerie's throne. Shetterly's style has lost some of its freshness
since the first book. There are too many self-conscious parenthetical paragraphs:
"(Okay, maybe I should've warned you that you can skip paragraphs that're in
parentheses)." Also, the author uses the same disguised-identity device twice-
elves must be hard to recognize. Still, the uniquely brutal/magical/urban setting
will attract young adult fantasy readers whose real world is as complex as Bordertown.
KJ
VALENTINE, JOHNNY 
Two Moms, the Zark, and Me; illus. by Angelo
Lopez. 
Alyson Wonderland, 1993 
48p
ISBN 1-55583-236-9 
$12.95 
NR 4-7 yrs
Awkwardly metered quatrains tell the didactic story of a little boy who goes to the
park with his two moms, meets the Zark (a wacky, faux-Seuss creature), and be-
comes lost. After hearing the lost boy's situation ("'Oh, our family,' I said, 'is
unlike some others./ I don't have a dad. But I have two great mothers'") the
unsubtly named McFinks plan to kidnap the boy and give him to a goony-looking
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
135
straight family, but the Zark steps in and delivers him unto the hands of another
couple who first deliver a sermon ("Don't fret about what the McFinks try to tell
you./ You don't have to buy what they want to sell you") and then take him back
to his mothers. Good message, but the hectoring rhyme is oppressive and the
story both silly and overcomplicated. Big cartoon paintings have an agreeably
loopy line, but they're also busy and cutesy and garishly colored. RS
WAAS, ULI 
Where's Molly? See Scheffler, above, for review.
WELLS, ROSEMARY Waiting for the Evening Star; illus. by Susan Jeffers. 
Dial,
1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1399-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1398-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The narrator of this pastoral nostalgic picture book tells of the small Vermont
farm where he grew up and where "time went by like a slow song with so many
verses you couldn't count them." In a leisurely-very leisurely-fashion Berty
describes the joys of New England farm life, where Grandma made butter, Mama
milked the cows, and the children played amid the fresh hay. Berty's older brother
Luke longs for wider horizons, however, which leads him to enlist to fight in World
War I and travel to France, while Berty hopes for him to return unchanged. This
is a sweetly romantic, picturesquely written viewof the past, where Mama's hot
cider was "red as a sunset" and the maple syrup was "clear as a cat's eye." Unfortu-
nately little happens and it happens very slowly, and the rosily selective view of
farm life is more desirable than plausible. Similarly idyllic are the muted line-and-
watercolor pictures, filled with hatch-work shadings and sun-dappled glens through
which wildlife and farm life stroll in unnatural proximity. Believers in rural utopia
(most of whom are older than the intended audience of the book) will enjoy this
hymn to a gentle life while sharing Berty's puzzlement at why anyone would want
more. DS
WHITCHER, SUSAN 
Real Mummies Don't Bleed: Friendly Talesfor October Nights;
illus. by Andrew Glass. 
Farrar, 1993 
119p
ISBN 0-374-36213-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
"A real mummy wouldn't bleed, any more than a salami. Because, see, they took
out all the blood and the guts and put it in these little jars." Thus begins "Hiero-
glyphics," one of five original short stories that will stretch much farther than
October. Rachel narrates this one in a child-voice that's authentic and idiosyn-
cratic, as are all the other protagonists: Annie, who temporarily acquires an unpre-
dictable pet witch; Kevin, who discovers that a suspicious neighbor has turned
various male acquaintances into dogs; Jewel, who finds a genie desperately seeking
to be reunited with his bottle after escaping Solly's Eastern Carry-Out in a paper
bag; and Ted, who, after promising to give his friend Toad a taste of Christmas
before hibernation takes over, has to substitute Frankenstein for Santa Claus. The
writing is as lively as the characters, and best of all, each story actually features a
plot, which seems to be a rarity these days. Imaginative and well crafted, Whitcher's
tales will make for first-rate classroom sharing aloud, though Andrew Glass' shad-
owy, slightly bizarre pencil drawings also lend the right touch for independent
readers. BH
136 
* THE BULLETIN
WILLARD, NANCY 
A Starlit Somersault Downhill; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
Little,
1993 
34 p
ISBN 0-316-94113-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
As she did in "Blake Leads a Walk on the Milky Way" in A Visit to William Blake's
Inn (BCCB 12/81), Willard has set up a dialogue between creatures of opposite
viewpoints, here a bear preparing to hibernate and a rabbit reluctant to confine
itself to the secure cave of its ursine friend: "The rabbit sighed. 'How ripe and
sweet/ this patch of clover by my feet!/ The fields are broad, the hills are wide./ A
pity we should stay inside.'" Even when the cold comes and the rabbit tries to
settle down, the stars and hills call irresistibly. Pinkney is at ease with animal
anatomy, and his warm brown watercolors, turning gray-toned as winter snows
take over, are layered into double spreads of striking composition. In fact, the
pictures are so realistically drafted and textured that they seem oddly literal in
accompaniment to the fantastical text. For instance, one stanza-"They carried
water from the spring/ and laid out all the breakfast things/ and washed their faces
in the stream"-is illustrated with a scene of the bear catching a fish. This in-
tensely dynamic view of the natural environment is slightly out of sync with the
daintily anthropomorphic world reflected by the verse. Later, a wolf seems to
threaten the rabbit by looming near the cave while the rabbit is deciding to emerge,
but this element of conflict evaporates. As a picture book, the whole is less success-
ful than its separate parts of verse and art, but it will nevertheless provide lilting
sounds and richly rewarding sights for a preschool audience. BH
WOODSON, JACQUELINE Between Madison and Palmetto. Delacorte,
1993 
[128p]
ISBN 0-385-30906-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Having left boarding school (see Maizon at Blue Hill BCCB 12/92), Maizon has
come back to her old neighborhood, which is changing-gentrifying-rapidly.
Maizon's best friend Margaret is changing too: frightened at the changes puberty
is making to her body, Margaret has taken to excessive dieting and making herself
throw up. Maizon herself faces a big change when her father, gone since Maizon's
birth and the simultaneous death of her mother, comes back, eager to try again
with his daughter. While there's a lot of incident and preaching about self-esteem,
the book doesn't have much plot momentum. Margaret's mother has a wise talk
with Margaret, and while Maizon constructs her own relationship with her father
without excessive interference from her (saintly) grandmother, it's just too easy.
What works best here is the slice-of-life portrait of Margaret and Maizon's friend-
ship: close, sometimes uneasy or prickly, but ultimately affirming. RS
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
The Ghost Witch. 
See Hiser, above for review.
YEP, LAURENCE 
Dragon's Gate. HarperCollins, 1993 
275p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022972-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022971-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
An ambitious sequel to The Serpent's Children (BCCB 3/84) and Mountain Light
(11/85), this tracks young Otter from his home in Kwangtung Province, China, to
the Sierra Mountain range, where he joins his adoptive father and uncle to build a
tunnel through solid rock for the transcontinental railroad. To establish a large
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
137
cast, two diametrically diverse settings, and events from the years 1865 through
1867 is a tall order for one novel. Yep has succeeded in realizing the primary
characters and the irrepressibly dramatic story of what amounted to slave labor for
Chinese immigrants at the hands of ruthless bosses. In the process, however, sec-
ondary characters are flattened, the sense of time is foreshortened, the action piles
up too fast, and explanation of motives sometimes replaces or repeats actual devel-
opment. One key incident, for instance, involves a musician whose instrument is
stolen, whereupon Otter inspires his crew of outcasts to chip in for another be-
cause "his music had become part of my life," something that will surprise readers
who have only heard about this music once or twice before. The very same morn-
ing, the musician's fingers freeze and must be chopped off with a kitchen knife, an
explosion blinds Otter's father, and Otter is publicly whipped for defying orders-
all of this shortly followed by an avalanche. While such a sequence may very likely
have occurred, it has the effect of crowding a work of fiction. Where the pace and
focus are controlled, as in Otter and his uncle's scaling a peak to save their snowed-
in camp, the writing becomes more credibly layered; and even when the story
surfaces to a shallower level, the carefully researched details will move students to
thought and discussion about a powerful piece of American history. BH
YOUNG, RONDER THOMAS 
Learning by Heart. Houghton, 1993 
172p
ISBN 0-395-65369-X 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Set in a small southern town during the 1960s, this first novel is narrated by ten-
year-old Rachel as she adjusts to the family's move into a new house, the arrival of
a baby brother, the presence of an African-American housekeeper named Isabella,
and the dynamics of their changing society. The cast is solidly rounded, including
secondary characters such as Rachel's hardworking parents, rigid grandmother,
independent aunt, and easy-going uncle. The integration of the protagonist's class-
room and scout troop is realized at a subtle level, as are Rachel's friendships with
the black girl who breaks the barrier and with a neighbor who belongs to a group
often called white trash, just as Isabella is still called (much to Rachel's consterna-
tion) "a nigger maid." If Isabella sometimes seems too perfect in her steady love
and wisdom, that is a common literary fate that nevertheless seems consistent with
her deeply religious commitment. What the ending makes clear-that no matter
how devoted the maid, she can be let go in hard times-is an issue less commonly
addressed, and it's developed here with realistic impact. A fire that destroys the
family store seems contrived as a denouement because of its unforecast sudden-
ness, but not overdramatized. The dynamics of the cast are what carry the novel,
and these are sustained to the end. BH
'9
138 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR LIBRARIANS AND TEACHERS
Despite the increasing numbers of books published for children and young adults,
there are still readers with fond memories of their own childhood favorites. Some
of these favorites may be literary classics, easily located in most public libraries.
Some may be series books that were popular for a brief time, and then weeded
from library collections, if they were ever purchased at all. And some may be
obscure titles that have long since disappeared from the shelves of most libraries,
even those having extensive collections of older or unusual materials. The follow-
ing is a brief list of some of the collections of children's books that may contain
those fondly remembered books from childhood.
Many of the collections listed below are located in universities and spe-
cial research collections. These collections have a mission to collect, maintain, and
preserve materials published for children. Access to these collections may be lim-
ited to affiliates of the institution, so it is always a wise precaution to verify borrow-
ing or visitation policies prior to traveling to one of these collections. A recent
article by St san A. Burgess in The New Advocate (6 (1): 87-88, Winter 1993 and
6(2): 155-157, Spring 1993) describes the process for visiting a research collec-
tion, including identification of the appropriate collection and the need to provide
credentials, and lists some of the larger research collections in the United States.
Her article also recommends consulting Subject Collections: A Guide to Special
Book Collections (edited by Lee Ash) prior to visiting a collection. Carolyn Field's
Special Collections in Children's Literature, 1982, is another excellent resource. The
3rd edition of this work, to be edited by Dee Jones, will offer expanded coverage.
The focus of the following list is not only research collections in the field of children's
literature, but also collections that might allow you to borrow some of those child-
hood favorites for yourself or your patrons, rather than perusing them in restricted
reading rooms.
Florida State University has two particularly interesting collections: the
Childhood in Poetry collection and the Lois Lenski collection. The former con-
tains the materials described in the well-known catalog, Childhood in Poetry; the
latter non-circulating collection includes books, drawings, and manuscripts. Illi-
nois State University also has a Lois Lenski collection, as does the University of
North Carolina at Greensboro.
Ball State University in Muncie, Indiana has an extensive collection of
children's literature as well as paper dolls, games, and manuscripts. Emporia State
University in Kansas contains a large collection of contemporary children's books
that circulate. Wayne State University in Detroit has two large collections, the
Eloise Ramsey Collection and a general collection of children's and young adult
literature with a special emphasis on urban and ethnic materials. Chicago Public
Library includes many series books and early ethnic books from the 1930s and
1940s.
The University of Minnesota's Kerlan Collection is well known for its
manuscript and illustration collection. It also includes award winning books in its
sizable holdings. The Lena de Grummond collection at the University of Missis-
sippi is another famous collection that includes magazines for children, popular
contemporary authors, and a companion collection of books for boys, such as
Oliver Optic and Horatio Alger stories. Mostly 20th century materials can be
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
139
found in the Keene Memorial Library in Fremont, Nebraska. This public library
includes a variety of editions of popular old titles for children, such as tales about
King Arthur and stories of Robin Hood.
The Dallas Public Library also has a wide range of materials, including
foreign language books, Texas books, and Mother Goose books. The Cooperative
Children's Book Center at the University of Wisconsin-Madison has a collection
of trade books, books published by alternative presses, and toy-books in its prima-
rily contemporary collection.
Specialized collections exist along with general collections. Michigan
State University in East Lansing has nearly 200 girls' series and over 300 boys'
series in its collection. New York Public Library contains a large number of books
relating to, by, or about African-Americans. The Los Angeles Public Library has
over 40 countries represented in its foreign language book collection for children,
while the Hempstead Public Library in Hempstead, New York contains numer-
ous foreign language materials, including Greek, Polish, and Italian. Russian and
East European languages can be found at Pennsylvania State University. Theat-
rical materials for children are available at Arizona State University, New York
Public Library, and the University of Washington in Seattle.
The University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) has a collec-
tion of 43,000 volumes. In addition, in November 1993, UIUC acquired the
58,000-volume collection of children's books formerly held by the Center for Re-
search Libraries (CRL) in Chicago. The CRL books generally have their original
dust jackets, and reflect the pattern of book publishing for children and young
adults in the United States since the mid 1940s. The CRL books will be processed
and integrated into the existing collection, with the same guidelines as those used
for the other UIUC children's collections: items published after 1920 circulate
and include nonfiction, picture books, and fictional works for older readers in-
cluding some girls' series books in French. Non-circulating materials include ex-
tensive holdings ofAesop's fables, alphabet books, and a limited collection of pop-up
books. The Center for Children's Books, also located at the UIUC campus, offers
a collection of 13,000 trade books and over 800 professional and reference books
on children's literature. This collection is non-circulating, but older items are
transferred into the other children's collections on a regular basis. These three
collections combine to offer a comprehensive view of publishing for children in
the United States since the late 1800s. Recently published titles as well as histori-
cal books are added to the collections regularly.
Collections of children's literature exist in a wide variety of places. Many
have a special focus, while others collect on a broad scope. Check with a librarian
to see if one of the many electronic databases can be consulted to verify that the
particular book being sought is available nearby. Many seemingly obscure books
are available, and in a surprising number of places. Any institution of higher
learning that has a teacher education or graduate library program is likely to have
a collection of children's literature. It pays to be persistent in tracking down a
particular work because the record of publishing for children is well-represented in
this country's public, college, and research libraries.
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, University ofIllinois Library
140 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Africa: Kreikemeier
Africa-folklore: Knutson
African Americans: Cox; Lyons
African Americans-fiction:
Woodson; Young
ALPHABET BOOKS: Pienkowski
Armenian-Americans-fiction:
Kherdian
Art and artists-fiction: Feiffer
Art and artists-stories: Rylant
Art: Dugin; Lyons; Roop
Aviation: Brown
Ballet-stories: McMullan
BEDTIME STORIES: Willard
BIOGRAPHIES: 
Bjirk; Coerr;
Colman; Knudson; Lyons; Roop
Birds: Roop
Birthdays-poetry: Goldstein
Birthdays-stories: Martin; Pryor
Boats: Burke
Boston Massacre-fiction: Rinaldi
Boys: Brooks
California-fiction: McCants
Chinese-Americans-fiction: Yep
Christmas-stories: 
McMullan;
Novak
Circuses: Duncan
Cliques-fiction: McCants
College-fiction: John
CONCEPT BOOKS: Lillie
Death: Coerr
Dinosaurs: Pienkowski
Divorce-fiction: Kenah
Dogs-fiction: Waas
Dolls-fiction: Hiser
Ecology: Anderson
Evolution: Jackson
FANTASY: Block; Chetwin; Hiser;
Shetterly
Farm life-stories: Wells
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Woodson
Fathers and daughters-stories: Cazet
Fathers and sons-fiction: Feiffer
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Dugin; Gordon; Greene; Grimm;
Jaffe; Kimmel; Knutson
Friends-fiction: De Felice;
Woodson
FUNNY STORIES: 
Kennedy;
Scheffler
Furniture: Giblin
Government: Colman
Grandfathers-stories: Petersen
Great Lakes: Burke
Greenland-stories: Petersen
Hanukkah: Kimmel
HISTORICAL FICTION: Rinaldi;
Yep; Young
History, Ancient: Gonen
History, U.S.: 
Colman; Cox;
Rinaldi; Yep
History, World: Giblin
Holidays: Ancona; Kimmel
Italy-stories: dePaola
Japan: Coerr
Jews-folklore: Jaffe
Jews-stories: Kimmel
Language arts: Sandburg
Latinos-stories: Cazet
Lesbians-stories: Valentine
Literature, American: Knudson
Literature, children's: Bjork
LOVE STORIES: Block; McCants;
Mills; Rinaldi
Magicians-stories: McCully
Mexico: Ancona
Mothers and sons-stories: Valentine
DECEMBER 1993 
* 
141
MYSTERY STORIES: Sharmat
Native Americans-folklore: Greene
Nature study: Anderson; Roop
New York City-fiction: Block;
Woodson
Photography: Duncan; Kreikemeier
POETRY: 
Goldstein; Kennedy;
Knudson; Valentine; Willard
POP-UP BOOKS: Pienkowski
Prejudice-fiction: Kherdian; Young
Reading aloud: Kennedy; Sandburg;
Whitcher
Reading, beginning: Sharmat
Reading, easy: 
Hiser; Kenah;
Kennedy; 
Scheffler; 
Waas;
Wright
Reading, family: Brooks; Valentine
Reading, reluctant: De Felice; John;
McCants
Religious education: Rylant
SCARY STORIES: 
De Felice;
Whitcher; Wright
School-fiction: McCants; Mills
School-stories: Cazet
Science: Jackson
SHORT STORIES: Whitcher
Snow-stories: Pryor
Social studies: Liptak
Storms-stories: Pryor
Story hour: 
Brown; dePaola;
Goldstein; Gordon; Greene;
Grimm; Kimmel; Knutson; Lillie;
Martin; McCully; McMullan;
Novak; Pryor; Willard
Transportation: Brown; Burke
Twins-fiction: John
Vermont-stories: Wells
Weaponry: Gonen
Winter-stories: Pryor; Willard
Wisconsin-fiction: Kherdian
Witches-fiction: Wright
Witches-stories: dePaola
Women's studies: Colman; Lyons
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION OF THE
BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN 0008-9036), as
required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is published eleven
times a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is $35.00 (domestic), $40.00
(foreign).
The owner and publisher is the University of Illinois Press acting for the Graduate School
of Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois, a nonprofit organization.
Office of publication is located at 1325 South Oak St., Champaign, IL 61820. The man-
aging editor is Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N.
Fremont, Chicago, IL 60622. There are no stockholders, bondholders, mortgages, or other
security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status
for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preceding twelve
months: 7597; number for single issue nearest filing date: 7086. Average number of copies
of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during preceding twelve months: 5733;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 6037. Average number of copies distributed
for free per issue during preceding 12 months: 300; number for single issue nearest to filing
date: 79. Average number of total copies distributed during preceding 12 months: 6033;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 6116. Average number of copies of each issue
not distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after printing) during preceding 12 months:
1563; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 970.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Ann Lowry
Journals Manager, University of Illinois Press
October 1, 1993
ittle, Brown's New Voices, New World
lulticultural Fiction Contest Winner
*'Two 
classic components, food and love, form the
basis of this story of ajoyous family celebration....
[The author] has a gift for the kind of specifics that
make a book come alive."- TheBulletin (starred review)
"This picture book set in Hawaii tells of seven-year-
old Marisa's attempt to make dumplings for [her
extended family's] New Year's Eve party....A lively
celebration of setting, tradition, and the rich diversity
F ->? * 
4-ii»< 
*-.1^-i 
11» 
X T X 
-
l-;,
Ages 4-8 (15.45) $15.95 0-316-73445-4
LITTLE, BROWN and COMPANY
7ate...
'ectable"7
Nancy Willard
Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney
*"In gossamer lyric verse, delicate as early snow, a
whimsical tale of a reluctant rabbit who's persuaded to
join his friend the bear in a long, safe winter sleep, only
to find himself tossing and turning alone."
-*Kirkus Reviews (pointer review)
*Newbery-medalist "Willard's sonorous rhyming couplets
impart liveliness to nature's sleeping season. [Galdecott
Honor-winner Pinkney's] lavishly detailed, full-spread
watercolors bristle with energy."
-Publishers Weekly (starred review)
Ages 4-8 (15.45) $15.95 0-316-94113-1
LITTLE, BROWN and COMPANY
Mi 
nOoMinimOi 
OininMio 
•o inOROmi 
BDMiOin 
Oii
~-~;DOtYnvC,
Evaluating Children's Books: A Critical Look
Aesthetic, social, and political aspects of analyzing
and using children's books
(Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Allerton Institute Conference, Graduate School of Library and
Information Science, University of Illinois)
Edited by Betsy Hearne & Roger Sutton
In a period when more juvenile books are being
published than ever before-and being published
for trade store consumption as much as for library
and education markets-professionals need to
think hard and critically about evaluation. The
34th Allerton Institute papers discuss not only
selection criteria, but also ideas about how to
reconsider and apply them in a new way. Public
and school librarians, along with teachers in
elementary, junior high, and high school, will find
here an update on the current trends in-and
increasing sophistication of-children's literature, a
debate on the problems and possibilities of
evaluating the 6,000 new books published annually
for children, and an exchange of ideas about the
aesthetic, social, and political aspects of analyzing
and using children's books.
$18.50 plus $3.00 postage (Please make checks payable to the University of
Illinois) from:
Publications Office, Graduate School of Library and Information Science,
University of Illinois, 249 Armory Bldg., 505 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
Illinois 61820.
Mastercard & Visa orders accepted at 217/333-1359.
From the publisher of the
Laura Ingalls Wilder Little House Books
Little House
R6ky Ridge
by Roger Lea MacBride
Pictures by David Gilleece
ected five-book series, the
family continues as Laura,
ir seven-year-old daughter
uture for themselves away
i from Rose's perspective,
g chronicle of the Wilders'
by covered wagon through
ricken Midwest to the lush
southern Missouri-where
e in Mansfield and begin a
ife on Rocky Ridge Farm.
lith] the story's enormous
I appeal and its closeness
e and tone to the original
oks...this is a must where
books are popular," says
"fine continuation of the
onicle."-Kirkus Reviews
(020842-2); $13.89t (020843-0)
hy paper ed. $3.95' (440478-1)
-06. "Trade and paper eds. tUibrary
I in no way reflect the prices at which
available from any other source.
UinsChildrensBooks
t 53rd Street, New York 10022
F-· 
II 
WV?. 
t
S~ny 
me winner or
the 1992 Coretta Scott King Author Award
"A unique celebration of the continuum of human life and of
childhood in all its robustness, fragility, and evanescent beauty.
Motivated by a desire to share his pleasure in the old
photographs of African-American children that he collects,
Myers has created an exquisite album [of] forty-two superbly
I1 
I 
-
-
-
reproauced blacK-.
[and] eleven origin
from the humorot
children have disc
Angels, they will i
images and want t
verses again and a
-School Library Jo
All ages.
$16.00 TR (0-06-0229:
$15.89 LB (0-06-0229:
AN ALBUM C
PICTURES AND 1
WALTER DEAN 1
Photograph
Walter Dean Myers is author of Scorpions-a 1989
Newbery Honor Book-and many other books including
NOW IS YOUR TIME
The African-American Struggle for Freedom
Photographs and drawings
1992 Coretta Scott King Author Award
1992 ALA Notable Children's Books
1992 ALA Best Books for Young Adults
Ages 11 up. $18.00 TR (0-06-024370-8); $17.89 LB (0-06-024371-6)
Harper Trophy paper ed. $10.95 (0-06-446120-3)
^. 
t Hairier~oll;ishlren-o 
os,,'R 
< 
I
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
ilk 
1 I
*»
-"` Starred by School Library Journal and
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
WHEN IT SNOWED
THAT NIGHT
Norma Farber
Full-color pictures by Petra Mathers
"This delightful collection of Nativity poems introduces a variety
of animals journeying to Bethlehem. Others come with gifts as well;
4-l, -l-lnr- 
-V'i 
r\f nn-ro 
a 
-
tiT- 
olc n
"Hooper, a member of Major League Baseball's Hall of
Fame, played for the Red Sox and the White Sox in a career
that spanned from 1909 to 1920. Zingg warmly portrays
one of pro ball's early college men.... This is a good choice
for sports shelves." -
Library Journal
A volume in the series Sport and Society
Illus. $29.95
Order toll free 800/545-4703
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street * Champaign, IL 61820
" Starred by School Library Journal
A GREAT MIRACLE
HAPPENED
THERE
A Chanukah Story
By Karla Kuskin * Full-color pictures by Robert Andrew Parker
On the first night of Chanukah a young boy's mother tells of the
celebration of the miracle of the bit of oil that kept the eternal flame
burning for eight days following the Rededication of the Temple of
Jerusalem. "An elegant tale.... Expressive watercolors glow with the
shimmering heat of the Middle Eastern sun and the candles in the
menorah. [A] splendid way for children of all religions to learn about
the Festival of Lights."-The Horn Book. "A book worth sharing for
many seasons to come."-SLJ
Ages 5-8. $15.00 TR (0-06-023617-5); $14.89 LB (0-06-023618-3)
Among Karla Kuskin's HarperCollins Children's Books
JERUSALEM, SHINING STILL
Full-color pictures by David Frampton
Best Books of 1987 (SLJ)
All ages. $13.95 TR (0-06-023548-9)
$13.89 LB (0-06-023549-7)
Harper Trophy paper ed. $5.50* (0-06-443243-2)
A Charlotte Zolotow Book
~~··~::
i~;-8;~e~E~"r""~iil~gl~
;·a,~
"h~~~
~ 
"With 
exceptional 
grace 
and 
honesty, 
Hamilton
sketches 
a vibrant 
portrait 
of 
a 
gifted 
12-year-old
of mixed race in search of her identity....Richly
textured with a cast of unforgettable characters,
this extraordinary novel offers a rare glimpse
of unconditional love, family loyalty and
compassion." 
--P~~C~erj WeeLI~, starred review 
·'
·k 
(( Ham;lton's style gets plainer, but her words lose
none of their music or their depth. She makes one
girl's search for identity both a realistic story and a
universal myth of awakening."
--Bon~Ct, starred review
+ 
"Subtlewise, complex--superb."
--Kir~Ud ReviewJ, pointer review.
The Blue Sky Press
0-590-47364-6
Ages 8-12 · $13.95 
~L~$7
An Imprint of Scholastic Inc.
Books as- warm as a toddler's smile fromn ~;
SHIRLEY HUGHES \i~
*-__ 
Hu~ghes expressersnestni 
O
"an udrtnigo
the emotions of young
children and... the delight her
'~'characters 
find in, their world."
-The Hiorn Book (star)
"Hughes' .understanding of
preschool concer~ns an her
.captivating drawings of real-
·world chiildren. are what 
give thnese books their
irrsistible appeal. "--ALA Bookist
1-56402-128-9 LC:92-53001
* If childhood h~as an
illustrator laureate, it must
be Hughies."
-Kirks 
Revie~s (pointelr) 
j
"Ideal for group sharing.
Winning choices for all
collections."
-School Library Journal
1-56402-129-7 LC: 92-53002
CA~nDLVcE PRESS
~1111~
Cowgirls of the Rod eo
icty
50
703
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street * Champaign, IL 61820
University of Illinois Press 
SECOND CLASS
54 East Gregory Drive 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
!*
nd
Ves
ve,
Ig.
of
a,*
Ws.
