T H E
B U L L E T I N
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
February 2012
Vol. 65   No. 6
 
T
he Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and 
critical evaluations of current children’s 
books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding 
the ever-evolving children’s literature field. 
Reviews give an in-depth look at a selected book’s content, reading 
level, strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, as well as 
suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August).  
To order: 
Volume 65 (2012). 
Call: 800-548-1784 or 410-516-6987
$55.00, individuals (print), $58.00 (online) 
Fax: 410-516-3866 
$95.00, institutions (print), $100.00 (online)  Email: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu 
$133.00, institutions (print & online) 
Online: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ISSN 0008-9036 / E-ISSN 1558-6766
Published by  
T h e JOhns hOpkins UnivErsiTy prEss
The BulleTin of The CenTer  
for Children’s Books: 
essenTial.
Deborah stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
February 2012
Vol. 65 No. 6
291  the BIg PICture
 
  I Lay My Stitches Down:  Poems of American Slavery  by Cynthia Grady; 
illus. by Michele Wood
292  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
300 •  Words Set Me Free: The Story of Young Frederick Douglass  by Lesa Cline-
Ransome; illus. by James Ransome
304 •  The Mighty Miss Malone  by Christopher Paul Curtis
309 •  Earwig and the Witch by Diana Wynne Jones; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky
324 •  Irises  by Francisco X. Stork
326 • Piggy Bunny  by Rachel Vail; illus. by Jeremy Tankard
330  Professional ConneCtions
331  subjeCt and use index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $11.99. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2012 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from I Lay My Stitches Down:  Poems of American Slavery ©2012 by Michele Wood and 
used by permission of Eerdmans Books for Young Readers.
FeBruary 2012 • 291
the BIg PICture
I Lay My Stitches Down: Poems of American 
Slavery
by Cynthia Grant; illustrated by Michele Wood
There are many different books, from biographies to historical narratives, from 
folklore to picture books, that share stories of African-American slavery with 
young people. Here’s one that takes a new approach: using the art of quiltmaking 
as both a structural and thematic motif, Grady has penned a series of fourteen 
poems to describe “the metaphorical patchwork of circumstances encountered 
by enslaved people in America.” The result is a rich and eloquent exploration of 
isolated moments in the lives of slaves, resonant with specific details rooted in the 
African-American experience. 
Like quiltmaking itself, the poems are carefully structured. Each poem is 
named for a traditional quilt pattern; the form is unrhymed but tightly metered 
lines of ten syllables apiece (“to mimic the square shape of a quilt block”), and each 
includes three references (because a quilt has three layers): a spiritual reference, a 
musical reference, and a sewing reference. The rhythm is deftly executed, echoing 
the cadences of speech much as its blank verse kin does, and the device actually 
functions to draw the reader into the poems and make this a work that only gets 
more rewarding as readers pore over the many facets of meaning in text and art. 
The verses aren’t merely cleverly formed, either: each poem speaks in a 
voice full of clarity and conviction. Several poems shine on moments of joy, such 
as “Traditional Fish,” about a boy who spends his summer days canoeing with the 
master’s son, or “Schoolhouse,” wherein a compassionate white teacher delivers her 
lessons a little bit louder for the sake of the two girls thirsty for forbidden learning 
who listen outside her window (“she twitch the curtain at the window, teach/ her 
lessons loud and clear—her voice, a prayer/ with wings. It give us hope; it sing us 
home”). Others recount the enduring of fear and suffering, as in “Tree of Life,” 
where a man, tied to a tree and raw from lashes, conjures up the memory of a 
preacher’s words of strength and solace, or “Wagon Wheel” where a girl is taken 
from her family (“Her mama moaning low, long burying/ songs: greedy wheels 
groaning, drag my heart clean/ out of my chest, leaving only the grief”). Together, 
they provide readers with minute, focused glimpses of the historical experience, 
singular moments in the lifetimes of individuals who stand for a multitude.
Visually, the book is an elegant work, with a tall portrait-oriented shape 
that enhances the album feeling and a repeated use of creams and browns in back-
ground and font. Wood, recipient of a King Award for her illustrations of Igus’ 
292 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
I See the Rhythm (BCCB 7/98), provides a single acrylic painting opposite each 
poem. The paintings are strikingly vibrant, with human figures in eloquent silent 
portraiture, careful symmetry and near-symmetry adding grandeur to many scenes, 
and exquisite modeling often makng the surfaces seem three-dimensional. Extensive 
patterning, including the quilt patterns titling the verses, drives the energy of the 
art, but compositions escape overbusyness with a skillful balance of elements and 
colors. The palette favors jewel-toned blues, greens, yellows, and reds in combina-
tion with the deep browns of faces and hands, but the compositions vary enough 
to give each painting fresh impact.
In addition to the poems and paintings, brief historical commentaries are 
included with each pairing, which touch upon the intended symbolism as well as 
delivering additional information to the reader. This is truly a work in which the 
sum is greater than the parts, and, like the pieces of a patchwork quilt, the individual 
elements of verse, art, and background information come together to tell a much 
greater story. (See p. 306 for publication information.)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer
abdul-jabbar, Kareem What Color Is My World?: How African-American Inventors 
Have Changed the Way We Live; written by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Raymond 
Obstfeld; illus. by Ben Boos and A. G. Ford. Candlewick, 2012 44p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4564-9 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 3-6
Ella and Herbie are moving into a house that has some need of repair. While Mama 
shops for supplies, the siblings are left to invest some sweat equity in their new 
digs under the supervision of the handyman, Mr. Mital, who has encyclopedic 
knowledge of African-American inventors and innovators. While Ella and Herbie 
good-naturedly kibitz and squabble, Mr. Mital tells them about the men (and one 
woman) whose contributions improve our everyday lives. Changing the lightbulbs 
puts him in mind of Henry Sampson and his gamma electric cell, Granville Woods 
and the induction telegraph, and Lewis Latimer’s improvement to the lightbulb 
filament. Lunchtime brings on stories about Joseph Lee’s bread machine, Lloyd 
Hall’s efforts in food preservation, and George Crum’s potato chips. The framing 
story is contrived, and it is certainly unnecessary to straightforward information 
delivery, but the book’s layout makes it relatively easy to bypass for those who want 
FeBruary 2012 • 293
to cut to the chase. Lift-up flaps reveal tidy little career bios (ostensibly Ella’s notes) 
for each inventor, and longer double spreads examine the work of James West (mic- 
rophones), Frederick Jones (refrigeration), Percy Julian (cortisone), and Garrett 
Morgan (firefighters’ safety hood) in more detail. Boos and Ford’s illustrations for 
the framing story veer to the garish, while portraits of the inventors themselves, 
and several line-and-watercolor spreads of sequential art, are more restrained and 
successful. A list of books, websites, and videos is also included.  EB
abrahams, Peter Robbie Forester and the Outlaws of Sherwood St. Philomel, 
2012 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25502-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Robbie Forester is just starting at a private school in New York City, missing her 
old public school friends and not yet making new ones. When she comes into the 
possession of a charm bracelet, things start to get weird: moments of strange magic 
(the ability to move things with one’s mind, among other things) connect her with 
other people, bringing her together with Ashanti, a girl at her new school, and Tut-
Tut, a boy from her old one. The intermittent magic seems related to injustice—it 
occurs when Tut-Tut is being bullied, for instance, and when the local homeless 
shelter is being forced to shut down because a developer has raised rents in hopes 
to clear out the entire neighborhood. As Ashanti and Robbie, aided by Tut-Tut 
and a homeschooled computer geek named Silas, try to solve the clues that unlock 
the magic, they discover the extent of the developer’s plot, which has progressed to 
arson to clear out recalcitrant small businesses, and their investigations lead them 
into and out of exciting danger. The assembly of a multicultural cast of kids on a 
mission to rid their neighborhood of corporate greed is certainly formulaic, but 
it’s a formula that has undeniable appeal, especially when wish-fulfilling magic is 
added into the mix. In fact, the magic is exactly the kind that kids might imagine 
for themselves, as it appears to intervene in specific situations with specific ends, 
and those ends are more important than explanations about its source. The char-
acters are extremely likable—Tut-Tut is even poignant—and the plot moves swiftly 
through Nancy Drew/Hardy Boys–style feats of suspense and derring-do. Mystery 
fans with a social conscience will applaud this offering.  KC
aPPlegate, Katherine The One and Only Ivan; illus. by Patricia Castelao. Harp-
er/HarperCollins, 2012 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-06-199225-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 4-6
Ivan, a silverback gorilla, is one of several animal residents of an interior park in a 
fading interstate mall owned by the conflicted Mack, a loving but flawed animal 
keeper. Ivan’s friends Stella, an elephant, and Bob, the resident stray dog, keep him 
reasonably occupied, as do occasional drawing sessions, the results of which Mack 
sells. Determined to increase attendance, Mack buys a baby elephant, Ruby, and 
while Ruby bonds with Stella and tries to adjust, Stella’s health declines. Ivan then 
makes a rash promise to his dying friend: to get Ruby out of the mall and into a 
more suitable nearby zoo. Ivan is a fascinating narrator with an intelligent, pithy 
voice that is, by turns, amusing and poignant (“It’s not so bad, I wanted to tell the 
little boy. With enough time, you can get used to almost anything”). Applegate 
294 • The BulleTin
doesn’t pull any punches in this look at the treatment of captive wild animals; 
Ivan’s remembrance of the demise of his gorilla family is brief but starkly brutal 
(his parents were shot, then dismembered), and the sadness and boredom of mall 
captivity is palpable. Castelao’s intermittent, slightly stylized illustrations, in smudgy, 
charcoal-like tones of gray, complement the evocative yet spare storytelling. Short 
chapters and widely spaced lines of text ensure the 300+ pages move quickly and 
will make this approachable for reluctant readers. Animal-loving youngsters and 
their adults will find plenty of food for thought in Ivan’s extraordinary story.  JH 
bauer, a. C. e. Gil Marsh. Random House, 2012 [192p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96933-1 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86933-4 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98311-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Smart, athletic, and well liked, Gil works hard to deserve his good reputation. 
After initial jealousy, he forms a deep friendship with an equally talented and 
good-natured newcomer, Enko. Soon Enko is diagnosed with an aggressive form 
of leukemia that takes his life; before he dies, he gives Gil a garnet ring, a family 
heirloom made by a supposedly immortal blacksmith in the countryside north 
of Quebec. A griefstricken Gil is wounded further by learning that Enko will be 
buried at home in Quebec and that Gil’s parents won’t be taking him to visit his 
friend’s grave for a final goodbye. Gil sets off alone for Quebec on his own on a 
quest to find the grave and the maker of the ring, hoping that perhaps the man’s 
immortality is real, and that he will have the secret to bringing Enko back. As a 
contemporary treatment of the Epic of Gilgamesh, this has the right bones, but as a 
piece of young adult literature, the bones are disappointingly bare. Gil and Enko’s 
fierce closeness develops rapidly and the book tells more than shows the relation-
ship’s significance. Gil’s open talk of the deep love he bears his friend is couched in 
terms that more often signal a love affair in contemporary literature, so readers may 
misunderstand the boys’ relationship as one based on homosexual feelings rather 
than the deeply homosocial sensibilities of the original epic. There’s still reward in 
following his journey, however, even if it ends in closure rather than success. Aidan 
Chambers’ classic Dance on My Grave (BCCB 8/83) is a more nuanced exploration 
of the same topic, but reluctant readers will find the quick pacing and well-defined 
themes here accessible, and the book provides some clear curricular possibility.  KC
bond, feliCia Big Hugs, Little Hugs; written and illus. by Felicia Bond. Philomel, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25614-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 2-4 yrs
“Everyone hugs all over the world,” begins this ode to the parent/child embrace, 
using an assortment of animals to illustrate that point. Bond begins by specifying 
various animals (“Cats hug/ Dogs hug”), then switches gears to focus on oppositional 
locales (“On this side/ And that side”), hug size (big vs. little), and time periods 
(“Winter/ Summer”). Strict literalists may protest at the very human way in which 
these animals snuggle with each other (or at their unnaturally colored or patterned 
bodies), and the textual shifts in foci are somewhat abrupt. Stylistically, though the 
FeBruary 2012 • 295
text itself is satisfyingly straightforward and age-appropriate in its scope, and the 
range of concepts is useful. Bond departs from her If You Give a Mouse a Cookie 
style here, using a bolder and more minimalistic approach, combining cut-paper 
collage with ink and watercolor. Patterned or textured paper also provides visual 
interest, to varying degrees of effectiveness; particularly well done is the double-
page spread depicting two elephants and two ants hugging, in which a fibrous tan 
paper fills in marvelously for wrinkled elephant skin. Although van Genechten’s 
The Cuddle Book (BCCB 1/05) is a stronger title on this theme, this will still be 
an easy fit into baby laptimes and toddler storytimes, as well as a snuggle-session-
prompting bedtime read.  JH
bostiC, megan Never Eighteen. Graphia/Houghton, 2012 [204p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-547-55076-3 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Austin is seventeen, he doesn’t have much time, and he’s on a mission: chauffeured 
by his best friend, Kaylee, he’s traveling around town to do things he’s always wanted 
to do and to say something important to the people in his life. As Austin’s narration 
goes on to reveals more backstory and undercurrents, it becomes clear that he’s 
suffering from a terminal illness, and it’s even clearer that his greatest wish is to 
be more than friends with Kaylee. Jenny Downham’s Before I Die (BCCB 10/07) 
is pretty much the gold standard among recent titles on this topic, and Austin’s 
story fails to achieve the same emotional impact: his bucket-list pilgrimage is more 
device than plot, and he’s so noble, bringing enlightenment and comfort to all the 
not-particularly-dimensional people he visits, that it undercuts any tragedy of his 
death by suggesting he was too good for earthly survival anyway. That’s not to say 
his story is without appeal—this is exactly the kind of sorrowful departure many 
would imagine for themselves, complete with palpable indications of having left 
the world a better place and their friends better people, and young readers will eas-
ily imagine themselves in Austin’s place; the text’s quick movement and accessible 
language adds to its sellability. This therefore has potential for “what would I do 
if” discussion as well as private contemplation of what a hole one’s passing would 
leave in the world.  DS
bowers, riCK Superman Versus the Ku Klux Klan: The True Story of How the Iconic 
Superhero Battled the Men of Hate. National Geographic, 2012 160p illus. 
with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0916-8 $25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0915-1 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0987-8 $18.95  
R Gr. 7-10
Bowers handily follows four different threads to their convergence in the showdown 
promised in his title. Before reaching The Adventures of Superman’s 1946 “Clan of 
the Fiery Cross” radio episodes, which arrive as the book’s climax, readers explore 
how the Superman character reflected the lust for action of its time, the experiences 
of its Jewish creators during a period of overt anti-semitism, and the ever-changing 
cast of villains inspired by current events. Of equal importance is the persistence 
of the Ku Klux Klan, particularly its 1920 resurgence, orchestrated by a PR team, 
and its revival following World War II (when it was infiltrated by Klan-buster 
Stetson Kennedy). Under pressure to produce more child-appropriate content, 
296 • The BulleTin
the Adventures of Superman producers planned a media assault on the Klan itself, 
in the form of a sixteen-episode series that would pit Superman against his even 
more elaborately caped—and hooded—nemeses. In collaboration with Kennedy, 
who fed secret Klan information through the Anti-Defamation League, the writers 
limned a villainous organization named Clan of the Fiery Cross, a thinly disguised 
feint that purposely fooled no one, and won critical and popular approbation for 
the series. Bowers’ text frequently takes a breathless, Movietone newsreel tone that 
is, save for a few overplayed moments, pitch perfect. An afterword looks at the 
post–event careers of the main players, and a bibliography, source notes, and index 
are also appended.  EB
bridges, robin The Gathering Storm. Delacorte, 2012 [400p] (The Kat-
erina Trilogy)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90829-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74022-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89901-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
As a member of the Russian nobility in the late nineteenth century, sixteen-year-old 
Katerina Alexandrovna is forced to attend one decadent St. Petersburg ball after 
another when she’d much rather be studying her father’s medical books. Her mother 
is insistent that she find a suitable husband, and there’s a rumor that the Crown 
Prince of Montenegro has taken an interest in Katiya; after a series of alarming 
encounters with dark faeries and reanimated corpses, however, Katiya realizes that 
the prince’s attention has more to do with her secret abilities as a necromancer 
than her potential as a wife. She soon finds herself ensnared in a political plot that 
extends into the very heights of Russian royalty, pitting the Imperial Royal family 
(including the tsar’s very handsome son) against a legion of undead ghouls awoken 
by vampires. The multitude of spectacularly Russian names and their associated 
royal titles may try the untutored reader’s patience, but fans of court intrigue will 
find themselves utterly engrossed by this tale of shifting alliances and royal scandal. 
The author rewrites a fair amount of Russian history by including the Imperial 
Family’s ties to faeries and battles with vampire, but these supernatural elements 
feel more terrifying than fantastical in that they are cloaked with an air of shadowy 
mystery. Details focus primarily on daily life among the Russian elite and the various 
backstabbing that often accompanies it, so that even readers with their feet firmly 
planted on the cold, snowy ground will find plenty to love here. A push-and-pull 
romance between Katiya and the tsar’s son promises to bring even more drama to 
the sequel, but for now readers will want to grab a blanket and hot cup of cocoa 
and settle in for this wonderfully atmospheric blend of history and magic.  KQG
buzzeo, toni One Cool Friend; illus. by David Small. Dial, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3413-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
After Elliott convinces his father to allow him to bring home a penguin (Dad thinks 
he means a toy) from the aquarium, he sets Magellan (named after the explorer 
who discovered the species) up in style, creating an ice rink in his bedroom using 
a wading pool, the garden hose, and the lowest air-conditioning setting. Elliott 
reads up on his new pet (“I have some research to do at the library about Magel-
FeBruary 2012 • 297
lan,” he tells Dad, who replies, “When I was in third grade, I got Captain Cook”), 
feeds him anchovy pizza, and lets him hang out in the freezer and the bathtub. 
In a clever twist at the book’s end, readers discover that Elliott is not the only one 
with an exotic pet—the “Captain Cook” Dad referred to was not the explorer but 
a Galápagos tortoise. Jacket flap gives the story’s origins as an urban legend, and 
there are also clear nods to the beloved Mr. Popper’s Penguins. Kids who have often 
wished they could bring home their favorite zoo critters will find this delightful, 
and all will enjoy the clever ways that the penguin is kept from Dad’s attention even 
while the tortoise is kept from the viewer’s (close scrutiny will find many hints to 
the tortoise’s presence). The comic characterizations of Elliott and his father, and 
Small’s lively ink, watercolor, and colored pencil illustrations—especially those 
featuring the penguin (he skates with flair and looks adorable in a bike helmet en 
route to the library)—will make this a popular choice for both reading aloud and 
reading alone.  JH
CaPaldi, gina, ad. Red Bird Sings: The Story of Zitkala-Sa, Native American Au-
thor, Musician, and Activist; ad. by Gina Capaldi and Q. L. Pearce; illus. by Gina 
Capaldi. Carolrhoda, 2011 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-5257-0 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-7159-5 $13.95  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Gertrude Simmons Bonnin of the Yankton Sioux, later known as Zitkala-Sa, bridged 
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and the white and Indian cultures. Brought 
up in an Indiana missionary school from the age of eight, she experienced both the 
demeaning boarding-school routines intended to strip students of their culture, 
and the opportunities to develop her talent as a writer and a violinist. Through the 
brief double-page spread chapters that mark highlights of her life, readers follow 
her school days, her later career as a political advocate for Indian rights, and her 
struggle to reconcile her determination for personal advancement with feelings of 
guilt for abandoning her family. First-person narration adapted from Zitkala-Sa’s 
own writings and supplemented with “additional primary and secondary sources” 
is frequently challenging in the formality of its turn-of-the-century tone; indeed, 
children who can negotiate this text may well be up to reading her autobiographical 
stories in the original. Zitkala-Sa is still an interesting figure, however, and one who 
rarely turns up in collective or individual biographies; this account offers insight 
not just into her achievements but into the complexity of identity. Stiff, sweetly 
doll-like figures in Capaldi’s mixed-media illustrations suggest a younger audience 
than is likely to connect with the content. Closing notes, as well as print and online 
resources, will however guide middle-graders and their teachers to further informa-
tion on Zitkala-Sa’s life and times.  EB
Carey, janet lee Dragonswood. Dial, 2012 [403p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3504-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
The magical wood near Tess’ small village has often provided her with respite 
from her stepfather’s cruel beatings. Her frequent visits to the forest have caught 
the attentions of suspicious neighbors, though, and she soon finds herself accused 
of witchcraft. Forced to flee with her two friends, also accused witches, Tess and 
company are eventually taken in by a mysterious huntsman to whom Tess feels 
298 • The BulleTin
drawn. Unwilling, however, to simply tie herself to a different man, Tess runs again, 
this time north toward the hushed whispers of the forest that seem to be calling 
to her. There she learns that her attraction to the forest is due to her fey heritage 
and that, as the daughter of a former fairy king, she is destined to unite humans, 
fey, and dragons, fulfilling an age-old prophecy through her marriage to a mortal 
prince—something to which Tess is utterly opposed. Factual references to medieval 
towns and events complemented by appearances of talking dragons and mercurial 
fairy people create an appealing blend of fantasy and history, giving this a wide 
audience, but fans of romance are likely to take the most enjoyment out of Tess’s 
tale. The relationship between Tess and the huntsman—whom readers will early on 
guess to be the prince in disguise—unfolds slowly and with caution by both parties, 
making their ultimate union that much more satisfying. Some of Tess’ more adult-
oriented thinking will be outside of audience experience, but readers of history will 
understand that Tess’ concerns with marriage and childbearing are entirely expected 
and appropriate for the time. Readers familiar with Carey’s Dragon’s Keep (BCCB 
5/07) will recognize the forests of Wilde Island and several faces, but knowledge 
of the previous book is not needed to get pleasantly lost in these woods.  KQG
Carnesi, môniCa Little Dog Lost: The True Story of a Brave Dog Named Baltic; 
written and illus. by Mônica Carnesi. Paulsen/Penguin, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25666-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 3-7 yrs
Based on real events in the cold Polish winter of 2010, this picture book follows an 
unlucky dog stuck on an ice floe in the wide, fast-moving river that’s taking him 
out to the Baltic Sea. Though firefighters from the nearby town try to help him, 
the river’s current is too swift; he’s spotted again, days later, by a ship at sea, and the 
determined crew eventually manages to save the exhausted pup, who then becomes 
the ship’s mascot. It’s a compact and satisfying story, and Carnesi writes with a simple 
immediacy that suggests the exclamations of a witness to the event (“Something is 
moving in the water! What is it?”), focusing on the action and largely letting the 
events provide their own emotional impact. The line-and-watercolor illustrations 
have a homey appeal, with the figures’ poses more telling than their simple dot-eyed 
faces wrapped up in hats and scarves against the cold. Varied compositions deftly 
avoid boring similarity as they convey the duration of the pooch’s voyage, but the 
brooding and seemingly inescapable slate blue waters are sufficiently ominous that 
the transition to a bright ship’s interior is a visual relief as well. With its gripping 
plot and simple text, this has natural early reader possibilities as well as readaloud 
merits, and it’ll be a treat for kids looking for an international dog story to coun-
terbalance the melancholy of Hachiko. A concluding note summarizes the actual 
event and includes photos of Baltic both on his ice floe and after his rescue.  DS
Castle, m. e. Popular Clone; written and illus. by M. E. Castle. Egmont, 
2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-232-4 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-301-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 4-7
Despite the assurances from the adults in his life that things will eventually get 
better at school, twelve-year-old Fisher Bas is weary of his role as bully bait, and 
FeBruary 2012 • 299
with his considerable I.Q. and his unfettered access to the science labs of his Nobel 
Prize–winning mother, he’s prepared to do something about it. Using Mom’s research 
into the Accelerated Growth Hormone (AGH), Fisher manages to create an exact 
duplicate of himself in just one weekend and sends his doppelgänger (dubbed Two) 
to endure the torments of middle school come Monday morning. Two, however, 
has a very non-Fisher-like quality of making trouble, and his bad-boy sensibilities 
not only win over Fisher’s classmates but also unfortunately attract the attention of 
the mysterious Dr. X, one of Fisher’s mother’s fiercest rivals. When Two is “clone-
napped” by Dr. X’s henchmen, it is up to Fisher (and his flying pig) to shed the lab 
coat, tap into his inner hero, and save the day. Endearingly awkward and eminently 
likable (despite what his classmates might think), Fisher is a protagonist to root 
for, and his ultimate triumph over both the bullies and Dr. X offers a pleasing bit 
of wish fulfillment to any kid who has ever dreaded the beginning of the school 
week. Gadget geeks will thrill at the wildly imaginative inventions that populate 
the Bas household, including a talking toaster (with a British accent), a table that 
sets itself, and a helpful watch that provides both dating tips and breath mints. 
The ethical dilemmas of cloning are largely avoided to favor a more light-hearted 
approach, and readers will likely end up fantasizing about what they could get away 
with if only they too had a Two.  KQG
ClarK, jay The Edumacation of Jay Baker. Ottaviano/Holt, 2012 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9256-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Jay Baker’s frustrations are never-ending: he’s hopelessly in love with his best friend, 
Cameo, bullied and harassed by his former best friend, Mike, and anxious about 
his parents’ relationship, which is clearly falling apart. When his mom moves out 
and he learns that she is having an affair with Cameo’s father, things really explode; 
tensions between Jay and Mike escalate into public displays and outright violence, 
and he finds himself suspended. A good-hearted, sassy teacher intervenes, suggesting 
that he give a new girl a romantic chance, forcing him and Mike to talk it out, and 
insisting on a creative outlet for his aggressions. As Jay narrates the chaos that his 
life has become, he launches witty pop culture references and riffs at readers with 
breakneck speed; the wordsmithing alone here will be worth the price of admission 
for readers who relish snappy comebacks, savvy puns, and subtle single and double 
entendres. Underneath the glib volleys, however, there are tender moments, as Jay 
turns to his usually snarly sister for comfort, attempts to understand and protect 
his vulnerable but misguided mother, and commiserates with his abandoned father. 
His teacher threatens to steal the show altogether, though, with her quick wit and 
outspoken wisdom; she’s the teacher every kid wants to have, even if her brand of 
truth-telling would surely get her fired in real life. Readers eager to give both their 
hearts and their brains an energetic work-out will enjoy this mash-up of rockin’ 
comedy and problem novel.  KC
ClarK, leslie ann Peepsqueak!; written and illus. by Leslie Ann Clark. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-06-207801-8 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-5 yrs
Peepsqueak the baby chick is “on the move,” a refrain that repeats many times as 
Peepsqueak pursues his dream: to fly high. He tries sailing off walls, hills, even a 
300 • The BulleTin
tower of other chicks, but he just can’t get airborne until Old Gray Goose takes 
him under his wing—literally—and gives Peepsqueak a ride through the sky. The 
determined Peepsqueak is a likable little guy, and Clark helpfully supports her 
very young listeners with repetition (“Peepsqueak jumped up, up, up! And then 
he fell down, down, down”), occasional rhyme, and a recognizable recurring motif 
(a farm animal tells Peepsqueak he can’t fly; he keeps trying). A sunny yellow little 
fellow, Peepsqueak is a bright focal point in his red T-shirt (with “P. S.” printed on 
it) against the digitally colored grass-green and sky-blue backgrounds. The simply 
drawn farm animals are dot-eyed and cuddly-looking, and children will especially 
enjoy searching for the small gray mouse that appears in many of the spreads. Pair 
this with any number of “chick” books, such as Stiegermeyer’s Cheep! Cheep! (BCCB 
4/06), for a poultry-themed storytime, or have kids who are on the move themselves 
act out the “up, up, up” and “down, down, down” parts for a lively story session.  JH
Cleminson, Katie Otto the Book Bear; written and illus. by Katie Clemin-
son. Disney Hyperion, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-4562-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-7 yrs
Otto the bear lives comfortably in his book, but when no one is looking, he comes 
to life and wanders off the book’s pages. One fateful day, he is left behind by his 
human family and thus must go out into the world to find a new place. It’s a 
treacherous journey, but Otto finally ends up at the city library, where he discovers 
a whole group of “book creatures” who, like Otto, come to life and love to have 
adventures. At its heart, this British import offers the fanciful premise of miniature 
storybook characters coming alive and exploring together. There are, however, too 
many unanswered questions about his situation: Why was his book left behind? 
Why doesn’t he return to the book’s pages upon his abandonment? Why doesn’t 
he discover the existence of other book characters from other books at his initial 
residence? The art is airily appealing, featuring muted watercolors framed by thick, 
casual black outlines that lend a softness to Otto’s quest. Otto is depicted as about 
the size of a mouse, and the illustrations are particularly good at portraying the 
daunting scale of the big world around him. Listeners with a soft spot for the lost 
might prefer a more developed tale such as Vulliamy’s Small (BCCB 4/02), but this 
could provide a nice pro-library readaloud for storytime.  HM 
Cline-ransome, lesa Words Set Me Free: The Story of Young Frederick Douglass; 
illus. by James E. Ransome. Wiseman/Simon, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-1-4169-5903-8 $16.99  
R 6-9 yrs
Frederick Bailey, who would later change his surname to Douglass, relates his early 
years, from first vague memories of his mother, who walked through the night to 
visit her sleeping son on a neighboring plantation; through his childhood, with his 
service leased to the Auld family of Baltimore; to his first attempt to make an escape 
from Talbot County, Maryland. The narration is dignified and tightly focused on 
the way learning to read both inspired and enabled young Frederick to plan for 
a life of freedom in the North. The depiction of the risk involved for a slave to 
achieve literacy is particularly well handled for a picture-book audience. Tales of 
cruel punishment for slaves who could read distract Frederick as Mrs. Auld teaches 
him his letters; he later uses religious services as a cover for passing his skill on to 
FeBruary 2012 • 301
fellow slaves. This chapter in Douglass’ story concludes with his forgery of a pass, 
written “in a firm and steady hand,” which would allow him to “walk right out of 
Talbot County and into freedom up north.” James Ransome’s oil and acrylic paint-
ings underscore young Frederick’s determination and independent spirit, and their 
interplay with the text leaves readers with the strong impression that, once he had 
mastered the written word, Frederick’s labors in town and fields were only going to 
be unfortunate layovers on his unstoppable journey to freedom. A concluding note 
explains that the forged-pass plan never came off, and it would be several more years 
before Douglass escaped to New York. However, even children unacquainted with 
Douglass the abolitionist will somehow sense that nothing is going to keep young 
Frederick Bailey in bondage. A brief timeline and list of sources are included.  EB
CoCCa-leffler, maryann Time to Say Bye-Bye; written and illus. by Maryann 
Cocca-Leffler. Viking, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01309-8 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 1-3 yrs
This very accessible picture book addresses the challenge of transitioning between 
activities for the toddler set, focusing on a kid who must move from park to 
Grandma’s to home to bath and finally to bed. The story is nicely patterned; for 
each place, a few featured activities are mentioned (“Swinging, digging, riding 
fun”), the tyke’s reluctance to depart is noted (“I don’t want to leave”), then there’s 
an audible farewell to a handful of the key objects for that setting (“Bye-bye swing. 
Bye-bye sandbox. Bye-bye friend”). Cocca-Leffler’s illustrations enhance watercolor 
and pencil with patterned fabric elements, from the child’s overall pockets to the 
lace hem of Grandma’s skirt, that add visual interest to the cheerful scenes. This 
would be a great addition to a babies’ laptime, particularly if the little ones were 
encouraged to say/wave bye-bye along with the story. While parents are likely to 
be impressed with (and perhaps a bit skeptical about) the smoothness of the transi-
tions, tots will just enjoy the description of this little kid’s happy, busy day.  HM 
Cordell, matthew Another Brother; written and illus. by Matthew Cordell.
Feiwel, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-312-64324-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-9 yrs
Davy the sheep has a great life—until his baby brother, Petey, comes along, and 
then another brother comes, and another brother, and so on, until Davy has twelve 
obnoxious little brothers who copy his every move. His weary mom and dad tell 
him that the brothers will outgrow their Davy-centric stage, and they finally do, to 
Davy’s relief, and surprisingly, to his disappointment, as his brothers now choose 
activities that leave him out. One morning, though, Davy hears someone copying 
him again “When he banged his elbow in the bathroom, Davy yelled, ‘honkin’ 
plunger!’ From the next room came a little voice, ‘honkin’ plunger!’” It’s not another 
brother, however, but a new sister, Gertie, and no one is more pleased than Davy. 
Cordell’s text is humorously absurd, and its brevity, straightforward language, and 
the amusingly detailed illustrations make it friendly to reluctant or lower readers as 
well. The cartoony illustrations (in line and watercolor on creamy paper) also are 
what render the story really hilarious. The ridiculously plump and pop-eyed sheep 
are funny in their own right (Mom wears a turtleneck sweater that seems to squeeze 
302 • The BulleTin
all her wool out below in a big puff, while Davy sports a John McEnroe–style red 
sweatband), but it’s the varying details of their individual actions that make this 
a book to pore over. Older brothers and sisters will surely relate to Davy’s sibling 
struggles, but even younger sibs will have a baaaaa-ll with this one.  JH
Crewe, megan The Way We Fall. Disney Hyperion, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-4616-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Kaelyn is hoping to reinvent herself as an outgoing social butterfly 
for her junior year, but her plans are abruptly put on hold when an unidentified 
virus strikes her Canadian island town, forcing the closure of schools and businesses. 
As the illness rapidly spreads and the mortality rate of those infected reaches one 
hundred percent, the government decides to quarantine the island, leaving Kaelyn 
and her neighbors to fend for themselves while scientists work towards an elusive 
cure. Isolated, residents divide into two groups: those that see survival as a joint 
effort band together to start food and medication drives, while those of the every-
man-for-himself mindset start looting and killing anyone showing the slightest 
symptom. After her mother dies and her uncle is shot, Kaelyn struggles to keep 
her young cousin safe from both the virus and the roaming gangs, until she herself 
becomes ill. Told in Kaelyn’s letters to her former best friend, the book offers a 
compellingly tight focus, relating the town’s descent into chaos with heartbreak-
ingly vivid details ranging from the echoing loneliness of an empty toy store to 
Kaelyn’s bloody discovery of the corpses of a mother and child. The inclusion of 
more quotidian elements, such as Kaelyn’s emerging romance with a local boy and 
her reconciliation with a former foe, make the survival story even more harrowing 
and recall the tone of Rosoff’s How I Live Now (BCCB 9/04) and Pfeffer’s Life as 
We Knew It (BCCB 12/06). Crewe’s dystopia, however, is even bleaker, as nearly 
everyone Kaelyn cares about is dead or missing by the book’s close. A promised 
sequel offers a glimpse of hope, but meanwhile, readers may find themselves pur-
chasing more hand sanitizer this flu season.  KQG
CroCKer, Carter Last of the Gullivers. Philomel, 2012 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24231-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Michael is headed for a life of gangs and thuggery until a dust-up 
with the law brings him to the backyard of one Lemuel Gulliver; there a miniature 
town and its pint-sized residents give Michael’s life new direction. Gulliver intro-
duces Michael to the Lesser Lilliputians as their next guardian, and the young boy 
takes to his new duties with enthusiasm, repairing fire-damaged buildings, helping 
the residents construct a new town center, and fending off the latest invasion of 
weasels. When Gulliver takes off, however, Michael’s old gang life catches up with 
him and he finds himself in juvenile hall, leaving the little people vulnerable to 
murderous rodents and scheming gang members. Specific knowledge of Swift’s 
Gulliver’s Travels isn’t necessary, but readers will need some pretty sophisticated 
sensibilities to get Crocker’s adult-oriented humor, including allusions to grand 
poobahs and macguffins; indeed, most of the satirical elements of the Lilliputians’ 
society have the potential to fly over the heads of the book’s target audience. Mi-
chael’s story, however, works well as a tale of redemption, and his transformation 
FeBruary 2012 • 303
from a lost and neglected nobody to a thoughtful, devoted caretaker of an entire 
village is heartwarming. The slew of action in the last thirty pages or so helps 
compensate for a slow start, so readers who stick it out will be duly rewarded by 
an exciting chase and a happy ending.  KQG
Crowe, Chris Just As Good: How Larry Doby Changed America’s Game; illus. by 
Mike Benny. Candlewick, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5026-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-8 yrs
It’s 1948 and Homer, an African-American boy, is not allowed onto the local Little 
League team. The coach is unswayed by Homer’s argument that Jackie Robinson 
is now playing for the majors: “‘That boy’s a fluke.’ Coach laughed. ‘Ain’t no other 
Negro ballplayer worth a spit!’” That kind of reasoning was about to collapse in 
the 1948 World Series, when the Cleveland Indians’ Larry Doby, the first African 
American in the American League, would smash a home run in the fourth game 
to help the Indians best the Boston Braves 2-1 and continue their march to the 
championship. Homer and his father listen to game four on their new radio, and 
even Mom is swept into the game by their enthusiasm. When the next day’s news-
paper comes out, there’s a photograph of the Indians’ white pitcher, Steve Gromek, 
jubilantly hugging Doby—an iconic shot that would help “tumble the barriers that 
had prevented African Americans from playing in the major leagues.” Although 
Satchel Paige would also make his appearance in that World Series, the spotlight 
here is strictly on Doby and the photograph that would rattle segregationist fans. 
There’s a spirit that recalls Peter Golenbock’s Teammates (BCCB 4/90), with its 
account of the friendship between Jackie Robinson and Pee Wee Reese. However, 
the effort here is somewhat diluted by the fictional storyline and the distractingly 
awkward artwork, which focuses less on the play action and more on Homer’s 
family, with their rigid poses, frozen smiles, and eyes that glare disconcertingly 
off into an indeterminate distance. There is nonetheless considerable appeal here 
for baseball fans, and kids who think that Jackie Robinson’s entry into the majors 
signaled smooth sailing for his race will think again.  EB
CuPala, holly Don’t Breathe a Word. HarperTeen, 2011 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-06-176669-5 $17.99 
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
It’s time for Joy to leave. The fifteen-year-old girl can no longer take her abusive 
relationship with the charismatic Asher, who also happens to be the son of her 
father’s boss, and she’s convinced the only way to escape is to disappear completely. 
Faking a kidnapping, she remakes her look, slips out of her suburban home, and 
heads for the Capitol Hill neighborhood of Seattle and its “ample teen homeless 
population.” There she meets up with Creed, a sensitive musician and a leader of 
a small enclave of runaways; with his help, she manages to survive on the street 
and the two begin to fall in love; winter’s approach, however, may be too much 
for the severely asthmatic Joy. The book effectively captures the hypnotic intensity 
of Joy’s surrender to Asher and credibly constructs the way her family’s treatment 
of her as someone who always needs protection and control set her up for being 
Asher’s target. The story has a hard time letting go of the intensity of that dynamic, 
however, with Joy basically just handing the reins to a different guy (to whom she 
304 • The BulleTin
runs knowing that he will save her) rather than changing her approach, a develop-
ment all the more disturbing for the book’s occasional acknowledgment of it. The 
homeless scene is gritty, but even there the author wraps Joy in a protective bubble, 
ensuring that the worst thing she does is take off her clothes for money once while 
her friends must support her by performing far more degrading and risky tasks. The 
fantasy of escape is a strong one for many young people, however, and they may 
sympathize with Joy’s rashness even as they’re happy at her eventual restoration to 
suburban home and suburban dating with Creed.  DS
Curtis, ChristoPher Paul The Mighty Miss Malone. Lamb, 2012 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90487-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73491-2 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89736-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
When Bud Caldwell (from Bud, Not Buddy, BCCB 11/99) had a brief stay in a 
Flint, Michigan Hooverville, the experience was doubly noteworthy: for the kind-
ness of strangers, and for his first kiss. The instigator of that kiss was Deza Malone, 
an “older woman” of twelve who was waiting in the camp with her mother while 
her father looked for work. Deza takes the spotlight here, as Curtis creates a stand-
alone backstory for the Malones, a family of four that is managing, just barely, to 
make it through the Depression until the double tragedies of the Joe Louis 1936 
boxing defeat and Mr. Malone’s boating accident on Lake Michigan leave Deza’s 
father a broken man who takes off under the guise of job hunting. Deza, a whip-
smart little paragon of self-styled “verbosity,” her mother, and her undersized older 
brother Jimmie, lose their Gary, Indiana home and hit the road for Flint in search of 
Mr. Malone. As Deza struggles to piece together some sort of normal life between 
school and their Hooverville shack, their mother juggles part-time cleaning jobs, 
and Jimmie takes off to parlay his singing ability into nightclub work. Money 
begins to arrive at Flint general delivery, but Mr. Malone doesn’t reappear to fulfill 
his promise to reunite the family, and it’s up to Deza and her mother to unravel 
the dual mysteries of their benefactor and the father’s whereabouts. The grinding 
burden of the working poor is handled even more poignantly and effectively here 
than in Bud, Not Buddy, as Deza and her family heartwrenchingly demonstrate 
how accustomed one becomes to hand-me-downs, welfare food, rotted teeth, and 
precarious employment. The ending, though, cautiously suggests a brighter future 
for the Malones (and perhaps a further title on Jimmie, should Curtis so deem), 
and readers will be relieved to see them “back on the road to Wonderful.”  EB
Cuyler, margery Tick Tock Clock: A Phonics Reader; illus. by Robert Neubeck-
er. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [32p] (I Can Read Books)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-136309-2 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-136311-5 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. K-1
Twin girls spend the day with Grandma while their mother works, and the pass-
ing hours of the day are marked by the ticking clock and their activities. The girls 
are a bit on the rambunctious side—whipping paint at each other, splashing their 
stockinged feet into the lake, hitting each other with pillows—and by the end of the 
day, Grandma’s tuckered out. There is plenty of repetition to support the beginning 
FeBruary 2012 • 305
reader here: every single page opens with “Tick tock,” there are no more than five 
words on any given page, and every single line ends with either “tock” or its rhyme. 
While there are a few stretches to fit this formula (particular when Grandma busts 
out the “wok” to make dinner), most episodes fit nicely into the story of the girls’ 
day. The girls’ inclination toward mischief is pretty much the only plot, though, 
making for a fairly thin story; much of the book’s humor lies in Grandma’s reac-
tions to the girls, but this subtle, adult-angled humor may be lost on the intended 
readership. Neubecker’s line and digital color illustrations contrast a tidy layout, 
with spot art against white pages, against the girls’ wildness, their arms flailing, 
hair flying, and mouths wide open. Grandma’s countenance decidedly shifts from 
happy to tolerant to frazzled to just plain worn out as the day wears on, though 
when the girls are gone and she collapses into her easy chair at the end of the day, 
there is a smile on her face and a framed picture of the girls at her side: “Tick tock. 
Asleep like a rock!”  HM
daswani, Kavita Lovetorn. HarperTeen, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-06-167311-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
At sixteen, Shalini is perfectly happy in living in the family home in Bangalore, 
India, and spending her time dreaming about marrying Vikram, the boy she’s been 
engaged to since she was three. When her family moves to Los Angeles for two 
years, her father and younger sister are thrilled and settle in easily, their mother 
completely shuts down, eventually spiraling into a clinical depression, and Shalini 
struggles with being teased and friendless in school. It’s not until Shalini meets 
another Indian girl her age (who’s never actually been to India), gets her unibrow 
waxed, and joins a service club that things start to improve for her. She also devel-
ops a crush on a guy, and her guilt over her new romantic interest is intense as she 
considers what it could ultimately mean—disgrace for her family, the ending of a 
lifelong friendship between Vikram’s and her parents, and an uncertain future for 
herself. Daswani does a fine job of cataloging the differences in cultural expecta-
tions, and Shalini’s confused negotiation of the conflicting expectations at home 
and outside of it will be familiar to many readers. Unfortunately, the characters 
and their responses tend to lack emotional depth: Vikram is unfailingly loving and 
loyal to Shalini, and Shalini’s family responds to her mother’s depression by simply 
going about their business without her. Vikram’s accepting reaction of Shalini’s 
betrayal (he’ll just wait for her until she tells him not to) is both implausible and 
narratively anticlimactic. Hidier’s Born Confused (BCCB 2/03) is therefore a better 
choice for emotional realism about the clash between Indian and American identi-
ties, but this offers some thoughtful exploration of the challenge faced by young 
people living across cultures.  KC
dowson, niCK North: The Amazing Story of Arctic Migration; illus. by Patrick 
Benson. Candlewick, 2011 56p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5271-5 $16.99  
R* Gr. 3-5
To us non-Polar weaklings, the Arctic may seem uniformly inhospitable, but, as 
Dowson and Benson remind us, it’s actually a seasonally variable region that brings 
a multitude of animals back in the warmer seasons in what they term “the great-
est journey on earth.” Quietly descriptive prose, arranged in a poetic ragged-right 
306 • The BulleTin
format, describes the seasonal transition as whales leave the warm Mexican waters 
to head up the Pacific coast; as the arctic terns wing their way from Antarctica; as 
shoals of herring, newly spawned, head north for food. The text (printed in oceanic 
aqua on snowy white, which reverses to white against aqua during the wintry season) 
has an appealing delicacy, with a touch of lyricism (“With bright scales like mir-
rors, [the herrings] swerve together, fin to fin”). It’s the art that provides the main 
drama here, though: Benson’s detailed illustrations in watercolor, pencil, and pen 
move easily from subtlety to grandeur; while the draftsmanship is softly realistic, 
the imagination behind them brings the natural world to vivid life. An overhead 
view shows boaters in a warm Mexican gulf pointing to the looming underwater 
shape of a gray whale, her blowhole and spine a moving island above the water 
level; a flock of terns tessellate like an Escher drawing against the striations of ocean 
below; echoing bird cries are almost audible in a scene where a craggy walrus pair 
in the foreground are nearly as rocky as the vertiginous crags, clustered with teem-
ing terns, behind them. Color usage is inspired, with the slate blue and charcoal 
of winter brightening up slowly, spread by spread, as pale buttery light touches the 
tundra and brings out warmer shades. The length of the book aims it above the 
usual picture-book age, making it a treat for middle-graders of an ecological bent, 
animal fans, and youngsters who favor the visual over the textual. A concluding 
information section gives more information about the Arctic and provides a brief 
glossary and an index.  DS
grady, Cynthia I Lay My Stitches Down: Poems of American Slavery; illus. by 
Michele Wood. Eerdmans, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-0-8028-5386-8 $17.00  
R Gr. 4-7
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 291, for review.
harKrader, lisa The Adventures of Beanboy; written and illus. by Lisa Harkrad-
er. Houghton, 2012 [240p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-547-55078-7 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-547-55083-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Comic-book connoisseur Tucker McBean sees an opportunity to help out his strug-
gling single mother when the makers of his favorite superhero, H2O, announce 
a contest with a hefty prize for the designer of the best superhero sidekick—and 
if it happens to jumpstart Tucker’s career as a comic-book artist, well, that’s just 
a bonus. Unfortunately, between seventh-grade schoolwork and looking after his 
little brother, Tucker doesn’t have much free time to devote to his budding comic 
creation, Beanboy, and even after his mother hires a babysitter (who, unbeknownst 
to her, is Tucker’s arch-nemesis and the school bully), Tucker can’t quite find the 
right inspiration for his character’s heroics and the deadline for the contest is loom-
ing. Will Beanboy manage to save the day, or will Tucker find out that he’s just an 
average nobody after all? Harkrader carefully surrounds a considerable amount of 
warmth and complexity with fart humor and boyish hijinks, so that readers coming 
for the wackiness of a flatulent caped crusader may also find themselves pleasantly 
surprised by the emotional resonance and nuance of Tucker’s tale. There are some 
pretty heavy character dynamics going on here, including Tucker’s role as caretaker 
for his developmentally challenged brother as well as his unexpected support for 
FeBruary 2012 • 307
Sam, the aforementioned bully, but these interactions thankfully never veer towards 
melodrama or preachiness, instead allowing readers enough space to consider how 
they themselves would act under Tucker’s circumstances. While superhero fans 
may be disappointed by the lack of an epic good-versus-evil battle, most readers 
will simply be pleased to see Tucker get a happy ending while Beanboy gets to fight 
another day.  KQG
hePler, heather Love? Maybe. Dial, 2012 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3721-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Valentine’s Day may be approaching, but Piper’s largely a cynic about the holiday and 
love in general. Things start looking up when Piper begins dating the widely lusted 
after Ben Donovan—or at least she feels things ought to look up, but her time with 
Ben is actually kind of flat and dull, and she’d rather spend time with her friends 
Jillian and Claire and her neighbor and longtime buddy, Charlie. Readers familiar 
with the rom-com genre will know where this is going right from the start (or at 
least from the introduction of Charlie, clearly destined to be Piper’s guy); while the 
story doesn’t offer the sparkling enhancement to the genre that the author’s Dream 
Factory (BCCB 6/07) does, it proceeds cozily and reassuringly through its paces. 
Piper’s employment in a candy shop, where her friends often pitch in, provides a 
tasty device for exposition, ranging from the insertion of a spicy love potion (Jillian’s 
idea) into truffles to Piper’s creation of cynically stamped “consternation hearts”; 
that’s particularly appropriate for such a sweet-natured book, wherein the wrong 
guy is merely a mismatch, not a jerk, and where snarky Valentine’s candy hearts 
raise eyebrows from concerned friends. The notion that Piper’s skepticism about 
romance is a self-protective response to having had a father and a stepfather leave 
her behind isn’t overplayed, so it adds a little depth without taking away the general 
sunniness. This will please romance fans who prefer to steer a course between the 
fluffy and the snarky.  DS
hoCKing, amanda Switched. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2012 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-250-00631-8 $8.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4299-5652-9 $8.99 
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
Stubborn, cold, and emotionally distant, seventeen-year-old Wendy has never felt 
comfortable with other people, so it makes sense to her when a strange boy named 
Finn tells her that she is fact a changeling and a member of a troll tribe. Her journey 
to her true homeland brings about many revelations including that she is to be the 
future Queen of the Trylle nation and, more disappointingly, that her mother in 
this world is, like her human mother, both unpleasant and possibly murderous. 
Originally self-published as an e-book, this trilogy opener immerses the reader 
almost immediately in the land of Trylle, dispelling any notions of stumpy-legged 
lurkers under fairy-tale bridges and instead offering up a compelling picture of 
an otherworldly race at the brink of extinction in a sumptuous, decadent setting. 
The main obstacle here is Wendy herself: she begins the book as a competent, if 
somewhat detached, narrator and devolves into a helpless, angst-ridden parody of 
herself whose sudden need to be emotionally involved with people she has just met 
(when she has otherwise never wanted to get close to anyone, including her ador-
308 • The BulleTin
ing brother and caretaker aunt) feels more convenient than natural. If readers can 
overlook this rather obvious flaw, they will be rewarded with an intriguing political 
plot that threatens to change the Trylle dynasty for good and a deliciously steamy 
romance with Finn, who ranks pretty high amid the genre’s pantheon of brooding 
bad boys. We’re always looking for the next vampire/zombie/fairy trend—who 
would have thought it would be trolls?  KQG
hoPKinson, deborah A Boy Called Dickens; illus. by John Hendrix. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2012 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96732-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86732-3 $17.99  
Ad 7-9 yrs
Hopkinson fuses fact and imagination in this account of Charles Dickens’ boyhood, 
specifically his tenure wrapping and labeling bottles of boot blacking while his father 
and family languish in debtors’ prison. Here young Charles passes the ten-hour 
days by regaling a fellow worker with made-up stories, elements of which would 
later appear in his best-known novels. This episode in Dickens’ life concludes with 
the turnabout in family fortune that finds the father released from prison, Charles 
released from factory work, and an education and a writing career in Charles’s fu-
ture. Hopkinson does her best to make Dickens relevant to children who probably 
know little or nothing to date about his work, but questions may certainly arise 
about how a man can pay off his debt while incarcerated and unable to work, and 
allusions in young Charles’s stories to David Copperfield and Great Expectations 
will probably miss their mark. Still, narration that addresses the audience directly 
is effective and involving (“There he is, running to that run-down, rickety house 
by the river. Are we brave enough to follow him?”), and Hendrix’s pictures are 
gritty and tenebrous enough to create a, well, Dickensian atmosphere, with just 
enough cheer to foreshadow a happy ending. A closing note comments more fully 
on autobiographic references in Dickens’ work; source notes are not included.  EB
johnson-shelton, nils The Invisible Tower. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2012 [352p] (Otherworld Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-06-207086-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
When twelve-year-old Artie starts receiving mysterious messages regarding his des-
tiny as king and the fate of the Otherworld through his favorite computer game, he 
is, to say the least, surprised. The weirdness only increases when he and his older 
sister, Kay, meet the owner of an extraordinary video game shop—who happens to 
be named Merlin; he tells the siblings that Artie is actually King Arthur and Kay is 
destined to become his greatest champion. Although they take a bit of convincing 
(in the form of the appearance of a magical sword and a battle with a dragon), 
the two eventually buy Merlin’s story and set off to defeat the evil Morgaine and 
her minions of darkness, thereby allowing Artie to take his rightful place as king. 
There’s much amusement from the incongruous mashup of the Arthurian legend 
and the modern wired world (a pint-sized fairy instructs Artie to look him up on 
Wikipedia, and a wood elf dons a D&D T-shirt). The plot unfolds very much like a 
video game, with Artie gaining weapons and strength with each time he overcomes 
an obstacle, but the sometimes page-long expository monologues and stiff dialogue 
unfortunately mirror the more clunky aspects of games as well; the list-like descrip-
FeBruary 2012 • 309
tions of the setting are also awkward. The draw here, however, is the action, and 
there is plenty of it that, especially in the battles with ferocious wolves, overgrown 
tree-men, epic tornadoes, and of course, dragons. As Artie dodges fire spells and 
enchanted swords, gamers will find themselves reaching for their controllers while 
they await the series’ next installment.  KQG
jones, diana wynne Earwig and the Witch; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. Green-
willow, 2012 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-06-207511-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Unlike most of the orphans at St. Morwald’s Home for Children, Earwig has no 
desire to be adopted—why would she give up bossing around all those younger 
kids to go be bossed around herself? Despite her best efforts to look unruly and 
not at all cute, Earwig does in fact end up getting adopted, but her new parents 
are a witch and a demon, so at least her new home will be interesting. Initially 
thrilled to find out that she’ll be the witch’s new apprentice, Earwig soon realizes 
that apprentice is just a fancy word for servant, and that she’ll have to learn magic 
by teaching herself magic—and if the witch happens to grow a hand out of her 
head as a result of Earwig’s experiments, well, then, so be it. In this new offering 
from the late author, Jones brings her characteristic witty humor and rich imagina-
tion to a whimsical chapter book that would undoubtedly delight as a readaloud. 
Stubborn and mischievous, Earwig is a likable, albeit irascible, heroine, and her 
triumph at the witch’s expense will elicit plenty of cheerful howls. The prose has 
an easy accessibility, and while some of the vocabulary will certainly stretch the 
skills of novice readers, short sentences, plenty of dialogue, and a fairly compact 
storyline will keep youngsters turning the pages. Animal lovers will find Earwig’s 
warm relationship with the witch’s cat just to their liking, but the real humor here 
lies in Earwig and her misguided attempts at magic, the results of which will enchant 
readers and listeners alike. Final illustrations not seen.  KQG
KamKwamba, william The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind; by William Kamkwamba 
and Bryan Mealer; illus. by Elizabeth Zunon. Dial, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3511-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-9 yrs
At age fourteen, William is forced to drop out of school; the drought in Malawi 
has wreaked havoc on his family’s crops and there is no money for tuition. He 
starts spending time at the American library, where he learns about windmills and 
their power to “produce electricity and pump water.” Determined (and, according 
to his neighbors, slightly “misala,” or crazy), he hits the junkyard and constructs 
a windmill that produces enough energy to light a small bulb. This is only the 
beginning for William, who later went on to create a solar-powered water pump 
in his family’s field and is currently an engineering student at Dartmouth with 
plans to return to Malawi “to work on renewable energy for electricity and pump-
ing water in villages.” This young reader’s edition of Kamkwamba and Mealer’s 
bestselling adult title is perfectly whittled down for the picture-book set, and the 
story of William’s creativity and perseverance is well suited for young dreamers. The 
language is rich and evocative, from descriptions of the ravages of hunger (“alone 
with the monster in his belly and the lump in his throat”) to his imaginings of how 
310 • The BulleTin
a windmill could impact his village. Zunon’s compositions seamlessly combine oil 
paintings with touches of cut-paper collage work, and rich, unexpected colors and 
textures bring warmth and intensity to the scenes. Kamkwamba’s tale will appeal 
to a wide cross-section of kids, from those drawn to human-interest stories to those 
who like to construct and deconstruct things; supplementary details are provided 
in the extensive author’s note, which includes a photograph of William atop his 
actual windmill.  HM
Kenneally, miranda Catching Jordan. Sourcebooks, 2011 [288p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-6227-2 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Carrying on her family’s football tradition, Jordan Woods is the best high school 
quarterback in the state of Tennessee, and she’s got her sights set on Alabama to 
play college ball. Her focus is shaken, however, when a guy named Ty shows up to 
join the team. The problem, besides the fact that Ty makes her knees go weak and 
wrecks her concentration, is that he, too, is a quarterback, and he’s used to being the 
team leader. The other problem is that she finally learns that her best friend, Sam, 
is in love with her, and she has to face the fact that while Ty is sweet, hot, and very 
interested, Sam might just be her first draft pick after all. All this romantic com-
plication comes as she is being courted by Alabama; their interest puts her over the 
moon, but when she finds out that they want her more as a PR stunt than a player, 
she has to rethink her dreams. Jordan is a compelling protagonist, an appealing 
mix of confidence and vulnerability, depending on which field she’s playing. Her 
growing appreciation of a few of the cheerleaders is deftly handled as she comes to 
realize that her prejudices against girls in general have been misguided; both girls and 
boys are depicted with admirable complexity and fairness, even while acknowledg-
ing that their motivations for relationships aren’t always that complicated. Jordan’s 
commitment and ability to stand by her goals and remain true to herself, even to 
the point where she stands up to her father (who doesn’t want her to play) and to 
Ty, is inspiring, and her relationship with her rock-solid, supportive teammates is 
endearing. Reminiscent of Murdock’s Dairy Queen (BCCB 9/06), this is a solid, 
substantive romance that makes all the right moves for girls who won’t settle for a 
seat on the sidelines, in love or on the field.  KC
lareau, Kara Mr. Prickles: A Quill-Fated Love Story; illus. by Scott Ma-
goon. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-483-7 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
Poor Mr. Prickles. The other forest animals continually reject the porcupine’s 
friendly overtures (“‘You’re not cute like us,’ said Raccoon. ‘Or cuddly like us,’ 
said Chipmunk. ‘Or playful like us,’ said Skunk. ‘I am,’ said Mr. Prickles. ‘On the 
inside’”), leaving Mr. Prickles quite lonely. Mr. Prickles’ sadness eventually turns to 
annoyance until he meets his neighbor (and fellow porcupine) Miss Pointypants. 
The two hit it off splendidly, and when the forest animals continue to give them a 
hard time, Mr. Prickles finds their rejection easier to ignore with a friend at his side. 
Young audiences will be amused by the humorous character names and pun-filled 
text (“He tried to join in their midnight picnicking, but it was pointless”), and 
many will sympathize with Mr. Prickles and his social rejection. Although there’s a 
FeBruary 2012 • 311
slightly muddled message here—the fact that Miss Pointypants is also a porcupine 
rather implies that it’s best to stick to your own kind—it is also somewhat refresh-
ing that the mean guys don’t finally discover how nice Mr. Prickles is and change 
their ways. Magoon’s comic illustrations serve to make Mr. Prickles even more 
endearing, with his ever-hopeful visage, big nose, and a tiny derby hat perched 
atop his shaving-stubble-like prickles. Muted greens, blues, reds, and grays suit the 
mostly nocturnal forest setting, while Magoon’s compositions effectively convey 
Mr. Prickles’ feelings (when angry, he looms enormously in full prickle against an 
orange and scarlet background). Pair this with Isop’s How Do You Hug a Porcupine? 
(BCCB 9/11) or Schmid’s Hugs from Pearl (BCCB 1/12) for a prickly-themed 
storytime, or use it to start a discussion about friendship and that perennial kid 
problem of being left out.  JH
levine, Kristin The Lions of Little Rock. Putnam, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25644-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
It’s 1958, and although the Little Rock Nine integrated an Arkansas high school 
the previous year, segregationists then succeeded in closing the public high schools 
rather than reopen them to a racially mixed student body. Twelve-year-old Marlee’s 
family is disrupted by the closing: her older sister cannot begin her junior year, 
and her mother cannot start her teaching job. It’s Marlee herself, though, who 
becomes deeply embroiled in the racial tension in the city when she makes friends 
with a transfer student, Liz Templeton, whose outgoing kindness draws painfully 
shy Marlee out of her shell. A bigoted neighbor happens to see Liz with a young 
African-American man on the “colored” side of town, and her cover is blown—Liz 
has been passing as white in order to attend a better school. Marlee takes to heart 
everything from Sunday school lessons to her father’s natural propensity toward 
tolerance and is determined to remain friends with Liz, but even her father advises 
against it: “Segregationists don’t take kindly to Negroes who try to pass as white. 
Liz and her family are in real danger. The farther away you stay from them, the 
better.” Sadly, he proves to be right: Marlee’s well-intended activism leads directly 
to a bombing with Liz as the target. This affecting tale of interracial friendship 
brings complex issues of principles, pragmatism, and family loyalty within the 
grasp of middle-school readers. The bombing plot steers the book briefly into a 
more crime-story (and less successful) style at times, but it’s the realistic unfolding 
of events that will grip audiences. The ultimate suspension of the girls’ friendship 
is the only credible outcome, and readers can only carry away the bittersweet hope 
that they’ll meet again in a more enlightened decade. EB
long, ethan Up, Tall, and High!; written and illus. by Ethan Long. Putnam, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-25611-0 $15.99  
R 2-5 yrs
Friendly one-upmanship unifies these three tiny tales of a flock of bird buddies. 
“I Am Tall” centers on boasting about stature: a tall bird and a taller one compare 
heights, but when the smallest bird joins in with a failed ruse (those stilts don’t 
fool anyone), he spreads his plumage and earns his props. “I Can Go High” finds 
the birds outdoing each other on altitude attempts; they good-naturedly take pity 
on a flightless penguin and send him airborne with a bunch of helium balloons. 
312 • The BulleTin
In “I Am Up,” two birds “up” in a nest collapse the branch and are now decidedly 
“down,” until their friends arrive to help them “up” on their feet again. Long’s avian 
crew are composed of simplified cartoon shapes heavily outlined in black, with the 
gumdrop palette and sweeping lines of a restrained Chris Raschka and the googly 
eyes of Mo Willems’ pigeon. The brevity and razor-sharp trajectory of the stories 
are well tuned to the youngest listeners, while the tightly controlled vocabulary 
invites newbie readers. As an added bonus, each tale’s punchline is delivered with a 
visual gag revealed with a lifted or pulled flap. Where can preschoolers turn when 
they’ve run through Willems’ Elephant and Piggie titles? Here.  EB
long, marK The Silence of Our Friends; written by Mark Long and Jim Demona-
kos; illus. by Nate Powell. First Second/Roaring Brook, 2012 200p
ISBN 978-1-59643-618-3 $16.99  
R* Gr. 8-12
This powerful graphic novel, based on the experience of Long’s father, a television 
news reporter, follows the unlikely friendship between James Long, who covers 
civil rights issues for a Houston station, and Larry Thomas, an African-American 
professor at Texas Southern University. In a fictionalized reconstruction of the events 
of 1967, Long is assigned to the story of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating 
Committee’s frustrated efforts to organize on campus; when students attempt to 
force the camera-wielding white man to leave the area, Thomas comes to his aid. As 
the two men begin to know each other better, they agree that if they truly believe 
in the tolerance they espouse, they should really visit each other’s homes. Thus 
begins a hesitant friendship between the two families, whose halting overtures are 
met with skepticism among the members of their own communities. Their newly 
established amity is sorely tested, though, when five African-American students 
are arrested in connection with the death of a police officer at a campus riot, and 
Long, who witnessed but did nothing to intervene in the melee, is called to give 
testimony. Powell’s black-and-white artwork moves nimbly between restraint and 
explosion, with scenes that patiently, and often silently, explore the miasma of 
prejudice in the late 1960s South, and then erupt into gutter-shattering bursts of 
violence and grainy images of rioting shrunken and corralled on television screens. 
A concluding note addresses the actual 1967 TSU episode and ensuing trial.  EB
maClaChlan, PatriCia Kindred Souls. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2012 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-06-052297-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 2-4
Ten-year-old Jake lives on his family’s farm with his parents, his brother, his sister, 
and his eighty-eight-year-old grandfather, Billy. When a dog shows up one day, 
Billy names her Lucy and announces that she will be staying; man and dog are 
inseparable until Billy gets bronchitis and has to be hospitalized. Prior to his ill-
ness, he and Jake had planned to build a sod house, like the one in which Billy was 
raised, so Jake gets his family members together to build it as a surprise for Billy 
while he is away. The surprise turns out to be Jake’s in the end; while he built the 
house so Billy could get well and be happy, what he ended up doing was giving 
Billy “the place he wanted so he could leave,” as Billy dies peacefully in his sod 
house a few days later. This slim novel is both quiet and profound; there is nothing 
overstated, nothing shocking, just the simply told tale of an affectionate, loving 
relationship between a boy and his grandfather with the added bonus of a solid 
FeBruary 2012 • 313
dog storyline. The possibility of Billy’s death is suggested early on, particularly as 
Jake frequently tells himself that “Billy is going to live forever,” and the progress 
of the illness storyline is organic, as is Jake’s growing acceptance of the inevitability 
of Billy’s eventual passing. The quiet rhythms of the story and the gentle banter of 
the dialogue make this an ideal group readaloud, but plenty of young readers will 
simply find it the perfect book to curl up with on their own.  HM
martin, emily winfield Oddfellow’s Orphanage; written and illus. by Emily 
Winfield Martin. Random House, 2012 [144p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96995-9 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86995-2 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98635-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Delia is new to the orphanage run by Oddfellow Bluebeard, a “distant relation” 
to the famous villain but “as gentle and kind as the other Bluebeard was cruel.” 
The orphanage turns out to be a wonderful place populated with friendly teach-
ers, unusual but pleasant pupils (among them Imogen, a tattooed girl, Ollie, an 
onion-headed boy, and Hugo, a hedgehog), and an entertaining family of dancing 
bears. The classes, such as Cryptozoology, “which is the study of mysterious and 
possibly imaginary animals” and “F. T. Studies,” focusing on folk and fairy tales, 
are likewise both captivating and unconventional. Each chapter opens with a brief, 
piquant profile of one of the orphanage’s residents, with the experiences of newcomer 
Delia providing an accessible entry point into this unique world. Nothing terribly 
dramatic happens here (the baby bear goes missing and is found, the orphans go 
to the circus, Christmas is celebrated), but readers who gravitate towards gentle, 
imaginative stories and orphan fans with a taste for mild eccentricity will find this 
satisfactory. The mute Delia (who communicates via tidy cursive in a notebook) is 
a sympathetic and intriguing character, and Martin’s monochromatic illustrations 
depict a sweet, old-fashioned world in which the people are wide-eyed and elfin 
and the animal (and vegetable) characters are just as appealing as the human.  JH
mCdonald, abby Getting Over Garrett Delaney. Candlewick, 2012 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5507-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5967-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
For years, Sadie has been Garrett’s faithful best friend, patiently offering her ear 
and her shoulder as he falls in and out of love with other girls and molding her 
dreams and inclinations to his artistic and alternative sensibilities. The problem is 
that she’s desperately in love with him. She figures absence might make his heart 
grow fonder when he’s away at writing camp, but when he calls let her know that 
he has fallen in love for real she decides she’s had enough. Her mom’s work as a life 
coach provides her with a self-help model, and her friends step in with distracting 
activities, advice, and perspective, and soon enough Sadie is on her way to finding 
out who she is without Garrett. The realism here is refreshing and affirming, as 
Sadie gradually realizes just how entangled she has allowed herself to become in 
Garrett’s worldview, which is actually kind of snobby and affected. She’s reluctant 
to give him up as a friend, however, and this too offers a site for realistic conflict 
resolution, as she has to reject her friends’ pleas to give him up completely and 
314 • The BulleTin
work out a way of protecting her heart and her newfound sense of self from the 
magnetic pull that attracted her to Garrett in the first place. McDonald moves with 
sure-footed grace through Sadie’s heartbreak and recovery, adding in the perfect 
pinch of schadenfreude for readers when Garrett finally realizes what a great girl 
he’s been missing all along. Sadie’s self-work is quietly inspirational and satisfying, 
offering genuine hope for the unrequited romantic.  KC 
meredith, Christina Kiss Crush Collide. Greenwillow, 2012 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-06-206224-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Leah expects that, like her older sisters, she will be valedictorian, homecoming 
queen, and the girlfriend of a boy who drives an expensive car. Then she meets 
the boy who parks cars at the country club and falls for him, taking off with him 
periodically for adventurous interludes. His presence in her life, which is entirely 
predicated on the electricity between them—they find out on the third rendezvous 
that they don’t actually know each other’s names—causes her to question the path 
she’s on. Leah’s also plagued by Valerie, a girl who sees herself as competition for 
valedictorian even if Leah does not, Leah’s snobby confidence convincing her that 
Valerie is beneath her notice in all ways. Valerie, it turns out, has motives that are 
almost altruistic; her concern for Leah mirrors Leah’s own worries that she is not 
expected or even able to step out from her sisters’ shadows, and she just wants to 
help. The golden-cage problem is, as usual, an intriguing one, and Leah’s erratic 
steps toward self-definition are understandable. Despite Leah’s self-awareness that 
her life is privileged and she shouldn’t complain, though, she can be a hard char-
acter to like or relate to, and Porter and Valerie serve more as excuses for rebellion 
and reflection, respectively, than fully fledged characters; even though she finally 
considers them a boyfriend and a friend, the emotional connection hasn’t been 
established for readers in a credible way. Rachel Vail’s Avery sisters trilogy (Lucky, 
BCCB 6/08, etc.) is therefore a better look at a fortunate-sister trio undergoing 
some reexamination, but there’s still plenty here for readers to relate to (or wish they 
could). Those feeling confined by family and looking for a little bad-boy breakaway 
action will get some vicarious thrills here.  KC
meyer, marissa Cinder. Feiwel, 2012 [400p] (The Lunar Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-312-64189-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Singing mice and glass slippers are replaced with snarky androids and mechanical 
feet in this richly imagined and darkly subversive retelling of “Cinderella.” Part 
human, part robot, Cinder is considered a second-class citizen by the Eastern 
Commonwealth, so when her malicious stepmother volunteers her as a test sub-
ject for the latest (and most likely fatal) experimental antidote for the plague that 
ravages New Beijing, she can do nothing but comply, even if it means missing the 
annual royal ball. The results of the test, however, reveal that not only is Cinder 
immune to the plague but that her origins—which orphaned Cinder has never 
known—place her squarely in the middle of the political battle that threatens to 
send Earth into war with the Lunar colonies of the moon. Savvy readers will see 
where this is headed long before the story gets there, but they will nonetheless 
delight in catching the cleverly disguised references to the traditional tale along 
FeBruary 2012 • 315
with a few nods to other classics (including one that hints at the direction of the 
series’ next installment). The focus on both the abilities and limitations of Cinder’s 
body is particularly interesting as a contrast to the fairy tale’s emphasis on beauty; 
although the link between Cinder’s struggle and body image issues is never directly 
made, the scene in which she shows up at the ball entirely herself and unapologetic 
for it will resonate deeply with teen readers. The science behind Cinder’s cyborg 
condition isn’t always convincing, but the prejudices against her are clear, as is the 
social hierarchy that guides the motivations of secondary characters and makes 
for an engrossing setting. Sci-fi buffs and fairy-tale fans will find the genres easily 
compatible in this mash-up.  KQG
nesbet, anne The Cabinet of Earths. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-196313-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209919-8 $8.99 
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Being in a new city where she doesn’t even speak the language turns out to be the 
least of thirteen-year-old Maya’s worries when her father takes a fellowship with 
the Society of Philosophical Chemistry in Paris. Besides language lessons with 
her weird aunt, Maya is also concerned about the apparent return of her mother’s 
cancer and the strange attention that her younger brother James is receiving from 
the director of the Society, a man with mismatched eyes and too many secrets. 
When Maya investigates further, she learns that she is a descendent of the maker 
of the Cabinet of Earths, a magical device that the Society is using to keep people 
young and immortal but at a terrible price. Nesbet plays on both the charm of her 
Parisian setting and the shadowy eeriness of a city steeped in history to create an 
alluring sense of place that envelops readers from the first page. Even youngsters 
with little faith in the viewpoints of adults, however, will find the gullibility of the 
grownups in Maya’s life to be illogical at best, unnerving at worst: it’s not credible 
that no one has noticed that members of the Society simply don’t age, nor does 
the laissez-faire attitude of Maya’s parents towards their children’s safety truly jibe 
with their otherwise very parental qualities. Regardless, the mystery behind the 
magic is well paced and intriguing, while the ethical dilemma that Maya inevitably 
faces regarding the mortality of her own mother is heartbreaking in its authenti- 
city. Those looking for fantastical journey abroad with no adult supervision and a 
hint of suspense may very well want to tag along on Maya’s adventure in the City 
of Lights. KQG
noe, Katherine sChliCK Something to Hold. Clarion, 2011 250p
ISBN 978-0-547-55813-4 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6 
Kitty is so used to moving with each of her father’s job reassignments that making 
friends in each new location is usually not much of an issue. The Warm Springs 
Reservation in central Oregon is, however, a new experience, since she and her broth-
ers are among the handful of white students in their new school. The brothers easily 
bond with Wasco, Warm Springs, and Paiute boys through common enthusiasm 
for baseball, but Kitty is intimidated by a pair of her classmates—dour, bullying 
Raymond and his snappish, aloof sister, Jewel. It doesn’t take long for Kitty to real-
ize how negligently, and even disdainfully, the Indian students are treated by the 
white teachers, and as she offers some tentative criticism of the teachers’ attitudes, 
316 • The BulleTin
Jewel thaws a bit toward Kitty. Kitty is much slower to catch on to what the other 
Indian kids already know—that Raymond and Jewel are often at the mercy of their 
abusive white stepfather, and that the reservation police and their municipal police 
are so gridlocked by jurisdictional mandates and prejudice that the children feel 
they have no legal recourse. While Kitty’s gradual involvement with Raymond and 
Jewel forms the backbone of the novel, details of life on the reservation in the early 
1960s, as seen through the eyes of a transient white family, are equally compelling, 
particularly the cooperative wildfire management between the government ranger 
and the Indian women who staff the lookout towers. An author’s note comments 
on the autobiographical aspects of the novel, and a glossary of terms from the local 
tribal languages (with pronunciation guide) is included.  EB
Prineas, sarah Winterling. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-192103-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210217-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Living on the wooded outskirts of a small town and learning herblore from her 
strict grandmother, young Fer has always felt more connected to the land than its 
people. After stumbling across an injured puck (a type of fairy) and saving him 
from a pack of wolves, Fer learns that her parents—the ones that GrandJane refuses 
to discuss—were actually residents of another, more magical world and that their 
deaths brought an eternal winter to that land, one that now threatens all adjoin-
ing realms. It is up to Fer to help spring reappear, but first she must overcome the 
beguiling enchantment of the land’s reigning Lady, an imposter, and find her way 
as a healer and the rightful heir of the true Lady. Quiet, wintry magic pairs with 
rich pagan lore to create a stunning backdrop to what is otherwise a traditional 
coming-of-age tale featuring a plucky protagonist. Prineas establishes Fer’s tena- 
city within the first few pages by having the girl recklessly take on three menacing 
wolves with great success, so that her unflappability when charged with the rescue 
of not one but multiple worlds feels entirely natural. The false Lady is a villain to be 
feared, as are the savage creatures that serve her, but perhaps the most compelling 
character is the puck, whose tendencies towards both trickery and true goodwill 
make him a fascinatingly nuanced counterpart to the earnest Fer. An eco-friendly 
message is subtly woven into the story’s resolution, making this an appealing choice 
for tree huggers and fantasy lovers alike.  KQG
revis, beth A Million Suns. Razorbill, 2012 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-398-3 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Elder and Amy (from Across the Universe, BCCB 1/11) are still traveling across the 
universe on a spaceship, but now it’s Elder who’s is in charge, and he has taken 
the mood-altering drug out of the water system so that people can think and feel 
for themselves. Unfortunately, independent will means people are less diligent 
workers, and the resulting drop in productivity causes shortages and unrest, with 
some people attempting to foment rebellion against Elder’s leadership. Meanwhile, 
Amy follows clues left by Orion, who has been cryogenically frozen to await trial 
for murder, and he’s hinting at the ship’s biggest secrets and forcing her to decide 
whether it is better for the people of the Godspeed to stay aboard the dying ship or 
FeBruary 2012 • 317
to land on a planet inhabited by aggressive life forms. The suspense of discover-
ing secrets and trying to deflect the efforts of an unknown saboteur provides an 
intense backdrop to Amy’s pressing personal question (does she really love Elder, 
or is their connection merely the result of being the only two teenagers aboard the 
ship?), and Elder’s (is he really the best person to lead these people now that they 
have full access to their free will?). As in the first book, this tantalizing blend of 
personal, teen-inflected melodrama set amidst dense philosophical conundrums 
and troubled by immediate danger makes for an irresistible and total immersion 
into the world. Knowing readers will trace provocative questions about the seeds 
of revolution, the French Revolution in particular, through to modern dilemmas 
of medical ethics, sound governing policy, and institutional justice, but they will 
also be thoroughly caught up in both Elder’s and Amy’s negotiations of self-doubt 
and first love.  KC
rex, miChael Fangbone!: Third-Grade Barbarian; written and illus. by Michael 
Rex. Putnam, 2012 [128p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-399-25521-2 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
On a far-off planet in a distant galaxy, a Viking-like people battle the evil armies 
of the great Drool—when they’re not competing to see whose axe is the sharpest 
or whose armpits are the smelliest. Young Fangbone, an enthusiastic but mostly 
annoying wannabe warrior, is magically transported to Earth to hide out and keep 
the enemy’s secret weapon, the Big Toe of Drool, hidden until it is safe to return. 
In his attempts to blend in, Fangbone enrolls in school, where he meets Bill and his 
fellow “loser” friends in Ms. Gillian’s 3G class, who are desperate to win this year’s 
beanball game against the popular kids. Serendipitously, Fangbone happens to be 
amazing at beanball, and the residents of 3G happen to have a few tricks up their 
sleeve to defeat the various monsters sent after Fangbone by Drool. Rex knows his 
audience well and so delivers the various booger/fart/poop jokes in spades, but he 
also includes a few instances of more layered humor, especially in his portrayal of 
Fangbone’s harried and overworked teacher and the clueless principal. Kids familiar 
with being labeled by both the adults in their lives and their fellow classmates will 
readily relate to the outcast youngsters of 3G and will cheer the group’s triumph 
over the A-listers and Drool. Rex’s art sports blocky, vigorous cartooning and 
unusual colors (the palette is mostly yellow and gray), capturing the text’s frantic, 
action-driven tone.  KQG
riChards, jasmine The Book of Wonders. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-201007-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-209918-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Zardi (short for Scheherazade) is just about to turn thirteen when the sultan of 
Arabithia kidnaps her older sister, Zubedaya, as punishment for her father’s treason, 
threatening to kill the girl in ninety days and to return to do the same for Zardi. 
Disguising herself as a boy and joined by her best friend, Rhidan, Zardi finds her 
way onto the ship of Sinbad with the intention of finding a magical item that will 
allow her to save her sister and possibly oust the sultan for good. The journey is 
fraught with danger, and the days fly by as Zardi and her fellow pirates battle storms, 
318 • The BulleTin
end up on snake-infested desert islands, clash with mechanical giants, and outwit 
tricky djinn only to discover that their tale doesn’t end with Zubedaya’s salvation. 
The Middle Eastern overtones here make this a refreshing addition to the mostly 
European-oriented genre of middle-grade fantasy, and Richards borrows heavily 
from the Arabian Nights and various Arabic folktales to offer up a strikingly vivid 
setting populated with awe-inspiring creatures. Once Zardi joins up with Sinbad, 
the adventure comes fast and furious, and although the characters are mostly 
two-dimensional, the action-packed plot makes up for any blandness amidst the 
sea-faring crew. Whether readers are familiar with original Scheherazade or not, 
the quick pace and high-seas adventure make this widely appealing and may in fact 
send some readers to the 398s to check out what else her tales have to offer.  KQG
roCKliff, mara My Heart Will Not Sit Down; illus. by Ann Tanksley. Knopf, 
2012 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94569-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84569-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
When Kedi, a girl in Cameroon, learns from her American missionary teacher 
that the United States is in the midst of a great depression, she wants to help. 
Though initially there’s resistance in her village (“Everywhere the answer was 
the same. Nobody had money to send far across the great salt river to America”), 
Kedi is both amazed and proud when, the next morning, villagers line up to offer 
what few coins they have to help the hungry children in America. This fictional 
story is based upon the fact that the city of New York, in 1931, “received a gift 
of $3.77 to feed the hungry” from Cameroon, and it offers a kid-friendly take on 
the importance of perspective: while Kedi is a poor villager, eating only one meal 
a day and struggling to survive, she perceives the distant children of New York as 
suffering from worse privations, and there is plenty of opportunity for discussing 
the comparison. Tanksley’s paintings are flat and stylized, but the soft fluid lines 
and expressive faces ensure the scenes are never stiff. Watercolor, pen and ink, and 
oils combine in a rich, jewel-toned palette that exudes warmth both in depictions 
of the village and the images of faraway New York. Though there is a clear contrast 
between the rural Cameroonian setting, with its sapphire sky and purple clouds, 
and the crowded tenement scene of New York City, flooded with people and under 
a gray sky, the vivid hues of people’s garb and houses underscores the commonality 
of their lives. Use this as a kickoff to a class service project, or simply share this 
simple tale of one girl’s drive to make a difference.  HM
rose, Caroline starr May B. Schwartz & Wade, 2012 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58246-412-1 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58246-393-3 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-58246-437-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
When May’s parents send her off to help out on a homestead fifteen miles west 
of their own Kansas “soddy,” she is overcome with grief; she wants desperately to 
continue going to school, despite her struggles with reading, and to remain with 
her mother, father, and brother. Things get even worse when twelve-year-old May 
is suddenly and unexpectedly left alone and must use all of her resources to survive 
FeBruary 2012 • 319
on her own for four months before her father comes to claim her at Christmas. 
The free-verse poems in May’s voice, numbered rather than titled, are eloquently 
composed; short phrases and abundant repetition create drama and convey May’s 
youthful determination. The survival story is riveting, particularly when May is 
snowed in and unable to dig her way out, and the backstory of her struggle with 
reading (readers may recognize her difficulty as dyslexia) adds additional interest. 
Some poems reflect back, providing context, others offer details of the present, 
while others are speculative, wherein May tries to figure out who she is and just 
what she is capable of accomplishing. Fans of frontier females will readily dive into 
May’s thoughts; the novel would also work well as a class readaloud during a frontier 
living unit. Isolation and determination work in perfect harmony in this thrilling 
tale of one girl’s survival under dire circumstances. An author’s note giving more 
factual detail and discussing her inspiration is included.  HM
rosenstoCK, barb The Camping Trip That Changed America: Theodore Roosevelt, 
John Muir, and Our National Parks; illus. by Mordicai Gerstein. Dial, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3710-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
Impelled by the works of John Muir to learn more about endangered forests, 
President Theodore Roosevelt arranged to take a respite from his formal tour of 
the western states to go on a California camping trip with Muir and see the sights 
for himself. Getting up close and personal with the giant sequoias, admiring the 
rock formations in Yosemite Valley, and listening to Muir’s campfire tales of griz-
zly bear encounters and even more frightening speculations about future runaway 
development of the wilderness, Roosevelt returned to the White House determined 
to protect the nation’s natural treasures. The result? “With John Muir’s spirit as his 
guide, Theodore Roosevelt saved more wild land than any president in history.” 
This feel-good tale, smoothly narrated and peppered with credible though uncon-
firmed dialogue, introduces listeners to the two public figures instrumental in the 
development of our national park system. Gerstein’s vivid artwork captures both 
the majesty of the western landscapes and the quieter personal exchanges between 
these men who shared a passion for the outdoors. Though the coverage is a little 
selective (Rosenstock omits any reference to Roosevelt’s famed shooting trips, for 
instance), this will serve as an attractive step-up title for children not quite ready 
for more comprehensive works on Muir and Roosevelt. A concluding note provides 
more information and a brief list of sources.  EB
rosenthal, amy Krouse Chopsticks; illus. by Scott Magoon. Disney Hyperion, 
2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-0796-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
In this companion book to Spoon, Rosenthal outlines the amusing activities of a 
pair of chopsticks who are not only working partners but also BFFs. Then the tip of 
one chopstick is broken in an unfortunate encounter with an asparagus spear, and 
after getting medical attention (the glue bottle mends him and wraps the “wound” 
with a bandage) the injured chopstick must “stay off it until it sets.” At first, the 
non-injured chopstick stays close by his friend’s side, but the injured one finally 
tells him, “You need to get out . . . venture off on your own a bit.” The chopsticks 
320 • The BulleTin
discover that time away from each other can also be a good thing: “Unexpectedly, 
being apart had made each of them even stronger.” Rosenthal’s message about 
friendship isn’t exactly subtle, but it also isn’t preachy, and the kitchenware antics 
keep the mood light and humorous. Multiple textual and visual puns (“Chopstick 
was quickly whisked away” is accompanied by a picture of the injured chopstick 
being carried off by a whisk with a first aid cross-emblazoned handle) will also 
tickle kids’ funny bones, as will the slew of pop-eyed, anthropomorphized utensils. 
The slightly muted colors of Magoon’s gently goofy digital art are well matched 
to the amusing yet thoughtful tone of the text. While Spoon would be the obvi-
ous partner to this title, it also might buddy up well with the comical and equally 
anthropomorphic characters of Grey’s Traction Man Is Here (BCCB 5/05), or it 
could be used as a springboard for creative writing, art, or puppet performances 
involving kitchen utensils and googly eyes.  JH
rosoff, meg There Is No Dog. Putnam, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25764-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 10 up
When a sweet, lonely, twenty-one-year-old zoo worker named Lucy sends a small 
prayer to God asking to fall in love, God gets the memo—and, being a rather 
feckless teenage boy named Bob, decides he will fulfill the prayer himself. This, as 
his assistant Mr. B knows from experience, can only lead to global meteorological 
upheaval of, ahem, biblical proportions. Bob has a gift for creative invention—
and the book excels at conveying the simultaneous wonder and absurdity of the 
world—but he’s also a bit of a sociopath when it comes to recognizing human 
suffering. Thousands dead of drought? Why should that be his problem when he’s 
overwhelmed by unrequited lust? His single-minded focus on Lucy both flatters 
and unnerves her (but he’s gorgeous, so she goes with the former impulse at first), 
and if she is a bit flat as a love interest, it is because the novel as a whole is more 
interested in allegory, image, and commentary than in character. The narrative 
threads and multitude of bit characters come together like puzzle pieces, offering 
thought-provoking world-building at an emotional remove. For all the flippancy 
of the setup, Rosoff conveys some genuine spiritual reflection in the character of 
Mr. B, who, as Bob has sent the planet into chaos over the millennia, has “struggled 
day after day to make things better, to answer a few prayers, right a few wrongs, 
who has suffered along with his planet and tried to fix things, in however small a 
manner.” Readers interested in the powerful-being-falls-madly-for-ordinary-girl 
angle will be better off with Greek mythology, but those with a fondness for satire 
or religious inquiry will be fascinated.  CG
rudetsKy, seth My Awesome/Awful Popularity Plan. Random House, 
2012 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96915-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86915-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87324-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
What’s a chubby gay boy to do when the whole school hates him and he has a 
crush on the most popular jock in school? What Justin does is pretend to be Becky’s 
boyfriend so that her controlling father won’t know she’s still dating Chuck, the 
FeBruary 2012 • 321
guy Justin’s crushing on. Justin figures that pretend-dating Becky will get him close 
to Chuck, who will of course dump Becky once he figures out how much Justin 
likes him. After all, crossing over the popularity divide was unthinkable in the days 
before before he and Becky started hanging out, and now he’s changed from bully 
bait to a fixture at the cool lunch table; why should crossing the gay/straight divide 
to get a kiss from Chuck be any more difficult? Of course, Justin’s plan goes sadly 
awry, as Becky starts to like Justin as more than a pretend boyfriend, Chuck turns 
out to be a major jerk, and Justin’s best friend and conscience, Spencer, refuses to 
talk to Justin because of the sneaky plan. The layers of self-delusion necessary for 
Justin to think his plan has any merit at all will certainly strain reader credulity 
beyond reasonable limits, but his hopeful romanticism and underdog appeal may 
ultimately win their hearts. His exuberant narration speaks with the familiar hy-
perbolic rhythms of afternoon teen sitcoms on cable, which is also where this silly, 
feel-good plot would feel most at home.  KC 
salas, laura Purdie Bookspeak: Poems about Books; illus. by Josée Bisaillon.
Clarion, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-22300-1 $16.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Twenty book-themed poems cover various aspects of books, reading, and the liter-
ary experience. Most verses speak in the voice of the book itself (in “Lights Out 
at the Bookstore,” books revel at a nocturnal party; in “Vacation Time!” a book 
celebrates being checked out from the library to travel with a reader) or one of its 
elements (“A Character Pleads for His Life” features a character desperate to be 
read); others address the process from outside (“This Is the Book” describes the 
writer-to-publisher-to-reader chain). The poetry is solid rather than sparkling, 
but there’s an inviting mix of forms from free verse to acrostic to rhyming, and 
the verses are clever in their approach and concept; kids will giggle at the notion 
of a come-hither index or an argument between the book’s beginning, middle, 
and end (“a poem for three voices,” of course). Bisaillon’s mixed-media art relies 
strongly on collage assembly, and while a few figures look younger than the text’s 
level would call for, readers will be drawn by the inventiveness of the graphic style 
and the crisp yet fanciful mix of digitally drawn elements, effervescent pieces of 
pattern, and reproduced slices of book page (composing bits of human and animal 
more often than books themselves). The result is a cheerfully circus-y feel to the 
visuals that emphasizes the poetry’s playful nature. There’s definite readaloud and 
performance potential here, and it would also be effective to slip a relevant poem 
into a language arts unit.  DS
shahan, sherry Ice Island. Delacorte, 2012 [176p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99009-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74154-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98575-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-7
Thirteen-year-old Tatum may be a relative newcomer to Nome, Alaska, but she’s 
devoted to the sport of dogsledding, and she’s thrilled when her friend Beryl, a 
several-time Iditarod participant, gives Tatum her retired lead dog, Bandit. For-
tunately, Tatum’s able to take Bandit along when she and her mother travel to the 
isolated island of San Ysabel, just off the Russian coast, where she gradually makes 
322 • The BulleTin
friends with Cole, a Siberian Yupik boy. When she and Cole head out for a dogsled-
ding excursion, savage weather pins them down, and their pleasure trip turns into 
a fight for survival. The setting dominates the story here, with the remote island, 
predominantly populated by the Yupik, home to a way of life very different even 
from that of Nome; Tatum is an effective focal point as an enthusiastic and adapt-
able newbie who nonetheless carries her own baggage into the situation (she’s got a 
sentimentality about animals that clashes with the locals’ pragmatism). Stylistically, 
though, the writing is often choppy and amateurish, shoehorning explanations 
into dialogue and lacking clarity on some key points (it’s tough to piece together 
the family’s history outside of Alaska, for instance), and characterization remains 
thin. The adventure has an appealing accessibility nonetheless, and readers looking 
for an old-fashioned survival story in an unusual locale may wish to mush along 
with Tatum.  DS
shulman, marK Are You “Normal”? National Geographic, 2011 176p illus. 
with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0837-6 $12.95  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Kids routinely brush aside frustrated parental outbursts (“Are you crazy?”; “Whad-
dareya—nuts?”); Shulman knows the salient gauge of sanity is comparison with 
peer attitudes and behaviors. Ten chapters organized around topics such as Home, 
Friends, Sports, Tech, and Food present a litany of questions with multiple-choice 
answers, followed by revelation of how survey respondents weighed in. For instance, 
“Who in your family gets to hears your problems first?” It turns out that “half of 
all kids want their mom in a jam,” while “only 1 out of 6 kids turns to dad in a 
dilemma.” “Do you pick your scabs?” garners a 43% response of Yes and 57% No. 
One would hope that a National Geographic approach would surpass similar tween 
magazine quizzes in reputability, and indeed Shulman prefaces the main event with 
general comments on how to read the statistics and addresses the darker side of 
implying some behavior is abnormal with the not completely reassuring disclaimer 
that “any way you score is totally your own and totally fine.” The insert “About 
Polls,” however, offers no details about how the surveys were conducted, and only 
claims that respondents “are within a few years of your age.” Hmm. A possible 
spread of ages 7 or so to 15 or so? For the same questions? Hopefully no readers 
will assess their personal “normal” based on such flimsy evidence but will simply 
enjoy this title in the spirit of entertainment that is so obviously intended.  EB
singer, marilyn A Stick Is an Excellent Thing: Poems Celebrating Outdoor Play; 
illus, by LeUyen Pham. Clarion, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-547-12493-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 6-9 yrs
Eighteen poems, two previously published, celebrate everything from jumping rope 
and balancing on curbs to making mud soup and playing in the sprinkler, in this 
tribute to playing outdoors. There is a wide variety of topics, and young listen-
ers will find both familiar and novel pastimes. The poems are variably successful; 
some scan smoothly, with words and meter working harmoniously together and 
evocatively detailing the topic at hand, while others are clumsy and difficult to read 
aloud. Pham’s illustrations, initially in pencil and ink and then colored digitally, 
have a warm and inviting palette, and they feature a multicultural cast of children 
FeBruary 2012 • 323
grinning widely as they ramble through the scenes. The art lacks the subtle flair 
usual in Pham’s work, and the children’s joy is a little overpointed, since every single 
child wears a look of sheer delight. Brad Burg’s Outside the Lines (BCCB 4/02) is 
a much more imaginative poetic look at the world of childhood games, but this 
could be effective in an April unit celebrating both spring and National Poetry 
Month, and it could also give kids some much needed memories of warmth and 
sunshine during the winter—or even provide them with the impetus to get off the 
couch and get outside.  HM
smith, Charles r., jr. Stars in the Shadows: The Negro League All-Star Game of 
1934; illus. by Frank Morrison. Atheneum, 2012 [112p]
ISBN 978-0-689-86638-8 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Shut out of segregated Major League all-star competitions, the Negro League 
launched its own high-profile game in 1933 and in 1934 featured a people’s-choice 
lineup of players, with voting coordinated by major black newspapers such as the 
Chicago Defender. Smith recreates the entire game in rhymed verse, with fictional 
Lester Roberts of WNLB calling the plays and providing color commentary, and 
Morrison supplying spirited, lovingly exaggerated charcoal illustrations of the ac-
tion that radio listeners could only conjure in their imaginations. Roberts keeps 
the patter flowing allegro non troppo through all nine tense innings, lacing the ac-
tion with plenty of humor (“The first inning, folks, is now in the books/ as Slim 
[Jones] brought the heat and Turkey [Stearnes] got cooked”). Commercial breaks 
advertise African-American businesses on Chicago’s South Side, and shaded sidebars 
eavesdrop on fans in the stands extolling the virtues of their favorite players: “Is 
that the same Josh Gibson everybody calls the Brown Bambino? . . . [I]t sounds to 
me like they should call Babe Ruth ‘the white Josh Gibson.’” Read aloud the top 
of the eighth for a booktalk hook, and kids who relive Cool Papa Bell’s mad dash 
for home for the day’s single run won’t want to be anywhere else but Comiskey 
Park on August 26, 1934.  EB
stoeKe, janet morgan Pip’s Trip; written and illus. by Janet Morgan 
Stoeke. Dial, 2012 [32p] (The Loopy Coop Hens)
ISBN 978-0-8037-3708-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. K-1
The three clueless chicken wonders from The Loopy Coop Hens (BCCB 1/11) have 
returned, and they’re ready for adventure. Or, at least, they think they are, when 
jumping into the farmer’s pickup for a trip is merely a plan, but when it comes 
to carrying it out, only Pip actually climbs aboard (“‘First we have to, um . . . ask 
Rooster Sam,’ says Midge”); a nervous Pip then crouches in the truck bed with 
eyes squeezed shut when the truck’s engine roars into life—only to find, when the 
sound stops, that her dramatic journey was actually a brief sojourn in a truck that 
never moved. There’s a touch of Stoeke’s popular poultry heroine Minerva Louise 
(A Friend for Minerva Louise, BCCB 1/98) in the goofy hens, but the warm and 
absurd barnyard friendship also recalls Cazet’s legendary cow buddies Minnie and 
Moo (Minnie and Moo Go to Paris, BCCB 10/99). The chapter-like divisions, big, 
clear print, and spare, streamlined text with subtle repetitions invite a beginning-
reader audience, and youngsters will appreciate the book’s open-handed sharing of 
324 • The BulleTin
important information (such as the truck’s remaining stationary because it’s being 
worked on by the farmer) through art as well as text. The art emphasizes toylike 
red and green, with smooth black line and big digital planes of color seemingly 
resisting nuance and complexity, but Stoeke’s a master at eliciting humor from 
simple visuals. Dot dons a hunting cap for the adventure she never has but retains 
the headgear nonetheless, and Pip in a panic is, well, a panic, ducking beneath an 
old blanket and peering fearfully out over the truckbed wall to view her fate. Both 
readaloud audiences and new readers will be happy to join Pip, Midge, and Dot’s 
friendly flock.  DS
storK, franCisCo x. Irises. Levine/Scholastic, 2012 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-15135-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-39263-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Since the accident that left their mother in a permanent vegetative state, Kate and 
Mary have suffered without her gentle support and respite from their pastor father’s 
oppressive rules about how they should dress, talk, and behave. Elder sister Kate 
has found some escape by depending on her best friend and her boyfriend to get 
her out of the house, but Mary has resigned herself to caring for her mother at 
home, her only self-asserting behavior being to claim an extra hour of art-studio 
time every day after school. When their father dies, the girls are lost at first, and 
they’re concerned about their financial ability to continue their mother’s care. Kate’s 
boyfriend proposes, but she finds herself attracted to the new pastor at their church, 
who introduces some challenges to her ideas of what it means to be selfish, among 
them the possibility of removing her mother’s feeding tube. The formal, measured 
diction of the prose reinforces the weightiness of the issues the girls face; it slows 
the reading down and mimics the girls’ own voices as they gradually awaken from 
their sheltered past to consider the ethics of their dreams. Kate and Mary are very 
different: Kate is a strong pragmatist who is extremely rational but feels inadequate 
in matters of the heart, while Mary is a dreamy artist who leads with her emotions; 
however, they are both strongly committed to each other and to their principles. 
Their story is thus a powerfully thoughtful exploration of one of the most serious 
questions contemporary life throws at us, and it’s made engrossingly messy by the 
sisters’ differences as well as the fact that their choice will ultimately determine their 
ability to embark on their own futures. Strong stuff, gently handled.  KC
tafuri, nanCy All Kinds of Kisses; written and illus. by Nancy Tafuri. Little, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-316-12235-1 $16.99  
R 1-3 yrs
 “Little ones love kisses,” Tafuri begins, going on to describe varying farm animals’ 
pecking preferences, from “Little Chick” who “loves Cheep kisses” to “Little Bunny” 
who “loves quiet—Sniff—kisses!” The “best kiss of all,” of course is “Mommy’s kiss 
goodnight.” Tafuri’s simple, age-appropriate text presents gratifying opportunities 
for toddler and parent participation through the practicing of animal baby names 
and sounds and the multiple occasions offered for kissing little listeners. The large 
watercolor and pencil illustrations have clear hues and up-close views of each parent-
child animal pair that will easily carry to the back of a library program room; smaller 
details, such as a bluebird that appears in every spread and the frequent inclusion of 
FeBruary 2012 • 325
tiny insects, will engagingly invite closer and repeated inspection as well. Although 
the drafting is coloring-book flat with occasional awkwardness in the figures, skillful 
shading, careful color blending, and deft pencil strokes give lifelike detail to their fur 
or feathers. Share this at baby laptime, toddler storytime, or as a cheerful bedtime 
book, and be prepared for an enthusiastic, if slobbery, response.  JH 
thomas, jan The Easter Bunny’s Assistant; written and illus. by Jan Thom-
as. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-06-169286-4 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
It’s understandable that the Easter Bunny could use a helping hand, but it looks like 
choosing a skunk as an assistant may prove a bad move. As E. B. carefully explains 
each of the simple steps in creating colored Easter eggs (“Step 1: Hard-boil the eggs”), 
the skunky assistant, giddy with anticipation, finds the excitement overwhelming 
and lets loose (“Uh . . . Skunk, what is that smell?”). After several foul emanations, 
E. B. finally exiles Skunk from the room, finishing the eggs unmolested; when it 
comes time to bring Skunk back in to help hide the eggs, E. B. is ready—with a 
clothespin on his nose. The skunk reaction isn’t the real-world kind, seeming instead 
to be a proxy for stinky human gases (it’s depicted as a funky green miasma that 
rises through the room), but that makes the events all the more guffaw-worthy for 
youngsters. The earthy humor toughens up the egg-decorating guide (the steps 
are outlined in full in a closing set of directions) into a comedy suitable for even 
the craft-averse who wouldn’t be caught dead with fluffy bunny tales. Thomson’s 
art has its familiar simplified manic vigor, with even the comparatively restrained 
rabbit mugging for the audience, while the ebullient skunk has all the overdramatic 
posing of a stage farceur. It’s going to be hard to curb participation on this one, so 
you might want to save it for a day when you can open the windows.  DS 
tougas, shelley Little Rock Girl 1957: How a Photograph Changed the Fight 
for Integration. Compass Point/Capstone, 2011 64p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-7565-4440-9 $33.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7565-4512-3 $8.95  
R Gr. 4-7
Fifteen-year-old Elizabeth Eckford’s family didn’t have a telephone, so Elizabeth 
wasn’t informed of the plan for bringing all nine African-American students together 
to Little Rock Central High School on the morning of September 4, 1957. As a 
result, she arrived alone, was turned away alone, was escorted through crowds of 
angry white protesters alone, sat at the bus stop alone, and became the lone black 
face in reporter Will Counts’ iconic photograph featuring a petite, pretty white 
student whose expression is distorted by jeering as Eckford walks stoically ahead. 
Tougas offers background on the efforts by segregationists to block the Little Rock 
Nine from attending the all-white high school and then discusses how the published 
images of the taunting crowd influenced national opinion. Perhaps most poignant, 
and ultimately a bit chilling, is the story of Eckford’s eventual rapprochement, orga-
nized by Counts, with Hazel Bryan Massery, the white teen in the infamous photo: 
“The women’s friends and family members thought the relationship was odd and 
perhaps forced. Some people accused Massery of seeking the media attention that 
Eckford had spent a lifetime avoiding. . . . The friendly relationship did not last.” 
This slim volume, heavily illustrated and supplemented with a timeline, glossary, 
326 • The BulleTin
resources lists, notes, bibliography, and index, will be particularly accessible for 
students who are unwilling to tackle a longer work on the topic. It can also serve 
as supplemental reading for Levine’s The Lions of Little Rock (reviewed above).  EB
tregay, sarah Love & Leftovers. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2011 [464p]
ISBN 978-0-06-202358-2 $17.99 
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Marcie and her friends are what they call the Leftovers, since they are “too smart 
to be jocks . . . too pretty to be losers . . . too nice to be popular,” but that’s okay, 
because they have one another. When Marcie’s dad leaves her mom for a man, 
however, Marcie’s mom decides they have to leave Idaho to spend the summer in 
her family’s cottage in New Hampshire. Come fall, they’re staying, and Marcie finds 
herself alone at a new school. Not wanting to be a Leftover on her own, she goes for 
popular, and meets a boy who seems more interested in her than her emo-rocker 
boyfriend in Idaho ever did. While her mom fades into depression, Marcie sorts 
out all of the emotions that one could expect to arise in the aftermath of finding 
out your father’s gay, leaving your friends, and boyfriend behind, discovering the 
pleasures of a physical relationship for the first time, and coping with a mother 
who can’t always get out of bed. Her cries of the heart are captured in effective and 
affecting free verse as she questions why her boyfriend, whom she loves and who 
loves her, never seemed to want to touch her the way this new boy does; is he gay 
like her dad, making her like her mother, or is she more like her dad, willing to 
cheat on someone she loves without caring whom she hurts? Is she being a good 
friend if she keeps some things private? Is it wrong to try to escape feeling bad by 
doing something that feels good? Mostly, she just longs to go home, but when that 
happens, she finds things aren’t as simple as picking up where she left off. Her story is 
thus as credible as her voice, and readers will relate to her complicated but accessible 
heartbreak, as she, like her parents, makes mistakes and struggles to fix them.  KC
vail, raChel Piggy Bunny; illus. by Jeremy Tankard. Feiwel, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-312-64988-3 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 5-7 yrs
“All the other piglets wanted to be pigs when they grew up. Liam wanted to be the 
Easter Bunny.” That’s a peculiar and lofty ambition for anybody, let alone a young 
pig, and Liam’s perplexed immediate family tries to point him toward pragmatism 
(“‘You are a piglet,’ said Liam’s big sister. ‘Deal with it’”). It’s Liam’s grandparents 
who heroically defend his dream (“They just have the imagination of a kumquat, 
the lot of them,” sniffs his grandmother), rustle him up a bunny suit (“We will 
order one on the Internet”), and see him through to the fulfillment of his fantasy. 
Vail’s high-spirited and highly comedic text just begs for a whole-souled readaloud 
with rich vocal characterization that’ll make the most of both the humor and the 
touches of poignancy (“This is the kind of problem,” sighs Liam, “that is called 
heartbreaking”). It’s a hilariously absurd story about a pig, but it’s also a cheerful 
championing of the kind of role play for which “pretend” seems a dismissive term 
and which sees little kids wearing their superhero capes to the supermarket; even 
beyond that, it’s a subtle reassurance about finding workable ways to explore a dream 
or an identity that may seem initially impossible. Tankard, author-illustrator of 
Grumpy Bird (BCCB 3/07), employs thickly solid yet fluid brushstrokes in figures 
FeBruary 2012 • 327
that have a touch of Japanese graphic flavor in their streamlined cuteness; digital 
color makes the piglets a luscious pink that stands out against gently patterned 
tone-on-tone backgrounds in stripes and spots. This will be an enjoyably loopy and 
stealthily reassuring readaloud any time of the year, and it would make a terrifically 
offbeat Easter entry. Oink.  DS 
walKer, brian f. Black Boy White School. HarperTeen, 2012 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-06-191483-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When one of his best friends is killed, Ant Jones decides he’s ready to leave his 
dangerous East Cleveland neighborhood, and he accepts a scholarship to Belton 
Academy, a boarding school in Maine. Fitting in there proves to be tough: the school 
is mostly white, and the locals are tense about an influx of Somali immigrants whom 
they perceive as taking their jobs. A large part of Ant’s education revolves around 
figuring out how things work in a mixed-race environment; his sort-of girlfriend, 
Gloria, accuses George, the school’s basketball star, of being an “Uncle Tom,” 
while George sees Gloria as “the worst kind of black girl in the world, reinforcing 
every negative stereotype she can find, crying racism when something doesn’t go 
her way, intimidating white folks with all that stupid attitude.” As Ant tries to sort 
out his own identity in the midst of these confusing messages, he runs afoul of one 
more important cultural difference: his instincts to retaliate for some mild hazing 
threaten to turn him into the negative stereotype of a violent black boy among his 
white peers. Ant’s a compelling and sympathetic character, and the explorations of 
identity and how it relates to milieu are interesting, especially in the way Ant often 
must grapple with people’s expectations of him. This would be a good companion 
piece for books like Matt de la Pena’s Mexican Whiteboy (BCCB 10/08), Sherman 
Alexie’s The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian (BCCB 10/07), and Walter 
Dean Myers’ The Beast (BCCB 1/04) in an in-depth exploration of racial identity 
in contemporary school culture.  KC
weingarten, lynn The Secret Sisterhood of Heartbreakers. HarperTeen, 
2012 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-192618-1 $17.99 
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210207-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When Lucy is dumped out of the blue by her boyfriend, her post-breakup grief 
attracts the attention of three mysterious senior girls, who tell her of a secret 
sisterhood who break hearts both as a source of magical power and as a service 
to others, since people emerge from the experience with more empathy. After a 
few demonstrations, Lucy is convinced of their strange claim and agrees to their 
terms, secretly planning to use their magic to get her boyfriend back. The week 
that follows puts Lucy through her paces; the girls take her to clubs and parties and 
try their best to teach her to flirt, that is, to go as far as she can with her natural 
charm, unaugmented by magic. The snarky sister provides a much-needed in-text 
voice for what will likely be the reader’s impatience with Lucy’s social gawkiness, 
and another rounds out the response with kindness and magical help when needed 
to shore up the fantasy that even the most awkward of girls can make good given 
the right support. This collection of character types, though a tad formulaic, of-
328 • The BulleTin
fers a kind of necessary balance, and there is a surprisingly strong and unexpected 
message about ethics in the midst of playing the dating game. Mixed in with the 
magical element, there is a lot of quite sound advice about how and why attraction 
works, making this a useful self-help guide for the flirt-challenged in the woefully 
unmagical world of teen dating.  KC
winter, jonah Jazz Age Josephine; illus. by Marjorie Priceman. Atheneum, 
2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-6123-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 7-10 yrs
In this picture-book biography, Winter traces the meteoric rise of dancer/singer 
Josephine Baker from her impoverished childhood in St. Louis, to her breakthrough 
in a New York chorus line, through her headliner career in Paris. Winter picks his 
way cautiously through the details of her life, doubtless in the dual interests of 
brevity and child propriety, limiting his focus to her rags-to-riches ascent, comedic 
talents, lithe and athletic dancing, and the sad irony of her shunning by American 
audiences, who couldn’t get past racial prejudice to embrace the talent the French 
so readily acclaimed. Missing, however, is any hint of her complex romantic life, the 
sensuality of her performances, or even her intriguing stint spying for the French 
in World War II, an episode that would surely captivate child listeners; without 
those, it’s mostly a spirited but generic portrait of a dancer. Winter rolls out his 
text in a blues cadence whose scansion bobs and weaves but which fairly begs for 
a steel guitar accompaniment: “Well she was born up in St. Louis,/ and she grew 
up with those St. Louis blues./ Yes, she was born in old St. Louis,/ and she grew 
up singin’ nothin’ but the blues./ She just had one old ragged dress/ and a pair of 
worn-out old shoes.” Priceman puts the spring in Baker’s step with her confetti-
colored, perspective-defying paintings that emphasize the limber limbs and svelte 
sophistication of the chanteuse as she takes Paris by storm. No notes or sources 
are included, but kids with unfiltered and unsupervised internet access will readily 
find their way to YouTube for an earful and eyeful of the stunning Ms. Baker.  EB
wunder, wendy The Probability of Miracles. Razorbill, 2011 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-368-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
“So the cancer is everywhere. Pretty much. Nothing’s changed.” That’s the news that 
Cam must break about her own prognosis, after years of fighting neuroblastoma, 
to her fiercely protective mother. Her mother, seeking one final chance at a cure, 
decides it’s time to leave Florida and Disneyworld (where Cam and her family 
have always worked) to travel to Promise, Maine, a village that’s supposed to be 
magical. The trip doesn’t start out so magically—Cam quarrels with Lila, her best 
friend and fellow terminal cancer patient, along the way—but Promise turns out 
to be full of surprises. Cam begins to feel better, make friends, even toy with going 
to Harvard in the fall; more importantly, she falls in love with Asher, a handsome 
local guy. Wunder has a fresh, funny, and rueful voice; half-Samoan Cam, with 
her expert hula dancing and Disney-reactive cynicism (“Magic, Cam knew from a 
lifetime of working for the Mouse, was a privilege and not a right”), is an original 
and memorable character. In contrast to Jenny Downham’s savagely sad Before I 
Die (BCCB 10/07), this takes the edge off of the realism with the fanciful pos-
FeBruary 2012 • 329
sibilities of Promise; the suggestion that the slightly Brigadoon-esque locale might 
actually have cured Cam hangs tantalizingly over the story. Even under the touches 
of near-fantasy (including a logistically miraculous trip back to Disneyworld for 
Cam and her new Maine friends), though, there are flashes of the reality of Cam’s 
situation and just how hard it is on her family. Some readers prefer a little whimsy 
and bittersweet philosophy to tearjerking, and the story of Cam’s final summer will 
be just what they’re looking for.  DS
zahler, diane Princess of the Wild Swans. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-20049-2-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210202-7 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
When the widowed king of Tiramore returns from a trip abroad with a new bride 
at his side, his five sons are initially enchanted by the woman’s beauty; however, 
their younger sister, Princess Meriel, is suspicious, especially after her brothers are 
mysteriously shipped off to school in the middle of the night. With the help of 
her new friends, two common children who also happen to be half-witches, Meriel 
discovers that the flock of swans that has recently taken residence at the castle’s 
lake are in fact her brothers, that the new queen is a witch intent on destroying 
the king and his children, and that she wants to rule both Tiramore and the Faerie 
underworld herself. The loquacious and utterly un-domestic Meriel must sew six 
shirts from nettles completely in silence in order to break the spell on her brothers 
and save the kingdom, all while trying to elude the queen’s ire. Zahler weaves in 
a bit of pagan lore with her inclusion of the faerie world, but this is otherwise a 
mostly faithful retelling of Andersen’s “The Wild Swans,” here featuring a likable 
but somewhat bland heroine and a richly detailed setting. Although Meriel is a 
fairly predictable style of plucky princess with no interest in her princess duties, 
some of the secondary characters here are wonderfully developed, particularly the 
half-witches she befriends, and their complicated relationships with the royal family 
reveal more about Meriel and her family than the princess’ unexamined narration. 
As with her other fairy-tale interpretations (The Thirteenth Princess, BCCB 3/10, 
etc.), Zahler shines in her ability to set an exquisite scene, and her descriptions of 
both the luxury of royal life and the more cozy aspects of a commoner’s cottage 
will bewitch fans of Andersen’s original.  KQG
correcTion:
In our November issue’s review of Anthony L. Manna’s The Orphan: A Cinderella 
Story from Greece, we state that no source note is included. The bound book does 
in fact include a source note. 
330 • The BulleTin
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
dong, lan Mulan’s Legend and Legacy in China and the United States. Temple 
University Press, 2011 263p illus. with photgraphs
Paper ed. 978-1-59213-971-2 $27.95
CCB affiliate and assistant professor of English at the University of Illinois at 
Springfield Lan Dong traces the evolution of Mulan’s image from her first appear-
ance as a folk heroine in a premodern China ballad to her more recent status as 
an iconic female warrior and of course, her presence as a global phenomenon as 
marketed by Disney. Examining ideas of female agency, ethnic identity, and the 
cultural contextualization of storytelling, Dong includes an analysis of the diverse 
interpretations of the original tale, its cross-cultural journey from China into the 
Western imagination, and its ensuing representations. While the first half of the 
book is devoted to looking at the original ballad of Mulan and its influence in 
major Chinese-American adult literature such as Maxine Hong Kingston’s Woman 
Warrior: Memoirs of a Girlhood Among Ghosts, later chapters examine American 
picture-book incarnations of the tale and animated movies specifically aimed at 
children. Scholars interested in the cross-cultural mutations of folktales as well as 
the surrounding cultural contexts that inform such iterations will find Dong’s inves-
tigations fascinating. An index and an extensive bibliography are included.  KQG
February 2012 • 331
Abuse–fiction: Cupala
Acceptance–stories: LaReau
AdventuRe: Johnson-Shelton; 
Richards
Africa: Kamkwamba
Africa–stories: Rockliff
African Americans: Abdul-Jabbar; 
Cline-Ransome; Winter
African Americans–fiction: Curtis; 
Long, M.; Smith; Walker
African Americans–stories: Crowe
African Americans–poetry: Grady
Alaska–fiction: Shahan
Aliens–fiction: Rex
Animals: dowson
Animals–fiction: Applegate
Animals–stories: Bond; Cleminson; 
LaReau; tafuri
Arctic: dowson
Art and artists–fiction: Stork
ARthuRiAn LeGend: Johnson-
Shelton
Baseball–fiction: Smith
Baseball–stories: Crowe
Bears–stories: Cleminson
Behavior: Shulman
BioGRAphieS: Capaldi; Cline-
Ransome; hopkinson; Kam- 
kwamba; Winter
Birds–stories: Clark, L.; Long, e.; 
Ward
Books and reading: Cline-Ransome
Books and reading–poetry: Salas
Books and reading–stories: Clem-
inson
Breakups–fiction: Weingarten
Brothers–fic: harkrader
Brothers and sisters–fiction: nesbet; 
Zahler
Brothers and sisters–stories: Cordell
Chickens–fiction: Stoeke
Child labor: hopkinson
Civil rights movement: tougas
Civil rights movement–fiction: 
Long, M.
Clones–fiction: Castle
Comics–fiction: harkrader
Communications: Bowers
ConCept BooKS: Bond; Long, 
e.
Contests–fiction: harkrader
Crime and criminals–fiction: Abra-
hams
dance: Winter
death–fiction: Bostic; MacLachlan; 
Stork; Wunder
depression, the–fiction: Curtis
depression, the–stories: Rockliff
dogs–fiction: MacLachlan; Shahan
dogs–stories: Carnesi
easter–stories: thomas; vail
Environmental studies: Rosenstock
epidemics–fiction: Crewe
epiStoLARy fiCtion: Crewe
Ethics and values: Applegate; Long, 
M.; Revis; Rockliff; Rosoff; Stork
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
332 • The bulleTin
fairies–fiction: Carey
families–fiction: Clark, J.; daswani; 
MacLachlan; Stork; tregay
fAntASy: Bridges; Carey; Crocker; 
hocking; Johnson-Shelton; Mar-
tin; nesbet; prineas; Weingarten; 
Zahler
fathers–fiction: hepler
flying–stories: Clark, L.
foLKtALeS And fAiRy tALeS: 
Meyer; Richards; Zahler
food and eating–stories: Rosenthal
football–fiction: Kenneally
friends–fiction: Bauer; Bostic; hep-
ler; Levine; Long, M.; Mcdonald; 
nesbet; Rudetsky
friends–stories: LaReau; Rosenthal
frontier life–fiction: Rose
Games–poetry: Singer
Gaming–fiction: Johnson-Shelton
Gangs–fiction: Crocker
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Rudetsky
God–fiction: Rosoff
Grandfathers–fiction: MacLachlan
Grandparents–fiction: Cuyler
GRAphiC noveLS: Long, M.
hiStoRiCAL fiCtion: Crowe; 
Curtis; Levine; Long, M.; noe; 
Rockliff; Rose; Smith
History, U.S.: Abdul-Jabbar; Bow-
ers; Grady; tougas
homelessness–fiction: Cupala
hugs–stories: Bond
huMoR: Buzzeo; Castle; Clark, 
J.; Cordell; harkrader; Jones; 
LaReau; Long, e.; Rex; Rosen-
thal; Stoeke; thomas; vail; Ward; 
Wunder
identity: Capaldi
identity–fiction: Mcdonald; Mer-
edith; Meyer; Walker
identity–stories: vail
illness–fiction: Crewe; Wunder
indian Americans–fiction: daswani
inventors: Abdul-Jabbar
Kisses–stories: tafuri
Language arts: hopkinson; Salas
Libraries–stories: Cleminson
Literature, English: Crocker; hop-
kinson
Literature, world: Bauer; Richards
Magic–fiction: Abrahams; Jones; 
prineas
Mothers–fiction: nesbet
Moving–fiction: tregay
Mutism–fiction: Martin
MySteRieS: Abrahams
native Americans: Capaldi
native Americans–fiction: noe; 
Shahan
Nature study: dowson
orphans–fiction: Jones; Martin
penguins–stories: Buzzeo
pets–stories: Buzzeo
Photography: tougas
pigs–stories: vail
poetRy: Grady; Salas; Singer
popularity–fiction: Rudetsky
presidents: Rosenstock
Racism: tougas
Racism–fiction: Levine; noe
Racism–stories: Crowe
Reading aloud: Grady; MacLachlan; 
Salas; Stoeke
Reading, beginning: Carnesi; Cuy-
ler; Stoeke
Reading, easy: Buzzeo; Jones; Kam-
kwamba; Martin; Rex
Reading, reluctant: Shulman
Relationships–fiction: Bostic; das-
wani; Mcdonald; Revis; Rosoff; 
Rudetsky; tregay; Weingarten
Romance–fiction: Carey; Cupala; 
hepler; hocking; Kenneally; 
Meredith
Royalty–fiction: Bridges; Zahler
Runaways–fiction: Cupala
Russia–fiction: Bridges
School–fiction: Abrahams; Castle; 
Clark, J.; noe; Rex; Walker; 
Weingarten
SCienCe fiCtion: Castle; 
Meyer; Revis
Scientists–fiction: Castle
Sheep–stories: Cordell
Sisters–fiction: Meredith; Stork
February 2012 • 333
Slavery: Cline-Ransom
Slavery–poetry: Grady
Space travel–fiction: Revis
Sports–fiction: Kenneally; Smith
Storytime: Cocca-Leffler; Clark, L.
SuRvivAL StoRieS: Carnesi; 
Crewe; Rose; Shahan
teachers–fiction: Clark, J.
toddLeR BooKS: Cocca-Leffler; 
tafuri
trolls–fiction: hocking
twins–fiction: Cuyler
valentine’s day–fiction: hepler
veRSe noveLS: Smith
voyages and travel–fiction: Bauer; 
Carey; Richards; Wunder
voyages and travel–stories: Cleminson
West, the: Rosenstock
Winter–fiction: prineas
Witches–fiction: Jones
World cultures: daswani; Kamkwam-
ba; Rockliff
Zoos–fiction: Applegate
 
E
ncouraging serious scholarship 
and research, Children’s 
Literature publishes 
theoretically-based articles that address 
key issues in the f eld. Each volume 
includes articles, essays, and abstracts 
of dissertations of note. 
Children’s Literature is the annual publication of the 
Modern Language Association Division on Children’s Literature and the 
Children’s Literature Association (ChLA).
Published annually. Volume 40 (2012). 
To become a member:
Individuals and institutions may 
Call: 269-965-8180
receive Children’s Literature as a  
Fax: 269-965-3568
benef t of membership to the ChLA.  
Online: www.childlitassn.org
ISSN 0092-8208 / E-ISSN 1543-3374 
Or write: ChLA
 
P.O. Box 138
Battle Creek, MI 49016-0138
Published by 
T H E JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE:
NOT
CHILD’S PLAY.
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief
Julie Pfeif er and Michelle Anne Abate, Editors
HOLLINS UNIVERSITY
2715 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD 21218 • 1.800.548.1784 • 410.516.6987 • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
The Bulletin of the  
Center for Children’s Books
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
issn: 0008-9036 / e-issn: 1558-6766
Children’s literature*
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief 
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, Editors
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
issn: 0092-8208 / e-issn: 1543-3374
Children’s literature 
assoCiation Quarterly*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, Editor
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
issn: 0885-0429 / e-issn: 1553-1201
The lion and the uniCorn
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman,  
and Naomi J. Wood, Editors
An international theme- and genre-centered  
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion  
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
issn: 0147-2593 / e-issn: 1080-6563
*Please direct inquiries and orders to the ChLA:  
www.childlitassn.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
ChiLDreN’S LiterAture
