T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
April 2007
Vol. 60   No. 8
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
April 2007
Vol. 60 No. 8
321  The Big PicTure
 
 The Invention of Hugo Cabret  written and illus. by Brian Selznick
322  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
323  • Twisted  by Laurie Halse Anderson
326  • Mr. Chickee’s Messy Mission  by Christopher Paul Curtis
334  • Henry’s Freedom Box  by Ellen Levine; illus. by Kadir Nelson
337  • Chicken Joy on Redbean Road: A Bayou Country Romp  by Jacqueline  
 
 Briggs Martin; illus. by Melissa Sweet
349  • Rex Zero and the End of the World  by Tim Wynne-Jones
350  ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2007
352  suBjeCt And use Index
320 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2007 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Brian Selznick from The Invention of Hugo Cabret ©2007. Used by permission of 
Scholastic, Inc.
April 2007 • 321
the BIg PICture
The Invention of Hugo Cabret
written and illutrated by Brian Selznick
Brian Selznick has created a bit of an anomaly: though his book is a blend of visual 
and textual narrative, it isn’t a graphic novel, it is hundreds of pages longer than 
the average picture book, and the term “illustrated novel” doesn’t really address its 
particular nature. Specifically, unlike most of the books in any of the three afore-
mentioned formats, the drawings and text in this novel work not in synchronous 
partnership but rather sequentially, with the story handed off from pages of text 
to pages of visual narrative, resulting in something that evokes an intricate and 
tension-filled silent movie. 
These alternating narrative media tell the story of twelve-year-old orphan 
Hugo, a boy who desperately misses his recently deceased father and who struggles 
to hold his life together after a new tragedy, the disappearance and likely death of 
his uncle, Hugo’s guardian. Hugo had been acting as an apprentice to his uncle, 
learning to set the clocks in a Paris train station; as long as he keeps the clocks set 
properly, suggesting his uncle’s continued presence, he can hide the fact that he 
is now living alone, stealing food to survive, and scavenging bits of machinery to 
pursue his dream: the restoration of a complex automaton that his father had found 
in a museum. At first, Hugo works from a notebook of diagrams that his father left 
behind, but after this is taken from him by an irate toymaker who catches Hugo 
stealing, he eventually discovers that he is talented enough to continue without it. 
The story also hints at broader mysteries with curious connections: the toymaker 
immediately recognizes the sketches of the automaton, a necklace worn by the 
toymaker’s granddaughter is the last item needed by Hugo to complete the resto-
ration, and the drawing that the automaton eventually produces has a dramatic 
impact on all of the characters. 
Far from feeling coincidental or forced, however, the plot unfolds in 
satisfying layers, like a dramatic mystery film. And indeed, the careful pacing, 
heavy black frames that outline each page, and the sequential views that zoom in 
on a single image produce a remarkable cinematic effect. The nearly 300 pages of 
elegant pencil drawings, most combined in pages-long sequences, pick up where 
the text leaves off and sweep the reader along until the story is picked up again in 
words, sometimes twenty pages and several scenes later. The film influences are 
apparent in both the plot (the toymaker is the prolific filmmaker George Méliès, 
considered the father of science fiction movies) and in the visual images, several of 
which are photographed stills from Méliès’ movies. 
Avi’s elegant Silent Movie (BCCB 4/03) recently explored this alluring 
genre, and Selznick ably picks up the thread, offering an engaging novel and in-
322 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
triguing end matter (author’s note, film credits, and further reading list) that all 
but guarantee interest in the subject of silent film. It may well elicit some rather 
unexpected library requests for more information on early twentieth-century film-
making; better yet, any library lucky enough to still have 16mm films in their 
collection will be perfectly equipped to offer young readers a rare glimpse into the 
quirkiness, beauty, and near magic of early moving pictures. 
Dspite that sophisticated artistry, this remains a book firmly and appeal-
ingly intended for its young target audience. True, adults are likely to find it intrigu-
ing, and they will enjoy some of the subtleties that kids may miss (Remy Charlip 
posing as Georges Méliès, for example). However, the pacing, plot, and characters 
are all geared to young readers, who will find Hugo, the intrepid orphan racing 
against time and toward his goals, as compelling as the artistic tribute to cinema 
and forgotten filmic geniuses. Nor are they likely to mind the book’s multiple lay-
ers; instead, they’ll appreciate the ambition, embrace the complexities, and revel 
in the rare experience of an original and creative integration of art and text. (See 
p. 344 for publication information.)
 
April Spisak, Reviewer
AlTer, STePhen The Phantom Isles. Bloomsbury, 2007 210p
ISBN 1-58234-738-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-7
Ming, Orion, and Courtney weren’t sure what would happen when they recited 
an incantation found in an old library book, but they certainly didn’t expect to 
conjure up the ghosts of an entire island nation. The phantoms are trapped inside 
books that belonged to a missionary who had lived on the Ilhas dos Fantasmas years 
ago; disturbed by the friendships between the ghosts and the living, the missionary 
discovered a way to photograph the spirits and freeze them onto a page. Although 
it seems nearly impossible for the three middle-schoolers to find a way to right 
this decades-old wrong, they are determined to release the ghosts. Fortunately, they 
have a dauntless librarian as a helper, clues that are all too willing to be found (and 
a local spirit who guides the children to them), and access to an old photocopier 
that will be key in reversing the images. The adventurous quest of the children 
is fairly predictable, but it’s still engaging; more intriguing and complex are the 
elegantly told flashbacks of the lives of the ghosts and clever side stories about the 
(fictional) scientific and astrological advances that led to their entrapment. Even 
in the midst of dreamy sequences about island life and what it feels like to die, 
however, Alter never loses focus on his three amiable protagonists: Ming, Orion, 
and Courtney are each richly developed characters, distinct from one another even 
in their closely aligned goals. Three black-and-white halftone illustrations backdrop 
the text, illuminating the convergence of ghost and page.  AS
April 2007 • 323
AnderSon, lAurie hAlSe Twisted. Viking, 2007 [256p]
ISBN 0-670-06101-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In a desperate bid for notoriety, nerdy Tyler sprays graffiti on his high school and 
ends up with probation and community service for his trouble. His hard labor has 
the unexpected benefit of turning him into a muscle-bound hulk, hot enough to 
catch the eye of his school’s “Alpha Female,” Bethany. Sadly, Tyler realizes that a 
nerd with muscles is still a target when he finds himself falsely accused of posting 
nude pictures of Bethany on the web and becoming the victim of increasingly vio-
lent bullying as a result. His distress intensifies to the point where he contemplates 
suicide, but he pulls back as a result of an emotionally powerful epiphany that shows 
him where the real problem and real solution lie. Though the dialogue is sometimes 
slick and clichéd, Tyler’s insights, like Melinda’s in Speak (BCCB 10/99), are most 
forceful when they excoriate social pretense with caustic sarcasm. In his way, Tyler is 
as emotionally flayed as Melinda, even though his personal violation isn’t as severe; 
his current crisis merely adds fuel to the slow burn of perpetual humiliation he 
has suffered throughout his life. Anderson remains a master at formulating small 
but apt symbols for emotional truths that trigger both thought and identification 
on the part of readers. Here, for instance, Tyler’s habit of picking at the blisters 
on his hands so that calluses form faster becomes a metaphor for his need to force 
the painful confrontations that will ultimately lead to his healing into a scarred, 
toughened masculinity rather than one that covers over and protects his pain. This 
is a gripping exploration of what it takes to grow up, really grow up, against the 
wishes of people and circumstances conspiring to keep you the victim they need 
you to be.  KC
AnTieAu, Kim Broken Moon. McElderry, 2007 183p
ISBN 1-4169-1767-5 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 8-12 
Nadira is an eighteen-year-old Pakistani girl, scarred in a revenge attack that left 
her unmarriageable and working as a servant in a wealthy household in Karachi, 
from where she writes to her six-year-old brother, Umar. When Umar is kidnapped 
into child labor as a camel jockey, a desperate Nadira disguises herself as a boy 
and sets out to find him, going undercover among the jockeys. Months later, at 
a regional race, Nadira both finds her brother and wins the race; though she’s 
initially refused her freedom, she reveals her gender to the Sheikh’s wife, describes 
the mistreatment of the many camel jockeys, and subsequently earns both her 
and Umar a ticket home, where she begins working with an agency to help the 
plight of the camel jockeys. The first section of the novel, which describes Nadira’s 
family history and the cultural backdrop of her world, is the stronger of the two, 
with its rich descriptions of traditional ways and strong character development. 
Unfortunately, the novel shifts abruptly into a somewhat choppy adventure/thriller 
in the second part, culminating in a wholly unbelievable ending that tidily solves 
Nadira’s dilemma and undermines the practice of enslaving young boys as camel 
riders. Nadira remains a likable and admirable character throughout, however, 
and those willing to see her through will find strength in her example. No note is 
provided, though a dedication recognizes the author’s sister, who first told her of 
the real-life child-jockeys.  HM
324 • The BulleTin
BATemAn, TereSA Fiona’s Luck; illus. by Kelly Murphy. Charlesbridge, 
2007 32p
ISBN 1-57091-651-9 $15.95   
R 6-9 yrs
Once upon a time, there was so much luck to be had in Ireland that it was thick 
in the air and “anyone could grab a handful of it.” When the big folks arrived, 
however, they soaked the luck up, so the leprechaun king gathered it up and kept 
it locked in a chest at his side. Now a clever girl named Fiona has figured out why 
the Irish people are plagued with bad luck, and she’s determined to take action; 
she publicly fakes a whole lot of luck and gains the attention of the leprechauns. 
In a duel of wits with the leprechaun king, Fiona cunningly tricks him into setting 
luck free once again. This well-crafted original tale is both logical and fanciful; the 
abundance of luck followed by the shortage of luck provides a creative premise for 
a tale, and Fiona proves a resourceful heroine. Murphy’s illustrations, rendered in 
acrylic, watercolor, and gel medium, contrast softly shaping landscapes with sharp, 
bright-eyed figures (though the leprechauns are rather stiff and doll-like). Shifts 
in color reflect the changing tone of the story and establish the verdant nature of 
the countryside without resorting to an unending panorama of Kelly green. Pair 
this with Willey’s Clever Beatrice (BCCB 10/01) for an up-close look at formidable 
females outwitting legendary folk.  HM
Bondoux, Anne-lAure Life as It Comes; tr. by Y. Maudet. Delacorte, 
2007 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90391-X $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-90390-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Nine months previously, fifteen-year-old Mado lost her parents in a car accident, 
which left her in the care of her flighty twenty-year-old sister, Patty; Patty is now 
pregnant, and Mado’s attempts to approach the situation practically prove to no 
avail. When the sisters leave their apartment in Paris for a vacation at their summer 
house, both girls find love next door, with a pair of visiting Dutch brothers, but 
their idyll soon ends when the boys leave and Patty gives birth. Patty quickly flees, 
leaving Mado alone with the baby—until Luigi, the baby’s unknowing father, turns 
up at the house in search of Patty. That’s a lot of event for one book, but French 
author Bondoux manages to pace it reasonably well, and Mado’s desperation and 
determination are effectively conveyed; Patty in particular is believably drawn as 
somebody whose sheer irresponsibility makes other people’s lives revolve around her. 
The parental death sometimes seems less a long-felt bereavement than a device to 
get Mado and Patty out of adult supervision, though, and the book strains credulity 
in its eventual depiction of flaky Patty as a successful shared-custody parent; the 
girls also seem to have much more money than their situation would realistically 
offer. Vincent’s Grief Girl, reviewed below, is therefore a more credible exploration 
of this situation, but the layers of unfolding drama and the sympathetic teen nar-
rator give this a stealthily soapy satisfaction.  DS
BoTTner, BArBArA You Have to Be Nice to Someone on Their Birthday; illus. by 
Tatjana Mai-Wyss. Putnam, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-399-24295-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Poor Rosemary: she’s expecting a delightful birthday, but instead her family is 
overtaken by “horrible, out-of-town cousins” and her mother doesn’t make her 
April 2007 • 325
special birthday breakfast. Once at school, things go further downhill, to which 
Rosemary responds unhelpfully (“Rosemary made ugly drawings and gave them 
away, making some children very upset”), but eventually she and her teacher bond 
over their shared rotten birthday. The next day, though, Rosemary is awakened to 
a birthday celebration, and she realizes she’s misunderstood an important calendar 
fact: just because her birthday was on Tuesday the previous year does not mean it’s 
on Tuesday this year. The text is a little lengthy and the set up is fairly contrived (kids 
with that level of day-of-the-week recall will be able to grasp the circled date on the 
calendar). Nonetheless, the wry, understated humor and sympathetically martyred 
heroine will win young audiences, who will be right on Rosemary’s wavelength 
when it comes to the rules of engagement for birthdays. The watercolor and pencil 
illustrations are somewhat overbusy in their multiplicity of objects and hues in each 
scene, but the result is entertainingly chaotic, and the strong and humorous drafting 
makes Rosemary a sturdy and lively figure. Though most kids aren’t likely to have 
made this fictional mistake, they’ll fully understand the horror of such a day’s being 
ignored, and they’ll be glad to see Rosemary get her celebration.  DS
BreAThed, BerKeley Mars Needs Moms!; written and illus. by Berkeley 
Breathed. Philomel, 2007 40p
ISBN 0-399-24736-X $16.99   
M 6-9 yrs
Milo can’t believe mothers have such a good reputation since all they do is enforce 
the eating of vegetables, boss children, and in general act as “thundering, humorless 
tyrants.” At his wit’s end, Milo shouts that he cannot imagine what is special about 
mothers, a moment of hubris that is sure to result in a life lesson. Indeed, Milo 
awakens to find that Martians are stealing his mom, and he leaps onto the spaceship 
at the last minute in an attempt to save her. Upon landing on Mars, however, Milo 
trips and his helmet breaks, leaving him exposed to the deadly Martian air. After 
his mother selflessly puts her own helmet on his head, both Milo and the Martians 
see how truly important mothers are. The story itself is entirely predictable, and it 
frequently relies on sentimentality rather than clever or original writing. The art is 
likelier to draw audiences, and the smaller black-and-white illustrations that hint at 
Milo’s perspective on the unfolding events are artistically effective. Unfortunately, 
the full-color spreads in virtual acrylic and watercolor are often garish and overbusy 
with relentless clashing color. The carnivalesque visuals do help mitigate the text’s 
didacticism and give young audiences a point of connection to a text that’s skewed 
more to adults, but this one is mostly for the grownups.  AS
comPeSTine, ying chAng The Real Story of Stone Soup; illus. by Stéphane 
Jorisch. Dutton, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-525-47493-5 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
Compestine takes a different tack with this retelling of the popular folktale, link-
ing it to a traditional dish in southeastern China. According to culinary folklore, 
a fisherman who forgot to bring a pot to cook his lunch instead dug a hole in the 
ground, filled it with water, heated rocks in a fire, and then added the hot rocks 
to the hole to heat the mix. This fictionalized folktale builds upon this legend in 
a slyly humorous tale of a not-too-wise uncle whose laziness and poor observation 
skills lead him to believe that the stones themselves give the soup its flavor. The 
self-important uncle narrates, telling of his outing with the three Chang brothers. 
Because they have no pot to cook their lunch, the boys set about digging a hole, 
heating the rocks, and preparing the water for what they promise will be a delicious 
326 • The BulleTin
stone soup. What the uncle does not notice, however, is the boys adding fish, wild 
vegetables, and eggs to the mix. The soup is indeed delicious, and thereafter the uncle 
carries the rocks everywhere with him and proclaims the miracle of stone soup. This 
entertaining variant is loaded with subtle visual and verbal humor; audiences will 
get a particular kick out of catching what the uncle is missing. Jorisch’s line-and-
watercolor illustrations depict a lush rural China, with monkeys in the trees and 
coolie hats on the brothers’ heads. The visuals are laced with humor throughout, 
not just in their revealing of the boys’ secret; the Chang brothers’ expressions are 
especially successful in providing hints about the uncle’s character, while the uncle’s 
brash posturings are giveaways in their own right. The play between the text, con-
veying the uncle’s perspective, and the illustrations, depicting the other side of the 
story, makes a game of the contradictory messages that will add to the pleasures of 
this witty retelling. A recipe for egg drop stone soup is included.  HM
criSler, curTiS l. Tough Boy Sonatas; illus. by Floyd Cooper. Wordsong/Boyds 
Mills, 2007 86p
ISBN 1-932425-77-2 $19.95   
R Gr. 10 up
Thirty-seven poems in three sections, “Gary,” “Son of a City,” and “Tough Boy 
Sonatas,” tell of growing up in Gary, Indiana. The Gary in these poems is an all-
black city of poverty and crime, where the outside white world slides in through 
the television, where “men here are/ rare commodities,” where groups of kids run 
in packs and play with the same intensity some will later bring to violence. There’s 
an adult edge (about twenty of the entries were previously published as adult 
works) and retrospection to these poems (they’re set roughly in the 1970s, when 
the idolized Foxx of “foxx and pryor and murphy” is likely Redd, not Jamie) that 
makes them more suitable to experienced young readers of poetry, but those willing 
to rise to the challenge will find a compelling poetic picture. While Crisler’s style 
varies, many of his poems favor pulsing internal rhymes and polysyllabic echoes, 
repetitions and near-repetitions, playing with homophonic syllables; the result are 
sonorous poems often begging for oral performance, which may also make them 
more accessible to teens intimidated by verse on the page. Poems treating darker 
subjects such as a heroin-using grandmother (“Grandma”) or methods of survival 
in the projects (“Back Tracks”) are leavened by warmer paeans to childhood joys 
such as Mom’s hamburgers (“Burgers, Homegrown”) and the passion for candy 
(“Addiction”). Cooper’s moody illustrations blend grainy pastel textures with pale 
washes, with browns and blacks sometimes the sole pigments and other colors 
introduced only as accents; the portraiture is eloquent and at times haunting, the 
landscapes poignant. Marilyn Nelson is mentioned in the acknowledgments, and 
while this is more challenging reading than her stunning Carver (BCCB 9/01), her 
fans will be first in line to explore Crisler’s poetic landscapes.  DS
curTiS, chriSToPher PAul Mr. Chickee’s Messy Mission. Lamb, 2007 230p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90942-X $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32775-7 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-7
In this sequel to Mr. Chickee’s Funny Money (BCCB 12/05), Steven, Richelle, and 
Russell go on the case when Russell’s diminutive dog, Rodney Rodent, disappears 
into a creepy wall mural. They discover that Rod-Rode’s strange utterance before 
he disappeared—George Clinton’s funk refrain “bow-wow-wow-yippee-yo-yippee-
yay”—is actually a password that allows people to travel between worlds. Intrepid 
April 2007 • 327
detectives, they follow Rod-Rode through the portal and unexpectedly find Steven’s 
old friend Mr. Chickee waiting for them. It turns out that Steven’s previous-volume 
misadventures with FBI Agent Fondoo and the quadrillion dollar bill were a test to 
see if he and his friends would be able to help the Old Souls decipher the prophecies 
of the Chronicles of Zornea-Hu that will save their dying world. This complicated 
yet familiar fantasy premise launches the detectives on their adventure, which re-
ally begins when Russell finds himself in a land created by his favorite author, a 
land threatened by a terrible monster. Russell is from first to last a dubious hero; 
he and Steven are Curtis’ goats as the author delivers jab after jab at dimwitted 
preadolescent boys. From bad puns to bathroom humor to slapstick physical gaffes, 
Curtis finds the funny bone of the nine-year-old male, and he doesn’t stop worry-
ing it until the giggles turn to groans. As with the first in the series, this makes a 
great shared reading experience for families—it features the kind of relentless but 
good-hearted teasing that passes between fathers and sons and invokes and parodies 
music and literature of parents’ and grandparents’ generations, paving the way for 
shared memories and knowledge along with the laughs. The ending promises more 
sequels to come, with Richelle’s turn coming up next.  KC 
dAvieS, JAcqueline The House Takes a Vacation; illus. by Lee White. Cavendish, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-7614-5331-8 $16.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
“When the Petersons left for vacation, their house decided to go on holiday, too.” 
After some discussion between components (the windows want to meet the houses 
they face, the roof wants to get out of the neighborhood, and the front door doesn’t 
care where they go as long as it leads the way), they decide to go to the sea; there 
the house takes a dip, gets swept away, and struggles damply back to shore, after 
which it heads squishily home. The plot is somewhat haphazard, especially in the 
house’s varying response to the sea, and there’s not much in the way of climactic 
action; nonetheless, this is an enjoyably silly notion, and the characterization of the 
different parts of the house adds another dimension of humor. White builds his 
house (and its background) out of oils and colored pencil, animating its elements 
with lively cartoon eyes and mouths to make faces out of architectural components. 
While youngsters may find the story a bit puzzling in places, the notion of a lively 
and quarrelsome house on the go and the surprised homeowners returning to their 
soggy abode could add a new storey to humorous holiday tales.  DS
doder, JoShuA A Dog Called Grk. Delacorte, 2007 249p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90374-X $16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73359-3 $14.99   
Ad Gr. 5-7 
Tim spends afternoons in the comfort of his own home, playing helicopter vid-
eogames while his workaholic parents are gone, and he likes that arrangement 
just fine. After Tim discovers a small lost dog and determines to find the owners, 
however, he gets caught up in an international political coup, and his quiet days 
are over. The dog, Grk, belongs to the Stanislavian ambassador’s daughter, who, 
after the overthrow of the country’s democracy, was kidnapped out of England and 
imprisoned in Stanislavia along with the rest of her family. Unable to accept his 
parents’ suggestion that they send the dog to a shelter, Tim sets off on a quest of 
heroic proportions, crossing countries, organizing prison breaks, and frequently 
risking his life to reunite imprisoned girl and faithful dog. A boy and a dog (even 
328 • The BulleTin
just a borrowed dog) against the world is an appealing concept, and Grk and 
twelve-year-old Tim, both of whom are brave, clumsy, and amiable, deliver on the 
promise. However, the grim adventures in which the protagonists find themselves 
are jarringly incongruous with the perky, humorous tone of the novel; indeed, a 
surprising number of adults die in front of and around the children, and political 
cynicism trumps governmental decency. Against such realistic but quite solemn 
elements, the fact that the climax involves Tim flying a real helicopter to escape 
seems forced and too convenient rather than exciting. Nevertheless, this British 
import, the first in a series, will still likely appeal to plot-driven action buffs who 
may find the additional layer of governmental intrigue to be a welcome supplement 
to the usual chase scenes.  AS 
golding, JuliA Secret of the Sirens: Book One, The Companions Quartet. Cav-
endish, 2007 [416p]
ISBN 0-7614-5371-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Giant oil refinery Axoil is having labor problems: their employees are turning up 
dead. Only the members of the secret Hescombe Society for the Protection of 
Mythical Creatures understand that the deaths are caused by sirens, who have lured 
the hapless workers to their doom and that the sirens are merely the first creatures 
to run out of patience with humans and their environmental choices. Enter young 
Connie Lionheart, destined to be a very special member of the secret society; she’s 
a universal, someone able to communicate with all species, both mythical and 
everyday. Kullervo, a shadowy menacing creature who feeds on chaos, pursues 
Connie, intending to subvert her to his dark purposes, so she must find a way to 
harness her natural gifts to stop Kullervo’s deadly intention as well as Axoil’s threat 
to Hescombe’s seaside. The characters are likable, but they’re shallow, with trite 
dialogue often getting the better of them (“But innocent men are dying! There must 
be something else we can do—something that means that you can remain here 
peacefully! Just give me time—I’ll think of it!”). The plot is moved along by plenty 
of action, though, including a spectacular twilight fight involving a midnight blue-
black eagle, a stormy weather giant, and flights of dragons and pegasi. Between this 
quick pacing and the appealing premise of gifted young pupils bonding to a variety 
of mystical creatures, this may find fans among middle-school fantasists.  CW
gormAn, cArol Games. HarperCollins, 2007 279p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-057028-8 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-057027-X $16.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Mick and Boot are two different kinds of bullies: Mick goads with his words, and 
Boot leads with his fists. Two weeks into eighth grade, they’ve already fought each 
other twice, and a new principal decides to try a new strategy. Since suspension 
hasn’t worked to stop their fighting, he tells them that they have to spend a couple of 
hours each day playing games together. Their unusual punishment garners them an 
unprecedented popularity; everyone, including Tabitha, the girl both boys fantasize 
about, wants to know how they are getting along. It turns out that Tabitha’s interest 
isn’t romantic, as both boys hope, so much as mercenary—she’s booking bets on their 
fights. The fights escalate into dares that threaten to destroy what matters most to 
each boy, but it isn’t until Boot hits bottom that Mick realizes just how vulnerable 
his favorite target really is. The boys take turns, appropriately, chapter by chapter, 
April 2007 • 329
narrating the action, and although Mick’s well established as the bookish one, his 
vocabulary and assessments of the situations the boys face, including his motiva-
tions for bullying Boot and his responses to his father’s alcoholism, are a shade too 
adult for first person narration. Boot, on the other hand, is believably sullen and 
stubborn, caught in a physically abusive situation that he expects to survive, as his 
brother has, through becoming as tough as his dad. Gorman puts various models of 
masculinity on trial here, with the principal emerging as the clear winner balancing 
strength, sensitivity, intelligence and a sense of fair play. Boot and Mick, despite 
their bullying tendencies, come across as ultimately sympathetic boys responding 
to tough home lives by making things tough for those around them, and readers 
will be heartened when they finally reach détente.  KC 
grAff, liSA The Thing about Georgie. Geringer/HarperCollins, 2007 220p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-087590-9 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-087589-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-6
The “thing about Georgie” is that Georgie is a dwarf. Now in fourth grade, Georgie 
is comfortable in his slightly modified world (a stool by the blackboard just for 
him, a lever on his light switch, a milk crate under his desk), but he soon finds 
himself buffeted by a ripple of change. First he finds out his parents are having a 
baby, then he and his best friend, Andy, get into a terrible fight, and to top it off 
he is assigned to a class project with Jeanie, a.k.a. “Jeanie the Meanie.” This is a 
remarkable story of maturation, featuring a boy whose growing up is not evident 
on the tape measure he keeps hidden in the back of his closet. Georgie’s anxieties 
ring absolutely true, from his fears at making new friends to his worry that an aver-
age-sized sibling will outshine him, and readers will readily embrace the complexity 
of concerns running through Georgie’s head. Throughout the novel, handwritten 
entries invite the reader to participate in different exercises that aid in understand-
ing Georgie’s world, from performing physical tasks that are difficult for Georgie 
(e.g., holding a pencil, tying shoelaces) to staring at a drawing of Georgie for thirty 
seconds (just to get the staring out of the way). The final chapter reveals that Jeanie, 
who doesn’t prove to be such a “meanie” after all, is the writer of these passages, and 
she has actually been working hard to understand what it is like to be Georgie. At 
the heart of the novel lies the message that no one “thing” about anyone is wholly 
definitive and that everyone is made up of lots of different characteristics, traits and 
“things.” Especially likely to draw fans of the TLC series Little People, Big World, 
this entertaining and thoughtful read will encourage youngsters to consider the 
true nature of growth.  HM
grAhAm, BoB Dimity Dumpty: The Story of Humpty’s Little Sister; written and 
illus. by Bob Graham. Candlewick, 2007 40p
ISBN 0-7636-3078-0 $15.99   
Ad 4-7 yrs
Rather than the pretentious bore of Lewis Carroll fame, Humpty Dumpty appears 
in this wistful tale as the reckless preadolescent older brother of timid Dimity. The 
Dumpty family have a circus act called The Tumbling Dumpties; her mother, father, 
and Dumpty perform death-defying feats on the flying trapeze, but Dimity demurs, 
preferring to play her flute quietly out of the spotlight. When her outlaw brother 
takes a tumble off a wall that he is in the process of tagging, cami-garbed soldiers 
passing by give him up for dead, but Dimity boldly marches to the center of the 
circus ring and demands that someone help her brother. After he’s rescued and 
330 • The BulleTin
restored, Dimity is modestly emboldened to play her flute for the circus perform-
ers, who cease their bustle to attend to her gentle reminder that quietude has its 
place even in the boisterous environment of the circus. Richly detailed watercolors 
in eye-easing pastels give distinctive character to the egg family and their circus 
environs, with the tiny details of their home and the outlandish costumes of their 
fellow performers adding a light-hearted humor to the more earnest text. Though 
Graham forcefully claims that this is Dimity’s tale, Humpty still garners more than 
his share of the action and attention, making Dimity’s contribution seem rather 
pale by comparison. In fact, Dimity’s character isn’t developed well enough for her 
act to be recognized as fully heroic; she’s never presented as actively fearing the 
spotlight, so that her being forced to take center stage doesn’t carry the impact it 
might have. Still, readers will smile at the whimsical humor of the nifty little egg-
carton caravan pulled by a harnessed and harassed-looking chicken, giggle at the 
graffiti-addicted Humpty, and applaud the graces of the shy girl who doesn’t have 
to get over being shy to find her place in the world.  KC
hAddix, mArgAreT PeTerSon Dexter the Tough; illus. by Mark Elliott. Simon, 
2007 141p
ISBN 1-4169-1159-6 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Dexter’s first day at his new school does not get off to a good start; within moments 
of arriving he decided that he hates the principal, the janitor, the secretary, and all 
the kids, and he punches a boy that he found crying in the restroom. When his 
teacher, Ms. Abbott, asks him to write something about himself, he turns in a paper 
that reads, “I’m the new kid. I am tuf. This morning I beat up a kid.” As Dexter 
writes and rewrites the story and works with his teacher on the revisions, he comes 
to understand exactly what happened that first morning in the boys’ room. He also 
seeks out his victim, a fellow fourth-grader named Robin who is also new to the 
school, and a somewhat cautious friendship begins between the two boys. Haddix’s 
latest novel offers a thoughtful exploration of a young boy’s coming to terms with 
inner rage (Dexter’s been sent to stay with his grandmother in Kentucky so his 
parents could go to Seattle where his father, who suffers from a life-threatening bone 
marrow disease, can get treatment), while simultaneously beginning to understand 
his own motives. The story successfully involves the reader, who reconstructs the 
events along with Dexter and thus shares the experience of self-discovery with 
him. Robin serves effectively as an aid in Dexter’s efforts to understand his own 
emotions, and his quiet assistance is well partnered with Dexter’s visible rage. This 
is a moving story of a boy working through anger and sadness in circumstances 
beyond his control. Occasional pencil sketches are stodgy, but they offer a deeper 
glimpse into Dexter’s world.  HM
hAnSen, roSAnnA Caring for Cheetahs: My African Adventure. Boyds Mills, 
2007 32p illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-59078-387-5 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
In this photoessay, author Hansen describes her visit to Namibia’s Cheetah Con-
servation Fund and her interactions with the animals there. Brief titled sections 
cover topics such as feeding the animals, cheetahs’ hunting methods, exercising 
the animals with “cheetah-racing,” and the organization’s work with local farmers, 
while sidebars offer tidbits about cheetah anatomy and multiple photographs (some 
taken by the author) decorate each page. This is more suited to browsing than read-
April 2007 • 331
ing, since the sections jump around disconnectedly; it’s also a little short on key 
explanations, failing to articulate the difference between “tame” and “habituated to 
humans” and never explaining how the facility is staffed (only the author and the 
organization’s director are identified in photos). Garish layout, involving multiple 
borders in multiple colors (one of them photographed cheetah fur), detracts from 
the visual impact of the cheetahs themselves, though the multitude of pictures 
show a magnificent cast of highly photogenic cats that will still absorb reader at-
tention. Turner’s Gorilla Doctors (BCCB 6/05) is a superior look at attempts to aid 
African wildlife, but big-cat aficionados may still enjoy pawing through the pages 
here. End matter includes a glossary and a brief list of websites for conservation 
organizations.  DS
JABlonSKi, cArlA Silent Echoes. Razorbill, 2007 344p
ISBN 1-59514-082-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-9
In 1882, sixteen-year-old Lucy, anxious to please her father and secure income for 
the family, has been pretending to channel the spirits of the dead in fraudulent 
séances. After faking it for so long, Lucy is shocked when she actually hears an 
otherworldly voice asking for help. The voice belongs to Lindsay, a modern-day teen 
who is hiding in a closet, overwhelmed by her mother’s alcoholism and her abusive 
new stepfather. After Lucy realizes that she can talk back, the two girls strike up 
an anxious and difficult relationship: Lindsay, certain she is schizophrenic, resists 
the voice for as long as possible, and Lucy is so distracted by wanting to help that 
she breaks character mid-séance, risking her career. Jablonski offers an intriguing 
concept in the parallel stories of Lucy and Lindsay, teens who are struggling to 
find family, security, and identity in a world that favored quiet young women 120 
years ago as little as it does now. Ultimately, the girls’ supernatural friendship aids 
each in her own time, and they reluctantly break their connection (both recognize 
the temporal danger in Lucy learning too much about the future), knowing that 
at least their brief cooperation has changed their lives for the better. A superfluous 
last-minute plot twist reveals a deeper tie between the two as Lindsay discovers that 
Lucy was her great-great-great grandmother; even without this enforced relation-
ship, the strong bond between the two girls is realistic and compelling. Essentially, 
this is a ghost story without any actual ghosts and as such, realistic and mystery 
fans alike should find much to enjoy in this novel.  AS
JohnSon, PeTer What Happened. Front Street, 2007 133p
ISBN 1-932425-67-5 $16.95   
R Gr. 9 up
This taut, nonlinear tale chronicles the narrator’s experience when the car he and 
his brother are riding in hits a bicyclist during a January snowstorm. The driver, 
Duane, is a privileged rich kid who’s afraid of his powerful father’s wrath and who 
wants to flee the scene; when the narrator and his brother, Kyle, get out to check 
on the victim and report the accident, Duane takes off (Kyle and his brother also 
leave the scene after calling the police and trying to protect the unconscious man 
from further injury). Now Duane’s father wants Kyle and his brother to take re-
sponsibility for the accident and keep Duane’s record clear, and he has considerable 
influence: he’s also the father of Kyle’s girlfriend, Emily, and he makes it known 
that he has considerable information about the boys’ dead mother and abandoning 
dad. Johnson deftly sets up the story’s fragmented nature by allowing his narrator to 
announce it at the start (“If my story seems erratic it’s because I think that way”), 
332 • The BulleTin
yet the story is actually pretty representative of the way experiences can fly by in 
the face of a life-changing incident. Attuned readers will realize that the disparity in 
fortune between Duane and the brothers, which Duane’s father takes every chance 
to point out, is ultimately far more unfair than Duane’s dad’s sleazy proposal, and 
that the brothers’ refusal of the proposal is a statement about themselves as well. 
This is therefore a drama that will provoke ethical and philosophical questioning 
not only about the central crisis but about the life paths that brought these boys 
to this moment in the first place.  DS
JohnSTon, Jeffry W. Fragments. Simon Pulse, 2007 204p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4169-2486-8 $6.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Chase is a walking mess. He’s in therapy following a suicide attempt, and the voice 
that told him to take his life isn’t finished with him. Fragmented memories of the 
car accident that claimed the lives of four of his friends come to him at odd mo-
ments; as the only survivor, he is haunted by survivor guilt, and maybe something 
more. His older brother comes and goes in random visits that Chase must keep 
secret from his parents, who have seemingly given up on their elder son. Plus he 
suffers from preacher’s kid syndrome, where his parents are attuned to everyone’s 
problems but his. He’s surrounded on all sides by secrets, mostly those that he is 
keeping from himself, according to his therapist, who provides painfully obvious 
commentary on Chase’s problems and progress. For those who’ve read around in 
young adult literature, there will be few surprises here; experienced readers will likely 
guess from the first reference to Chase’s brother that he is either dead or never existed 
in the first place, and that the sinister secret surrounding a bachelor uncle living 
next door has something to do with sexual abuse. Those same experienced readers 
will certainly not need the therapist’s explanatory summations of Chase’s hang-ups 
and motivations, and they may find them intrusive and overplayed. None of that, 
however, stops this book from being readable. As the story races to its conclusion, 
readers will stagger under the weight of Chase’s misplaced guilt, yell at him for 
repeating his mistake of choosing a mean girl over a nice one, fight the urge to 
give his insensitive parents a good slap, and bite their nails over Chase’s nagging 
urge to end it all. With its guessable plot and it-all-makes-sense-now resolution, 
this is melodrama just the way many readers like it, with the chief pleasure being 
that you knew what was coming all along, but had to keep reading just to be sure 
you were right.  KC  
KAdohATA, cynThiA Cracker!: The Best Dog in Vietnam. Atheneum, 
2007 308p
ISBN 1-4169-0637-1 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Cracker starts out as a beloved pet, but when hard times force her family into a 
no-pets-allowed apartment, she’s donated to the U.S. Army. There the German 
Shepherd becomes the partner of Rick Hanski, a seventeen-year-old volunteer 
preparing to fight in Vietnam, who finds that behind Cracker’s aggression and 
stubbornness lies a gifted and loyal tracker and alert dog. Once in Vietnam, the 
two struggle to learn the ropes but excel at a range of missions, including a secret 
incursion into Cambodia. When Rick takes a hit that means he’s sent back home, 
he’s more concerned that Cracker disappeared in the incident, and he moves heaven 
and earth to try to find his dog and then get military permission to bring her home 
as well. The book is a strange mixture: it’s part classic mid-twentieth-century dog 
April 2007 • 333
story, complete with gee-whiz enthusiasm and accessibility, modest anthropomor-
phism, and a general absence of deep reflection, and part candid war story that’s 
pulling no punches about the disposal of the dogs upon the army’s pullout and 
the often-bloody fates of both the U.S. soldiers and their enemies. That’s a blend 
that could well appeal to readers (and reluctant readers in particular), however, 
especially once the book picks up pace as Rick and Cracker arrive in country and 
begin to do their work; Kadohata keenly evokes the nervous tension of the young 
dog handler on a mission, reading his dog with the same focused intensity that she 
reads the scents, hoping to prove his dog’s merits and to keep his followers alive. 
Rick may be a boy in age but the book, like the army, treats him as a man, another 
aspect that will please young readers. The book deviates from fact on some of the 
dog material, including a romantic dog-story ending for Cracker herself; Sherlock’s 
Letters from Wolfie (BCCB 6/04) gives a more realistic account. Most readers would 
rather the humans bear the hard truths anyway, though, so they may forgive the 
inaccuracy for the satisfaction.  DS
KeAney, BriAn Jacob’s Ladder. Candlewick, 2007 [224p]
ISBN 0-7636-3071-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
In this British import, an amnesiac boy awakens in a gray world, knowing only 
that he’s not home. Jacob remembers very little about his life before, but he firmly 
believes that it was better than his new existence in Locus, where he works all day 
at gathering stones, lives in a dormitory with boys who seem to have lost all hope, 
and eats the same spongy white food for every meal. While Jacob’s initial assumption 
that he was simply transported or kidnapped seems less likely than another new 
arrival’s theory that they are all dead, Jacob remains fiercely determined to regain his 
old life, and he leaves the bland safety of Locus in search of it. Locus, haunted by 
voices of the living and haunting in its unconquerable, lulling sameness, is a richly 
developed setting in which Jacob explores his vulnerabilities and mortality. Unfor-
tunately, once Jacob leaves Locus, he embarks on a meandering quest marked with 
confusing villains, poorly described environments, and a few too many convenient 
escapes. While readers will be relieved that Jacob is restored to his living self, they 
are also left with the disturbing and unresolved issue of the children remaining in 
Locus, all of whom are no less compelling in their lost states. Nevertheless, Keaney 
has captured an afterlife milieu that is memorable, a feat considering the recent 
spate of fantasies about various heavens, hells, and beyonds.  AS
KoSTicK, conor Epic. Viking, 2007 [384p]
ISBN 0-670-06179-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Epic is the game of all games: occupation, income, housing, and even power for heat 
and light are all dependent on players’ skills in the arena, and death is serious but 
not fatal. Originally a virtual reality game intended to entertain space travelers, it 
has become the legal and economic foundation of a society that prohibits all forms 
of violence and dissent. Central Allocations administers justice and favors via its 
virtual champions, who have the best weaponry and magic and who are literally 
virtually unbeatable. Stung by a series of inequities, high-school student Erik decides 
to take on the system. Discovering that Epic has evolved as the society it supports 
has begun to fail, he realizes that the only option is to try to end the game forever, 
334 • The BulleTin
which leads him into an ultimate battle against the game’s own consciousness. The 
storyline becomes predictable, and characters are two-dimensional in their clear 
commitment to good or evil and their lack of growth. The premise is engaging, 
though, and the book emphasizes action, which is enhanced by interesting subplots 
about treachery and the consequences of absolute power. Readers may therefore 
find themselves rooting for the youngsters, and the nicely constructed gaming 
framework will likely ultimately draw teens.  CW
levine, ellen Henry’s Freedom Box; illus. by Kadir Nelson. Scholastic, 
2007 [40p]
ISBN 0-439-91848-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Among the stories of runaway slaves, the tale of Henry “Box” Brown’s successful 
1849 flight from Richmond, Virginia, to Philadelphia via packing crate is one 
of the more famous. Although it can be related in the quasi-folkloric tone of a 
trickster tale, Levine focuses on the poignant details of his earlier life—his forced 
separation from his mother and later from his wife and children—that make his 
ultimate escape a bittersweet triumph. Levine and Nelson’s collaboration is well 
suited to primary-grade listeners, from the plainspoken text (“‘Your wife and 
children were just sold at the slave market.’ ‘No!,’ cried Henry. Henry couldn’t 
move. Henry couldn’t think. Henry couldn’t work”) to the dramatic images (a 
larger than life double-page bleed of Brown’s mounting anxieties; cross-sections 
of his contortion in the wooden crate). Nelson’s mixed-media illustrations, with 
their cross-hatched pencil lines inspired by a nineteenth-century lithograph, often 
seem to more closely emulate crackled glazing; and although some male figures in 
their lengthy topcoats appear oddly truncated, the sober, fixed gaze of Brown as a 
boy and the steely dignity of Brown as a man are riveting indeed. No citations are 
offered for quotations, which are loosely paraphrased from Brown’s own account, 
but reference to the Brown narrative and that of equally famous escapee William 
Still are included following a brief author’s note.  EB
leviThAn, dAvid, ed. This Is PUSH. Push/Scholastic, 2007 [240p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-439-89028-4 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In this anthology, readers will find work (original except for one republished story) 
from some of their favorite writers who have appeared under the Push imprint, 
including Markus Zusak, Tanuja Desai Hidier, Chris Wooding, Kevin Brooks, and 
Patricia McCormick. Dark humor, perplexing relationships, and elusive emotions 
skitter around in these tiny jewels that reveal the facets of each writer’s specific style. 
Zusak, for instance, writes a lyrical and philosophical piece that explores falling 
in love as the seductive caress of self-murder. Coe Booth deploys a stunningly au-
thentic urban voice to explore the way a black teen’s first taste of freedom behind 
the wheel leads him to clarify his vexed feelings toward his incarcerated father. In 
a surreal drama, Billy Merrell’s protagonist reconciles himself to a boyfriend who 
isn’t as adept at the trappings of romance as he’d like. Eireann Corrigan reintro-
duces a minor character from her novel You Remind Me of You, explaining how 
he was edited into a lie to keep him from detracting from the main plot line and 
then purporting to tell his real, poignant story. Hidier’s baroque writing treats a 
daughter’s pending abortion from her mother’s point of view, overwriting memo-
April 2007 • 335
ries and hope with her sense of failure and remorse. Fans of these writers will find 
here a smorgasbord of the things they like best about their longer works; for the 
uninitiated, these tasty bites will tempt readers to enjoy a fuller banquet of these 
innovative authors.  KC
lloyd-JoneS, SAlly How to Be a Baby . . . by Me, the Big Sister; illus. by Sue 
Heap. Schwartz & Wade, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93843-5 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83843-0 $15.99   
R* 5-8 yrs
In this entertaining tale, a six-year-old big sister records her observations of what 
exactly it means to be a baby, from being in a crib and wearing pajamas to not 
having hair and not eating normal food. It won’t take the listener long to realize 
that this is really an extended tribute to all the amazing and wonderful things a 
six-year-old can do, like face the right way in the car, eat chocolate ice cream, use 
scissors, and do arithmetic. The child perspective is spot on; it is clear that the 
baby is missing out on all the wonderful things in life that are at the center of the 
six-year-old world. What is most successful about the story is the original take on 
sibling relations; it doesn’t overtly address resentment or jealousy or adjustment 
issues (though this will be a great salve for kids struggling with these issues) but 
humorously acknowledges that babies and kids are different and can do different 
things. In a thoughtfully developed ending, the big sister lists the baby’s current 
and somewhat questionable strengths (burping, peeing, pooping, etc.), but then 
anticipates her baby brother growing up and joining her world (when he will follow 
her, copy her, and sit in her fort and share secrets). Heap’s playful mixed-media 
illustrations offer lots of exuberant interpretations of the story, at times providing 
literal depictions of the little girl’s outlandish descriptions (so that when she states 
“When you’re a baby, you don’t sit on a chair. You are tied to it,” the illustration 
features a confused infant strapped to a chair by an assortment of different lengths 
of cord). There’s plenty to pore over in the detail-rich scenes, and the childlike but 
deft lines match the text’s exuberance while the candy colors sweeten the text’s edge. 
This is perfect family fare and a welcome departure from storybooks that assume 
the worst when a new life joins the family.  HM
long, loren The Barnstormers: Tales of the Travelin’ Nine: Game 1, Porkopolis; by 
Loren Long and Phil Bildner; illus. by Loren Long. Simon, 2007 [144p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4169-1863-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 3-5
The Pain siblings—Griffith, Ruby, and Graham—are finishing out the last summer 
of the nineteenth century on the road with their deceased father’s barnstorming 
baseball club, the Travelin’ Nine, comprising a group of Rough Rider veterans 
who are just getting the hang of the game. In this debut volume of a series, Long 
and Bildner provide their protagonists with a laundry list of upcoming challenges 
to meet and mysteries to solve, including Mom’s masquerading as a man to play 
catcher, an urgent but unspecified need for lots of cash, the appearance of ghostly 
train signals and locomotives popping up on the diamond, warnings of danger from 
wheelchair-using Uncle Wen, and a baseball that trembles and quivers for no appar-
ent reason. There’s a decent amount of play action in the Nines’ match-up with the 
Cincinnati Swine, but by the book’s end no plot points are any nearer to resolution 
and readers are left to conclude that their investment of time has earned no real 
336 • The BulleTin
payoff. If they do come away with anything, it’s an expanded glossary of baseball 
terms (some arcane), which the authors copiously annotate in the margins. A little 
argot goes a long way: “Indeed, the cranks [hometown fans] were everywhere” feels 
authentic, but “An uncharacteristic muff by Happy on an easy comebacker plated 
still another ace” is just excessive, and the remainder of the writing is bland and 
pedestrian. Black and white charcoal illustrations and spot art, deeply shadowed 
and tinged with hazy sadness, create an appealing aura of nostalgia and impend-
ing woe that quite nearly succeeds where the text falters. Determined baseball fans 
might be lured back for the next promised game in Louisville, but most kids, one 
suspects, will wander off in search of greener fields.  EB
loomiS, chriSTine The Best Father’s Day Present Ever; illus. by Pam 
Paparone. Putnam, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-399-24253-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
With Father’s Day approaching, Langley the snail is determined to find a gift 
for his father. His mother assures him that the best presents are homemade, but 
“everything Langley ever made was a disaster”; he hopes to use his pocket money 
to buy something nice, but by the time his snail’s pace gets him to the store, it’s 
closed. Fortunately, on his trip back from the store, he gets an idea . . . This story 
touches on a fairly common childhood anxiety, treating it with clear sympathy but 
also rueful wit (after his misconceived present last Father’s Day, Langley “spent the 
rest of the day in his room, staring in the mirror to see if he looked as dumb as he 
felt”), and Langley’s solution—he gives his dad a shared walk—is one that most 
dads would genuinely welcome (and with its immediacy, it’s vastly superior to the 
never-really-effective coupon books for nice deeds). Paparone’s illustrations are a 
far cry from her oil pastels for Soto’s My Little Car (BCCB 6/06); here she’s work-
ing in line and watercolor, with lines so thick, sturdy, and regular and so inclined 
to decorative touches of patterning that they suggest linocuts. Strong colors in a 
rainbow of contrasting hues balance the lines out, with Langley himself a fetching 
daffodil-yellow and just a generally approachable snail. While this has obvious 
Father’s Day appeal, it would be a reassuring readaloud before any holiday wherein 
kids give presents to grownups.  DS
mAcdonAld, mArgAreT reAd, ad. The Old Woman and Her Pig: An Appalachian 
Folktale; illus. by John Kanzler. HarperCollins, 2007 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028090-5 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028089-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
When an old woman ventures to the market to buy a pig, she picks out “the fattest 
little pig of all” and then dances her way down the road home with the little piggy 
following . . . that is, until they come to the bridge. “That little pig would not set 
one foot on that bridge. He was scared of the water. He was scared of the height. 
He just stood there and squealed.” Try as she might, the old woman can’t get the 
pig to budge, so she enlists the help of, sequentially, a dog, a rat, and a cat; in true 
cumulative tale fashion, the cat (after determining that it is in his best interest) 
worries the rat who nips the dog who barks at the pig, sending the pig right over 
the bridge and all the way to the old lady’s home. MacDonald’s knack for toddler-
friendly patterning and dialogue is evident in this simply told tale of troubleshooting 
April 2007 • 337
in the face of necessity. The adapter’s note describes the story’s source and identifies 
the elements of the tale she’s added, including the helpful cat and the “jogging 
song” the old woman sings as she heads to town. The illustrations, thick acrylic 
paints textured by brushstrokes, depict the protagonist as a sturdy country lady, 
practical shoes, petticoats and all; skin tones run a little orange, and characters are 
often oddly depicted with their eyes tightly closed, but there’s a cheerful rural vigor 
to the spreads. This will perfectly suit a preschool storytime, and toddlers will beg 
to act out the animal parts. An adapter’s note and musical notation for the two 
songs are included.  HM
mAcKAll, dAndi dAley Crazy in Love. Dutton, 2007 232p
ISBN 0-525-47780-2 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
A bit of almost innocent flirting at a study party upsets the intricate social structure 
of Mary Jane’s small senior class when Mary Jane finds herself irrevocably in crush 
with Jackson House, boyfriend of Star, the queen bee of her group of friends. Star 
starts spreading vicious rumors about Mary Jane, which results in a sudden rush 
of attention of the wrong kind, with her phone ringing off the hook with boys 
wanting a little action. With her best friend, Alicia, away at college, Mary Jane is 
at the mercy of her personified conflicting impulses, Plain Jane, the hyper-respon-
sible, hypercritical good girl, and M. J., the sultry sex kitten, who understandably 
give contradictory advice; this further complicates Mary Jane’s struggle to keep 
the abstinence pact she made years ago. Despite her quandary, Mary Jane is a self-
possessed, assertive girl who consistently acts in her own best interest, particularly 
where guys are concerned. Her emotional landscapes are mostly credible, except 
for the absolute and uncomplicated devotion she has for her disabled sister, who 
functions more as an emotional salve, a litmus test for character, and an oracle than 
a fully developed character in her own right. Similarly, her friends operate rather 
as object lessons in the “should I or shouldn’t I?” sex debate; however, their situ-
ations are certainly recognizable if a bit convenient. Overall, though, Mary Jane’s 
story is an energetic and compelling look at the kinds of emotional entanglements 
high school is famous for, and her acknowledgement and careful negotiation of 
the voices inside her head will serve as an admirable model for readers engaged in 
their own inner dialogues.  KC
mArTin, JAcqueline BriggS Chicken Joy on Redbean Road: A Bayou Country Romp; 
illus. by Melissa Sweet. Houghton, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-618-50759-0 $17.00   
R* 5-8 yrs
When chicken measles takes the voice of the blue-headed rooster, his pragmatic 
owner, Mrs. Miser Vidrine, decides it’s time for “quiet rooster stew.” The brown 
hen, Miss Cleoma, decides on a “barnyard strategy” to save the rooster, and she 
takes off in search of Joe Beebee, the fiddler whose music is sure to restore a rooster’s 
crow. With its unquestioned animal/human interaction and its repetition, this story, 
in Martin’s quietly lyrical prose, has a folklike flavor. The tale garners additional 
suspense from its cutting back and forth between Miss Cleoma, who’s trying to 
get directions to Joe Beebee’s, and Mrs. Vidrine, who’s slowly preparing the other 
ingredients for her rooster stew (keen-eyed viewers will note the barnyard influence 
in the repeated appearance of vegetables that distract Mrs. V from the rooster). 
The final festive party set to Joe Beebee’s music is both a delicious celebration and 
a credible venue for solving the various problems—the rooster does indeed redis-
338 • The BulleTin
cover his crow, while Mrs. Vidrine finds that vegetable stew is quite a salable item. 
The illustrations are a tasty stew in their own right, line, watercolor, and collage 
create a quirky world wherein cuddly, globose chickens utter Cajun exclamations 
in speech bubbles and chat readily with sharp-featured humans; compositions 
vary inventively, employing techniques such as comic-strip panels and overhead 
views, and a frontispiece gives a map of the neighborhood. There’s just something 
irresistible about a good chicken story: pair this with Wattenberg’s Henny-Penny 
(BCCB 5/00) for a hat trick about chickens with a mission.  DS
mATTheWS, TinA Out of the Egg; written and illus. by Tina Matthews. Houghton, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-618-73741-3 $12.95   
Ad 4-7 yrs
When the Red Hen finds a green seed, she’s on her own: the Fat Cat, the Dirty 
Rat, and the Greedy Pig all choose their own pastimes over helping her tend the 
seed as it turns into a tree. The tree provides shelter when Red Hen lays an egg, 
which produces, logically enough, a little red chick; the tree also draws a little cat, 
rat, and pig (obviously the offspring of the hen’s heedless roommates) to play in its 
shade. Though Red Hen initially responds to their requests with prim selfishness, 
her chick reproves her (“Mum, that’s MEAN!”), and she relents for a multi-species 
sub-arboreal playtime. The original “Little Red Hen” is a somewhat strange story 
when closely examined, but Matthews’ retelling is even preachier, with a dollop of 
heavy sentiment at the end and some logistical issues (either that’s one fast growing 
tree or one old chicken). Nevertheless, it’s clever in adding leverage to the hen’s 
frustration by making her housemates with the wastrel mammals (who lounge 
about watching big-screen TV with their feet up on the coffee table), and the shift 
in moral from turnabout to inclusion makes it more palatable to contemporary 
tastes. In Matthews’ illustrations, handmade woodblock prints layer red and green 
on black; the elegance of the artistic style, with its delicate patterning and austere 
outlines, provides amusing contrast in the depictions of the going-to-pot mammals 
and attractive scenes of the industrious hen. Young listeners may enjoy compar-
ing this to the original and discussing the difference, or they may just appreciate 
a story about somebody who decided that lightening up and sharing unilaterally 
made for a better life.  DS
mcKiSSAcK, PATriciA A Friendship for Today. Scholastic, 2007 [176p]
ISBN 0-439-66098-X $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
It’s 1954, and twelve-year-old Rosemary Patterson has to say goodbye to her beloved 
elementary school in the suburbs of St. Louis because the Supreme Court has ruled 
against segregation. She and her best friend J.J. are set to attend the same formerly 
all-white school when J.J. is stricken with polio, leaving Rosemary to brave the 
new school on her own. Her chief nemesis, a poor white girl with a bad attitude 
and a bigoted family, is also in her class, and it isn’t long before the two girls forge 
a friendship based on Rosemary’s unwillingness to ostracize Grace because of her 
poverty, and Grace’s reciprocal gesture of not taking a dare to call Rosemary the 
n-word. The school year proceeds smoothly thanks to the enlightened perspective 
of Rosemary’s teacher, and Rosemary is happy to finally get J.J. back just as Grace 
moves away. This Midwestern story of school integration is an interesting departure 
from Southern accounts of Sturm und Drang at the schoolhouse door; the racial 
April 2007 • 339
problems that Rosemary faces are interpersonal and they are offset by people of good 
will, who represent the majority of the folks she encounters. More important are the 
friendships and Rosemary’s growing understanding of the difference between ones 
that last and the ones that are impermanent, a distinction made poignant by her 
parents’ divorce. Her rescue of a badly wounded cat provides a teachable extended 
metaphor for J.J.’s partial recovery, as well as a sentimental touch. According to an 
author’s note, the book is based on McKissack’s own experiences, which explains 
the occasional flashes of adult insight Rosemary demonstrates and the catalog of 
nostalgia that frames the beginning of chapters that mark new years. For the most 
part, though, Rosemary’s voice is fresh, credible, and engaging, and readers will relate 
to the pangs of making new friends and losing, albeit temporarily, old ones.  KC
mcnAmee, eoin The Navigator. Lamb, 2007 342p
ISBN 0-375-83910-0 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 5-7
Owen has grown up weighted by his father’s apparent suicide and his mother’s grief: 
uncomfortable under the curious gaze of his neighbors, he spends most of his time 
in solitary explorations. A sudden and dramatic temporal shift leaves him stranded 
on a “time island,” along with the Resisters, a group of humans who awaken only 
when time is jolted. Ancient dark forces, the Harsh, have turned back time, es-
sentially erasing any period in which humans existed. Owen quickly learns that 
it is no accident that he survived the shift: he is the Navigator, destined to play a 
key role in the struggle to reinstate normalcy. Even with a large cast, individual 
characters are distinct and compelling, including the villainous Harsh and their 
human compatriots who are complex and well developed. Unfortunately, Owen’s 
role as Navigator is underwhelming, as he spends most of the book kidnapped or 
being saved by various tough female Resisters. In addition, the concept itself is 
filled with questionable holes: if the Harsh can create time islands, why can’t they 
destroy other ones, in what ways will it benefit the Harsh if humans never existed, 
and how did Owen’s family become engaged in these efforts (Owen’s father was 
also involved before his death)? Frenetic pacing and an unforgettably dark and 
fascinating setting almost compensate for the many confusing plot elements, and it 
is possible that, given the fact that a sequel is forthcoming, Irish author McNamee 
intends to dole out more complete answers in the future. In the meantime, fantasy 
readers may still enjoy the creepy Harsh, the unforgiving landscape, and the flawed 
but determined Owen.  AS
miller, KATe Poems in Black & White. Wordsong/Boyds Mills, 2007 40p
ISBN 1-59078-412-X $17.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Seventeen poems, a couple rhyming, but mostly free verse, focus on manifestations 
of light and dark. Poems describe a newborn’s hospital-record footprints (“First 
Steps”), a comet in the night sky (“Comet”), moonlight through window panes 
(“Tic-Tac-Toe”), and various animals (“The Cow,” “Raccoon in Winter,” “King 
Crow”), often personifying or taking the voice of the subject. A few conceptual 
glitches occur (“Dog-Eyed” rests on the largely debunked belief that dogs see only 
black and white, recent events make Pluto misplaced in the list of planets chalked 
on “Miss Fitzgibbon’s Board,” and the newborn footprints are mighty large), and 
there’s a definite adult flavor to the viewpoint, though the verses are sometimes less 
sophisticated in execution than they are in vocabulary. The black and white theme 
is nonetheless an imaginative one, and a few particularly creative entries go beyond 
340 • The BulleTin
the mundane, addressing sequential contrast in “The Tunnel” and making a random 
concurrence significant in “Dad’s Closet.” Miller’s hand-printed monotypes are, 
logically, black and white themselves; while draftsmanship is sometimes stiff, textures 
range from smudgy and mottled to linear strokes resembling scratchboard, and 
their treatment of contrast is intriguingly ambiguous, with smoky shadows in their 
whites and highlights on their blacks. Despite the book’s drawbacks, the slenderness 
of the volume will reassure readers with little poetic stamina, while young writers 
may be inspired to write black and white verses of their own.  DS
miTchArd, JAcquelyn Now You See Her. HarperTempest, 2007 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-111684-X $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-111683-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 7-10
Hope Shay was born Bernadette Romano, but when she landed her first big role as 
Annie in a dinner theater production, her mother rechristened her with a flashy stage 
name. Sure that Hope is destined for stardom, her mother sends her to a performing 
arts school to prepare for her career. There, Hope has a hard time making friends, 
so she opts for a fantasy relationship with the very real Logan, a relationship that 
ends with the two of them, in Hope’s imaginary world, plotting a kidnapping that 
would ensure them start-up cash for a new life together in New York. In real life, 
Hope acts alone, staging her own kidnapping that has the entire country looking 
for her; her ruse unravels quickly upon her rescue, causing her to be put away in 
an institution and her father to be stuck with punitive damages. Hope’s litany of 
delusions throughout the first two thirds of the book fully establishes her motiva-
tion: no one understands how talented and special she is, everyone’s jealous of her, 
and it’s all her mother’s fault for pushing her too hard as a kid, even though she 
admits that she responded to the praise. Although her narration offers a number 
of clues that her account isn’t perhaps as grounded in reality as it seems to her, 
her incessant whining bogs down her story of her life before the kidnapping. The 
narrative then shifts to more convenient than credible newspaper and magazine 
accounts of her search and rescue, and the story concludes with Hope’s full recovery 
and reclaiming of present reality, which ties up loose ends but isn’t at all believable 
in light of the extent of her earlier delusions, and ultimately settles into a critique 
of mothers and daughters who crave a life in the spotlight. It’s a provocative plot, 
but readers with a media itch will be far better served by Douglas’ True Confessions 
of a Hollywood Starlet (BCCB 2/06).  KC 
myerS, WAlTer deAn Harlem Summer. Scholastic, 2007 [176p]
ISBN 0-439-36843-X $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Mark Purvis is not the son of his mother’s dreams; he leaves that to his college-
bound older brother, preferring his schemes to get noticed in the 1925 Harlem jazz 
scene and to make some money on the side. An opportunity to do both presents 
itself when Fats Waller asks him to help load a truck for five dollars—Mark figures 
that this will give him the chance to ask Fats if he can play with him sometime. 
Meanwhile, Mark’s mother has finagled him a job as errand boy at the offices of the 
Crisis, where he humorously tries to figure out what it means to be a New Negro and 
whether there’s anything worthwhile in that identity for him. When Fats’ promise 
of easy money puts Mark on the wrong side of Dutch Schultz’s bootlegging opera-
April 2007 • 341
tion, Mark fears for his life. After pursuing several angles, he resorts to prayer, and 
God provides a creative deliverance that leaves Mark with a gangster reputation 
too hot for even the notorious Queenie St. Clair to mess with. Myers seamlessly 
embeds a good deal of cultural history in this very funny story of a boy angling for 
a future of his own choosing. Mark’s naïve perspective on his experiences at the 
Crisis juxtaposes with fictionalized but entirely likely responses from the likes of 
Langston Hughes and Jessie Fauset to create a new take on the way the efforts of 
DuBois and company were probably seen by the local teens. Myers also manages 
to show the other side of Harlem with its bootleggers and numbers runners, a place 
where New Negroes and their advocates disdained to tread; Fats’ appearance at a 
party thrown by Alfred Knopf illustrates the deep divide that Mark finds himself 
straddling. With an appended list of the real people and Harlem nightclubs that 
feature in the book (though the pictures are sometimes too small to be useful), this 
is a light-hearted introduction to a fascinating place in one of its finest and most 
exciting periods.  KC
neWBery, lindA At the Firefly Gate. Fickling/Random House, 2007 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75114-8 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75113-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
It was the dream of Henry’s parents, certainly not Henry himself, to move from 
London out to the country, and now he finds himself facing a new school and his 
parents’ efforts to arrange a friendship for him with sulky next-door neighbor, 
Grace. He actually gets along far better with Grace’s great aunt Dottie, with whom 
he promptly forms an unspoken bond when he realizes that she, like himself, sees a 
mysterious figure that occasionally appears at the garden gate and seems to have come 
from another time. As Henry makes friends with kids from the neighborhood, he 
also begins to unravel threads of local history that ultimately connect an abandoned 
World War II airfield, Dottie, a chum’s grandfather, and the ghostly presence in 
the garden. This is about as tame and gentle as ghost stories get, and there’s never 
much doubt that there’s romance rather than peril behind the apparitions. Still, the 
story Henry uncovers involves an act of wartime heroism that compensates for any 
disappointment in the haunting department, and the supernatural lovers’ reunion 
he is privileged to witness should touch even cynical grade-school hearts.  EB
orenSTein, deniSe goSliner The Secret Twin; illus. by Dan McCarthy. Tegen/
HarperCollins, 2007 [400p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-078565-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-078564-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The secret twin of the title is Noah’s conjoined brother, who died shortly after 
birth in what’s known as a “sacrifice surgery” to allow Noah to survive. Living now 
with his grandmother, who’s convalescing from surgery under the care of a nurse, 
thirteen-year-old Noah still views himself as “half a boy,” and he’s afraid that his 
dead twin’s influence still operates in some way; he’s particularly concerned with 
the actions of a neighborhood sniper, who’s randomly shooting inoffensive resi-
dents. Meanwhile, Nurse Grace watches Noah, trying to bring the undernourished 
and isolated boy out of his shell, hinting at the truth about the outcome of his 
grandmother’s surgery, and dealing with her own past tragedies. This starts out as 
342 • The BulleTin
a neogothic with echoes of Gantos’ twin-themed The Love Curse of the Rumbaughs 
(BCCB 6/06) in Noah’s obsession with his dead twin, and experienced genre readers 
will early on guess that Noah’s grandmother never made it back home from surgery. 
Ultimately, though, the book is about the taming of the gothic, and its tone thaws 
into warmth as it reflects Noah’s changes under the heedless and anxious attentions 
of Nurse Grace. The gothic chill is more powerful than the story of recovery, and 
the shifting of viewpoint that keeps Grace at bay with a third-person narration while 
Noah himself narrates his section additionally foregrounds control over connection; 
the sniper story is creepy and suggestive, with its Tarot-card symbolism (images of 
Tarot cards introduce text sections), but it doesn’t interweave as well as Noah’s and 
Grace’s tales. There’s still plenty for fans of psychological drama to chew over and 
interpret, however, and fans of rescue drama will be relieved to see the half a boy 
finally becoming whole.  DS
rABB, mArgo Cures for Heartbreak. Delacorte, 2007 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90414-2 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73402-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
It’s only twelve days from the time Mia’s mother goes into the hospital with a 
stomachache to her death from liver cancer, leaving fifteen-year-old Mia, her older 
sister, Alex, and their father reeling. Three months later, the girls’ father suffers his 
second heart attack and goes into the hospital for a bypass, and soon after that Alex 
goes away to college, leaving Mia struggling with a home suddenly both depleted 
and overwhelmed by mortality. Though six out of eight of these chapters have been 
previously published as short stories, they’re effectively connected, haunting, vivid 
snapshots of a puzzled and uncertain survivor trying to learn the ropes. Narrator Mia 
is believably a sad and angry teenager, whose voice evinces the unwilling wisdom 
of sad experience: “What no one ever tells you is that people don’t die all at once, 
but again and again in waves, before their deaths and after.” Rabb, who draws on 
her own past in this novel, believably weaves death into the family pattern: Mia’s 
father takes a cancer survivor as his second wife; Mia finds her most meaningful 
relationship with a teenaged hospital-mate of her father’s, a boy she had thought 
died of leukemia. This is undeniably a book of anguish, it’s also one of raw strength 
and casual, clever humor in random and surprising places, making it a compelling 
as well as tearful read that’s sure to find YA fans.  DS
rAnSom, JeAnie frAnz What Do Parents Do (When You’re Not Home)?; illus. by 
Cyd Moore. Peachtree, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 1-56145-409-5 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
The narrator and his little sister are taking off for a night at their grandparents, 
and the minute his parents are left in the house alone, the grownups “do exactly 
what they always tell us not to do.” Adult mischief includes jumping on the bed 
(with their shoes on!), sledding downstairs on pillows, messing up the kitchen while 
making huge snacks, wasting their time on videogames, and enjoying a rousing 
indoor game of basketball. When the kids return, the poker-faced parents insist 
they did “nothing much” in their offspring’s absence, but they’re also eager to know 
when their kids’ next overnight might be. It’s not entirely clear how the narrator 
knows what’s going on if he’s elsewhere, but kids will immediately get the joke, and 
April 2007 • 343
Ransom is particularly adept at echoing parental admonitions (“That’s not the way 
we treat pillows in our house. . . . You’d think by now they would have learned to 
share! . . . Is that the best use of their time?”) as the kid comments on his parents’ 
behavior. The watercolor and pencil illustrations counterpoint the chaotic scenes 
of parental mischief with vignettes of the kids’ comparatively decorous behavior 
at their grandparents’ (though that’s a contrast that could have been made even 
clearer); sometimes the scenes tip from gleefully frenzied into visual confusion, 
but kids will giggle at the parental silliness and the visual clues to the parental 
mayhem remaining in the final scenes. Kids often draw a blank in their notion of 
how grownups occupy themselves away from their youngsters, and this will elicit 
giggles even as it confirms some secret suspicions on the matter.  DS
rocco, John Wolf! Wolf!; written and illus. by John Rocco. Hyperion, 
2007 32p
ISBN 1-4231-0012-3 $15.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
A stiff old wolf, trying to dig the pesty weeds out of his garden, distantly hears a 
cry of “Wolf!” Hoping the shout comes from a friend with dinner, he discovers the 
source is actually a playful boy with a herd of tasty goats and a hunger for attention, 
and the wolf sees an opportunity. When the villagers finally stop running at the 
boy’s yells, the wolf makes a deal with the boy for a plump goat; the goat proves so 
useful at eating the weeds out of the wolf’s garden that the two wind up as friends 
instead of dinner and diner. While there’s humor in the telling and in the notion 
of the wolf’s figurative if not literal toothlessness, the revised version of Aesop’s 
classic fable doesn’t manage much in the way of clear plot trajectory or solid twist 
on its precursor, and it’s hard to avoid wondering what will happen to the goat 
when the growing season ends. Illustrations set the story in an idyllic rural China 
awash in cherry blossom and decorated with picturesque wildlife. Soft modeling 
touched with the smoky textures of colored pencil contrasts with crisp outlines, 
with the personified animals rich in character and the compositions intriguingly 
varied. Hennessy’s The Boy Who Cried Wolf (BCCB 4/06) is a superior revamp of 
the fable, but this might still amuse kids whose sympathies rest with the wolf more 
than the boy.  DS
rodoWSKy, colBy Ben and the Sudden Too-Big Family. Farrar, 2007 [128p]
ISBN 0-374-30658-3 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
It’s been just Ben and his father since Ben’s mother died, but now his family is ex-
panding: first, Ben gets a new stepmother when his father marries Casey, and then 
he gains a new baby sister when Casey and his father adopt a girl from China. Then 
summer means Ben must forego soccer camp to vacation by the shore with Casey’s 
family—all twenty-seven of them. The book skims rather quickly over the fairly 
significant events of the marriage and adoption to focus on the week’s vacation, but 
this isn’t really a new-marriage-adjustment book so much as a story of a boy who 
goes suddenly from minimalism to excess in the family department (“synonyms 
for family I never knew about” include “crowded” and “noisy”). Veteran author 
Rodowsky again demonstrates her skill at bringing a low-key approach to possibly 
melodramatic events, a technique that makes Ben’s narration particularly believable 
as the voice of a preteen boy; the subplot about Ben’s bonding with Great Aunt Nora 
(known with affectionate mockery as Poornora) is also credibly spun, keeping the 
344 • The BulleTin
connection (and its accompanying messages) modest rather than preachy. Readers 
will be glad to see Ben finding the pleasures of his new family and will agree that 
“there was a ton more all-right stuff than not-all-right in my life.”  DS
SelznicK, BriAn The Invention of Hugo Cabret; written and illus. by Brian Selznick 
and illus. with photographs. Scholastic, 2007 [544p]
ISBN 0-439-81378-6 $22.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 321, for review.
SoTo, gAry Mercy on These Teenage Chimps. Harcourt, 2007 147p
ISBN 0-15-206022-7 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 5-8
When Ronnie Gonzalez wakes up on his thirteenth birthday, he finds he has turned 
into a chimp. Okay, he’s not really a chimp, but given the dorky simian effects of 
puberty (fuzz on his chin, arms hanging too long, ears sticking out, goofy grin), he 
finds the metaphor irresistible. When Ronnie and his best pal, fellow chimp Joey, get 
a detention for being late for school (they stopped to swing on the monkey bars), 
they find themselves assigned to the task of assisting the middle-school coach with 
a sports banquet. There Joey meets Jessica, a gymnast from another middle school, 
and he is immediately smitten. He follows their meeting with a very chimplike 
act of bravado—when her balloon escapes into the rafters of the gym, he scales 
the wall to valiantly rescue it for her—and he is subsequently dressed down by the 
coach right in front of the young lady. An embarrassed Joey then moves into his 
treehouse, so Ronnie plans to bring his friend down from the treetops by getting 
the coach to apologize and getting Jessica to visit Joey. There’s slapstick aplenty in 
the account of Ronnie’s adventures as he tries to achieve these goals, but woven 
throughout the narrative is the repeated exploration of what it means to become 
a teenager, delivered in the guise of the chimp metaphor with varying degrees of 
success. The boys tend to delve into reflections beyond the wisdom of their years 
(“I came to understand that I had matured”), which takes away from otherwise 
apt characterizations of early teenaged boys. The coming-of-age plot holds appeal, 
however, and the compression of the events—and the adolescence—into a few 
days’ time makes for a quick, entertaining read.  HM
STrong, Jeremy Stuff: The Life of a Cool Demented Dude; illus. by Matthew S. 
Armstrong. HarperTempest, 2007 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-084106-0 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06084105-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-9 
At fourteen, Stuff feels like his life isn’t quite working out as planned: at home 
he is menaced by his new stepsister and stepmother and their man-hating rabbit, 
he and his girlfriend have very little in common, and his mundane life doesn’t 
compare to the wild adventures of his best friend, Pete. Fortunately, he has his art 
to keep him happy—Stuff is the anonymous creator of a school newspaper comic 
series, the loose plot of which is based on his own life but the setting of which is 
an interplanetary world with an eighteen-eyed villain and superhero chicks—and 
he has inspiration in the form of the gorgeous and mysterious Sky, a new student 
in school. This comic series, six chapters of which appear in the novel, is visually 
April 2007 • 345
appealing and humorous, enlivening and exaggerating Stuff’s fairly average life 
problems. Unfortunately, Stuff’s secret art gig is mostly sidelined, making way for 
the central romance and domestic plots, both of which are entirely predictable. 
In addition, readers will catch on way quicker than Stuff that Pete is telling lies to 
make his life seem more enviable, that Sky is totally crushed out on Stuff, and that 
his new stepsister and stepmother are as uncomfortable and nervous as he is.  Even 
while his plodding revelations may be exasperating, being inside Stuff’s head, which 
is full of trivia of the weirdest and most endearing sort (e.g., how many sausages 
went down with the Titanic) is still an amusing, if not memorable, experience. The 
included glossary will decipher some of the unfamiliar phrases used in this British 
import. Final art not seen.  AS 
ThomPSon, KATe The New Policeman. Greenwillow, 2007 441p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-117428-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-117427-0 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Fifteen-year-old J.J. is not the only one who feels as though days pass by more 
swiftly than they should: his family, his neighbors, and indeed, all of Ireland is 
experiencing the same time crunch. Like everyone, J.J. is frustrated, but until his 
mother asks for more time as her birthday present, it never occurs to him that he 
may be able to change their situation. In the hopes of borrowing or buying extra 
time, J.J. passes through a portal into Tir na n’Óg, the land of eternal youth. In-
stead, he discovers that time is corrupted there as well, advancing when it should 
be stable. Suddenly, J.J. is thrown into a quest to find the catalyst of the temporal 
shifts before both worlds are irreversibly damaged by the ravages of unpredictable 
time. Tir na n’Óg is an intriguing and unsettling environment, where desperately 
injured dogs never heal and infants are shuttled off to earth so that they can grow 
(some find their way back and some never do). Music is central to this novel: J.J. 
comes from a musical family, the residents of Tir na n’Óg are much more concerned 
about playing amazing music than intervening to avoid their impending doom, and 
sheet music closes each chapter. While many readers may not read music or value it 
more than their lives, J.J.’s sense of passion is universal, and his fierce determination 
to set things right makes him a compelling protagonist even in Tir na n’Óg, where 
normalcy equals talking goats. A glossary, bibliography, and music notes will aid 
readers interested in further exploration of Irish culture and myth.  AS
TrAcy, KriSTen Lost It. Simon Pulse, 2007 276p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4169-3475-8 $6.99   
R Gr. 9-12
The “It” in the title is exactly what you’d think: Tess Whistle starts junior year with 
a crush on handsome newcomer Ben Easter, and by Christmas vacation she has 
lost her virginity to him under a canoe at his parents’ vacation cabin. En route to 
that fateful day, Tess is left behind by her parents when a midlife crisis takes them 
wilderness trekking in Utah; she’s deprived of her best friend, Zena, after a modestly 
violent act of rebellion gets Zena sent away to an aunt’s; she’s got Ben convinced 
she’s a diabetic; and her car collides with a moose, totaling both moose and car 
and leaving Tess the worse for wear. As a narrator, Tess manages both a snappily 
humorous style (Zena “confused the fact that she didn’t like to wear underpants 
with the notion that she’d make a good anarchist”) and sympathetic frailty with her 
desperation to be liked by Ben and her fear of everything wild (a problem for an 
Idaho girl). While the story feels, save for one out-of-the-blue mention of an mp3, 
346 • The BulleTin
like it’s set a decade or so ago (and the book’s plagued with uncaught misspellings), 
the feelings are contemporarily credible, and the trajectory of the relationship, from 
startup to culmination to breakup, rings true. Secondary and tertiary characters 
are colorfully drawn (except for Ben himself, who’s mostly just nice), but there’s 
genuine emotion, not just broad farce, in Tess’ story of loving and losing. Readers 
who relished Susan Juby’s Alice, I Think (BCCB 9/03) will likely enjoy Tess’ wry 
account of a girl’s first lust and love.  DS 
TruemAn, Terry 7 Days at the Hot Corner. HarperTempest, 2007 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-057495-X $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-057494-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Scott Latimer thought he knew just how his senior year would wrap up—with a 
glorious championship victory for his baseball team and an offer to move up to the 
pros. Instead, he now faces a hellish week he didn’t count on, waiting for the results 
of an HIV test and dreading an all too brief future wasting away with AIDS. And 
it’s not because of anything he did, Scott will have you know; no, it’s that his friend 
Travis, who’s just come out, bled on him in a batting cage accident. Feelings of 
confusion, betrayal, and outright horror cloud Scott’s perspective, but as he works 
through his emotions with the help of his parents over the agonizingly long week, 
he begins to consider his own minimal risk of infection with greater objectivity 
and to see his way back to the friendship he’s valued for so many years. Scott’s well 
established as a credible ordinary guy, and the baseball theme adds appeal. This is 
bildungsroman lite, though, with Scott touching the bases of self-awareness with 
programmatic precision. Moreover, there’s a fair amount of painfully obvious AIDS 
education built into the text, as Scott regales the reader with the fruits of his Google 
searches for the most authoritative informational sites. Everything’s tidied up too 
conveniently—the big win, the minor league contract, the negative test result, 
even the revelation that the supposed class homophobe is actually a very nice gay 
guy (and possibly Travis’s significant other) afraid of his family’s wrath. Still, Scott 
and Travis are decent sorts with genuine issues, and readers won’t begrudge them 
their happy endings.  EB
umAnSKy, KAye I Don’t Like Gloria!; illus. by Margaret Chamberlain. Candle-
wick, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-7636-3202-3 $15.99   
R 3-6 yrs
Gloria is a cat, and the narrator, Calvin, is a woebegone dog whose life has been 
turned upside down by Gloria’s arrival (“The first thing she did was eat out of my 
bowl. MY bowl”). As family newcomers tend to, she soaks up all the attention, 
while poor Calvin gets scolded for objecting. Things change, though, when Jeffrey 
the bunny joins the family: Calvin and Gloria still don’t like each other, but they 
find a point of union in their shared resentment of Jeffrey. This has clear similari-
ties to siblingesque pet dramas such as Jenkins’ That New Animal (BCCB 3/05) 
and Voake’s Ginger (BCCB 4/97), but the resolution here is refreshingly tart. The 
text gains both pathos and power from its simplicity, and kids will only empathize 
the more as a result of Calvin’s clear pleasure in feeling sorry for himself (skilled 
readers-aloud could also use exaggeration to make this splendidly comedic). Even 
audiences unmoved by the text will melt at the illustrations, which feature a pup-
pyishly small, big-eyed Calvin (in the foreshortened view familiar from popular 
April 2007 • 347
doggy photos) often gazing out sadly at the viewer (he’s even reduced to tears at 
one point). Digitally colored pencil illustrations balance softly grainy sweeps and 
casual strokes with planes of sweet yet subdued color. Kids will likely be ruefully 
familiar with the situation of opportunistic alliance, and even if they’re not they’ll 
relish the idea of taking adorable Calvin home and soothing his ruffled fur.  DS
vincenT, erin Grief Girl: My True Story. Delacorte, 2007 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90368-5 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73353-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Everything changes for fourteen-year-old Erin one night: a speeding truck hits her 
jaywalking parents, killing her mother instantly, disabling her father, and leaving 
Erin and her three-year-old brother, Trent, in the care of their older sister, Tracy, 
who’s only a few days short of eighteen; a month later, their father succumbs to 
complications, orphaning the three sibs. In this memoir, author Vincent relates her 
youthful experience of stunning tragedy in novelistic present tense, documenting 
the long stretches of depression that left her with no interest in washing or chang-
ing clothes, the rarity of true support from friends or family (in fact, Erin’s uncle 
turns out to have embezzled funds from both her parents’ estate and the legal settle-
ment the kids received), and the bitter loneliness of a home where the person who 
should have been her closest ally, Tracy, is cold and angry. This is understandably 
paced more like a journal than a novel, with elements occasionally appearing, as 
they do in life, without developing into any particular story (we never hear again 
about the tragedy that kills Tracy’s boyfriend’s sister, or about Erin’s hideous perm); 
it’s also realistic that Erin really can’t see beyond her own suffering, giving her the 
self-centeredness of the grief-stricken. Vincent’s capable writing adds dimension to 
the account, shaping and shading Erin’s anguish so that it’s readable and not just 
raw, and the sheer practical difficulty of eking out a living in this kind of makeshift 
family is vividly conveyed. Teens with fantasies of sudden independence will find 
this fascinating and soberingly eye-opening.  DS
WAhl, mATS The Invisible; tr. by Katarina E. Tucker. Farrar, 2007 186p
ISBN 0-374-33609-1 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 7-10
“It was on one of the first days of May that Hilmer Eriksson discovered he had 
become invisible.” Teenaged Hilmer is confused as well as invisible, unable to 
remember much about his life or to make contact with anyone. When Detective 
Fors from the nearest town’s police force comes to Hilmer’s rural Swedish village 
to investigate the boy’s disappearance, Hilmer’s spirit attaches himself to the po-
liceman, tagging along as the officer interrogates Hilmer’s family, girlfriend, and 
acquaintances in hopes of finding the missing boy alive. This Swedish import is at 
its best when it’s floating along with Hilmer, echoing his fragmented assessments 
of his state and offering quietly haunting judgments (“The invisible ones stumble 
along next to us, legions, cohorts, armies of invisible lives”). The book is also 
effective in its refusal to idealize its rural setting: it roots the crime in a wave of 
neo-Nazism and violent xenophobia among the youth, a tendency that the local 
burghers are trying to brush under the carpet lest it interfere with their plans to 
restore the economy by enticing German tourists. Ultimately, though, too much 
of the plot is adult-centered, focusing on Detective Fors and his colleagues, and the 
largely cool, unemotional prose of the police procedural diminishes reader sympathy. 
348 • The BulleTin
Nonetheless, some teens will respond to the unusual story and its shocking turns, 
finding it a bridge to cerebral adult detective fiction.  DS
WilliS, JeAnne Delilah D. at the Library; illus. by Rosie Reeve. Clarion, 
2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-618-78195-1 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Though her mother won’t confirm it, Delilah D. is quite certain she comes from 
a land far, far away, where the rules are different and she is the Queen. When her 
French au pair takes Delilah and her little brother to the library, the clash of rules 
and expectations between this world and Delilah’s realm—where cupcakes are served 
along with the books, quiet is certainly not the custom, and book shelves are for 
climbing—pushes exasperated Library Anne to wish for an alternate career. Busy, 
energetic colored pencil illustrations set a friendly stage for Delilah’s shenanigans; 
a full spectrum of jellybean colors of balanced visual weight keep the eye bouncing 
around the page in pursuit of Delilah’s frenetic activities. The grandmotherly library 
patron, Mrs. Woolly Hat, is an inspired touch as she wistfully supports Delilah’s 
antic vision, while librarians with their hands full in the children’s section will find 
a kindred spirit in Library Anne. Delilah may insist that her country is a tiny island 
between Jafrica and Smindia, but knowing readers will recognize her as a distant 
cousin of Pippi Longstocking; her tenacious spinning out of her fantasy will delight 
young listeners who are absolutely sure of their own status as royal exiles.  KC
WoodSon, JAcqueline Feathers. Putnam, 2007 [128p]
ISBN 0-399-23989-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9
As Frannie puzzles over the line from the Emily Dickinson poem, “Hope is the 
thing with feathers,” that her teacher shared with her class, her peace is interrupted 
by the arrival of a new boy. The problem is that he’s white, and white people don’t 
belong on this side of town. When Trevor, the class bully, tells him he looks like 
Jesus, he accepts the nickname, adding another dimension to his enigmatic presence. 
His appearance makes people uneasy in different ways; Frannie’s deeply religious 
friend Samantha, for instance, toys with the idea that maybe he really is Jesus, until 
the day he stands up to Trevor in a mean way. He unseats Trevor from his place of 
power, but in doing so proves that he, too, is merely human. This strongly char-
acter-driven novel is as ephemeral in tone as its title connotes, with much of the 
narrative taken up with Frannie’s speculations on the various situations in her life 
that require hope and thoughtful pondering. She worries, for instance, about her 
deaf brother’s outsider status, and about her mother’s pregnancy (several previous 
pregnancies ended in tragedy). She contemplates Samantha’s need to believe, and 
wonders about the Jesus boy and how he might fit in. Beyond these wise child 
deliberations, there is very little action; what tension is created revolves around the 
status of Frannie’s mother’s pregnancy, an issue the book leaves unresolved (though 
there is a strong sense that things are going to be all right). Those who read for plot 
will be left wanting more, but readers of a more philosophical turn of mind may 
appreciate the way the novel probes ordinary circumstances for their potential for 
luminous insight.  KC
April 2007 • 349
Wynne-JoneS, Tim Rex Zero and the End of the World. Kroupa/Farrar, 
2007 186p
ISBN 0-374-33467-6 $16.00   
R Gr. 4-7
The Cold War is in full flower, with hydrogen bomb tests in the Pacific and Khrush-
chev banging his shoe at the U.N., and collective angst is manifest in Ottawa, where 
the Norton-Norton family has just moved. Aside from the local eccentric who 
prophesies imminent destruction, adults are busying themselves with bomb shelters 
and the kids are obsessed with tracking down Tronido, a panther on the loose from 
Ottawa’s Granby Zoo. Ten-year-old Rex Norton-Norton would be happy just to 
make some new buddies, but it’s pretty clear that any prospective friendships will 
have to involve getting past the unhinged doomsayer, a beatnik who holds forth 
with wry observations in the park, his sister Annie Oakley (who smells conspiracy 
everywhere), and the ever present specter of the elusive (and possibly nonexistent) 
Tronido. Rex is up to the task, though, and by the end of summer 1962 he’s not 
only been accepted by his peers but has also unmasked the identity of Tronido and 
adopted a philosophy of life to help him keep his bearings and his optimism amid the 
constant threat of nuclear annihilation. In a closing note, Wynne-Jones remarks on 
the extensive amount of autobiographical detail incorporated in this novel—which 
accounts, in all likelihood, for the deluge of cultural references that flood the text 
with little or no explanation (Sea Hunt, Ferlinghetti, Peter Gunn, Harry Belafonte, 
Rin Tin Tin, Twilight Zone, Rex Harrison, etc.). However, kids who are willing to 
brush aside the trivia (or to invest some serious time on Wikipedia) will be rewarded 
with a fast-moving, quirky romp through apocalyptic anxiety.  EB 
young, JAneT ruTh The Opposite of Music. Atheneum, 2007 346p
ISBN 1-4169-0040-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-12
“We don’t know many people who’ve been to psychiatrists,” says fifteen-year-old 
Billy, “and when they did it didn’t turn out well.” Now it’s Billy’s father, unable 
to shake his depression, who’s going to therapy, and it’s not turning out well for 
him either. Both he and Billy’s determined mother find the side effects from the 
various medications untenable, so the family decides to go it alone, but they get 
increasingly exhausted as tending Dad becomes the only activity of the family and 
Dad is bogged down under the weight of an illness that’s sapping his strength. 
Though the voice is sometimes polished to an adult degree, Billy’s narration of the 
experience sometimes plays like a journal, gaining authenticity from its absence of 
foreknowledge and broader perspective; the book trusts the reader to understand 
that this is a viewpoint, that Billy’s friends are staying away because Billy’s push-
ing them, and that the family in general is isolating themselves when they most 
need connection. Also authentic rather than programmatic is the family’s horrified 
reaction to the side effects and the mistaken decision to dump the medication as 
a consequence, a decision that means they must eventually turn to electroshock 
therapy when Dad’s illness gets too much of a foothold to be dislodged by tech-
niques that would have formerly worked. There are also quiet reminders of what 
the family has lost (“Dad would have loved this,” Billy thinks of a beautiful object, 
unironic about the fact that his father is actually present at the time), and about 
the difficulty of readjusting to finding it again as Dad begins to regain his health. 
This is a smoothly told and believably painful depiction of a family going down as 
it tries to save a drowning member.  DS
350 • The BulleTin
ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2007
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Susan Patron for The Higher Power of Lucky, 
illustrated by Matt Phelan (Jackson/Atheneum). Three Newbery Honor Books were 
also named: Penny from Heaven, by Jennifer Holm (Random House); Hattie Big 
Sky, by Kirby Larson (Delacorte); and Rules, by Cynthia Lord (Scholastic).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to David Wiesner for his book Flotsam 
(Clarion). Caldecott Honor Books are Gone Wild: An Endangered Animal Alphabet, 
illustrated and written by David McLimans (Walker) and Moses: When Harriet Tub-
man Led Her People to Freedom, illustrated by Kadir Nelson and written by Carole 
Boston Weatherford (Jump at the Sun/Hyperion).
The Coretta Scott King Award for writing will be presented to Sharon Draper, 
author of Copper Sun (Atheneum). The Coretta Scott King Award for illustration 
will be presented to Kadir Nelson, illustrator of Moses: When Harriet Tubman 
Led Her People to Freedom, written by Carole Boston Weatherford (Jump at the 
Sun/Hyperion). One King Author Honor Book was selected: The Road to Paris, 
by Nikki Grimes (Putnam). The King Illustrator Honor Books are Jazz, illustrated 
by Christopher Myers, written by Walter Dean Myers (Holiday House) and Poetry 
for Young People: Langston Hughes, illustrated by Benny Andrews (Sterling). The 
Coretta Scott King/John Steptoe New Talent Award for writing goes to Traci L. 
Jones, author of Standing against the Wind (Farrar).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most 
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is Dela-
corte for Jean-Claude Mourlevat’s The Pull of the Ocean, translated from the French 
by Y. Maudet. Two Honor Books were also selected: The Killer’s Tears, written by 
Anne-Laure Bondoux, translated from the French by Y. Maudet and published by 
Delacorte; and The Last Dragon, written by Silvana De Mari, translated from the 
Italian by Shaun Whiteside and published by Miramax/Hyperion.
The Michael L. Printz Award for a book that exemplifies literary excellence in young 
adult literature goes to author/illustrator Gene Luen Yang for American Born Chinese 
(First Second/Roaring Brook). Honor books are The Astonishing Life of Octavian 
Nothing, Traitor to the Nation: The Pox Party, by M. T. Anderson (Candlewick); An 
Abundance of Katherines, by John Green (Dutton); Surrender, by Sonya Hartnett 
(Candlewick); and The Book Thief, by Markus Zusak (Knopf).
The Robert F. Sibert Award for most distinguished informational book for children 
goes to Catherine Thimmesh for Team Moon: How 400,000 People Landed Apollo 
11 on the Moon (Houghton). Three Sibert Honor Books were also named: Freedom 
Riders: John Lewis and Jim Zwerg on the Front Lines of the Civil Rights Movement, 
by Ann Bausum (National Geographic); Quest for the Tree Kangaroo: An Expedi-
tion to the Cloud Forest of New Guinea, written by Sy Montgomery and illustrated 
with photographs by Nic Bishop (Houghton); and To Dance: A Ballerina’s Graphic 
Novel, written by Siena Cherson Siegel and illustrated by Mark Siegel (Jackson/
Atheneum).
April 2007 • 351
The Theodor Seuss Geisel Medal for the most distinguished contribution to begin-
ning reader literature is Zelda and Ivy: The Runaways, written and illustrated by Laura 
McGee Kvasnosky (Candlewick). Honor Books are Mercy Watson Goes for a Ride, 
written by Kate DiCamillo and illustrated by Chris Van Dusen (Candlewick); Move 
Over Rover!, written by Karen Beaumont and illustrated by Jane Dyer (Harcourt); 
and Not a Box, written and illustrated by Antoinette Portis (HarperCollins).
The Schneider Family Book Award winner for young children is The Deaf Musi-
cians, written by Peter Seeger and Paul DuBois Jacobs and illustrated by R. Gregory 
Christie (Putnam). Cynthia Lord is the winner of the middle school award for 
Rules (Scholastic). The winner of the teen award is Louis Sachar for Small Steps 
(Delacorte).
The Andrew Carnegie Medal for excellence in children’s video goes to author/il-
lustrator Mo Willems and Weston Woods Studios for Knuffle Bunny (MaGiK 
Studio).
The 2008 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by David Ma-
caulay.
The winner of the 2007 Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal for a substantial and lasting 
contribution to literature for children is James Marshall.
Lois Lowry is the 2007 winner of the Margaret A. Edwards Award for Outstanding 
Literature for Young Adults, honoring an author’s lifetime contribution in writing 
books for teenagers.
The Scott O’Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Ellen Klages for The Green 
Glass Sea (Penguin).
The Canadian Library Association’s Book of the Year for Children is The Crazy 
Man, by Pamela Porter (Groundwood). Two Honor Books are The Gravesavers, by 
Sheree Fitch (Doubleday) and Hannah Waters and the Daughter of Johann Sebastian 
Bach, by Barbara Nickel (Penguin). The Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon Illustrator’s 
Award goes to Leslie Elizabeth Watts for The Baabaasheep Quartet, written by the 
illustrator (Fitzhenry & Whiteside). The Young Adult Canadian Book Award goes 
to Shyam Selvadurai for Swimming in the Monsoon Sea (Tundra).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Mal Peet for Tamar (Walker).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Wolves, written and illustrated by 
Emily Gravett (Macmillan).
The 2007 Gryphon Award was awarded to The True Story of Stellina, by Matteo 
Pericoli (Knopf). Three Honor Books were named: Sea Horse: The Shyest Fish in the 
Sea, by Chris Butterworth, illustrated by John Lawrence (Candlewick); Ruby Lu, 
Empress of Everything, by Lenore Look, illustrated by Anne Wilsdorf (Scholastic); 
and Good Boy, Fergus!, by David Shannon (Blue Sky/Scholastic).
352  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Johnston
Accidents–fiction: Johnson
Adventure: doder; Golding
African Americans: Levine
African Americans–fiction: Curtis; 
McKissack; Myers; Woodson
African Americans–poetry: Crisler
Afterlife–fiction: Keaney
AIdS–fiction: trueman
Anger–fiction: Haddix
Animals: Hansen
Animals–fiction: Macdonald
Animals–stories: Matthews; rocco
AntHoLoGIeS: Levithan
Art and artists–fiction: Strong
Babies–fiction: Bondoux
Babies–stories: Lloyd-Jones
Baseball–fiction: Long; trueman
BIoGrApHIeS: Levine; vincent
Birthdays–stories: Bottner
Brothers–fiction: Johnson
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Antieau
Brothers and sisters–stories: Graham; 
Lloyd-Jones
Bullies–fiction: Anderson; Gorman
Chickens–stories: Martin
Child labor–fiction: Antieau
China–folklore: Compestine
Cold War–fiction: Wynne-Jones
Colors–poetry: Miller
Creation–fiction: Selznick
Crime and criminals–fiction: Myers; 
orenstein; Wahl
death: vincent
death–fiction: Keaney; orenstein; 
rabb
dogs–fiction: doder; Kadohata
dogs–stories: umansky
dwarfism–fiction: Graff
Ecology: Hansen
ecology–fiction: Golding
Ethics and values: Anderson; Anti-
eau; Johnson; Kostick; Mackall; 
Matthews
FABLeS: Matthews; rocco
Families–fiction: Graff; rodowsky; 
Young
FAntASY: Curtis; Golding; Mcna-
mee; thompson
Father’s day–stories: Loomis
Fathers: Young
Fathers–fiction: rabb
Fathers–stories: Loomis
FoLK-LIKe tALeS: Bateman
FoLKtALeS And FAIrY tALeS: 
Compestine; Macdonald
Food and eating–stories: Compestine
Friends–fiction: Haddix; McKissack; 
newbery; Soto; Wynne-Jones
Games–fiction: Gorman; Kostick
Gays and lesbians–fiction: trueman
GHoSt StorIeS: Alter; Jablonski; 
newbery
Grandmothers–fiction: orenstein
GrApHIC noveLS: Selznick
Grief: vincent
Growing up–fiction: Graff; Soto
Health: Mackall; tracy; trueman
HIStorICAL FICtIon: 
Kadohata; Long; McKissack; 
Myers;Wynne-Jones
History, U.S.: Levine
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
April 2007  •  353
Houses–stories: davies
HuMor: Bottner; Curtis; davies; 
Graham; Lloyd-Jones; ransom; 
rocco; Soto; Strong; tracy; 
umansky; Willis
Ireland–fiction: thompson
Ireland–stories: Bateman
Islands–fiction: Alter
Libraries–stories: Willis
Little people–fiction: Graff
Luck–stories: Bateman
Mental illness–fiction: Johnston; 
Mitchard; Young
Mothers–fiction: Mitchard; rabb; 
Woodson
Mothers–stories: Breathed
Music and musicians–fiction: Myers
Music and musicians–stories: Martin
MYSterIeS: Long; Wahl
Mythological creatures–fiction: 
Golding
nurSerY rHYMeS: Graham
orphans: vincent
orphans–fiction: Bondoux; Selznick
parents–stories: ransom
parties–stories: Martin
poetrY: Crisler; Miller
pregnancy–fiction: Woodson
presents–stories: Loomis
pride–fiction: Soto
racism–fiction: Wahl
Reading aloud: Crisler
Reading, family: Curtis
relationships–fiction: Gorman; 
Mackall; tracy
School–fiction: Anderson; Haddix; 
McKissack; Woodson
SCIenCe FICtIon: Kostick
Secrets–stories: ransom
Sex–fiction: tracy 
Sharing–stories: Matthews
SHort StorIeS: Levithan
Sisters: vincent
Sisters–fiction: Bondoux
Slavery: Levine
Space travel–stories: Breathed
SpeCuLAtIve FICtIon: Keaney
Spiritualism–fiction: Jablonski
Stepfamilies–fiction: Strong
Stepparents–fiction: rodowsky
Storytime: Macdonald; umansky; 
Willis
SupernAturAL StorIeS: 
Jablonski
time–fiction: Mcnamee; thompson
time travel–fiction: Mcnamee
twins–fiction: orenstein
vacations–fiction: rodowsky
vietnam War–fiction: Kadohata
voyages and travel–fiction: Keaney
voyages and travel–stories: davies
World cultures: Antieau
