T h e
B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
School of Information Sciences
by Johns Hopkins University Press
June 2022
Vol. 75   No. 10
75 
YEARS
o
f
 
d
e
d
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
 
y
o
u
t
h
 
l
i
t
e
r
a
t
u
r
e
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Bookbird:
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
The Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books
Children’s Literature
Children’s Literature 
Association Quarterly
Journal of the History of 
Childhood and Youth
The Lion and the Unicorn
A Look Inside
T h e B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books 
June 2022
Vol. 75 No. 10
313  The Big Picture
 
 Zyla & Kai by Kristina Forest
314  New Books for Children and Young People
 
 Reviewed titles include
317 •  Lou written and illus. by Breanna Carzoo
321 •  Uncle John’s City Garden written by Bernette G. Ford and illus. by Frank 
Morrison
324 •  Answers in the Pages by David Levithan
330 •  Finding Jupiter by Kelis Rowe
335 •  Wretched Waterpark by Kiersten White
339  Subject and Use Index
Explanation of code symbols used with reviews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
 Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
© 2022 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois School of Information Sciences by Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218-4363, USA. Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, 
MD 21233-9651, and at additional mailing ofﬁces. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363.
Reviewing Staff
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Editor (KQG)
Quinita Balderson, Reviewer (QB)
Natalie Berglind, Reviewer (NB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Kara Forde, Reviewer (KF)
Fiona Hartley-Kroeger, Reviewer (FHK)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Adam McConville, Reviewer (AMM)
Danica Ronquillo, Reviewer (DR)
Sarah Sahn, Reviewer (SS)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Amanda Toledo, Reviewer (ART)
Aaren Tucker, Reviewer (AT)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
Office Staff
Anna Wiegand, Editorial Assistant
Subscription rates
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/subscribe. Subscription checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. 
All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising. Or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Kate Quealy-Gainer, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.ischool.illinois.edu
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration © Adriana Bellet, from Zyla & Kai by Kristina Forest. Used with permission of 
Kokila.
June 2022 • 313
The Big Picture
Zyla & Kai 
By Kristina Forest
Kai Johnson is a serial monogamist, while Zyla Matthews is committed to single-
dom, but when the two meet while working summer jobs at Sailor Joe’s Amusement 
Park, everything they believed about love and romance is challenged. As the months 
go by, Kai and Zyla get together, fall in love, and eventually break up. It seems to 
be a typical ending to a high school relationship until months later when the two 
apparently run away together during their Senior Day trip in the Poconos. Their 
shocked friends and family reflect on key moments from the past as they try to 
understand what happened between the two teens; everyone has a different idea, 
but only Zyla and Kai know the truth.
What would have been a simple, albeit sweet, YA romance is elevated by 
Forest’s mastery of the narrative structure, as she utilizes different tenses, points of 
view, and styles, to make the book almost act as a relationship primer, exploring a 
wide variety of romantic relationships through the experiences and perceptions of 
supporting characters. Most of the book is written in third-person past tense and 
has an invitingly conversational style: “No doubt the story had evolved to include 
some elements that weren’t true . . . The rumor mill game at Sailor Joe’s was strong.” 
The day of the pair’s disappearance, however, switches to present tense and focuses 
on the thoughts and perceptions of various secondary characters. The seamless shift 
in tenses moves the reader around in the timeline without interrupting momentum 
or breaking the immersive storytelling, layering the past and present perspectives 
to add an element of mystery to Kai and Zyla’s courtship.
Forest also brings a healthy dose of realism to the story through the rela-
tionship role models that directly and indirectly influence Kai and Zyla’s emotional 
lives. Kai’s parents (who tragically died when he was young) and his guardians 
(his aunt and uncle) have solid, supportive, and loving relationships that Kai is 
constantly seeking to emulate with his many romantic partners. Zyla’s parents, 
meanwhile, are divorced; her mom has had a string of disruptive failed relation-
ships and her father’s philandering ways have contributed to Zyla’s cynical opinions 
about love. Additionally, the romantic escapades of their peers—including some 
of Kai’s ex-girlfriends—non-judgmentally model a variety of other relationship 
foibles and mishaps for teen readers who are themselves making their first forays 
into romance and dating. For example, when Kai’s best friend Jamal realizes his 
crush Alanna is using him, Alanna similarly realizes that while she enjoyed Jamal’s 
attentions, it was unkind of her to string him along. While most of the book fo-
cuses on heterosexual romantic relationships, Forest includes queer representation 
as well, as Zyla’s mother starts dating a woman, and readers get to see the seeds of 
314 • The Bulletin
New Books for Children and Young People
AdAm, Jennifer Lark and the Wild Hunt. HarperCollins, 2022 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062981332 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062981363 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Lark is twelve years old, clever as heck, fearless, and apparently the only person 
who can repair a clock that will save her world when the Briar King threatens a 
longstanding (and wary) alliance between the fae and humans. Her brashness 
leads to her befriending a fae boy, despite all the warnings Lark has heard about 
trickery from the other side of the fae border. It’s a fortunate alliance, as the two 
bring their remarkably different perspectives and abilities to work on neutralizing 
the significant threat the new king represents. While the fae world is pure fantasy, 
the tone and pace is folkloric—this is a story that feels like it could be told on a 
cold winter’s night to a rapt audience. There’s true love, unexpected heroism, cool 
magical animals, a formidable villain, and a spritely girl in the middle of it all who 
knows her own strengths. Each element feels well-integrated and necessary to tell 
the whole tale, earning the book its page count.  AS
that relationship begin to grow. Indeed, teenagers and grown-ups alike in the book 
are all stumbling and grasping toward fulfilling relationships in their own ways, 
with varying degrees of success. 
Taken together, these explorations of the side characters and their 
zoomed-out perspectives, along with chapters focused on Kai’s and Zyla’s experi-
ences, demonstrate the unexpected ways human lives are interconnected and how 
relationships are a culmination of experiences, perceptions, and assumptions. 
Reminiscent of Nicola Yoon’s works, it’s a smart, thoughtful take on a romance, 
ultimately imparting the value of self-reflection, positive communication, healthy 
coping skills, and forgiveness.
—Aaren Tucker, reviewer
June 2022 • 315
Albert, melissA Our Crooked Hearts. Flatiron, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250826367 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250826374 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Ivy desperately tries to get her drunken ex-boyfriend to stop the car when he nearly 
runs over a naked girl standing in the road. They leave the bloodied but alive girl 
in the woods—unfortunately, the encounter is just the first of a slew of strange and 
terrible events, as Ivy later finds a mauled rabbit outside her house and discovers 
a jar of blood her mother buried in the lawn. When Ivy’s mom Dana and Dana’s 
best friend go missing, Ivy has to investigate their disappearance, leading her to 
unsettling secrets about her mother, who likely has something to do with the ghostly 
girl following Ivy around. Alternating chapters leap to the past, tracking Dana’s 
childhood and her dabbles with magic that will have disastrous consequences that 
affect her daughter. Albert’s interweaving of Ivy’s and Dana’s stories is expertly 
done, providing readers with information Ivy needs in the present via Dana’s his-
tory, ramping up tension. The story itself is haunting and beautiful, full of messy 
girls drunk on messier magic and told with electric prose brimming with sharp 
metaphors. Readers who previously enjoyed the harrowing atmosphere of Albert’s 
The Hazel Wood (BCCB 1/18) should pick up a copy ASAP.  NB
Aronson, KAtelyn Poo-Dunit?: A Forest Floor Mystery; illus. by Stephanie La-
beris. Candlewick, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536216370 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 4-7 yrs
Admittedly, hygiene practices differ between human animals and forest creatures, 
but even so, Mouse has reason to take offense when one of her neighbors leaves 
a malodorous pile of poop near her burrow. The hunt to sniff out the culprit is 
on, and as Mouse accuses one animal after another, they explain why the poop in 
question cannot be theirs: much too big, much too messy, not pointy. Finally, Bear 
proudly claims the impressive output. “‘Yes!’ said Bear/ ‘That’s mine! It’s true!/ The 
mystery’s solved./ I made this poo . . ./ A poo that no one can outdo!’” Pride cometh 
before the fall, however, and in this case it’s a massive cascade unleashed by Moose, 
whose production leaves Bear looking like a rank amateur. Aronson’s rhymed verses 
will be a treat to read aloud, assuming, that is, they can be heard over audience 
laughter. Laberis’ digital artwork renders foregrounded details in painterly strokes 
that spring from a flattened suggestion of forest backdrop, and the visual pièce de 
résistance—Bear, framed by the arch of Moose’s legs at the exact moment Moose, 
shall we say, bests his rival—should reduce any storytime group to pandemonium. 
There are some pithy nature lessons here as well, as Aronson’s Mouse spreads ma-
nure near her burrow so that sweet-smelling flowers will grow, and Laberis supplies 
matching games for poo, animal tracks, and critters in end matter and end papers. 
A closing note cautions readers not to DIY fertilizer at home (and why “not just 
any poo will do”). Alas, librarians, there are no make-n-take project ideas here.  EB
316 • The Bulletin
Arroyo, JeAnnette Blackwater; written and illus. by Jeannette Arroyo and Ren 
Graham. Holt, 2022 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250304025 $25.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781250777058 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
The small town of Blackwater, Maine, has a lot of strange things going on, and 
teenagers Eli and Tony are right in the middle of all of it. Though the two don’t usu-
ally run in the same crowd—Tony is a track star, Eli a chronically ill outcast—they 
end up relying on each other as Tony struggles with his new identity as a werewolf 
while Eli tries to help a ghost resolve whatever is holding the spirit from moving 
on. The paranormal elements are far more engaging and memorable than the high 
school angst, but the story has a clear—but thankfully not preachy—message 
that asking for help (from a parent, peer, other werewolf, or ghost fisherman) is 
exponentially better than going it alone. This popular webcomic is smoothly ad-
justed for graphic novel format, with alternating chapters illustrated by each of the 
creators. The result feels fluid and dynamic as readers see the story unfold through 
distinct, visual perspectives. Wordless panels steadily move the story forward and 
are particularly succesful in conveying distance and isolation. While werewolves 
and ghosts, bullies and family dynamics are all worthy subjects, Eli and Tony are 
just so darn shippable that the rest is all gravy.  AS
bAhrAmpour, Ali Monsters in the Fog; written and illus. by Ali Bahram-
pour. Abrams, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419752452 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647002046 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
After knitting a sweater for his friend Daisy, Hakim the donkey wants to deliver it 
to her at the top of a mountain, but a goat cautions him: “There are monsters up 
there!” Despite the warning, Hakim continues his trek and is indeed confronted by 
monstrous, hulking shadows. When the figures step through the dense mountain 
fog, however, they reveal themselves to be different animals with various bundles 
and join Hakim’s journey. A dog with a stack of bricks, a pig with umbrellas, and 
a bear on a tricycle make their way up the mountain with Hakim until they reach 
Daisy, who has green fur, tentacles, and three eyes, and who screams at their arrival: 
“You all looked like a monster in the fog.” Detailed ink outlines of the animals 
are neatly filled with solid colors while the fog effectively varies in opacity. The 
revelation of a monstrous looking Daisy is a whimsical and delightful plot twist 
that plays on viewer expectations, but the real fun comes from the opportunity to 
guess what the fog illusions really are at storytime.  NB
beAty, erin Blood and Moonlight. Farrar, 2022 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250755810 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250755827 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
Catrin is a seventeen-year-old orphan working at the Sanctum, ensuring the safety 
and soundness of the holy building by climbing it to check for structural flaws. Her 
vantage point allows her to see the aftermath of a prostitute’s murder—a prostitute 
June 2022 • 317
who was at the Sanctum earlier that night with the master architect. When hand-
some Simon is assigned to investigate the murder as an expert on madness, Catrin 
involves herself to ensure the architect is free of suspicion. This murder won’t be 
the last, though, and as the targets pivot from prostitutes to people in Catrin’s life, 
it’s obvious that Catrin’s being targeted . . . but by whom? This murder mystery 
in a high fantasy setting starts out strong, slowly weaving in important clues with 
worldbuilding tidbits that organically introduce readers to the world, the crime, 
and Cat’s magical heritage. Unfortunately, the plot culminates with the men in 
Catrin’s life vying for her attention and an unsatisfyingly cartoonish standoff with 
the killer. The problematic depiction of two schizophrenic characters as physically 
and sexually violent will be a non-starter for some readers, but those willing to take 
up the journey will still find a well-structured mystery with an investigation that 
heavily relies on psychological profiling. An author’s note on schizophrenia and 
real-world influences are included.  NB
CArzoo, breAnnA Lou; written and illus. by Breanna Carzoo. HarperCollins, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063054059 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Lou the fire hydrant knows his own potential, but to his chagrin, canines mostly 
see him as a toilet: “they sniff and twist and twirl and lift.” As a urine-soaked Lou 
laments his fate, the doggy day care across the street catches fire, and the dalmatian 
that approaches him doesn’t do it to relieve his bladder—instead, the dalmatian 
works with a firefighter to hook Lou up to a hose and save the day. With his faith 
in himself restored, Lou proudly proclaims: “My name is Lou, and I’m . . . a su-
perhero!” Carzoo depicts Lou in bold red with just two round eyes and a mouth 
for his expressions, which volley between hopeful, annoyed, and surprised. There’s 
a steady geometry to the digital art with balanced textures evocative of gouache, 
and the various dogs and the people in the background of each scene provide ad-
ditional humor (particularly amusing is the scene in which the pups dance around 
poor Lou before . . . well, letting loose). Beyond the obvious and sweet message 
that everyone contains more potential for greatness than meets the eye, viewers may 
think twice about life-saving infrastructure that blends into the sidelines when out 
on a walk with their pups.  NB
Cohen, emi WAtAnAbe The Lost Ryū. Levine Querido, 2022 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781646141326 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781646141579 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
While small, palm-sized dragons known as ryū still populate Japan and are close 
companions to many people, their larger counterparts disappeared after World 
War II, a decade before Kohei was born. Even so, Kohei has dreamt of them in 
ways that feel like memories more than imagination, and he is certain that if he 
can find a big dragon, it will heal his angry grandfather, who has made Kohei and 
his mother miserable even though they remain loyal. With new neighbor Isolde, 
who is half-Jewish and half-Japanese and struggling to find her sense of home after 
moving to Japan, Kohei sets off on a poorly prepared, emergency-driven quest when 
it seems his grandfather may be dying. Things don’t go at all as they planned, but 
318 • The Bulletin
the two do unlock mysteries about where the dragons went, why they left, and how 
Kohei’s family was involved. Kohei and Isolde are a dynamic pair, with contrasting 
skills and such different life experiences that they are constantly challenging and 
learning from each other. The tiny dragons are a neat touch, bonded fiercely to 
their humans and a steady reminder that enormous relatives of theirs once filled 
the skies. The thread of quiet agony that runs under the misery of Kohei’s mother 
and the anger of his grandfather hints at the war and its devastating ripples across 
generations. A detailed, and personal, author’s note offers contextual details and a 
pronunciation guide.  AS
Cooper, helen Saving the Butterfly; illus. by Gill Smith. Candlewick Studio, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781536220551 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Lost crossing a darkened sea, two siblings are rescued from a boat. People bring the 
brother and sister to a town that is clearly not their own (“ . . . they had nothing. 
Or almost nothing. Nothing left from before, except each other”), but the two are 
given shelter and food. Over the next few months, the boy flourishes, but the older 
sister sinks into sadness, unable to move past whatever tragedy brought them to 
that boat: “But the bigger one couldn’t forget. She felt she shouldn’t forget. Over 
her mind a shadow fell, and a squeezing in her chest sometimes made it hard to 
breath.” In an effort to cheer his sister up, the little boy brings her a butterfly in 
a jar, and, eventually, the girl leaves the darkness of her room to release it into 
the sky. The final scene, in which the big sister plays outside with her sibling, is 
made particularly poignant by a closing line that implies more dark days might 
lie ahead for the sister, but there will now be hopeful, cheery ones as well. While 
illustrations make it clear the kids are refugees, the specifics are never detailed, 
and the girl’s struggle to deal with her trauma, compounded by the fact that she 
was and seems to remain the primary caretaker of her brother, remains the focus. 
Soft mottling and crayon-like textures anchor the art in a steady stillness, while 
the palette is used with care and precision, consistently balancing bright, vibrant 
shades with darkened inks and smudgy grays. This is certainly more somber than 
Marwan’s Where Butterflies Fill the Sky (BCCB 3/22), but pairing the two titles 
would make for a compelling exploration of rebuilding a life in an uncertain, and 
perhaps, unwanted, new home.  KQG
Culley, betty The Name She Gave Me. HarperTeen, 2022 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063157835 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063157859 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Sixteen years ago, Rynn’s biological mother named her Scheherazade, and it’s the 
only clue she has to go on as she begins her search for her biological family. She was 
renamed Rynn by her adoptive parents, who have (understandably) been tightlipped 
about the closed adoption, and it’s only when she needles them that they let loose 
she might have a sister. Fired up now to find the daughter her bio mom did not give 
up for adoption and struggling with her adoptive mom’s emotional abuse, Rynn 
eventually locates her sister Sorella in the foster home where she was placed after 
their shared mother died. Rather than being fulfilled, however, Rynn is terrified 
June 2022 • 319
that her adopted mother’s vicious barbs might break Sorella’s lively spirit if she joins 
their family. Poetic verse is deployed with a poignant beauty, and the spare text 
gives readers the sense that Rynn is not telling the whole story, particularly in regard 
to her adoptive mother: she’s not quite ready to indict the woman who promised 
love but gave only cruelty, especially when her other option for a maternal figure is 
the mother who gave her up. The journey for Rynn here is as much about finding 
her birth family as it is about finally realizing she is loveable and loved by so many 
people. The evolution of that discovery is tracked by the growing list of the names 
she takes on as she begins to value herself and her role in the lives of people she 
loves: she’s Rynn, of course, but also Scheherazade, and Win to the little boy she 
babysits, Grande Sorella and Sherry to her little sister, and July to her best friend 
June. A bittersweet conclusion brings Rynn as much closure as she’s going to get 
with both her mothers, but readers will be grateful to see her looking toward a 
future of self-discovery now that the past has been put to rest.  KQG
deVos, Kelly Go Hunt Me. Razorbill, 2022 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593204856 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593204863 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
A group of film students catches their big break when an actress invites them to shoot 
their feminist interpretation of Dracula at the castle where Vlad Dracul once lived. 
The opportunity is especially important for Alex, whose application to her dream 
school USC is waitlisted while several of her male friends are accepted. Instantly, 
though, the castle trip feels wrong: the actress that promised to chaperone them 
leaves; there is no wi-fi or cell service; and the GoFundMe that funded their trip is 
hacked. What was merely a creepy vibe becomes a direct threat when a figure in a 
Dracula mask begins to pick the friend group off one by one. The framing device 
of Alex retelling her story to the Romanian police as the last survivor is compelling 
from the get-go; readers already know what happens but not how. In a nod to the 
structure of the source material, excerpts of police evidence, including the film 
students’ script, social media posts, and the interrogation itself, are interspersed 
with Alex’s narration and allow readers to piece together more than what Alex is 
sharing. The building paranoia about the identity of the killer is executed well, 
and readers who enjoy bloody, locked-room horror stories and masterfully built 
suspense should pick this book up.  NB
dunbAr, helene The Promise of Lost Things. Sourcebooks Fire, 2022 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9781492667407 $10.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781492667414 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Ghosts aren’t fiction in St. Hilaire, New York, a small enclave where those with 
powers to commune with the dead live according to rules established by a corrupt 
Guild. Russ, a teen eager to prove himself as student leader of the Guild’s Youth 
Corps, mixes addictive herbs from his grandmother’s garden to enhance his powers 
and is helped further by the ghost of powerful teen medium Ian Mackenzie, who is 
no less charming for being dead. Outside the town gates, seventeen-year-old Asher 
wants to mourn his sister in peace, but his parents, hosts of the reality TV show 
Ghost Killers, want to film a special episode proving the mystics of St. Hilaire are 
320 • The Bulletin
frauds. Asher befriends Russ to help his parents but finds he doesn’t want to take 
down the town of the boy he’s slowly growing attached to. Meanwhile, Willow, 
the delightfully wicked medium training Russ, has plans to bring prominence and 
power to herself and the town, and she’s not letting anyone get in her way. The 
three narrators bring a lot of moving pieces to this plot, but the story unspools with 
intriguing suspense and satisfyingly resolves leftover mysteries from the first novel 
in the series, Prelude for Lost Souls. In a book dealing with the ethereal, Dunbar’s 
writing is grounded in richly detailed descriptions of physical sensations and emo-
tions, and those qualities shine in a brief but exhilarating kiss Russ and Asher share. 
Fantastic elements layered in with poignant, human moments of grief make this 
ghost story a solid sequel.  ART
dutton, tAliA M is for Monster; written and illus. by Talia Dutton. Surely/
Abrams ComicArts, 2022 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419762208 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781419751974 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647001926 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Grieving the death of her beloved sister, Frances is so certain she can bring Maura 
back to life that she does not stop to consider the fact that death is not a conquer-
able force. Indeed, M, the young woman she has stitched together and reanimated, 
is not at all like her younger sister, but Frances refuses to believe anything else, 
callously explaining that she can always scrap this version of Maura and try again. 
M doesn’t even like the same things as Maura once did, from science on down to 
wardrobe choices, and at first, she hides all of the things that make her an individual. 
Eventually, however, both Frances and M must face that Maura is truly gone and 
that trying to mold M into her replacement is unjust to Maura’s memory and 
strips M of her right to an independent life. Dutton’s deft use of the graphic novel 
format ably captures the crushing grief that Frances carries in her posture and her 
face in ways that the reader will notice and feel—it is difficult to feel sympathy 
for Frances based on what she says, but it is impossible to not do so when you see 
her absolute devastation. A limited green, gray, and black palette evokes feelings 
of monsters, secret, and iffy science experiments while also narrowing focus to the 
characters themselves. Both Frances and M deserve joy, and their slow movement 
toward it is well-told and memorable.  AS
ferguson, Jen The Summer of Bitter and Sweet. Heartdrum/HarperCollins, 
2022 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063086166 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063086180 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
Lou’s plan to spend her post-senior summer slinging ice cream cones at her uncles’ 
Creamery and hanging out with her best friend is quickly disrupted by two un-
wanted arrivals in her small Canadian town. First, after three years gone with no 
word, her former friend King returns, and his presence is a constant reminder of 
the lies Lou told for so long to hide her Métis heritage and pass as white. Then, a 
letter shows up from her white father, who was imprisoned for the rape of her Métis 
mother that resulted in Lou’s conception, informing her that he has been released 
and would like to meet. It doesn’t help that her mother is away for the summer, 
June 2022 • 321
Lou’s uncles’ business is most certainly failing, and her growing feelings for King 
have her questioning her sexuality. There’s a lot going on here, and Lou’s tendency 
to overthink her own decisions and other people’s motivations makes the plot feel 
overstuffed and unstructured. Her struggle to figure out why and when and even 
if she wants to have sex with someone is compellingly authentic, but it comes to 
a jarring stop when King gives a stiff, essay-like description of the LGBTQIA+ 
spectrum. The book offers a more nuanced, steadier exploration of Lou’s biracial 
identity, as she deals with her and her mother’s previous efforts to eschew both their 
Native heritage and the distressingly common abuse by non-Indigenous people 
that can come with it. Lou’s very existence is a direct result of such abuse, so her 
arc from wanting to stay hidden to demanding to be seen is profound in both her 
specific experience and in the larger cultural context.  KQG
ford, bernette g. Uncle John’s City Garden; illus. by Frank Morrison. Holiday 
House, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823447862 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823453085 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
A blank, lifeless apartment building looms over an equally bare vacant lot full of 
carefully raked dirt when Li’l Sissy and her siblings arrive with towering Uncle 
John to begin a transformation. Each has a contribution: Brother, lima bean and 
corn seeds; Sister, tomato and onion; Li’l Sissy, okra. Mother comments later that 
they’ve landed on the fixings for succotash, which is fine with Li’l Sissy. There’s 
planting, hoeing, weeding, and worrying about rainstorm washouts as the summer 
goes by, but the crops eventually yield a bountiful harvest; even after the relatives 
gather for a big barbecue (featuring, of course, a succotash side dish), there’s plenty 
to bag up for everyone to take home. Morrison’s paintings play with perspective 
and composition to easily capture the oversized presence of a towering Uncle John 
and the Brutalist sensibility of a housing project, in which even brick and fabric 
take on the chilly sterility of concrete. Meanwhile, the madly saturated colors of 
picture-perfect plants bring vibrancy, and the body language of the siblings is both 
sturdy and dynamic. A blink-and-you’ll-miss-it end matter reference to support 
from the TERC organization, which develops math curricula, should send adult 
readers scrambling back over the text to notice how Li’l Sissy’s frequent observations 
of height and length and amount—a believable preoccupation for the youngest of 
the sibs—can seed a flourishing math discussion.  EB
forest, KristinA Zyla and Kai. Kokila, 2022 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593407240 $19.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr 8-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 313, for review.
goodmAn, JuliAnA The Black Girls Left Standing. Feiwel, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250792815 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250793140 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When Beau’s unarmed sister is shot and killed by an off-duty police officer, her 
family and the media are fed the same old line that too many Black communities 
have heard: Katia and her boyfriend Jordan were illegally breaking into a house 
322 • The Bulletin
and therefore a threat that the cop could only meet with lethal force. Knowing that 
her sister was no criminal, she sets out to clear Katia’s name, but first she must find 
Jordan, who hasn’t been seen since the night Katia died. Despite warnings from 
her best friend Deja that any snooping will attract the attention of Onyx Tigers, 
the gang that basically runs the Chicago projects where Beau lives, she sets up an 
anonymous Twitter account to gather any tips that might shed light on what hap-
pened. The secrets she uncovers draw her further into a web of petty crime and 
potential violence, and it threatens her chance at a relationship with Champion, a 
wealthy boy from her magnet school. Like Thomas’ The Hate U Give (BCCB 3/17), 
this is a study in code switching, as Beau moves between her friends in Grady Park 
and her classmates at Millennium Magnet, but she sees these shifts as a whole of 
her identity rather than a fracturing of it. She also, however, knows what the world 
sees when they look at a girl from the projects, and she believes emphatically that 
had Katia been the right type of Black girl with the right type of story—smart, 
talented, boot straps, etc.—her death would have earned more than a few days of 
the media cycle. Discovering the circumstances around Katia’s death does bring 
some closure for Beau, but she also realizes that her grief will have to live in tandem 
with her hopes for her own future.  KQG
hemingWAy, edWArd Pigeon & Cat; written and illus. by Edward Heming-
way. Ottaviano/Little, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316311250 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Cat is a loner, only leaving his cardboard box in the abandoned lot for food, until 
he finds an egg that hatches a pigeon. He befriends and raises Pigeon, who even-
tually learns to fly and fetches wonderful things like chalk and buttons and old 
signs to decorate Cat’s dreary lot until it bustles with color. After a storm, when 
Pigeon doesn’t return, Cat overcomes his introverted nature and journeys into the 
overwhelming city, chalking messages around for Pigeon for months. The two 
eventually reunite at the lot, which Pigeon has turned into a shelter where “all are 
welcome.” Dreary greens and browns give way to pops of candy colors as Cat ven-
tures out of his lot, while painterly textures and skewed geometric shapes enliven 
the animal-dominated cityscape. The book misses an opportunity to discuss the 
circumstances that lead to homelessness, but most viewers will simply enjoy seeing 
Pigeon bring the community together, and they will appreciate the small details 
and visual treats in the art.  NB
June, JAson Out of the Blue. HarperTeen, 2022 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063015203 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063015227 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr 10-12
Everything is on track for the last few months of Sean’s junior year to be perfect, 
just like the gay romcoms he plans to direct—that is, until boyfriend Dominic 
abruptly dumps him for Miguel, star swimmer and the most popular guy in school. 
With prom just over a month away, Sean doesn’t have much hope that things will 
get any better, but then he finds Ross washed up on the beach near the L.A. swim 
club where he works as a lifeguard. Ross is a merperson on their Journey, a merfolk 
rite of passage where they have to live as a human for a month and help another 
June 2022 • 323
person in some way before they can return. It’s a stupid tradition, as far as Ross is 
concerned, as humans are selfish, destructive, and weirdly obsessed with gender 
(merfolk are, much more sensibly, all they/them). To get the Journey quickly over 
with, Ross agrees to pretend to date Sean and make Dominic realize what he gave 
up, but of course, as in any good rom-com, it isn’t long before fake dating turns into 
real feelings. Alternating chapters contrast Ross’ fish-out-of-water bewilderment and 
their wry outsider observations with Sean’s self-conscious film-director narration 
(movie lovers will spot plenty of references). Scenes of sexual intimacy between 
the two are tender and full of joy, and Sean supplies some needed size diversity to 
a genre that typically centers the thin and conventionally beautiful. Readers who 
are drawn to the whimsical premise will stay for its emotional truthfulness about 
the earth-shattering intensity of first, if not forever, love.  SS
Kutub, nAz The Loophole. Bloomsbury, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781547609178 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781547609352 $12.59
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Sy deeply regrets choosing the comfort of the familiar over the adventure of running 
away with his boyfriend, Farouk, three months ago. Now, however, two things have 
upended Sy’s life anyway: his extremely conservative Indian-Muslim father kicks 
him out after finding out Sy is gay, and he also meets Reggie, who offers him three 
wishes (and proves she can deliver on at least the first one as a million bucks sud-
denly appears in Sy’s bank account). Sy and Reggie team up to help him accomplish 
his second wish, finding Farouk, though it is not nearly as easy as a magical poof 
out of L.A. Reggie foots the bill for all the travel, encourages Sy and helps bolster 
his confidence, and cheerleads his ultimate goal of rekindling a romance with the 
love of his life. Of course, such a journey would dramatically change anyone, and 
Sy’s evolution is so well-earned and sweet that it borders on treacly, but Reggie’s 
sardonic commentary manages to keep it on the proper edge. Farouk isn’t the same 
when they find him, but nor is Sy, whose priorities have shifted now that the world 
is proven to contain far more than just Farouk’s love. Romance buffs will appreciate 
this not-quite-wish-fulfilling story that explores love from a variety of perspectives 
with a keen eye for tenderness.  AS
lACey, Josh The Pet Potato; illus. by Momoko Abe. Roaring Brook, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250834157 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6yrs
After dogs, cats, rabbits, and giraffes are nixed as options for a pet, Albert’s dad 
comes up with a great idea for a gag gift: a pet potato. Albert initially sets the potato 
aside, ignoring it, but eventually it becomes his starchy sidekick on adventures down 
the slide, to the library, and at bedtime. After learning all the fun things potatoes 
can do, Albert finds his moldy friend cannot last forever, which leads to a new 
horticultural adventure. The titular spud’s amusing facial expressions and fashion 
(a pirate costume will be a hit with children who spot it) rendered in crayon-like 
strokes livens the book’s simple color palette and Lacey’s unadorned writing. The 
simple language here could provide some nicely structured practice for early readers, 
but Abe’s art provides the true delight of the book, which makes it a great fit for 
a close storytime audience. While culture and race are not mentioned in the text 
324 • The Bulletin
nor impact the story, Albert’s implied biracial family and diverse community offer 
visual representation, though it’s disappointing that some appearances lean toward 
stereotypical. Pair this with Miller’s Sophie’s Squash (BCCB 10/13) for a silly take 
on questionable produce selections.  ART
leVithAn, dAVid Answers in the Pages. Knopf, 2022 [176p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593484692 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593484685 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593484708 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
A fifth-grade boy whose mother objects to a book he’s assigned to read for class; two 
boys in the ’90s falling in love for the first time; and the challenged book itself, with 
protagonists who could be read as gay. Levithan ties all three narratives together in 
this short but powerful book that puts censorship in concrete terms, centering its 
effects on the children of Sandpiper Township, Virginia. First-person narration from 
Donovan, whose mother launched the challenge, underscores the embarrassment 
he feels in the wake of his mother’s actions, as well as the rifts they created with his 
peers and his family. The ’90s love story, relayed in third-person, anchors the novel 
and gives weight to the impassioned finale at a school board meeting, while included 
chapters from the fictional novel invite readers to form their own opinions as they 
read the challenged material. Levithan doesn’t demonize the challengers or broadly 
ascribe a religious motive, acknowledging that most of them are people who really 
do want the best for their children, but he also doesn’t hold back in showing the 
harm their actions inflict, intended or otherwise. That emotional impact, paired 
with the clever framing device, realistic classroom conversations, and enjoyable, 
genre-spanning writing, makes this an accessible entry point for readers looking to 
understand the challenges that come from banning books.  AMM
lloyd-Jones, emily The Drowned Woods. Little, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780759556317 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780759556331 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Mer has been hiding from the cruel prince who wants to exploit her talent as a 
water diviner, but a former friend brings her out of the shadows with a proposal 
to circumvent the extensive security around the prince and then kill him. Thus 
begins a quest to gather allies, make a plan, and see it through. Simple. Alas, the 
allies are all a bit suspect, the plan is built on hope and impossibility, and seeing it 
through may cost Mer her life. Character development is impeccable here—each 
person on this heist is haunted and gifted at once, carrying their curses and abilities 
woven together like cloaks on their backs, Mer included. There seem to be few easy 
lives in this world where fae can be fatally tricky, thievery and cruelty are rampant, 
and magical powers are likelier to cause suspicion (or worse) rather than offer any 
good. It is therefore eminently satisfying when Mer fully understands her abilities 
and taps into them for heroism, not violence, bringing a hopeful close to this sharp 
and witty fantasy.  AS
June 2022 • 325
ludWig, trudy Brave Every Day; illus. by Patrice Barton. Knopf, 2022 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593306383 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593306376 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593306390 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7yrs
While other kids are playing hide and seek, Camila just wants to hide from her 
(many) worries. The “What if?” worries appear every morning at the bus stop; the “I 
can’t” worries pop up throughout the school day; the “I’m scared” worries creep in 
after dark. Camila worries all week about the field trip to the aquarium, and when 
the big day arrives, she quickly gets overwhelmed by the flood of kids. When she 
tries to find a place to hide, however, she finds fellow anxious classmate Kai duck-
ing out as well. Together they decide that the thought “I’ll try” overrides their fears 
and venture out to meet the sea creatures. Ludwig delivers a simple and compas-
sionate take on anxiety in the early school years, and Barton’s sketched silhouettes 
of Camila’s body language relay her experiences of being overwhelmed, as she is 
often wide-eyed, slumped, and retreating into her clothing. The undersea theme is 
more distracting than illuminating as the calm blue and grey hues favor the story’s 
setting over representing an anxious tone, but young readers already familiar with 
the experience of anxiety will find themselves soothed. With the second game of 
hide-and-seek that bookends the story, Ludwig charmingly, if idealistically, conveys 
that a habit of hiding may occasionally be replaced by a brave, “here I come.”  KF
mCCAll, guAdAlupe gArCíA Echoes of Grace. Tu/Lee & Low, 2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781643794259 $21.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 10-12
Graciela—Grace—carries a don (gift) from her mother’s side of the family in be-
ing able to involuntarily experience “echoes” of people and past events, a skill that 
too often pulls her attention away from the real world. She’s having a particularly 
rough morning, distracted by echoes and her deteriorating relationship with her 
sister, when her beloved nephew, whom she was caring for, wanders into the street 
and is struck by a car. The trauma tips her into memories of a horrific sexual 
assault, compounding her grief and stirring up thoughts of her mother’s brutal 
murder twelve years ago. As in her Summer of the Mariposas (BCCB 12/12), Mc-
Call’s characters seek answers and understanding by journeying across the border 
to Mexico to interrogate their familial past. Generations of internalized misogyny 
and victim-blaming amplify the trauma of assault here, as Grace’s maternal grand-
mother shifts between solicitude and slut-shaming, and her paternal grandmother, 
while consistently honest, can also be cruel. Many readers will recognize the social 
rhetoric that holds women and girls responsible for the violations enacted on them 
by others, and even Grace judges her sister’s serial dating as a moral flaw. If Grace’s 
feelings for new neighbor Daniel prompt a somewhat unrealistic confrontation 
and sudden resolution with the echoes that have been haunting her, there is still 
satisfaction in the sisters’ reconciliation, the revelation of their mother’s past, and 
the revenge enacted on her murderer. Though the past continues to haunt Grace’s 
present, her hope steadily marches into the future. Includes an author’s note and 
resources page.  FHK
326 • The Bulletin
mCCArthy, Cory Man o’ War. Dutton, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593353707 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593353714 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
It’s almost unfathomable for River to imagine a world outside of small-town Ohio 
and a strict Arab mother, but an impulsive jump into the local theme park shark 
tank starts a new journey toward self-acceptance. Once you have a reputation as the 
odd one who literally threw themselves to the sharks, after all, you might as well 
tackle some of the symbolic, gender-related beasts as well. Patient readers will be 
rewarded with a rich and long-ranging exploration of gender identity and growth—
this book covers high school and college years with an epilogue that extends out 
even further, to River’s adulthood as a fulfilled trans man. It takes time, dysphoria, 
and doubt to reach that point, though, and admittedly the spinning wheels of being 
stuck at a new stage of self-exploration, however entirely realistic and painful, can 
make the story feel as long as the time it takes River to figure things out. The juice 
is absolutely worth the squeeze, however, with River finally emerging bruised but 
whole and madly in love (the epic, soulmates kind), and it is exactly as sunny and 
uplifting as one would hope.  AS
mCCoolA, mAriKA Slip; illus. by Aatmaja Pandya. Algonquin, 2022 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781643752495 $24.95
Paper ed. ISBN 9781616207892 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 9781643752921 $15.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Jade is struggling to find her footing at a summer art residency. She is still reeling 
from the fact that her best friend, Phoebe, attempted suicide and Jade had no idea 
she was hurting that much. She feels like a failure as a friend and quickly adds 
feeling like a failure as an artist as the Art Farm is way tougher than she expected. 
When Jade torches one of her sketches in a fit of frustration, memories appear in 
the flames, and when she shapes a cat out of clay, it seemingly comes alive, with a 
fair amount of fury. Most of the story is told via text, but changes in palette deftly 
signal movement between the concrete events of Jade’s time at camp and her inner 
turmoil, shifting from the grainy grayscale of the present to the rusty reds of Jade’s 
memories and thoughts on Phoebe. Jade’s crushing guilt about feeling happy while 
her best friend suffers is poignant and relatable, and the thread of magic here is 
presented as fact, though there is room to interpret it as Jade grappling with her own 
demons instead. Urgent, quick line drawings mirror the pressure Jade feels during 
this short residency, and expressive body language underlines Jade’s despondency, 
with her perpetually slumped shoulders in a protective gesture. While the strict 
narrative focus on Jade limits the impact of other characters at the camp, it allows 
for a deep character study within a trim graphic novel that ends on a tentatively 
hopeful note.  AS
mCgrAth, Jennifer Pugs Cause Traffic Jams; illus. by Kathryn Durst. Kids 
Can, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781525303401 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781525303630 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Kirby the pug is missing, and his owner, a little girl, sets out to find him. She en-
June 2022 • 327
counters many other dogs along her way, all with pleasant, or at least benign traits 
(“Golden retrievers are pleasers. / Poodles are overachievers”). Then perspective 
flashes to Kirby, whose oblivious frolicking after a butterfly has caused a mas-
sive car accident. Thus the punchline “But pugs cause traffic jams” is set, and the 
book is free to switch between the owner’s neighborly chats and Kirby’s incidental 
mayhem until the two are reunited. Durst’s art in this picture book is dynamic: 
digital spreads feature cartoon-proportioned, diverse characters with big heads, 
dogs with exaggerated shapes, and enough background detail to warrant multiple 
rereads or I Spy quests. The matter-of-fact structure of the rhyming text contrasts 
with the chaotic speech bubbles as people shout and point at Kirby, with a police 
officer even calling in for help with a P.I.T.: “I repeat: we have a Pug-in-Traffic.” 
Dog lovers—especially dog lovers whose dogs are charmingly dumb—will have 
plenty to delve into here.  NB
meddour, Wendy Howard the Average Gecko; illus. by Carmen Saldaña. 
Peachtree, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781682634349 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781682634509 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Confident he is the only camouflaged creature in the rainforest, Howard the gecko 
loudly and proudly proclaims himself “Howard the Camouflaged King of the 
World” for all to hear. Audible interjections emerge from his verdant, seemingly 
unpopulated surroundings (“Ouch!” and “Ribbit”), but Howard doesn’t notice, 
preferring to show off his aptitude for adaptation. Only when the stick insect, 
frog, sloth, and company become visible does Howard realize that camouflage is 
the norm, and he despairs, wondering if anyone could ever love an average gecko. 
Children will delight in spotting the camouflaged animals before they shed their 
facades and relish in Howard’s redemptive love story with purple gecko, Dolores. 
Saldaña’s warm-toned pencil, watercolor, and digital illustrations capture the magi-
cal, diffused light of the rainforest and the layered textures of the spreads cleverly 
conceal the forest animals before they are unveiled. An appended page explains 
basic information about geckos and prompts readers to count and identify the 
camouflaged creatures upon rereading.  KF
menArd, rAChel Game of Strength and Storm. Flux, 2022 [400p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9781635830767 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781635830774 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Each year the cruel empresses of Olympia hold a lottery and the winners may 
ultimately ask for anything—great or inconsequential—in exchange for a service 
to their rulers. Gen, a MindWorker capable of magically controlling living crea-
tures with a bit of her hair or blood, only wants her father released from prison. 
Meanwhile, Castor, a StormMaker adept at wielding bottled storms and lightning, 
wants the throne of her island home, but her twin brother Pollux doesn’t agree with 
Castor’s grab for power. Pollux wants to stop the StormMakers’ dealings in danger-
ous weapons; he’s also been enamored with Gen since childhood. The empresses 
will fulfill either Gen’s or Castor’s wishes, but first the two must complete a series 
of dangerous and complicated tasks around their world. Citizens of various skin 
colors (blue, pink, orange, silver), physical ability, and magical ability are presented 
throughout the book, though unfortunately some of the characterizations and 
328 • The Bulletin
descriptions stumble into stereotypical casting, with the villains often disfigured 
in some way. Readers who push through the exposition-heavy beginning will still 
find a fast-paced, suspenseful, magical adventure with a satisfying twist on Greek 
mythology; offer this to Percy Jackson fans seeking additional LGBTQIA+ repre-
sentation in their next read.  ART
mitChell, sAundrA, ed. Out There: Into the Queer New Yonder. Inkyard, 
2022 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781335425898 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780369718945 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
In this third and final anthology in a planned trio, seventeen short stories explore 
LGBTQIA+ identity through the lens of futuristic love, most of it set in a dying 
version of Earth. Good thing love conquers all, as things look pretty crummy 
otherwise, with the poor Earth invaded, polluted to the extremes of toxicity, or, in 
a most creative twist, suddenly bereft of all non-queer people (they disappeared in 
an instant). “Renaissance” by Emma K. Ohland is a splendid example as two girls 
who come from drastically different lives (one will someday leave the dying planet 
in a fantastic, exclusive spaceship and the other will . . . not) nevertheless find 
each other and build as tender and memorable a relationship as possible, keenly 
aware of the ticking clock. Nita Tyndall offers a true gem with “Translating for 
the Machine,” in which Eden’s nonbinary identity is an unexpectedly perfect tool 
for them to tap into and communicate with a mysterious machine that gives (and 
perhaps shapes) world-changing information. The stories are diverse and feature 
representation of an impressive range of identities in ways that are fully integrated 
into the narration and thoughtfully presented. Short story collections, especially a 
science fiction outing as well-curated and wide-ranging as this one, are a rare treat 
in teen literature, and Mitchell has ended this series with a bang.  AS
morrison, lAurie Coming Up Short. Amulet/Abrams, 2022 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781419755583 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781647003678 $15.54
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
When the Bartletts married, they named their daughter Beatrix, “she who brings 
joy,” to mark their happiness as two widowed people who had found a bright path 
forward, and Bea has mostly delivered that joy, supported by her parents’ attention 
and reassurance. Her lawyer father, however, has made a string of ill-advised and 
ultimately unethical business decisions, for which he’s lost his stature in the com-
munity and been shamed across social media. The fallout for Bea is rough: a move 
to more modest housing is inevitable; her friends are weird, embarrassed by their 
parents’ animosity toward Bea’s family but unable to do much; and her softball 
skills have totally unraveled. Worst of all, a closet full of family secrets swings open 
when Bea takes refuge with her maternal Aunt Mary, but a large dose of her aunt’s 
tactful honesty makes Bea realize she’s not personally responsible for her parents’ 
past choices, current behavior, or overall happiness. Morrison’s tale hits the ground 
running, and Bea’s emotional journey is as deftly chronicled as her time at a softball 
camp, which backgrounds the summer of her recovery. There are no villains here, 
just people of all ages who’ve made decisions they regret but are learning to dust 
themselves off and do better.  EB
June 2022 • 329
onomé, louisA Twice as Perfect. Feiwel, 2022 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250823502 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250823519 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
At home with her Nigerian immigrant family, she is Ada, a dutiful family member 
who helps her cousin prepare for her wedding and an excellent daughter filling “a 
two-person-size void” after her brother Sam abandoned the family six years ago. At 
school, where teachers could not pronounce her name properly (they consistently 
used a harsh A to begin her name even after correction), she is Sophie, a serious 
student and debate team champion with her entire future planned. Ada thinks she’s 
content in both halves of her life, until a chance encounter with her brother while he’s 
performing slam poetry; reconnecting with Sam over poetry, Ada tentatively begins 
to explore dreaming for herself instead of for her parents. Ada’s life is realistically 
full, as she juggles friends, her budding crushes in the two separate spheres of her 
life, her relationship with her brother, and her cousin’s wedding. Onomé artfully 
weaves emotionally dense commentary on straddling multiple cultural identities and 
meeting immigrant familial expectations with playful dialogue in Nigerian pidgin 
and compelling characters, making for a full, feel-good read. Recommend this to 
fans of realistic fiction and children of diaspora seeking joyful representation.  ART
phelAn, mAtt Leave It to Plum!; written and illus. by Matt Phelan. Greenwil-
low, 2022 [128p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063079168 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063079199 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Plum the peacock is content with his life at Athensville Zoo: he gets to hang out 
with Mike the alligator, chat with Kevin the giant elephant shrew, and follow 
the sacred instructions of Hampstead the head peacock regarding zoo visitors: 
“MINGLE! GUIDE! DELIGHT!” Over in the Small and Unusual Mammal Pa-
vilion, however, Itch the ningbing has had it with all the peacocks strutting around, 
mingle-guide-delighting visitors. With the help of some devious squirrels, he enacts 
a brilliantly evil plan to overthrow the birds’ reign. After framing the peafowl for 
a series of thefts, he sends the birds on the Kiddie Monorail to meet their doom, 
and it’s only Plum and his pal Jeremy, a smart but insecure cat, who can save the 
day. True to his mission, Plum does indeed delight in this beginning chapter book, 
and the straightforward, concise storyline is both accessible and goofy, with a cast of 
amusingly quirky characters and a surprising amount of emotional weight. Plum is 
all innocence and naivete, which sets him up for disappointment when he realizes 
not everyone operates out of the goodness of their heart, but, even after that reality 
check, he still wants the best for everyone—including Itch. Phelan’s characteristic 
sketchy black and white art is given more definition here, and wide-eyed, feathery 
Plum makes a visually appealing foil to angular (and angry), sharp-toothed Itch. The 
turn in Jeremy’s role from fraidy-cat to courageous hero neatly and triumphantly 
brings everything together, and this will be an instant hit with kids who like to 
root for the underdog (cat? bird?)  KQG
330 • The Bulletin
redWine, C. J. Rise of the Vicious Princess. Balzer + Bray, 2022 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062908933 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062908988 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Charis Willowthorn, crown princess of Calera, has been taught all her life that to 
rule is to be alone. “Be smarter. Strike harder. Never falter, never waver, never break” 
are the lessons she learned from her mother, the queen. However, Charis has yet to 
shoulder the full weight of ruling a kingdom until now: assassins have infiltrated 
the palace and the queen has been gravely injured. To keep their kingdom stable, 
Charis must take up the mantle of leadership, keeping her nobles in line, rooting 
out a spy, and perhaps even bringing an end to the war that has plagued her coun-
try for years. Above all, Charis must avoid the temptation to get close to her new 
bodyguard. For a story so focused on the minutia of monarchical ruling (securing 
taxes, brokering trade agreements, etc.), it is a feat that this book avoids becoming 
tedious. The narrative moves forward at a quick pace, balancing its business aspects 
with a close view of Charis’ emotional reality and her human vulnerabilities. While 
the various balls, dinners and soirees do become repetitive, each scene moves the 
plot forward, and the accompanying sumptuous descriptions of clothes and food 
are a constant delight. The conclusion follows a predictable path to set up for the 
sequel, but the story nonetheless offers a real treat to readers with an appetite for 
intense, carefully maneuvered political conversations conducted while dancing in 
gorgeous gowns.  AT
roWe, Kelis Finding Jupiter. Crown, 2022 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593429266 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593429259 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593429273 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Ray has no plan for summer hook-ups this year, much less 
romance, despite her best friend’s encouragement. Orion, meanwhile, is supposed 
to be focusing on his swimming as he prepares to head off to college, and frankly, 
he’s not too smooth with the ladies as it is. Cue adorable meet-cute at a roller rink, 
and suddenly the next few months look very different than they had thought. 
Playful flirting leads to lusty encounters, but also to profound emotional discus-
sions, especially as they open up about personal tragedies: Ray’s father was killed 
in a car crash the night she was born, and Orion lost his little sister ten years ago. 
The pair’s newly developing bond, however, is tested by Orion’s overbearing father, 
Ray’s cagey mother, and a long-held secret that, when brought to light, throws their 
lives and families into disarray. The twist isn’t particularly earth-shattering, but it 
does allow further character development, as Ray digs into why she always expects 
disappointment and Orion sorts through why he always feels like a disappointment. 
Rowe strikes the perfect romantic balance, keeping just enough dramatic realism 
to temper the idyllic sweetness of Ray and Orion’s blossoming relationship but still 
allowing their love to unfold tenderly. Orion is especially refreshing as a male lead 
with a big heart and absolutely no game, wearing his earnestness proudly even in 
the face of a father who’d prefer him to be tougher. The name drops of the Memphis 
locale and culture bring added charm, and readers will be happy to see that, despite 
both Ray’s and Orion’s best efforts, there was love in the summer air after all.  KQG
June 2022 • 331
rylAnder, Chris The Hurricanes of Weakerville. Walden Pond/HarperCollins, 
2022 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062327505 $16.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Alex Weakerman’s ancestors founded Weakerville, Iowa, but now all that’s left of 
their legacy is Mustard Park and the semi-pro Hurricanes, a team in which the 
community has pretty much lost interest. Under Grandpa Ira’s tutelage, Alex has 
grown into a middle school baseball fanatic, worthless on the field but an ace at 
record keeping and statistical analysis. When Ira dies, the team passes into the 
ownership of Ira’s brother-in-law, brash and wealthy Tex Cohaagen, who had been 
quietly keeping the Hurricanes afloat for years. More of a shock is Ira’s direction 
that Alex be installed as team manager, with the caveat that he has one season to 
make play-offs or Tex can dissolve the team and sell the property for development. 
If you think this is boilerplate middle grade wish-fulfillment sports fiction, you 
got it in one: friends support Alex, adult players reluctantly cooperate, lessons are 
learned, and the satisfying ending (after the last-minute big play by the underdog) 
is assured. The formula is skillfully executed, though, and Rylander freshens things 
up with a nicely individuated cast and bursts of hilarity whenever Tex takes the 
stage, all tall tales and jovial menace. This serves double duty: easy to enjoy under 
the summer sun, and easy to write about when book reports are due in fall.  EB
sCAnlon, liz gArton Frances in the Country; illus. by Sean Qualls. Porter/
Holiday House, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823443321 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Frances is feeling pretty hemmed in by all the rules about life in the big city. She 
wants to be good, but “it’s hard when you’re not supposed to climb or ride or race 
or shout,” and it’s discouraging when “city mamas say things like look out!/ hush…/ 
come back right this minute.” A visit with cousins in the country is just the ticket—
a place where “cats are for catching. And roads are for racing down” and “Frances 
gets to go go go.” While it’s hard to eventually leave that freedom, she’s buoyed 
by plans to invite her cousins to visit “Where city cats croon and city alleys echo 
and city streets beep and shine,” and where her own city mama’s “Come here right 
this minute!” now rings with welcome rather than discipline. Qualls’ multimedia 
illustrations work their magic not only through depictions of the brown-skinned 
cousins’ joyful activities, but also through subtle visual contrasts—the tightly 
braided and bunned hair styling of city daughter and mama alongside the looser 
curls of country cousin and aunt; the warm sunshine beaming on country days 
alongside the twilight violets of city nights coming to life. The country mouse/city 
mouse theme is a hardy perennial, and this will be the perfect pick for kids itching 
to be—just for a little while—somewhere, anywhere else.  EB
senf, lorA The Clackity. Atheneum, 2022 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781665902670 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781665902694 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-8
Evie already lost her parents, and she sure as heck isn’t going to lose her beloved 
aunt Desdemona, the town’s local expert on all things paranormal. Desdemona 
332 • The Bulletin
has disappeared into the abandoned, likely haunted, slaughterhouse at the edge of 
town, and when Evie follows her, she meets the Clackity, a terrifying creature who 
is every bit as scary as his name implies. Thus begins a horrifying adventure that 
sends Evie through a nightmarish series of houses, having made a deal that if she 
brings him the ghost of a serial killer who lurks around this otherworld then she 
can have her aunt back from him. Of course, best not to trust monsters who make 
grand promises, and Evie soon realizes it is up to her grit, cleverness, and kindness 
to pull her through. Each house is distinct in its misery and creepiness, from an 
abandoned abattoir that would be plenty haunted even if it wasn’t a gateway to an 
even worse place to a twisted replica of the house Evie shared with her parents. The 
serial killer’s jaunty whistle signals him inexorably closing in; John Jeffrey Pope has 
not lost any of his malice from when he menaced Evie’s small town a century earlier, 
and the likelihood that Evie will indeed save herself and her aunt does little to tone 
down the terror. Evie is vulnerable and scrappy, and readers will likely empathize 
with her and wonder if they, too, could have boldly prioritized fearless action over 
a fearful state of mind.  AS
sheffield, heidi WoodWArd Ice Cream Face; written and illus. by Heidi Wood-
ward Sheffield. Paulsen/Penguin, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780525518488 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780525518495 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-7 yrs
Now here’s a young man who knows his ice cream—not just its innate delicious-
ness and range of flavors, but its rituals: the frustration of waiting in line to be 
served, the melty ice cream river trickling through fingers, the shock of brain 
freeze, the horror of watching precious scoops tumble onto the sidewalk, and the 
joyful camaraderie of fellow aficionados who share their own scoops to put a smile 
back on your face. The narrator for this tasty outing is an appealing Everykid with 
a mischievous, anticipatory smile stretched across his expressive brown face, and 
his keen observations of the many ways to enjoy a cone (from dribblers to ice 
cream-bearded babies) ring true. Sheffield’s collage artwork is especially evocative 
in its consistent contrast between grainy cut paper figures and backdrops mixed 
with photographs of the ice cream itself—smooth, glossy, and technicolor-bright. 
Use this with Lisa Robinson’s The Sweetest Scoop (BCCB 5/22) and Lucky Diaz’s 
Paletero Man (BCCB 5/21) for a satisfying triple scoop of storytime goodness.  EB
smith, heAther Annie’s Cat is Sad; illus. by Karen Obuhanych. Feiwel, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250806840 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Annie comes home to her cat, Delilah, contentedly resting in a cat tree: “Are you 
okay? You look sad.” Delilah saunters away and hides under the couch, but Annie 
is determined to improve her cat’s mood with some warm milk (a “cattuccino”), 
TV, and yoga. These tactics seem to work until they don’t, as Annie warns Delilah, 
“Just when you think you’ve forgotten your bad day, you will remember it again.” 
It’s clear that Annie is the sad one here, not Delilah, but when Annie stops dis-
tracting herself and accepts her need to cry out her feelings, Delilah is there for 
her with cuddles. Obuhanych utilizes negative space impactfully, gradually pulling 
June 2022 • 333
away background details in Annie’s home to convey both her melancholic mood 
and her ownership of it. Mixed media art in paper collage, pencils, and paint gives 
each color blotchy textures, especially Annie’s vibrant, swirling orange hair that 
crosses full-page spreads. The message is transparent but effective: sometimes we 
just have to feel our feelings, even when it’s easier to project them onto someone 
else. Viewers who struggle to express their emotions in a healthy way may benefit 
from Annie’s acceptance, or at least from her reliance on a trusty feline to make 
things better.  NB
stAmper, phil Small Town Pride. HarperCollins, 2022 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063118782 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063118805 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Word travels fast in the village of Barton Springs, Ohio, so when Jake’s dad raises 
a Pride flag on the front yard flagpole as a well-intentioned but misguided show 
of support for his gay son, Jake is suddenly out to the whole town. If life were like 
Songbird Hollow, the farming sim Jake uses as an escape, his community would 
rally to show they care for him as much as he does for them. In reality, reactions 
are mixed, and Jake soon finds himself pushing for greater acceptance, leading the 
effort to hold the town’s first Pride. Stamper succeeds in evoking the best aspects 
of small-town atmosphere, conveying the excitement for local sports games and 
festivals and building the layered connections that evolve from long histories with 
the same set of people. The story is at its strongest when handling those close 
relationships—with Jake’s parents, best friend Jenna, and closeted boy-next-door 
Brett—and allows for a natural evolution of Jake’s mutual crush on Brett that re-
spects Brett’s boundaries. However, the politics of this contemporary scenario are 
watered-down, with Jake facing so little outright bigotry that it strains credulity. 
Resistance here comes primarily from Brett’s mother, the mayor, who flattens 
conflict in the name of welcoming all and winning her reelection, and allies who 
fail to act in key moments. This does allow for valid critiques of performative al-
lyship, though, with a focus on calling people in, rather than out. There’s genuine 
conviction in Jake’s longing for acceptance at home, rather than a far-flung city; 
pair this with Levithan’s Answers in the Pages (reviewed above) for a look at local 
politics and community organizing.  AMM
sumner, JAmie The Summer of June. Atheneum, 2022 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534486027 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534486041 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old June is determined that this summer will mark her transforma-
tion into someone entirely different. She will defeat her anxiety, she will connect 
with people, and she will make her mark. Alas, sheer will is generally not enough 
to change into someone else, and June soon hits a wall: she is struggling to even 
work up the nerve to go eat at her new friend’s house, let alone take on the rest of 
the world. Her therapist and mom are steady and supportive, though, helping her 
build her toolbox to handle her anxiety better and wisely acknowledging there is 
no magic cure here. Instead, the focus is on managing, just as anyone manages the 
ebbs and flows of life—June just has a lot more ebbs. Her steps toward change are 
334 • The Bulletin
small but mighty—she shaves her head with confidence as a way to break her habit 
of pulling out her own hair, she finally acknowledges her own strengths rather than 
only focusing on her limitations, and she even manages to make a short speech. 
A kind and vulnerable author’s note describes Sumner’s own anxiety and offers a 
reminder that respect, thoughtfulness, and accommodation for different experiences 
are valuable necessities in a loud, chaotic, and often mean world.  AS
sWift, indiA The Girl and the Glim; illus. by India Swift and Michael Doig. IDW, 
2022 [128p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9781684057412 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Bridgette is doing her best at her new school, but her plastered-on smile is becom-
ing more and more strained as the days goes on and she is bullied mercilessly. Then 
life takes a strange turn when she encounters a nightmarish beast, and she can now 
see otherwise invisible alien monsters, including a glimmering bit of fluff she dubs 
Glim. Glim turns out to be quite the staunch ally in Bridgette’s quest to trap the 
other, more sinister members of its kind. It is a relief that Bridgette finds a friend, 
even if it is a puffball, and something to keep her busy while she adjusts to a new 
place; there are hints that a human or two may have noticed her (in a good way) as 
well. The high-volume color palette shouts excitement and adventure, with neon 
highlights underscoring an already bright series of pinks and blues. The bullying 
Bridgette endures is painfully ordinary, so the focus on the monsters and their 
origin story offers readers a chance to leave that realism behind and join Bridgette’s 
adventurous rampage through town in pursuit of monsters more menacing but 
perhaps more manageable than school dynamics.  AS
Weber, Audrey helen The Wind & the Clover; written and illus. by Audrey 
Helen Weber. Little, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316459914 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
In a verdant clover field, ground bees scurry out of their burrowed homes to enjoy 
playful, sunlit days and return to safety for restful windy nights. One morning a 
ground bee wakes up and flies on a cardinal wind to somewhere new. The next 
morning, another bee; the following day, another. One bee remains and wakes to 
find the familiar clover field turned wondrous, full of bits of vegetation and wildlife 
brought on the wind from the other bees’ travels. The gouache painting style, with 
its varying opacity and richness of colors, enhances the whimsical mood of the story. 
Most pages are visually packed without overwhelming the senses, and portrayals 
of different ecosystems invite children to spot and name various critters and flow-
ers populating the new homes for the ground bees. Short sentences on each page, 
plenty of repetition, and an engaging author’s note call readers to notice the little 
things around them, making this a great fit for storytime.  ART
West, KAsie Places We’ve Never Been. Delacorte, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593176306 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593176320 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 6-12
Growing up, Norah and Skyler were the best of friends—and so were their moth-
ers—until Skyler’s family moved to Ohio four years ago, leaving devastated Norah 
June 2022 • 335
behind. Now it’s the summer before their senior year, and their moms’ long-talked-
about-but-never-realized family RV trip is suddenly happening. Norah is excited 
for the chance to reconnect with Skyler, but he’s apparently not as eager to rekindle 
their friendship. Confused and rejected, Norah focuses instead on her upcoming 
college entrance interview and the secrets her mom and brother both seem to be 
keeping from her. Through Death Valley saunas and river tubing mishaps, however, 
Norah finds she can’t quite give up on the friendship she once treasured so much. 
The tension—both platonic and romantic—between Norah and Skyler will quickly 
have readers invested in seeing its resolution. Norah is an appealing narrator, whose 
struggles to find balance between her true self and the curated version she shows oth-
ers are a timeless aspect of growing up. West uses flashbacks sparingly but skillfully, 
showing events in Norah and Skyler’s past to connect readers to Norah’s emotions 
in the present. The dialogue is both funny and realistic (especially in family interac-
tions), helping to drive the brisk pace while also allowing for poignant and sweet 
moments. This is a perfect romance for reading on a road trip or at the beach.  AT
White, Kiersten Wretched Waterpark. Delacorte, 2022 [256p] (Sinister 
Summer)
Library ed. ISBN 9780593379059 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593379042 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593379066 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-8
The Sinister-Winterbottom children can’t recall how or why they landed in the care 
of their Aunt Saffronia (decidedly of the Sinister side of the family) for the whole 
summer, but at least they get to spend their days at the Fathoms of Fun waterpark. 
Twelve-year-old Theo (brave, a fan of churros), her twin brother Alexander (cau-
tious, a fan of proper food safety protocols), and their older sister Wil (a fan of her 
phone, Rodrigo), are surprised to find that the waterpark is significantly, ahem, 
gloomier than normal, almost as if it were from a different era. The guests use black 
lace parasols instead of sunscreen; the rafts are shaped as coffins; and the cabana 
resembles a mausoleum. After they learn of the disappearance of the waterpark 
owner’s husband in the treacherous wave pool, Wil and her new waterpark staff 
friends also vanish, and Theo and Alexander must figure out what’s going on under 
the surface. Witty prose, droll humor, literary allusions, and unexpected details 
make this a delightfully middle grade Gothic read. The omniscient narration 
cleverly builds suspense, punctuating each chapter with hints of a less-than-cheery 
future for the children, and while the mechanisms of the plot are predictable, the 
characters, especially Theo and Alexander, are lovable and fully fleshed-out. Only 
the most bookish kids will pick up on some of the references to Gothic literature, 
but White deftly delineates the dark, nineteenth-century style setting in the mind 
of the reader. Several mysteries remain, so there’s plenty of room for more Gothic 
fun in the upcoming Sinister Summer series titles.  KF
Wolo, mAmle The Kaya Girl. Little, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780316703932 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780316703925 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
With her doctor father at work and her mother receiving prenatal care in London, 
Abena is spending the summer with Auntie to help out at her fabric store in the 
massive Makola Market in Ghana. The experience certainly won’t match the travels 
336 • The Bulletin
of her classmates at her posh school, but she takes the humbler surroundings with 
good grace and even looks forward to submitting a photo illustrated essay on market 
life for a junior journalism contest. She gets not only a new angle on the market, 
but on the diversity of Ghanaian culture when she forms a fast friendship with 
Faiza, a Muslim kayayoo—one of the many young girls who earn their money as 
porters, carrying customer purchases in large metal pans balanced atop their heads. 
Abena and Faiza initially communicate in pidgin dialect, gestures, and intuitive 
word exchanges, and they bond easily over music, crushes, favorite foods, bossy 
Aunties, and genuine curiosity about the other’s life. However, narrator Abena 
senses from her Auntie’s reaction to this unusual friendship that Northerners like 
Faiza are held in contempt by many in Accra, and she also suspects that her own 
family might disapprove. When Faiza is framed for a theft and forced to move on 
to a different market, a distraught Abena confides her sorrow to her father, who 
opens her eyes to family backstories that bridge regional differences—and lay the 
groundwork for a joyful reunion between the two friends nearly fifteen years later. 
Originally published in Ghana, the book explores the mutual bias and mistrust 
between Ghanaian regions, and the role colonial land grabs and boundaries play in 
the deep-rooted tensions. Readers may sense that Abena and Faiza’s happy ending 
is optimistically orchestrated, but they will also recognize that moving beyond bias 
can be an act of individual courage and choice.  EB
Wong-KAlu, hinAleimoAnA Kapaemahu; by Hinaleimoana Wong-Kalu, Dean 
Hamer and Joe Wilson; illus. by Daniel Sousa. Kokila/Penguin, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593530061 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593530238 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 5-9 yrs
Drawn from script and artwork of the 2020 animated short by the same name, 
this dual text retelling of a traditional tale explains the origins of a group of sacred 
stones buried beneath the tourist development of Waikiki. Centuries ago, four 
healers arrived from Tahiti. “They were not male. They were not female. They were 
mahu—a mixture of both in mind, heart, and spirit.” Their kindness and skill made 
them beloved by the people of Waikiki, and in gratitude the islanders erected four 
stone monuments, into which the healers transferred their powers and their mahu 
spirit. The mahu disappeared, but the stones remained sacred until missionaries, 
colonists, and tourists altered indigenous folkways and landscape, and the stones 
passed into legend. When they were rediscovered at the site of a bowling alley 
demolition, much of their story was recovered from oral and written sources. 
While the stones themselves were moved to a protected site, their mahu spiritual 
significance was suppressed, and visitors eager to learn their destination’s indigenous 
history are presented an edited version. Sousa’s illustrations portray the healers as 
chiseled, monumental forms reminiscent of the stones that house their spirits; the 
inky shadows and rich red-gold light of the ancient tale contrasts dramatically with 
the sand-reflected brightness of modern Waikiki. In thoughtful, informative end 
notes, Wong-Kalu comments on their mahu identity, their choice of Olelo Niihau 
for the bilingual text, and the source material for the film and book.  EB
June 2022 • 337
WortChe, Allison Ruby and the Itsy-Bitsy Icky Bug; illus. by Sally Walker. Knopf, 
2022 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593174180 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593174173 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593174197 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 5-7 yrs.
It’s a perfect sunny Saturday morning, but as soon as Ruby opens her curtains, the 
day is ruined by a big, icky bug on her window screen. To be clear, Ruby loves all 
animals furry and scaled; bioluminescent sea creatures are the coolest. She’s going 
to be a marine biologist or a paleontologist (and a rock star), but “entomologist” 
is a definite no, because bugs? Bugs are gross. She wants that bug gone, so she takes 
matters into her own hands. A spray of water doesn’t work, and neither does blow-
ing hard at it through the screen. The bug stays put when Ruby screams as loud as 
she can, and she ends up with a time-out. In her room. With the bug. But maybe 
. . . the bug isn’t so bad. His little antennae are kind of cute, and it’s not so lonely 
being in time out with the bug to keep her company. Even after time-out is over, 
Ruby goes back to check on him, and at bedtime she makes an exciting discovery: 
Mr. Yuck-Bug is bioluminescent, just like her favorite fish! Ruby is a delightfully 
expressive protagonist, with rosy, light brown cheeks and a wide-eyed, gap-toothed 
look of horror when she encounters her insect visitor. Walker’s whimsical artwork—
a combination of printmaking, ink, and pencil, layered and colored digitally in 
a warm, earthy palette—provides an energetic depiction of Ruby’s thoughts and 
imaginings, as vignettes and speech bubbles are interspersed with full-bleed pages 
and spreads as Ruby gets to know her bug friend. Cool tones take over in the closing 
scenes, zooming out to a nighttime landscape dotted with fireflies. Bring this book 
for science-themed story time, a warm-up before a nature program, or a read-aloud 
with a bug-ambivalent kid.  SS
June 2022 • 339
Adoption—fiction: Culley
ADVENTURE: Swift
Aliens—fiction: Swift
Animals—stories: Aronson
Anxiety—fiction: Sumner
Anxiety—stories: Ludwig
Aquariums—stories: Ludwig
Arab American people—fiction:  
McCarthy
Art and artists—fiction: McCoola
Baseball—fiction: Rylander
Bees—stories: Weber
Black people—fiction: Goodman; 
Onomé; Rowe; Wolo
Black people—stories: Ford; Scanlon
Butterflies—stories: Cooper
California—fiction: June
Camouflage—stories: Meddour
Canada—fiction: Ferguson
Castles—fiction: deVos
Cats—stories: Hemingway; Smith
Censorship—fiction: Levithan
Chicago—fiction: Goodman
Cities—stories: Ford; Hemingway; 
Scanlon
Communication—stories: Ludwig
Competitions—fiction: Menard
Current events: Levithan
Death—fiction: Dutton
Dogs—stories: Carzoo; McGrath
Dragons—fiction: Cohen
Emotions—stories: Sheffield; Smith
Ethics and values: Morrison
Fairies—fiction: Adam
Families—fiction: Ferguson; McCall; 
Morrison
FANTASY: Adam; Beaty; Cohen; 
Lloyd-Jones; Menard; Redwine
Fear—stories: Bahrampour; Wortche
Field trips—stories: Ludwig
Films and filmmaking—fiction: deVos
Fire hydrants—stories: Carzoo
Firefighters—stories: Carzoo
FOLKLIKE TALES: Adam
Food and eating—stories: Sheffield
Forests—stories: Meddour
Friends—fiction: McCoola; Sumner; 
West; Wolo
Gardens and gardening—fiction: 
Sumner
Gardens and gardening—stories: Ford
Gay people—fiction: Kutub; Levithan; 
Stamper
Geckoes—stories: Meddour
Gender: Wong-Kalu
Ghana—fiction: Wolo
Ghanaian people—fiction: Wolo
Ghosts—fiction: Dunbar; Senf
Grandfathers—fiction: Cohen;  
Rylander
GRAPHIC NOVELS: Arroyo;  
Dutton; McCoola; Swift
Grief—fiction: Dunbar; Dutton; 
Goodman; Rowe
Hawaii: Wong-Kalu
Heists—fiction: Lloyd-Jones
History, world: Cohen
Homelessness—stories: Hemingway
HORROR: Albert; deVos; Senf
HUMOR: Aronson; Bahrampour; 
Carzoo; Lacey; McGrath;  
Meddour; Phelan; Wortche
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
340 • The Bulletin
Ice cream—stories: Sheffield
Indian Americans—fiction: Kutub
Indigenous people—fiction: Ferguson
Insects—stories: Wortche
Japanese people—fiction: Cohen
Latinx people—fiction: McCall
LEGENDS: Wong-Kalu
LGBTQIA people—fiction: Arroyo; 
Dunbar; Ferguson; June; Kutub; 
Levithan; McCarthy; McCoola; 
Menard; Mitchell; Stamper
Libraries—fiction: Sumner
Lost and found—stories: McGrath
Magic—fiction: Albert; Beaty;  
Lloyd-Jones
Maine—fiction: Arroyo
Mathematics: Ford
Mediums—fiction: Dunbar
Memories—fiction: McCall
Memphis—fiction: Rowe
Mental illness—fiction: Beaty
Mermaids—fiction: June
Métis people—fiction: Ferguson
Missing persons—fiction: Adam; 
Albert
Monsters—stories: Bahrampour
Mothers—fiction: Albert; Culley
Murder—fiction: Beaty
Muslims—fiction: Kutub
MYSTERIES: Beaty; White
Mythology, Greek: Menard
Native Hawaiians: Wong-Kalu
Nature study: Aronson; Weber
Nigerian people—fiction: Onomé
Ohio—fiction: McCarthy; Stamper
Orphans—fiction: Senf
Peacocks—fiction: Phelan
Pets—stories: Lacey
Pigeons—stories: Hemingway
Plants—stories: Weber
Play—stories: Scanlon
Poets and poetry—fiction: Onomé
Police violence—fiction: Goodman
Politics—fiction: Redwine; Stamper
Poop—stories: Aronson
Potatoes—stories: Lacey
Princes—fiction: Lloyd-Jones
Reading, beginning: Phelan
Refugees—stories: Cooper
ROMANCE: June; Rowe; West
Romance—fiction: Arroyo; Kutub; 
Redwine
Royalty—fiction: Redwine
Rules—stories: Scanlon
Sadness—stories: Smith
Schools—fiction: Levithan; Onomé; 
Stamper; Swift
Schools—stories: Ludwig
Science: Wortche
SCIENCE FICTION: Mitchell
Secrets—fiction: McCall; Rowe
Serial killers—fiction: Senf
SHORT STORIES: Mitchell
Siblings—fiction: Onomé; White
Siblings—stories: Cooper
Sisters—fiction: Culley; Dutton; 
Goodman
Social classes—fiction: Wolo
Softball—fiction: Morrison
Sports—fiction: Morrison; Rylander
Storytime: Bahrampour; Sheffield; 
Weber
Summer—fiction: West
Supernatural beings—fiction: Arroyo
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:  
Dunbar; Dutton
Swimming—fiction: McCarthy; 
White
Trans people—fiction: McCarthy
Vacations—fiction: West; White
VERSE NOVELS: Culley
Voyages and travel—fiction: Kutub
Voyages and travel—stories:  
Bahrampour
Wishes—fiction: Kutub
Zoos—fiction: Phelan
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
TO ORDER
CALL: 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987   FAX: 410.516.3866
E-mail: jrnlcirc@jh.edu 
or visit us online at
Kate Quealy-Gainer / Editor 
University of illinois at Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s 
Books provides concise summaries and 
critical evaluations of current children’s 
books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-
evolving children’s literature field. Reviews 
give an in-depth look at a selected book’s 
content, reading level, strengths and 
weaknesses, and quality of the format, as 
well as suggestions for curricular use.
Published 11 times per year monthly except 
August. 
Volume 75 (2022). 
P-ISSN: 0008-9036; E-ISSN: 1558-6766.
Annual Individual 
Subscriptions
$55.00 (print); 
$65.00 (online)
Annual Institutional 
Subscriptions
$125.00 (print);
$140.00 (online); 
$175.00 (print & online)
International postage fees apply.
FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH
The BulleTin of The CenTer
for Children’s Books
PUBLISHING À LA CARTE. 
GUMPTION À L A MODE.
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
