I LLINOI 
0
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
;li
r 
c: 
.rx
,~.~?;rt 
~P;·
: 1 
; ·:::
; ·1, 
i·
; 
*
"' 
"--I
A new series celebrating the
accomplishments of
AFRICAN-AMERICAN ARTISTS
AND ARTISANS
By Mary E. Lyons
Illustrated with full-color and black-and-white photographs
"A significant addition to the growng body of
biographies of African-Amercans."-Horn Book
IP'W'UBg',UW 
U~*^t 
£nF 
Uf'( 
S 
-V Wft
The Story Quilts of
Harriet Powers
"Harriet Powers learned quilting in
her southern slave community....
She sewed two great story quilts
that hang today in the Smithsonian
and the Museum of Fine Arts,
Boston.... What grabs you here is the
social history...how slaves forbidden
to read and write told stories...and
how Powers sewed her stories and
their harmonies into her work. The
quilts...are shown in glowing color
and detail, and Lyons is 
is lyrical in
describing their artistry." -Booklist
STARTING HOME
The Story of Horace Pippin,
Painter
"Horace Pippin was a self-taught
painter whose work reflects his per-
sonal story. Haunted by his experi-
ence as a soldier in World War 1, he
painted scenes from the trenches
years after he returned.. and Lyons
shows that his lonely feelings were
also expressed in pictures set close to
home. The paintings are haunting,
andA I .rvns 
arva 
~lrut 
t,em with
warm appreciation." -Booklist
(0 
An ALA Notable Book
CHARLES S 
NER'S SONS 
Each: $15.95 SBE/Ages 8-11
An imprint of the 
Starting Home: 0-684-19534-8
Macmillan Children's Book Group 
Stitching Stars: 0-684-19576-3
866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022 
SBE indicate a rinfrced hwdover edion.
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
April 1994
Vol. 47 No. 8
A LOOK INSIDE
247 THE BIG PICTURE
Making Friends with Frankenstein: A Book ofMonstrous Poems and
Pictures written and illustrated by Colin McNaughton
248 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
251 
* Am I Blue?: Coming Outfrom the Silence compiled by Marion Dane
Bauer
257 * Tukama Tootles the Flute adapted by Phillis Gershator; illus. by Synthia
Saint James
259 * Time for Andrew written by Mary Downing Hahn
265 * The Cat, the Crow, and the Banyan Tree written by Penelope Lively; illus.
by Terry Milne
272 * Ever After by Rachel Vail
274 CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 1994
275 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Carol Fox, Reviewer (CF)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1994 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Colin McNaughton, from Making Friends with Frankenstein ©1994 and used
by permission of Candlewick Press.
APRIL 1994 
* 247
THE BIG PICTURE
Making Friends with Frankenstein: A Book of
Monstrous Poems and Pictures
written and illustrated by Colin McNaughton
Contemporary poetry for children is fortunate in its many voices: the lyricism of
Myra Cohn Livingston and Constance Levy, the zest ofJack Prelutsky and Dennis
Lee, the rhythmic snap of J. Patrick Lewis. That's just a few among the many-
but is there any room left for the enthusiastically disgusting?
Cockroach sandwich
For my lunch,
Hate the taste
But love the crunch!
"Cockroach Sandwich," the opening quatrain of McNaughton's new collection,
certainly sets the tone, and visually, the portrait of the grizzled old man with cock-
roaches running out of his mouth adds a certain statement of its own.
Cheerfully gross and often witty, the poems in Making Friends with Fran-
kenstein often sound a folkloric ring akin to those playground and afterschool
rhymes kids make up for themselves. Three notable recent books have collected
those: the Opies' I Saw Esau (BCCB 5/92), Alvin Schwartz's And the Green Grass
Grows All Round (5/92) and David Booth's Doctor Knickerbocker (9/93). While
the rhymes are authentic, the presentations are institutionalized. Despite some
naughty bits in Maurice Sendak's illustrations for I Saw Esau, the book has a slyly
sedate look to it; both The Green Grass and Doctor Knickerbockerwould be at home
in the story hour hands of a teacher or librarian. Making Friends with Franken-
stein, though not from the oral tradition and written by a single poet, keeps alive
the rude delight children often bring to language, whether in playground insults
("Airhead, doughbrain, pizza face,/ Reject from the human race"-from "Another
Poem to Send to Your Worst Enemy"), stupid puns ("Sons and daughters,/ Neph-
ews and nieces,/ The monster is dead-/May he rest in pieces"-"Frankenstein's
Monster Is Finally Dead!") or gross-out noises ("Slobber, chomp, slurp, gulp!
BLEARRGGHHOOOWOURGHH!!!"-"A Pound of Gummy Babies").
The illustration for the last shows a greedy pig-child vomiting gummy
bits and a barrage of yellow mucus; not your thing or my thing, certainly, but kids
will, all right, eat it up (as they will the poem about the bogeyman, who "gets right
up my nose"). Unlike many children's books which pander to juvenile tastes, all
the while barely concealing their adult authority, this one feels unmediated and
248 
* THE BULLETIN
unrepentant, with the last poem being a haiku-short "Farewell to Dracula": "So
long,/ Sucker!" The book isn't afraid of anything and, along with its ego-puffing
putdowns, offers kids their own chants to be brave, particularly spells against bul-
lies. "Yah, Boo, Hiss," pictured on this month's Bulletin cover, finds for kids a
friend ("Yah, boo, hiss/ To all of you!/ My best friend/ Is nine foot two!") and
throughout, various cyclopses, the Frankenstein monster, Quasimodo, and aliens
from space face defeat. Strong measures require strong words, and McNaughton
doesn't hesitate to say them.
But what do kids get here that they won't get on the playground? Pic-
tures, for one thing, large-scaled, literal-minded, and highly funny pen-and water-
color portraits that accompany the burlesque with competitive vigor and that have
plenty of shut-the-book-here-comes-teacher vulgarity. There are also plenty of
readaloud possibilities-for them, not you. Best of all is the generous sense of
personality that bounces through the book. While not all of the poems quite
succeed (although McNaughton's "The Forth Worst Pome Wot I Ever Ritted" is
actually a deconstructionist's masterpiece), taken together they have a rounded
joviality that shows how a single sense of humor can wander down many paths.
Kids will enjoy the stroll. So will you.
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ACKERMAN, KAREN 
The Night Crossing; illus. by Elizabeth Sayles. 
Knopf,
1994 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-679-83169-X 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
"We must leave Austria now, before it is too late," Clara hears her father whisper
one night in 1938, and shortly thereafter he sells all their valuables except a pair of
antique family candlesticks, which Mama sews into Clara's older sister Marta's
petticoat. All Clara takes are some hair ribbons, a small mirror, the two dolls her
grandmother carried in flight from a Russian pogrom, and the memory of her best
friend screaming at her with a crowd of other children in the street: Juden, Juden.
Walking by night from Innsbruck to the Swiss border entails several close calls,
but the most dangerous moment comes with the crossing itself, when Clara sug-
gests hiding the clanking silver candlesticks inside her old dolls and then smoothly
convinces the Nazi borderguard to believe their false papers: she claims that Mama
made her leave her good dolls at home in Switzerland, to which the family pre-
tends to be returning after a visit with Austrian relatives. An epilogue, which
seems oddly out of joint in extending a piece of fiction, describes how the family
eventually settle in England and learn that their relatives have disappeared in the
Holocaust. The story seems self-consciously tailored to a young audience, with
telescoped action, role-defined characters, and restricted background. It is never-
APRIL 1994 
* 249
theless realistically child-centered, and the selective scope allows intense focus, within
circumscribed limits, for those who have moved beyond picture book accounts
such as Shulamith Levey Oppenheim's The Lily Cupboard(BCCB 3/92) but aren't
ready for the shocking facts of Isabella Leitner's The Big Lie (BCCB 1/93). Re-
viewed from an unillustrated galley. BH
ADA, ALMA FLOR 
Dear Peter Rabbit; illus. by Leslie Tryon. 
Atheneum,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31850-2 
$14.95
Spanish ed. Querido Pedrin ISBN 0-689-31915-0 
$14.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
What's going on here with all this clever deconstructing of favorite fairy tales? The
Ahlbergs (with The Jolly Postman and Ten in a Bed), Scieszka and Smith (The True
Story of the Three Little Pigs and The Stinky Cheese Man), Trivizas and Oxenbury
(The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig) and many others are taking a new
look at old tales, shifting allegiances, subverting endings, and introducing the most
unlikely characters to each other. Like The Jolly Postman, Dear Peter Rabbit ex-
changes letters, here between Pig One and Peter Rabbit, as well as between
Goldilocks (McGregor) and Baby Bear; a closing party brings everybody together,
as well as occasioning a letter from Little Red Riding Hood: "Dear Grandma...
Goldilocks has very interesting friends." Ada's book is as clever as most in the
genre, and kids will enjoy putting together the narrative pieces from the various
stories. Leslie Tryon's observant and fully-packed line-and-watercolor paintings
have a romantic tone that softens the edges of the gimmick. John Barth has called
parody "the literature of exhaustion," and this particular trend in children's books
will probably wear itself out fairly quickly. So-where do we go from here? RS
ANDERSON, JANET S. 
The Key into Winter; illus. by David Soman. 
Whitman,
1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-4170-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A story within a story with mythic overtones, this opens on a cozy scene of Clara in
her mama's lap with Grandmother nearby. These three belong to a line of women
who control the keys to each season, and Mama recalls trying, as a child, to stop
time by throwing the key to winter into the burning wood stove so that her own
aged grandmother would not die. Christmas does not come, the snows do not fall,
and the child (Mama) realizes that there will never be a chance for her grandmother's
"one more spring." It's not till her mother helps her retrieve the crystal key from
the flames, where it glows with white heat, that the women turn the key and re-
store nature to its cycles. The watercolor paintings generate a warm radiance in
firelit scenes, contrasted energetically with icy blue spreads. The characters are
African American, never remarked on in the text but expressively portrayed in the
art. Text and pictures together exert an unexpected and slightly mysterious power;
share this one alongside Miska Miles' Annie and the Old One (BCCB 12/71). BH
ARCHBOLD, RICK 
Deep-Sea Explorer: The Story ofRobert Ballard, Discoverer ofthe
Titanic. 
Scholastic, 1994 
14 4 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-47232-1 
$13.95 
R Gr. 5-7
Probably the most dramatic underwater images of the last ten years come not from
Hollywood sci-fi special effects but from Robert Ballard's videotaped encounter
250 
* THE BULLETIN
with the Titanic's long-submerged hulk on the ocean floor. Archbold, who col-
laborated with Ballard on a previous children's book (Exploring the Bismarck),
chronicles the oceanographer's boyhood in California, his work for the Navy, his
attachment to the group that introduced the extensive use of the Alvin submersible
for undersea study, and his landmark discoveries via submersible and remote cam-
era. The author tends to list facts rather than convey Ballard's personal life (we
don't really need the name of his high school girlfriend, and what ever happens to
his beloved sister?), but the treatment of his marine work is clear and exciting as it
details life-threatening underwater snags, knotty technological problems, and sus-
penseful hunts for shipwrecks. Chock-full of black-and-white photographs, this
could be an interesting partner to Macaulay's Ship (BCCB 11/93), and it won't
hurt the book's popularity that the hero is adventurous and photogenic (as well,
apparently, as being the model for the hero of the TV series Seaquest DSV). There
are no notes, but a bibliography (which oddly does not include Ballard's adult
book on his discovery), an index, and a glossary are included. DS
AUCH, MARY JANE 
The Latchkey Dog; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith. 
Little,
1994 
120p
ISBN 0-316-05916-1 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Eight-year-old Sam is determined to keep his dog in spite of a neighbor's angry
objection that Amber barks all day long. Since his parents' divorce, Mom has had
to go back to work-and Amber's not the only one who misses the way things used
to be. It sounds like a serious situation, but it takes on sit-com proportions as Sam
makes various agonizingly impossible attempts to give Amber to the neighbor's
Alzheimer-afflicted husband, to quiet Amber with the company of a cat, and to
reprogram Amber to sleep during the day and stay up all night. Something finally
works out, a believable combination of the predictable and the unexpected, both
of which involve lots of work and even a little sacrifice on the part of Sam. Amber
becomes a children's and senior citizens' day-care companion part of the time (Sam
has to be there to oversee her instead of going to the Y program), Mom arranges to
work at home more, and Sam's best friend's father gets over his dog phobia enough
to take on Amber the rest of the time. Illustrated with casual, squiggly-lined, pen-
and-ink drawings, Auch's text maintains a natural simplicity of style. What could
have been simply formulaic is instead rendered funny by the quick dialogue and
quirky characters, not the least of whom is Amber, who can never catch a frisbee
but manages to snatch a frozen steak midair. Ribsy fans will eat this one up. BH
BAKER, BARBARA 
Staying with Grandmother; illus. by Judith Byron
Schachner. 
Dutton, 1994 
4 8p
ISBN 0-525-44603-6 
$12.99 
Ad 
Gr. K-2
Clair is immediately homesick when her parents drop her off for a visit (length of
time unspecified) with Grandmother. After dinner, Grandmother takes Clair to
visit a special friend of hers, who turns out to be a little girl who invites Clair to
play the next day. Crisis resolved. Both story and tone in this beginning-to-read
book are static ("We have macaroni and cheese. It is good. But I like the way my
mother makes it better. She puts in more cheese"), and doleful little Clair's prob-
lem is going to seem babyish to kids learning to read on their own. The book
might have been more successfully conceptualized as a picture book, and Schachner's
line-and-watercolor illustrations have a sweet, cozy appeal that would be just right
for a bedtime story. RS
APRIL 1994 
* 251
BAT-AMI, MIRIAM 
When the Frost Is Gone; illus. by Marcy Dunn
Ramsey. 
Macmillan, 1994 
[6 4 p]
ISBN 0-02-708497-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
"I must have been twelve years old for a hundred thousand years. Waiting."
Natalie's last summer before adolescence is a time of trials, including the sporadic
reappearance of her drug-addicted mother and the departure of Natalie's best friend
Tasha after Tasha's house burns down. The theme of friendship is the best fo-
cused in this sparsely developed novel, which features many flashes of observant
writing, but just as often relies on elliptical references or even just ellipses to fill in
gaps or make transitions: "I didn't want her looking down at me-it felt ... I
can't explain it." Yet there is more explanation than action here and not enough
sustained scene-building to anchor the protagonist's intense emotions. The scenes
that are realized in detail work beautifully: a neighborhood porch gathering, for
instance, when Tasha's grandmother announces she has just paid off her mort-
gage, is very moving; the struggle between Natalie and her mother over eating
scrambled eggs for breakfast conveys real tension; and the Italian stonemason next
door to Natalie invariably effects a strong presence. Other elements, such as a
dog's killing its puppies, appear and disappear as free-floating symbols without
being well-integrated into the world of the novel. Although the book tries to do
too much in too little space, especially in dealing with the main character's com-
plex family situation, kids will get involved in the relationship between troubled
Natalie and her confident African-American friend Tasha. Reviewed from an
unillustrated galley. BH
BAUER, MARION DANE, comp. 
Am I Blue?: Coming Out from the Silence.
HarperCollins, 1994 
[224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024254-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024253-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 8-12
The presence of a pink triangle in the otherwise unrevealing cover art will probably
clue gay and lesbian teens into the fact that this is an anthology about them; straight
readers might be pulled in by the presence of several popular writers, among them
Francesca Lia Block, William Sleator, and Jane Yolen. All but a couple of the
sixteen stories (all newly written for the collection) feature gay or lesbian teen
protagonists whose discovery, confirmation, or public admission of their homo-
sexuality provides the heart of the fiction; the exceptions, such as Lois Lowry's
"Holding," show teens in relation to gay adults in their lives. A few of the stories
are pretentious, and others are in the breezy-to-read style popularized by Don
Gallo's various YA collections (Sixteen, etc.), but the best are focused, intense, and
even sexy, as in editor Bauer's "Dancing Backward," about two girls who discover
sexual love in a boarding school, and James Giblin's "Three Mondays in July," in
which a boy is drawn to a kind-and naked-stranger on a beach. In these two
stories, as well as several of the others, there is a welcome rejection of problem-
novel theatrics and prescriptions, and the collection as a whole rejects the stereo-
type that being gay is something one "decides" rather than something one (and
others) learns to accept. Brief-and considering the book's subtitle, Coming Out
from the Silence, generally reticent-autobiographical essays follow each story. RS
252 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BERMAN, Avis 
JamesMcNeill Whistler. Abrams, 1993 
92p 
illus. with pho-
tographs 
(First Impressions)
ISBN 0-8109-3968-1 
$19.95 
R Gr. 7-12
GREENFELD, HOWARD 
Paul Gauguin. Abrams, 1993 
92p 
illus. with photo-
graphs 
(First Impressions)
ISBN 0-8109-3376-4 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Whistler follows the life of the tempestuous and witty Mr. Whistler from his peri-
patetic childhood through his artistic career and multitudinous feuds. Gauguin
examines the iconoclastic artist's search for tropical paradise and struggle for artis-
tic recognition. Although inexplicably lacking source notes, both books are filled
with attractive black-and-white and color reproductions including an extended
fold-out page particularly successful in showing oversized works. Although com-
petent and detailed, the text in Gauguin is flat and occasionally awkward, and the
book a report rather than an examination of a life; the black-bordered format is
somewhat constrictive, and some textual inconsistencies (the use of Symbolism and
Syncretism, for example) seem to have slipped by the editor as well. Berman's text
for Whistler, however, is chatty and readable, fleshing out the character of Whistler
as well as describing in clear and concise terms his techniques and philosophies-
readers familiar only with his ubiquitous mother ("Arrangement in Grey and Black")
will enjoy their encounter with a magnetic man and some of his less famous but
still significant work. Both books are well-illustrated accounts of important fig-
ures in art history, and they'll be useful for their substantive attention to signifi-
cant individuals. DS
BIERHORST, JOHN 
The Way of the Earth: Native America and the
Environment. Morrow, 1994 
[336p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-688-11560-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9 up
Even more far-reaching than Bierhorst's mythologies of South America (BCCB 6/
88) and North America, this explores the environmental attitudes and practices of
Native Americans on both continents. The first section discusses the personaliz-
ing of natural forces and creatures, the second explains attributions of human kin-
ship with nature, the third deals with restraint in consuming natural products, the
fourth examines death as a balance of natural cycles, and the last considers renewal
in the face of destruction. Eschewing adulatory, sentimental cliches of the noble
savage, Bierhorst emphasizes the complex variations among myriad Indian peoples,
citing elements of myth and ritual to illustrate the cultural concerns, social motiva-
tions, and physical or geographical elements shaping their relationships with the
earth they loved, feared, and most of all, respected. "We Indians have been put
here [to be] like the wilds and we cooperate with them," Black Elk is quoted. The
questions of how and why that cooperation works requires a wide-ranging, de-
tailed analysis. Bierhorst's arguments are subtle, gathering force through a gradual
accumulation of examples that will daunt most young readers but reward those
who become involved in his anthropologically meticulous study. A section of
notes includes citations to all sources, and an extensive bibliography will lead stu-
dents to further reading. The format is varied with depictions of Indian art and
artifacts, while parables from different folkloric traditions are set off from the text.
A synthesis of rare integrity, this will prove valuable for research, reference, or
informational browsing. BH
APRIL 1994 
* 
253
BOELTS, MARIBETH 
Dry Days, Wet Nights; illus. by Kathy Parkinson. 
Whitman,
1994 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-8075-1723-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
Little Bunny has hopefully stopped wearing his diapers at night, but he always
seems to wake up wet, in need of a change of both sheets and pajamas. His easygo-
ing parents tell him not to worry, with Papa offering the information that he, too,
wet the bed when he was Little Bunny's age, and Mama saying she doesn't think
he needs to go back into diapers: "We don't mind washing your sheets in the
morning if you don't mind changing your pajamas in the middle of the night."
Both assure him that when his body is ready to stay dry, it will, and when a dry
night finally comes, Little Bunny rejoices: "I'm never going to wet the bed again!"
"Let's take one day at a time," responds Mama, and then the family goes out for a
celebratory treat. Bibliotherapy to be sure, but the lack of a story is compensated
for by the cozy, reassuring tone of the text and the gentle and well-drawn line-and-
watercolor pictures. There's a little too much text-kids who can't make it through
the night might not make it through the book-and the structure of the book is
static, but its repetitiveness may well serve as a mantra for kids, soothing them
until they, too, can get it right. RS
BRANDENBURG, JIM 
Sand and Fog: Adventures in Southern Africa; written and
illus. with photographs by Jim Brandenburg. 
Walker, 1994 
[4 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8233-7 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8232-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Brandenburg went to Namibia on assignment from National Geographic to cover
the war, here summarily dispatched: "After fulfilling my official obligations to
provide images of war and of the racial conflicts involved, I turned, as quickly as
possible, to the region itself." While the pictures of people tend to exoticize their
subjects, he's got an eye for beauty, all right, capturing the abstract patterns in the
fog-shrouded coastline and in the wind-etched patterns on the desert; the pictures
of animals are attentive, bold and often uncannily caught, as in a stunningly grace-
ful portrait of a silvery flamingo. The text is casual and engaging but rambling,
and perhaps too much about Brandenburg himself and not enough about his os-
tensible subject. The book would have benefited from the same kind of strong
focus the author found in the wolves of the Arctic (To the Top of the World, BCCB
11/93); nevertheless, his glorious pictures of animals and the desert landscape have
plenty of allure. RS
BUNTING, EVE 
Sunshine Home; illus. by Diane de Groat. 
Clarion, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-63309-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-7 yrs
A story that could have stayed at the level ofbibliotherapy instead cuts to the heart
as the narrator suffers through his family's forced-cheerful visit to Gram's nursing
home, discovers his mother and grandmother separately in tears afterwards, and
confronts them with the fact that everything is not all right. The ending makes no
promises beyond honesty, "because maybe Gram will never be well enough to ride
in a red convertible" (for which she has threatened to trade her wheelchair). Yet
it's clear that an admission of sorrow will at least allow mutual comforting. It's
254 
* THE BULLETIN
also clear that isolation is the real curse of old age, something a child not far re-
moved from the throes of separation anxiety can understand with special intensity.
de Groat's watercolors are well composed and colored, if heavily literal; in fact,
they have a photo-realistic quality that weights the total impact without becoming
somber. BH
CHANDRA, DEBORAH 
Miss Mabel's Table; illus. by Max Grover. 
Browndeer/
Harcourt, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-15-276712-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
A cumulative rhyme, roughly following the pattern of "The House That Jack
Built," tells of the ingredients gathering on Miss Mabel's table in preparation for
the making of pancakes. Each spread has the growing rhyme on the verso, illus-
trated by the rapidly filling table, and on the recto Miss Mabel starting her day and
commuting through the city, a conundrum resolved when she arrives at her restau-
rant, Miss Mabel's Table, and proceeds to make pancakes for her customers. The
culinarily cumulative countdown is a cute idea, but there are some problems with
the execution. It's not clear how these ingredients are getting out on the restaurant
table if Mabel's not there, and there's a logical glitch when the text describes Mabel
mixing the batter while the picture clearly shows her already frying up the end
product (the pancakes themselves will be rather odd since the recipe parameters-
ten dashes of yeast, nine spoons of sugar, eight pats of butter, seven sweet strawber-
ries, six pinches of cinnamon, five eggs, four cups of flour, three glasses of milk,
two teaspoons of salt-are hardly Betty Crocker). The pictures are sunshiny-bright
with contrasting colors and a cheerily make-believe feel, although the draftsman-
ship sometimes wavers between naive and awkward. This is fun to chant aloud
and perhaps to follow up with some treats, but be prepared to field a few questions
from the audience. DS
COOPER, MELROSE 
Life Riddles. Holt, 1994 
90p
ISBN 0-8050-2613-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Janelle determines to become a writer just about the time her
family seems to be falling apart: Daddy has lost his job and left the family; five-
year-old Roxann whines while nine-year-old Crystal pesters; Mama's so strapped
for cash that the phone and electricity are turned off before she, too, loses her job;
Aunt Barbara can only do so much to help out. But there's lots of love and strength
of character in this African-American family, and they always make it through
somehow. In a way, that's the problem-there are no inner adversaries here, so
the outer adversities never seem truly threatening. The adults are super strong
(even Daddy comes back); Janelle's first story is accepted by a magazine for two
hundred dollars, which sustains her through the next couple of rejections; and
Aunt Barbara is a font of wisdom. Still, Janelle has a strong voice, the writing is
fluid, and the reading is easy. Kids will find this a friendly first-person narrative,
and one that shows what daily difficulties face many low-income children. BH
DALOKAY, VEDAT 
Sister Shako and Kolo the Goat: Memories ofMy Childhood in
Turkey; tr. by Giiner Ener. Lothrop, 1994 
[96p]
ISBN 0-688-13271-5 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
In a book full of sudden spurts of humor and equally unexpected measures of
APRIL 1994 
* 
255
sadness, Dalokay remembers an old woman whose family had been murdered in a
vendetta and who set up housekeeping, with a herd of goats led by the milk-white
mother-goat Kolo, in his father's abandoned stable. The brief chapters vary from
intriguing episodes to descriptions punctuated with naive irony: "If Kolo's ears
pointed up, Sister Shako grew very cautious. 'Either a wolf,' she said, 'or the
gendarme sergeant is coming."' There is little cohesive tension built throughout
the book, but it nevertheless exerts a magnetic quality that becomes strongest as
Sister Shako's death approaches. "I shall be the grass in the pasture and I shall be
the milk in Kolo's udder.... I shall enter the blood of whoever drinks Kolo's milk,
and I shall be in your flesh, in your bones, in the light of your eyes, dearest." This
first-person narrative conveys vividly both the wisdom and superstition, the suffer-
ing and closeness with nature, that were common to rural Turkey in past genera-
tions, and it is with regret that readers discover how a dam destroys it all-"The
great story of life and of our village disappeared in the water of the lake"-and how
the author of this lyrical recollection was killed with all his family in an automobile
accident before its translation and publication were completed. Even though the
memoir aspect per se will not appeal to children, the voice is direct and immediate,
while the relationship between an observant young boy, his beloved friend, and
her individualistic animals overshadows any traces of nostalgia. The book may
have particular appeal among children of Turkish background, but it will also
make a successful read-aloud in any classroom. Heavy borders at the top and
bottom of each page contribute to a decorative, if somewhat crowded, format. BH
DORFLINGER, CAROLYN 
Tomorrow Is Mom's Birthday; illus. by Iza
Trapani. 
Whispering Coyote, 1994 
32p
ISBN 1-879085-84-4 
$14.95 
R 
4-6 yrs
Tomorrow is Mom's birthday, and little Tyler doesn't know what to get for her.
Last year he made cookies-but Mom's on a diet. His friend Samantha suggests
wildflowers-but it's January. He'd make Mom dinner-"but her favorite meal is
lobster, and I'm afraid to touch one." And so on. It's a bit catalogish, but the
dilemma is real, touching, and gently funny; and the solution is sweet if anticli-
mactic: Tyler paints a family portrait for his mom to hang over the fireplace.
Tyler's narration has just enough real-boy exasperation, and the watercolor illus-
trations are familial and cozy. RS
DOWDEN, ANNE OPHELIA 
Poisons in Our Path: Plants That Harm and Heal; writ-
ten and illus. by Anne Ophelia Dowden. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
[64p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020862-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020861-9 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
There's something enticingly creepy about the combination of Dowden's mea-
sured prose and meticulous illustrations (all half-life-sized) with the malignity of
her subject: water hemlock "grow in clumps, like dahlia roots, and they smell like
parsnips. In winter, when they are swollen and succulent, people sometimes mis-
take them for wild parsnips. But one mouthful can kill a man." As Dowden
reiterates throughout this intriguing botanical history, the line between poison
and cure is a fine one, as are those between medicine, folklore, and witchcraft.
Also between history and legend-it's a little disconcerting (not to mention con-
fusing) to read in the same caption that foxglove is useful for heart ailments and
256 
* THE BULLETIN
that it is also "a very special fairy flower, a hiding place for elves." But the stories
are good, although it is unfortunate that no notes or information sources are pro-
vided, and the seasoning of nature study with human nature makes for a tasty
brew. Indexes of plant names and subjects are appended, and the book would
make a handy complement to Carol Lerner's more strictly botanical Moonseed and
Mistletoe: A Book of Poisonous Wild Plants (BCCB 3/88) and Dumb Cane and
Daffodils: Poisonous Plants in the House and Garden (3/90). RS
EHLERT, Lois 
Mole's Hill: A Woodland Tale; written and illus. by Lois
Ehlert. 
Harcourt, 1994 
34p
ISBN 0-15-255116-6 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
"We're planning a path to the pond," says Fox to Mole, "and your hill is in our
way. It must go." Mole doesn't want to leave her beloved home, so she cleverly
makes the hill even bigger and plants seeds all over it. When Fox comes to enforce
his deadline in the fall, the flower-covered hill is so splendid that neither he nor his
henchmen Skunk and Raccoon want it to disappear; Mole is instead commis-
sioned to tunnel a path through it, which she happily does. This is a pleasing
trickster-diplomat story, where the trickee is as happy as the trickster with the
results of the trick. Ehlert's language is compact and telling, with dialogue easily
understandable to small fry ("Better listen to Fox-he's got big teeth") and inter-
personal dynamics familiar from the playground. The art (inspired by the ribbon
applique and sewn beadwork of the Woodland Indians, says a note) is dark-hued,
appropriately nocturnal without losing spirit or contrast, and the beads stippled
across the cutout cloth shapes lend interesting texture to the planes of color. The
stylization of the images might sometimes prompt guessing games, as with a phases-
of-the-moon spread, but that just adds to the sharing fun. The animal figures are
loaded with personality conveyed by a tilt of the head or a flick of the tail, and the
blossoming hill is a two-dimensional pastoral delight reminiscent ofRemy Charlip's
spreads in Margaret Wise Brown's Four Fur Feet. The story (which Ehlert says she
based on a fragment of a Seneca tale, with source completely cited in the book) has
charm and vigor, and you may want to plan a paper-garden project for followup-
or maybe just tuck the little moles in. DS
FIRESIDE, BRYNA J. 
Is There a Woman in the House ... 
or Senate? Whitman,
1994 
144p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8075-3662-8 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
A collective biography of ten women formerly or currently in the United States
Congress, this describes the lives and careers ofJeannette Rankin, Margaret Chase
Smith, Shirley Chisholm, Bella Abzug, Barbara Jordan, Patricia Schroeder, Millicent
Fenwick, Barbara Mikulski, Nancy Kassebaum, and Geraldine Ferraro. The de-
scriptions are brisk and simple, relying substantially on interviews with the author
and others; subjects tell of grinding labor, mistakes made, and goals reached, with
determination the one characteristic common to all ten women. Although some-
what stodgy, the format is enlivened with frequent black-and-white photographs.
The inclusion of some renowned characters and the feminist slant make the book
appealing as well as useful. The work begins with a laudably straightforward and
understandable explanation of "How Congress Works"; an index and bibliogra-
phy are included. DS
APRIL 1994 
* 257
GERSHATOR, PHILLIS 
Rata-pata-scata-fata: A Caribbean Story; illus. by Holly
Meade. 
Little, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-316-30470-0 
$14.95 
R 3-6 yrs
Gershator has a light and lively sense of language, along with a storytelling rhythm
that shows experience with keeping young listeners involved. Unlike her adapta-
tion of Tukama Tootles the Flute, a folktale reviewed below, this is an original story,
though it does incorporate an old Virgin Islands nonsense phrase that the main
character, dreamy little Junjun, repeats whenever he makes a wish to avoid the
chores his mother assigns him. Junjun thinks his wishes are fulfilled by magic, but
the audience may credit good luck: a fish Junjun wishes for actually drops in the
dust from a passing fisherman's basket; the goat Junjun wishes he could find actu-
ally follows him for a taste of his straw hat; the tamarinds he's supposed to pick fall
to the ground with a big whoosh of wind; and the rain he convinces his mother to
wish for falls in the night, "ra-ta-pa-ta-sca-ta-fa-ta." Just as lighthearted as the
story are Meade's illustrations, which outline each shape with white space that
gives the compositions an airy quality; the patterns have a torn-paper collage look,
and the colors are soft, all of which contributes to a happy celebration of Carib-
bean childhood. BH
GERSHATOR, PHILLIS, ad. 
Tukama Tootles the Flute: A Talefrom the Antilles; illus.
by Synthia Saint James. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08661-5 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06811-0 
$15.95 
R* 4-7 yrs
Tukama is a rascally boy who runs away and plays on his flute instead of helping
his grandmother with chores on the Caribbean island where they live. "Don't you
know a two-headed giant runnin' about here, lookin' for wild children to eat?"
he's warned. True to folkloric form, Tukama violates his grandmother's prohibi-
tion to visit the dangerous rocks by the sea, whereupon guess-who appears, two
heads and all. Only Tukama's music distracts the giant, which commands the boy
to jump on its big toe, knee, chest, and nose, singing the song each time: "Tanto,
tanto, tango,/ Guavaberry, mango,/ Bombwiti, bombwiti,/ Bimbala, bango." But
it's the giant's wife who lets the boy out of the bag as she requests yet more music:
"Tanto, tanto, taya,/ Tamarind, papaya,/ Mama lama, cuma lama,/ Mama lama
laya." This generates a mesmerizing quality reminiscent of Virginia Hamilton's
rhythmic adaptation of "A Wolf and Little Daughter" in The People Could Fly
(BCCB 7/85). In fact, pairing the two for a story hour will ensure breathless
listeners, but don't cheat on showing the oil paintings, which use large, plain shapes
in red, black, green, and brown for a monumental effect. A note names the source
and describes the author's variations on it, with a bit of cultural background as
well. BH
GOLDIN, BARBARA DIAMOND 
The Passover Journey: A Seder Companion; illus. by
Neil Waldman. 
Viking, 1994 
56p
ISBN 0-670-82421-6 
$15.99 
R Gr. 3-6
Including stories from Midrash as well as Torah, Goldin begins by recounting the
Israelites' slavery in Egypt and escape under the leadership of Moses. The second
part of the book describes rituals of Passover, with the fourteen steps of Seder
explained in relation to their symbolic representation of history. A brief section on
the Warsaw Ghetto uprising at Passover seems isolated; the example could have
258 
* THE BULLETIN
been either expanded to include others or placed at the end of the first section, but
overall the organization is clean. Key words are given in Hebrew and English
transliteration, while a glossary helps with translation of any words not thoroughly
clarified in the text. Goldin's style is straightforward and her source note com-
mendable. The book will be useful with a wide age range because it can be either
read aloud with younger children or read alone by older ones. The smoothly
stylized illustrations, which have an airbrushed effect, will appeal to both groups.
More thorough than many children's books on Pesach, this takes great care to
explore Jewish tradition and to encourage individual response to it. BH
GOODSMITH, LAUREN 
The Children ofMauritania: Days in the Desert and by the
River Shore; written 
and 
illus. 
with 
photographs 
by 
Lauren
Goodsmith. 
Carolrhoda, 1994 
56p
ISBN 0-87614-782-1 
$14.96 
(The World's Children)
HERMES, JULES 
The Children of India; written and illus. with photographs by
Jules Hermes. 
Carolrhoda, 1994 
4 8p 
(The World's Children)
ISBN 0-87614-759-7 
$14.96 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Lavishly illustrated photo-essays of various exotic areas of the world are definitely
flavor-of-the-month in children's publishing these days. They generally focus upon
one child or a single family, taking the child (and the reader) through some cul-
tural customs or rites, and usually find room for dramatic shots of the local land-
scape as well. The trick is keeping a keen, honest focus, distilling the chosen
culture without betraying its complexities, and maintaining a proper balance of
the anecdotal and informative that respects both subject and reader. These two
entries in the publisher's World's Children series appealingly center upon child-
life, have plenty of attractive color photos, and give a sense of cultural particulars,
but each tries to cover too much. The Children of India features about twenty
children and cultures, admirably acknowledging the diversity of such a huge coun-
try, but it seems as if we've just met one when we're off to another, sometimes in
the space of a single page. Mauritania focuses on two children only, one from the
Arabic north of the country and the other from the West African south, but their
stories go back and forth confusingly, with neither text nor design giving us warn-
ing of the frequent shifts in perspective. As Russ Kendall (Russian Girl, BCCB 1/
94) and Barbara Margolies (Olbalbal 3/93) have learned, the world's a big place,
but slow down, take it easy, concentrate on one place at a time. India's appended
material includes a glossary and index; Mauritania has a pronunciation guide and
an index. RS
GREENE, ELLIN, ad. 
Billy Beg and His Bull; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken
Root. 
Holiday House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1100-1 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
A hero tale with a gender-switched Cinderella motif, this follows the fortunes of
young Billy, the only son of an Irish king, and the beloved bull given him as a child
by his mother. After fleeing from the wiles of an evil stepmother, Billy and the bull
have parallel adventures: the bull fights three other bulls and is killed by the last,
but not before endowing Billy with magical powers; Billy fights three many-headed
giants, overcomes them all, frees a princess from a dragon, rides away as the prin-
cess seizes his shoe, and is found by the fit later on. Greene has done a skillful job
of adapting this Seumas MacManus story, honoring the traditional rhythms of
APRIL 1994 
* 259
language without belaboring them and selecting for sharp focus without oversim-
plifying the story. Root's paintings, too, revel in deep green drama without in-
dulging in the visual cliches that are sometimes derived from folk art motifs; rather,
she maintains a sly sense of humor in both style and content while at the same time
dignifying the larger-than-life figures with hardy action. This makes a robust ad-
dition to any folktale collection, the kind of picture book that will outlast St.
Patrick's Day by 364 days. BH
GREENFELD, HOWARD 
Paul Gauguin.
See Berman, p. 252, for review.
HAAS, JESSIE 
Uncle Daney's Way. 
Greenwillow, 1994 
[128p]
ISBN 0-688-12794-0 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Cole is at first uneasy about his uncle's moving in with the family,
but Uncle Daney, an ex-logger who uses a wheelchair after an accident, turns out
to be an exciting and helpful companion. Daney brings his big logging horse,
Nip, of whom Cole grows fond and who proves useful at tasks around the farm.
Uncle Daney is determined to keep his horse, so he and Cole decide to enter Nip
in the Single-Horse Log Skid and win enough money to pay for Nip's feed. Okay,
so it's not a surprise that Nip, guided by Cole rather than Daney, has a victory of
sorts, coming second in the contest and garnering local attention for Daney's su-
perb training, but Haas' smooth and lively prose makes the Disneyesque tale seem
classic rather than hackneyed. 
Details such as Cole's outsider status at school,
Daney's happy-go-lucky character, and Nip's taste for hard-boiled eggs fill the
story out, as does the backgrounded depiction of a hard-working family trying to
do its best under difficult circumstances. This could be either a horse book that
happens to have a boy or a boy book that happens to have a horse, depending on
reader interest; for whomever, it's a good old story told with affection and subtlety.
DS
HAHN, MARY DOWNING 
Time for Andrew. 
Clarion, 1994 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-66556-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
While Hahn's latest is subtitled "A Ghost Story," it's actually a timeshift tale, but
very spooky nonetheless. Staying, under protest, with his great-aunt Blythe and
her father in their old Missouri house while his parents work in France for the
summer, Drew, twelve, finds himself switched in time with his namesake Andrew,
who lived more than eighty years before. Unlike the timid Drew, Andrew is tough
and troublesome, but he's afraid to go back to his own time where, according to
Andrew who heard it from Aunt Blythe, he died while still a boy. The two boys
(who can meet in the attic of the house) strike a bargain that they will return to
their own times as soon as Drew can beat Andrew at a game of marbles, a skill at
which Andrew excels while Drew is hopeless. Although the time-travel matrix is
not as rigorously worked out as it could have been, the to-ing and fro-ing is easy to
follow and suspenseful, as each boy finds himself becoming the other and forget-
ting his own self. Together they manage to change family history as well as them-
selves, the best qualities of one rubbing off onto the other and leading to a greatly
260 
* THE BULLETIN
satisfying meeting in the present for a neat conclusion. Assured work from a de-
servedly popular writer, who, while gifted with the instincts of a storyteller, doesn't
let her narrative get away from her characters. RS
HAUSMAN, GERALD 
Turtle IslandABC: A Gathering ofNativeAmerican Symbols;
illus. by Cara and Barry Moser. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021308-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021307-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
6-9 yrs
This an alphabetically arranged gathering of "symbols" taken from "The People,"
and a more pretentious ABC has not been published for awhile. A is for Arrow, B,
Buffalo ... G, Great Serpent... M, Mother Earth ... Z, Zigzag, "the arrow of the
sky." Each letter is captioned with a paragraph written with the hushed reverence
that surrounds so much children's-book neo-Indianism (Round: "Round, the
dance The People do; round, the lodge they live in. Round is the world and the
word round I am Round, the shape of all good things") and the book seems
blithely unaware of the differences between symbol, object, and concept. Like-
wise, it slaps together beliefs from different tribes and parts of the country, forget-
ting, for example, that Pueblos (for P) are not Round ("round, the lodge they live
in") nor would pueblos be familiar to "The People" living outside the Southwest.
Moser and Moser's pastel crayon illustrations of the symbols are mistily attractive,
if dim, pictures that recall Ed Young's work; although an introduction indulges in
much historical anachronism, there isn't a hint of a source note for any of the
information in the book. It looks like a good storyhour starter or teaching tool,
but it's actually more deceptive than useful. RS
HAYNES, BETSY 
Deadly Deception. Delacorte, 1994 
[2 2 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-32067-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Ashlyn Brennan lives a rich and privileged Florida existence,
but that doesn't keep her from heartache when her life turns upside-down. First
Drew, her loving but tormented boyfriend, shows signs that his drug problem is
returning, and then her boss, the school counselor, is found murdered. Drew is
suspected, but Ashlyn, who believes in him, sleuths around until she discovers that
the school counselor was in fact her own biological mother, from whom Ashlyn's
"mom" had kidnapped her as an infant; the evil Mrs. Brennan has killed the coun-
selor to avoid exposure. It's an outlandish plot, but it could have made a decent B-
movie adventure. Here, unfortunately, the characterizations are shallow and
oversimplified and the unlikely is made ludicrous by flat writing: "I should never
have let my business keep me away from home so much," says Ashlyn's father
sadly upon discovering all this melodrama. Worst of all, the plot is mushy, with
some apparently important points tossed away (the murder weapon assumes great
importance but then proves to have been discarded early on, as any armchair de-
tective would have assumed), other points left unexplained (where did Mrs. Brennan
get the drugs she uses to try to poison Ashlyn at the end?), and a few points simply
confusing, such as the set-up chapter which describes Drew's problem with an
awkward and overdramatic image of dual personality. This isn't a difficult read
and the lurid subject matter has its pleasures, but it doesn't provide a potentially
valuable bridge between Christopher Pike and Joan Lowery Nixon, both of whom
do their respective thriller turns much better. DS
APRIL 1994 
* 
261
HERMES, JULES 
The Children oflndia
See Goodsmith, p. 258, for review.
HOBERMAN, MARYANN, comp. 
My Song Is Beautiful: Poems and Pictures in Many
Voices. 
Little, 1994 
32p 
illus.
ISBN 0-316-36738-9 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Hoberman has gathered fourteen poems celebrating personal as well as ethnic di-
versity, with fourteen artists depicting African-American, Asian-American, Native
American, Latino, and white characters in cultural context. "I'm gonna beat/ out
my own rhythm," says Nikki Giovanni's narrator, portrayed by David Diaz as a
black drummer beating on the globe; "I too when my time comes/ Shall do might-
ily," concludes a Chippewa song illustrated by Bernie Fuchs. There's plenty of
tonal variety for reading aloud: James Houston's "Ayii, Ayii, Ayii: A Central
Eskimo Chant," with its clean black-and-white graphics by Dale DeArmond, in-
vokes physical movement and loud voices; Kim Soo-Jang's "In a Hermit's Cot-
tage" is as silent and still as Yoriko Ito's accompanying watercolor painting.
Devoting a double spread to each poem and picture not only avoids awkward
juxtapositions of style but also allows room for verbal and visual images to rever-
berate. It's a luxury that allows simple poems the space to expand, and precocious
independent readers as well as young listeners will dwell on each selection. BH
HUTTON, 
WARWICK, 
ad. 
Persephone; ad. and illus. by Warwick
Hutton. 
McElderry, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-689-50600-7 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Hades' abduction of Persephone and her mother Demeter's subsequent search,
which caused all growing things to shrivel in the world, makes a strong mythical
context for artist Hutton's perpetual play with light and dark. Vivid tonal con-
trasts demarcate the gloom of an underworld lit by a few streaks of sunlight, the
yellow glare of barren ground where Demeter wanders, the cool blue-greens of the
river that tells where Persephone has been taken, and the cycles of seasonal color
that accompany Persephone's return to her mother in springtime and to Hades in
winter. Even the pomegranate seeds themselves, whose rosy hue highlights the
headband on an expressive heroine and permeates the endpapers of the book, be-
comes an intense graphic motif. Like Hutton's other interpretations (Perseus, Theseus
and the Minotaur, The Trojan Horse), this compressed adaptation gains power from
its restrained visualization. BH
IRWIN, HADLEY 
Jim-Dandy. McElderry, 1994 
[144 p]
ISBN 0-689-50594-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Caleb and his stepfather are homesteaders in post-Civil-War Kansas, and Caleb
finds no joy in the empty prairie that surrounds him, in the constant hard labor
required to keep the farm going, or in his dour stepfather, even more stern since
the death of Caleb's mother. When the colt Dandy is born, Caleb lavishes all his
affection on him, secretly gentling him and breaking him to ride. Caleb's stepfa-
ther, however, is forced to sell Dandy to the army, and Caleb follows his horse,
becoming a stableboy for Custer's Seventh Cavalry and traveling with them as they
embark on their Indian-exterminating mission. Dandy and Caleb provide a good
262 
* THE BULLETIN
focus for this historical drama, which brings to life a hard chapter of American
history; the book wisely stops before Little Big Horn, which would have overshad-
owed the daily-life impact of the story. The two halves of the plot (homestead and
army) hinge together relatively well, especially since Caleb's moral questioning of
the military sends him back to his Quaker stepfather. The book is a little too well-
meaning, but it's a compelling story with appealing characters, and kids who ordi-
narily resist historical fiction may find the horsey subject appealing. A note attests
to the existence of the real Dandy, who traveled with Custer and who survived
Little Big Horn to live to the ripe old age of twenty-eight. DS
KILLINGSWORTH, MONTE 
Circle Within a Circle. McElderry, 1994 
[176p]
ISBN 0-689-50598-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Chris, a young teen whose parents died in a double tragedy, has been shunted
from foster home to foster home, abused and misunderstood. He finally can stand
it no more and runs away to be picked up on the freeway by a highly educated
Native American scientist whose passion is souping up his Volkswagen bus with a
Porsche engine. The scientist, a Vietnam veteran nicknamed Chopper, has been
called home (the Northwest) to help his people keep conglomerate developers and
the local establishment from building an exclusive golf resort on sacred Indian
land. Realizing that the town meeting at which he chastises the public for their
greed and environmental insensitivity won't stop the project, Chopper and Chris
take matters into their own hands, infuriating the developers. After a chase scene,
the book ends with the two main characters deciding to stick together. It's a
loaded situation, and the good guys/bad guys scenario is oversimplified, with the
tone sometimes tipping from serious to self-righteous. On the other hand, the
writing is vivid and the plotting smooth. This is a book that could well attract
rebellious teens drawn to automotive action and will make ideal preparation for
best-selling adult fiction--or good copy for a made-for-TV movie. CF
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
The Three Princes: A Tale from the Middle East; illus. by
Leonard Everett Fisher. 
Holiday House, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1115-X 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
A variant of "The Rarest Gift" tale type (653A), this describes three men's search
for a present that will win them marriage with a beautiful princess. One finds a
crystal ball, the next a flying carpet, and the last an orange that will cure any illness.
The crystal ball reveals that the far-away princess lies dying, the carpet takes them
all home, and the orange cures her. Since each man has contributed to saving her,
which deserves her hand? The answer here is the third (sometimes it's a fourth
man entirely), since the first two have something left while the gift of the third is
gone. This princess has had her eye on the third for some time, anyway, since he's
young, handsome, and poor-and she's able to flex both her will and her wisdom
more than most Middle Eastern heroines (in other versions, her father is seeking a
suitor for her). Kimmel cites several Saudi Arabian students and The Arabian
Nights as the source for this, and Fisher's thick acrylics make the most of luxuri-
ously draped Arab robes and kaffiyehs, with dramatic backgrounds of bare desert
landscape or nighttime skies. There's an element of caricature to these figures,
especially the wazir and the princess, who is veiled early on but later appears un-
veiled before all her courtiers. Still, we have precious few picture book folktales
APRIL 1994 
* 263
from the Islamic world, and this one will make good group showing and telling.
The story first appeared in Cricket Magazine. BH
KLAss, DAVID 
California Blue. 
Scholastic, 1994 
199p
ISBN 0-590-46688-7 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
John Rodgers is a high-school junior in a California logging town, where cafes
advertise "Spotted Owl Omelet" in the window and he was once beaten up for
receiving a naturalist's magazine in the mail. Not surprisingly, when John discov-
ers a never-before-seen butterfly in the logging-company forest and environmen-
talists seek to halt logging in order to preserve its habitat, all hell breaks loose.
Klass doesn't stack the deck by making his subject species cute and furry, and he's
more perceptive about this battle than most writers on the subject; while his hand
is tipped in favor of the environmentalists, there's good and bad on both sides.
The subplots-John's struggle to understand his domineering and now critically
ill father, and his crush on his biology teacher-blend well into the main plot,
making the book about manhood and the price of inclusion as well as ecology.
John's narration is compelling (although he tends to philosophize too much and
resorts to capital letters for emphasis too often), and his divided loyalties are well-
depicted: "I had the terribly uncomfortable feeling of being an enemy among
people who treated me like a friend." The topicality of subject and appeal of the
themes make this a good choice for a variety of readers, including Chris Crutcher
fans who are ready for something a little more restrained. DS
KLEIN, ROBIN 
Seeing Things. Viking, 1994 
189p
ISBN 0-670-85282-1 
$12.50 
R Gr. 5-8
Miranda begins "seeing things" when, bored during a lecture on Captain Cook,
she visualizes an ancient, angry face in the ripples on the classroom ceiling. Later,
when watching Good Queen Bess on TV with her grandmother and tiresome Uncle
Bernie, Miranda sees the picture fade to a vision of the real Elizabeth I, and she
realizes that she is psychic: "I think I can see into the past." Bernie senses a
goldmine in Miranda's newly discovered powers, and while she successfully per-
forms for a psychic society, her powers fail her the one time she really needs them,
when the criminal father of her sister's baby kidnaps Miranda and demands she
"see" where one of his nefarious companions has run off to. Despite some heavy-
handed psychologizing about Miranda's refusal to accept her parents' death in an
accident some years before, the story is suspenseful, and Miranda is a cranky, com-
pelling narrator. The revelation near the end that Miranda's been making it all up
is skillfully done, and readers, feeling just as gulled as the family, will scurry back
through the book to see what they missed. It's all there, and it's a tribute to Klein's
powers of storytelling that we didn't see it in the first place. RS
KRENSKY, STEPHEN 
The Iron Dragon Never Sleeps; illus. by John
Fulweiler. 
Delacorte, 1994 
[80p]
ISBN 0-385-31171-0 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Ten-year-old Winnie Tucker begins the summer of 1867 with a train ride from
Sacramento to the small town where her father works as a mining engineer for
Central Pacific; she ends the summer knowing a lot about the railroad and those
who build it, primarily Chinese workers as represented by her newfound friend
264 
* THE BULLETIN
Lee Cheng. Chapter One concludes with Winnie's thought that "Chinese work-
ers must be very brave," and subsequent episodes reveal them to be clean, hard-
working, sensitive, scorned by people who take no trouble to understand their
traditions, and victimized by villainous company strike-breakers. It's a purposive
novel, with scenes and characters set up to show unfair employment practices and
racist discrimination against immigrant laborers. On the other hand, Winnie and
Lee Cheng's relationship does take on a kind of fragile reality, albeit one informed
by current multicultural ideals. The book is easy to read for discussion among
younger students than those who could handle the only other recent novel about
this subject, Laurence Yep's Dragon's Gate (BCCB 12/93). An afterword distin-
guishes between fictional elements and historical facts. Reviewed from an
unillustrated galley. BH
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Memoirs ofa Bookbat. Harcourt, 1994 
[192p]
ISBN 0-15-215727-1 
$10.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Harper is at first relieved when her troubled parents find religion, but when their
new fundamentalist faith causes them to cast a doubtful eye on Harper's reading
preferences, which range from William Steig and Judy Blume to the fictional Rose-
mary Nearing and Dolores Macuccho, she begins to feel threatened. All four
writers-and many more-are suspect in her parents' newly opened eyes, and
now, since her family has taken to traveling the country and trumpeting the cause,
books, the only constant in her life, are more important than ever to Harper:
"Every new classroom was different, but I could always count on the library to be
familiar." The protagonist's development through books is an appealing idea, and
her alienation from the family will focus readers' sympathy. Unfortunately the
parents, who offer rich potential for depth at the book's beginning, are flattened as
their oversimplified ideology (fundamentalist Christianity gets conflated here with
racist villainy) takes over, moving inner conflicts to a superficial level; Harper's
choices become only too obvious as her parents and their cohorts become stereo-
typed. Stephanie Tolan paints a more fair and sympathetic picture of fundamen-
talism in Save Halloween!(BCCB 10/93), and if it's skewering of the censors you
want, Konigsburg's T-Backs, T-Shirts, COATand Suit (11/93) is more on target
and recognizes the fact that if you're going to pick on some of your characters,
you've got to pick on them all. The plot here is overprogrammed with contriv-
ances (for instance, after Harper's friend Gray helps her run away from California
to her grandmother's house in Georgia, he wins a scholarship to a Huntsville,
Alabama, Space Camp and both kids are invited for a weekend with their favorite
author in Mississippi) and is editorially-driven to make a point (as when Harper's
little sister, brainwashed by another little girl, co-writes a hate letter to "JEWdy"
Blume). Lasky's writing smooths over some of the storytelling missteps, but the
real tensions and ambiguities of a cast caught up in a cause ultimately get lost as the
characters are manipulated by the message. RS
LEWIS-FERGUSON, JULINDA 
Alvin Ailey, Jr.: A Life in Dance. Walker, 1994
[96p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8241-8 
$13.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8239-6 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
For older readers than Pinkney's Alvin Ailey (BCCB 11/93), this volume by dance
APRIL 1994 
* 
265
critic Julinda Lewis-Ferguson goes into more detail about Ailey's professional ca-
reer. The author traces Ailey's involvement with the dance from his work with
Lester Horton to the formation of his own ballet company with its attendant trials
and triumphs. Although diligently compiled, the material is sometimes confus-
ingly organized, with the account ofAiley's stage career popping up in chronologi-
cally inappropriate places and the contemporary description of the American Dance
Center appearing before the chapter on Alley's death; it's also a shame that there
aren't more photographs of Alley's dances in performance. There's substantial
information on an important figure here, though, and quotes from Ailey and asso-
ciates appear throughout the text (said Judith Jamison wryly about Alley's famous
dance Cry: "I didn't know how difficult the dance was until opening night ...
because we never got the chance to run it from beginning to end until the curtain
was up"). An unusual section entitled "A Sampler of Ailey Dances" devotes a page
or two each to description of his major works; there are no notes, but a bibliogra-
phy of books, selected articles, and selected dance reviews is included. DS
LIPTAK, KAREN Adoption Controversies. Watts, 1993 
158p 
(The Changing
Family)
ISBN 0-531-13032-0 
$13.50 
R Gr. 7-12
There is really no uncontroversial area of adoption, and Liptak, recognizing that,
has responded with one of the most competent surveys of the subject to appear in
recent years. Her chapter topics include "Today's Options for Unwed Pregnant
Teenagers," "Open versus Closed Adoptions," "Agency versus Independent Adop-
tions," "Transracial Adoptions," "Searches," "Surrogate Motherhood," and many
others. Her stated aim, successfully achieved, is to create a book not only useful as
a research tool but also helpful to any reader grappling with his or her part in the
"adoption triad" of biological parent, adoptive parent, and adoptive child. The
author makes clear that each state regulates adoption differently and that she has
based most of her specific legal discussion on her home state ofArizona. She treats
attitudes towards the various controversies evenhandedly and has managed to be
current (discussing recent decisions about rights of birth fathers and Native American
tribes, for instance) without being sensational. The book's main flaw is that al-
though most of the extensive research is documented, much of it is not: at least
one book mentioned in the text (and under an incorrect title) does not appear in
the bibliographies, and what appear to be interviews with people are neither attrib-
uted nor cited. The book does include endnotes, a list of organizations, a glossary,
a bibliography, a list of books for further reading, and an index; it is a well-written
and helpful book on a subject that needs one. DS
LIVELY, PENELOPE 
The Cat, the Crow, and the Banyan Tree; illus. by Terry
Milne. 
Candlewick, 1994 
[2 6p]
ISBN 1-56402-325-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
In many of her novels, Penelope Lively has played with concepts of time and place;
now she one-ups both by deconstructing a story as it unfolds. Well, two stories,
actually: "The cat and the crow lived under the banyan tree. All day long they told
stories. The cat was thin and quick, and she told stories that were elegant and
entertaining. The crow was fat and handsome, and he told stories that were fast
and furious. The banyan tree was tall and wide and light and dark and full of
266 
* 
THE BULLETIN
secrets." That quickly, the setting, action, and characters are laid out. What comes
next is an elegant and entertaining story followed by a fast and furious story ("'I
don't like this story,' wailed the cat. 'I want to get off"), each consistent with its
teller, and both concluded by a tea party for the whole cast. Did I mention that
both characters walk, run, and fly through each story? It's complicated, but not so
much that kids won't eventually absorb the play of action and narrative. Terry
Milne's pen-and-ink wash illustrations help, because they're inventive without
getting surrealistic and they give a light, nonsensical touch to the whole operation.
Neither art nor text become self-conscious, but there's an air of Edward Lear here,
and even Alice in Wonderland. BH
MCNAUGHTON, COLIN 
Making Friends with Frankenstein: A Book ofMonstrous
Poems and Pictures; written and illus. by Colin McNaughton. 
Candlewick,
1994 
[90p]
ISBN 1-56402-308-7 
$19.95 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
See this month's Big Picture, p. 247, for review.
MENNEN, INGRID 
One Round Moon and a Star for Me; illus. by Niki
Daly. 
Kroupa/Orchard, 1994 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08654-2 $14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06804-8 
$14.95 
R 3-6 yrs
It's not exactly a story, but the situation is universal as a young southern African
boy must suddenly share his parents with a brand-new baby, which arrives shortly
after Mama sees a falling star-"a star for a new baby." Watching the baby take
everyone's attention, the narrator seeks reassurance and finds it: "Tonight," says
Papa, "when the moon is big and round and the stars light up God's great sky, I'll
show you, there is also a star for you." The watercolor paintings tell all. Warm
browns dominate the affectionate portraits of a rural family and their neighbors.
The setting is Lesotho, which offers sweeping, sun-glazed or midnight-blue land-
scapes, both of which contrast richly with cozy, rounded figures who enfold a child
in cradling arms. Visual and textual details of Lesotho tradition, along with rhyth-
mic patterns of writing and art, will make the book especially attractive to African-
American parents and to preschools emphasizing readalouds with multicultural
themes. BH
MILLER, MARGARET 
My Five Senses; written and illus. with photographs by Mar-
garet Miller. 
Simon, 1994 
[24p]
ISBN 0-671-79168-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 2-5 yrs
Couldn't be simpler-"With my eyes I see myself (girl looking in a mirror), my
shadow (girl standing in the sun), my dog (a benign face-off), and my city (skyline
as viewed from a park). Similar sequences inform smell, taste, hearing, and touch,
each experience illustrated by a large color photograph that conveys not only the
example, but the emotion it provokes, the difference between smelling flowers and
garbage, for example. As in her previous concept books, Miller doesn't try and get
too fancy: the experiences pictured here are those available to most young children
(although smelling a horse might be wishful thinking); follow the book up with a
sensory cruise around the house. RS
APRIL 1994 
* 267
MINTERS, FRANCES 
Cinder-Elly; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Viking, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-670-84417-9 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
If your charges are in the mood for a finger-snapping spoof and you have a soft
spot for rhymed couplets, you can count on this New York City Cinder-Elly. Her
mean sisters have gone to the basketball game and left her behind, when God-
mother-looking vaguely like a winged bag lady-comes wandering by and
reclothes Cinder-Elly for the game. "Thank you, dear Godma,/ I'm glad that you
came./ But how am I going/ To get to the game?" The answer is a garbage can
turned into a bike and the rest of the story follows suit. It's a longish, jingly-jangly
text, with a syllable too many now and again, but the paintings are energetic, jazzy,
and funny, with a Lane Smith twist to some of them and a bit of intertextual
dialogue ("Don't fret, Elly. Things will get better soon") in the decorated panel
beside each three-quarter-spread illustration. What the verses lack in ingenuity,
the pictures and format make up for with inventive flair. BH
NAMIOKA, LENSEY 
April and the Dragon Lady. 
Browndeer/Harcourt,
1994 
[22 4 p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-276644-8 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200886-1 
$3.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-9
April, a Chinese-American high school senior, is happy in school, excited about a
new beau, and looking forward to going off to college. The problem is Grandma,
who dominates the Chen family with her demands and need for attention, and,
increasingly, protection, as Grandma has become increasingly eccentric and has
taken to wandering off. It's on April that most of the responsibility falls; since her
mother's death two years ago, she's had to take on the role of the dutiful daughter
while her older brother goes his merry way, and her father helplessly goes along
with Grandma's regime. It's a compelling tangle of relationships, but the writing
takes a summary, even desultory tone that makes the problem seem less serious
than it's apparently meant to be. April's romance with a white boy seems more
friendly than passionate, and their conversations are stiff: "It came as a shock to
discover that some of my values were not the same as Steve's. 'I must have ab-
sorbed my Chinese attitudes without realizing it,' I said in a low voice. 'Maybe it's
because of having Grandma live with us.'" Grandma herself is the only real live
wire in the group (when she cleans out the residents of a nursing home in a mah-
jongg game, for example) but not all of her tricks ring true (such as pretending
she's a homeless person in order to embarrass the family into taking better care of
her). Unconvincing but undemanding, smoothly if slightly written, the book pre-
sents family drama in a light way, and the resolution is contrived but satisfying for
all concerned. RS
NOLAN, HAN 
Ifl Should Die Before I Wake. 
Harcourt, 1994 
[288p]
ISBN 0-15-238040-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
While she narrates the story, neo-Nazi Hilary is apparently comatose after a mo-
torcycle accident "in some Hebe town" lands her in the "freakin' Jew hospital"
within which she has the disconcerting experience of being blown back in time to
268 
* THE BULLETIN
the Holocaust, where she inhabits the body of a girl named Chana. (In an alter-
nate gloss, Hilary could be reading the mind of Chana, now grown and in the
same hospital as a patient.) As in Jane Yolen's The Devil's Arithmetic (BCCB 10/
88) for younger readers, the time-travel device is distracting, and Nolan's picture
of neo-Nazi culture ("Heil Hitler, babe. See you in Hell") is simplistically drawn.
Like Yolen, she's at her best when conveying the hopelessness and random terror
of the death camps, and despite the presence of a saintly grandmother, she's not
afraid to portray the shameful-yet understandable-betrayal of Jews by other
Jews: "I knew it would do me no good to try to plead with this woman. To her,
I was Jewish scum and she was Jewish royalty." The writing is sometimes over-
wrought ("I dropped the shovel and fell into the dirt pile screaming, knowing
somehow that from that day forward, I would be screaming forever") and there's a
fair amount of speech-making that gets repetitious, but on the whole, Nolan deals
honestly with her material, and her graphic descriptions of camp life have a mor-
bid interest that teeters on exploitation but comes down on the side of the truth.
RS
OPPENHEIM, SHULAMITH LEVEY, ad. 
Iblis; illus. by Ed Young. 
Harcourt,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-15-238016-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. K-4
Drawn from the work of a ninth-century Islamic scholar whom Oppenheim cites
in her opening author's note, this has much in common with the tale of the first
temptation as related in both the Bible and the Koran. The Satanic figure Iblis
beseeches first the peacock and then the serpent to smuggle him past the angel
Ridwan into Paradise, his bribe being a promise of everlasting youth and beauty.
Once inside, he lures Eve to eat a grain of the forbidden wheat tree, from which
she then persuades Adam to eat, and both are expelled from Paradise. Ed Young's
pastels create a soft texture, but the colors are ominously dark (maybe too dark for
use with a group), and the creatures he depicts are eerie, especially the menacing
Iblis as it hides in the nick between the serpent's teeth-the source of snakes'
poison from that day forth. (This is one of several pourquoi motifs here: the
serpent coils to protect itself from God's wrath, for instance, and loses her legs; the
peacock loses his melodious voice.) The deep hues also serve to draw viewers in,
along with Iblis, for a close look at the depths of Paradise, while the suddenly
contrasted red and fiery orange thrust us away, just as Adam and Eve are thrust
away. Altogether, the book has a haunting quality that touches the imagination
and will stimulate comparison with more familiar variants. BH
RAY, KAREN 
To Cross a Line. Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
[160p]
Library ISBN 0-531-08681-X 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06831-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
"Egon kissed the chocolate-covered cookie and slipped it into his shirt pocket,
where it wouldn't get crushed." This simple gift to his girlfriend makes an unas-
suming start to a Holocaust story, but the Jewish protagonist's journey is more
than a flight out of 1938 Nazi Germany; it's also a passage from childhood into
maturity, as Egon gets into and out of increasingly dangerous situations. Based on
experiences of the author's father-in-law, whose mother and two sisters were killed
in death camps during the war, the novel has been carefully paced for suspense.
Action rules characterization here, and Egon's motor-bike accident while deliver-
APRIL 1994 
* 
269
ing baked goods, his trial, escape from arrest, hiding with cousins, aborted attempt
to leave for Holland, and narrow escape across the Danish border (and eventually,
we learn in an afterword, to Shanghai and the U.S.) are dramatically fictionalized.
Language and event occasionally slip out of place: the description of a street as
being "off the main drag" seems a jarring bit of American slang, for instance; a
Danish guard describing his superior officer (who will decide Egon's fate) as "a fair
man" has also just told of being ordered-presumably by the same fair man-to
force a Jewish refugee family back across the border into Germany, where they
were beaten with rifle butts. However, these are exceptions; on the whole, Ray's
book features smooth writing and convincing details that turn Egon's trip into a
race through some terrifying history. BH
RINALDI, ANN A Stitch in Time. 
Scholastic, 1994 
[305p] 
(The Quilt Tril-
ogy)
ISBN 0-590-46055-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-12
It's Salem in 1788, and Hannah is the mainstay of the stormy Chelmsford family:
her mother is dead, her father brutal; her one sister planning an elopement with a
Southerner, her other sister willfully wicked; her younger brother hated by her
father and her other brother preparing to leave for the West. The plot thickens-
boy, does it thicken-when a concern headed by her father brings low-paying
textile mills to town, Hannah's old flame returns from the West with a half-Indian
baby, which she cares for, Hannah falls in love with a young man suspected of
running a slave ship, she discovers the dark secret about her mother, her gobd
sister seems to be lost at sea, and her father and bad sister go west, where her sister
is kidnapped by Shawnee. Andshe works on a quilt. Even as a lengthy but unde-
manding historical sudser this has problems: the multitude of events makes the
saga more sprawling than sweeping, the romances don't spark, and the villain isn't
convincing. Rinaldi's historical research, documented in an author's note and
bibliography, goes for naught when contemporary sentiments and phrases break
the mood ("Lack of trust ruined my parents' marriage"; "The man is slime"). In A
Break with Charity (BCCB 9/92), about the Salem witch trials, Rinaldi focused
with great success on an emotion-charged historical situation, making the incred-
ible truth credible; here the events aren't really involving because there's little emo-
tional underpinning to the story. Readers who simply like historical settings may
enjoy the early-American details. Two more books about the fate of the Chelmsford
family's quilt over the generations are planned. DS
RIPSLINGER, JON 
Triangle. Harcourt, 1994 
[224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200048-8 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200049-6 
$3.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Darin, Joy, and Jeremy have been friends for almost ten years; following an acci-
dent, Darin, nominally Joy's boyfriend, has been paralyzed for nearly two years,
and for the last several months, Joy and Jeremy, unbeknownst to Darin, have been
having an affair. Jeremy narrates the story of the summer after graduation, as Joy
pitches her heart out in summer softball, hoping for a college scholarship. The
already tense situation escalates when Jeremy gets Joy pregnant, and decisions about
the future must be made. The writing is smooth and the situation provocative,
but the plot is too heavily melodramatic, with a mystery ofJeremy's parentage and
270 
* 
THE BULLETIN
a supposedly dark but actually anticlimactic secret between Joy and Darin as well.
And while the characterization of Joy and Jeremy is careful and credible (and it's
nice to see a serious athlete in a gritty sport as a romantic heroine), Darin's bitter-
ness is somewhat cliched. It's still an involving, emotional read, full of serious
softball action and high drama. DS
ROWAN, N. R. 
Women in the Marines: The Boot Camp Challenge; written and
illus. with photographs by N. R. Rowan. 
Lerner, 1994 
72p
ISBN 0-8225-1430-3 
$17.21 
R 
Gr. 5-8
"You will, upon my order, disembark my bus! . . .You will speak only when
spoken to! There are no private 'I's!" shouts the drill instructor to the new female
recruits as they begin thirteen weeks of Marine boot camp. The author visited the
Recruit Depot at Parris Island, South Carolina, talking to and photographing the
young women, ages eighteen to twenty-four, who hope to be among the 75% who
meet the challenge of basic training and become Marines. Rowan examines not
only the strict discipline and grueling physical regime, but also the determination
and strength of the recruits as they push themselves to the best of their abilities
("This recruit would like to say that everything here builds your self-confidence
and your ability," says one Marine novitiate). The text is crisp, clear, and positive
without sugarcoating the experience, telling about camp life and giving general
information on women in the U.S. military. The black-and-white photographs
are atmospheric, with images ranging from a young woman staring up-possibly
in shock-at her new drill instructor, through camouflage-clad platoons on the
weapons range, to a happy graduate and her family. Usefully informative, this will
also evoke some gender pride in young female readers. An index is included. DS
SIMON, SEYMOUR 
Mountains. Morrow, 1994 
[32p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-688-11040-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Arrestingly designed endpapers showing comparative heights of the world's moun-
tains enclose this fairly simple survey of mountains: where and what they are ("to
call something a mountain seems to depend upon who is looking at it and how
high its surroundings are"), how they were created, and what effects they have on
the local climate and ecology. All this, of course, is illustrated with Simon's typi-
cally dramatic selection of full-color, full-page photographs, along with instructive
charts (although it's unfortunate that a map of tectonic plates is incompletely ref-
erenced and only shows half the planet). The distinctions among various kinds of
mountains (folded, fault-block, volcanic, and domed) are clearly explained, dia-
grammed, and pictured, and Simon's long-view is expressive: "As soon as moun-
tains rise, they begin to be worn down .. ." There's no documentary material, but
the book is short, and as recommendable for a story hour accompaniment as it is
for basic information. RS
SMITH, DORIS BUCHANAN 
Remember the Red-Shouldered Hawk. 
Putnam,
1994 
[160p]
ISBN 0-399-22443-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old John-too (so called to distinguish him from his father John) loves
his grandmother, and he's shocked to realize, after Nanna moves in with his fam-
APRIL 1994 
* 
271
ily, that Alzheimer's disease is affecting her mind. His difficulty in dealing with
her lapses is complicated by problems with his lifelong best friend: Brod seems
more and more to be picking up the racism of his father, attacking a black school-
mate and playing neo-Nazi computer games-plus he and John-too like the same
girl. The two plots don't really mesh; the subtler story of Nanna's deterioration is
impeded by the more dramatic racism thread, which culminates in a Klan cross-
burning at the house of John-too's Puerto Rican brother-in-law. 
The writing
doesn't always flow smoothly, but it's sensitive in its exploration ofJohn-too's
grief, and readers will applaud John-too's winning of the fair Annajoy. The badly
drawn cover art will reduce the browsing quotient. DS
TAMAR, ERIKA 
The Things IDid Last Summer. Harcourt, 1994 
[25 6 p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-282490-1 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200020-8 
$3.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Andy Szabo, of It Happened at Cecilia's (BCCB 3/89) and The Truth about Kim
O'Hara, is spending the summer at a borrowed Long Island beach house, where
his pregnant stepmother awaits the impending arrival of Andy's half-sibling in
comparative peace and where his father comes to visit when he can get away from
his restaurant. Soon after arriving, Andy discovers Susan, a beautiful older woman-
twenty to Andy's seventeen-and falls in love with her despite her rich employers'
(she says she's an au pair) strict restrictions on her social life. The young couple are
romantic as well as sexy, but they're also sad: Tamar clearly foreshadows that
Susan is deceiving Andy about her identity, but the adult truth, revealed when
Andy attempts to rescue her from her "imprisonment," will surprise many readers.
The subplots of Andy's budding journalism career at the local paper and the birth
of his stepmother's baby counterpoint the main story well, and the characteriza-
tions are subtle and lively, especially of Andy's flaky and loving-and loved-
stepmother Lorraine, his colorful newspaper boss, and unhappy, magnetic Susan.
This has an M. E. Kerr flavor of irrevocable movement beyond childhood, and it's
a well-written, absorbing story about first love and disillusionment. DS
TEMPLE, FRANCES 
The Ramsay Scallop. Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
[336p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08686-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06836-6 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Long betrothed-by parental arrangement-to Thomas, the neighboring
landowner's son who has just returned to England from a Crusade in 1299, four-
teen-year-old Elenor has no wish to either marry or to bear children. A priest
observes Elenor's reluctance, Thomas' restlessness, and the strains of family adjust-
ment following all the Crusaders' return, and assigns the two young people a pil-
grimage to unload the village sins at the shrine of Santiago de Compostela in Spain.
The trip toughens Elenor, softens Thomas, and turns the two from enemies into
friends who fall in love and chafe at their temporary vow of chastity. The journey-
driven plot allows for an enormous amount of historical detail that never seems
intrusive, although several scenes are obviously informed by twentieth-century at-
titudes of feminism and religious tolerance. There's also too large a cast to develop
beyond functional roles, but the main characters are well drawn, and their rela-
tionship will involve readers with a bent for romantic historical fiction. BH
272 
* 
THE BULLETIN
TRuPP, NATHANIEL 
Thunderstorm!; illus. by Juan Wijngaard. 
Dial, 1994 
[4 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1366-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1365-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Kids drawn in by Wijngaard's alluringly ominous cover painting of a towering
thunderhead will find inside a natural suspense story, as the inhabitants of a small
farm await a change in weather. Tripp focuses the information through three
creatures-the farmer, a fox, and a hawk-with regular sights upwards into the
amassing clouds. The watercolor paintings, moody and meticulous, provide the
atmosphere while the text explains it; both employ the perspectives of the animal
subjects to show how storms affect hunting (as the eagle hawk empiurs the warm
updrafts for scouting), food-gathering (get that hay in, farmer Ben) and shelter-
seeking (fox and kits have a near-miss with a lightning bolt). Information about
how the storm forms, precipitation, and thunder and lightning are well-balanced
with the drama on the ground, and there's a real sense of build-up that enhances
both the story and the facts. RS
VAIL, RACHEL 
EverAfter. Jackson/Orchard, 1994 
[17 6 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08688-7 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06838-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
How does Vail do it? Whether it's school cliques (Wonder, BCCB 9/91), parental
divorce (Do-Over, 12/92) or, as here, the troubles that come between best friends
when a new summer friend comes along, she always seems to find a fresh way to
see and hear (her ear is phenomenal) a tired topic. "I'm stressed," writes newly
fourteen Molly in the journal she's received as a birthday gift from her best friend
Vicky. There's a lot of reasons: Vicky doesn't like Molly's new (and rich and
sophisticated) friend Grace, Molly has a crush on Vicky's big brother, the boy who
used to "like" Molly now likes Grace, and Molly feels fat. Then she gets her
period: "How is it possible that I will bleed for five days in a row and not die?"
Summarized, it sounds like a teen-novel parody, but Vail makes it all live, right
down to the tortuous, nagging verbal fights that girlfriends get into: "Sometimes
I think it would be easier to be a guy. When Jason gets pissed at Freddy, he says,
Freddy, that pissed me off, and maybe even hits him. Maybe they even get in a
major fistfight, but then it's right back to armpit farts." Vicky's surprising be-
trayal-she's read Molly's journal, just like us-makes for a tough conclusion, as
high school begins with the former-best friends ("She passed me at my locker
today. I tried to blend into the metal") on their separate ways. RS
WIENER, LORI S., comp. 
Be a Friend: Children Who Live with HIVSpeak; comp.
by Lori S. Wiener, Aprille Best, and Philip A. Pizzo. 
Whitman, 1994 
[4 0p]
ISBN 0-8075-0590-0 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-6
Drawings and writings by children with AIDS, HIV infection, or those with AIDS
in their families comprise this collage of young reflections upon a terrible disease.
The book is divided into three sections: I Wonder ("I wonder why some kids have
to take medicine and others do not"), Living with HIV ("Dear God: If this was a
joke, it wasn't very funny"), and Family, Friends, and AIDS ("I know I'll miss
David when he goes, but I also know that he won't hurt any more"). The art is
very childlike, even from the older kids, and while the individual pictures only
APRIL 1994 
* 
273
sometimes have an emotional impact, as a collection of real-live-kid documents,
the total effect is telling. Although the book is not informative about AIDS in the
way Hausherr's Children and the AIDS Virus (BCCB 6/89) and other titles are, its
value lies in the way it will confront readers with how much like themselves and
their families are the stories and feelings spoken here. Children's art and writings
usually mean more to adults than to children, but AIDS and HIV claim kids'
interest enough for them to identify with other kids' self-expression. RS
YORK, CAROL BEACH 
The Key to the Playhouse; illus. by John Speirs. 
Scholastic,
1994 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-590-46258-X 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The title makes the book sound like a mystery, but it's actually an update of Estes'
The Hundred Dresses, with the roles of Peggy and Maddie being taken by cousins
Alice Ann and Megan, and that of Wanda by Cissie, a chubby girl who lives down
the road from the cousins' grandmother's house where the girls are spending two
weeks' vacation. Alice Ann and Megan are thrilled when Gran gives them a key to
lock their backyard playhouse. At first, they mean just to keep robbers away but
soon discover it's even more fun to use the key to keep Cissie out: "When Cissie
got there and began her knock-knock-knock, they stood just inside the door and
held their hands over their mouths so Cissie wouldn't hear them giggling." The
reading is easy and the message is clear but not pushy, with nobody, including the
author, stepping in among the girls to straighten things out. Most kids have been
on both sides of the excluding game and will be able to imagine themselves on
either side of that door. There are also enough ordinary summer doings in the
book that the story doesn't get too heavy. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley.
RS
274 
* THE BULLETIN
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 1994
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Lois Lowry for The Giver (Houghton).
The Newbery Honor Books are Crazy Lady! by Jane Leslie Conly (Geringer/
HarperCollins), Dragon's Gate by Laurence Yep (HarperCollins), and Eleanor
Roosevelt: A Life ofDiscovery by Russell Freedman (Clarion).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Allen Say for Grandfather's Journey (Hough-
ton). The Caldecott Honor Books are Peppe the Lamplighter, written by Elisa
Bartone and illustrated by Ted Lewin (Lothrop), In the Small, SmallPondby Denise
Fleming (Holt), Raven by Gerald McDermott (Harcourt), and Yo? Yes! by Chris
Raschka (Jackson/Orchard).
The Coretta Scott King Award will be presented to Angela Johnson, author of
Toning the Sweep (Jackson/Orchard) for writing and to Tom Feelings for Soul
Looks Back in Wonder (Dial) for illustration. King Honor Books for writing are
Joyce Carol Thomas' Brown Honey in Broomwheat Tea (HarperCollins) and Walter
Dean Myers' Malcolm X(Scholastic). King Honor Books for illustration are Brown
Honey in Broomwheat Tea, written by Joyce Carol Thomas and illustrated by Floyd
Cooper (HarperCollins) and Uncle Jed's Barbershop, written by Margaree King
Mitchell and illustrated by James Ransome (Simon).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is
Farrar, Straus & Giroux for Pilar Molina Llorente's The Apprentice. Honor books
are Anne Frank: Beyond the Diary by Ruud van der Rol and Rian Verhoeven
(Viking) and The Princess in the Kitchen Garden by Annemie and Margriet Heymans
(Farrar).
The (G. K.) Hall Award for Library Literature will be given to Hazel Rochman's
Against Borders: Promoting Books for a Multicultural World (Booklist/ALA).
The Scott O'Dell Award for historical fiction will be given to Paul Fleischman for
Bull Run (Geringer/HarperCollins).
The Canadian Library Association's Best Book of the Year for Children is Ticket to
Curlew by Celia Barker Lottridge (Groundwood). The Amelia Frances Howard-
Gibbon Award for illustration goes to Paul Morin for The Dragon 's Pearl, written
by Julie Lawson (Clarion).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Anne Fine for Flour Babies (Little, Brown).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Anthony Browne for Zoo (Knopf).
The 1995 May Hill Arbuthnot Lecture will be delivered by Leonard Everett Fisher.
APRIL 1994 
* 
275
The Margaret A. Edwards Award will be given to Walter Dean Myers.
NCTE's Orbis Pictus Award for Outstanding Nonfiction for Children goes to
Across America on an Emigrant Train by Jim Murphy (Clarion); Honor Books
include To the Top ofthe World: Adventures with Arctic Wolvesby Jim Brandenburg
(Walker) and Making Sense: AnimalPerception and Communication by Bruce Brooks
(Farrar).
NCTE's Award for Excellence in Poetry for Children goes to Barbara Esbensen.
Much of the above information was graciously provided by the Children's Book
Council, which offers a materials brochure listing their many helpful publications.
To receive this, send a request, enclosing 6" x 9" SASE with 2 oz. first-class post-
age, to the Children's Book Council, 568 Broadway, Suite 404, New York, NY,
10012.
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption: Liptak
African Americans: Lewis-
Ferguson
African Americans-fiction: Bat-
Ami; Cooper
African Americans-stories:
Anderson
AIDS: Wiener
ALPHABET BOOKS: Hausman
Armed forces: Rowan
Art history: Berman, Greenfeld
Babies-stories: Mennen
BEDTIME STORIES: Ehlert;
Mennen
Bedwetting-stories: Boelts
BIOGRAPHIES: Archbold;
Berman; Fireside; Greenfeld;
Lewis-Ferguson
Birthdays-stories: Dorflinger
Books and reading-fiction: Lasky
Careers: Rowan
Caribbean Islands-stories:
Gershator
Chinese-Americans-fiction:
Krensky; Namioka
City life-fiction: Bat-Ami
Cliques-fiction: York
CONCEPT BOOKS: Boelts;
Hausman; Miller
Dance: Lewis-Ferguson
Death-stories: Anderson
Divorce-fiction: Auch
Dogs-fiction: Auch
Ecology: Bierhorst; Klass
Exploration: Archbold
Extrasensory perception-fiction:
Klein
276 
* THE BULLETIN
Family problems-fiction: Cooper
FANTASY: Hahn
Farm life: Tripp
Farm life-fiction: Dalokay; Haas
Folklore: Dowden
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Ada; Gershator;
Greene; Kimmel; Oppenheim
Food and eating-stories: Chandra
Friends-fiction: Bat-Ami; Vail;
York
Geography: Goodsmith; Hermes
Geology: Simon
Government: Fireside
Grandmothers-fiction: Baker;
Namioka; Smith
Grandmothers-stories: Bunting
Guidance: Liptak; Wiener
Health: Wiener
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Ackerman; Irwin; Krensky; Ray;
Rinaldi; Temple
History, American: Bierhorst
History, U.S.: Irwin; Krensky
Holocaust, The-fiction: Nolan;
Ray
Homosexuality-fiction: Bauer
Horses-fiction: Haas; Irwin
Ireland-folklore: Greene
Jews: Goldin
Jews-fiction: Ackerman; Nolan
Lesotho-stories: Mennen
Libraries-fiction: Lasky
LOVE STORIES: Ripslinger;
Smith; Tamar; Temple
Medicine: Dowden
Middle ages-fiction: Temple
Middle East-folklore: Kimmel
MYSTERY STORIES: Haynes
Mythology, classical: Hutton
Namibia: Brandenburg
Native Americans-fiction:
Killingsworth
Native Americans: Bierhorst;
Hausman
Nature study: Dowden
Nursing homes-stories: Bunting
Photography: Brandenburg
POETRY: Hoberman;
McNaughton; Minters
Prejudice-fiction: Krensky;
Namioka; Smith
Railroads-fiction: Krensky
Reading aloud: Dalokay;
Hoberman; McNaughton;
Tripp
Reading, beginning: Baker
Reading, easy: Auch
Reading, family: Anderson;
Goldin; Miller
Reading, reluctant: Archbold;
Cooper; Hahn; Haynes;
Ripslinger; Rowan; Vail
Religious education: Goldin;
Oppenheim
SCARY STORIES: Hahn
SCIENCE FICTION: Jones
Seasons-stories: Anderson
Shipwrecks: Archbold
SHORT STORIES: Bauer
Social issues: Klass; Lasky; Liptak;
Rowan; Wiener
Sports-fiction: Ripslinger
Story hour: Ada; Anderson;
Chandra; Ehlert; Gershator;
Greene; Hoberman; Hutton;
Kimmel; Mennen; Minters;
Simon
Storytelling-stories: Lively
Time travel-fiction: Hahn; Nolan
Turkey: Dalokay
Weather: Tripp
Women's studies: Fireside; Rowan
World War II-fiction: Ackerman;
Ray
-* 
ALA Booklist stars
A Story in English and Spanish
by Arthur Dorros
Full-color pictures by the author
Spanish translation by Sandra Marulanda Dorros
The voices on Diego's ever-present radio provide a connecting
thread to the world as his migrant farm worker family travels
from state to state harvesting crops-they even help Diego
keep in touch with his friend David. "An upbeat but largely
realistic picture of migrant life-and an entertaining boost to
bilingualism." -Kirkus Reviews. "Both English and Spanish
texts are handled well...the naive-style paintings reflect the
strong family ties and efforts at community Dorros conveys in
his storv."-Booklist
1
IV
f the
rness
SLife of
Lincoln
Hanchett
biographies of
print, but until
>een no short,
fe story for the
nchett offers a
ow a boy born
raised without
Id become the
t at the time of
sis and of how
any leadership
im to keep the
rth sufficiently
1 the Civil War.
r will also get
better Lincoln
an-the lover,
isband, father,
riend. A video
nentary based
the book, with
same title, has
een produced
y White River
Pictures.
Illustrated.
Cloth, $21.50;
Paper, $7.95
'U
1*
and
Starred)
the
:ts
Iletin
nd
)s.
ages.
932-4.
Viking
ince 1933
Penuuin USA
~~;ir~~~ix~
Penguin USA
^*'*we^l^-aBf^l^"'®??®^*™'*®^
j
Cited by Library Journal as one of its
"Best Sci-Tech Books" of 1989
Ninety-nine Gnats,
Nits, and Nibblers
May R. Berenbaum
Illustrated by John Parker Sherrod
"This is a witty and enlightening account
of the lifestyle of common insects, from
cockroaches in the kitchen sink to maggots
in apples and lice on body hair ... This
book is a delight for general readers who
wish to make better sense of their everyday
observations on insects without having to
plod through the technical details of an
entomological textbook." -
Scott D.
Hawke, Science Books & Films
"This delightful collection of 99 insect
cameos is designed to enlighten the lay
person about a few of our most abundant
fellow voyagers on this planet.... This
illuminating book may turn the disgust with
which many people greet these fascinating
creatures to curiosity and admiration."
-
Library Journal
Illus. Paper, $10.95
£^^^~c~
de, t"I'l-fic" 8001i-i 5--j -Q5
UN1VLRSF1-Y0F ILLINOIS PRLSS - 1325 Smith Oak Street - Champaign, IL 61820 
1
Ninety-nine More
:s, Mites,
Inchers
May R. Berenbaum
Illustrated by John Parker Sherrod
This companion volume to Ninety-nine Gnats,
Nits, and Nibblers runs the gamut from the
regrettably familiar, including mosquitoes, ticks,
cockroaches, and what the author describes as
"other arthropodan indignities," to the bizarre
and obscure, creatures such as sheep keds,
mantispids, and reindeer throat bots. Combining
a naturalist's keen observation of the subject
with witty wordplay and amazing anecdotes,
Berenbaum has provided a uniquely informative
and entertaining book, useful not only for the
scientific novice but also for entomologists who
need a handy guide for their own use or for use
in teaching, especially in introductory classes.
"May Berenbaum has again shed a warm light on
a part of the animal world that is usually outside
our circle of understanding." -
Bayard Webster,
retired New York Times science writer and
freelance nature writer. Illus. Cloth, $32.50;
Paper, $12.95
at bookstores or order
C9e©-wia "
Evaluating Children's Books: A Critical Look
Aesthetic, social, and political aspects of analyzing
and using children's books
(Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Allerton Institute Conference, Graduate School of Library and
Information Science, University of Illinois)
Edited by Betsy Hearne & Roger Sutton
In a period when more juvenile books are being
published than ever before-and being published
for trade store consumption as much as for library
and education markets-professionals need to
think hard and critically about evaluation. The
34th Allerton Institute papers discuss not only
selection criteria, but also ideas about how to
reconsider and apply them in a new way. Public
and school librarians, along with teachers in
elementary, junior high, and high school, will find
here an update on the current trends in-and
increasing sophistication of-children's literature, a
debate on the problems and possibilities of
evaluating the 6,000 new books published annually
for children, and an exchange of ideas about the
aesthetic, social, and political aspects of analyzing
and using children's books.
$18.50 plus $3.00 postage (Please make checks payable to the University of
Illinois) from:
Publications Office, Graduate School of Library and Information Science,
University of Illinois, 249 Armory Bldg., 505 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
Illinois 61820.
Mastercard & Visa orders accepted at 2171333-1359.
THE LION
AND THE
UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children's Literature
Smith and Jack Zipes, Editors
e 17, Number 1 presents
Kiddie Lit(e): The Dumbing
* a 
Down of Children's Literature
* Sharon Shaloo "Get with the Program!" The Mass and Direct
Marketing of Children's Literature
* Elizabeth Law "Yes, but Im Eleven": An Editor's Perspective
on Condescension in Children's Literature
* David Galef Writing Wrongs: Revising a Children's Book
Manuscript
* Julie Brown and Robert Brown Manufacturing Kiddie
Lit(e): The Process and Politics of Abridging History
* Richard Flynn Can Children's Poetry Matter?
* Anne Lundin Under the Window and Afternoon Tea:
"Twirling the Same Blade of Grass"
* Judith L. Kellogg The Dynamics of Dumbing: The Case of Merlin
* Joel D. Chaston Polistopolis and Torquilstone: Nesbit, Eager,
and the Question of Imitation
* A. Waller Hastings Moral Simplification in Disney's
The Little Mermaid
* Plus book reviews!
Published twice a year in June and December.
Prepayment is required. Annual Subscriptions: $19.00, individuals; $34.00,
institutions. Foreign Postage: $2.40, Canada & Mexico; $4.40, outside North
America. Single Issue Prices: $10.00, individuals; $18.50, institutions. Double
Issue Prices: $13.50, individuals, $23.00, institutions. Payment mustbe drawn
on a U.S. bank or made by international money order. MD residents add 5%
sales tax. For orders shipped to Canada add 7% GST (#124004946).
Send ordersto:The Johns Hopkins University Press, PO Box 19966, Baltimore,
MD 21211.
VCall Toll Free 1-800-548-1784, Mon.-Fri., 8:00-5:00 ET for VISA or
MasterCard orders. Or FAX your order anytime: (410) 516-6968.
STHE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
PRyEA3
i
B rush 
"The author of two collections
Srusii 
of splendidly witty extensions
ith 
c 
a Chinese folktale to
S anovel 
length. Old Li
raises a baby he finds
illiam J. Brooke 
floating in the river. But
istrated by Michael Koelsch 
the indigent farmer is
ignorant of the purpose
of the paintbrush he finds in Liang's basket; and when the
boy begins to experiment with it... he fails to see that the
1 
• 
• . .
, 
i.or 
A. 
r 
, 
.
f 
.
Ages 8 up.
$15.00 TR (0-06-022973-X)
$14.89 LB (0-06-022974-8)
Also by William J. Brooke
A Telling of the Tales: Five Stories
Pictures by Richard Egielski
1991 ALA Notable Children's Book
Ages 8-12. $13.00 TR (0-06-020688-8)
$12.89 LB (0-06-020689-6)
HarperTrophy paper ed. $5.95 (0-06-440467-6)
Untold Tales
Ages 10 up. $15.00 TR (0-06-020271-8)
$14.89 LB (0-06-020272-6)
MartolyTrrhi nano-r Aor t 
Qta In_-n-AlAQ_4\0Q
* Kirkus Reviews pointer
Ilu
Ilk.
Kirkus Reviews pointer
* "Sure to draw readers with its jewel-bright
colors and pleasingly gruesome witch."*
BABA YAGA
A Russian Folk Tale * Retold and Illustrated by
KATYA ARNOLD
"A disarmingly direct and authentic introduction to the well-known
witch.... Using gouache, Arnold emulates traditional Russian "lubok"
art... in a vivid, energetic style that's a beautiful complement to the
lively story. Sure to draw readers with its jewel-bright colors and
pleasingly gruesome witch ... Excellent source note."
Kirkus* (pointer review)
"Bold illustrations combine with an absorbing story to create a Baba
Yaga who definitely means business.... Suitable for sharing aloud,
... Arnold's depiction of Baba Yaga pulls very few punches. In the
process, it presents a slice of Russian folklore in an authentic and
masterful style." 
School Library Journal
ISRN 1-55R8582-90n-R. 
Aq 4.05 I 
IRN I.-RKfSan.r 
OA t1lR 
II R
Grades: K-3 Ag
New from the sar
THE LITTI
ISBN 1-55858-28
ISBN 1-55858-28
Grades: K-3 Ag
North-South
1123 Broadway, Sui
New York, NY 10(
-Wo
University of Ilinois Press 
SECOD CLS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSrGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
US.A. 
CHAMPA 
, IL
RLrUaI 
POSTAGE GUAANTrD
