ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
:.- 
" .^ --.^ rf'"'^ * :*^ ^'y*'^ y ' 
3
Winner
1996 National Book Award
for Young People's Literature
"This contemporary novel, lyrically related in a series of
vignettes, tells the story of a Mexican-American family's
struggle to maintain its integrity in the face of poverty,
discrimination, and cultural alienation. Throughout, the
powerful thread is Manny's search for acceptance, laced
with adolescent angst. Martinez writes with clear insight
into Chicano culture. His narrative is poetic in depicting
the joys, sorrows, and traumas of the Hernandez family."
-School Library Journal
"Martinez maintains the authenticity of his setting and
characterization through a razor-sharp combination of tense
dialogue, coursing narrative and startlingly elegant imagery.
-Best 
Books 96, Publishers Weekly
Ages 12 up. $14.95TR (0-06-026704-6); $14.89LB (0-06-026706-2)
Joanna Cotler Books
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
January 1997
Vol. 50 No. 5
A LOOK INSIDE
161 
THE BIG PICTURE
Pictures in the Dark by Gillian Cross
162 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
168 * Sees Behind Trees by Michael Dorris
171 * My Little Sister Ate One Hare by Bill Grossman; illustrated by Kevin
Hawkes
174 * Team Pictures by Dean Hughes
176 * Home on the Bayou: A Cowboy's Story written and illustrated by G.
Brian Karas
181 * Toussaint L'Ouverture: The Fight for Haiti's Freedom written by Walter
Dean Myers; illustrated by Jacob Lawrence
188 BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1996
190 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
_
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Amy E. Brandt, Graduate Research Assistant (AEB)
Lisa Mahoney, Graduate Research Assistant (LM)
Pam McCuen, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1997 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Slatter-Anderson, from Pictures in the Dark ©1996 and used by permission of
Holiday House.
JANUARY 1997 
* 
161
THE BIG PICTURE
Pictures in the Dark
by Gillian Cross
Charlie is a talented young photographer trying to find some artistic new shots
when he snaps a picture of what he claims is an otter. His affectionate family
scoffs, since otters are supposedly long gone from that part of England, but Charlie
sees more and more evidence that he was right. It begins to be apparent, in fact,
that the nocturnally roving otter is somehow connected to Peter Luttrell, a strange
younger boy whose oddity provokes tormenting at school and abuse at home.
Like everyone else, Charlie is initially repelled by Peter; Peter may have
caused Charlie to have an accident and has almost certainly stolen his prize picture
from the display. Even Charlie's mother notes, looking at a photo of Peter, that he
has "an irritating face" that "makes you want to shake him." Yet Charlie is a good
kid, whose essential sense of fairness won't let him leave Peter the isolated target of
the whole world that the boy more and more seems to be. When Charlie's dad
observes that this kind of scapegoating can bring serious trouble, adding, "Some-
one ought to watch it doesn't turn nasty," Charlie responds, "Yes, someone should,"
and takes on the job himself.
Cross doesn't make the decision-or the situation-simple, however.
There is something creepy about this boy, and the fact that his schoolgirl harassers
(including Zoe, Charlie's own close cousin) are clearly self-interested and power-
mad doesn't explain away the constant mishaps that seem to happen around him
or his mother's fear of him. Even when it's clear that what the girls are doing is
wrong, it's not completely evident that their opinion that Peter is a witch is mis-
taken. The irony is that Peter's supernatural connection to the otter, with whom
he psychically roams at night when his father has locked him into the garden shed,
is the last thing that his accusers would contemplate, and that the persecution is
what, essentially, causes the witchcraft.
Smaller details are equally imaginative. The peripheral characters nudge
into the book with the suggestion of full and solid lives behind them, and they're
complicated: the protective librarian, who provides Peter with sanctuary amid the
books, still can't bring herself to touch him in his hour of need, and the creative
and warm-hearted photography teacher, Mr. Feinstein, falls prey to the general
disease of finding Peter's unlovability prejudicial. Stealthier imaginative touches
include the elusiveness of Eleanor Martin, the persecutors' ringleader, who seems
to hover just beyond the action to goad it all on, and a nice Latin pun in Peter's
late name (lutra being Latin for otter).
Cross has done a masterful job of uniting the threads here, with the
visuality of the photographic theme enhancing both the otherworldly aspect of the
book and the intensely depicted human story. And ultimately it's the latter that is
the work's superlative achievement: the stubborn, stupid, and nearly murderous
162 
* THE BULLETIN
witchhunt conducted by Zoe and her cohorts provides an excellent illustration of
both the banality of evil and the ease of becoming a persecutor. The pressure and
suspense mounts as Peter's father tries ever harder to catch and dispatch the otter
that despoils his tidy life and as the Peterphobes grow more determined to prove
their target's maleficence. The very mundaneness of the spitefulness, the suspi-
cion, the headiness of dominance, and the refusal to admit wrong that drive Zoe to
torture and almost to destroy Peter is what makes the process so very, very chilling.
If you're looking to couple this with another supernaturally touched story
of abuse, you could booktalk it with Lynne Reid Banks' animal-transformation
story Melusine (BCCB 9/89); if you want to springboard a lively and immediate
discussion on the terrible results of gleeful power combined with fear, use it with
Ann Rinaldi's story of the Salem witchcraft trials, A Break with Charity (BCCB 9/
92). (Imprint information appears on p. 166.)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALDANA, PATRICIA, comp. 
Jade and Iron: Latin American Tales from Two Cul-
tures; tr. by Hugh Hazelton; illus. by Luis Garay. 
Groundwood/Douglas &
McIntyre, 1996 
[64p]
ISBN 0-88899-256-4 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 6-10
These fourteen tales from Latin America are a complex and rewarding combina-
tion of elements with a remarkably strong cultural subtext. The opening seven
pre-conquest stories include traditional origin tales, as in "When Mountains Be-
came Gods" and "How the Opossum Stole Fire." The seven post-conquest stories
include legends of supernatural figures such as "The Enchantress of Cordoba" and
"The Tears of Sombrero Grande," as well as several tricksters. Retold by various
Latin American authors and folklorists, the selections have been translated from
their original language and have a poetic sensibility and narrative strength that
make them robustly sensual. Violence, love (familial and romantic), betrayal, and
humor all have their place in these richly layered stories. Garay's full-page pen,
ink, and watercolor illustrations are subtle combinations of dark and light, the
colors pure and unmuddied, the compositions hypnotic. This is a highly success-
ful collection on all counts: the retellings are involving, the physical design is
elegant, and the overall effect is powerfully evocative. Source citations are given
for each tale. JMD
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
The Snow Queen: A Christmas Pageant; ad. by Rich-
ard Kennedy; illus. by Edward S. Gazsi. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 1996 
88p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027116-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027115-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
In a production reminiscent of a British panto, the skeleton of this familiar tale is
recreated in playscript form and fleshed out with song, dance, and broad humor.
JANUARY 1997 
* 
163
A trio of singing flowers cryptically banter with Gerda about a Hindu widow on
her funeral pyre; the crow's sweetheart gives him French lessons; a Christmas set-
ting is furnished for the Robber Girl's pistol-shooting big finish; and the Snow
Queen herself is a loquacious kidnapper who explains away all her mysteries to a
gullible Kai. Limited excerpts from Mark Lambert's score promise quite lovely
and varied musical numbers, and hints for choreography are provided. Gazsi's
garish full-page illustrations, featuring characters with photorealistic faces perched
atop stiff, stubby torsos, literally interpret the tale but shed no light on staging it as
a pageant. While this infomercial-esque retelling (an address is provided to send
away for the full score and playbook) is likely to put purists' noses out of joint,
directors looking for an ambitious, off-beat production for the next holiday season
might give this consideration. EB
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
The Steadfast Tin Soldier; ad. by Adrian Mitchell;
illus. by Jonathan Heale. 
DK, 1996 
32p
ISBN 1-56458-310-4 
$14.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
From poet Adrian Mitchell's opening lines-"Five times five is twenty-five,/ And
there were once twenty-five tin soldiers./ They were all brothers, for they'd all
been made/ Out of the same old melted-down tin spoon"-this is a remarkably
readable interpretation of Andersen's tragic fairy tale. Mitchell's narration, al-
though simplified extensively, manages to maintain the feeling ofAndersen's prose
in this abbreviated free-verse adaptation. While Mitchell's text makes Andersen
accessible to young readers, Heale's woodcuts avoid the frothy romanticism of so
many versions of this tale. No bloodless tones and frail airiness here, but strong
black lines and solid compositions that bring the story's hidden darkness to the
foreground. The colored woodcuts have substance, giving a solid realism to what
is usually interpreted as a gauzily sentimental love story. It's sometimes difficult to
make a case for yet another picture-book version of an often-retold fairy tale, but
this unique interpretation is its own convincing argument. JMD
ARNOLD, CAROLINE 
Stories in Stone: Rock Art Pictures by Early Americans; illus.
with photographs by Richard Hewett. 
Clarion, 1996 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-395-72092-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
This is a crisply written, richly photographed account of the oldest known art in
the world-rock art, "drawings that are carved or engraved into stone as well as
those that are painted on rock surfaces." Using as her (comparatively young) ex-
ample the rock art found in the Cosos Range of California, Arnold explains the
two different types-petroglyphs (unpainted, usually etched into the surface of
the rock) and petrographs (a drawing made on a stone, sometimes painted). The
author does a first-rate job deducing the evolution of hunting methods and weap-
ons from rock art spanning many thousands of years. As far as the art's religious
significance goes, Arnold sticks with what is known ("rocks or caves were believed
to be entrances to the spiritual world") and makes an educated guess at the prob-
able identity of many of the artists ("in some Native American languages the word
that means 'shaman' also means 'a man who writes on rocks'"). Hewett's color
photographs are finely detailed, clear, and well composed, and they enrich the text
enormously. There is a brief listing of other rock-art sites in North America, a
glossary, and an index. SSV
164 
* THE BULLETIN
BATESON-HILL, MARGARET 
Lao Lao ofDragon Mountain; Chinese text by Manyee
Wan; illus. by Francesca Pelizzoli; paper cuts by Sha-liu Qu. 
De Agostini,
1996 
30p
ISBN 1-899883-64-9 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Lao Lao's artistry with paper cutting spreads far and wide, even to the greedy em-
peror, who imprisons her in a stone tower with a mountain of paper and demands
that she cut him jewels. "Diamonds, I suppose," says the old woman and, with no
other alternative, begins to cut. Piece after piece she folds and cuts, but in the chill
of the night, she "lay exhausted on the stone floor with the cold freezing her bones."
The Ice Dragon from the top of the mountain rescues Lao Lao, and "Lao Lao's
papers billowed round in the ice-cold air ... and when the people woke in the
morning, the ground was covered in papery white snow." The English-language
text in black is accompanied by Chinese-language text in red, each page shadowed
with paper-cut silhouettes of dragons and snowflakes, flowers and butterflies.
Pelizzoli's color paintings are framed in a soft black that sets them off from the
screen-printed background, enhancing the luminous colors and graceful folds of
the robes as well as the stylized figures and architecture. Endnotes include a sec-
tion on Chinese writing and some simple instructions for papercutting the butter-
fly, flower, and snowflake figures; the dragon's more complex pattern is also given.
This is an unusual visual treat complemented by simple restrained language and a
strong storytelling voice. JMD
BELTON, SANDRA 
Ernestine &Amanda. 
Simon, 1996 
149p
ISBN 0-689-80848-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-6
For ten-year-olds Ernestine and Amanda, it's hate at first sight. Ernestine thinks
Amanda is stuck-up (which she is), and Amanda thinks Ernestine is fat (which she
is). They are also in competition for friends Alicia and Edna as well as for the
opportunity to play piano in recital with the great Camille Nickerson. The story is
told in alternating chapters, from September to May, first from one girl's point of
view and then from the other's. The plot unfolds easily and without artifice as each
girl begins to unbend toward the other until, in the final pages, Ernestine exercises
her gift of compassion toward Amanda, broken-hearted at the news of her parents'
separation, and a real friendship begins. Set in a middle-class African-American
community in the 1950s, this character-based story of a growing friendship is time-
less. Belton lets the girls tell their own story in language suitable to the sensibilities
of their ages and age, and the humor and spirit they bring to it sparkles as they
describe the people and incidents that affect and surround them. Funny, true, and
appealing, this deserves a cozy spot on the "favorites" shelf. JMD
BREWSTER, 
HUGH 
Anastasia's Album. 
Hyperion/Madison 
Press,
1996 
64 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7868-0292-8 
$17.95 
R Gr. 5-8
"Anastasia could not know that the world depicted in the pages of her albums
would soon be gone forever," this book concludes. Readers know, however, and
that's what makes this book poignant and macabrely fascinating. Each scrapbooky
page provides details of a lively girl leading an untroubled and luxurious life, un-
aware of what fate has planned for her. A multitude of period photographs (some
hand-colored by Anastasia), interspersed with contemporary pictures of palaces
JANUARY 1997 
* 
165
and paraphernalia, documents (Anastasia's English homework is drolly pedagogi-
cal), and quotes from the imperial family and their retinue bring the Grand Duch-
ess' world to romantic and vivid life as the text provides a simple biography. Brewster
doesn't slide over the terrible state of most Russians, particularly under the depri-
vations of World War I, but keeps the focus where it belongs, on the Romanoffs.
The book also contains more recent information, including the discovery of the
gravesite and the disproving of Anna Anderson's claim to be Anastasia; readers
caught up in the story, however, will want to work their way through the Anastasia
myth on their own. An alluring layout, a royal family, and a tragic story-it will
be an enticing combination for many readers and browsers. A glossary and list of
works consulted are included. DS
BROWN, MARGARET WISE 
The Sleepy Men; illus. by Robert Rayevsky. 
Hyperion,
1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2126-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0154-9 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Brown's rhythmic sleepytime text (which apparently has not been previously pub-
lished) tells of storytelling: after they both retire to bed, a big sleepy man tells a
little sleepy man (a young boy, in Rayevsky's illustrations) a story about the boy-
hood of the Man in the Moon, who used to, every night, dream about growing up
to full lunar glory. The pacing, helped by some ungimmicky and totally appropri-
ate variations in typeface, makes the story sing, and the repetition and dreamy
theme will lure young listeners into slumber. Rayevsky's ink-and-acrylic illustra-
tions play interestingly against the softness of the text; their opinionated lines and
solid figures never become leaden but keep things from becoming too airy-fairy,
and the cloudy nocturnal skies are streaked with vivid and near-tangible breezes.
The father-son implications make this a particularly welcome bedtime read for
sleepy daddies, who may find the bedtime rituals described at the beginning a
good way to get Junior started in the right nighttime direction. DS
CASANOVA, MARY 
Riot. 
Hyperion, 1996 
116 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2204-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0215-4 
$13.95 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Bryan Grant's Minnesota community is poised for upheaval; non-union Badgett
Construction has been awarded the contract to build a huge new paper-rolling
machine, and many local union members have begun a harassment campaign against
the new workers they refer to as "rats." Bryan sneaks around tailing his dad, a
staunch union man, as he commits midnight acts of vandalism, and when Dad
torches the mobile home of a non-union worker during a full-scale riot, Bryan
crouches in the background, capturing the whole event on videotape. Good guy/
bad guy treatment of the labor action grossly oversimplifies the issues of open-
shop employment and union busting; Bryan's tender feelings for the daughter of a
"rat" and Mom's unfailing pacifism further cast the union members in a villainous
light. In a climactic prison interview with his son, Dad first blusters, "Arresting
the wrong people in this one, that's what I say," but one page later concedes, "If
that tape's evidence, then it's against the law to withhold it. You know what you
have to do." Given what we know of Dad's character and cause, this law-abiding
finale is thoroughly unconvincing, and it only serves to let Bryan off the moral
hook. EB
166 
* THE BULLETIN
CLARKE, GILLIAN, comp. 
The Whispering Room: Haunted Poems; illus. by Justin
Todd. 
Kingfisher, 1996 
72p
ISBN 0-7534-5024-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Poems of the supernatural touch the same nerve thrilled by ghost stories and hor-
ror fiction, and they have a kid-perceived, built-in advantage-they don't take
nearly as long to read. Clarke has collected poems by fifty poets and compiled
them in an effectively appalling collection of shivers and shakes. From Jack
Prelutsky's "The Bogeyman" ("In the desolate depths of a perilous place/ the bo-
geyman lurks, with a snarl on his face") to Stevie Smith's "Fairy Story" ("I went
into the wood one day/ And there I walked and lost my way") to Emily Bronti's
"Spellbound" ("The night is darkening round me/ the wild winds coldly blow") to
Dannie Abse's "Emperors of the Island" ("Four ghosts dug one grave in the sand/
four ghosts stood on the sea wet rock/ five ghosts moved away"), Clarke's selec-
tions move from the overt scariness of witches and ghosts to the subtle eeriness of
voices barely heard and shadows barely seen. Justin Todd's full-page and double-
page gouache illustrations have what can only be described as a sort of wholesome
spookiness, his glossy characterizations looking more gleefully alarming than truly
horrific. These will make great "stretchers" and "fillers" for scary story programs,
as well as an unusual introduction to poetry for the skeptical. There is no table of
contents, but an author and a title/first line index are included. JMD
CROSS, GILLIAN 
Pictures in the Dark. Holiday House, 1996 
197p
ISBN 0-8234-1267-9 
$16.95 
R* 
Gr. 6-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 161, for review.
CURTIS, JAMIE LEE 
Tell Me Again About the Night I Was Born; illus. by Laura
Cornell. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024529-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024528-X 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
In this breezy new-baby and adoption book, the usual syrupy sentimentality is out
and energetic particularity rules. The young narrator begs her parents to tell the
story of her arrival; her familiarity with the tale, however, means that she's telling
even as she's asking ("Tell me again how you called Granny and Grandpa right
away, but they didn't hear the phone because they sleep like logs"). The account is
lively and believable, convincingly depicting the joy and solidity of the new family
without evading the birthmother's role. Cornell's effervescent line-and-watercolor
illustrations show a pair of thrilled and frazzled new parents amid a sea of baby
books and substances as baby clearly calls the shots (though young viewers may be
a bit confused by the shift from past to present in the penultimate spread). The
style of the narration makes it easy for readers-aloud to interject their own versions
of homecoming, and kids will enjoy the idea of bossing the story as well as the
household. DS
DAY, NOREHA YUSSOF, ad. 
Kancil and the Crocodiles: A Tale from Malaysia; illus.
by Britta Teckentrup. 
Simon, 1996 
26p
ISBN 0-689-80954-9 
$16.00 
R 4-6 yrs
This is a Malaysian variant of the tale in which a clever little animal tricks some
hungry crocodiles into forming a bridge by lining them up across the river to be
JANUARY 1997 
* 
167
counted. Here a mouse deer and a tortoise manage to reach some juicy rambutan
fruit on the other side of the river. Unfortunately, they then insult the crocodiles,
forgetting the need for a return journey. The concluding question-"How are we
going to get back?"-can serve as an imaginative springboard to ideas or a guessing
game. Day's narrative is succinct but rhythmic, while Teckentrup's intensely con-
trasting hues, echoed shapes, and palpable textures will make dramatic showing
for a storytime crowd. The source note indicates only that Day heard this story as
a child, but cultural variants can be easily accessed in collections such as Ellen
Babbitt's Jataka Tales and in Paul Galdone's picture book Monkey and Crocodile
(BCCB 4/70). BH
DELACRE, LULU, ad. 
Golden Tales: Myths, Legends, and Folktalesfrom Latin America;
ad. and illus. by Lulu Delacre. 
Scholastic, 1996 
[74p]
ISBN 0-590-48186-X 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
These dozen tales from Latin America include the Taino myth of how the sea was
born, the Mexican legend of Our Lady of Guadalupe, and a Quechua tale of a
brave courier and his encounter with a shapeshifter. Delacre's selection ranges
from tales from indigenous peoples like the Taino, the Inca, and the Zapotec, to
post-conquest tales that incorporate the changes wrought by the Spanish conquis-
tadors. The choppy retellings lack the smooth narrative flow that would make
them effective readalouds, but there is an inherent drama to these tales that makes
the occasional awkwardness tolerable. The oil paintings, generously interspersed
throughout, are similar to the text-somewhat flat and occasionally awkward.
Delacre's notes, however, are valuable, as she provides information not only on the
sources for the stories here but also for the visual and cultural elements she in-
cludes in the art. A short introduction places the tales in their historical and cul-
tural context, and a pronunciation guide is included. This collection has been
simultaneously released in Spanish. JMD
DEMI, ad. 
The Dragon's Tale: And Other Animal Fables of the Chinese Zodiac; ad.
and illus. by Demi. 
Holt, 1996 
26p
ISBN 0-8050-3446-3 $16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Each of the twelve animals of the Chinese zodiac is featured here in a fable. While
most of the tales are likely to be unfamiliar, listeners will recognize a version of
"Henny Penny" in "The Rabbit's Tale" and of "Who Is Strongest?" in "The Rat's
Tale." The appended morals, however, recast even old standards into a different
genre, and while the stories are all quite accessible to young listeners, the moral
summations are often more challenging--e.g., "Those with a narrow view cannot
know the immensity of the sky." Each brief fable is enclosed in a circular border
featuring motifs from the tale; another circle on the facing page extends the theme.
While there is some chromatic harmony between pairs of circles (the bright greens
of "The Goat's Tale" and the inky blacks of "The Monkey's Tale"), occasionally
hue and texture of facing circles are at odds (rich, deep purple washes of the full
illustration vie with the icy aqua border in "The Rat's Tale"). There is no explana-
tion offered of the zodiac itself, nor are there any source notes for the retellings.
Teachers looking for traditional fables other than iterations of Aesop may want to
consider this volume; those seeking material on the Chinese zodiac should first
check out Ed Young's Cat and Rat (BCCB 11/95). EB
168 
* THE BULLETIN
DoRRIS, MICHAEL 
Sees Behind Trees. 
Hyperion, 1996 
104 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-02215-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0224-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Walnut's extreme nearsightedness seems to doom his hopes of becoming a hunter,
but, with his mother's coaching, he learns to sharpen both hearing and logic; soon
his ability to identify objects and movements that clear-sighted boys cannot earns
him the adult name Sees Behind Trees. Gray Fire, a slightly disabled elder (once
the tribe's fastest runner), enlists Sees Behind Trees to guide him on a journey to
find an overwhelmingly beautiful site where, as a young man, carelessness had
caused him to lose his fleet-footedness forever. Together they achieve the quest,
the older man is mystically transformed into a rock formation, and Sees Behind
Trees is left to uncover the balance of the truth behind Gray Fire's tragic life and
mysterious "death." Just beneath the thick cultural trappings of this American
Indian story is a psychological drama with a quite contemporary sensibility. The
sixteenth-century characters exchange analyses easily ("You get alone faster than
other people. ... Your alone space is smaller"; "Being right mattered so much to
her. ... We were shielding her from discouragement"), and a coming-of-age con-
test, designed around Walnut's peculiar skills, would do Howard Gardner's Mul-
tiple Intelligence theory proud. Still, the mystical eeriness that pervades the quest
is enticing, and the theme of overcoming a disability transcends its setting. EB
ENGLISH, KAREN 
Big Wind Coming!; illus. by Cedric Lucas. 
Whitman,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-0726-1 
$14.95 
R 
4-7yrs
The big wind is a hurricane, and its advent is spooking the mules, sending cats
under the bed, and keeping the cake from rising. Sarah Ann's family calls in the
neighbors who live on lower ground and prepares to weather the onslaught, though
Sarah Ann is distressed that she can't find her namesake doll who's been left in the
pea patch. When the storm comes, it wreaks havoc, but when it goes, it leaves not
only chaos but also solid neighborliness, hope for rebuilding, and a muddy but
undamaged doll. The story is simple but charged with atmosphere, with English
deftly handling the quietly cumulative tension of the impending cataclysm. Lucas'
watercolors look more like pastels at times, with smudgy skies and horizontal brush-
strokes conveying the wind's force on every page. Though there's an old-fash-
ioned visual hint or two (a wall phone in the kitchen), the African-American family's
solid and hardworking farm life seems pretty timeless. Kids looking for a dramatic
but cozy account of some literal Sturm und Drang will enjoy hearing this in safety
when meteorological trouble starts brewing. DS
ERNST, LISA CAMPBELL 
Duke the Dairy Delight Dog; written and illus. by Lisa
Campbell Ernst. 
Simon, 1996 
34p
ISBN 0-689-80750-3 
$15.00 
R 
6-9yrs
After years of travel, Duke the dog has finally decided to settle down at Darla's
Dairy Delight, but there's one hitch-Darla the neat freak is dead against it. Ev-
erybody else likes Duke as he waits patiently outside the Home of the Famous
Chocolate-Vanilla Swirl, so he figures Darla would too if she just got to know him.
He can't quite sneak past her defenses, however, until one day when he flies in
under her olfactory radar, skids through a pool of liquid soap, and ends up in the
roaring cleaning machine-from whence he exits bedecked in a Chocolate-Vanilla
JANUARY 1997 
* 
169
Swirl coiffure. This isn't as crisply constructed or humorous as some of Ernst's
other work, but it's silly and doggy and appetizing in its swirly way. The luminous
hues of the watercolor art keep the breezy lined figures from seeming slapdash, and
both the soft-serve swirls and the dog look good enough to take home. It's hard to
go wrong with a mutt and a munchie; kids with a taste for both may even start to
drool. DS
FABULOUS FACES; ISBN 0-7894-1109-1. Monster Faces; ISBN 0-7894-1108-3.
Each book: DK, 1996 
32p 
$19.95 
illus. with photographs 
R 
Gr. 3-8
It's a rare day indeed when we tout the merits of a book/make-up kit that initially
defies library circulation. Obviously in the interest of sanitation (user's) and sanity
(librarian's), the makeup should be discarded and patrons should supply their own,
but the clarity of the instruction books easily outweighs the grief involved in trim-
ming away the heavy backboard and attached tray to get them shelf-ready. Each
series of four or six captioned color photo-frames demonstrates how children can
transform themselves, one crystal-clear step at a time, into icicle queens or rainbow
warriors, robotoid exterminators or spider-infested zombies. Sections on basic
techniques discuss and depict how to shade, blend, and stencil (Fabulous Faces)
and how to create wrinkles, stubble, bruises, gashes, etc. (Monster Faces: "Cereal
for scabs and jam for congealed blood are just some of the tricks of the trade in the
world of gore"). Ring-bound to lie flat, the thick, glossy leaves should easily wipe
clean of inevitable smudges. This is bound to be a hit with trick-or-treaters and
schoolhouse thespians, so butter up a buddy in Technical Services and go for it.
EB
GARLAND, SHERRY 
Letters from the Mountain. 
Harcourt, 1996 
211p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-200661-3 
$12.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-200659-1 
$6.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
When Taylor Ryan becomes too much trouble for his widowed mother, she sends
him off to the remote Texas home of his great-uncle. Taylor resents the restric-
tions, the chores (including the mandatory writing of one letter per day), and the
separation from his all-important buddies, and he schemes to get himself home
ASAP. Soon, however, he begins to make friends with a local boy and to realize that
he may have been wrong in a lot of ways and about a lot of things. Garland is a
capable writer and the attention-grabbing beginning, wherein Taylor confesses to
his participation in a hazing ritual that left a would-be friend in a coma, possesses
energy, but the rest of the book squanders it. The story is ultimately pretty pre-
dictable from start to finish, and the characters never really rise above cliche. The
rural setting is appealing, however, and some readers may still warm to the story of
a boy learning to stop fleeing from his conscience. DS
GEESLIN, CAMPBELL 
In Rosa's Mexico; illus. by Andrea Arroyo. 
Knopf,
1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-96721-4 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-86721-X 
$17.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Three very brief yet complete tales of young Rosa grace this unusual picture book.
Rosa's "morning music," El Gallo, saves himself from the cooking pot by crowing
violets; a dream visit to las estrellas (the stars) gives a burro new life; and honest,
generous actions by Rosa result in her acquisition of El Lobo's silken pillow. The
170 
* THE BULLETIN
magical realism of Geeslin's gentle tales requires a suspension of disbelief that is
surprisingly easy to provide. Arroyo's watercolor illustrations act as a strong visual
narrative, drawing the reader into Rosa's world with their elegantly airy composi-
tions and clarity of tone, the lush hues of the violets, the golden feathers of the
rooster, and the purple coat of El Lobo enhancing the sense of a place and time
more magical than mundane. Geeslin's simple text easily incorporates Spanish
vocabulary (a brief glossary and pronunciation guide is included) and combines
harmoniously with Arroyo's fluid visuals. In an extremely gratifying conclusion to
an unexpectedly satisfying book, the final illustration shows the sleeping, smiling
Rosa floating in a starlit sky, her head on an embroidered pillow, surrounded by
what looks like winged halos. The text reads, "Now, every night, Rosa sleeps on El
Lobo's pillow and dreams of golden anillos [rings] with wings." Insert contented
sigh here. JMD
GILBERT, BARBARA SNOW 
Stone Water. 
Front Street, 1996 
169p
ISBN 1--8'6910-11-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Grant is fourteen, and he's facing the biggest decision of his young life: whether or
not to help his grandfather die. Grandpa had always hated the idea of helplessness,
and now that he's had a stroke, his grandson is faced with the instructions the old
man left for him. Grant's lawyer father is distant and self-absorbed, incapable of
understanding his father or his son, and Grant's mother, a judge, is too loyal to the
law for Grant to enlist her assistance in illegal euthanasia. Grant is on his own, and
he has to wrestle with morality, law, opportunity, and will before he can try to
fulfill his grandfather's request. It's a compelling issue and Gilbert gives it its
thoughtful due (a lawyer herself, she allows substantial consideration of the legal
questions); the writing is smooth and capable. The characterization tends to be
sketchy and predictable (particularly Grant's busy father), however, and the book
makes the setup overelaborate at the beginning and disappointingly easy at the
end. The result is a story less emotionally involving (at least until the dramatic
conclusion) than intellectually challenging, but it does a reasonably entertaining
job of being the latter. Gilbert adds an explanatory-and cautionary-note about
assisted suicide. DS
GILSON, JAMIE 
Wagon Train 911. 
Lothrop, 1996 
191p
ISBN 0-688-14550-7 
$15.00 
Ad Gr. 3-5
Mr. Marconi's annual antidote for mid-winter curricular ennui is an interdiscipli-
nary role-playing project known to veterans of fifth-grade classes as WOW-Wag-
ons Out West ("It was math when you bought fake lanterns ... with fake money.
It was science when you caught fake cholera"). Dinah, the fifth grade's tallest girl,
and Orin, the fifth grade's shortest boy, are randomly paired as (expectant!) pio-
neers Lydia and Martin Jones and, together with four other couples in their ficti-
tious wagon train, battle the make-believe elements and each other as they make
their way to Oregon and, hopefully, a passing grade. Gilson has a keen eye for
pedagogical absurdities and for those interpersonal frictions that tend to combust
into adolescent trauma. On this outing, however, she takes a lengthy cut-off into
a subplot involving Kool-Aid hair dye and never quite gets to the hearts of her
wisecracking protagonists. Still, Gilson fans will paint their wagons for her latest
journey through the wilderness of middle school. EB
JANUARY 1997 
* 
171
GOURLEY, CATHERINE 
Sharks!: True Stories and Legends. 
Millbrook,
1996 
96p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-0001-5 
$19.90 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Anyone who has watched a middle-grade student cruise through a shark book
knows that the higher the tooth and blood levels, the higher the title's juvenile
rating. Gourley knows this, too, and she provides both in profusion. From a
retelling of the Hawaiian myth of the flesh-hungry shark-man Nanaue to a report
on the series of shark attacks that plagued Matawan, New Jersey in 1916, there's
something here to sate even the most bloodthirsty aficionado. Historical accounts,
literary excerpts, and legend blend exceptionally well, and they are presented in
spaciously designed themed chapters and illustrated with dramatic full-page color
photos. A brief note introduces each selection, generally indicating the tale's pedi-
gree, but specific source notes are not provided. Hand this to just one diehard
shark fan, and others will quickly pick up the scent. EB
GRIMM, JAKOB LUDWIG KARL 
The Twelve Dancing Princesses; ad. and illus. by
Jane Ray. 
Dutton, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45595-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A returning-soldier wins the hand of a princess by discovering how she and her
eleven sisters nightly wear out their dancing slippers when they are supposed to be
sleeping peacefully in a locked room. Ray's rosy palette and gilt detailing enhance
the fantasy atmosphere, evoking an other-worldly feel. Each illustration is framed
in gold, with gold touches highlighting embroidery on costumes, stars, hair, jew-
elry, and a bird in a (really) gilded cage. The sisters are a wide variety of shapes,
sizes, and ages, with a visual personality unique to each one. The text is more a
condensation than a retelling: the soldier follows the princesses for three nights,
but the rhythm of his successive "shadowing" is eliminated by Ray's abridgement.
Ray's changes are safe and cosmetic: the penalty for failure to discover the prin-
cesses' secret dancing life is banishment as opposed to death, the soldier chooses
the eldest princess because she is "the most interesting," and when the eldest be-
comes queen she appoints a royal shoemaker (illustrated as a woman) to keep their
dancing shoes in good repair. But Ray's utilitarian retelling of the Grimms' tale is
secondary to her extravagant illustrations, and fairy-tale fans will be pleased with
her visual interpretation. JMD
GROSSMAN, BILL 
My Little SisterAte One Hare; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Crown,
1996 
26 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-59601-6 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-59600-8 
$17.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
In this variant of "I Know an Old Lady Who Swallowed a Fly," the narrator's
omnivorous younger sister sucks down nine lizards, eight worms, seven polliwogs,
six mice, five bats, four shrews, three ants, two snakes, and one hare ("We thought
she'd throw up then and there./ But she didn't"). Eventually ten peas prove to be
her undoing ("But eating healthy foods like these/ Makes my sister sick, I guess"),
and everything comes right back up ("Oh, my goodness! What a mess!"). The
grossness is restrained but still kid-appealing, with touches that will provoke giggles
(she eats the ants' underpants) and hearty eews (she eats the mice, then "spits them
out and eats them twice"); though the ending isn't quite as snappy as one might
wish, it's nonetheless dramatically satisfying. Hawkes' art sets all this dietary derring-
172 
* 
THE BULLETIN
do in a darkened theater, with Sis chowing down on stage as a wide-eyed audience
looks on in horror and amazement. Changing perspectives and clever costuming
of both the food and its consumer (the nautical shrews, for instance, walk a sword
plank into little sister's gaping piratical mouth) keep the visuals dramatic as well as
illustrative. Young audiences will pity the hapless meals heading into the maw
even while chanting along with the repeated refrain, and they'll surely wish to
regale you with tales of what they could eat. DS
HADDIX, 
MARGARET 
PETERSON 
Don't You Dare Read This, Mrs.
Dunphrey. 
Simon, 1996 
108p
ISBN 0-689-80097-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Tish Bonner is one of the hard-edged, shoplifting "gum-cracking brigade," but the
journal she writes for English class tells a story of a different life beneath her tough
carapace. Tish's mother is mired in hopelessness, longing for the return of her
abusive husband and unable to take care of Tish and her little brother Matt. After
the return (but not reform) and re-departure of Tish's father, Mrs. Bonner takes
off to find him, leaving fifteen-year-old Tish to cover mortgage payments and
parental duties. The journal setup isn't original and the happy ending seems tacked
on, but Tish's narration is genuinely touching in its increasing desperation. Haddix
is particularly good at the inexorable march of isolation: Tish begins with little
comradeship and spirals down to none, but it's also clear that Tish's problems at
being the adult aren't due to any personal deficiencies, just to the impossibility of
the task. The peeking-into-a-life appeal of the journal format combined with the
realism of Tish's plight will satisfy readers looking for high drama with a gritty
edge. DS
HALLWORTH, GRACE, comp. 
Down by the River: Afro-Caribbean Rhymes, Games,
and Songs for Children; illus. by Caroline Binch. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-69320-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
Listeners soon realize that a washed-out playday in the Caribbean prompts the
same familiar rhyme chanted on the American mainland ("Rain, rain,/ Go away;/
Come again/ Another day"), and that a taunt is a taunt, regardless of its idiomatic
lilti "Tit for tat,/ Butter for fat;/ Yo' kill m' dog,/ I go kill yo' cat." These jingles,
which Hallworth introduces as childhood memories and contributions from Car-
ibbean friends, range from fingerplays and jumprope jingles to nonsense verse and
rhymes for traditional games. Foreign words are defined in small print (although
American children will enjoy a nasty little ditty about "Teacher" more if someone
fills them in on the meaning of "knickers"), and Binch's luminously expressive
watercolor cast clearly conveys the appropriate setting or mood for the playful
lyrics. So infectious, in fact, are their beach-bumming and schoolyard antics that
readers and listeners may well feel short-changed by the inadequate directions
Hallworth offers for several of their games and the absence of hints for chanting
some of the arrhythmic verses. Still, much of the fun of these chants is their adapt-
ability, and there's no reason the audience can't swipe a few favorites for their own
playground jammin' and jeerin'. EB
JANUARY 1997 
* 
173
HELPRIN, MARK 
A City in Winter; illus. by Chris Van Allsburg. 
Viking * Ariel
1996 
14 7p
ISBN 0-670-86843-4 
$22.50 
M 
Gr. 7-12
The nameless narrator recounts the story of how, when she was ten, she came into
her rightful place as queen of her conquered country. Raised in the distant forest
by her beloved tutor after the murder of her parents and the accession of the usurper,
she goes forth to fulfill her royal destiny in the city on the plain. There she en-
counters a strange world of corruption, misinformation, obsessive bureaucracy,
and slavery, but she perseveres, finding friends and fate on her side. It's a classi-
cally appealing plotline, but Helprin doesn't do it justice. The pace is glacial and
the action and characters distanced; the language is heavily metaphoric, and the
tone veers uneasily between poetic, political, and fussily arch. There is much cre-
ativity in the world of this city, but there are too many intricately worked details
(the two pages describing the street vendors, for instance) and not enough heart
(the helper characters are quirky but flat, never engaging any sympathy or interest
in their fate). The surprising warmth of Van Allsburg's color plates is a relief, but
they are ultimately as static and distant as the story. Kids drawn by the idea will do
better with Philip Pullman's The Golden Compass (BCCB 4/96) or William
Goldman's The Princess Bride. DS
HUBBARD, JIM, ed. 
Lives Turned Upside Down: Homeless Children in Their Own
Words and Photographs. Simon, 1996 
4 0p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-80649-3 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Hubbard is the founder of Shooting Back, a program which teaches homeless kids
photography. Here he provides a brief foreword to the text, in which four home-
less kids describe their lives. The result ranges from downright sad ("I'm not really
homeless because I have a place to live. I live in the Sunlight Mission Church with
my brother, Kevin, and my mother"-Sarah, age ten) to vaguely hopeful ("I really
want to have a big house someday ... big and white and we would have a fence
around it and a dog in the backyard"-Lennie, age twelve). The children matter-
of-factly tick off situations even worse than a homeless shelter-living on the street,
in a park, sleeping in a car. Each personal essay is punctuated with photographs
(often dim and lacking in contrast) taken by the speaker, which provide sometimes
thoughtful, sometimes in-your-face glimpses into his or her gritty reality. The
multi-voiced text makes the book feel choppy, which ironically serves to distance
the reader from the stories and mute the obvious there-but-for-the-grace-of God-
go-I message. An appendix offers names and addresses for five non-profit national
groups involved with the homeless. SSV
HUCK, 
CHARLOTTE, 
ad. 
Toads and Diamonds; illus. 
by Anita
Lobel. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13681-8 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13680-X 
$16.00 
R 
5-7 yrs
The tale of the kind and unkind sisters-one rewarded with jewels and flowers
falling from her mouth with every word, and the other punished with repulsive
snakes and toads-is well known from Perrault's French version but has many
other cultural variants as well. This picture book is an elaborate production, with
detailed narrative, an exemplary source note, and operatically dramatic art. Lobel's
sweeping, curvaceous gouache paintings feature elegant costuming and are layered
174 
* 
THE BULLETIN
with thick color. Fictionalized dialogue extends the text, and one hopes that lis-
teners will see some irony in Huck's changed ending: "On the day of her wedding
to the prince, as Renee spoke her marriage vows, neither jewels nor flowers fell
from her lips, for now she no longer needed them." One message coming through
loud and clear is that wealth, beauty, and sweet words will catch a husband, and
after that you're home free. BH
HUGHES, DEAN 
Team Picture. Atheneum, 1996 
155p
ISBN 0-689-31924-X 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-9
In Family Pose (BCCB 3/89), David found a makeshift family in the staff of an old
hotel; now he's living with Paul, the bellman there, who has become his legal
guardian. Things aren't always easy at home (Paul is having setbacks in his struggle
with alcoholism), and David concentrates on his baseball, the one area he can
really exert control over; soon, however, it becomes clear that even his desired
control comes at a high price and loses him as much as it gains him. Hughes is true
to his original characters here, and the absence of an idyllic sequel for troubled
David is realistic and refreshing. Characterization remains strong and the depic-
tion of relationships is sensitive and convincing, particularly David's with his team-
mates, the older woman on whom he has a crush, and a girl who gradually becomes
his friend. The intensive baseball scenes may get pretty thick for non-fans, but
"They're not extraneous: the nature of David's play reveals his inner demons. Read-
ers who like sports stories with more behind them will join fans of the first book in
appreciating the new chapter in David's story. DS
HUTH, HOLLYYOUNG 
Darkfright; illus. by Jenny Stow. 
Atheneum, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80188-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
For Darkfright, an Afro-Caribbean woman, the night is "a heap of bad t'ings."
She barricades her house against the cool, purply blues of the night with all the
noise and bright yellow light she can muster, enlisting dayclean songs, calypso
tunes, and fireflies. Her neighbors, kept awake by Darkfright's wild, solitary par-
ties, fuss and complain but cannot convince Darkfright to enjoy the daylight and
sleep through the dark night. Healing an injured star enlightens Darkfright to the
good things about the dark, though this somewhat self-conscious and fantastical
solution does little to mitigate her role as the fool. An inconsistent use of internal
and end rhymes, fanciful alliteration coupled with explanatory prose, and hard-
consonant dialect ("everyt'ing," "t'rowing") results in an arrhythmic text more
suited for reading alone than reading aloud. A few of Stow's figures border on
caricature (e.g., Darkfright dancing a sunrise jubilee), but her paint, pastel, and
cut-paper collages, with their spongy textures and multi-colored palette, generally
suggest an island landscape both sun-drenched and starlit, friendly and not to be
feared. AEB
INGOLD, JEANETTE 
The Window. 
Harcourt, 1996 
[192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-201265-6 $12.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-201264-8 
$5.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
The accident that killed Mandy's mother has left Mandy blind and, until her Texas
great-aunt and great-uncles take her in, homeless. She works on adjusting to her
new home and her disability, but her real interest lies in her newfound ability to
JANUARY 1997 
* 
175
hear past events from her attic-bedroom window. That's how she becomes famil-
iar with the life of Gwen, who fell in love with a young salesman in 1950 and left,
never to return; Gwen turns out to have been Mandy's grandmother, whose baby,
given up for adoption, became Mandy's mother. The reality of tough little Mandy's
dealing with her new situation is the strong point here: the first-person narration
tells of struggles with Braille and with new people in a way both convincing and
unsentimental. The Gwen part of the story doesn't blend in too well and is less
successful, involving as it does fantasy, unlikely facts (the ease of tracing birth or
adopted family), and one strange gap: why, when Mandy is becoming so obsessed
with discovering the identity of her grandfather, does the book never mention her
father at all? Still, young readers may enjoy Mandy's nerve and persistence as she
struggles with the present and chases down the past. DS
JENKINS, LYLL BECERRA DE 
So Loud a Silence. 
Lodestar, 1996 
154 p
ISBN 0-525-67538-8 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Seventeen-year-old Juan Guillermo gets off a bus from Bogota to find himself in a
lonely, mountainous area of Colombia where everyone seems afraid-of what, he
does not understand. His aunt's farm is luxurious compared to the life of poverty
his parents and siblings endure back in the city. During the course of the novel, he
discovers that his aunt is really his grandmother, who has disguised her relation-
ship to her illegitimate son; he discovers a first love, only to lose her to the conflict
between soldiers and guerrillas; and he discovers a deep love for his family, whom
he has distanced with angry contempt. Like The Honorable Prison (BCCB 1/88)
and Celebrating the Hero (11/93), this intertwines the personal with the political,
but the latter seems less sturdy an element; the context of the fighting remains
obscure to the reader and even to the protagonist, who simply sees (once unexpect-
edly and once predictably) the bitter effects of a war that ultimately victimizes
innocent campesinos. Despite the explanation that "there was so much violence
taking place in the streets that no one gave a thought to faraway mountains," it
seems odd for Juan Guillermo to be so totally unaware of the conflict. By contrast,
his relationships with his grandmother and the girl to whom he's attracted are
clearly developed, as is his growing respect for a father we never meet but neverthe-
less begin to know. With some scenes functionally representative and other scenes
fully realized, this is thinner than Jenkins' earlier work but could involve readers
familiar with Latin America's more repressive regimes-and with the terrorist tac-
tics they engender. BH
JENKINS, MARTIN 
Fly Traps!: Plants That Bite Back; illus. by David
Parkins. 
Candlewick, 1996 
27p
ISBN 1-56402-896-8 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 2-4
What could be more delicious than a picture book of nature ingesting its own?
Unless you're feeling waspish, there's plenty to admire in the resourcefulness of
these botanical diners, any number of which can turn an afternoon flyby into a
terminal outing. In short order, we're introduced to a variety of carnivorous plants-
bladderworts, sundews, butterworts, Venus flytraps, cobra lilies, pitcher plants-
all of which capture and consume their prey while looking rather fetching. The
unnamed narrator follows his bliss ("I like watching plants that eat animals") around
the world, tossing out random asides (sundews hate fertilizer and require rainwa-
ter). Botanical notes in "handwritten" script are liberally sprinkled throughout the
text, providing more details on these exotic plants. The cartoony ink-and-water-
176 
* THE BULLETIN
color drawings are effective and entertaining for the most part, although they some-
times degenerate into cutesy critters grinning at their grim reapers (readers want-
ing clearer pictures of the subjects might turn to Jerome Wexler's photoessay Sundew
Stranglers, BCCB 7/95). Collect this specimen for your own little shop of horrors.
SSV
JENNINGS, PATRICK 
Faith and the Electric Dogs. 
Scholastic, 1996 
14 6p
ISBN 0-590-69768-4 
$15.95 
NR Gr. 4-6
Faith's dog (whose name is Grumph in the Bowwow language and Edison accord-
ing to Faith) narrates the story of his owner's adventures as she struggles to adjust
to her new life in Mexico (her new stepfather is Mexican), sets off in a rocket ship
to return to San Francisco, crashes on a deserted island instead, meets a castaway
who left Mexico in a similarly absurd fashion sixty years ago, and realizes that
maybe she was a bit hasty about her departure. Edison's narration is peppered
with phrases (each explained in the margin) in Spanish, French, and various dog
languages; combine this with long rambling dialogues, a dearth of characteriza-
tion, and the preciousness of the exploration of doggy culture and the result is a
disjointed and shallow book. The plot turns are random and inexplicable rather
than fantastical and inventive, and the ultimate message (Mexico is kind of a neat
place once you get used to it) is so predictable it's surprising that it took such
limply peculiar turns to get there. The topic of a child's adjustment to a new
culture can make for an interesting book, but it certainly doesn't here. DS
KARAs, G. BRIAN 
Home on the Bayou: A Cowboy's Story; written and illus. by G.
Brian Karas. 
Simon, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80156-4 
$15.00 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Poor Ned: his mother is forcibly removing him from his natural cowboy habitat
of the West to live in a swamp (okay, the Louisiana bayou); even his trusty lasso
succumbs after being used to tie the luggage to the roof, so Ned has to make do
with a garden hose. At school he's plagued by dreams of his former home and by
loathsome bully Big Head Ed ("'You couldn't lasso a dead alligator,' said Big Head
Ed"), until Ned finally musters his cowboy pride and whups his rival soundly.
Karas' first picture-book text is a delight: the standard moving-adjustment story is
made effervescent and new by the authenticity (an angry Ned would "rather eat
cactus spines than answer his mom"), the humor (when Ned frustratedly kicks a
rock into the bayou, "the rock stopped short of the bayou, but Ned didn't"), and
the imaginative details (Big Head Ed's comeuppance comes when Ned hooks up
his ersatz lasso and turns on the water). The illustrations drift across a background
of green-tinged cream, showing cowboy-hatted Ned woeful among Spanish moss
and alligators and then modestly triumphant as his Peanuts-esque classmates wor-
shipfully polish his boots. Sort of a pint-sized tall tale, this never loses sight of
realism but still packs a comic wallop. DS
KORT, MICHAEL G. 
Yitzhak Rabin: Israel's Soldier Statesman. Millbrook,
1996 
191p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-0100-3 
$16.90
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7613-0135-6 
$8.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
This worshipful biography marks the first anniversary of Rabin's assassination by
another Israeli, a law student and religious fanatic who acted on "instructions from
God." In the final irony of his life, the old soldier was killed while trying to lead
JANUARY 1997 
* 
177
his reluctant nation to peace. Kort interweaves sections of Rabin's memoirs with a
chronological retelling not only of the subject's personal history but of Israel's
history as well. Kort's unquestioning acceptance of Israeli policies and actions and
his glossing over some troublesome episodes in Rabin's life (his "nervous collapse"
was cured by a good night's sleep; Mrs. Rabin's conviction of keeping illegal bank
accounts in the U.S. was "embarrassing") are problematic. Despite the workman-
like prose style and uncritical tone, persistent readers will be rewarded with solid
information as they follow the usual biographical timeline, examining Rabin's role
in Israel's numerous wars, observing him as ambassador to the United States, and,
finally, admiring him as a Nobel Prize winner and peace advocate. A detailed
chronology, endnotes, bibliography, and index are included; black-and-white pho-
tographs appear throughout. SSV
KRENSKY, STEPHEN 
Breaking into Print: Before andAfter the Invention ofthe Printing
Press; illus. by Bonnie Christensen. 
Little, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-316-50376-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
This isn't so much the history of printing itself as it is the history of the written
word. The text begins with monks creating illuminated manuscripts during the
Dark Ages in Europe, but the fact-filled sidebars flash back to as early as A.D. 105,
the invention of paper in China some 1,000 years before its introduction to Eu-
rope. Linking the importance of writing and printing to the growth of govern-
ment and commerce, Krensky shows how the invention of the printing press was
the almost-inevitable result of the combination of need, opportunity, a concise
written language, and common sense. All these elements finally came together in
fifteenth-century goldsmith Johannes Gutenberg's invention, the printing press; it
cost him twenty years and his business, leaving him a pauper at his death. The
story of printing closes with a segue to the modern world-an image of children
viewing Gutenberg himself on a computer monitor. Christensen's ornate yet re-
strained wood engravings are tinted with watercolors; each illustration is framed
by painted borders in the style of illuminated manuscripts. The result is rather
that of strolling through chronologically arranged art galleries-all that pleasure
without aching feet. The final spread of the book is a timeline which ranges from
3500 B.C. (pictographic writing) to the 1980s (computerized typesetting). SSV
KVASNOSKY, LAURA MCGEE 
What Shall I Dream?; illus. by Judith Byron
Schachner. 
Dutton, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45207-9 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Prince Alexander's family rushes to consult the experts when the prince asks, night
after night, "What shall I dream?" Unfortunately, the dreams concocted and wo-
ven and swept by the Dream Brewers, Dream Weavers, and Dream Sweepers are
more suited for the adults that summoned them than for an active young prince.
The more unsatisfying Alexander's dreams are, the grumpier Alexander becomes,
but sleeplessness and a wise nursemaid's suggestion eventually lead him to his own
adventure-filled dreams. 
Figures and facial expressions are sometimes stiff, but
are set against a watercolor landscape that spans the spectrum; daylight romps and
dreams are dominated by primary colors, while fantastical evenings and dream-
making scenes are more subtly hued, with cool greens and warm yellows. The
story tends toward the precious, and it's informed by an adult point of view that
betrays itself through Alexander's sulks, scowls, and sobs; rather than sympathiz-
ing with the prince, young readers may be more apt to wonder why he doesn't
178 
* 
THE BULLETIN
stick up for himself, especially when the soon-tedious deferral to the dream experts
is unsuccessful. Young insomniacs, however, may take heart at Prince Alexander's
plight. 
AEB
LANE, DAKOTA 
Johnny Voodoo. 
Delacorte, 1996 
199p
ISBN 0-385-32230-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Deirdre is a transplanted New Yorker, who moved with her father and little brother
to a small Louisiana town after the death of her mother. She dislikes her father,
hates her school, where she's an outsider, and misses her mother terribly, so she's
immediately drawn to the sensitive loner who seems to understand her so well.
Johnny is a local near-legend; he's lived on his own for years, ever since his older
brother disappeared (the neighborhood presumes him dead), and he makes his
living from his gifted playing of the accordion. Lane writes with incisive accuracy
about the various cliques and patterns in the high-school social world, then slips
into a lush and yearning tone when describing Deirdre and Johnny's intense ro-
mance. The book spirals down and gets murky towards the end, with the shifting
family dynamics (Deirdre learns an unpleasant truth about her late mother) and
the problems in the lovers' relationship seeming necessary for closure rather than
emotionally or even factually likely. For most of the story, however, this is intense
and alluring, a dangerous romance to draw the readers of Hahn's The Wind Goes
Backward (BCCB 5/93). DS
LAWLOR, LAURIE 
Where Will This Shoe Take You?: A Walk Through the History of
Footwear. Walker, 1996 
132p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8435-6 
$18.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8434-8 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
It's never too early to start up a shoe fetish, and readers who haven't yet suc-
cumbed to this mania just might now. Although the subtitle suggests this may be
a costume reference, Lawlor actually demonstrates to her readers how samples of
historical and contemporary footgear reflect the economic class, social status, level
of authority, or even the political tendencies of their wearers. The probable inven-
tion and development of seven categories of shoes (sandals, boots, oxfords, pumps,
clogs, mules, and moccasins, in case you're curious) are discussed, as well as shoe-
related customs and superstitions from various cultures. The design is clean and
balanced, black-and-white illustrations and photographs are plentiful, and an ex-
tensive annotated bibliography is appended. Read this and you'll never look at
your old sneakers the same way again. EB
LEE, MARIEG. 
Necessary Roughness. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
228p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025130-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025124-7 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
When the Kim family closes their produce store in Los Angeles and moves to
northern Minnesota, Chan and his sister Young have a severe attack of culture
shock. Arriving at high school for their first day, Chan notes, "The kids looked
normal enough, like kids, anyway, but I finally figured out what was weird. They
were all blond. Blond beyond California blond. Albino blond.... I strained to
catch a glimpse of the familiar black hair of the Asian or Mexican kids. Or the
dark skin of the black kids. Nope. It was a complete whiteout." Likeable Chan
narrates the story of the family's adjustment to life in Iron River, Minnesota in a
JANUARY 1997 
* 
179
believable voice. Lee strikes an effective balance between action and character
development, as Chan's football skirmishes, echoed in his battles with his tradi-
tional Korean father, are softened by his relationship with his gentle sister and his
growing appreciation of their new home. The death of Young in a car accident is
a tragic catalyst, bridging gaps between friends and family, community and new-
comers, in a way that could be terribly contrived but is, in Lee's hands, emotion-
ally true. JMD
LESTER, HELEN 
Princess Penelope's Parrot; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-395-78320-8 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Princess Penelope (whose favorite phrases are "Gimme! Gimme! Gimme!" and
"Mine! Mine! Mine!") is having a birthday. Her cake decoration is a green parrot
in a cage, who suffers great verbal abuse because he will not talk to her. When
Prince Percival ("Rich! RICH! RICH!") stops by for a visit, Penelope gets what's
coming to her as the parrot (hidden behind a curtain) repeats all Penelope's nasty
phraseology to the aghast prince. Lester's spoiled-brat princess is perfectly embod-
ied in Munsinger's watercolor and pen-and-ink illustrations. The bedraggled green
parrot undermines the egregiously pink ruffled princess in a progressively more
chaotic throne room, as curtains, paintings, and princess are undone by the squawk-
ing bird. This is a great readaloud for primary graders who can appreciate the
humor in the princess' comeuppance. JMD
LEVITIN, SONIA 
A Piece ofHome; illus. by Juan Wijngaard. 
Dial, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1626-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1625-7 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Gregor and his family are emigrating from Russia to America. He is understand-
ably anxious, and he chooses his security blanket, part of a quilt made by his great-
grandmother, as the one "treasure" he can take with him. When the family finally
arrives in America, Gregor is sorry he brought it, certain that Elie, a cousin his age,
will laugh at him. But Elie has a blanket just like it, and Aunt Marissa explains the
similarity, saying, "We cut the blanket in half, so I could bring a piece of home
with me to America." Levitin's story is message-driven, but it makes a specific
immigrant experience universal by concentrating on the moving anxiety of one
little boy. Gregor's uncertainty is evident in both text and illustrations as he huddles
beneath and clings stubbornly to his old blanket. Though inclined to be flat and
stodgy, Wijngaard's watercolors have a photo-documentary feel to them; focusing
on the faces and reactions of the reunited family, they concretely chronicle the
journey from Russia to America. JMD
MAGUIRE, GREGORY 
Oasis. Clarion, 1996 
[176p]
ISBN 0-395-67019-5 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Hand-short for Mohandas-has been quietly living with his idealistic father,
who now owns and manages the low-rent Oasis Motel in rural Massachusetts.
After his father's sudden death, Hand's strong-minded mother, long separated
from her husband, returns to take care of her thirteen-year-old son. The ranks of
Oasis-dwellers swell when Iranian refugees, a father and little boy to whom Hand's
father had offered shelter before he died, arrive to stay, and soon Hand's mother
180 
* THE BULLETIN
has invited Hand's Uncle Wolfgang, dying of AIDS, to make his home there. The
hotel of wayfaring strangers, like the ship of fools, is a time-honored plot device
and metaphor; Maguire uses it for a subtly and credibly rendered story of strong
emotional resonance, as Hand comes to terms with his guilt about his parents'
separation and his father's death and begins to forgive everyone, including himself,
for their frailties. Characterization is strong, with Nur and Vuffy Ziba, the Iranian
guests, particularly richly depicted, and the relationship between Hand and little
Vuffy is the book's most touching. Never heavy-handed, frequently leavened with
humor, and always accessible to young readers, this is a nuanced story about hu-
man fragility and hope. DS
MANSON, AINSLIE 
Just Like New; illus. by Karen Reczuch. 
Groundwood/Dou-
glas & McIntyre, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-88899-228-9 
$14.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Sally's Sunday school in Montreal is collecting Christmas gifts for children in war-
torn England; the gifts are not to be store-bought, but well-loved possessions from
home, things which are "just like new." While older brother Jim seizes the oppor-
tunity to get rid of a decidedly unmasculine book on flowers, Sally decides to send
one of her three cherished dolls on the long journey to London, choosing Ann
Marie, the only one who is "just like new." Even if the story is a bit idealized, it
suggests the extent to which a child living far from the bombs of World War II was
nevertheless affected by the devastation; Sally's concern for her doll's welfare (she
makes air holes in the gift box so Ann Marie can breathe) and future owner is
heartfelt. Honest characterization transforms a history lesson into a story, and
details provide authenticity in both the illustrations (women factory workers, vic-
tory posters on telephone poles) and text (Jim marches like Dad did before he was
wounded, Sally wears turned-down skirts and darned sweaters). Broad watercolor
scenes with smooth doll-like figures chronicle Sally's life (in color) simultaneously
with that of Deborah, the girl who will receive Ann Marie (in black and white,
until the end). Pair this with stories of the U.S. homefront, such as Gloria Houston's
But No Candy (BCCB 12/92). AEB
MEAD, ALICE 
Adem's Cross. 
Farrar, 1996 
132p
ISBN 0-374-30057-7 $15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Adem is an ethnic Albanian in the former Yugoslavian province of Kosovo, where
the Serbian soldiers are making their violent presence increasingly felt. Attending
the segregated school has become a small act of resistance, but acts of resistance are
met with reprisals and death-as Adem finds out when his defiant older sister loses
her life. After his father and then Adem himself become the victims of beatings
and torture, Adem decides he must make the dangerous and illegal flight to Alba-
nia. The Kosovo conflict has been largely overshadowed by its Bosnian neighbor,
but this is a sobering reminder of the toll ethnic violence is taking there; Mead
doesn't shrink from the awfulness and the hopelessness of the situation. The youth
of the protagonist-and of the victims-makes the story particularly resonant for
young readers, and the total disarray of life in such a state is well conveyed. The
characters are unfortunately less involving than they should be, and the one bit of
questioning of the good guy/bad guy ethnic characterizations comes in briefly and
late. The author's introduction explains the area's history (blandly describing Tito
as "a strong leader"), but there is no explanation of her sources except in a jacket-
flap mention of two visits to the area. DS
JANUARY 1997 
* 
181
MORPURGO, MICHAEL 
Robin ofSherwood; illus. by Michael Foreman. 
Harcourt,
1996 
113p
ISBN 0-15-201315-6 
$22.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
A contemporary young boy finds Robin Hood's great tree uprooted after a storm,
then drifts into dreams of Robin's adventures. Robin Hood here is a poor man's
young son, driven to the Outcasts of Sherwood when he rescues his father from a
death sentence. Marion, Much, Friar Tuck, Little John, and the others all get
their stories, and Robin and his band engage in the usual duping of the sheriff and
restoration of King Richard, until eventually vengeful treachery ends his life. The
book includes no source notes, so it seems that it is Morpurgo himself who has
added eugenics to the Sheriffs evil practices: like many of the Outcasts, Marion is
an albino, and others are similarly physically differentiated or disabled; Robin and
Marion's young son is also not a typical part of the legend. Between the contem-
porary framework, the Sheriffs xenophobia, and the stately style (which often has
Robin displaying various shades of twentieth-century angst), this has a somberness
that saps the energy from the legend; the earnest members of this collective are
hardly Merry Men. There's really not enough magic or character development to
make up for the absence of panache, but this greater sense of oppression does have
its historical merits. A plethora of Foreman's watercolors adds movement to the
text, as swiftly drawn Outcasts lurk amid the trees or gallop through the night.
This isn't a particularly noteworthy take on the classic, but kids eager for Robiniana
might enjoy the trek through the familiar forest. DS
MORRIS, WINIFRED 
Liar. Walker, 1996 
161p
ISBN 0-8027-8461-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Fourteen-year-old Alex has one last chance to stay out of McBride, a juvenile de-
tention center-keep out of trouble. He leaves his emotionally unstable, abusive
mother behind and attempts to recreate himself with his maternal grandparents in
a rural Oregon community-working with his grandfather, avoiding fights, be-
coming tentatively romantic with the bright compassionate Mickey, even befriend-
ing the class underdog-but he doesn't have the skills to live in the present, and
his explosive past won't let him alone. In an unusually sober conclusion, Alex gets
into a fight with a longtime tormentor and is sent to McBride. His grandparents
don't give up on him, however, and he manages to come out at the end of his time
with a fragile grip on a possible future. Alex is not a precociously adult teenager,
nor does he indulge in out-of-place philosophizing. The author is not given to
much sentimentalizing but comes down hard on the side of personal choice and
controlling the direction of your life. The short sentences and solid physical de-
scriptions make this accessible to a wide age and reading range, and the spare,
gritty description of the unsavory circumstances of Alex's upbringing are
unsensationally yet realistically presented. It's a pretty good "good boy goes bad
but gets good again" tale, with Alex as a believable narrator and ultimately sympa-
thetic character. JMD
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Toussaint L'Ouverture: The Fight for Haiti's Freedom;
illus. by Jacob Lawrence. 
Simon, 1996 
40p
ISBN 0-689-80126-2 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
According to a note, Lawrence's series of narrative paintings about Toussaint
L'Ouverture, created in the late 1930s, launched his artistic career; here, paired
182 
* THE BULLETIN
with Myers' text, they capably and succinctly explain the story of the great leader
of Haiti's revolution. The writing is simple and straightforward, describing the
history of Haiti, Toussaint's birth and self-education, and finally his brilliant
generalship of the bloody fight against both the Spanish and the French for Hai-
tian independence-which came only after Toussaint had died in a French prison.
It's likely that the paintings are most powerful in their original form as silent, full-
sized independent narrative rather than illustration for an accompanying text, but
the visual rhythm of their flat planes of muted color (energized by varied compo-
sitions) convey the thoughtful somberness of the man and the time as well as the
hazards and action of the battle. A concise and effective account of the general of
a lesser-sung revolution, this will provide some vivid history for younger readers.
DS
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Song ofthe Magdalene. 
Scholastic, 1996 
24 0p
ISBN 0-590-93705-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Young Miriam sometimes finds her life very confusing, but no one seems inter-
ested in answering her queries. What is the meaning of love? What is the meaning
of the fits she sometimes falls into? Why are there limits placed on her merely
because she is a woman? Her growing friendship with Abraham, the son of the
family servant, brings her comfort but more questions: Abraham is loving and
wise, but an outcast because of his palsy. Eventually her questioning leads her to
Galilee, to meet the healer and prophet Joshua, and to carve her place in biblical
history as Mary Magdalene. This isn't as successful as Napoli's fleshing out of
legendary characters in Zel (BCCB 7/96) and The Magic Circle (BCCB 4/93); the
story here moves with painstaking slowness and lacks the atmospheric and mysti-
cal appeal of those works. The depiction of Miriam/Mary as possessing a fairly
modern mindset and being misunderstood rather than sinning is interesting, but it
does mean that her redemption by Jesus is essentially superfluous and therefore
undramatic. It's still a provocative imagining about one of the most famous women
in the New Testament, however, and readers may enjoy sharing Napoli's "what
ifs." A brief note explains the author's sources. DS
NIXON, JOAN LOWERY 
Search for the Shadowman. Delacorte, 1996 
14 9p
ISBN 0-385-32203-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Andy and his friend J.J. are initially lukewarm about their Texas history assign-
ment, which requires their asking their relatives what local life was like years ago.
Andy, however, stumbles on a mystery: the family patriarch's black-sheep son,
about whom no one will speak and whose name has been crossed out of the family
Bible. Andy takes a shine to his late great-great-great uncle Coley Joe and decides
to clear his name; his research leads him to the truth about the dead, but also to
some unpleasant secrets that might hurt the living, which forces him to make a
decision about publicizing his revelations. Old secrets, graveyard wandering, Texas
outlawry-it's a heady brew, and readers will relish seeing Andy solve the mystery
even as they understand his final dilemma. The details of the research, however,
bog the story down, particularly in the laborious descriptions of Andy's on-line
hunt, and Andy's final resolution to keep the scandalous parts of his discovery to
himself is honorable but unlikely. It's still an engaging mystery, however, with
one foot in the archives and one in the present day; kids who like their sleuthing
on the technical side will enjoy it. A frontispiece provides a family tree to help
keep the fictional ancestors straight. DS
JANUARY 1997 
* 
183
OLDHAM, JUNE 
Found. Kroupa/Orchard, 1996 
199p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08893-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-09543-6 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Ren is sent by her pregnant mother to "foster" in a community with a more gener-
ous allowance for children, but something goes wrong, and her expected caretaker
does not appear. Hiding from the authorities, Ren is joined by three other adoles-
cents: Brocket, a foundling raised in the woods by the traveler Mrs. Glimmer; Lil,
a teenage streetperson fleeing unidentified horrors; and Hilary, an educated young
man scouting the terrain in an effort to complete the work of his scientist father.
The four adolescents join forces to save an abandoned baby, christened "Found"
by Lil, and find their way to more hospitable environs. The tension level increases
with the appearance of Cob, a half-mad traveler who kidnaps Found for her own,
the baby's recovery by Lil, and Found's subsequent illness. The author makes this
dystopian twenty-first-century world believable not by the complete evocation of a
society, but by showing the detritus of a society that has moved on to something
else. Oldham places her four characters and the pivotal baby in the midst of a
deserted countryside peopled with the disenfranchised, haunted by ghosts, and
beleaguered by the authorities. Small hints give a picture of fractured society in
which children are seen as commodities to be exploited or problems to be handled.
The characterizations of the four adolescents definitely fill a specific function within
the action-driven plot, but they are still developed enough to make them more
than caricatures. The action takes place over a few days and moves quickly to the
denouement: Hilary, the group's only legitimate connection to a benign outside
community, finally leads them to salvation. JMD
OSBORNE, MARY POPE 
One World, Many Religions: 
The Ways We
Worship. 
Knopf, 1996 
86 p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-93930-X 
$26.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-83930-5 $25.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
This exceptionally handsome volume offers middle graders a thoughtful overview
of major world religions-Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism,
Confucianism, and Taoism. Rather than conforming to an arbitrary checklist,
each of six essay-styled chapters addresses themes of religious tenets, deities, mo-
rality, and ritual only as they are pertinent to a particular faith. Points of contro-
versy are met with candor and delicacy: "Some believe that the caste system is
unfair because it means that people are not treated equally. But many Hindus
defend it, saying that for centuries it has helped their society run smoothly." Plenty
of white space frames the text and the numerous photos, which tend to focus on
worshippers rather than on sites and artifacts. Viewers will be especially drawn to
images of other children engaged in their diverse rites-an intent Moslem boy
poring over the Koran, a Buddhist boy solemnly undergoing tonsure to prepare
for a stay in the monastery, dazzlingly costumed Hindu girls celebrating Diwali. A
glossary, timeline, distribution map, and index are appended. EB
OWEN, GARETH 
Rosie No-Name and the Forest of Forgetting. Holiday House,
1996 
109p
ISBN 0-8234-1266-0 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Rosie's father is going to write a general's biography, so Rosie is accompanying
him to the interview. In her explorations of the general's sprawling old house, she
184 
* THE BULLETIN
has a terrible accident that sends her out of her body and back through time. First
she chases after a willful girl playing hide and seek, then she makes friends with
adventurous young Alastair (who is really the general as a boy), then she and Alastair
both fall into the clutches of the Witch of the Dark Pool, who has already seized
Alastair's sister. Owen has a lively sense of dialogue and character, and his writing
is energetic. His plotting, however, is another matter: on top of what could have
been a nice Tom's Midnight Garden story he piles unnecessary devices, curves,
subplots, and superplots; the result is opaque, murky, and frustrating. We don't
care about extraneous dungeons and witches or the story becoming a book; we just
want to hear more about the friendship between Rosie and the general both young
and old. The style will pull some readers in, but the haphazard plot will disappoint
them. DS
PRESILLA, MARICELE. 
Mola: Cuna Life Stories andArt. Holt, 1996 
32p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-3801-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
As Pegi Shea used pa'ndau cloth to illuminate Hmong culture in The Whispering
Cloth (BCCB 3/95), Presilla interprets the images in Cuna molas (intricately lay-
ered and embroidered cutwork) to explicate the culture of these Panamanians who
have settled the coastal islands but still farm the mainland. Whereas Shea could
select a single pa'ndau to illustrate an entire span of Hmong history, mola images
depict smaller slices of life, and although the array of needlework selected for this
volume is broad enough to illustrate aspects of Cuna culture from history and
political organization to fishing, cooking, and childrearing, there are moments
when the text seems stretched to fit appealing samples of art. (Apropos of nothing,
Presilla interjects, "The Cuna tell their children that babies are brought to the
world on the backs of animals like this giant bird.") However, Presilla generally
adheres to loose but cogent organization and briefly relates well-chosen details of
this matriarchal society in fluent, poetic prose interspersed with quotes from Cuna
songs. In a concluding note, the author speaks of her passion for mola collecting,
and how appreciation of the art has led to appreciation of the culture. The absence
of a map is unfortunate. EB
RUBINSTEIN, GILLIAN 
Foxspell. Simon, 1996 
219p
ISBN 0-689-80602-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Along with his mother and his two older sisters, Tod, twelve, has moved in with
his flinty grandmother while his father has left the country to rethink the marriage.
Beset by family changes and by the unwanted attentions of a school gang, Tod
finds refuge in roaming the wilder land by the railroad tracks and becomes ob-
sessed with the foxes that also roam the area. Soon his connection with the foxes
becomes supernatural, as he begins, with the aid of their guardian spirit, to trans-
form into a fox and prowl the land by night. Rubinstein handles the magic quite
well, with Tod's vulpine leanings credible and understandable in the context of
the story. The real-life saga is less well developed, which is a shame as the eccentric
cast of characters has great promise. As a result, the relationship between the two
plot strands is unclear, which makes the dramatic ending frustratingly mystifying
in its implications. Young readers unconcerned with the mundane may not mind,
however, and they'll enjoy the hard-edged fantasy of the foxspell. DS
JANUARY 1997 
* 
185
SCHLEIN, MIRIAM 
More than One; illus. by Donald Crews. 
Greenwillow,
1996 
24 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14103-X 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14102-1 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
This book attempts to tackle the concept of sets by demonstrating how the word
"one" can, in fact, be used for items coming in different numbers: two (as in one
pair of shoes), seven (as in one week of seven days), nine (as in one baseball team of
nine players), etc., going up through sets like "one family" or "one beach" that
have a varying and perhaps countless number of components. It's an interesting
idea, but its treatment here is likely to provoke questions as well as answer them.
Since there's no example of more than one set of anything, it's not clear how the
sets themselves accrue; some of the examples here (pairs, weeks) exceed one set
merely by numerical accumulation, for instance, whereas some (oceans) are delin-
eated only theoretically; for some sets (a forest) only part of the whole is seen,
further confusing the issue. Crews' watercolors range from clean-edged vignettes
of objects to the patterned expanses of a flock of birds or a stand of trees; his people
are cheerful but sometimes oddly drafted. Someone may have to finish the con-
cept for young students, but this is an attractive start. DS
SHREVE, SUSAN 
The Goalie. Tambourine, 1996 
95p
ISBN 0-688-14379-2 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Fifth-grader Julie MacNeil is the anchor of the family since her mother died: she
takes care of her little sister, cooks the family meals, and keeps the household
running smoothly. Her world starts to go awry when her father begins dating
Eliza True, who in Julie's eyes is a usurper both of Julie's mother's place and her
own, and whose son Benji is competing for the same position on the soccer team,
goalie, as Julie. Shreve is always good at the delicate subject of power dynamics
within families, and here she draws vividly and with intensity the portrait of a
determined young girl; it's clear Julie's insistence on single-handedly running the
homefront is both her pride and her curse, and that her loving father is half-wor-
ried, half-relieved about his daughter's assumption responsibility for the family
destiny. While the insights occasionally lean toward the adult, the pro'se remains
clear and accessible, and readers will respond to the strong emotions as well as the
invigorating soccer sequence. DS
SOLIN, SABRINA 
The Seventeen Guide to Sex and Your Body; by Sabrina Soliniwith
Paula Elbirt. 
Simon, 1996 
130p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-80796-1 
$17.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-80795-3 
$8.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
It's been a fructive year for the female anatomy in literature: now, following Mavis
Jukes' It's a Girl Thing (BCCB 7/96) and Karen Gravelle's The Period Book (7/96)
comes this breezy paperback entry. Divided into two parts, "Your Body" and
"Sex," the book includes chapters such as "Periods, Period," "Body Image and
Eating Disorders," "Gay or Straight?", "How Not to Get Pregnant-and What
You Can Do If You Do." Written by the editor of Seventeen's "Sex and Body"
column with the assistance of a doctor, the book takes questions (presumably from
Seventeen's readers, though their source isn't clear) and provides advice in a collo-
quial conversational style while boxed sidebars address common myths and ques-
tions, detail additional resources, or examine a specific situation firther. The style,
186 
* THE BULLETIN
though comradely, sometimes gets in the way of its own message: for instance, a
reader who really is concerned that being friends with a lesbian means something
about her own sexuality probably won't appreciate the "duh" that accompanies
the puncturing of that myth. Often, too, questions posted in the opening letters
don't actually get answered, and overgeneralizations may occasionally mislead (some
women will disagree with the contention that a Pap smear "doesn't hurt at all").
Under the flaws, though, is a knowledgeable and sisterly pitch for self-knowledge,
self-respect, and responsibility, with some useful real-world details such as how to
explain to your boyfriend that you won't sleep with him unless he uses a condom
and why alcohol can make you more vulnerable to a bad situation. Seventeen
fans-and there are a lot of them-will warm to the approach and will benefit
from the sound advice. DS
SOUTHGATE, MARTHA 
Another Way to Dance. Delacorte, 1996 
179p
ISBN 0-385-32191-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Ballet, always Vicki's great love, has become even more important to her since her
parents' divorce; she's fallen into the habit of finding solace in a fantasy relation-
ship with her idol, Mikhail Baryshnikov, that offers more ease and tenderness than
real life. Now she's thrilled to be spending her summer attending the prestigious
School of American Ballet in New York, even if she is uneasy about being one of
only two African-Americans in her class there. As is common with first novels, this
one is a bit overstuffed with plot and theme, but at its core is a compelling portrait
of a young woman trying to turn dreams into reality. Southgate gives Vicki a
believable narrative voice that blends adolescent naYvete with years of ballet exper-
tise ("I was like, God, what if we have to do lifts today; this guy's totally going to
drop me. But I got lucky. We just worked on supported pirouettes and ara-
besques"), and she writes particularly touchingly of Vicki's yearning for her ro-
mantic dream and her tentative forays into a more realistic romance with a young
man who works near the school. The book's detailed evocation of its world and its
refusal to engage in easy sentimental triumph (Vicki is not good enough to stay on
at the school but will continue to dance) gives it an authenticity that readers will
appreciate. DS
TALBOTT, HUDSON 
Amazon Diary: The Jungle Adventures ofAlex Winters; writ-
ten by Hudson Talbott and Mark Greenberg; illus. by Hudson Talbott and with
photographs by Mark Greenberg. 
Putnam, 1996 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-399-22916-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Alex Winters doesn't spend his Christmas vacation like the other sixth grade boys
back in Chicago; no, he flies into the Amazon in a Cessna 185 to join his anthro-
pologist parents who are searching for a "lost" Stone Age tribe, the Yanomami.
We're not in the least surprised when, according to Alex's diary, the plane crash-
lands in the jungle and Alex is rescued by the "lost" tribesmen, taken to their
village, and accepted into the tribe (it must have helped to have a Walkman, Polaroid
camera, and malaria pills). The story trips along breathlessly in its gee-wow fash-
ion; even the handlettered text has a hyperkinetic appearance. Illustrations are a
combination of photos and cartoony drawings interspersed throughout in an in-
formal family-album manner. The net result, though, is a letdown that leaves the
reader with the feeling that the entire production was for our own good and not
JANUARY 1997 
* 187
just for the fun of it. There's information in the back about where to write if we're
concerned about the plight of the Yanomami; we're informed in the flap copy that
Talbott and Greenberg traveled to the Amazon to observe "the beauty and har-
mony of the Yanomami people, living in a simple natural environment." Well,
that may be, but first-rate photojournalism would have been more effective than
this overdramatized fiction. SSV
TAMAR, ERIKA 
Alphabet City Ballet. HarperCollins, 1996 
16 8 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027329-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027328-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Ten-year-old Marisol is thrilled to the tips of her toes, which she hopes will soon
be enpointe, when she wins a scholarship to a prestigious Manhattan ballet school.
She fights her way through obstacle after obstacle to get there but settles in despite
setbacks and prejudice, finding a friend in her fellow scholarship student, Desiree.
Her obsession, however, begins to cut her off from her friends at school and even
from her older brother, Luis, who wishes he had a dream as his sister does and
begins to turn to the local gang for fulfillment. Though the subplot about Luis
and the conditions on Loisada (the Lower East Side) is predictable and poorly
incorporated into the general plot, it's nice to see a good, honest ballet story about
a youthful True Believer, and Tamar has added some nice touches with Marisol's
father's failure to understand just what it is his daughter actually does and her very
realistic obnoxiousness about her passion. Ballet-struck readers will applaud the
efforts of Marisol's loving family to get her the opportunity she deserves. DS
TEMKO, 
FLORENCE 
Planes and Other Flying Things. 
Millbrook,
1996 
4 5p 
illus. and with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-0041-4 
$15.40
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7613-0082-1 
$7.95 
R 
Gr. 2-6
Instructions for eighteen paper fliers, from helicopters and pterosaur mobiles to
blunt- and straight-nosed gliders, will have sheaves of transmuted notebook paper
zipping and zooming through domestic airspace. With only a passing nod to
arcane aerodynamics, Temko tailors her collection to children who regard paper
planes as sport rather than science. Directions are generally clear and accurately
illustrated, although a glitch in a step for "The Glider" results in a different, albeit
airworthy, craft. Three levels of construction difficulty are noted, but even the
most challenging fliers, such as the elegant "Concorde" and spunky "Hydroplane,"
should be accessible and rewarding to aviators with the patience to follow direc-
tions carefully. With Temko's simple suggestions for launching, stabilizing, and
experimenting, the ceiling's the limit. EB
WEST, DELNO C. 
Bravingthe North Atlantic: The Vikings, the Cabots, and acques
Cartier Voyage to America; by Delno C. West and Jean M. West. 
Atheneum,
1996 
86p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31822-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Any work joining the glut of books on New World exploration had better have a
fresh angle, and, in fact, this one does. Focusing only on landfalls on the North-
eastern Coast, and even more narrowly on three series of trans-Atlantic voyages,
the Wests do not merely report on the explorations but critically examine the
188 
* THE BULLETIN
documentation that has informed secondary source accounts over the centuries.
The reliability of Norse sagas, Christian legend, medieval maps, and a host of
archival materials are thoughtfully weighed, leading readers to consider how little
can actually be known about the European discovery of the continent. The nearly
half a millennium between the voyages of the Vikings and the Cabots is covered in
a few swift stokes, and readers unfamiliar with European developments during
that period are likely to reel from so abrupt a sea change. But graduates of Jean
Fritz's breezyAround the World in a Hundred Years (BCCB 6/94) should be able to
supply the connections, and researchers who are game to add a little historical
speculation to their class reports will be on the right heading. Period illustrations,
a glossary, index, bibliography, and chronology are included. EB
WILSON, NANCY HOPE 
Becoming Felix. Farrar, 1996 
184p
ISBN 0-374-30664-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
JJ, real name Felix, loves the family farm, but it's getting harder and harder to
make ends meet in the dairy business: JJ's dad has to work another job to keep the
money coming, and his brother Ray sees farming as a dead end and looks forward
to finding a more secure job. When Gran has a mild stroke and JJ's mother incurs
a knee injury that limits her mobility, it's time to sell off the milkers and explore
other paths, leaving JJ to come to terms with conflicting desires to pursue a musi-
cal career but also to remain loyal to the farming tradition. This is all predictable
and more than a bit programmatic, and the subplot of JJ's coming to terms with
his best friend's Judaism is awkwardly interpolated. The farm saga, however, is
engaging-Wilson capably evokes the farming milieu with all its hard labor and
occasional rewards, making it clear both why it's a difficult life and why some
might find it desirable. Kids looking for some depth behind the plight-of-the-
family-farm headlines may appreciate this sympathetic account. DS
WINDSOR, PATRICIA 
The Blooding. 
Scholastic, 1996 
281p
ISBN 0-590-43309-1 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Delighted to get away from her domineering mother for the summer, Maris is
looking forward to acting as an au pair for an English family. All is not right,
however: there is tension between the invalid Mrs. Forrest and handsome Mr.
Forrest, and the children seem to be keeping a terrible secret. Soon Mrs. Forrest is
dead, apparently a suicide, and Maris confronts Mr. Forrest with the possibility
that his wife was, in fact, a werewolf; he shocks her by explaining that he himself is
the shape changer and inviting Maris to join him. Windsor capably employs many
traditional motifs (missing animals, unexplained bloodstains, mysterious dog-like
creatures appearing in the dark, a dangerously handsome man), and she's provided
an inventive and provocative ending that ties in nicely with Maris' attraction to
Mr. Forrest and his lupine lifestyle. Unfortunately the writing talks about this
attraction but never really conveys it, lacking the sensuality of Hahn's vampirical
Look forMe by Moonlight (BCCB 4/95) and rarely maintaining the necessary pace.
While the Forrests' problematic relationship (Mrs. Forrest's desire to share her
husband's wolfishness is outstripped by her revulsion) is interesting, Maris herself
is not, having little personality and seeming to justify her mother's low opinion of
her. It's still entertainingly horrific, however, and teens looking for some atmo-
spheric chills may enjoy it. DS
JANUARY 1997 
* 
189
WINKLEMAN, KATHERINE K. 
Police Patrol; illus. by John S. Winkleman. 
Walker,
1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8454-2 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8453-4 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 2-4
As a crayon-blue NYPD squad car responds to a call for police backup, readers
browse through bite-sized chunks of information to learn about the apprehension
of criminals and about the officers and techniques that help bring culprits to jus-
tice. The first few entries, introduced in bold blue type, follow a logical pattern:
introduction to the police station, officers, arrests, and Miranda warnings. From
here the organization collapses, and without any clear reference to arraignment,
trial, and conviction, Winkleman skips to correctional institutions, and then leaps
around such loosely related topics as fingerprints, harbor and scuba units, bomb
squads, and small-town police forces. Readers will dig up some intriguing nuggets
of data-the use of wicker containers for safe bomb detonation, and a ship-bot-
tom hiding place favored by drug smugglers-but description of law-enforcement
training is noticeably absent. Bright, scribbly cartoon scenes that camouflage crime
details and corny jokes may draw casual viewers into their own investigation, but
children with a serious interest in the topic are likely to find this willy-nilly intro-
duction short on law, and long on disorder. EB
WOOD, AUDREY 
The Bunyans; illus. by David Shannon. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-590-48089-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
"By the flickering light of his torch, he saw a gigantic woman banging a behemoth
pickax against the wall. It was love at first sight." Thus giantess Carrie McIntie
catches the eye of Paul Bunyan and, having carved a place in his heart, hollows out
Kentucky's Mammoth Cave to boot. Their offspring, son Little Jean and daugh-
ter Teeny, settle right into the family business of continent shaping-Little Jean
being responsible for building the Bryce Canyon and Teeny sorting out the rivers
on either side of the Continental Divide. Wood spins a short, folksy yarn for each
feat but strains to link them into a single Bunyan Family saga. Ma and Pa Bunyan's
retirement to "a wilderness area, where they still live happily" (in sunglasses and
gym shoes, they tap croquet balls around Monument Valley, AZ) could have pro-
vided a pithy wrap-up, but instead Wood limps to a silly conclusion that lands
Teeny in London and Little Jean on Mars. Shannon's signature rock-solid figures,
customarily called into the service of more solemn or dignified texts, adapt them-
selves to light-hearted hyperbole with surprising ease, but text boxes that emulate
evenweave fabric with counted cross-stitched borders are too delicate to stand their
ground against the dense, massive portraits of the Bunyans at work. This is a tall-
tale extension that shouldn't have extended quite so far. EB
190 
* THE BULLETIN
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1996 
_
The 1996 Bulletin Blue Ribbons list spans a broad range of genres and age groups,
from picture-book biography to young-adult poetry, from middle-grade fantasy to
primary-grade readers. This is nothing if not an eclectic bunch of books-which
basically reflects the eclectic bunch of reviewers we have here at the Bulletin. Oddly
enough, without planning or forethought, we have nearly the same number of
titles in each of our three categories: fourteen fiction titles, thirteen nonfiction
titles, and twelve picture books. (If you count Avi's books as one two-volume title,
the numbers are even closer.) The criteria for inclusion is stringent but clear-
whatever is still on the table at the end of weeks of vehement discussion, debate
and dissection gets a Blue Ribbon. If you buy everything on it for your collection
you've pretty much covered the outstanding titles for 1996. Such hubris.
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
FICTION
Armstrong, Jennifer. The Dreams ofMairhe Mehan. Knopf. (November)
Avi. Beyond the Western Sea, Book One: The Escape from Home; Beyond the Western
Sea, Book Two: Lord Kirkle's Money. Jackson/Orchard. (February; December)
Bawden, Nina. Granny the Pag. Clarion. (March)
Cross, Gillian. Pictures in the Dark. Holiday House. (January 1997)
Dickinson, Peter. Chuck and Danielle; illus. by Kees de Kiefte. Delacorte.
(February)
Doyle, Brian. Spudin Winter; SpudSweetgrass. Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre.
(July)
Freeman, Suzanne. The Cuckoo's Child. Greenwillow. (March)
Koertge, Ron. Confess-O-Rama. Kroupa/Orchard. (November)
Napoli, Donna Jo. Zel. Dutton. (July)
Pausewang, Gudrun. The FinalJourney. Viking. (December)
Pullman, Philip. The Golden Compass. Knopf. (April)
Turner, Megan Whalen. The Thief. Greenwillow. (November)
Voigt, Cynthia. Bad Girls. Scholastic. (April)
NONFICTION
Aldana, Patricia, ad. Jade and ron: Latin American Tales from Two Cultures; tr. by
Hugh Hazelton; illus. by Luis Garay. Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre.
(anuary 1997)
Duffy, Carol Ann. Stopping for Death: Poems of Death and Loss; illus. by Trisha
Rafferty. Holt. (September)
Fleischman, Sid. The Abracadabra Kid. Greenwillow. (September)
Florian, Douglas. On the Wing: Bird Poems and Paintings; written and illus. by
Douglas Florian. Harcourt. (April)
JANUARY 1997 
* 
191
Freedman, Russell. The Life and Death of Crazy Horse; illus. by Amos Bad Heart
Bull. Holiday House. (July/August)
Geisert, Arthur. Roman Numerals I to MM/Numerabilia Romana uno ad duo
mila: Liber de difficillimo computando numerum; written and illus. by Arthur
Geisert. Lorraine/Houghton. (March)
Hamilton, Virginia, ad. When Birds Could Talk and Bats Could Sing: TheAdven-
tures ofBruh Sparrow, Sis Wren, and Their Friends; illus. by Barry Moser. Blue
Sky/Scholastic. (June)
Igus, Toyomi. Going Back Home: An Artist Returns to the South; illus. by Michele
Wood. Children's Book Press. (December)
Ippisch, Hanneke. Sky: A True Story of Resistance During World War II. Simon.
(May)
Krull, Kathleen. Wilma Unlimited: How Wilma Rudolph Became the World's Fast-
est Woman; illus. by David Diaz. Harcourt. (April)
Opie, lona, ed. My Very First Mother Goose; illus. by Rosemary Wells. Candlewick.
(December)
Sierra, Judy, comp. and ad. Nursery Tales Around the World; illus. by Stefano
Vitale. Clarion. (February)
Stanley, Diane. Leonardo da Vinci; written and illus. by Diane Stanley. Morrow.
(September)
PICTURE BOOKS
Blake, Quentin. Clown; illus. by Quentin Blake. Holt. (June)
Byars, Betsy. My Brother, Ant; illus. by Marc Simont. Viking. (February)
Henkes, Kevin. Lilly's Purple Plastic Purse; written and illus. by Kevin Henkes.
Greenwillow. (October)
Heo, Yumi, ad. The Green Frogs: A Korean Folktale; ad. and illus. by Yumi Heo.
Houghton. (October)
Johnston, Tony. The Ghost ofNicholas Greebe; illus. by S. D. Schindler. Dial.
(October)
Lester, Julius. Sam and the Tigers: A New Telling of Little Black Sambo; illus. by
Jerry Pinkney. Dial. (July/August)
Mark, Jan, ad. 
The Tale of Tobias; illus. by Rachel Merriman. Candlewick.
(December)
Martin, Jacqueline Briggs. Grandmother Bryant's Pocket; illus. by Petra Mathers.
Houghton. (July/August)
Rael, Elsa Okon. What Zeesie Saw on Delancey Street; illus. by Marjorie Priceman.
Simon. (December)
Sabuda, Robert, illus. The Twelve Days of Christmas: A Pop-Up Celebration; illus.
by Robert Sabuda. Little Simon. (September)
Stanley, Diane. Saving Sweetness; illus. by G. Brian Karas. Putnam. (November)
Winter, Jeanette. Josefina; written and illus. by Jeanette Winter. Harcourt.
(October)
~yfl^^^
192 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-stories: Curtis
African Americans-fiction: Belton;
Southgate
African Americans-stories: English
AIDS-fiction: Maguire
Amazon-fiction: Talbott
American Indians-fiction: Arnold;
Dorris
Art: Arnold
Asian Americans-fiction: Lee
Babies-stories: Curtis
Ballet-fiction: Southgate; Tamar
Baseball-fiction: Hughes
BEDTIME STORIES: Brown;
Kvasnosky
Bible-fiction: Napoli
BIOGRAPHIES: Brewster; Kort;
Myers
Botany: Jenkins, M.
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Haddix; Lee; Tamar
Bullies-stories: Karas
Canada-stories: Manson
Caribbean-folklore: Hallworth
Caribbean-stories: Huth
Child abuse-fiction: Cross;
Haddix
China-stories: Bateson-Hill; Demi
Civics: Winkleman
Clothing: Lawlor
Cousins-fiction: Cross
CUMULATIVE TALES:
Grossman
Death and dying-fiction: Gilbert;
Lee; Maguire
Disabilities-fiction: Dorris; Ingold
Dogs-fiction: Jennings
Dogs-stories: Ernst
Dolls-stories: English; Manson
Dragons-stories: Bateson-Hill
Dreams-stories: Kvasnosky
Eastern Europe-fiction: Mead
England-folklore: Morpurgo
Ethics and values: Cross; Garland;
Gilbert; Morris
Euthanasia-fiction: Gilbert
Explorers: West
FABLES: Demi
Families-fiction: Gilbert; Haddix;
Lee; Morris; Nixon; Wilson
FANTASY: Cross; Geeslin;
Helprin; Ingold; Jennings;
Owen; Rubinstein; Windsor
Farms-fiction: Wilson
Fashion: Lawlor
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Lane; Owen; Shreve; Tamar
Fathers and sons-fiction:
Casanova
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY
TALES: Aldana; Andersen
Snow; Andersen Steadfast; Day;
Delacre; Huck;
Morpurgo;Wood
Food and eating-stories: Ernst;
Grossman
Football-fiction: Lee
Foster families-fiction: Hughes
Foxes-fiction: Rubinstein
Friends-fiction: Belton; Garland
Genealogy-fiction: Nixon
Grandfathers-fiction: Gilbert
Haiti: Myers
Health: Solin
JANUARY 1997 
* 
193
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Dorris; Manson
History, U.S.: Arnold
History, world Krensky; West
Homelessness-children: Hubbard
Hurricanes-stories: English
Immigration-stories: Levitin
Israel: Kort
Latin America-fiction: Jenkins, L.
Latin America-folktales: Aldana
Latinos-fiction: Tamar
Love stories: Lane
MAKE-AND-DO BOOKS:
Fabulous Faces; Temko
Malaysia-fiction: Day
Marine life: Gourley
Mathematics: Schlein
Mexico-fiction: Jennings
Mexico-stories: Geeslin
Mothers and sons-fiction:
Maguire
Mothers and sons-stories: Karas
Moving-stories: Karas
Music and musicians-fiction:
Wilson
MYSTERIES: Nixon
Panama: Presilla
Parrots-stories: Lester
PLAYS: Andersen Snow
POETRY: Clarke; Hallworth
Prehistoric art: Arnold
Princesses-stories: Grimm; Lester
Printing: Krensky
Reading aloud: Aldana; Clarke
Reading, easy: Jenkins, M.
Reading, reluctant: Gourley;
Haddix
Religious education: Osborne
Romance-fiction: Lane
Rural life-fiction: Garland;
Wilson
Russia: Brewster
SCARY STORIES: Clarke
School-fiction: Cross; Gilson
SCIENCE FICTION: Oldham
Sharks: Gourley
Sheep-stories: Kvasnosky
Shoes: Lawlor
Sisters-stories: Huck
Sports-fiction: Shreve
Storytelling: Aldana; Bateson-Hill; Clarke
Storytime: Brown; Day; Grossman;
Lester; Hallworth; Wood
Suicide-fiction: Gilbert
Supernatural-poetry: Clarke
Survival-fiction: Oldham; Talbott
TALL TALES: Wood
Time travel-fiction: Ingold; Owen
Toys-stories: Andersen Steadfast; Manson
Unions-fiction: Casanova
Voyages and travel: West
War-fiction: Jenkins, L.; Mead
Werewolves-fiction: Windsor
Witches-fiction: Owen
Women's studies: Solin; Napoli
World cultures: Osborne
World War II-stories: Manson
SStarred by Booklist and Publishers Weekly
SaBsŽ le
by GARTH NIX
Winner, 1995 Aurealis Award for Excellence in Australian Science Fiction
"This vividly imagined fantasy pits a young necromancer
against a shambling horde of deliciously gruesome minions
of an unspeakably evil sorcerer. Teenaged Sabriel suddenly
receives evidence that her father is no longer in the Land of the
Living. She sets out to find him ... [and] evades a thicket
of traps and hazards to rescue him-only to lose him
permanently in the opening rounds of a vicious, wild climax.
[Nix's] sense of humor is downright sneaky and he put his
heroine through engrossing physical and emotional wringers.
This book is guaranteed to keep readers up way past their
bedtimes."-School Library Journal
"The action charges along at a gallop... a page-turner for
sure."-Booklist
Ages 12 up. $15.95 TR (0-06-027322-4); $15.89 LB (0-06-027323-2)
i 
IJ
* 
"Making [this book]
S widely available may well
A 
be a patriotic duty."
S- 
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
' 
"An impressive
Scollection of 12
stories representing
* 
the development of
the American fairy
tale from 1819 to
1922.... [T]hese
literary selections
Sreflect the land-
scape, egalitarian
philosophy, and for-
ward-looking opti-
mism of America."
S 
-
School Library Journal
* 
* "McCurdy's precise black-and-white woodcuts perfectly
capture the idiomatic spirit of stories from Kansas to
Kalamazoo to Rootabaga Country .. ." - Kirkus Reviews, pointer
* 
AMERICAN FAIRY TALES
From Rip Van Winkle to the Rootabaga Stories
Compiled by Neil Philip * Illustrated by Michael McCurdy
Preface by Alison Lurie
All ages * 0-7868-0207-3 (Trade ed) $22.95
0-7868-2171-X (Lib. ed) $22.89
SHyperion 
Books for Children
American
FairyTales
iRon
Lompnea y ie 
-rlmump
Illustrated by Michael McCurdy
Preface t Alin Lurie
orie
THE
ROOSTERts
GIFT
By 
Full-colo pictures by
PAM 
CONROAD ERIC BEDDOWS
"Young Rooster is sure that his 'Cot Cot Cot Cot Ca-toodle tooooooo!'
has made the dawn appear. But [one morning he discovers] that the
day has begun [without his help]. He is devastated, until Smallest
Hen proves that his ability to announce the day splendidly is
'a Gift nonetheless.' The late Conrad's barnyard tale is exceedingly
well-crafted-filled with shining descriptions of sunrise, engaging
characters, captivating dialogue and a storytelling voice that
rings true."-Starred review, Publishers Weekly
"Beddows' gently humorous treatment of character, visual pacing,
and impressive command of color and light are this talented artist's
own special contributions to a memorable text."-ALA Booklist
Ages 4-8. $15.95TR (0-06-023603-5); $15.89LB (0-06-023604-3)
Also just published by Pam Conrad
ZOE RISING
A sequel to Stonewords: A Ghost Story
Ages 9 up. $13.95TR (0-06-027217-1); $13.89LB (0-06-027218-X)
LAURA GERINGER BOOKS
t HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10022
the usual 'book review'
escribed in varied, intriguing
contributors."
en's Bookwatch, from a review of Booktalk! 4
Th 
okakigSre
SBooktalking the Award
Winners: Young Adult
Retrospective Volume
375 pp. * Covers 460 titles * 1996 *
ISBN 0-8242-0877-3 * $32
U.S. and Canada, $36 other countries
Booktalking the Award Winners:
1993-1994
190 pp.* Covers 213 titles 
1995 * ISBN 0-
8242-0876-S * $32 U.S. and Canada,
$36 other countries
Booktalking the Award Winners:
1992-1993
224 pp. * Covers 250 titles
ISBN 0-8242-0866-8 * 1994 * $32 U.S.
and Canada, $36 other countries
Booktalk! 5
More Selections From
The Booktalker For All Ages
and Audiences
294 pp. Covers 320 titles * 1993 *
ISBN 0-8242-0836-6 * $32 U.S. and Canada,
$36 other countries
Booktalk! 4
Selections From The Booktalker
For All Ages and Audiences
320 pp. * Covers 350 titles * 1992 -
ISBN 0-8242-0835-8 * $32 U.S. and Canada,
$36 other countries
Booktalk! 3
More Booktalks for All Ages and
Audiences
386 pp. Covers 500 titles * 1988 *
ISBN 0-8242-0764-5 . $32 U.S. and Canada,
$36 other countries
Booktalk! 2
Booktalking for All Ages and
Audiences
Second Edition
408 pp. * Covers 260 titles * 1985 *
ISBN 0-8242-0716-5 * $32 U.S. and Canada,
$36 other countries
Booktalking with Joni Bodart
Videocassette, 28 minutes * 1986 *
ISBN 0-8242-0741-6 * Color/VHS/HiFi with
Viewer's Guide * $89 U.S. and Canada,
$99 other countries
Now... Four Easy Ways to Order!
* Phone Toll-Free 1-800-367-6770 (Outside of the U.S. & Canada, call 1-718-588-8400)
SFax Toll-Free 1-800-590-1617 (Outside of the U.S. & Canada, fax 1-718-590-1617)
SE-mail: custserv@info.hwwilson.com
SBy mail
H.W. Wilson* 950 University Avenue * Bronx, NY 10452-4224
http://www.hwwilson.com
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
1 111 II 
I I
0008-9036(199701)50:5*;1 -K
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
invites you to visit our newly expanded home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
New features include:
* Bulletin Stars 
what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles (this month:
Four-Hankie Reads)
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1996
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Newcomer to Watch-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
;·rir- r~·;~t~~i~4·;~·:~
E 
i" 
·~;: 
~"~5.
~"~ 
"~:~ 
^s 
grll
,jir~ 
i
