T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
May 2007
Vol. 60   No. 9
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
May 2007
Vol. 60 No. 9
357  The Big PicTure
 
 The Mysterious Benedict Society  by Trenton Lee Stewart; illus. by Carson  
 
 Ellis
358  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
359  • A Long Way Gone:  Memoirs of a Boy Soldier  by Ishmael Beah
367  • Leaving the Nest  written and illus. by Mordicai Gerstein
369  • A Good Day  written and illus. by Kevin Henkes
371  • Today and Today  by Kobayashi Issa; comp. and illus. by G. Brian Karas
380  • Tamar  by Mal Peet
393  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
394  suBjeCt And use Index
356 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2007 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Carson Ellis from The Mysterious Benedict Society ©2007.  Used by permission of 
Megan Tingley Books/Little, Brown and Company.
May 2007 • 357
the BIg PICture
The Mysterious Benedict Society
by Trenton Lee Stewart; illustrated by Carson Ellis
Messianic child fantasy has a familiar enough recipe: gather one lonely child (usu-
ally an orphan), some stalwart companions, and a wise and benevolent elder, and 
place in a large, castle-like building. Sprinkle liberally with quirky helpers. Test the 
children with some minor challenges, and leaven their critical responses with kindly 
insights from the elder. When they are properly seasoned, have the elder tell them 
of a villain who is determined to destroy the world and inform them that, alas, 
though he will always be there to help them, he cannot defeat the villain himself 
but must send them on a dangerous and potentially fatal mission to save the world. 
Variations on this casserole can turn out cheesy, bland, or deliciously tasty, with a 
substantial mouth-feel and a complex blending of flavors. This last is the case with 
Trenton Lee Stewart’s The Mysterious Benedict Society. 
Reynie Muldoon, a lonely, gifted orphan, is encouraged by his beloved 
tutor to check out a mysterious newspaper ad seeking gifted children interested in 
“special opportunities.” A series of cleverly conceived tests that challenge Reynie’s 
integrity and cunning as well as his intelligence follows, and he finds himself in 
the company of three other children who have also passed the tests using their own 
singular gifts: Sticky has a photographic memory, Kate is a preadolescent MacGyver, 
and tiny Constance has a remarkable gift for undiluted obstinacy. The four find 
themselves in the home of a benevolent, narcoleptic genius, Mr. Benedict, who 
commissions them to find out what’s behind a series of subliminal messages that 
are being broadcast from a private school on an isolated island. The children enroll 
in the school and, through deciphering a well-laid series of clues, discover that the 
messages are part of a plot for world domination devised by the headmaster, Mr. 
Curtain, who looks remarkably like their beloved Mr. Benedict. To foil the plot, the 
children must creatively employ their particular gifts: Reynie’s keen understanding of 
people’s motivations, Sticky’s formidable bank of obscure knowledge, Kate’s athletic 
problem-solving skills, and Constance’s ability to resist even the most seductive 
lures all play a part in defeating Mr. Benedict’s evil twin.
More importantly, though, these four loners must overcome a lifetime of 
forced independence to forge a deep friendship and depend on their bond to bol-
ster their individual strengths and dampen their foibles. Each of them has a strong 
motivation for distrust; they have all been hurt, mistreated, neglected, and misun-
derstood. Indeed, their largest challenge lies in overcoming their natural inclination 
to separate themselves and act only in their own self-interest, especially in times of 
great stress. The character arcs of Reynie and Sticky are especially poignant; their 
self-doubt and their desire to live up to their first-ever friends’ expectations tap a 
358  •  The BulleTin
New Books for ChildreN aNd YouNg PeoPle
deep vein of empathy that many readers will respond to. When they ultimately go 
their separate ways, the gestalt of their friendship has led them to be more open, 
more forgiving, and more able to love than they were before their ordeal.
In keeping with the gentle seriousness of his focus on the four characters, 
Stewart eschews the glib, intrusive narration that infects so much contemporary 
fiction for this age group. Instead, his atmospheric storytelling invites a reader to 
become absorbed in the world he has created, so that even the slightly cheesy mecha-
nism that Mr. Curtain uses for mind control may be forgiven (what’s a casserole 
without a little cheese, after all?). Dashes of mild humor and introspection rest on a 
solid base of suspense, mystery, and well-rounded characters, making this a satisfying 
dish for readers of varying tastes. (See p. 388 for publication information.) 
Karen Coats, Reviewer
AndreAsen, dAn The Giant of Seville: A “Tall” Tale Based on a True Story; written 
and illus. by Dan Andreasen. Abrams, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-8109-0988-X $15.95   
M 4-8 yrs
Conflicting accounts abound concerning Martin Van Buren Bates, the seven-foot-
plus Confederate Army veteran who went on tour as a human curiosity, married 
a giantess of renown, and eventually settled down in Seville, Ohio. The public 
circumstances of Bates’ life are wondrous enough (and the apocryphal legends 
that filter through various genealogies or are embedded in fictional work can be 
downright lurid) that fashioning a tall tale around him seems excessive, but that’s 
Andreasen’s project nonetheless. Not much is made here of the agreed-upon facts 
of Bates’ life, beyond the book’s noting at the climax that the Bateses built an 
home in Seville scaled to suit their requirements. The tale at hand plays instead 
upon predictably generic elements such as Bates riding a train with his head out 
the window, sleeping with his feet out a boarding-house window, consuming a 
mountain of pancakes (sorry, but Paul Bunyan claimed that feat already), and 
dancing through the floorboards of his future neighbor’s house. Andreasen misses 
opportunities, both in words and pictures, to showcase the jewel-encrusted watch 
presented to Bates by Queen Victoria, to shine a spotlight on his equally famous wife, 
Anna Swan, or to even hint at his later marriage, following Anna’s death, to a local 
woman of average height. Listeners can be forgiven if they find the informational 
endnote and the photograph of the Bateses posed with a much shorter man more 
intriguing than the amiable, bland illustrations reminiscent of tinted lithographs. 
Think twice before trusting the LOC data—their 599.9 recommendation is a tall 
tale, indeed.  EB
BAnks, kAte Fox; illus. by Georg Hallensleben. Foster/Farrar, 2007 34p
ISBN 0-374-39967-0 $16.00   
R 3-5 yrs
In early spring, “a baby fox is born,” and as the season progresses, the little fox 
May 2007 • 359
grows stronger. As the year turns to summer, his parents teach him to hunt and 
forage for food; fall comes, and the little fox finally grows big and capable enough 
to go out on his own. The text is quietly, even lullingly descriptive in its lyrically 
touched evocation of the changing seasons; it remains focused on the growth of the 
little fox, though, and listeners will grasp the reassuring message that growth and 
independence happen when you’re ready for them. Hallensleben’s painterly oils make 
the most of landscapes in lush vegetative greens that take on a golden hue as the year 
turns to fall, and his softly textured fox family in bright russet contrasts stunningly 
with that complementary background, their white accents flashing. The little fox’s 
soft, inquiring face makes him about as cuddly as a relatively unanthropomorphized 
vulpine can get. With its tender poetry and nocturnal emphasis, this would work 
as an animal-themed bedtime story, and the blend of cozy safety and movement 
toward autonomy will speak to youngsters walking that line themselves.  DS
BeAh, ishmAel A Long Way Gone: Memoirs of a Boy Soldier. Crichton/Farrar, 
2007 [240p]
ISBN 0-374-10523-5 $22.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9 up
When twelve-year-old Beah, his brother, and a few of their hip-hop-crazy friends 
hiked from their village on an overnight trip to a talent show, none could predict 
that they were in fact heading straight into a war, raging in their Sierra Leone 
homeland, about which they had only heard rumors. After two years of hiding 
in the forests, raiding the scant resources of abandoned or burned-out villages, 
and narrowly escaping assassination by groups of rebels, young teenager Beah was 
recruited by government troops, equipped with rifles and grenades, offered all 
the dope he could smoke, sniff, or swallow, and told to take revenge on the rebels 
who were “responsible for everything that has happened to you.” The young man’s 
violent career ended as abruptly as it began, though, when his commanding of-
ficer sent him to a rehabilitation camp run by UNESCO, where he and other boy 
soldiers underwent withdrawal from drugs and from killing and tried to reclaim 
their humanity. Beah recounts with painful candor the atrocities he both witnessed 
and inflicted, but this is no sob-wracked, daytime-talk-show confessional. There 
is a restrained, almost distant, tone to his narrative that bespeaks pain too acute to 
share casually and hints perhaps at an ongoing struggle to reconcile his own actions 
of a decade past with the more mature realization that he was as much a victim 
as a perpetrator of violence. Beah’s personal life and that of his country appear to 
have taken a turn for the better, but it won’t take much imagination for readers to 
see that war has done irrevocable damage that neither rehab nor free elections will 
ever fully remediate.  EB 
BeAudoin, seAn Going Nowhere Faster. Little, 2007 [224p]
ISBN 0-316-01415-X $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Stan Smith has a mighty big IQ and a mighty big apathy problem. He wants to 
write a screenplay rather than go to college, but mostly he wants to avoid the awful 
fate he imagines is lurking at the hands of Chad Tilford, a high-school bully who 
threatened him on the last day of school. Menaced by muscle cars in the dark and 
bike vandals in broad daylight, Stan alternates between anticipation of imminent 
pain and real and present embarrassment from his ex-hippie parents (an abnormally 
360 • The BulleTin
tall, vegan, organic farming mother and an inventor father, whose creations, with 
the exception of a VW bus that runs on discarded French fry oil, rarely work). 
Then there’s Prarash, the strangely fat, strangely smelly, strangely strange guy that 
lives on their farm in a yurt and spouts nonsense in the form of pseudo-Buddhist 
aphorisms. Stan relates all of the events of his loser life in a sardonically witty voice; 
his propensity for making silly lists when he’s under stress and his really lame at-
tempts at story treatments for movies act as funny little commercial breaks in a 
storyline that is itself fraught with darkly comic twists. His angst and perpetual 
underachievement are more than slightly reminiscent of Holden Caulfield, with 
an adoring and adorable little sister who makes everything all better serving to 
augment the connection. Fans of King Dork (BCCB 5/06) will find this a lighter 
and less demanding version of the same fare.  KC 
BecciA, cArlyn Who Put the B in the Ballyhoo?; written and illus. by Carlyn 
Beccia. Houghton, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-618-71718-8 $16.00   
R Gr. 3-6
If you could assemble a dream team from among the most famous circus and 
sideshow acts of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, it might look a lot 
like the gallery of notables Beccia highlights in her updated advertising bills. The 
posters, loosely (and unnecessarily) organized by alphabetized hype, are painted in 
shades suggestive of once-bright colors now faded with age, and short verses extol 
the performers’ talents: “G is for graceful/ Without any strings/ Lilly soars through 
the air/ As if she had wings.” Beneath each poster, in white lettering on the black 
background border, are a few sentences that note the performer’s full name and 
comment on the act. Beccia is sometimes a bit overconfident in her assertions—the 
OED takes gentle issue with her explanation of the way “jumbo,” meaning large, 
entered the lexicon, the Hilton twins appear to be conjoined at the shoulder rather 
than at the hip, and clown Dan Rice’s inspirational role in the creation of Uncle 
Sam is far from a settled matter. However, as Beccia notes, anyone who comes to 
the circus has to expect some ballyhoo. The artwork is enticing, and the array of 
freaks and wonders should have kids tying up the terminals with Google searches. 
Pair this with Debon’s The Strongest Man in the World: Louis Cyr (reviewed below) 
for a virtual trip to the Big Top.  EB 
Bolden, TonyA M. L. K.: Journey of a King. Abrams, 2007 128p illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-5476-1 $19.95   
Ad Gr. 6-10
Less a general biography than a tribute to a nation-changing career, Bolden’s 
overview of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.’s life is organized into three sections 
covering his rise as a public figure during the Montgomery Bus Boycott, his civil 
rights activities through the waning of his influence in the Albany Movement, and 
the controversial addition of anti-war and anti-poverty issues to his civil liberties 
agenda. By focusing narrowly on the public figure, Bolden conveniently overlooks 
blemishes in his personal life (marital problems, are, for example, passed over with 
a photo of strained partners, captioned, “Like most couples, M. L. and Coretta 
had their ups and downs”), and indeed she admits, “I chose not to detail his flaws 
because I was hard-pressed to see how that helps us focus on ‘the dream.’” More-
over, she never quite settles into a consistent tone, shifting instead between serious 
exposition, preacher-like oratory, and even playfulness. She does, however, include 
May 2007 • 361
thoughtful discussion of facets of King’s career that sometimes receive insufficient 
attention—his early resistance to ministry and skepticism concerning Scripture, 
the evolution of his philosophy of nonviolent resistance, the resentment among 
some other civil rights leaders of his position in the spotlight. Layout is spacious 
and attractive, with generous leading, a plethora of neatly dated and captioned 
black-and-white photos, and a change in colored accents from section to section. 
A timeline sets events in King’s career into a broader context, and citations, index, 
and bibliography are also appended.  EB 
Brashares, ann Forever in Blue: The Fourth Summer of the Sisterhood. Delacorte, 
2007 384p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90413-4 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72936-7 $18.99   
R Gr. 9-12
The harmonious quartet, having weathered their respective freshman years at 
college, must now adjust to the fact that being far apart from one another has 
become a permanent way of life. Carmen, in an uncharacteristic slump of timid-
ity and self-doubt, has latched on to student actress Julia; dragged off by Julia to 
a summer theater program, Carmen shows dramatic promise that jealous Julia 
promptly attempts to undermine. Bee, ever tempted by forbidden fruit, has her 
eye on a married archaeologist on her summer dig in Turkey. Lena hooks up with 
a dishy art-school upperclassman, only to find her past love Kostos, now divorced 
and needy, knocking on her dorm door. And following a pregnancy scare after her 
first sexual encounter with her beloved Brian, Tibby pushes him away until a rival 
for his affection reminds her that Brian’s her guy for ever and always. Brashares 
continues to exhibit her uncanny skill at cutting furiously among multiple plotlines 
and interjecting effective segues that masquerade as scrawled notes, breathless emails, 
and pithy chapter heading quotations. There’s ample opportunity for bittersweet 
regret at the girls’ semi-permanent separation, but they wrap up the summer with 
an understanding that home is where the heart is, and their hearts are inseparable. 
By novel’s end, the Pants have disappeared, but whether that signals the finale of 
this wildly successful run is anybody’s guess. Pants fans who privately wondered 
whether the magical jeans—or the series—would hold up through another summer 
of hard wear can rest assured they do.  EB
Browne, n. M. Silverboy. Bloomsbury, 2007 298p
ISBN 1-58234-780-8 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-10
Sentenced to a hazardous apprenticeship in a spellstone grinder’s dreary basement, 
Tommo escapes, claiming sanctuary to avoid being returned to that lethal place, 
and he is given ten days to vacate the province or be hunted down and killed. 
During his run for freedom he meets Akenna, a fisherman’s daughter, and the two 
of them find themselves at the nexus of a plot involving everyone from the Protec-
tor, highest power in the land, to a peculiar flock of birds that all have the same 
human face and that follow Tommo and Akenna wherever they go. The Protector 
is troubled by a prophecy that an agent of the greatest thaumaturge (magician) 
that ever lived will cause his downfall, so he has arranged for the deaths of all the 
major thaumaturges except for the best of them all, Gildea, whom he has caged in 
his Fortress of Winter. Tommo and Akenna have powers of their own, undiscov-
ered and untried though they are, and they must draw upon those powers as they 
travel into danger and lead their unusual flock into the Protector’s hands. Browne 
362 • The BulleTin
is adept at creating characters that trigger reader sympathies and express believable 
relationships, in particular fragile spellstone-contaminated Tommo and ensorcelled 
Vevena, who must fight descents into frivolity any time she thinks of matters of 
substance. There are also intriguing plot elements, such as the Gildea-faced birds 
that each carry a fragment of the sorcerer’s soul, and pleasing surprises in the hid-
den familial relationships only made clear near the conclusion of the tale. Readers 
will appreciate Akenna’s toughness and Tommo’s sweetness, and they will be glad 
to share the protagonists’ journey.  CW
Burns, loree griffin Tracking Trash: Flotsam, Jetsam, and the Science of Ocean 
Motion. Houghton, 2007 56p illus. with photographs (Scientists in the 
Field)
ISBN 0-618-58131-6 $18.00   
R Gr. 5-9
Of the various and fascinating scientific endeavors examined in the “Scientists in 
the Field” series, Curt Ebbesmeyer’s ongoing work must rank among the quirkiest. 
Following a newspaper lead suggested by his mother, the oceanographer has been 
tracing the surface currents of the seas via the movement of plastic rubbish that has 
escaped from broken cargo containers. With the aid of beachcombers, he carefully 
logs the landings of athletic shoes (identified by serial number as belonging to a 
particular wreck), plastic tub toys, and several other categories of floating refuse that 
can be traced to release in a verifiable place and date. Computer modeling helps 
confirm his observations that the paths the flotsam follows are the variable paths of 
the major surface currents. Other ocean scientists (at least the ones who are willing 
to take his efforts seriously) have subsequently built on his research to track huge 
buoyant corrals of junk known as garbage patches that collect in areas of current 
convergence. Hydrological information is clearly conveyed in the smoothly written 
text and in the half-dozen labeled maps that help readers visualize the trajectory of 
the currents and their relation to landfall of errant objects. Most powerful are the 
inescapable conclusions at which Burns arrives—plastic litter just won’t go away, and 
sea life suffers for it. A gallery of color photos shows Ebbesmeyer and his colleagues 
at work or puckishly posing with bits of his collection. End matter comprising a 
glossary, index, and lists of kid-friendly sources not only augments the title’s useful-
ness but gives some solid direction about how enthusiasts, particularly of a coastal 
ilk, can become involved in low-tech but crucial data collection.  EB
cArey, JAneT lee Dragon’s Keep. Harcourt, 2007 [320p]
ISBN 0-15-205926-1 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Rosalind is born with a dragon’s claw in place of her left ring finger; that’s trouble 
enough for any girl, but a curse indeed for the one who will be the twenty-first 
queen of Wilde Island, a dragon-plagued territory ruled by descendants from King 
Arthur’s banished sister, Evaine, for over six hundred years. Rosalind, who wears a 
pair of golden gloves at all times in order to hide her deformity, is also destined to 
fulfill a prophecy that will restore her family to the rightful throne. On her journey, 
she submits to various painful treatments intended to cure her hand, which mirror 
her anguished inner struggle to integrate that part of her which leads to the death of 
others but is the sole reason she survives an early dragon raid. In the story, set against 
the real historical backdrop of twelfth-century Britain, formal language and period 
details of medieval life create a vivid setting as Rosalind learns to accept herself and 
May 2007 • 363
her roles as daughter and queen. Unfortunately, the pacing lags for the first third of 
the novel, and the underdeveloped characters are too lackluster to compensate, while 
the ending seems rushed and overly convenient. Once Rosalind is abducted during 
a dragon raid and taken to Dragon’s Keep, however, the story picks up considerably. 
Fantasy fans will appreciate the dragon lore, while those more firmly grounded in 
reality may be drawn to the complex relationships between the dragon-like girl and 
the human-like dragon. A spell-casting witch, loyal best friend, evil mage, and love 
interest round out the cast, adding traditional supportive elements. If readers can 
forgive a slow beginning and a quick end, they will be rewarded with a satisfying 
dragon adventure in between.  KB
chArlTon-TruJillo, e. e. Feels Like Home. Delacorte, 2007 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90349-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73332-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Family life has never been perfect for Michelle, known as Mickey; her mother left 
years ago, and her adored brother, Danny, one of the small Texas town’s beloved 
football stars, departed home abruptly after his involvement in a tragedy that killed 
a friend. When Mickey’s father dies in a car accident, Danny returns out of the 
blue to care for his now seventeen-year-old sister, but the siblings won’t succeed in 
creating a family if they can’t sort out their anger, guilt, and grief. Charlton-Trujillo 
(author of the compelling Prizefighter en Mi Casa, BCCB 10/06) vividly evokes the 
insular life of a small Texas town with a Friday Night Lights obsession with football, 
and it’s utterly credible that Danny, as the hero gone wrong, would be persona 
non grata there. The book is also deft in its clear indications that Mickey’s view of 
her life with—and sometimes without—her alcoholic father is a rose-tinted one, 
and that it’s her feeling of betrayal toward her beloved older brother rather than 
any real change in status that elicits her anger. The use of Hinton’s Outsiders as a 
sibling touchstone is overplayed, however, and the secret about Danny’s role in the 
tragedy (he’s taking the rap for the friend who died) and Mickey’s repression of the 
relevant memories are fairly hackneyed plot devices; it’s never explained why the 
sibs would have to live together to achieve the desired rapprochement (Mickey has 
lived for long periods of time with family friends), and Danny’s genuinely unstable 
behavior is never really acknowledged as problematic in a legal guardian. The picture 
of small-town life is still a vivid one, though, and readers will be glad to see Mickey 
negotiating her way to a happier and more accepting adulthood.  DS
cohn, rAchel Cupcake. Simon, 2007 248p
ISBN 1-4169-1217-7 $15.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Former hellion Cyd Charisse (from Gingerbread, BCCB 4/02, and Shrimp, 2/05) 
is now comfortably ensconced with her older half-brother, Danny, in Greenwich 
Village, having left her home behind in San Francisco and lost her beloved surfer 
boy, Shrimp, to a breakup. She’s so comfortably ensconced, in fact, that she’s taking 
her cushy situation for granted, skipping out on culinary school and ticking her 
brother off with her cavalier treatment (from bringing home drunken conquests 
unannounced to bunking out on parties held in her honor) of his free hospital-
ity. When Shrimp shows up at her doorstep, though, she’s thrown back into their 
relationship, and she begins to think being with Shrimp is what she really wants 
in life. That part of the plot is a bit too reminiscent of C.C.’s relationship woes 
364 • The BulleTin
with Shrimp in the previous volume, but our heroine remains a salty and comedic 
companion. She also undergoes considerable maturation here, finally coming to 
grips, to some extent, with her privileged self-centeredness and its unpleasant ef-
fects on those around her, which allows her to understand Shrimp’s own growth 
even when it seems to be at her expense. C.C. fans won’t want to miss this latest 
chapter, and they’ll be pleased at the clear prospect of future adventures for their 
heroine.  DS
cooney, cAroline B. Enter Three Witches: A Story of Macbeth. Scholastic, 
2007 [288p]
ISBN 0-439-71156-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Veteran author Cooney is mostly known for her contemporarily set works, but here 
she turns to fictionalized history, retelling the story of Shakespeare’s Macbeth. This 
prose revision focuses on fourteen-year-old Lady Mary, boarding at the Macbeths’ 
castle in preparation for marriage to the squire of her father, the Thane of Cawdor. 
When her father is executed for rebellion against the King of Scotland and his title 
given to Macbeth, Mary’s position becomes tenuous, and she becomes increasingly 
aware, as the Macbeths ascend to glory, that something is rotten in the state of 
Scotland. Cooney is clearly familiar with the play, to the point of offering an ex-
planation for the mystery of Banquo’s third murderer, and she takes an interesting 
tack in focusing on the powerless in the castle, with particular attention given to 
a young woman in the servants’ hall and to Banquo’s son, Fleance (who is falsely 
reputed to have killed Lady Mary’s betrothed). Readers will really need familiarity 
with the play to understand the novel, however, and Lady Mary is implausible 
in her presence at multiple key plot turns. Invented subplots fail to sustain the 
same level of interest or credibility as the main story: the servant girl’s personal 
tale of unmarried childbirth is buried amid events; the literal demonization of the 
character of Seyton is superfluous; since Fleance’s failure to kill Lady Mary’s fiancé 
wasn’t the result of his kindness or nobility but his simple ineptness in battle, her 
forgiveness seems capricious at best. Those who’ve read or seen the play, though, 
may appreciate a look behind the battlements that’s spiced up with young love, 
teen espionage, and dramatic chapter endings. An author’s note clearly differenti-
ates Shakespeare’s account from history and documents her own additions to the 
story, while encouraging readers to dive into the play itself.  DS
dAley, michAel J. Shanghaied to the Moon. Putnam, 2007 251p
ISBN 0-399-24619-3 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Stewart dreams of becoming a space pilot like his late mother, but Stewart’s father 
wants nothing to do with space, and thirteen-year-old Stewart doesn’t stand a chance 
of getting into the proper schools without his father’s signature. The frustrated boy 
is therefore receptive when a craggy and ominous old man promises just the right 
thing to make him ignore his misgivings and leave his brother and father: a chance 
to copilot a mission to the moon. Of course, heading off-planet with an alcoholic 
121-year-old adventurer in the equivalent of a spacebound jalopy is not likely to 
fulfill all of Stewart’s space-faring dreams, and at first he seems more kidnapped 
victim than willing partner. Val, the haunted space pilot with whom Stewart teams 
up, is refreshingly complex and imperfect: he knows the right thing to do but rarely 
does it first, he never coddles Stewart, and he covers his vulnerabilities with a bluster 
May 2007 • 365
that will likely endear him further to the reader. Unfortunately, the perspective is 
instead firmly trained on the rather unlikable Stewart, and much of the book is 
consumed with his angst about wanting to fly and his inability to unravel even the 
most obvious deceits. While readers will likely sympathize with Stewart’s fierce desire 
and his continuing grief over the loss of his mother, Val and his rattletrap spaceship, 
both relegated to secondary character status, are the stars of this novel. Sci-fi fans 
may nonetheless find enjoyment here, especially in the satisfying resolution of an 
adventure-bound partnership of Val and Stewart.  AS
deBon, nicolAs The Strongest Man in the World: Louis Cyr; written and illus. 
by Nicolas Debon and with photographs. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 
2007 [28p]
ISBN 0-88899-731-0 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
He may not be currently ranked among the superlatives on the official list of record 
holders, but Canadian power-lifter Louis Cyr was credited, at least in the nineteenth 
century’s less than fastidious reckoning, as the strongest man known. In this engag-
ing graphic-novel-styled picture book treatment, an older, weakened Cyr recounts 
his exploits for his young daughter in plainspoken narration that bespeaks a man 
who boasts as much modesty as muscle. Readers may marvel at his feats—lifting 
a draft horse or a platform of men on his back, besting an opponent by heaving 
a mud-slicked 450-plus pound boulder, raising a 553-pound weight with one 
finger—but they will also experience a touch of sadness at the dwindling career 
of a renowned athlete whose still bulky body has been worn by years of overuse. 
The bordered panels of varying sizes that huddle shoulder to shoulder might have 
benefited from the inclusion of gutters, but Cyr himself is cleverly portrayed as if 
chiseled from a boulder, and the restrained earth and blue-gray shades evoke an 
aura of melancholy memory. Closing materials comprise a note on Cyr and the 
traveling circuses of his era, photo reproductions, and a brief list for further reading, 
and endpapers feature a host of contemporary showmen.  EB 
de lA cruz, melissA Angels on Sunset Boulevard. Simon, 2007 232p
ISBN 1-4169-2767-0 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The Angels Practice, or TAP, seems to be an innocent enough website where teens 
set up profiles, find friends, and spread L.A. gossip. But TAP soon goes beyond the 
net, to parties with mysterious back-room rituals that involve Kool-Aid spiked with 
a legal but dangerous drug that resembles Ecstasy. Deeply entrenched in the TAP 
network are a singer named Johnny Silver and his girlfriend Taj; lore has it that 
Johnny became famous by posting his home-produced songs to TAP, but things 
are not as straightforward as they seem. When kids connected to TAP, including 
Johnny himself, start disappearing, Nick Huntington, a jock who isn’t as committed 
to TAP as his friends, starts asking questions and comes up with some disturbing 
answers about who and what are behind TAP. Playing to the fascination readers 
have with the lives of the wealthy and plugged-in kids of L.A., this tantalizing 
mystery recalls Francesca Lia Block, albeit without the magic realism or dreamy 
language. Characterization falters at the end when the seemingly independent 
and countercultural Taj chooses the pleasures of TAP over the possibility of a real 
relationship; her motivations remain unclear, and Nick’s vow to get her out from 
the cultish clutches of TAP makes for an abrupt and unsatisfying ending. That said, 
366  •  The BulleTin
the seductive world of TAP, where the predators lurking on the network are not 
pervy grownups but the kids themselves, is as fascinating as it is frightening; if sex, 
drugs, and rock ’n’ roll have long formed the trinitarian deity of the teen universe, 
the possibilities of the Internet have introduced a new god—fame—that everyone 
worships, and for which some people are willing to martyr themselves.  KC
Floca, Brian Lightship; written and illus. by Brian Floca. Jackson/Atheneum, 
2007 40p
ISBN 1-4169-2436-1 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
What could possibly be the raison d’être of a ship that puts out to sea and then, 
well, stays put (“She holds to one sure spot as other ships sail by. She waits”)? As 
Floca guides his audience on a tour of the Ambrose, viewers begin to understand just 
what she’s waiting for—the need to warn passing vessels that danger is imminent. 
Most of her time is spent in patience, keeping the engines and crew in working 
order, keeping the anchor in position, and dodging (with the occasional salvo of 
salty verbiage: “#@*%&!”) the huge cargo ships that barrel down upon her closer 
than they should. But “when the fog comes creeping in, the crew knows what to 
do. They sound their horn so loud the whole ship SHAKES” (“BEEOOH,” says 
the sound bubble for the horn in huge letters) so the other ships at sea will navigate 
past underwater perils and safely into port. While the prose unreels in graceful 
simplicity, line-and-watercolor paintings capture the inner working of the Ambrose 
and the changeable environment in which she stands guard. Even the endpapers 
are worth close inspection, featuring a labeled cutaway view of the Ambrose, from 
the deck hoist fore to the gin rummy game aft. Listeners are bound to be so caught 
up in the immediacy of the present-tense narration that Floca’s revelation in a 
concluding note may come as a bit of a disappointment—the last lightship station 
was closed down in 1983. Still, there’s always room in the picture-book collection 
for books about heroes past or present, and these guys will stand up (okay, float) 
with the best of them.  EB
Franco, Betsy Birdsongs; illus. by Steve Jenkins. McElderry, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-689-87777-3 $16.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Franco’s text traces the trajectory of a day through a neighborhood’s birds as they 
start up in the morning (the red-capped woodpecker makes ten tapping sounds “as 
he looks for breakfast bugs”), pursue their activities through the day (the white gull 
“nags 7 times that rain is coming” with cries of “eeyah”), and finally wind down 
for the night (a hummingbird finishing up its supping on a honeysuckle blossom 
utters a single “tzik”). The quiet lasts only until the mockingbird bursts forth into 
song imitating all the birds’ sounds. Franco’s gently lyrical prose is attractive, and 
the avian approach of the world is bound to intrigue youngsters. The book gets 
overly focused on its concept, however: the countdown from 10 to 1 is superflu-
ous, suggesting a different pattern than the rise and fall of a day, and some of the 
bird sounds (which aren’t technically all songs, despite the title) are misrepresented 
somewhat in order to fit into the book’s pattern. It’s also never explained if all these 
birds can be found throughout the U.S., and the additional bird-by-bird informa-
tion in the concluding spread is random and spotty (there’s no explanation of the 
meaning of “songbird,” for instance, among the cast of birds who are all basically 
identified as having songs). Jenkins’ collage art is always particularly well suited to 
our feathered friends, with intricate weaving of feathers and overlaying of marbled 
May 2007 • 367
or textured elements for effective contrast, and layouts are dramatic (the swooping 
gull is a particularly impressive in-your-face flier) as well as attractive. Ultimately, this 
is most successful when viewed simply as an auditory evocation of a day outdoors, 
and youngsters will likely enjoy it as a bird’s-eye-view.  DS
gersTein, mordicAi Leaving the Nest; written and illus. by Mordicai 
Gerstein. Foster/Farrar, 2007 36p
ISBN 0-374-34369-1 $16.00   
R* 4-7 yrs 
The titular leaving of the nest is a literal one, in the case of the baby blue jay who falls 
out of his safe abode, but it’s also figurative, as with the girl who ventures nervously 
out on a bike ride and finds herself growing in confidence—and who also finds 
the fallen Baby Jay, rescues him from her inquisitive kitten, and returns him to his 
home. Gerstein unfolds his intertwining narratives entirely in speech balloons from 
the participants (which helpfully include dialogue tags for easier reading aloud) and 
in the illustrations. This approach capably emphasizes the individual experience of 
the cast members and garners particular meaning from their often contradicting 
views of the situation (“This is fun!” the kitten says as he pounces on the jay, while 
the girl and the jay family cry out in alarm), while deftly braiding together the 
stories of different creatures each exploring their independence and capabilities. 
The sunny, verdant backyard scenes hint at happy endings from the start, reducing 
the worries of the tenderhearted in the audience, and humorous touches leaven 
the story further (young audiences will especially get a giggle out of the squirrels’ 
tricking the cocky little kitten); since all the action essentially occurs on the same 
stage set, with occasional shifts in orientation to follow the girl’s climb up (first 
to return the baby bird, then to rescue the kitten), the changes in the individuals 
take center stage. Overall, this is a considerable technical achievement that hides 
its labor well, resulting in a gentle and deceptively simple story about a small event 
that marked the growth of a handful of different youngsters.  DS 
gonzAlez, Julie Ricochet. Delacorte, 2007 [176p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90254-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73228-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Connor’s life changes irrevocably after a troublemaking classmate tempts Connor 
and two other teens into a game of Russian roulette, a game that leaves Daniel, 
Connor’s best friend, dead. Now Connor’s on probation after a plea bargain in the 
face of an accessory to murder charge, his relationship with his family is troubled 
(“My mother looked at me as if I was a broken, frightening new thing she had 
to protect”), and beneath the guilt and fear he misses his friend terribly. This is 
a poignant and emotional story, authentic in the variability of Connor’s family’s 
response, the sharpness of his regrets, and the change in his days now that suspi-
cion rather than trust is the default response to him. Connor’s narrative voice has 
a studied and self-conscious artistry that’s distracting (especially in the symbolic 
interludes about his relationship with a flying dragon) and implausible, though, 
and his musicianship (he’s a violinist) isn’t sufficiently well incorporated to carry the 
emotional weight it’s asked to; the instigator of the dangerous game is reductively 
villainized, and the moralizing in general is pretty simplistic, if subtly expressed. 
This therefore falls short of the high standard of VanOosting’s similarly themed 
The Last Payback (BCCB 6/97), but it’s still a thoughtful exploration of a teen who 
never expected to grow up so quickly in such a tragic way.  DS
368 • The BulleTin
gourley, cATherine War, Women, and the News: How Female Journalists Won 
the Battle to Cover World War II. Atheneum, 2007 198p illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-689-87752-8 $21.99   
Ad Gr. 6-10
World War II marked the first time that a significant number of women journalists 
could compete with their male counterparts for the opportunity to cover hard news, 
particularly events breaking along the front lines. Gourley introduces the types of 
reporting in which women engaged before the war and then turns to the careers 
of such prominent women as Margaret Bourke-White, Dickey Chapelle, Helen 
Kirkpatrick, and Martha Gellhorn, who secured press credentials and muscled or 
conned their way into the action. The stories themselves are exciting and often 
heroic; quote citations, index, and bibliography are useful; and the wealth of ac-
companying photographs of and by the featured journalists is a welcome bonus. 
However, organization is haphazard, with biographical background awkwardly 
supplied in ill-placed insets, and frequent backtracking in order to keep the various 
careers in play throughout the title; even more problematic is the scant attention 
Gourley pays to the women’s collective struggle to become credentialed in the first 
place. For smoother coverage of the same topic, consider Penny Colman’s Where 
the Action Was (BCCB 4/02), but this could serviceably introduce readers to some 
intrepid real-life heroines.  EB 
grimm, JAkoB ludwig kArl The Bremen Town Musicians; tr. by Anthea Bell; 
illus. by Lisbeth Zwerger. Minedition/Penguin, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-698-40042-9 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
The esteemed illustrator turns her hand to the traditional story of “The Bremen 
Town Musicians.” The crisply told story follows its usual pattern, with an ag-
ing donkey, who fears for his life upon his retirement, running away to Bremen 
where he hopes to become a musician. Along the way, he picks up a dog, a cat, 
and a rooster who, also feeling their lives are in danger now that their usefulness 
to humans is ending, join him on the journey. When they come upon a robber’s 
lair, they execute a successful plan to chase out the robbers; while they never do 
make it to Bremen, the four live contentedly together in the robber’s former home. 
Zwerger’s watercolors are evocative, making effective use of light and playing freely 
with shadows and darkness as the day progresses into night. They’re also cool 
and symbolic, eschewing the slapstick elements of the story for an emphasis on 
its theme of discarding the economic liabilities in a visual idiom suited for older 
viewers than usual for this tale. Though the images may not carry well in a group 
format or draw the usual animal-story suspects, they would be very conducive to 
poring over the details. While this quiet interpretation of the familiar story lacks 
the dynamism of such offerings as Janet Stevens’ chaotic Bremen Town Musicians 
(BCCB 11/92), it may be appealing to a more observant viewer who will find 
reward in close examination.  HM
hAlls, kelly milner Mysteries of the Mummy Kids. Darby Creek, 
2007 [72p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-58196-059-X $18.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Halls takes readers on a tour of five continents to discover remains of infants, 
May 2007 • 369
children, and teens, some of which were mummified naturally, and some of which 
were purposely preserved. Though more comprehensive information on the main 
actors is available in other titles, the real value of Halls’ work lies in demonstrating 
just how widespread the incidence of child mummification is, and in surveying 
the varying reasons that cultures choose to preserve their dead. Although there’s 
always an eerie attraction to the stories of child sacrifice (particularly as found 
among South American peoples) and violent ends (the European bog bodies that 
show unmistakable signs of murder), Halls is vigilant about stressing the respect 
due to human remains, and she maintains a fairly neutral position on decisions 
to repatriate, rebury, or scientifically conserve the mummies. Plenty of color pho-
tographs will keep browsers engrossed; truly interested readers can find more in 
the book’s treasure trove of sources to consult, from museums (listed by state), to 
books, articles, and websites, videos and web-archived radio broadcasts, as well as 
her own bibliography. A glossary and index are included.  EB
hemPhill, sTePhAnie Your Own, Sylvia: A Verse Portrait of Sylvia Plath. Knopf, 
2007 261p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93799-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83799-X $15.99   
Ad Gr. 9 up
With her brilliance, marriage to a famous fellow poet, and dramatic suicide, poet 
Sylvia Plath quickly became a legendary literary figure. Hemphill tells the story of 
that legendary life in poems, many of them closely modeled on Plath’s own verses, 
written from the viewpoint of the people in Sylvia’s life or in a third-person imagin-
ing of Plath’s own experience. Though there’s an un-Plathian grammatical careless-
ness to some of the writing, the poems are generally capably executed, especially 
in their technical underpinnings (the explanatory notes attached to each poem are 
inclined to be randomly if genuinely informative); the author clearly takes Plath’s 
side, but the poems honestly acknowledge the poet’s unlikable tendencies toward 
entitlement and superiority. It’s certainly an intriguing biographical approach, and 
teen fans of confessional poetry in general and Plath in particular will find it invit-
ing; its main achievement is imitative, though, and readers ready for these verses 
will reach to their originals, so the book is likelier to contribute to young writers’ 
own experimental projects than to a readerly understanding of Plath or poetry. 
End matter includes a note to the reader about Hemphill’s own interest in Plath, 
a description of her sources for the biographical information in each poem, and a 
list of further resources; a spread of photographs of Plath is included.  DS 
henkes, kevin A Good Day; written and illus. by Kevin Henkes. Greenwillow, 
2007 24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-114019-8 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-114018-X $16.99   
R 3-6 yrs
In this very short, very simple picture book, four featured animals—a bird, a 
dog, a fox, and a squirrel—are all having bad days. The tide turns, however (“But  
then . . . ), and the same animals find happy solutions to their problems. In a 
satisfying conclusion, a little girl finds the bird’s missing feather (the cause of his 
original consternation), which makes her day and leads her to frolic happily in the 
rural landscape among the other four contented animals. While the text is spare 
and the illustrations simple, there is real resonance in this tale, rooted mostly in 
the suggestion that bad days can turn into good days on a dime. The watercolor 
370  •  The BulleTin
and brown ink illustrations are tightly focused on their subjects, and each animal 
is composed of bold, precise strokes and framed in a thick brown square. Facial 
expressions distinctly model both unhappiness and happiness, clearly indicating 
the animals’ mood changes. This begs to be read again and again, and it would 
also work very well as a writing prompt for the early elementary set as they explore 
what makes a bad day better.  HM 
Herrick, Steven The Wolf. Front Street, 2007 214p
ISBN 1-932425-75-6 $17.95   
R Gr. 7-10
On a dusty road in rural Australia live two teenagers: sixteen-year-old Lucy, who 
lives with her abusive father, passive mother, and needy younger brother in a fam-
ily of outsiders; and her classmate Jake, happy in his loving home. This narrative 
in verse alternates between Jake’s and Lucy’s viewpoints, describing Jake’s growing 
interest in the wolf his father believes he saw in the bush, and Lucy’s increasing 
desperation at her soul-crushing family life. In her desire to get away, Lucy tells 
Jake she knows of the wolf’s whereabouts, planning to head out to the bush with 
him and then just keep going, but when Jake is injured on their excursion to find 
the animal, Lucy unexpectedly finds herself bonding with him and seeing new 
possibilities in her life as a consequence. The book’s plot is driven more by message 
need than by realism, but it’s a dramatic story with a classic and teachable plot as 
Lucy finds her life transformed by the act of becoming important to somebody 
who needs her. The free verse is straightforward and somewhat prosy and explana-
tory, making it accessible to poetry-shy readers, and the text would particularly 
lend itself to turn-taking readalouds. Readers intrigued by but not ready for Sonya 
Hartnett’s similarly themed Stripes of the Sidestep Wolf (BCCB 3/05) will find this 
a discussable and emotional drama.  DS
HobbS, valerie Anything but Ordinary. Foster/Farrar, 2007 168p
ISBN 0-374-30374-6 $16.00   
R Gr. 9-12
Winifred and Bernie have been an item since eighth grade, two nerdy outsiders who 
draw their self-confidence from each other and use it to fuel their way to the top 
of their high-school class. His mother’s death sends Bernie into a tailspin, leaving 
him working at his father’s tire shop, while Winifred forges on to college in Santa 
Barbara. At the hands of her banal roommates, Winifred the nascent nonscientist 
gets an extreme makeover, cosmetic and psychic, and turns into Win the party 
girl. She sends Bernie a Dear John postcard; he interprets it as a cry for help and 
rushes cross-country to her aid, only to find a girl he barely recognizes. Will Win 
come to her senses, or flunk out of her new communications major? Will Bernie 
pack his duffle bag and head home, or find his true career path as a writer? Most 
urgently, will they lose their virginity to the wrong people? Hobbs spins the classic 
perennial problem—assault on high-school True Love by the cruel hand of Fresh-
man Year—into drama of the highest order, analyzing it in lusciously agonizing 
detail with a touch of sardonic humor that only heightens the potential tragedy. 
Readers on the cusp of their own romantic separations will have reason to fidget 
nervously, but Hobbs concludes with a hopeful if not deliriously happy ending, 
and realists will accept that, at nineteen, that’s probably the best that Winifred, 
Bernie, and they can expect.  EB
May 2007 • 371
holmes, sArA lewis Letters from Rapunzel. HarperCollins, 2007 184p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-078074-6 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-078073-8 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Cadence’s beloved poet father is under an evil spell, or at least that is how she 
decides to think about the clinical depression that has landed him in a hospital. 
Now Cadence is imprisoned in a wretched afterschool program rather than being 
allowed to spend her afternoons eating popcorn, drinking root beer, and playing 
word games with her dad. Finding a snippet of a letter that her father wrote, she 
decides to write to its addressee, hoping that this person knows some secret that will 
help her father. Adopting the persona of Rapunzel, she writes about her memories, 
hopes, and fears regarding her dad, as well as about her current dilemmas of trying 
to avoid being tapped for a gifted program and to figure out a way to save an old 
railroad bridge that is obviously very important to her dad and has been targeted 
for destruction. As her letters remain unanswered and her father remains hospital-
ized, she realizes that she needs to find her own way to a happy ending. Cadence’s 
giftedness reveals itself in her clever responses to homework prompts that leaven 
the work with offbeat humor, a humor that also sets in perspective the many ways 
she is acting out at school and at home. Holmes manages her copious fairy-tale 
metaphors with a delicately layered grace and springiness; casual readers will be 
satisfied with the surface story of a stubborn yet resourceful and likable girl trying 
to cope with a difficult situation, while more thoughtful types will be rewarded by 
thinking through the subtle and well-drawn connections between both Cadence’s 
and her father’s predicaments and the fairy tales she references and rewrites. Her 
emotional growth is figured just as subtly; she begins by saying that she can only 
twist old tales around rather than writing new ones and ends by creating an original 
story from motifs that admirably answer to her circumstances.  KC 
issA, koBAyAshi Today and Today; comp. and illus. by G. Brian Karas. Scholastic, 
2007 [34p]
ISBN 0-439-59078-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 3-6
Compiler and illustrator G. Brian Karas employs eighteen haiku from famed Japa-
nese poet Issa to guide readers through a year in the life of a pictured family. The 
narrative begins in the spring, when the cherry blossom adorns the garden and the 
elderly grandfather dotes on his grandson and granddaughter; in summer, the boy 
and his sister steam in the heat and revel in the cool nights. Autumn begins with 
the increasingly infirm grandfather sitting in a chair in the yard as his active family 
works and plays around him; the empty chair in the section’s concluding spread 
foreshadows his coming death in winter. Indeed, the winter section shows the kids 
sad at what’s likely the final visit to their grandfather in the hospital and then visiting 
his grave in the cemetery as the snow falls, but then a concluding spread brings us 
back to spring and the continuation of the cycle. The quiet story will take active 
reader attention to tease out, but once involved, youngsters will be intrigued by 
the resonances of the selected haiku with the events unfolding in the illustrations. 
Karas has been particularly clever in selecting elegant verses that harmonize with the 
theme without necessarily explicitly narrating the story. Mixed-media art follows 
the haiku tradition of involvement in the natural world by predominantly depict-
ing outdoor scenes, with indoor scenes either looking out through a window or 
appearing through one to an outside viewer (indeed, apertures are a recurring visual 
372 • The BulleTin
theme). The art is strongly textural, employing collage as well as frescolike mottles 
of resisting pigment, and its interpretation of the poems ranges from the literal 
(there is indeed a focal cherry tree to go with the verses discussing cherry blossom) 
to the interpretatively inspired (a scene that initially appears to be wall-to-wall with 
the poem’s chrysanthemums is actually awash in golden autumn leaves, while the 
chrysanthemums appear unobtrusively in the hands of the children). This would 
be an evocative addition to a language arts lesson or a sensitively oblique way to 
talk about loss and change. An illustrator’s note gives more information about Issa 
and explains the spirit behind the illustrations.  DS
Jocelyn, mArThe How It Happened in Peach Hill. Lamb, 2007 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93701-3 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83701-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-9
Fifteen-year-old Annie and her mother have just settled in the sleepy town of Peach 
Hill after bolting from their most recent temporary residence, where Mama’s scam 
as a medium was exposed. Annie knows the drill, and her current contribution to 
the mother-daughter ruse is to play the part of an imbecile, a role that allows her 
to eavesdrop on her new neighbors and gather helpful bits of information for her 
mother to reprocess into messages from Beyond. But Annie is getting older, wiser, 
and needier—for friends, romance, independence—and drooling and eye-rolling 
aren’t helping to advance her personal life. She seizes an opportunity to publicly 
shed her fake persona, staging a “healing” that stirs excitement throughout the 
community but also puts her into competition with her mother for the local lime-
light and touches off domestic battles over school (Mama’s against it), boyfriend 
(Mama’s against it), normal friendships (Mama’s skeptical), and Mama’s gold-digger 
romances (Mama can’t see that she’s the one currently being played for a fool). As 
Annie approaches sixteen, the age for emancipation in the 1920s, she’s developed 
just enough of a conscience and a vision of a normal future that she must decide 
between loyalty to her mother, who has pathetically fallen for a man as deceitful as 
herself, or pilfering some of the family funds and striking out on her own. Secondary 
characters, from the stern but dedicated truant officer to Annie’s confused boyfriend 
to Mama’s gullible lovers, are meticulously drawn, and the details of Annie and 
her mother’s paranormal antics will delight fans of flummery. Resist drawing the 
inevitable comparisons with Schlitz’s A Drowned Maiden’s Hair (BCCB 11/06); just 
rejoice that we’ve been treated to two such juicy tales in less than a year.  EB
JohAnsen, k. v. Nightwalker: The Warlocks of Talverdin, Book One. Orca, 
2007 [144p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55143-481-4 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Maurey has grown up as an outsider: his mother died giving birth, he doesn’t 
know who his father is, and, after his guardian dies, he is truly alone. He’s also 
despised by humans because his physical appearance reveals him to be one of the 
Nightwalkers, once powerful and respected sorcerers, since forced into hiding to 
avoid extermination. After Maurey is attacked for being a Nightwalker, he escapes 
with a gorgeous young baroness, Annot, who has had her own share of trauma. 
Joined in their quest to inform the Nightwalkers of the escalating hostilities against 
them and unravel the mysteries of each of their pasts, Maurey and Annot set off 
May 2007 • 373
on a months-long journey filled with peril, magic, and a healthy dose of flirtation. 
Maurey, oppressed but defiant and steadfast, is an endearing and realistically drawn 
protagonist who, even in the throes of danger, narrates his own life with a dry wit. 
Unfortunately, he is surrounded by a dizzying number of characters, most of whom 
are simply cast as either good or evil and portrayed with little nuance or depth. 
In addition, the extensive exposition and intricate descriptions of the human and 
Nightwalker worlds occasionally slow the otherwise lively adventure pace. While 
careful to satisfy readers with some resolutions, Johansen leaves this novel rather 
open-ended; fantasy fans who favor rich settings are likely to find Maurey’s quest 
through dangerous landscapes in pursuit of his identity compelling enough to 
anticipate the next volume. A basic map is included.   AS
kimmel, eric A., ad. The Three Cabritos; illus. by Stephen Gilpin. Cavendish, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-7614-5343-1 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
In this revision of “The Three Billy Goats Gruff,” three young goat brothers, fiddle-
playing Reynaldo, guitar-picking Orlando, and accordion-squeezing Augustín, are 
determined to cross the Rio Grande to get to a fiesta in Mexico. Trouble is, in order 
to cross the bridge, you have to get by Chupacabra the goat-sucker, who lives beneath 
it. As in the traditional tale, the first two brothers promise a fatter, more delicious 
brother to follow, but here they set the story’s theme by playing the monster a tune 
before they escape. The eldest brother, stopped by Chupacabra, also starts up a 
melody on his instrument, but it turns out that his magic accordion compels the 
monster to dance as long as it’s playing. Chupacabra thus dances himself to death, 
and Augustín is able to safely join his brothers across the river in Mexico. At the 
center of this story’s success is Chupacabra, a gigantic furry blue monster perched 
on tiny legs with huge eyes, horns on his back, and a splendidly dour expression; 
as each brother plays for him, he dances back and forth across the bridge, flapping 
and waving his arms about. The clean layout and focused compositions are well 
suited to the simple yet humorous text, and the three brothers are craftily distin-
guished from one another. Pair this with Kimmel’s The Runaway Tortilla (BCCB 
12/00) for a Latin-inspired set of traditional tales, or use it for a preschool program, 
complete with lots and lots of dancing. An adapter’s note and glossary of Spanish 
words are included.  HM 
lAfevers, r. l. Theodosia and the Serpents of Chaos; illus. by Yoko 
Tanaka. Houghton, 2007 [352p]
ISBN 0-618-75638-8 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Theodosia Throckmorton lives an enviably unsupervised life for an eleven-year-old 
in Edwardian London: her American mother is hunting down relics in Egypt, and 
her British father is an absent-minded museum curator, who often forgets to take 
his clever daughter home for a real meal and a sleep in her own bed. Her parents 
have also forgotten to replace her last governess, so she spends her days reading 
hieroglyphics and hunting down cures for the curses and malevolent spirits that 
infest the items housed in the small museum. Her mother returns from her latest 
treasure hunt with the Heart of Egypt, a cursed object that threatens to bring down 
the whole British Empire unless Theodosia and her pair of unlikely junior assistants 
(eight-year-old brother Henry and young London pickpocket Sticky Will) can return 
374 • The BulleTin
the amulet to its rightful place in the tomb of the Egyptian pharaoh Thutmose III. 
Danger, mysterious museums stuffed with exotic treasures, and children who best 
adult evildoers are surefire ways to engage young readers, and LaFevers has combined 
them to good advantage here. Theodosia walks a fine line between precocious and 
unbelievable, but young readers will have no problem putting themselves into her 
self-assured shoes; they will particularly revel in the triumph of youth over stuffy 
adults, who should know by now to pay attention to really smart kids.  CW
lAskAs, greTchen morAn The Miner’s Daughter. Simon, 2007 250p
ISBN 1-4169-1262-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Willa is a coal miner’s daughter in West Virginia during the Depression, stoically 
bearing up under poverty, hard work, and the uncertainty of her family’s future. 
There’s as much grit in her spirit as in her clothes as she silently and competently 
takes over chores for her pregnant mother, giving up her dreams of going to school. 
When a missionary comes to town, Willa finds solace for both her mind and spirit 
in Miss Grace’s welcoming room full of books. With the mine closed after the elec-
tion, Willa’s father and brother leave town to do some dangerous but steady work, 
and Willa disguises herself as a boy to do field work in exchange for produce to 
can. She falls in love, and she begins to contemplate her future when Miss Grace 
introduces them to a loud, homely woman who changes the course of their future. 
This is Eleanor Roosevelt, and Grace and her family are invited to participate in her 
pet project, a resettlement community called Arthurdale. There’s a bit of authorial 
forcing in both prose and conclusion, but Willa and her family emerge as strong, 
likable people who make the best of what they have and deserve the break they get. 
Their convincing and readable story would make a fine curricular addition to a 
study of the effects of the Depression and the New Deal on family and community 
life in the ’30s. An author’s note points readers to websites about Arthurdale and 
coal camps of the time.  KC
luBAr, dAvid True Talents. Starscape/Doherty, 2007 [320p]
ISBN 0-765-30977-7 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
Fifteen-year-old Eddie “Trash” Thalmeyer really needs his psychic network of five 
“talented” friends, introduced in Hidden Talents, in order to escape from evil Mr. 
Bowdler and the experiments designed to expose Trash’s psionic skills. The trouble 
is, he hasn’t seen his five buddies, Torchie (the firestarter), Martin (who can read 
people’s souls), Lucky (who finds lost items), Flinch (who sees the future), and 
Cheater (who can read people’s minds), in the year since they left Edgeview Alterna-
tive School. When Trash emerges from a Bowdler-induced stupor and temporarily 
escapes the man, he is surprised to learn that his parents and friends think he died 
in a car accident. After telekinetically lifting some funding from a bank, Trash runs 
into Martin and, one by one, the other members of the gifted group converge on 
Philadelphia to help put an end to Bowdler’s grand plans. Fans of the first book 
will be delighted to rejoin the guys for this reprise, and, although those who come 
to the sequel first may initially need a scorecard to keep the names and nicknames 
attached to the right talents and problems, new readers will root for the group 
from the start. The characters are pleasantly quirky; for example, Flinch’s ability 
to see the future makes him especially effective as a stand-up comedian since he 
can anticipate hecklers, and Torchie’s accordion playing motivates his neighbors 
May 2007 • 375
to sponsor his trip to an accordion conference—in another town. Admirers of 
Sachar’s Holes (BCCB 9/98) will enjoy the light humor, the touch of melodrama, 
and the male camaraderie here, and teachers and librarians using the short chapters 
as readalouds will find students eager for the next installment. Final illustrations 
not seen.  CW
lyons, mAry e. Letters from a Slave Boy: The Story of Joseph Jacobs. Atheneum, 
2007 197p
ISBN 0-689-87867-2 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Prompted by questions from readers of her Letters from a Slave Girl: The Story of 
Harriet Jacobs (BCCB 11/92), Lyons takes up the story of Harriet’s son, Joseph. 
Because little is known of Joseph other than the broad outlines of his travels, this is 
historical fiction rather than biography. Adopting the same format of journal-style 
letters that are never intended to be mailed to their recipients, Lyons gives voice 
to Joseph as a young boy living in Edenton, North Carolina, where he is taught to 
read and write by a white boy his own age. He then moves to Boston to live with 
his escaped uncle, John, who unwittingly inspires him to join a whaling expedi-
tion. He lives on the sea for three years, and then returns to New Bedford until the 
Fugitive Slave Laws drive him to seek his fortune in the gold rushes of California 
and Australia. Since Joseph’s status as a slave is somewhat ambiguous (he was sold 
to his white father by his mother’s abusive master, but that sale was contested, and 
his father, though he didn’t press his ownership, nevertheless never officially freed 
Joseph), he is continually haunted by the specter of capture and the temptation 
to pass as white; both conditions add emotional tension and urgency to Joseph’s 
letters. His missives often lack credibility, though: while Lyons notes that she takes 
some of his creative misspelling from letters produced by Harriet, the device is too 
inconsistent to ring true, and their novelistic pacing, dialogue, and tone exudes 
fiction rather than documentation. Despite these flaws, readers will be absorbed 
by Joseph’s range of adventures, and his musings about race relations, especially 
between blacks and Irish immigrants, lend themselves to cross-curricular discus-
sions. An author’s note, pictures, a glossary of nineteenth-century racial slurs, and 
suggestions for further reading on related topics are included.  KC
mAcdonAld, mArgAreT reAd, ad. Little Rooster’s Diamond Button; illus. by Will 
Terry. Whitman, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-8075-4644-5 $16.95   
R 4-8 yrs
In this entertaining adaptation of “Drakestail,” Little Rooster finds a diamond 
button and decides to bring it home to his mistress. En route, he is accosted by 
the king, who wants the button for himself. Fortunately, the rooster has a magic 
stomach, so when the king has him thrown in the well, he drinks all the water; 
when the king has him set on fire, he spits up the well water and extinguishes it; 
when the king has him thrown into a beehive, he swallows the bees; and when the 
king attempts to sit on him, he lets those bees fly out into the king’s baggy trousers. 
When Little Rooster is finally given open access to the king’s treasure chamber, he 
retrieves the riches the king has been stealing from his village through the years, 
then brings it home and brings it up for the villagers. A magic stomach proves a 
pretty resourceful tool for Little Rooster, and young listeners will delight in his 
boundless determination and likable nature. In typical MacDonald style, the story 
is perfectly paced and effectively patterned for a foolproof readaloud. Terry’s jovial 
376 • The BulleTin
acrylic paintings are loud and unsubtle but stylish, featuring portly figures (a squat 
king, a plump rooster). Bulging eyes and bulbous noses fill most of the human 
faces, and the facial expressions of the king are particularly successful in capturing 
his steady escalation, as the text lays out, from “mad” to “angry” to “furious” to 
“infuriated.” The ending is deliciously just, and young listeners will readily applaud 
the successes of this super rooster. A note identifies the source of the tale.  HM
mAcleAn, chrisTine kole Mary Margaret Meets Her Match. Dutton, 
2007 148p
ISBN 0-525-47775-6 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
She hatched a scheme for pet acquisition in Mary Margaret and the Perfect Pet 
Plan (BCCB 6/04) and regretfully adapted to supporting-actress status in Mary 
Margaret Center Stage (BCCB 4/06); now ebullient motormouth Mary Margaret 
gets the opportunity of her dreams when her family spends a week at a dude ranch. 
The thrill turns to frustration, however, when Mary Margaret finds that she can’t 
control her beginner horse well enough to pass the basic riding test, and her hopes 
of buddying up to cool teenaged cowgirl Kansas seem to be biting the dust as well. 
The equestrian theme is appealing enough in its own right, but it’s also refreshing 
to see the topic of big-kid crushes treated in a children’s book, since so many kids 
get starstruck by charismatic relative elders. MacLean has the elements of such hero 
worship down pat, making Kansas’ glamour understandable even as Kansas herself 
is clearly imperfect, but Kansas’ resistance to Mary Margaret’s charms is credible, 
since Mary Margaret is four feet plus of pure nonstop (“Being all quiet like that 
is nice, for a minute. After that my mouth gets ants in its pants”). Underlying 
this accessible story are some gently made points about reality being tougher than 
one’s dreams and one’s chances for getting along sometimes improving when one 
musters some self-restraint, but these messages are delivered smoothly within Mary 
Margaret’s effervescent and humorous present-tense narrative. Both readers new to 
Mary Margaret and her followers from previous outings will sympathize with her 
trials as she discovers she’s not quite at home on the range.  DS
mAdison, AlAn The Littlest Grape Stomper; illus. by Giselle Potter. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93675-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83675-6 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
The village of Ear is famous for its delicious grape juice, so when Boss Nova 
Boombatz, C.E.O. of “all things grape,” spots young Sixto Poblano’s six-toed feet, 
he is bound and determined to get the boy stomping grapes for him. Sixto does in 
fact have a particular propensity (“because his spare toes made his feet so worldly 
wide, all the juicy grapes were now grape juicy”), which Boombatz is delighted to 
exploit despite the boy’s repeated requests to go back to a life of playing kickball 
with his friends. In the end, Sixto pulls a fast one on Boombatz and drains forty 
days worth of grape juice from a gigantic vat, forming “the five Grape Lakes” and 
sending Boombatz swimming for the rest of his days. This unusual tall tale is a little 
overlong, with a lot of telling for its modest plot, but it is loaded with alliteration 
and playful language that make it a fine candidate for a boisterous readaloud. Sixto 
is as effective as a beloved hero as Boombatz is as an all-business and no-humanity 
villain type. Potter’s characteristic illustrative style renders the fine citizens of Ear 
attractive and slightly fantastical, and while the children often look more like small 
May 2007 • 377
bodies with adult heads, there is great variety of expression. Fields of blue and green 
predominate the compositions, all perfectly juxtaposed with the juicy purples of 
the titular fruit. Young spectators will likely find it difficult getting past the hilarity 
of the front cover, which depicts Sixto in his underwear stomping a vat of grapes, 
but, really, what better outfit for such a sticky job?  HM
mArcus, leonArd s. Pass It Down: Five Picture-Book Families Make Their 
Mark. Walker, 2007 56p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-9601-X $20.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-9600-1 $19.95   
R Gr. 5-8
In this collective biography, Marcus features five multigenerational picture-book 
families—the Crews and Jonas family, the Hurd family, the Myers family, the 
Pinkney family, and the Rockwell family—and explores their histories, both per-
sonal and artistic. The biographical sketches are extremely reader-friendly; written 
in conversational style, each makes great use of example and offers clear explana-
tions for ideas presented. Accompanying each section is a range of visual support, 
including family photos, examples of artwork, and documentation of the publishing 
process (letters from editors, etc.). Many of the stories speak of overcoming great 
odds, from poverty to foster care to discrimination, and there is a quiet implication 
that these creative talents have truly earned their successes. Marcus’ introduction 
challenges readers to consider the strengths and talents of their own families, and 
this challenge is nicely supported by the variety of strengths and talents highlighted 
in the featured families. This would be a useful resource to complement an author 
study as well as an interesting component to a family history project. An incomplete 
(and seemingly somewhat haphazard) booklist is included for each family, as is a 
glossary and an index.  HM
meAd, Alice Dawn and Dusk. Farrar, 2007 152p
ISBN 0-374-31708-9 $16.00   
R Gr. 5-8
Azad has lived with his father since his parents divorced several years ago, but he’s 
never quite figured out the cause for their separation. Now, at thirteen, he’s becom-
ing more aware of the rumors that swirl among the neighbors and more troubled 
by his father’s insistence that he keep away from his mother’s family, particularly 
her brother Mohammad, who is soon to be married. Headstrong Azad charges into 
the wedding plans anyway, and over the coming weeks he pieces together how his 
family’s private dramas are immersed in the larger political drama that’s playing 
out in Kurdish Iran, 1987. His father is, in fact, a police informer who blew the 
whistle on his wife’s human-rights activities to save his own skin; Mohammad’s 
friends are members of the Kurdish resistance movement, to which his mother and 
her family are cautiously sympathetic. After Saddam Hussein’s chemical attacks on 
Iraqi and Irani Kurds, Uncle Mohammad joins the resistance as well and becomes 
a marked man, drawing his entire family—including Azad—into danger. Mead 
hustles over a few key details, but Azad, a mouthy, self-absorbed adolescent forced 
to look beyond his own concerns, is effectively portrayed, and his experience of the 
chemical attack is gripping. This is a compelling tale, and enough of the political 
background of Irani-Iraqi-Kurdish relations is woven into the story to place events 
in context; many readers, though, will pass over the particulars and simply revel in 
an involving story of kids and conflict.  EB 
378  •  The BulleTin
Mills, Claudia  Being Teddy Roosevelt;  illus.  by  R.  W.  Alley.  Farrar, 
2007  90p
ISBN 0-374-30657-5  $16.00     
R  Gr. 3-5
If there were a biography about fourth-grader Riley, it might, he thinks, be entitled 
Riley O’Rourke: The Boy Who Would Forget His Head If It Weren’t Fastened On. He’s 
thinking about biography titles because his class is working on a big biography as-
signment, culminating in a biography tea where the kids all attend in character as 
their subjects. Despite his initial reservations, Riley grows interested in his subject, 
Theodore Roosevelt, and he’s also determined to ace his report to earn permission 
from his mother to take up the saxophone—assuming he can somehow find the 
money. The ever-reliable Mills deftly combines these two threads, credibly conveying 
the way the kids are genuinely responding to their assigned and assumed characters 
(Riley’s friend Grant tackles being Gandhi with surprising conviction, while brusque 
Erika derives a certain sense of noblesse oblige from Queen Elizabeth I) even as she 
mines humor from their different approaches to their topics. The financial obstacles 
to Riley’s saxophone playing are matter-of-factly treated, and it’s understandable 
that Riley’s carelessness is a greater issue in such straitened circumstances; the book 
is also refreshing in its open acknowledgment of the financial disparity among the 
classmates. This could be a clever lead-in to a biographies unit, and the classroom, 
social, and family dynamics will be warmly and wryly familiar to middle-grade 
readers. Alley’s lively black-and-white illustrations capture the bright-eyed energy 
of the fourth-grade classroom.  DS
MitChell, todd The Traitor King.  Scholastic, 2007  [368p]
ISBN 0-439-82788-4  $16.99
Reviewed from galleys     
R  Gr. 5-8
Everyone in eleven-year-old Darren Mananann’s family has gathered at “touched” 
Uncle Will’s broken-down cabin on the Maine coast for the annual two-week family 
reunion, but the man himself is nowhere to be found. There is a note indicating 
that Will left under his own steam and that he will return, and Darren and his 
sister, Jackie, used to Uncle Will’s summer treasure hunts, think this must be a first 
clue to his whereabouts. As Darren and Jackie look for more clues, family tensions 
escalate; night after night their father, their uncle Aidan, and their aunt Cass sit up 
late, drink, and argue in hushed voices. The siblings pursue the mystery of their 
missing uncle and find themselves standing in front of a tree that is actually the 
entrance to Tir Na N’Og, land of seelie and unseelie creatures, where Uncle Will 
has been transformed into a tree. To save him the children must return to the real 
world and find the missing half of the mythical Staff of Mananann, rumored to 
have the power to rip the veil between the fey and real worlds. As in Thompson’s 
The New Policeman (BCCB 4/07), characters and settings adapted from Celtic 
mythology serve the main plot, adding interest and richness. The story clips along 
speedily, and the adults’ secretive behavior adds intrigue. Though there are super-
fluous touches in subplot and character, the children’s quest remains exciting, and 
young readers will picture themselves joining Darren and his sister as they travel 
enchanted waters with nixies and brownies for company.  CW
Moses, shelia P.  The Baptism.  McElderry, 2007  130p
ISBN 1-4169-0671-1  $15.99     
M  Gr. 5-8
Twins Luke and Leon have turned twelve, and Mama has decided that it’s time 
May 2007 • 379
for them to get baptized. Luke is okay with the idea, but narrator Leon is not sure 
he’s ready to give up his sinning ways and be saved. A week of revival meetings 
precede the baptism, but something happens each day that prevents the boys from 
being sin-free enough to go down to the “mornin’ bench”—they get into a fight 
with their white cousin on Monday, disobey their mother during a tornado on 
Tuesday, don’t stop their big brother from fighting a gorilla at the county fair on 
Wednesday. More trouble with their white cousin follows on Thursday, but Luke 
repents, and then their thieving no-good stepfather leaves their mother on Friday. 
Moses revisits literally familiar ground here—this is the same mid-twentieth century 
Southern community she’s written about before, and Luke and Leon are related (by 
custom, not blood) to Pattie Mae Sheals and Buddy Bush (The Legend of Buddy 
Bush, BCCB 4/04, The Return of Buddy Bush, BCCB 4/06), both of whom make 
superfluous cameo appearances. Leon’s first-person narration lacks a storied shape, 
and it is often contradictory in ways that are confusing and flawed rather than 
surfacing as complications of a fully developed character. For instance, the only 
aftermath of the devastating tornado is that his grandmother moves in with them 
after losing her house—there’s no mention of its affecting either the revival or the 
fair. Leon’s ultimate decision to be baptized is unmotivated (he defies his mother 
most of the time, so why would he do this?), and the sudden outpouring of sup-
port from Mama’s white brother at the loss of her husband seems utterly random 
as well (where was the support after the loss of her first husband, who was likely 
murdered?). The story of a Southern black baptism is certainly worth the telling, 
but the storytelling here leaves too many substantial gaps.  KC 
Nimmo, JeNNy Emlyn’s Moon: The Magician Trilogy, Book Two. Orchard, 
2007 [176p]
Paper over board ed. ISBN 0-439-84676-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
      The Chestnut Soldier: The Magician Trilogy, Book Three. Orchard, 
2007 [208p]
Paper over board ed. ISBN 0-439-84677-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
The second and third books of The Magician Trilogy (which began with Snow 
Spider, BCCB 11/06) pick up two and four years, respectively, after the events of 
the first book. At the conclusion of the first novel, nine-year-old Gwyn was just 
learning to harness his extraordinary but volatile magic powers, and he had only 
just glimpsed an icy parallel world into which his sister had settled. In the second 
and third volumes, there are new mysteries surrounding the enchanted items that 
Gwyn inherited (especially the evil and disturbing horse figure he was told to never 
use). The focus expands to include Gwyn’s cousin, Emlyn, and several members 
of the Lloyd family, Gwyn’s former neighbors, all of whom will be impacted if the 
dark forces unleashed by the breaking of the horse figure triumph, as it indeed 
seems they might. Although introverted Gwyn (newly reluctant to perform magic 
because he fears it is stunting his growth) continues to be the central figure, the 
added elements of Emlyn’s creativity and the bustling chaos of the large Lloyd 
family enliven the final two volumes of the trilogy. Unfortunately, readers hoping 
for the clear resolutions of the author’s more recent Charlie Bone books (Midnight 
for Charlie Bone, BCCB 5/03, et al.) will be sorely disappointed, as several threads 
are left unanswered by the end of the third novel in this series. In addition, the 
380  •  The BulleTin
pacing is uneven, with entire chapters in which little action occurs often followed 
by too-quick exposition and rushed resolutions. Nevertheless, these novels, first 
published in Britain in the mid-1980s, may still be exotic and engaging enough to 
appeal to young fantasy readers who favor introspective heroes and well-developed 
settings.  AS
Peet, Mal Tamar. Candlewick, 2007 424p
ISBN 0-7636-3488-3 $17.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
With Hitler struggling to retain his hold on Europe in 1944, two young men trained 
by the British are sent back into their native Netherlands to impose some order on 
the decentralized Dutch resistance, whose disorganized activities have been bring-
ing horrendous Nazi reprisals to their countrymen. For the first man, code-named 
“Tamar,” the assignment brings unexpected joy since it means he will be billeted at 
the farm of his lover, Marijke; for his radio operator colleague, code-named “Dart,” 
it means being stranded with strangers in town under continual peril of discovery. 
Dart, his nerves stretched taut on fear and benzedrine, mistakes Marijke’s friendly 
concern for ardor, and when he learns of her affair with Tamar, he orchestrates an 
abortive resistance mission into a vehicle for revenge on his one-time friend. The 
rivalry resonates across generations when a granddaughter, named in honor of her 
war-hero grandfather, inherits a box full of clues that lead her to uncover a family 
skeleton insidious as that in M. E. Kerr’s Gentlehands. As a multigenerational story 
focusing on the Dutch resistance, this recalls Chambers’ Postcards from No Man’s 
Land (BCCB 9/02), but it’s a considerable original achievement as well. Peet deploys 
alternating narratives with exceptional skill, allowing the twentieth and twenty-first 
century players substantial stretches of page space to spin out their dramas in un-
nerving detail. There is cunning misdirection to satisfy mystery lovers, treachery 
to touch fans of tragic love stories, convincing recreation of resistance operations 
to engross historical-fiction buffs, and subtle underpinnings of metaphor to please 
readers who appreciate polished storytelling. An appended note comments briefly 
on Peet’s sources and on an historical incident recounted in his novel.  EB 
Perkins, Mitali Rickshaw Girl; illus. by Jamie Hogan. Charlesbridge, 
2007 91p
ISBN 1-58089-308-2 $13.95   
R Gr. 3-5
In the rural Bangladeshi village where ten-year-old Naima lives with her mother, 
father, and younger sister, there are few options for girls besides helping at home and 
creating alpanas, decorative patterns painted on pathways during holidays. Naima 
wishes there were some way she could provide financial assistance to her father, a 
bicycle rickshaw driver who puts in long hours trying to pay off his new rig, but 
her attempts to help drive the rickshaw result only in expensive damage. Naima 
then decides to offer her labor at the rickshaw painting shop in exchange for the 
repainting of her father’s rickshaw; after she disguises herself in boys’ clothing and 
walks an hour to the next village, she arrives at the rickshaw shop and finds to her 
surprise that the business’ owner is a woman, who eventually agrees to take Naima 
on as an apprentice. Naima’s engaging story is written in simple narrative and 
printed in large font, thus offering a multicultural tale for early or easily daunted 
readers. Her voice is true to her age, and her desire to help her family is convinc-
ingly portrayed; though kids may wish the book had shown Naima successfully on 
the go in her new apprenticeship, the point here is her acquisition of opportunity. 
May 2007 • 381
As detailed in an author’s note, a central intent of this novel was to highlight the 
way microfinance has changed the role of women in rural Bangladesh, a topical 
message with the awarding of the Nobel Peace Price to Bangladesh microfinancier 
Muhammad Yunus. While this lesson may be largely lost on the intended readership, 
it’s a point that could be expanded into a good discussion when using this short 
novel as a readaloud. Loosely composed black-and-white pastel-crayon sketches 
are sprinkled throughout the text, offering both literal interpretations of the story 
and examples of the patterned alpanas. An author’s note and illustrated glossary of 
Bangla words are included.  HM
PosAdA, miA Guess What Is Growing Inside This Egg; written and illus. by Mia 
Posada. Millbrook, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-8225-6192-1 $15.95   
R 4-7 yrs
Through the double pleasures of a rhymed riddle and a hidden-picture clue, 
children learn about half a dozen animals who begin life inside an egg shell. Each 
entry, a pair of double-page spreads, is introduced with a couplet or two that reels 
out hints about the creature’s environment or parentage (“Their mother crawled 
from sea to land/ To bury these soft eggs in the sand”), while the accompanying 
illustration features a segment of the parent’s body. A page turn reveals the answer 
(“Sea turtles!”) and offers a paragraph about the hatchling’s growth, habitat, and 
diet. The full-bleed collages, crafted of painted and textured papers, can be enjoyed 
by individuals and small groups, and the information is right-sized for squirmy 
audiences with limited attention spans. A pair of concluding diagrams display the 
six egg shapes in full scale for easy comparison (and “oohs” at the relative sizes of 
the spider and penguin eggs), and cutaway views of duckling eggs at four stages 
in their twenty-eight-day incubation period. This is a first choice for kindergarten 
classrooms or for the bookshelf of any child who appreciates nestling penguin 
chicks, snapping alligators, or parachuting spiderlings.  EB
reid, roger Longleaf. Junebug, 2007 133p
ISBN 1-58838-194-3 $19.95   
R Gr. 4-7
It all starts when Jason looks out of his airplane window and sees something strange 
on the ground: three men pushing a truck into a lake. Once the plane lands, 
thirteen-year-old Jason insists on reporting the event, taking it to the local sheriff 
when it turns out that the scene of his witnessed crime is right near where he and 
his scientist parents are camping in Alabama’s longleaf pine forest. There he meets 
Leah, a savvy local girl who’s in the know about fauna—including people—of the 
region; Leah becomes his ally when the dangerous Morris brothers find out that 
Jason witnessed their crime and try to shut his mouth—permanently. There’s some 
unlikelihood in the events and, even more, the setup here, but the solid character-
ization of the kids, the touches of understated humor in Jason’s ruefully self-aware 
narration, and the rich local atmosphere offer considerable compensation. Though 
Leah’s speech is sometimes transcribed as dialect, that proves to be an important dif-
ferentiation as Leah neatly crosses cultures between country girl and well-informed 
young naturalist. The information about local flora and fauna is modestly doled 
out and well integrated with the main story, which is an old-fashioned kids-vs.-
criminals adventure with plenty of danger to keep the excitement up. Fans of Peg 
Kehret’s novels and other middle-grade adventures will want to join Jason on his 
walk on the wild side.  DS
382 • The BulleTin
ries, lori Fix It, Sam; illus. by Sue Ramá. Charlesbridge, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 1-57091-598-9 $15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57091-722-1 $6.95   
R 2-4 yrs
Oh, the wonders of a big brother! Petey knows that Sam, with his trusty toolbelt 
and big-brother dexterity, can fix anything. When Petey embarks on his own 
construction project, Sam has a lot of fixing to do. As Petey pulls toys out of the 
toy box, books from the bookshelves, and a blanket from his bed to build a fort, 
he leaves behind a respectable wake of destruction. At each mishap, he repeats 
the refrain, “Uh-oh. Sam, help?” and Sam, showing only mild annoyance and the 
occasional angry eyes, sets things right. Of course, Petey keeps in good graces by 
always remembering to thank or praise Sam. In the end, though, even Sam can’t fix 
the fort, and a freshly empowered Petey comes to his own rescue. Shades of grape 
and lime dominate the boys’ room, and friendly crayon scribbles lend depth and 
texture to the expressive and energetic watercolor and colored pencil drawings of 
the two boys, one trying to contain the chaos the other can’t help making. The 
text is simple and repetitive enough for new readers to try out on younger sibs 
in attempts to encourage imitative adulation, and they can ponder the wordless 
problem-solving page, where the boys test different ways to make the fort stand 
up together.  KC
rinAldi, Ann An Unlikely Friendship: A Novel of Mary Todd Lincoln and Elizabeth 
Keckley. Harcourt, 2007 243p
ISBN 0-15-205597-5 $17.00   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Rinaldi’s latest offering is based upon the historical friendship between Mary Todd 
Lincoln, wife of Abraham Lincoln, and Lizzy Keckley, an African-American seam-
stress born into slavery who becomes the First Lady’s primary dressmaker and good 
friend. After a prologue, which details the events of the day President Lincoln was 
shot, the novel is divided into two parts, the first detailing the early years of Mary 
Todd and the second describing the life of Lizzy Keckley. Each section is told in 
first person, the tonal shifts between the two sections effectively distinguishing the 
two tales. Mary’s story tells of a life of wealth and privilege in Lexington, Kentucky, 
and highlights the important African-American figures in her childhood. Lizzy’s 
story describes the life of a slave child, detailing everything from beatings to Lizzy’s 
plaguing uncertainty about where she might end up and from whom she may be 
separated. These separate tales end abruptly, giving way to a cursory summation 
of events and bringing the biographical portion up to date with the assassination 
of Lincoln; the framing tale of their friendship isn’t particularly effective, relying 
too much on dramatic language and superlatives to demonstrate how important 
Lizzy was to Mary (“Go and get my friend Elizabeth Keckley. She is the only one 
who understands me”). Still, the details of this unlikely friendship are intriguing, 
and there’s historical interest in the readable narrative. An author’s note, which 
identifies what elements are based in fact and which are invented, is included, as 
is a bibliography.  HM
roBerTs, TArA, ed. What Your Mama Never Told You: True Stories about Sex and 
Love. Graphia/Houghton, 2007 258p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-64636-1 $7.99   
Ad Gr. 10-12
A strong tone of retrospective wisdom dominates the offerings in this anthology of 
May 2007 • 383
true stories (almost all first appearing in this volume, most penned by writers new 
to literature for young people) about the piquant emotions aroused by sexuality; 
targeted specifically to brown girls, these sixteen stories provide insights from women 
not yet old enough to have sexually active daughters, but with enough distance from 
their first times to have developed opinions about what those first (and second, 
third, and so on) times ought to be like, and how girls ought to feel about their 
bodies. Indeed, while each of the stories is exhortative in some way, many blanket 
the reader with an overblown flurry of affirmations and New Agey woman power 
rhetoric that seem rather dated or at least generationally out of step. Though the 
title claims that these are things your mama won’t tell you, many of the stories 
make positive reference to legacies of strong, intergenerational female connections 
that have helped the writers embrace their sexuality and put their experiences into 
perspective. Outside of that context of female community, the only other context 
that these stories really acknowledge for coming of age sexually is the claiming of 
one’s own pleasure; other aspects of intimacy, mutuality, respect, or even love in 
relationships are given relatively short shrift, as these are only valued as enhance-
ments of a woman’s enjoyment. These explicit explorations of all aspects of female 
sexuality (and one might note the number of Xs in that description), as well as 
the feeling that we’re all in this together so we may as well be frank about it, will 
undoubtedly keep this book in high demand. A glossary, an extensive list of web 
resources, and biographical sketches on contributors are provided.  KC 
roche, ArT Art for Kids: Comic Strips: Create Your Own Comic Strips from Start 
to Finish. Lark, 2007 112p
ISBN 1-57990-788-1 $17.95   
R Gr. 4-6
Roche offers budding artists a new outlet with this tutorial on how to create their 
own comic strips. In seven chapters, everything from the basics of drawing and 
brainstorming ideas to layout, design, and publication are carefully described and 
supplemented with copious examples, including an original comic strip Roche cre-
ated for this book. While the strip is amusing and well developed, it also features a 
small cast of characters, straightforward plotlines, and easy vocabulary, all of which 
are elements that will encourage rather than intimidate new artists. The book itself 
is visually appealing, with clear borders and ample white space, a mix of brightly 
colored illustrations and pencil sketches, and short blocks of text. Occasionally, 
Roche’s focus becomes a little too broad or a little too narrow; for the most part, 
however, the instructions and humor are nicely geared to a middle-grade audience, 
who will be able to reproduce many of the projects described herein. An appendix 
includes an interview with a comic-strip editor and a brief recommended reading 
list; an index is included.  AS
sAldAñA, rené, Jr. The Whole Sky Full of Stars. Lamb, 2007 [144p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90078-3 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73053-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
When Alby’s taste for cards gets him in financial trouble with a young but dangerous 
cardsharp, he knows he can’t turn to his dad for help. It’s not that his father won’t 
give him the money; it’s just that it won’t come without another lecture. Instead, 
Alby decides to pimp his best friend, Barry; seeing a sign for a Man o’ Might boxing 
competition, Alby is sure that the talented though untried Barry can take home 
384 • The BulleTin
the purse and Alby can pick up enough action on the side to pay off his debts and 
have plenty left over. Barry is reluctant, but he’s tempted—his father trained him 
to be a boxer, and he knows he needs to step up now to help support his mother. 
Rather incredibly, the high-school boxer defeats all comers in the competition, but 
when Barry finds out Alby is taking illegal bets on the side, he refuses the ill-got-
ten gain and turns his back on his best friend for using him. The relatively short 
text and high-interest themes of gambling and boxing will be a boon for reluctant 
male readers; even if they won’t admit to relating to the tearful reunion of the two 
friends, they will certainly understand what it’s like to be in over their heads, feel 
alienated from demanding fathers, and experience the pain of betrayal. Barry’s 
internal dialogues and memories of his father are especially moving, acting as clear 
motivations not only for Alby’s jealousy but also for his desire to reconnect with 
his own dad, which he is able to do, at least partially, as he struggles to regain his 
honor as well as his most important friendship.  KC
schneider, roByn Better Than Yesterday. Delacorte, 2007 220p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90362-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73345-3 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Skylar is surprised to find herself first in line to be valedictorian at her posh boarding 
school, since that award always goes to a boy. She is equally surprised to see her old 
partner in crime from freshman year, Blake, back in school after a two-year absence. 
Charley, another friend and the one everyone expected to take the valedictorian 
slot, is at school for the summer under strict orders from his parents to bring his 
2330 SAT scores up to a perfect 2400. Marissa completes the set, and the four 
begin right away to relive their glory days from freshman year by pulling pranks. 
Soon enough, however, it becomes clear that Blake has picked up some dangerous 
substance-abuse habits during his time away, and when he disappears, his friends 
realize that they have to find him and attempt to save him from himself. The story 
evolves in chapters narrated alternately by Charley and Skylar, and as a result, Ma-
rissa and Blake never become fully developed characters. With her lack of serious 
problems, Skylar is believable if not fascinating, credibly pretty and popular despite 
being shackled by a reputation for hooking up with lacrosse players. Charley is the 
most interesting character: he’s desperately in need of growth, he is being severely 
pressured by his parents to pursue medicine even though his ambition is in music, 
and he is painfully in love with Skylar but too shy to act. The trip to NYC to find 
Blake is a thinly disguised catalyst for Charley’s transformation; the rest of the 
plot, including Blake’s “rehab,” which is set in motion by a good talking to by the 
heretofore timid Marissa, is just thin. However, the narration is clever, the story is 
well paced, and the message of positive peer pressure reminds readers that they do 
have a lot of power for good over friends in trouble.  KC 
schooley, BoB Liar of Kudzu; by Bob Schooley and Mark McCorkle. Simon, 
2007 183p
ISBN 1-4169-1488-9 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-6
The creators of the animated television series Kim Possible now turn their hands to 
literature in this slick and lightning-paced debut novel, wherein twelve-year-old 
Liar considers himself to be able to dissemble his way out of any situation. Then 
summer hits, bringing a lovely new girl, Justine, and a UFO crash, both of which 
leave Liar unsure how to respond. Luckily, the shock of the crash brings Justine 
May 2007 • 385
and Liar closer together, and they team up with the local science genius to solve 
the mystery behind the crash and subsequent disappearance of the spacecraft. 
Since the small town of Kudzu is accustomed to Liar’s mendacious ways, the kids 
know that no one will believe them when they discover newspapers from the future 
(on a disc left behind at the crash site) that report a devastating train accident, so 
they are on their own to avert disaster. Although the premise is essentially “boy 
who cried wolf” repackaged, sardonic Liar channels Holden Caulfield (without 
the cursing) more than he does bored shepherd. Indeed, Liar’s observations about 
the ease of manipulating grown-ups and the ways in which many adult lives are 
entirely built of lies add a sharp and unexpectedly complex layer to this rollicking 
adventure. Fans of Kim Possible will expect and revel in the wry hints of social 
commentary, but the almost irresistible concoction of humor, action, and UFO 
drama will make this an easy sell to most of the middle-grades set, whether or not 
they’ve seen the show.  AS
Selzer, AdAm How to Get Suspended and Influence People. Delacorte, 
2007 183p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90384-7 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73369-0 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Leon is a gifted eighth-grader with an appropriately exaggerated sense of the cross 
he has to bear with his embarrassing parents. His father is a failed inventor who 
makes his living as an accountant, and both his parents are “food disaster hobbyists,” 
which means they collect obscure cookbooks and try out all the most bizarre recipes. 
At school, Leon escapes the persecution reserved for the gifted by being into heavy 
metal, and he enjoys his gifted program, where this year they are going to make 
health videos to show to the sixth- and seventh-graders. He immediately chooses to 
make a sex-ed video and, after seeing La Dolce Vita, decides to go completely avant- 
garde with his own production of La Dolce Pubert. Blending stills of naked people 
from works of art with a few live-action moments in the absurdist tradition and an 
explosion in the eighth-grade-boy tradition, he finds himself in plenty of trouble 
with the conservative supervisor of the gifted pool and of course becomes a folk 
hero in his school. Smart and savvy on all fronts, this portrait of a young auteur is 
spiked with wry insight into what it’s like to be remarkably intelligent but also still 
have eighth-grade sensibilities. Although he can parse grownups’ good intentions 
out of their goofy execution, Leon is still surprised when the adults in his life show 
that they really do understand what’s going on and can be reasonably cool about 
it. Selzer wisely distinguishes the genuinely gifted from the merely dorky in his 
character crafting; all of Leon’s pals in the gifted pool ponder big ideas and express 
themselves in authority-challenging humor rather than, say, being good at chess or 
socially maladjusted. Leon’s narration is full of read-out-loud-to-whoever-happens-
to-be-around passages, and the plotting cleverly incorporates all of the funny bits 
along the way into its explosive finish and romantic resolution.  KC
ShuStermAn, neAl Darkness Creeping: Twenty Twisted Tales. Puffin, 
2007 [304p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-14-240721-6 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
It’s tough all around for Shusterman’s beleaguered protagonists in these twenty sto-
ries, in which a revenge planned for bullies is enacted upon the good guys, too, the 
386 • The BulleTin
ultimate thrill ride leaves a boy with the choice of watching his brother die or dying 
along with him, and grandmothers who see the future predict nothing but doom. 
Of course, there is the occasional victory, though it rarely comes without cost, as in 
“Catching Cold,” when Marty finally catches the maniacally driven ice-cream truck 
only to discover he is now trapped on the vehicle until someone else does the same, 
or as with “An Ear for Music,” wherein über-talent Lee is finally recognized as the 
best violinist in the world, but he is now trapped forever by his vampiric instruc-
tor. Shusterman maintains a snappy pace and uses personal introductions to each 
story to good effect as he suggests childhood incidents or weird dreams that led to 
the creation of these tales. Unfortunately, the stories themselves are sometimes less 
creepy and interesting than the introductions; the author’s musings on all the ways 
in which the functioning of airports could go awry is, for example, more haunting 
than the actual story of a ghost plane superimposed onto a real one. In addition, 
there is a sameness to the tone and to the repeated “surprise” endings that grows a 
bit wearisome if one reads the whole collection. However, horror anthologies seem 
to have a perpetual audience, and there are several clever stories hidden away in 
here that are well worth readers’ attention.  AS
smiTh, cynThiA leiTich Tantalize. Candlewick, 2007 310p
ISBN 0-7636-2791-7  $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Quincie thinks that her life has hit bottom when, in one short 
week, she finds out that her hybrid-werewolf first love will be leaving forever to 
join a pack, and the chef of her family’s restaurant has been brutally murdered. 
Unfortunately, the worst is yet to come, as the kitschy new vampire theme for the 
restaurant soon attracts the real thing. At first, Quincie is blissfully unaware as she 
discovers the joys of red wine, tries to give the mysterious new chef a vampiric 
makeover, and actively loathes her uncle’s new girlfriend. After waking up tied to 
a bed and feeling rather bloodthirsty herself, however, she finally puts the pieces 
together, realizing that her uncle, his girlfriend, and the new chef have all been 
collaborating to turn Quincie and the Austin nightlife brave enough to frequent 
the restaurant into a massive vampire force. In the end, Quincie may not be able 
to save the world, but she can at least restore order to her own small corner of it. 
Smith cleverly extends the restaurant subplot to shape the book itself: each section 
is a different course of a large Italian meal, and the predator and prey menus the 
new chef creates (from chilled baby squirrels to eggplant parm) are included in 
full. Readers who would happily choose the predator menu will relish the hearty 
amounts of bloodsucking, gore, and danger. Those who would go for the prey 
option may leave a bit squeamish, but they will be well rewarded with an impec-
cably paced suspense story, a sexy romance, and a tough and witty heroine who 
may not be able to resist a perfect Italian meal but can certainly fend off an army 
of vampires.  AS
snAdowsky, dAriA Anatomy of a Boyfriend. Delacorte, 2007 259p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90339-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73320-8 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 10-12
Dominique is seventeen and barely been kissed when she meets cute, funny, friendly 
Wes. Because he has even less romantic experience than she does, their relation-
ship builds slowly, mostly via email, until she finally can’t stand the tension any 
more and confesses that she wants more than just a friendship. He admits that his 
May 2007 • 387
inexperience has been the only thing holding him back, but they soon solve that 
problem. After an attenuated and drawn out build-up the physical side of their 
relationship proceeds overly smoothly from a February first kiss to prom-night vir-
ginity loss, leaving Dom with only two regrets: she has yet to climax, and she can’t 
bring herself to give him oral sex. Tucked into this fairly typical story of first love 
are fully detailed—indeed, almost medically precise—accounts of every aspect of 
kissing, petting, and sex, including how exhausting hand jobs can be, the fact that 
sex can hurt more than just the first time, the proper use of condoms and dental 
dams, and the long list of vitamins and minerals found in semen (she finally man-
ages, quite proudly, to perform oral sex when she and Wes reunite after their first 
few months apart at separate colleges). Her own climax has to wait until after they 
have broken up, so readers get a lesson in the use of a “personal massager” as a sort 
of strange parting gift. The clinical dissection isn’t limited to the physical side of 
the relationship; Snadowsky is as committed to detailing the obsessive emotional 
character of first love and the excruciating pain of first heartbreak as she is its hor-
monal expression. Dom has a remarkably open relationship with her parents, and 
her dad is her sounding board for her pain—her mom apparently never had an 
intense relationship that didn’t work out, so her advice is limited to SAT rhetoric: 
“Cancel and move on.” This may lack character and credibility, but it will prove a 
boon for inexperienced readers who want to know exactly how things work, a teen 
sequel, as it were, to Judy Blume’s lessons on body changes.  KC
sTAhler, dAvid, Jr. The Seer. Eos/HarperCollins, 2007 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-052289-5 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-052288-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
In this second installment in The Truesight Trilogy (Truesight, BCCB 4/04), thir-
teen-year-old Jacob discovers that his newfound ability to see makes him an outcast 
among his community of non-seeing Blinders, so he moves away from tight-knit, 
sheltered Harmony and into the world of commercial mega-cities controlled by 
corporations. In the quest to find his childhood friend, Delaney, Jacob pairs up 
with the prickly and unpredictable Xander, who proves to be a resourceful ally in 
the unexpected struggle against Mixel Corporation, which has hooked its money-
hungry talons into Delaney’s musical talent. On top of it all, Jacob begins to experi-
ence horrific nightmares, indicators of the growing powers he possesses but as yet 
does not understand. Stahler’s world resembles reality, providing some familiarity 
but introducing enough futuristic elements to keep the reader entranced: citizens 
ride in elevators in addition to floaters; fans obsess over pop stars while spaceships 
navigate the celestial stars. The central crises facing Jacob will also be familiar to 
teen readers: he must figure out where he belongs and forge an identity for himself 
in a changing world where the right choices never seem clear. Jacob’s thoughtful 
reflections on the relative merits of embracing or avoiding the truth continually 
underscore that central theme by questioning the morality of turning a blind eye 
to the uglier aspects of human nature. Contemplative flashbacks intermingle with 
suspenseful sequences and an overall quick pacing to create a story successful in 
drawing in new readers and keeping returning fans intrigued. The nonstop action 
leaves eager readers waiting for the final installment and trusting that a maturing 
Jacob will know where in the galaxy to go next.  KB
388 • The BulleTin
sTAnley, diAne The Trouble with Wishes; written and illus. by Diane 
Stanley. HarperCollins, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-055452-5 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-055451-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 3-5
In this picture-book adaptation of the Greek myth Pygmalion, a young sculptor 
discovers that getting what you wish for isn’t always the ideal outcome. Pyg is content 
to develop his talent and pass on his knowledge to his best friend and apprentice, 
Jane, until he creates his masterpiece. Suddenly, he is consumed with the ethereal 
beauty he has carved out of stone, offering her gifts and fervently wishing for her to 
become real. When she does, however, the goddess proves to be heartless, and she is 
as obsessed with her beauty as Pyg had been. Luckily for Pyg, faithful Jane is waiting 
to soften the blow and play Scrabble, so all is not lost. The text spices up the classic 
storyline with references to board games, French perfumes, and contemporary spa 
treatments, and Stanley similarly combines ancient details with modern elements 
in her vivid illustrations. Rich crimson borders and golden backgrounds provide 
classical touches that marry well with the timeless appeal of the toga-sporting pro-
tagonists. Although there are clear morals here about respecting your true friends 
and understanding that beauty may only be skin-deep, the clever anachronisms and 
a humorous climax involving a fierce battle with a stone fountain (the only dragon 
Pyg could find to fight) keep the overall tone light. An author’s note acknowledges 
the various literary influences on this adaptation.  AS
sTewArT, TrenTon lee The Mysterious Benedict Society; illus. by Carson 
Ellis. Tingley/Little, 2007 485p
ISBN 0-316-05777-0 $16.99   
R* Gr. 6-9
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 357, for review.
sTine, r. l. Goosebumps Graphix #2: Terror Trips; ad. and illus. by Jill Thompson, 
Jamie Tolagson, and Amy Kim Ganter. Graphix/Scholastic, 2007 [144p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-439-85777-5 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-439-85780-5 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
In this second volume of the Goosebumps Graphix series, three similarly themed 
Goosebumps novels are abridged and adapted into graphic-novel format. In this 
collection, two stories focus on amusement parks gone awry and the third addresses 
hidden but potentially profitable mysteries to be found under the ocean. While the 
stories are, unbelievably, even shorter and possessed of less plot development then 
their originals, the addition of illustrations compensates, layering the remaining 
threads of the original story with effectively creepy visuals. In fact, it is the black-
and-white illustrations that carry the collection, with each of the three graphic 
stories created by a different comic artist who did both the editing and illustrating. 
In this way, the sameness of the original series is actually mitigated: it is easier to 
see the distinctive horrors of the novels when, for example, one is now combined 
with dense and complex pencil and pen sketches, and another has blocky, manga-
influenced and computer-enhanced gray, black, and white illustrations. Even with 
the nicely varied graphic styles, however, this series is unlikely to appeal to readers 
looking for anything more complex than the original Goosebumps books; fans, 
however, will find these adaptations to be a nice treat.  AS
May 2007 • 389
Townley, roderick The Red Thread: A Novel in Three Incarnations. Jackson/
Atheneum, 2007 294p
ISBN 1-4169-0894-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-9
Sixteen-year-old Dana is haunted by grueling recurring nightmares. Even though she 
is dubious about her psychotherapist’s techniques, Dana goes along with hypnosis, 
which only seems to be exacerbating the problem by dumping Dana into two dif-
ferent past lives. Although those existences are more than two hundred years apart 
(1580s, 1850s) and centuries before her current life, events that happened to Dana 
before are directly shaping and influencing her now. Indeed, most of the people in 
her life (including her parents, boyfriend, and psychotherapist) also played key roles 
in her two previous lives, either as allies and loved ones or torturers and murderers. 
Dana’s present-day life depends on unraveling the mystery before another legacy 
of these past lives stops her from making her story public. While it seems odd to 
remark on the realism of a past-lives murder mystery, Townley manages consider-
able verisimilitude, with the consistency across centuries of Dana’s faulty judgment 
helping to inspire empathy and providing a foundation onto which the impact of 
the complicated but inextricable ties of one’s way-back history seems credible. The 
book has created an effective villain in the psychotherapist (eccentric and demand-
ing now, diabolical in another life), who is a well-developed and chilling foil to the 
wry but generally optimistic Dana. And what a way to put the normal agonies of 
high school into perspective: Dana may have girls lusting after her boyfriend, but 
at least they aren’t threatening or torturing her.  AS
uPdAle, eleAnor Montmorency’s Revenge. Orchard/Scholastic, 2007 [304p]
ISBN 0-439-81373-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
Readers take up the fourth installment of the thief-turned-espionage agent drama 
with the cast rabidly focused on avenging the death of their dear friend and col-
league, George Fox-Selwyn. Their plans are considerably hindered, though, by the 
facts that Dr. Farcett is suffering from an obsessive-compulsive disorder brought on 
by guilt over the death of his almost-lover Maggie and young Francis Fox-Selwyn 
is being pursued by Italian anarchists. A clever switch of identities sends Farcett off 
to an enlightened asylum for treatment under Francis’s name, leaving Frank free to 
assist his elders in tracking down his uncle’s murderers. Updale again constructs a 
cunning labyrinth of plots and counterplots, and page-flipping peril is never more 
than a moment away. She does fudge a bit this time, though, by allowing the ever-
cagey Montmorency to expose his identity in a fit of bravado, which seems less 
like a lapse in caution than an authorial flick of the wrist to keep the plot aligned. 
Nonetheless, she inveigles her characters in three of the most high-profile events 
of the early twentieth century—the assassination of King Umberto, the death of 
Queen Victoria, and the assassination of President McKinley—and can quite nearly 
convince her readers that, had Montmorency’s circle not pursued their private 
vendetta, history might well have changed its course. Montmorency currently has 
a gun leveled at the back of his head, so stay tuned for new developments.  EB
390 • The BulleTin
velez, ivAn, ed. Dead High Yearbook; ed. by Ivan Velez and Mark McVeigh; 
illus. by Shawn Martinbrough, Wilfred Santiago, Brian Hurtt, et al. Dutton, 
2007 80p
ISBN 0-525-47783-7 $18.99   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Editors Velez and McVeigh combine nine overlapping stories about an ill-fated 
group of high-schoolers in this macabre graphic novel. The introductory and 
concluding stories provide the skeleton for the collection: a bemused group of 
newly dead are now staffers, working with permanent editors to create their own 
yearbook before they head off to various afterlives. The remaining stories, mostly 
created by different authors and illustrators, focus in on the horrific fates of each 
of the characters. In one of the most surprising and entertaining entries, “Head of 
the Class,” a fiercely dedicated student won’t let anything, even decapitation, get 
in the way of acing the SATs. More predictable is a bitter love-triangle showdown 
that takes out three teens at once in “Have a Nicey Icee Last Day.” The entries 
themselves are uneven in quality, with several standard 1950s horror-comic plots 
easily overshadowed by their garish and engaging illustrations. In fact, it is the 
complete product itself that shines here, with a puffy faux-leather yearbook cover, 
bloodstained page corners, and endpapers that feature the characters lined up in 
yearbook-style photographs (typical and alive in the front, grotesque and dead 
in the back). If some of the individual stories are standard fare, many teens will 
nonetheless be appeased by the inspired packaging. Horror fans may yawn, but 
graphic-novel aficionados who might be less familiar with the tropes of the genre 
may find enjoyment in this collection.  AS
wAde, reBeccA The Theft & the Miracle. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2007 351p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-077495-9 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-077493-2 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
A promising young artist, twelve-year-old Hannah finds herself fascinated with the 
medieval Virgin and Child sculpture in the local cathedral; as a consequence, when 
the Child is stolen twelve-year-old Hannah is first on the suspect list. Together with 
her best friend, Sam, she determines to find the missing Child, a quest that leads her 
into a supernaturally charged world of witches, ghostly monks, and magic. The story 
is loose and rambling, incorporating too many elements and consequently reducing 
their individual impact as well as the plot’s energy. The book offers a fair amount 
of compensation, though: Wade writes with enjoyably wry wit about grade-school 
dynamics, Hannah is believably drawn as a kid possessed of above-average kindness 
without realizing it, and there’s an echo of Robert Westall in the effective ground-
ing of the supernatural story in provincial Britain and British history. Readers who 
relish a bit of otherworldly danger leaking into ordinary life may therefore wish to 
join Hannah and Sam as they try to solve the paranormal purloining.  DS
welsh, T. k. Resurrection Men. Dutton, 2007 214p
ISBN 0-525-47699-7 $16.99   
M Gr. 8-10
1830 isn’t a very good year for Victor, and neither, for that matter, is 1831. First 
he witnesses his parents’ murder in Italy, then he is sold to a shipmaster, crippled 
and thrown overboard, rescued in England and rehabilitated only to be sold again 
into a band of beggar children. His new buddy Nico is a simpleton/savant who will 
die of cholera and be dissected before Victor’s eyes—but that’s later. His girlfriend 
May 2007 • 391
is blind and being abused, kinkily, by a man who will turn out to be a respected 
doctor by day and a vicious human experimenter by night—but that’s later, too. 
Meanwhile, Victor will be taken in by kindly Dr. Quigley, who will fix his leg 
and train him for a career in medicine, but that career might just be cut tragically 
short when Victor discovers two cells full of children held captive in the evil Dr. 
Crum’s basement, just through the back room with the carousel where young girls 
ride naked for his—the evil doctor’s, not Victor’s—amusement. In vain does the 
reader wander amid this dense forest of gothic/Dickensian motifs in search of some 
sign of parody; Welsh gives every indication that he is in dead earnest. Therefore 
it comes as no real surprise to discover that the narrator, a physician who relates 
Victor’s story some twenty years later while performing brilliant thoracic surgery on 
another suffering urchin with the aid of an awl (anachronistically sterilized) and a 
bird’s quill, is no other than Victor himself. There’s undeniable fascination in seeing 
just how much suffering an author can inflict on his protagonist before rewarding 
him with a happy ending, but YAs in search of the macabre might better turn to 
Wooding’s The Haunting of Alaizabel Cray (BCCB 9/04).  EB
Willard, NaNcy The Flying Bed; illus. by John Thompson. Blue Sky/Scholastic, 
2007 [40p]
ISBN 0-590-25610-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 3-5
Guido may be the son of a legendary Florentine baker, but he lacks his father’s 
touch, so Guido and his wife, Maria, “earned scarcely enough money to live on.” 
When a strapped Guido sells the couple’s bed, Maria is so angry that he placates 
her by finding another bed, a beautifully carved piece that, according to the seller, 
“chooses its owners.” It definitely has special properties: at night, it flies Guido and 
Maria to a mystical town where an otherworldly baker gives Guido a special yeast 
that brings magic to his baking and customers to his shop. Soon, though, Guido 
gets greedy and breaks the rules of the gift, ruining his business and leaving him so 
desperate that he threatens to chop up the magic bed for firewood—unless Maria and 
the bed can stop him. The story has touches of folkloric interest, and there’s appeal 
to the notion of a flying bed that takes you magical places. Unfortunately, though, 
the lengthy text can’t support the fairly scanty plot, and the elements don’t cohere 
(the bed/bread connection is particularly tenuous); though the ending has symbolic 
value, readers will be frustrated that it fails to address the story’s main problem. 
Thompson’s paintings are at their best in the sweeping vistas of the sleeping city as 
the bed flies over it; their stiff and sometimes awkward photorealism makes human 
portraits stilted and ungainly, and their brassy corporeality bogs the story down 
further by making it mundane rather than ethereal. Despite the pleasing fantastical 
touches here, young readers will be better off with Willard’s previous fancies, such 
as The Tale I Told Sasha (BCCB 7/99) or Shadow Story (11/99).  DS
WoNg, JaNet S. The Dumpster Diver; illus. by David Roberts. Candlewick, 
2007 26p
ISBN 0-7636-2380-6 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Once a month (weekly in the summertime), Steve the electrician enters his apart-
ment building’s basement storage room only to emerge moments later as the 
Dumpster Diver, ready to travel the refuse with the aid of his trusty Diving Team 
(the young narrator and his two friends). Together, the apartment dwellers traipse 
392 • The BulleTin
down to the back alley, where Steve launches headlong into the dumpster in search 
of discarded treasures as beetles, roaches, and spiders fly every which way; when 
he emerges with his finds, his team sprays him down and they then move their 
new treasures indoors, where the real fun begins as they start the reusing process. 
Creative juices will be flowing as audiences see blenders turned to lava lamps, 
lamps built into tables, broken TVs functioning as fish tanks, and other odds and 
ends hung from ceiling mobiles. Roberts renders the creations and their creators in 
stylized line-and-watercolor illustrations; definite boundaries and solid geometric 
backgrounds simultaneously impose a certain tidiness on the trash and ground 
the exaggerated figures with an appealing, squeaky-clean charm. Appropriately, 
the trash hunters’ story appears to be recorded piecemeal on scraps of paper, soiled 
doilies, discarded band-aids, or whatever rubbish is at hand, and the visual chaos 
of the scattered text adds humor to the narrator’s lively relation of the rules and 
results of dumpster diving. Barring one unfortunate run-in with some broken glass, 
the rewards of dumpster diving shown here are impressive, albeit optimistic and 
not easily replicable; clearly, this functions less as a factual guide and more as an 
artistic inspiration. Audiences will be sure to imagine their own innovations . . . 
and maybe use up some of that junk around the house.  KB
zArr, sArA Story of a Girl. Little, 2007 192p
ISBN 0-316-01453-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
In a small town like Pacifica, ugly stories have a long shelf life. Three years ago, 
when Deanna was thirteen, her dad pulled Tommy off of her when he caught them 
in the back seat of Tommy’s Buick, and even though she hasn’t even kissed a boy 
since, she’s still known as the school slut. Worse, her father hasn’t forgiven her; 
instead, he’s become angry, distant, and disappointed with most everything in his 
life. Her older brother, Darren, now lives in the basement with his girlfriend and 
their baby, and Deanna wants nothing more than to make enough money so that 
the four of them can get a place of their own. Sixteen is the year of Deanna’s grow-
ing up—she finds herself forced to deal with Tommy again and to come to terms 
with the way her past has refused to let her go forward, not just because everyone 
else remembers it, but because she has never let it go herself. Through subtly crafted 
and utterly credible plotting, Zarr spins out a series of encounters that confront 
Deanna with the necessity of forgiveness; as she makes another mistake and receives 
the forgiveness of her best friend, she slowly comes to understand that redemption 
requires acceptance of forgiveness in order to be complete. She and her brother 
also realize that the ability to forgive is what will allow them to escape the legacy 
of pain their father has visited on them. There’s nothing canned or artificial about 
the insights here: Zarr’s very real characters speak with either the wisdom or the 
stubbornness they have chosen to distill from the pain of their past mistakes. Nor 
do Deanna’s epiphanies emerge fearless and fully formed; rather, she is slowly but 
surely, with faltering steps that many readers will recognize as their own, in the 
process of becoming someone she can like and trust.  KC 
May 2007 • 393
Follos, Alison M. G.  Reviving Reading: School Library Programming, Author 
Visits, and Books that Rock!  Libraries Unlimited, 2006  143p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59158-356-X  $32.00
Follos is an avid fan of journaling, reading aloud, and creating situations where 
students in grades 4-9 can develop a love of reading, and her enthusiasm perme-
ates her book. She begins with a multi-chapter justification for the importance of 
pushing youth toward a love of reading, with representative chapters entitled “Why 
Literature Is Important NOW” and “Mass-Communication Pile-Up,” but finally 
gets down to business, describing a school-wide program known as “Title Trekking” 
and a weekly class called “Reader’s Workshop” that have both contributed toward 
a readers’ environment at her school. Title Trekking resembles an extended sum-
mer reading program, with journals for reflective reading responses, author visits, 
curricular tie-ins and incentives, while her Reader’s Workshop consists of reading 
aloud to the students after which they journal and discuss what was read. Follos 
is most effective when she is describing her programs and less so when she builds 
the case for reading itself. At times her chatty tone verges on the flippant and her 
strategies are the usual ones (refresh lists with new books, make reading success 
visible, engage with faculty whenever possible), but her dedication to students and 
their reading development is unmistakable. She covers everything from author visits 
to book fairs, and she includes short, sometimes annotated lists of titles in genres 
such as poetry, coming-of-age stories, and memoirs. There are references at the end 
of each chapter, and an index along with a bibliography of the books mentioned in 
the text. First-time media specialists or librarians looking for ways to frame their 
approach to faculty will find Follos’ treatment helpful.  CW
Professional ConneCtions: resourCes for teaChers and librarians
394  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Herrick
Adventure: Cooney; daley; 
LaFevers; Mitchell; nimmo; reid; 
Schooley; Stewart; updale
African Americans: Bolden
African Americans–fiction: Lyons; 
Moses; rinaldi
Animals–stories: Banks; Gerstein; 
Grimm; Henkes
AntHoLoGieS: Shusterman
Anthropology: Halls
Art: Marcus; roche
Art and artists–fiction: Wade
Athletes: debon
Bangladesh–fiction: Perkins
BedtiMe StorieS: Banks
BioGrAPHieS: Beah; Bolden; 
debon; Hemphill
Biographies–fiction: Mills
Biology: Posada
Birds: Franco
Books and reading–fiction: Mills
Boxing–fiction: Saldaña
Brothers–fiction: Moses
Brothers–stories: ries
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Charl-
ton-trujillo; Mitchell
Bullies–fiction: Beaudoin
Careers: Burns
Chickens–stories: Macdonald
Circuses: Beccia
Civil rights movement: Bolden
Clothing–fiction: Brashares
Creativity–stories: Wong
Crime and criminals–fiction: 
Cooney; de la Cruz; Gonzales; 
Jocelyn; reid; Stewart; townley; 
Welsh
Crime and criminals–stories: Grimm
Curses–fiction: LaFevers
dance–fiction: Kimmel
death: Halls
death–fiction: daley; Gonzalez; issa; 
velez
depression, the–fiction: Laskas
doctors–fiction: Welsh
dragons–fiction: Carey
drug abuse–fiction: Schneider
Ecology: Burns
economics–fiction: Perkins
Environmental studies: Burns
Ethics and values: Gonzalez; Mead; 
roberts; Saldaña; Stahler; Stanley; 
Zarr
Faith–fiction: Moses
Families: Marcus
Families–fiction: Beaudoin; Charl-
ton-trujillo; Cohn
FAntASy: Browne; Carey; Johan-
sen; Lubar; Mitchell; nimmo; 
Willard
Fathers–fiction: Holmes
FoLK-LiKe tALeS: Willard
FoLKtALeS And FAiry tALeS: 
Grimm; Kimmel; Macdonald
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
Holmes
Food and eating–fiction: Smith; 
Willard
Food and eating–stories: Macdon-
ald; Madison
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
May 2007 • 395
Forgiveness–fiction: Charlton-Tru-
jillo; Zarr
Fraud–fiction: Jocelyn
Friends–fiction: Brashares; Browne; 
Gonzalez; Herrick; Lubar; 
MacLean; Mills; Reid; Rinaldi; 
Saldaña; Schneider; Stewart
Garbage–stories: Wong
Giants–stories: Andreasen
Giftedness–fiction: Selzer
Grandparents–fiction: Peet
GRAPHiC noveLS: Stine; velez
Growing up–fiction: Selzer; Zarr
Growing up–stories: Banks; Gerstein
Health: Roberts; Snadowsky
HiSToRiCAL FiCTion: Jocelyn; 
LaFevers; Laskas; Lyons; Moses; 
Peet; Rinaldi; Updale; Welsh
History, U.S.: Bolden; Gourley; 
Lyons
History, world: Mead
HoRRoR: Shusterman; Smith; 
Stine; velez
Horses–fiction: MacLean
HoW-To BookS: Roche
HUMoR: Beaudoin; Holmes; kim-
mel; MacLean; Schooley; Selzer; 
Stanley
immigrants–fiction: Mead
independence–stories: Gerstein
internet–fiction: de la Cruz
Journalism: Gourley
Language arts: issa
Literature, children’s: Marcus
Literature, English: Cooney
Magic–fiction: nimmo
Money–fiction: Perkins
Mummies: Halls
Music and musicians–fiction: Mills
MySTeRieS: Stewart; Townley; 
Updale; Wade
Mythology, classical: Stanley
Nature study: Franco; Posada
orphans–fiction: Stewart
Physical education: Debon
PoeTRy: Hemphill; Herrick; issa
Poverty–fiction: Laskas
Reading aloud: issa; Lubar; Shuster-
man
Reading, easy: MacLean
Reading, reluctant: Beccia; Stine
Recycling–stories: Wong
Reincarnation–fiction: Townley
Relationships–fiction: Brashares; 
Cohn; de la Cruz; Herrick; 
Hobbs; Johansen; Schneider; 
Snadowsky
Religious education: Moses
Romance–fiction: Hobbs
School–fiction: Mills
Science: Burns
SCienCe FiCTion: Daley; 
Schooley; Stahler
Secrets–fiction: Jocelyn; Peet
Sex: Roberts
Sex–fiction: Hobbs; Snadowsky
Ships and sailing: Floca
SHoRT SToRieS: Shusterman
Slavery–fiction: Lyons; Rinaldi
Spies–fiction: Updale
Spiritualism–fiction: Jocelyn
Storytime: Henkes; kimmel; Mac-
Donald
SUPeRnATURAL SToRieS: 
Wade
SUSPenSe: de la Cruz; Stewart
TALL TALeS: Andreasen; Madison
Transportation: Floca
vampires–fiction: Smith
violence–fiction: Gonzalez
voyages and travel–fiction: Browne; 
Carey; Daley; Johansen; LaFevers; 
Stahler
War: Beah
War–fiction: Peet
Women’s studies: Gourley; Hemp-
hill; Perkins; Rinaldi; Roberts
Work–fiction: Cohn; Perkins
World cultures: Beah; Perkins
World events: Beah
World War ii–fiction: Peet
