T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
October 2012
Vol. 66   No. 2
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
essential.
Deborah stevenson, Editor
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 66 (2013). 
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $58.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$98.00 (print); $105.00 (online); 
$137.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
October 2012
Vol. 66 No. 2
63  the BIg PICture
 
 Ask the Passengers  by A. S. King
64  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
66 •  Come August, Come Freedom: The Bellows, the Gallows, and the Black Gen-
eral Gabriel  by Gigi Amateau
106 • The Spindlers   by Lauren Oliver
108 • Jump into the Sky  by Shelley Pearsall
114 • Splendors and Glooms  by Laura Amy Schlitz
116 •  Bomb: The Race to Build—and Steal—the World’s Most Dangerous Weapon  
by Steve Sheinkin
123  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
124  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $11.99. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2012 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Ask the Passengers ©2012 and used by permission of Little, Brown and Company.
OctOber 2012 • 63
the BIg PICture
Ask the Passengers
by A. S. King
Love is a complicated thing for seventeen-year-old Astrid. On the one hand, she’s 
silently sending it to people who merely cross her path, and she’s particularly 
focused on floating up warm feelings to the passengers in the planes flying over 
her backyard. On the other hand, reciprocal, real-life relationships are much more 
difficult. Her small, ironically named town of Unity Valley engages in harassment 
and ostracism of those outside what’s considered the norm, and secrets lurk behind 
its homogenized exterior. Astrid’s best friend, Kristina, is officially the longterm 
girlfriend of yearbook editor Justin, but they’re both gay and using double dates as 
a front for their real relationships. Astrid herself has fallen for her coworker, Dee, 
but she hasn’t mentioned this to Kristina, who believes Astrid is straight. Then 
there’s Astrid’s tense life at home, where her overcontrolling mother notices only 
Astrid’s younger sister, Ellis, while Astrid’s father retreats from life behind a constant 
haze of pot smoke. All these façades of unity shatter, however, when Astrid and her 
friends get publicly busted for underage drinking—at a gay bar. 
This isn’t simply a coming-out-among-the-homophobes tale, however. Its 
main topic is really finding and owning your own truth, which King authentically 
depicts as a painful process. Astrid’s nearly buried under a multitude of expect-
ant and judgmental voices, whether they’re coming from the townsfolk, her own 
“brain people,” or even friends who are supposed to be on her side, like Kristina 
and Dee. Astrid counterbalances this input by taking her questions to less invested 
sources: those same passengers to whom she sends her love, and an amiable, imag-
ined Socrates (modernized into Frank Socrates), who waits patiently for Astrid to 
flounder her way toward truth. 
That process has more than a few bumps, of course. As Astrid tries to find 
what’s true for her—is she gay, does she want to have sex with Dee—she sometimes 
overlooks the equally legitimate travails of those around her. Dee struggles with 
waiting for an uncertain girlfriend’s commitment, being tacitly disowned at every 
turn; Kristina, who trusted Astrid with her own secret, feels betrayed that Astrid 
kept the truth from her in turn; Ellis, already negotiating the gender stereotypes of 
being on the field hockey team, suffers harassment as a consequence of her sister’s 
new reputation. In fact, King gifts every character with validity: they all have their 
own hopes, fears, and ways of coping, and readers can see how they got to where 
they are and where they might go next. And even amid the brutality of small-town 
judgment, little decencies abound: the boy who Astrid dated to cover her tracks 
amiably shrugs off her deception; Ellis’ biggest tormentor is matter-of-factly chal-
lenged on her own terms by her peers. 
64 • the bulletin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
It was Astrid’s Humanities class that brought her the bolstering compan-
ionship of Frank Socrates, and it’s also there that she finds her central metaphor, 
that of Plato’s famous cave. When all you know is the dark place with shadows, it’s 
hard to emerge to a reality of light and dimensionality, so hard that you might go 
back into the cave. Astrid knows this well, as she repeatedly contemplates coming 
out of her “Unity Valley suit” to let her real self out, only to turn back at the last 
moment. That’s understandable, since she’s not wrong about the judgment she’ll 
encounter, but she also sees glimpses of the light-filled life beyond it, where this 
small-town teen pettiness looks as trivial as it really is. And when eventually she 
takes that step to stand or fall as who she really is (and does it so loudly—“I’M 
GAY! Okay? I’m fucking GAY!”—that she earns a suspension from school), it’s a 
glorious, freeing mess that really does make things better. 
For kids still struggling with their own truths, it can be hard to believe 
how much light there is once you come out of the cave. This is a book that knows 
and understands that, and it’s one that readers will believe. (See p. 92 for publica-
tion information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Aguirre, Ann Outpost. Feiwel, 2012 [336p] (Razorland)
ISBN 978-0-312-65009-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
After running up against a corrupt government and leaving her underground 
home, Deuce survived the post-apocalyptic “Topside” landscape with her scarred, 
mismatched compatriots Fade, Stalker, and Tegan (in Enclave, BCCB 3/11). She 
now struggles to make a place for herself in the above-ground community of Salva-
tion, where she challenges the rigid, religiously tinged gender roles, but where her 
stellar fighting skills are desperately needed as the zombie-like Freaks encroach ever 
further on the community’s land. When Fade is kidnapped by the Freaks, who’ve 
started building a rudimentary settlement complete with cattle pens for human 
livestock, it becomes clear that they are no longer just dangerous predators but an 
enemy force preparing for war. Outpost continues the brutal world-building and 
gritty, complex character development of Enclave, but it suffers from being a middle 
volume; much of the plot is concerned with continuing arcs from Enclave and set-
ting up the Freak-human conflict that will take center stage in volume three. While 
the resulting action can feel directionless, and the romantic interludes that build 
up the connection between Fade and Deuce are far less affecting than her poignant 
OctOber 2012 • 65
interactions with her foster family and new mentor, the continuing exploration of 
this far-future world—how it came to be, what social coping mechanisms evolved, 
and how (or if) it can possibly endure—considers themes of prejudice, redemp-
tion, and social meaning-making in fascinating ways. Deuce is a tough-as-nails 
protagonist, just barely vulnerable enough to be relatable, and readers will enjoy 
watching her struggle to adapt to yet another dangerous new setting, this one all 
the more cautionary for its familiarity.  CG
Airgood, ellen Prairie Evers. Paulsen/Penguin, 2012 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25691-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Raised in the mountains of North Carolina, ten-year-old Prairie Evers has been 
homeschooled all her life, taught mostly by her grandmother. Now her parents have 
moved the family to a farm in New York state, Grammy is going back to North 
Carolina, and, worst of all, Prairie is going to attend public school: “Right away 
I could tell it would be just like in the henhouse; there was going to be a pecking 
order, and I was going to be at the bottom of it.” Raising chickens becomes her 
only comfort until she befriends her classmate, Ivy, and soon the two girls are BFFs. 
When Ivy’s negligent and emotionally distant mother remarries, an impending 
move threatens to separate the girls; fortunately, Prairie convinces her parents to 
take Ivy in for the remainder of the school year. Prairie’s rural North Carolina voice 
is sometimes too mature to be believable (“I thought, You are my earth. How will 
I grow up any more without you?”), and the events are pretty low-key, so there’s 
not much tension to hook reader interest. However, the situation will intrigue 
kids, who will understand the specter of outsiderdom; the book also compellingly 
explores Prairie’s navigation of the ins and outs of a first best-friendship, and the 
lessons she learns about friendship and loyalty are worthwhile. Ivy’s tough family 
life may also strike a chord with kids in similarly bleak positions, and while the 
adults here are not given much dimension, the senior Everses’ plan to get Ivy’s mom 
to let her stay with Prairie is both compassionate and authentically complex.  JH
AllegrA, Mike Sarah Gives Thanks; illus. by David Gardner. Whitman, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-7239-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 6-8 yrs
This picture-book biography traces the life of Sarah Josepha Hale, the nineteenth-
century writer and editor best known for nudging, pestering, and nagging presidents 
into making Thanksgiving a national holiday. Allegra’s account covers a bit more 
of Hale’s personal history than Laurie Halse Anderson’s Thank You, Sarah (BCCB 
2/03), particularly Hale’s work as a contributor and editor of influential women’s 
magazines. The trade-off, however, is that less attention is paid to how the inter-
pretation of Thanksgiving as a public feast has evolved over time, culminating in 
the pie and football fest in which we indulge today. Flashbacks to Hale’s early years 
are somewhat abrupt and disorienting in a brief work without section headings, 
and the youngest listeners may need assistance in placing events in chronological 
order. Gardner’s vibrant line and watercolor pictures, reminiscent of the biographical 
illustrations of Emily Arnold McCully, are pleasant to peruse but don’t establish a 
66 • the bulletin
steady age progression that would help children understand just how many years 
Hale’s Thanksgiving crusade lasted. An informative author’s note on Hale’s many 
other causes assures this title will certainly get its share of curricular use, but the 
more energetic Anderson/Faulkner offering is likelier to get the “Read it again!”  EB
AMAteAu, gigi Come August, Come Freedom: The Bellows, the Gallows, and the 
Black General Gabriel. Candlewick, 2012 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4792-6 $16.99 
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-12
Trial records and historical scholarship yield a credible account of the 1800 Virginia 
slave insurrection organized by Gabriel, a literate blacksmith owned by Thomas 
Henry Prosser. Far less is known, though, of Gabriel’s personal life, and here Ama-
teau steps forward with an intense, empathetic, richly imagined novel that explores 
how love, betrayal, and the rhetoric of revolution in America, France, and Saint 
Domingue could have impelled a born leader to make a desperate and violent bid 
for freedom. The structure of Gabriel’s known story is intact: his training and hiring 
out as a blacksmith; his attack on a white man and narrow escape from the gallows 
through a legal technicality; the intricate recruitment of slaves, free blacks, and a 
few white sympathizers for the uprising; the betrayals, trials, and executions that 
brought the aborted event to its tragic coda. Amateau seamlessly interweaves plot 
threads that supplement political with emotional motivations: Gabriel’s enduring 
love for the slave Nanny, whom he marries and whose manumission he works 
tirelessly to secure, and a rift between Gabriel and Prosser, who had grown up as 
“milk brothers” and playmates, drive his quest for freedom as much as his ideals. 
Amateau’s prose is appropriately passionate, but it’s tempered with disciplined 
restraint and moments of startling delicacy. Although the subject of this title will 
call to historical fiction readers who appreciate such thoughtful works as M. T. 
Anderson’s Octavian Nothing (BCCB 11/06), teens who approach history with the 
poetic insight of Marilyn Nelson will also find Amateau’s chronicle rewarding. The 
bound book will unfortunately include only a minimal source note, but it points 
to what’s promised to be a more extensive bibliography online.  EB 
BAker, keith 1-2-3 Peas; written and illus. by Keith Baker. Beach Lane/Simon, 
2012 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4551-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6575-6 $12.99  
R 3-5 yrs
In this companion to L-M-N-O Peas, the wildly animated crew of peas takes a 
numerical jaunt from 1 to 100. The rhyming text is carefully structured, as peas in 
rising numbers engage in various activities celebrated with a relevant repeated sound 
effect or tag word (“One pea searching—look, look, look/ Two peas fishing—hook, 
hook, hook”). The numeric sequence goes 1 through 10, then gracefully passes over 
the teens (“Eleven to nineteen—skip, skip, skip!”), continuing to count by tens all 
the way to one hundred. The crisply metric text makes this as much fun to read as 
it is to pore over, and it’s a whole lot of fun to pore over. The relevant number of 
peas is shown for each iteration, with the number appearing both in word and huge 
numeral form; the numeral is treated as a physical element in the pea-rich vignettes 
for the little veggie participants to fish off of, drive around, or build on. The highly 
detailed activities of said peas are definitely worth a closer look (Peayoncé can be 
OctOber 2012 • 67
found crooning on the “Seventy peas singing” page). In Baker’s digitally rendered 
illustrations, textured fields of candy color stand out boldly against pages of stark 
white. The peas themselves are actual size, but they lead intricate lives unusual in 
the veggie kingdom and sport such minute details as hats, hairstyles, and teeny 
tiny expressive little eyes (they also have arms and legs, which allows for far more 
movement). While little listeners will appreciate the story, they will especially enjoy 
the opportunity to take a closer look when storytime is through.  HM
BAniA, MichAel Kumak’s River: A Tall Tale from the Far North; written and illus. 
by Michael Bania. Alaska Northwest, 2012 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-88240-886-6 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-88240-887-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Since ice breakup and dramatic river surges are common springtime phenomena in 
the far north, Kumak and his family take the flood of their small Alaskan village in 
stride (“Hooray! No classes today!” cheer the children), clambering matter-of-factly 
onto the roof and putting all the dogs in a boat that they tie to the house as the 
river sweeps away everything that was left on the ground. Eventually the ice jam 
breaks and the river level drops, so the family goes in search of their swept-away 
items, finding their fishing gear, oil drums, and more importantly, the dogs, whose 
boat broke its rope and drifted away, but who have washed up safely elsewhere 
in the village. This new title about Kumak (Kumak’s House; Kumak’s Fish) and his 
Inupiat village is a fascinating contrast to stories of floods as disaster; here the flood 
is like a snow day, with the break of normal routine adding a note of excitement 
and festivity (although the book is awfully sanguine about the messy cleanup). The 
story is told in spare yet rhythmic prose, with the repeated refrain of “Just in time!” 
adding structure. The book’s compact trim size makes the art best suited for the 
close-up and keen-eyed, but the line and watercolor art is jaunty and appealing, 
with teeming vignettes of people and stuff contrasting with the wide open skies and 
broad blue river. A float-ringed thumbnail “window” cleverly provides an ongoing 
dog-cam that follows the exploits of the drifting dogs as the family waits for the 
waters to subside. With a style that’s suitable for reading alone or reading aloud 
one on one, this is an unusual adventure that will intrigue many young residents 
of the lower 48.  DS
BAnks, kAte The Magician’s Apprentice; illus. by Peter Sís. Foster/Farrar, 
2012 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-374-34716-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-7
When the day comes that Baz is to follow in his older brothers’ footsteps and venture 
out into the world to be apprenticed in a trade, the sixteen-year-old boy is delighted 
to leave his utterly unremarkable village in the company of a seemingly kind and 
generous stranger. Unfortunately, the man takes Baz to the sun-baked town of Kal-
lah, where he is forced into servitude under a weaver who is quick with his whip. 
Though relieved when this master sells him to another, he holds no hopes that his 
new owner will treat him any better. Tadis, however, is a magician whose mission 
is to remove illusions and help people find who they truly are, and he surprises Baz 
by offering him his freedom and inviting the boy on his quest. Aspiring Buddhists 
68 • the bulletin
and young Zen practitioners will find many of their beliefs reflected here, but Tadis’ 
moralizing becomes both repetitive and reductive by the book’s close. There’s little 
character development or plot; once Baz meets Tadis, the story comes to a virtual 
standstill and scenes consist mostly of the characters’ conversations regarding heady 
issues like faith, love, and reality. The prose, however, is often fluidly elegant, and 
the folkloric structure lends itself to both reading aloud and discussion. Sis’ spot 
illustrations are pared-down versions of his characteristically intricate pen and ink 
drawings.  KQG
BArnes, Mike The Reasonable Ogre: Tales for the Sick and Well; illus. by Segbing-
way. Biblioasis, 2012 154p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-926845-44-9 $16.95  
R Gr. 7-12
This collection of twelve original fairy tales canvasses a range of complex emotional 
experiences that speak to the deepest fears and desires of teens (and adults) through 
the use of fairy tale creatures and settings. Some are fairly straightforward, address-
ing the infinite sadness of child death or the loss of an elderly beloved, while others 
require more thoughtful conjecture in order to come to a conclusion about what 
the ultimate theme might be, though the images resonate strongly throughout. A 
fragile glass garden, for instance, becomes the setting of a story about a young girl 
who believes her parents don’t understand her, but then the tale turns in another 
direction to call into question the nature of reality itself and to ask who might 
be in charge. The stories address the conditions for desire, what motivates us to 
move forward, and what haunts us from our pasts, all within contexts that tease 
the solidity of the veil between imagination and experience. The imaginative lyri-
cism and touches of fantasy and symbolism provide much of the same appeal as 
Nayeri’s Straw House, Wood House, Brick House, Blow (BCCB 12/11). Segbingway’s 
lyrical monochromatic brushstrokes create artwork that complements the ethereal 
nature of the stories themselves, producing landscapes and figures that are alive with 
movement and texture and yet still intangible. The stories are beautifully written 
and inexhaustibly discussable, but they’re also appropriate for private enjoyment 
and reflection.  KC
BAuer, JoAn Almost Home. Viking, 2012 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01289-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Sad family circumstances and eviction from their home send sixth-grader Sugar 
Mae Cole and her mother, Reba, to Chicago, where Reba has a lead on a cleaning 
job (“I can clean up anybody’s mess except my own,” says Reba). The lead proves 
fruitless and their first night in Chicago, Reba experiences a “severe depressive 
incident” and ends up in a mental hospital. After a few nights in a group hope, 
Sugar is placed into foster care with a couple named Lexie and Mac, a placement 
that proves to be her salvation in the end as she and her mother together begin 
to take steps towards rebuilding their lives. Sugar is a remarkable character, and 
her development is fully realized in this complex story of survival; she is gracious, 
grateful, persuasive, honest, and far stronger than she realizes. Accompanying her 
on her journey is Shush, a puppy who came to her by accident but who proves to 
be a formidable force in her recovery. A plethora of quirky side characters (most 
notably Mr. B, her teacher back in Missouri, with whom she keeps up an email 
OctOber 2012 • 69
correspondence) and writing formats (the narrative is punctuated with a cross-
section of Sugar’s writing, from poetry to letters) drive the novel. While Bauer fans 
will definitely want to get their paws on this one, there’s plenty of realism here to 
draw a wider crowd.  HM
BeAudoin, seAn The Infects. Candlewick, 2012 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5947-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6211-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Nick’s job at the local chicken plant ends in disaster when he stabs his hand and 
jams up a conveyor belt, causing thousands of dollars worth of damage. Presum-
ing his actions were deliberate, the court sentences him to a wilderness trek with 
a group of other youthful offenders, where, on the very first night, his counselors 
mysteriously turn into crazed flesh-eating zombies. Nick and those few other who 
haven’t been munched on take off, but before long the group is divided: should 
they run or fight? Conflict ensues, complicated by the fact that Nick’s crush, who 
has also found herself sentenced to wilderness hijinks, has been zombie-bitten but 
hasn’t turned. Beaudoin fans will recognize themes (a sharp critique of unreflective 
consumerism), rhetorical style (razor-sharp, sophisticated, darkly inflected wit), 
plot concerns (manic twists, moral complications that are likely unresolvable), and 
character types (including a tough protagonist with a heart of gold, his sharp but 
vulnerable autistic sister, and some misguided and evil adults) from his previous 
works. For those unfamiliar with his work, it’s an impressively cerebral and engaging 
entry in zombie lit, offering a self-conscious parody of the conventions of the genre 
that focuses attention on the underlying cultural forces that make the zombie such 
a compelling symbol in the contemporary imagination. It is the zombie novel only 
Beaudoin could write, an allusive horror novel that engages in philosophical, social, 
and humanist critique while providing plenty of laugh-out-loud moments.  KC
Bell, cece Rabbit & Robot: The Sleepover; written and illus. by Cece Bell. Can-
dlewick, 2012 [56p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5475-7 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 1-3
In four brief chapters, each corresponding to an item on Rabbit’s sleepover “to do” 
list, rabbit and his pal Robot engage in standard slumber-party activities before 
going to bed. Robot, however, falls asleep before the pair finishes playing Go Fish 
and Rabbit tries to interpret a message that scrolls out of Robot a few letters at a 
time. “BAT” prompts Rabbit to try to scare his friend awake with a rubber bat, 
“BATTER” gets him whipping up cake batter and offering it to Robot’s inert form, 
and finally “BATTERIES LOW” causes him to understand and to replace Robot’s 
batteries. This gives Robot almost too much energy, but after the friends put on 
pajamas and Robot “reviews the day’s data” (“1. We enjoyed a pizza picnic. 2. We 
laughed about the TV remote in your ear. 3. We played Go Fish and Old Maid. 4. 
We giggled when I put on your pajamas”), the duo finally goes to bed. The large 
font, simple, short sentence structure, and numerous attractive illustrations make 
this accessible for readers who are beyond Willems’ Elephant and Piggie series but 
not quite ready for lengthier chapter books. There’s plenty of humor, both in the 
text and the crisp and simply composed digital illustrations (Rabbit’s buck-toothed, 
70 • the bulletin
big-nosed face is amusing in its own right, and he looks even funnier with a re-
mote stuck in his ear). Rabbit’s initial list-making, Robot’s “data review,” and the 
gradually unscrolling message in which multiple words can be found also provide 
useful instructional opportunities for talking about prediction, summarization, 
and decoding.  JH
Best, cAri Ava and the Real Lucille; illus. by Madeline Valentine. Ferguson/
Farrar, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-374-39903-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-7 yrs
Longing mightily for a dog, Ava, with the help of her sister, Arlie, enters a contest 
at a local pet store. Unfortunately, their win gets them not a dog but a bird, whom 
Ava initially refuses to like; soon, though, Lucille charms her, chirping a friendly 
greeting when she and Arlie get home from school and perching on Ava’s pencil 
while she does her math homework. When Lucille falls ill, Ava, unable to afford a 
vet, follows the pet-store owner’s advice, which leads to Lucille’s eventual recovery 
and Ava’s increased appreciation for her pet. Many kids will relate to Ava’s craving 
for a canine, which is palpably evoked in Best’s text, and many will also sympa-
thize with her acute disappointment that this wish remains ungranted. However, 
while the refusal of Ava’s apparently cash-strapped mother to seek a vet’s care may 
be believable, it’s a sufficiently problematic pet-care practice that it will dismay 
committed pet owners, and Ava’s subsequent success with “healing” Lucille seems 
contrived and unlikely. Valentine’s pencil and watercolor illustrations have an 
upbeat warmth, and the snub noses and widely spaced eyes of her human figures 
gives them a homey and slightly comical look that meshes comfortably with Best’s 
straightforward text. Lucille, though tiny, is well rendered,with her turquoise body 
arranged in elegantly adorable curves. Despite a few flaws, this could easily be 
paired with Prudence Wants a Pet (BCCB 9/11) for a pet-themed storytime duo or 
included in a classroom unit on pets.  JH
Bickle, lAurA The Hallowed Ones. Graphia/Houghton, 2012 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-547-85926-2 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10 
Just before seventeen-year-old Katie is to taste the freedom of rumspringa, the 
elders close the gates of her small Amish community in reaction to a terrible 
disaster that has taken hold of the Outside world. Determined to discover what 
has happened, Katie daringly ventures Outside to find true horror: vampires have 
decimated a small nearby town and apparently much of the world’s population. 
The creatures are currently unable to cross onto the holy land of the Plain Folk, but 
Katie is convinced that the monsters will find a way in, especially when the village 
elders refuse to take the proper precautions against them. Her situation is further 
complicated when she rescues Alex, a handsome Outsider who may or may not be 
a carrier of the contagion that seemingly caused the vampirism epidemic. Bickle’s 
studious details of Amish life lend scenes of Katie’s daily routine a sense of bucolic 
peace, making the eventual invasion of bloodthirsty vampires even more shattering. 
Unfortunately, this attention to the quotidian often slows down the pace, and the 
story stalls even further when Katie and Alex, sparing time from their sometimes 
steamy romance, engage in a series of rather didactic debates of religion. Readers, 
OctOber 2012 • 71
however, may very well appreciate Katie’s struggles to understand the nature of evil, 
while horror fans just looking for a gore fix will have their appetites sated when the 
vampires begin tearing the Plain folk limb from limb. Katie’s an original character, 
and her thoughtful rebellion makes her an interesting addition to supernatural 
fiction’s gallery of strong heroines.  KQG
Bigelow, lisA Jenn Starting from Here. Amazon Children’s, 2012 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6233-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6234-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Colby is about ready to give up on people: her girlfriend Rachel dumps her and 
immediately moves onto Colby’s opposite (a nice Jewish guy who does well in 
school), her mom is dead, and her dad is a frequently absent truck driver to whom 
she still hasn’t come out. Only her best friend, Van, can bring her out of her shell. 
Then she adopts Mo, a friendly but wary stray dog, and life starts to move again: 
the local vet becomes her mentor and surrogate parent, she develops a hesitant 
interest in Amelia, who writes a school paper feature on Mo, and she starts to get 
over Rachel. Colby’s tight-knit community is both a comfort (people look out for 
her when her dad is away) and a pain (Rachel’s new boyfriend, newly educated 
in LGBT issues, starts to participate in the same school organizations and online 
forums that have always been Colby’s safe spaces). Colby’s connections with other 
Rainbow Alliance members allow Bigelow to grapple realistically with the issues 
surrounding coming out from many different angles, but the book wisely keeps its 
focus on Colby’s personal journey, which unfolds in a haze of hormones, awkward-
ness, and sweetness. No one is all good or bad here—even Rachel is redeemable, 
while Colby is hopelessly mixed-up and often a terrible friend—and the story 
explores real-life problems with humor, warmth, and nuance. Any animal lover 
will be moved by the life and companionship Mo brings to Colby’s empty house, 
and they’ll root for Colby and all of her friends as they get their lives together and 
prepare for a more hopeful future.  CG
BlAck, MichAel iAn I’m Bored; illus. by Debbie Ridpath Ohi. Simon, 2012 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1403-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5325-8 $12.99 
 R 5-8 yrs
 “I’m so BORED!” complains a little girl, who has a moment of hope for enter-
tainment when she finds a potato (“You wanna do something?”). Unfortunately, 
the potato likes just one thing—flamingos—and it isn’t excited about hanging 
out with a kid (“Kids are boring”). The girl’s efforts to show it all the enjoyable 
things kids can do—playing games, engaging in some epic pretends—leave the 
potato unimpressed, so she stalks off in frustration. Fortunately for the potato, 
a flamingo appears; unfortunately for the potato, the flamingo’s response to the 
situation is “I’m bored.” While there’s a didactic touch to the story, it’s plausible 
that it’s indignation, not enlightenment, that makes the girl abandon her ennui, 
and the karmic comeuppance of the potato adds a satisfying flourish to the tale’s 
end. The text, which is limited entirely to dialogue, is perfect for a dual readaloud 
or performance, and kids will relish the opportunity to throw themselves into the 
whine of “Boring. Boring. Boring.” Ohi’s digital illustrations rely on spiky black 
linework that suggests linocuts imbued with crackling energy; the spare visuals 
72 • the bulletin
balance the copious white space with touches of saturated color, occasionally fill-
ing the background with imagined realms drawn in pale aqua. While this might 
remind a few listeners of the endless possibilities for self-entertainment, it’ll divert 
even more with the notion of goofing off with a sulky potato.  DS
Bliss, hArry Bailey at the Museum; written and illus. by Harry Bliss. Scholastic, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-23345-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-7 yrs
Bailey, the confident pooch whose grade-school matriculation was chronicled in 
Bailey, now joins his class on a field trip to the natural history museum. After ditch-
ing his designated buddy to splash in the fountain at the main door, Bailey quickly 
recovers his school manners and rejoins the group as they’re greeted by the stodgy 
docent. Some displays are a little disappointing, but the T. rex bones are everything 
a dog could desire, and Bailey is up the display in a shot, gnawing on a tailbone. 
The guard who retrieves Bailey takes a shine to the pooch, and soon guard and 
dog are sharing lunch and even getting briefly lost together. While the youngest 
listeners can easily follow Bailey’s Curious George–style exploits via the narration 
line that runs along the top of most spreads, older children and adults recruited for 
readaloud duty will appreciate the goofy little gems hidden in plain sight: the “Do 
not dance” caution label on the extension ladder; the author’s name “Author” on 
all reading matter, the “Almost Organic Soy Stuff” on the milk carton; the Greek 
urn decorated with the stylized dog chasing a squirrel. Less cerebral, perhaps, than 
his similarly thick-snouted, flop-eared literary cousin Snoopy, Bailey boasts the 
same pettable charm and the same tendency to share only his thoughts, never his 
words. Bailey and his long-suffering cartoon classmates will have firmly secured a 
fan base with this outing.  EB
BluMe, lesley M. M. The Wondrous Journals of Dr. Wendell Wellington Wiggins; 
illus. by David Foote. Knopf, 2012 242p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96850-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86850-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89918-8 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 4-7
This whimsical travel journal documents the voyages and discoveries of the noted 
(and entirely fictional) nineteenth-century paleozoologist, Dr. Wendell Wellington 
Wiggins as he seeks to understand the natural world by traveling to the six continents 
and excavating the remains of their most ancient creatures. Accompanied by a lovable 
wombat-like sidekick, Dr. Wiggins uncovers evidence of all sorts of spectacular (and 
also entirely fictional) extinct species, including Gargantuan King Mosquitoes in 
the jungles of South America; the Dreaded Gossip Peacocks and the Two-Headed 
Mammoth Buffalo of North America; and the Mighty Telephants of the plains of 
Africa, to name just a few. Each entry works a bit like a short story, with Dr. Wig-
gins setting the scene of the dig, giving a brief history of the species, concluding 
with a pithy observation about the creatures’ eventual demise, and relating that 
lesson to human behavior (the beautiful Balloon Dragons were brought down by a 
group of envious prehistoric monkeys in an example of “everyone want[ing] to tear 
down what they wish they were, but can’t be”). Ultimately, though, this formula 
becomes tiring, and the doctor’s conclusions are too simplistic and reductive to 
OctOber 2012 • 73
survive much repetition. The short entries and conversational tone will make this 
an easy book to put down and revisit again later, though. Foote’s black and white 
illustrations accompany each entry, providing eye-catching reconstructions of the 
animals along with bits of visual humor. The animals are amusing creations, and 
the journal format may inspire creative naturalists to begin documenting their own 
backyard explorations. Notes from Dr. Harriet J. Knickerbocker (also fictional) 
provide factual data.  KQG
Bodeen, s. A. The Raft. Feiwel, 2012 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-312-65010-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
By cleverly manipulating some adult miscommunications, fifteen-year-old Robie 
faces the delicious prospect of an unsupervised week in Honolulu. The first twenty-
four hours of loneliness and a scary encounter with a street person, however, are 
enough to send her straight to the airport for the first cargo flight back to her sci-
entist parents on Midway Island. She’s the only passenger, and when the plane goes 
down and the pilot goes with it, Robie is left in the hands of the injured copilot, 
Max (twenty-something and gorgeous), who inflates the rubber raft, drags Robie 
onboard by the hair, and promptly passes out. Given that the genre virtually requires 
sharks, dehydration, hunger, killer sunburn, a deserted island, and at least a touch 
of sexual tension, it’s now up to Bodeen to establish why this particular survival 
story is the one to pick. Much to her credit, she distinguishes Robie’s tale by first 
creating a largely believable young teen—not bratty, just heedless; not incapable, 
just unprepared; not lovestruck, just intrigued—and then carefully resisting the 
authorial urge to imbue her with anything close to the skill set she would need to 
survive. Just when the raft has been patched, rainwater collected, new nose pierc-
ing infected, there’s a nifty plot twist involving Max, a guy who needs saving from 
more than a plane wreck, that should have middle school girls caught somewhere 
between a gasp! and an ooh! Sure, Robie survives—she’s the narrator, after all—but 
readers who pass this novel around will have lots of fun debating exactly what saves 
her in the end.  EB
BrAnford, AnnA Violet Mackerel’s Brilliant Plot; illus. by Elanna Allen. Ath-
eneum, 2012 [112p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3585-8 $12.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3586-5 $5.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3587-2 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-3
Every Saturday, young Violet accompanies her older siblings and her mother to the 
flea market where her mom sells her knitting, and where Violet looks longingly at 
a blue china bird for sale in one of the stalls. She decides to hatch a plot to obtain 
the bird for her own, but her many efforts fail; a simple act of generosity on her 
part, though, gains the attention of Vincent, the stall owner, and he eventually gives 
Violet the very thing she wanted all along. This trim little chapter book, the first 
of an Australian series now being published in the U.S., is a delightful tale with an 
original protagonist in Violet, who will be especially appreciated by kids who think 
outside the box. Young readers ready to tackle longer sentences and the occasional 
tricky vocabulary word will be able to handle this on their own, but it would also 
74 • the bulletin
make a splendid readaloud selection, especially for a multi-age group. Branford’s 
writing is pithy and piquant, and her descriptions of minor familial frustrations 
are particularly realistic and humorous. Allen’s monochromatic illustrations are 
occasionally cutesy, but they are warm and friendly and their frequency will give 
respite to novice readers. Kids who aren’t quite ready for the reading level of Cleary’s 
Ramona books will find this has similar appeal.  JH
BrAy, liBBA The Diviners. Little, 2012 [608p]
ISBN 978-0-316-12611-3 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Evie O’Neil’s parents have finally had it with their daughter’s rebellious flapper 
ways, so they send seventeen-year-old Evie off to stay with her uncle at the Mu-
seum of American Folklore, Superstition, and the Occult. Luckily for Evie, the 
museum happens to be located in New York City, which in 1926 is the height of 
decadence and debauchery, offering up much of Evie’s favorite kind of fun. When 
Evie accompanies her uncle as he’s consulted on a murder case, though, she finds 
a different kind of thrill. Alerted by the psychic powers she’s long kept secret, she 
realizes there’s a serial killer on the loose; she therefore reveals her gift to her uncle, 
and the two begin to hunt for the killer themselves. Smart and unapologetically 
snarky, Evie is a kindred if psychically gifted spirit to Haines’ noir girl sleuth Iris 
Anderson (The Girl Is Murder, BCCB 7/11, The Girl Is Trouble, BCCB 9/12), and 
her crackling dialogue is a delight, leavening a disturbingly dark tale with plenty of 
banter. Bray has a knack for scene-setting, pulling back from Evie to offer a picture 
of both the excess and the poverty of the roaring twenties and to lay ominous clues 
that link Evie’s battles with the supernatural to the economic crises that will soon 
take hold of the country. Readers interested in Americana will find much to oc-
cupy their Google searches here, and a few of the subplots seem to indicate future 
installments, a development that will certainly please fans of historical fiction and 
fantasy alike.  KQG
BrennAn, sArAh rees Unspoken. Random House, 2012 [384p] (The 
Lynburn Legacy)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97041-2 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87041-5 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98918-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
As a budding investigative journalist, seventeen-year-old Kami Glass is looking 
for a story to help sell her school newspaper and boy, has she found one. The leg-
endary Lynburns, Sorry-in-the-Vale’s founding family, have returned after being 
“abroad” for decades, and their arrival in Kami’s English country village coincides 
with a spate of animal sacrifices discovered in the nearby woods. Few believe that 
Ash Lynburn, the town’s newest golden boy, would have anything to do with such 
atrocious acts, but plenty of people suspect Jared, Ash’s brooding, angry cousin. 
Kami, however, knows for a fact that Jared didn’t do it, because she and he have 
shared a telepathic connection since birth that means they can’t keep secrets from 
each other—or can they? Brennan’s efforts to modernize the gothic romance with 
a plucky girl sleuth are somewhat mixed in their success: Kami’s sparkling wit and 
playful banter are certainly amusing, but her lighthearted tone often feels at odds 
OctOber 2012 • 75
with the ominous setting; the horror of the ritualistic killings (of humans as well 
as animals) is lost amid the rapid-fire dialogue and a pace that devotes little time to 
building suspense. The relationship between Jared and Kami is far more interesting, 
flipping the oh-so-common YA trope of instantaneous love on its head: here, the 
two protagonists have shared a lifelong connection but when confronted with the 
physical reality, they flee from any sort of romantic relationship, certain that too 
many of their vulnerabilities are known. Clement-Moore’s Texas Gothic (BCCB 
7/11) is a more effective revamp of the gothic tale, but readers may want to keep 
an eye on this series to see how it develops.  KQG
BriAnt, ed I Am (Not) the Walrus. Flux, 2012 280p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7387-3246-6 $9.95  
R Gr. 6-9
For Toby, his bass playing is a point of connection with his absent, idolized older 
brother Shawn, who joined the Navy and now occasionally sends much-needed 
money back home. This makes it even more meaningful when the Beatles cover 
band Toby formed with his friend Zach gets its first gig opening for a popular local 
band. Then Toby finds a note inside his brother’s bass claiming that it is stolen, 
and the straightforward plot opens up into something a lot weirder as Toby gets 
sucked into a strange world of obsessive bass aficionados, kindly music-store men-
tors, possible scam operations, and his brother’s shady past. Accompanying him 
on this journey is Michelle, his sharply witty new girlfriend who’s capable of giving 
as much brash oddness as she gets. The dialogue—between Toby and Zach, Toby 
and Michelle, even Toby and his mom—sparks with life and wit, and Briant gets 
to the heart of every scene with humor and flair (on stage fright: “What is this 
instrument? How do I play it? Who am I?”). Toby’s money problems add realism 
to the obstacles standing in the way of his success in both love and music. Fans of 
Diary of a Wimpy Kid (BCCB 6/07) who are ready for an older protagonist will 
find this a pitch-perfect next step; readers who like their mysteries quirky, their 
heroes hapless, and their music retro will also rejoice.  CG
Buckley, MichAel Kel Gilligan’s Daredevil Stunt Show; illus. by Dan San-
tat. Abrams, 2012 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0379-9 $16.95  
R 3-7 yrs
From the challenge of too-tight neck holes to the horrors of broccoli, no obstacle 
is too daunting for fearless Kel, a Captain America Lite vision in his cape and red, 
white, and blue safety helmet. Kel stares viewers down with his piercing eyes and 
clenched jaw, regaling them with such epic feats as “the time I threw caution to the 
wind and faced . . . the Potty of Doom! Dun-Dun-Duhhhhh!” His adventures have 
obviously been captured on video (in spreads framed in black with a digital time 
display rolling along the top), and his parents, siblings, and grandmother gasp at 
each new attempt: “Is he insane?” “If I hadn’t seen it, I wouldn’t have believed it!!” 
Even the youngest listeners will recognize Kel’s accomplishments: eating vegetables, 
toilet training, dressing independently, bathing, waiting patiently for parental at-
tention, and going to bed “without checking the room for monsters!” It’s the older 
sibs, though, who will most enjoy owning their role in this affair—contributing 
the appropriate mock terror and loud acclaim as the little guy reaches each new 
milestone. Hyperbolized Photoshop illustrations will have immediate appeal for the 
Pixar generation, and big, blocky upper-case letters in speech bubbles will entice 
76 • the bulletin
beginning readers. If marvels of bravery fail to elicit shrieks of approval, then flashes 
of bare butt certainly will. Expect demands for multiple readings.  EB
Burks, JAMes Bird & Squirrel on the Run!; written and illus. by James 
Burks. Graphix/Scholastic, 2012 [128p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-31283-7 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
In this full-color graphic novel, brave Bird and timid Squirrel join forces to head 
south for the winter after Squirrel loses his entire winter cache of nuts in an attempt 
to rescue Bird from the predatory Cat. Excitement ensues on their migratory journey 
as the duo faces a waterfall, a storm, angry bees, a snake, and a hawk, not to men-
tion the Wile E. Coyote-like Cat, who keeps coming back for more even though 
he always gets the worst of it. Happily, the pair safely make it to their southern 
destination; what’s more, the trip has apparently awakened their thirst for adventure, 
and the book ends with them taking off into “the great unknown.” There’s little 
substance or surprise to Burks’ plot, but Bird and Squirrel are engaging partners, 
the persistent but continually thwarted Cat is both alarming and amusing, and 
the Looney Tunes-esque action is lively and quick. Burks’ comic-strip-like panels 
utilize zesty colors, bold compositions, and varying perspectives to create plenty 
of visual interest. Blocky yellow Bird is as perky as his perpetually raised eyebrows 
and jaunty head feathers suggest, while square-headed, buck-toothed, blue Squirrel 
seems constantly worried (frequently with good reason) and keeps his acorn-cap 
helmet on at all times. With his lime-green eyes and enormous, toothy mouth, 
bulky orange Cat looks quite menacing, but he becomes increasingly bedraggled, 
and thus less threatening, as the book goes on. Older fans of Owly and Wormy 
(BCCB 3/11) might want to give this comical couple a try.  JH
Burleigh, roBert Hit the Road, Jack; illus. by Ross MacDonald. Abrams, 
2012 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0399-7 $17.95 
 R 5-8 yrs
Joining the ranks of such age- and genre-defying picture books as Chris Raschka’s 
John Coltrane’s Giant Steps (BCCB 9/02) and Jonah Winter’s Gertrude Is Gertrude 
Is Gertrude Is Gertrude (BCCB 1/09) is this homage to Jack Kerouac, who’s inter-
preted here as a restless jackrabbit who treks across the U.S.A. to see the sights, 
meet the people, and just generally take life as it comes. MacDonald’s long-eared 
traveler, with jeans rolled at the ankle, rucksack, sturdy shoes, and squint-eyed grin, 
makes his coast to coast journey via bus and freight car, hitched rides and on foot, 
reveling in the golden sun-washed vision of a mid twentieth-century America rife 
with small-town carnivals and big-city bustle. The rhymed text sports an urgent 
momentum as restless as its subject: “The wind against the windshield./ The smell 
of rubber burning,/ An old tune on the radio,/ The click of wheels a-turning./ Into 
the Great Plains, growing dark,/ A farm, a twinkling light,/ While the moon plays 
whoopsie-doopsie/ With the blackness of the night.” Primary-grade teachers who 
want to take the low road could certainly map Jack’s route for an obvious geography 
tie-in, but why not throw curricular caution to the wind, read the author’s note 
about the real Jack Kerouac first, and then let the rhythm of the road get under 
the kids’ skin and inspire their own cross-country dreams?  EB
OctOber 2012 • 77
cAlin, MArisA Between You & Me. Bloomsbury, 2012 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-758-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
“I don’t know if I want to be her or kiss her but I know my heart is ready to explode.” 
That’s how sixteen-year-old Phyre describes her feelings for her new drama teacher, 
Mia, to her best friend, identified throughout this debut novel-in-screenplay-form 
as only “You.” “You” becomes increasingly frustrated as Phyre falls deeper into 
infatuation with her oblivious teacher, since it’s clear to the reader (though not to 
Phyre) that “You” is head-over-heels for Phyre. Calin entertainingly captures the 
self-deprecation and overreaction of one drama-prone girl’s reaction to crushes (both 
her own and those directed at her), and the theater crowd will recognize themselves 
in the larger-than-life ensemble cast. Unfortunately, the book’s screenplay format 
is a misfire, wavering between an actual script and a straightforward novel with 
paragraphs of description, paraphrased conversations, and scenes that tend to rush 
through time in a way that wouldn’t work on screen and doesn’t work here. Given 
that the book is ostensibly written from Phyre’s perspective (she’s “Me” in the lines), 
this may be a realistic reflection of her (lack of) skill in the form, but it’s confusing 
nonetheless. This lighthearted emotional roller-coaster of a book adds a touch of 
complexity by refusing to assign “You” a gender, a provocative meta-commentary 
on gender identity and sexual orientation that should generate both discussion 
and interest while keeping the story’s appeal organically broad. It’s to Calin’s credit 
that “You” is a well-developed, crush-worthy character regardless of what gender 
readers assign to the persona, and Phyre’s melodramatic tendencies are entertaining 
in their own right. Hand this to fans of Lockhart’s Dramarama (BCCB 9/07) or 
Wilkinson’s Pink (BCCB 1/11).  CG
cAlMenson, stephAnie Ollie’s School Day: A Yes-and-No Book; illus. by Abby 
Carter. Holiday House, 2012 [24p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2377-4 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
A playful question-and-answer format leads viewers through Ollie’s day at school: 
“What will Ollie eat? A bowl full of bubblegum? No! Fishy-flavor ice cream? No! 
A sour pickle with mustard? No! Will Ollie eat a bowl of cereal with milk and 
fruit? Yes!” The structure of three jokey answers to each question, which continues 
throughout, will be familiar to audiences who encountered it in Margaret Miller’s 
similarly humorous titles (such as Guess Who?) in their younger years, and young-
sters will find many of the alternative responses laugh-out-loud funny. Silliness 
aside, there is also a strong understory here about appropriate school behavior, 
making this a great selection for reviewing classroom expectations. The line and 
watercolor illustrations are vibrant and playful, with Carter’s rumply lines and 
carefully chaotic touches adding accessibility to the images; pages swoop between 
broad class-scapes and closeup vignettes of Ollie engaging in the various absurd 
suggestions, visually matching the rhythms of the text. Because there is a lot of 
literal text to image matching, non-readers have the option of retelling the story 
by following the pictures. Readers aloud will find ample opportunity to improvise 
and add in other silly suggestions throughout the reading, making this as adaptable 
as it is amusing.  HM
78 • the bulletin
cAMeron, shAron The Dark Unwinding. Scholastic, 2012 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-32786-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46964-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Orphaned at a young age in Victorian London, Katharine Tulman has spent the 
majority of her seventeen years playing servant to her hateful aunt and the woman’s 
equally foul son. When Aunt Alice gets word that her eccentric brother-in-law is 
squandering the family estate (and her son’s inheritance), she sends Katharine off to 
the remote family mansion to have the old man committed to an asylum. Upon her 
arrival, Katharine discovers that her uncle is certainly strange, but he is also likely 
a genius, running a workshop that produces fantastic automatons and employs 
the entirety of a nearby village. Katharine’s mission to have him institutionalized 
is complicated first by her growing affection for her uncle and the people who 
work for him (especially his handsome apprentice) and then by the hallucinations 
and visions that begin to plague her the longer she stays at the estate, putting her 
own sanity into question. From the blustery moors that surround the mansion to 
the Byronic love interest to the blurred line between reality and insanity, this has 
all the fare any Gothic fan could ask for. Katharine is likable but far from sweet, 
looking out for her interests from the beginning; her casual acceptance of her aunt’s 
ire and her status as merely a financial burden will nonetheless evoke sympathy 
from the reader. The uncle is a bit of a caricature as the genius savant, but the 
people that rely upon him for the livelihood are heartbreakingly authentic, making 
Katharine’s ultimate decision even more triumphant. An author’s note revealing 
the true-life inspiration for the story—a nineteenth-century British duke with a 
thing for underground mazes and pink walls—will send the history buffs straight 
to Wikipedia, but any reader looking for romance, thrills, and mystery will find 
this entirely satisfying.  KQG
coville, Bruce Always October. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 367p
ISBN 978-0-06-089095-7 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
On a dark and stormy night, a basket holding an infant shows up on the doorstep 
of sith-grader Jake Doolittle. That’s odd enough, but it gets much weirder when 
Jake is babysitting and said infant turns into a furry, sharp-toothed monster under 
the full moon. A nursery stakeout with his friend Lily convinces Jake that while 
the baby (now affectionately known as Little Dumpling) is indeed a monster, he’s 
pretty harmless. No, it’s the terrifying, fiery creature that comes out of the closet 
that sends Lily and Jake (with LD in tow) running into the neighboring graveyard 
where they find passage into Always October, LD’s native land, which is a realm of 
nightmares and dreams that is in dire need of saving. In this surprisingly charming 
blend of fantasy and mystery, Coville strikes just the right balance of terror and 
whimsy with his picture-book worthy descriptions of the monstrous inhabitants 
of Always October. Jake and Lily alternate narration, and they represent two com-
mon and entirely relatable responses to fear: Jake is a multi-phobic who attempts to 
control every aspect of his life, while Lily is a thrillseeker whose response to being 
scared is to find something that scares her even more. Their voices are authentically 
kid-centered, and readers will likely recognize aspects of themselves in both reac-
tions. The rules that govern Always October and its interaction with Jake and Lily’s 
OctOber 2012 • 79
world are at times unclear, but the highly entertaining storyline and the occasional 
interjection of bathroom humor will make this a hit among middle-schoolers.  KQG
dennArd, susAn Something Strange and Deadly. HarperTeen, 2012 388p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208326-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-208328-9 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
The dead are rising in Philadelphia, just in time for the 1876 World’s Fair, and 
high-society gal Eleanor Fitts is forced to deal with the reanimated corpses while 
she searches for her missing brother. Convinced that Elijah’s research into the 
arcane arts has gotten him kidnapped by the necromancer currently controlling 
Philadelphia’s dead, Eleanor attends the Expo to obtain the help of the Spirit-
Hunters, a group of paranormal investigators led by a young Creole man and his 
gruff but devastatingly handsome assistant. While the Spirit-Hunters attempt to 
discover Elijah’s whereabouts and find a way to stop the encroaching zombie inva-
sion, Eleanor must negotiate her own life-or-death situation as she tries to save her 
family from financial ruin—until she uncovers a disturbing connection between 
the posh world of society’s upper echelon, her brother’s disappearance, and the rise 
of the undead. A wonderfully brisk pace sweeps readers into a intriguing mystery; 
there’s further fun to be had with the Victorian setting, replete with corsets and 
cobblestones, as well as Eleanor’s tempestuous romance with the sigh-worthy 
Spirit Hunter, Daniel. As skilled at disabling zombies with her parasol as she is 
at charming her suitors with witty banter, Eleanor serves as a highly entertaining 
guide through the steampunk/supernatural world, and readers will find themselves 
settling in among the nineteenth-century undead just fine. The promise of further 
romance and adventure is set up in fabulous fashion at the book’s close, so look 
out for future installments.  KQG
durst, sArAh Beth Vessel. McElderry, 2012 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2376-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2378-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Liyana has trained all her life to be the vessel for her desert tribe’s goddess Bayla, 
who every 100 years leaves the Dreaming to live among her chosen tribe, the only 
time she’s able to directly intervene on humans’ behalf. Bayla never shows up, but 
the trickster god Korbyn appears in human form and gives Liyana some startling 
news: the gods have all been imprisoned in false vessels, and he and Liyana must 
retrieve the various tribes’ unsuccessful vessels, figure out where the deities are being 
held, and rescue them. Durst balances a compelling survival story in a harsh envi-
ronment with an intriguing exploration of deities’ right to human vessels. Korbyn 
is a charismatic, capricious foil to earnest, ruthless Liyana, and his ancient love for 
Bayla makes for one of the more interesting love triangles in recent YA fiction, with 
two of the three souls involved trapped in a single body. Durst’s prose is vividly 
tactile, emphasizing the value of Liyana’s physical existence and the enormity of 
her planned sacrifice, and investing readers in the central philosophical question: 
are the desert tribes the chosen people of the gods, or the brainwashed victims of 
magical parasites? And what level of sacrifice is justified by the goal of preserving 
one’s culture (instead of leaving the desert for a place where survival doesn’t require 
divine intervention)? The author has also carefully created a folkloric backstory for 
80 • the bulletin
her world, and the rich interweaving of folktales and storytelling into the main plot 
gives weight to both sides of the debate. Fans of unconventional, thought-provoking 
fantasy will flock to this sweeping tale.  CG
ee, susAn Angelfall. Amazon Children’s, 2012 [288p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6327-6 $6.99 
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-6110-9425-1 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
There’s been a Biblical-style apocalypse, and Penryn’s living in the hellscape of 
what was once San Francisco. She makes an unlikely alliance with Raffe, an injured 
avenging angel, after her little sister Paige is carried away by the faction of angels 
who incapacitated him. Endangered by Penryn’s violently paranoid schizophrenic 
mother, the brutal gangs who rule the streets, and the packs of feral cannibal 
children starting to appear on the landscape, the pair tries to find and save Paige. 
Ee leaves much of her backstory unexplained, so readers will be left wondering 
about the history of the gangs and of Penryn’s family history (how did the gangs 
form? why are Penryn and Paige still with their mother when she is apparently the 
one responsible for Paige needing a wheelchair?). The mystery around the angels’ 
motives and endgame is well developed, though, and it pays off in the disturbing 
final reveal. The book’s biggest draw is the electric, antagonistic attraction between 
Penryn and Raffe, temporary allies caught on opposite sites of a war that is just 
beginning; fans of angst-ridden vampire and werewolf romances will find plenty 
to enjoy. A cliffhanger ending promises much deeper explorations of this dark, 
devastated world and its implacable angelic invaders in future volumes.  CG 
fAMA, elizABeth Monstrous Beauty. Farrar, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-374-37366-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
In 1872, Syrenka forsakes her life as an immortal mermaid and joins the human 
world to be with her lover. Their union is short-lived, however, ending in his death, 
her rape, and a curse that haunts Syrenka’s descendants for generations. More than 
a century later, seventeen-year-old Hester is convinced that if she falls in love (and 
more significantly, has sex and then gives birth) she will die—like her mother, her 
grandmother, and her great-grandmother. A chance meeting with a handsome 
stranger has Hester rethinking her stance on abstinence, but as her investigation 
into her family’s history reveals only more misfortune, Hester is certain that even if 
she can lift the curse, she will end up alone. The bittersweet story is threaded with 
unresolved tragedy, making it compulsively readable. Chapters shift their focus 
between Syrenka and Hester, but, as Syrenka’s actions serve as the story’s catalyst, 
she is the far more compelling protagonist—she is indeed, as the title suggests, 
a monstrous beauty, both seductive and dangerous, and her well-intended but 
ultimately selfish choices have repercussions beyond her imagining. Bearing the 
brunt of these consequences is Hester, whose need to dispel the ghosts of her past 
before she can build a future will resonate with teens. Though not as stylistically 
sophisticated as Margo Lanagan’s The Brides of Rollrock Island (BCCB 9/12), this 
explores similar themes of love, possession, and fate.  KQG
OctOber 2012 • 81
fletcher, rAlph Guy-Write: What Every Guy Writer Needs to Know. Ottaviano/
Holt, 2012 166p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9404-6 $14.99  
R Gr. 5-9
Drawing mainly on his own and his sons’ personal experiences, Fletcher writes 
with a crusader’s zeal about the problems faced by guys trying to write in school. 
He contends that the things guys like to write about too often fall outside the 
zero-tolerance policies of their schools; blood, weapons, epic battles, and outright 
fantasy don’t pass muster with teachers who want real stories, but not real enough 
to include bodily functions or fighting. So what’s a guy to do? Fletcher combines 
personal stories, interviews with famous authors such as Jon Scieszka, Greg Trine, 
Robert Lipsyte, and Robert San Souci as well as graphic-novel artist Jarrett Kros-
oczka, excerpts from published books and short stories written by tween boys, 
and writing tips to inspire boys to write what they want. The authors offer advice 
on how to write humor that’s actually funny, how to use blood, gore, and other 
gross stuff effectively in the service of storytelling, how to condense play-by-play 
sports stories so they aren’t boring, and how to use provocative hints to evoke hor-
ror. Fletcher also talks about process, including using drawing as a springboard 
for writing and keeping a writer’s notebook. While the book occasionally makes 
some overbroad assumptions about who guys are and what they like, it opens up a 
necessary conversation about what is acceptable in school writing, and how narrow 
restrictions can constrict the achievement of boys, making it important reading for 
teachers as well as budding guy writers.  KC
frAdin, dennis Brindell Zora!: The Life of Zora Neale Hurston; written by 
Dennis Brindell Fradin and Judith Bloom Fradin. Clarion, 2012 180p illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-00695-6 $17.99  
R Gr. 4-7
Zora Neale Hurston is a lively subject for a biography but also a challenging one. As 
a collector of folk stories and “lies,” she herself often played fast and loose with the 
truth, regularly changing her age to suit her purposes and lying to her friend and 
coworker Langston Hughes on multiple occasions. The Fradins parse truth from 
fiction carefully here, and they don’t shy away from reporting on the mistakes, fits 
of temper, plagiarism, and other shady dealings that peppered Zora’s fascinating 
and varied career. They introduce readers to her exuberant and fanciful childhood 
in the all-black community of Eatonville, Florida, a childhood that was shattered 
by the death of her beloved and supportive mother. Her father’s remarriage proved 
disastrous to the cohesion of the family, with Zora and her stepmother even coming 
to physical blows at one point, resulting in Zora leaving her father’s home forever. 
Zora possessed a keen intelligence and an unfailing confidence in herself; while she 
worked at various jobs throughout her life, she never gave up the idea that she was 
destined to be a famous writer. The Fradins trace her academic and writing careers 
during the heady days of the Harlem Renaissance, providing child-friendly explana-
tions for why her work went largely unrecognized by the general public until after 
her death, and they explore in detail why an award-winning author found herself 
working as a housekeeper in her fifties. The biography thus features the humor 
and heartache of the life of a brilliant but largely underappreciated writer who only 
became really well known after her death. Two folktales that Hurston collected, a 
timeline, source notes, bibliography, and index are included.  KC
82 • the bulletin
gAgnon, Michelle Don’t Turn Around. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210290-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-210292-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12 
In her first YA outing, adult thriller author Gagnon follows two teen hackers through 
a harrowing conspiracy investigation. Noa is a former foster kid living off her tech 
skills, while Peter, a rich kid still troubled by his brother’s death, runs a hacktivist 
group that targets people who take advantage of the weak. After waking up in a 
hospital with no memory of how she got there, Noa flees to the streets of Boston, 
while Peter is threatened by mysterious men in black after his hacking leads him to 
something called Project Persephone. Connecting through the hacking network, 
Noa and Peter gradually uncover a massive medical experimentation ring surround-
ing the epidemic of a new teen-killing illness known as PEMA, which has links to 
Peter’s parents’ corporate ties as well as Noa’s time in the foster system. Gagnon’s 
writing has an assured flow that draws readers effortlessly into an adrenaline-packed 
ride, and she doles out wrenching character moments organically, deepening reader 
investment without ever disrupting the plot’s inexorable escalation. The book gains 
additional appeal from its immensely likable protagonists, everyday heroes who are 
determined, ingenious, and driven by a desire to make the world a better place for 
all. With an ending that answers many questions but promises much more in the 
future, this is a smart, gripping addition to the growing hacker-action genre with 
strong appeal to fans of Doctorow’s Little Brother (BCCB 11/08) and Falkner’s 
Brain Jack (BCCB 9/10).  CG
george, elizABeth The Edge of Nowhere. Viking, 2012 [448p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01296-1 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Becca can hear thoughts; unfortunately, some of her stepfather’s thoughts reveal 
his murderous crimes, so Becca is sent off to a remote island to hide out with an 
old friend until her mother can sort out the legalities of a new life. However, her 
mother’s friend is dead, and Becca’s mom isn’t answering the phone, so Becca is 
stranded. Luckily this is one friendly town. Punky Seth gives her a sandwich and 
directs her to Debbie, a motel owner who offers room and board in exchange 
for babysitting her grandkids. Debbie calls in a favor to enroll Becca at the local 
school, and before long she’s settled into a safe holding pattern—until Derric, a 
quiet, kind Ugandan adoptee for whom Becca immediately falls head-over-heels, 
turns up comatose in the woods and Becca’s frantic 911 call puts her secret identity 
at risk. While the writing tends to be clunky, the plotting is surefooted as George 
interweaves the mysteries of Derric’s injury, Becca’s mom’s disappearance, and the 
origins of various town conflicts. Becca’s psychic gifts are smartly underplayed—the 
thoughts she overhears frequently cause more confusion than they resolve—and 
the small town, with its wealth of idiosyncratic, layered characters, is bursting 
with tantalizing secrets. George plays up the emotional elements of her theme of 
rebuilding life after tragedy (which Becca, Derric, Debbie, Seth, and others are 
all attempting in their own ways), and the atmosphere of rich introspection gives 
this series opener strong appeal to fans of Beth Kephart and Nancy Werlin.  CG
OctOber 2012 • 83
gherMAn, Beverly First Mothers; illus. by Julie Downing. Clarion, 2012 64p
ISBN 978-0-547-22301-8 $17.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Gherman takes readers on a quick stroll through this gallery of presidential mothers, 
pausing to speculate on the kind of influence each woman may have had on her 
son. A unique adjective in the heading of each entry encapsulates a notable trait: 
“The Affectionate Mother” of James Madison was known for her warmth and social 
egalitarianism; “The Brave Mother” of Andrew Jackson helped negotiate her cap-
tured sons’ release in the Revolutionary War; “The Protective Mother” of Rutherford 
Hayes “decided to educate Ruddy and his sister at home, rarely letting them out 
of her sight.” Most entries comprise a single page, but some share space and a few 
earn a double spread. Downing’s art varies from realistic historically tinged images 
to the funny but respectful cartoon style of Michael Emberly. Brief comic-book 
panels make an occasional appearance, and First Mother Mary Ball Washington 
(not a candidate for Mother of the Year) sticks her opinionated head in from time 
to time. A bibliography is appended. It remains now to be seen whether this book 
will last another four years, or require a revised edition as of November 6th.  EB
gidAli, orit Nora the Mind Reader; tr. from the Hebrew by Annette Appel; illus. 
by Aya Gordon-Noy. Enchanted Lion, 2012 26p
ISBN 978-1-59270-120-9 $15.95  
R 5-7 yrs
In this creative Israeli import, when young Nora is insulted by a boy in her class 
who says she has “flamingo legs,” Nora’s mom comes to the rescue with a hug and 
a “magic wand” (depicted as a lovely mauve bubble wand). Nora is surprised to find 
that when she looks through the holes in the magic wand, she is suddenly able to 
see the true meanings behind people’s sometimes contrary words. When she looks 
again at the boy who insulted her, for example, he says, “Hi there, flamingo legs,” 
but his thoughts are “When you’re around, everything looks pink.” After much 
practice, Nora realizes she can now “make magic without a wand” (e.g., see the truth 
behind people’s words). Gordon-Noy inventively depicts a difficult but important 
concept by having a person’s actual words appear in a standard white speech bubble, 
while their true thoughts are written inside a pale gray, photo-realistic illustration 
of a soap bubble, thus connecting the inner thoughts to the soap bubble “magic 
wand.” The mixed-media illustrations (some presented against a background of 
muted Hebrew print) are attractive in their combination of drawing, painting, 
and collaged materials and integral to the simple, straightforward text, while the 
scribbly-haired Nora is an appealing young heroine. Creative adults armed with a 
stack of bubble wands could easily use this as a springboard for a lesson on emo-
tions and thoughts vs. words or actions.  JH
giff, pAtriciA reilly Hunter Moran Saves the Universe. Holiday House, 
2012 [128p] illus.
ISBN 978-0-8234-1949-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
After intercepting a cryptic phone call, fifth-grader Hunter Moran becomes 
convinced that the dastardly dentist down the street is planning to bomb his 
small town and only Hunter and his twin, Zack, can save Newfield from certain 
doom. Sure, Hunter only heard some static and a few vague references to agents, 
84 • the bulletin
and absolutely zero references to bombs. It’s summer vacation, though, and the 
brothers need something to occupy their time, so a few well-planned forays into 
bomb defusing, spy-catching, and general mischief are just the ticket. This is an 
amusing tale of an imagination gone wild, a affectionate tribute to a kid whose 
mischief is entirely warm-hearted and endearing. Hunter’s voice is pitch-perfect as 
a boy who is completely unaware of the chaos he tends to cause, and his genuine 
surprise at finding himself in the middle of the hullabaloo is often as amusing as 
the hullabaloo itself. Quirky secondary characters round out the cast, with Hunter’s 
chocolate-loving younger brother Steadman deserving of a book in his own right. 
While even youngsters with a penchant for pretend play will find Hunter’s dentist/
bomb scheme a bit unbelievable, they will certainly understand his need to create 
some excitement and will be happy to join him in doing so.  KQG
goldstone, Bruce Awesome Autumn. Holt, 2012 48p illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 978-0-8050-9210-3 $16.99  
R 5-8 yrs
This accessible introduction to autumn features a wealth of interesting tidbits about 
the season in vivid photo-dense pages. Large-print headings introduce concepts 
(“Before the frost comes, it’s time to harvest crops”; “Animals who stay awake in 
winter use autumn days to get ready for the cold”) that are then described in more 
detail. There is a wealth of information here ranging from fall leaf ID to migrat-
ing animals to autumnal foods, and the narrative and layout are nicely organized 
to support reading aloud. Extensive stock photographs are cleverly employed, 
manipulated into photocollage, isolated in diagrammatic captioned vignettes, and 
panoramically expanded into background landscapes, making the book both attrac-
tive and informative. While the emphasis here is on science, the volume expands 
to embrace anthropology with the account of what humans do in the fall and the 
acknowledgment of fall holidays such as Halloween and Thanksgiving. The book 
closes with several pages of craft projects (“Awesome Autumn Activities”). This visu-
ally and narratively engaging exploration of the season offers the perfect jumpstart 
for autumnal studies in the classroom or library.  HM
grossMAn, nAncy A World Away. Hyperion, 2012 394p
ISBN 978-1-4231-5153-1 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Eliza Miller is curious about the world outside her secluded Amish 
community. When Rachel, a visiting academic, offers her a job as a nanny at her 
home near Chicago, Eliza aches to go, and her parents allow it when they see that 
trying to keep her home now may mean losing her forever. Leaving behind her lov-
ing family and friends, including a special young man named Daniel, Eliza enters 
the “fancy” world with grace and relatively little awkwardness, considering that 
she is using buttons, not to mention electricity and cell phones, for the first time 
in her life. She has an eager guide in Josh, a handsome boy her own age who lives 
near Rachel, and soon Eliza and Josh have developed a relationship Eliza knows her 
parents will not approve of. The pace of the novel is gently absorbing, as Eliza moves 
from one first experience to the next, tolerating the blunt and tactless questions of 
her peers with mild good humor. Drama works its way in with revelations about 
Eliza’s family, including the discovery of an aunt she never knew she had because 
she was shunned and left the community, and a long-held secret of her mother’s that 
OctOber 2012 • 85
helps Eliza understand her parents’ reluctance in letting her go. Although Grossman 
provides no notes (and does perpetuate an insulting misunderstanding about the 
Amish reluctance to be photographed), she avoids exoticizing the Amish lifestyle. 
She presents Eliza’s decision-making process as one of choosing a lifestyle rather 
than making a commitment based on faith or belief, though; thus readers who are 
unfamiliar with the Biblical bases for Amish tradition may still be a bit lost as to 
the deeper reasons of why a group of people would choose to live such a simple life. 
For the most part, real differences between the concerns of Amish and “English” 
teens are minimized as Eliza seeks her path toward adulthood, but readers may 
nonetheless see their ordinary pastimes and habits afresh through Eliza’s eyes.  KC
hAn, Jenny Burn for Burn; written by Jenny Han and Siobhan Vivian. Simon, 
2012 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4075-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4077-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
After Kat, Lillia, and Mary suffer slights from friends on their island home, they 
band together to take revenge. Kat still stings from being wedged out of her three-
way friendship with Rennie and Lillia years ago, especially since Rennie never 
neglects an opportunity to humiliate her publically. Lillia willingly pays the price 
for hanging with the popular crowd, but she feels betrayed when she is date-raped 
after Rennie drags her to a party, and she is determined to protect her little sister 
from a similar fate at the hands of the older boys she’s attracting. An overweight 
Mary left the island after popular, athletic Reeve humiliated her to the point where 
she attempted suicide in junior high; now she’s back and thin, but she still isn’t 
getting the kind of attention from Reeve that she wants. As the girls plot their 
vengeance, however, they find that they may not have seen things as they really 
are. Hints at supernatural powers emanating from Mary are never developed, and 
an abrupt ending will either titillate or frustrate readers, depending on their abil-
ity to tolerate a huge buildup with a lack of resolution. However, Han and Vivian 
are seasoned veterans of the friendship drama; they manage an appealing premise 
with a well-paced plot and lots of juicy, atmospheric detail. Readers hungering for 
a little payback for social snubs may well find some vicarious satisfaction here.  KC
hArvey, MAttheA Cecil the Pet Glacier; illus. by Giselle Potter. Schwartz & 
Wade, 2012 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96773-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86773-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
Ruby Small’s parents are embarrassingly unusual: Dad creates topiary while Mom 
designs tiaras, and the two love tangoing in the front yard and playing miniature 
Ping-Pong on the tray tables during an airplane flight. When a small glacier “calf” 
(the technical term for a chunk of ice that falls off of a glacier) begins following 
Ruby on a family trip to Norway, her parents are delighted that she’s found a 
pet. Even after the family takes him home (safely ensconced in a snazzy red Igloo 
cooler), Ruby is less than thrilled with Cecil. It is only when Cecil, at great risk to 
himself, retrieves one of her beloved dolls in a downpour on the playground that 
Ruby warms to her strange icy pet. Harvey’s narrative is at once absurd and wry, and 
86 • the bulletin
even the peripheral details of Ruby’s story are amusing (“Mrs. Small piled fifteen 
hatboxes into the car—she didn’t like to repeat tiaras even on vacation”). While 
kids embarrassed by their parents will sympathize with Ruby, Cecil is amazingly 
endearing for a lump of rocky ice, and Ruby’s initial cold-shouldering will earn him 
sympathy. Potter’s trademark folk-art-style watercolor illustrations (in blues, greens, 
and golden browns, with pops of red) are effective in their pairing with this strange 
little story; while the slightly surreal quality of her paintings is well matched to the 
text’s odd subject matter, the straight-faced approach of the illustrations lends a 
bit of gravitas to the amusingly bizarre narrative. Use this to spice up a pet-themed 
storytime or classroom unit, or simply share it aloud with kids who will appreciate 
its particular brand of weirdness.  JH
hAyles, MArshA Breathing Room. Ottaviano/Holt, 2012 244p illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-0-8050-8961-5 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-7
Evvy and her twin brother have always been so close that it’s difficult to comprehend 
why she has been stricken with tuberculosis while Abe has been spared. Now she’s 
at Loon Lake Sanatorium, on a regimen of enforced rest and near-immobility, pro-
tected from learning any excitement-inducing news from either home or the nation, 
which teeters at the brink of entry into World War II. The many readers engrossed 
by Peg Kehret’s autobiographical Small Steps (BCCB 11/96) will find strong and 
understandable similarities between Kehret’s actual experience with disabling ill-
ness and Evvy’s fictional experiences. Restricted to a room shared with other girls 
with little to do and much to worry about, undergoing treatments now considered 
ineffective (e.g., intentional lung collapse), and facing seemingly arbitrary outcomes 
of recovery or death, roommates engage in interpersonal dramas that become the 
focus of their event-starved lives. There will be considerable alignment of interest 
and reading levels between this title and Jim Murphy’s Invisible Microbe (BCCB 
9/12), and language arts and science teachers may want to consider a collaborative 
fiction/nonfiction reading activity. Most readers, though, won’t need prodding to 
immerse themselves in Evvy’s medical travails. Notes on the historical chapter il-
lustrations are included.  EB
heiligMAn, deBorAh Intentions. Knopf, 2012 263p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96861-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86861-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89933-1 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Rachel has always been a devout believer, a little in awe of the profound wisdom 
of her rabbi, until the day she takes refuge in the sanctuary of the temple and hears 
him having sex with a young woman on the bima. Thoroughly shaken, she enters 
a downward spiral that has her messing up in school, fighting with her best friend, 
and nearly hooking up with the wrong guy while she tries to build a relationship 
with the right one. Meanwhile, her grandmother is losing touch with reality, her 
parents’ marriage is falling apart, and she has reason to suspect that her mother is 
also having an affair with the rabbi. Rachel’s response to her shattered ideals has a 
ring of truth as she comes to terms with the fact that the secure enclosure of wise, 
moral, adults she thought surrounded her was an illusion. The jagged barbs of 
her best friend, whose own parents divorced years ago, serve as a brittle reminder 
OctOber 2012 • 87
that Rachel’s faith was in the wrong things; as Rachel learns that she has to accept 
everyone’s flaws, including her own, and act with intention rather than react out 
of hurt and anger, she is rewarded with a firmer sense of self. Sketched in this way, 
the plot appears purposive, but it never feels that way; instead, Rachel’s is a well-
storied path to forgiveness and self-direction that readers will relate to as they shed 
their own illusions but struggle to keep their faith.  KC
hest, AMy Charley’s First Night; illus. by Helen Oxenbury. Candlewick, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4055-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
When Henry brings his new puppy home, his parents are very clear on the rules: 
Henry will be responsible for walking and feeding Charley, and Charley will be 
sleeping in the kitchen. The first part is fine with Henry, who can’t wait “to feed 
Charley every day forever,” but the second doesn’t go so well (“The crying started in 
the middle of the night, and you knew right away it was Charley”). Henry tries his 
best to follow his parents’ dictate, but his soothing of his beloved pup ends up with 
them back in Henry’s room, and “we both fell asleep on my bed.” This is a tender 
little story that draws its weight not from event but from emotional resonance. 
It’s got elements of a classic bedtime story, but it puts the child in the position of 
caretaker and comforter, and the softspoken intimacy of Hest’s prose shines with 
Henry’s protective love, an affection that’s simultaneously kidlike and parental. It’s 
hard to imagine anybody better suited to illustrating such a story than Oxenbury, 
whose gentle watercolor and pencil illustrations capture worlds of individuality and 
domestic realism in every gesture and detail. The layout draws on soft gray frames 
to balance text against art, with spot art alongside the text providing additional 
glimpses of boy and dog. Wee yellow Charley (and, in one spot illustration, weeing 
yellow Charley), who beams with trust as he wiggles around his new home and flops 
in Charley’s arms, is sure to elicit the same response from audiences that he does 
from Henry. The special relationship, with boy and dog watching the moonlight 
together while the adults sleep, is exactly why youngsters yearn for pets, and this 
cozy bedtime story will be perfect to share with kids as they snuggle up to their 
own purring or tail-wagging charges.  DS
hoBerMAn, MAry Ann I Like Old Clothes; illus. by Patrice Barton. Knopf, 
2012 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96951-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86951-8 $16.99  
R 5-7 yrs
In rhythmic rhyming verse, this picture book points out the many pros of hand-
me-downs and secondhand clothing, from their imagined past lives (“When I 
wear them,/ I say, ‘Clothes,/ I wonder who wore you before you were mine?/ Was 
she light-haired or dark-haired, seven or nine?/ Did you make her look awful or 
make her look fine?’”) to their comfort (“I like old clothes,/ Cozy warm clothes,/ 
Broken-in clothes”) to their sentimental associations (“Sweaters and shirts/ That 
are brother-and-sistery”). Clever and carefully cadenced, Hoberman’s poetry is a 
treat to share aloud, and the verse pattern varies just enough to keep things divert-
ing without disturbing the readaloud flow. Barton’s unique, somewhat dreamy art 
(digitally enhanced pencil and mixed media) aptly complements the contempla-
88 • the bulletin
tive tone of the text. Muted retro tones are accented with pale washes of patterns, 
and the tawny-haired girl narrator and her blond baby brother model a variety 
of clothes while radiating gentle enthusiasm and good cheer. The subject matter 
might not initially interest all children (and some style-conscious youngsters may 
not buy the “used is better” mindset), but the poor economy, a renewed interest 
in vintage styles, and a surge of DIY activity are making secondhand everything 
more popular, and this title may have a variety of uses as a result. Share this with 
children before a thrift-store trip, or read it before presenting kids with a dress-up 
trunk full of “clothes with a history, clothes with a mystery.”  JH
hogAn, edwArd Daylight Saving. Candlewick, 2012 [244p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5913-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Leisure World Holiday Complex is not usually where pudgy, unpopular Daniel 
would spend any time, but his father is determined that the two of them need to 
get away after the departure of Daniel’s mother sends the family into a tailspin. 
While Daniel’s father mostly just drinks, Daniel finds a girl: Lexi, who frequents the 
resort’s lake at odd hours and who clearly hides a secret. As Daniel and Lexi grow 
closer, he notices odd things about her: a watch that goes backwards, her growing 
signs of injury, her invisibility to the rest of the holidaymakers. He’s therefore not 
shocked to discover that Lexi is actually dead, but he’s horrified to hear that she 
must every year relive her brutal murder on its anniversary, during the hour in 
autumn where the clocks fall back. British author Hogan writes with verve and 
tender clarity, crafting a poignant ghost story that’s more about human sadness and 
the struggle to move forward than shivery effects. Daniel’s narration is plaintive 
and unhappy yet still compelling; his own feeling of culpability for his parents’ split 
clearly contributes to his determination to save Lexi, despite the fact that he begins 
to sport his own predictive injuries that suggest intervention could destroy him 
along with Lexi. Lexi’s rape and murder are realistically vicious rather than literarily 
attractive, but the book avoids exploitation of that fact, instead feeding the horror 
in gradually and effectively. This is a well-paced and emotionally effective tale, and 
fans of the recent narrated-from-beyond books (Warman’s Between, BCCB 7/11, 
etc.) will appreciate seeing things from the point of view of those left behind.  DS
hood, susAn Just Say Boo!; illus. by Jed Henry. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-201029-2 $12.99  
R 4-7 yrs
When three siblings, dressed as a bat, a witch, and a shark, venture out on Hal-
loween night, they deal with all manner of slightly spooky situations by collectively 
and gleefully shouting “BOO!” in the face of adversity (“If the ghosts in the trees/ 
wibble-wobble your knees,/ what do you say?// BOO!”; “If a yip and a yowl make 
you shiver and scowl, what do you say? BOO!”). The rhyming story ends with 
the three siblings returning to their home and comforting their frightened baby 
brother (“If the little one cries,/ please help dry his eyes/ and teach him to just say// 
BOO!”), thus ensuring that this useful tool is available to future ranks of trick-or-
treaters. Hood’s seasonal tale is particularly successful at balancing the scariness and 
the festivity of Halloween; there is just the right amount of potential spookiness to 
satisfy young listeners while keeping the emphasis squarely on kid-centered fun. 
OctOber 2012 • 89
Henry’s watercolor illustrations have a somewhat nostalgic feel, with toothy kids 
grinning out from fields of browns, golds, and yellows. The deft employment of 
creepy shadows adds to the fear factor, and the alternately quailing and bouncing 
kids keep the compositions lively. There is obvious potential here for group involve-
ment, and the rich language and enjoyable visuals make it an ideal readaloud for 
the Halloween season.  HM
hood, susAn Spike, the Mixed-Up Monster; illus. by Melissa Sweet. Wiseman/
Simon, 2012 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0601-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5243-5 $12.99  
R 5-8 yrs
Spike thinks he’s one tough monster, with his “slithery tail,” “spiky crown,” and 
“stumpy teeth.” Unfortunately his tiny size (“no bigger than a lily pad”) means the 
other animals (el pato, el armadillo, and el campañol) find him more adorable than 
alarming, much to Spike’s shame. When Spike—whom endnotes reveal to be a 
Mexican axolotl—stands up to a “real monster” (a Gila monster, who in fact just 
wants directions to his cousin’s fiesta), the other animals gain new respect for the 
little guy. There’s a pleasantly folkloric cast to this short, simple story; there’s also 
considerable animal-story appeal, since readers can find out “More about Spike 
and His Amigos” at the book’s end with photos and compelling factual tidbits 
depicting and describing the axolotl, Gila monster, Mexican vole, cinnamon teal 
duck, and nine-banded armadillo. A glossary of the Spanish words that are used 
is also included, and the bilingual aspect and informative end matter both serve 
to broaden the book’s educational use. Sweet’s gently comic watercolor, gouache, 
collage, and mixed-media illustrations feature plenty of aquatic blues and greens, 
and their subtle textures and details add interest. Use this in a lesson on unusual 
animals, Mexican fauna, or possibly include it in a monster-themed storytime to 
throw a nonfiction twist into that popular theme.  JH
huBBArd, MAndy Dangerous Boy. Razorbill, 2012 262p
ISBN 978-1-59514-511-6 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Harper can’t imagine how she found herself on a cliff above a raging river, menaced 
by a boy she thought she knew after stumbling over his murdered uncle in the woods. 
That’s the opening scene in this thriller, which then flashes back to the beginning of 
Harper’s relationship with Logan, which starts very differently. When Logan moves 
to town, he understands Harper’s sadness at the recent death of her mother, having 
lost both his parents recently; he listens to her and helps her overcome the fears 
that have plagued her, and she’s thrilled to have a good-looking, caring boyfriend. 
When she visits his house unexpectedly, though, she finds him to be a completely 
different person—twisted, evil, and frightening. Logan reluctantly explains that 
she met his twin brother, Daemon, whose personality completely changed after 
the accident that killed their mother. Some investigation reveals that Logan isn’t 
who he seems, but Harper still buys the evil-twin story and blames Daemon for 
the series of creepy events happening in town, events that are escalating into real 
danger. Bloody handprints, animal bones in mailboxes, late night car chases in 
remote wooded areas, a haunted house where a horrific murder took place, a corn 
maze, flocks of dead birds—in short, all of the typical tropes of cheesy horror flicks 
are present and accounted for here. Only the most inexperienced readers will fail to 
90 • the bulletin
recognize the evil-twin scenario for the ruse it is, but in the end, this is what readers 
come to horror for—an almost reassuring sameness of conventional nightmares. 
While this lacks the polish of Berne’s Still Waters (BCCB 1/12), readers new to the 
genre or who prefer milder applications will find it provides a sufficient frisson of 
excitement.  KC
JAckson, corrine If I Lie. Simon Pulse, 2012 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5413-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4001-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Quinn lives in a small North Carolina where just about everyone is connected to 
the Marine Corps. She was the supposed girlfriend of Carey, who graduated early 
to enlist and is now a hometown hero serving in Afghanistan. Ever since a compro-
mising photograph revealed her commitment to Carey to be a sham, though, she 
is the town’s pariah, because to cheat on a soldier on deployment is an unforgiv-
able sin—and one that her mother committed before her. Her lieutenant-colonel 
father sentences her to work at the VA hospital, a move that proves her salvation 
as she bonds with a dying Vietnam War veteran, George, who alone believes in 
her even without her telling him the truth—that Carey is gay, and he pleaded with 
Quinn to keep his secret. Quinn’s life becomes even more complicated when her 
mother returns to town, and she has to sort out her feelings for the mother who 
left and the father who stayed, neither of whom know how to show their love for 
their daughter. Carey became Quinn’s lifeline during the difficult period of her 
parents’ breakup, earning a depth of loyalty then that now threatens to destroy 
her; her anger is both righteous and palpable as she alone bears the consequences 
of everyone’s lies and secrets. This is an intense and heartbreaking bit of quality 
realism, putting the stress of life in a small military town during wartime on full 
display as a pertinent backdrop for more personal drama. Characters that could 
easily become stereotypes are instead drawn with sensitive attention to idiosyncratic 
detail that displays the vulnerability of the gruff warrior, the heartlessness of the 
well-meaning friend. Quinn’s outer forbearance set against her inner rage makes 
her a compelling character indeed as she fights her own wars and learns that while 
some battles are winnable, others are ongoing.  KC
Joosse, BArBArA Lovabye Dragon; illus. by Randy Cecil. Candlewick, 
2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5408-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Once upon a time, in this liltingly rhyming story, there was “an all-alone girl . . . 
who didn’t have a dragon for a friend” and “an all-alone dragon . . . who dreamed of 
a girl for a friend.” The little girl cries a river of dragon-yearning tears that trickles 
through the countryside (“past a frog in the bog/ round a bend in the glen”) and 
into the dragon’s cave; the dragon follows the trail, and girl and dragon are finally 
united (“Now they’re friends/ best friends/ forever friends”). Joosse is a skilled 
versifier for the picture-book set, and her creative poetic form is tightly crafted 
for bouncy reading aloud. The plot is minimal, but the emotions are strong and 
the celebration of girl-dragon friendship is immense and joyous. Cecil’s signature 
style, delicate, measured brushstrokes in oil, render the scenes soft and smoky and 
OctOber 2012 • 91
the figures touchable, a texture that gives surprising depths to the exaggerated, 
cartoonily drafted figures of girl and dragon. The cloudy gray-blues with little warm 
contrast risk overchilling the palette at times, but the bulbous-eyed dragon and his 
little charge are a visually endearing pair. A friend, a pet, a protector, a means of 
transport—who wouldn’t want a loyal dragon?  DS
kehret, peg Animals Welcome: A Life of Reading, Writing, and Rescue; written 
and illus. with photographs by Peg Kehret. Dutton, 2012 172p
ISBN 978-0-525-42399-7 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6 
Author Peg Kehret shares her experiences with animals (both wild and domestic) and 
gives readers a peek into her life as a writer, pet owner, cat fosterer, and all-around 
animal champion on her ten acres of woods in Washington State. Kehret’s emphasis 
here is squarely on the “rescue” part of the subtitle, although she does introduce some 
of the real-life animals (and people) behind various characters in her novels (real 
cats Mr. Stray and Mama inspired the character of Mrs. Stray in The Ghost’s Grave, 
for example). The text is both entertaining and informative, as the author provides 
plenty of specific details about individual animals and their care, including house 
pets, strays, foster kitties, and wild critters. The writing is sometimes so measured 
and thoughtful that the pacing lags a bit, but quieter kids will appreciate Kehret’s 
calm, steady approach, and there are many humorous incidents and poignant 
moments that enrich the account. Kehret is also particularly adept at giving kids 
a realistic look, via her personal experiences, at issues such as the pros and cons of 
animal shelters, feeding wildlife, and interacting with feral strays (“Like so many 
things in life, I can’t control the outcome of my efforts. All I can do is feed him, to 
keep him as safe and comfortable as possible, and to keep talking to him”). Readers 
will also find it satisfying to be able to see many of the animals Kehret describes in 
the numerous black and white photographs sprinkled throughout the book. This 
will be an easy sell to Kehret fans and other animal lovers.  JH
kelsey, elin You Are Stardust; illus. by Soyeon Kim. Owlkids, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-1-926973-35-7 $18.95  
Ad 4-7 yrs
pArker, MichAel You Are a Star!; illus. by Judith Rossell. Walker, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2841-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-6 yrs
Young children who have begun to speculate about how they fit into nature’s grand 
scheme may find direction for their musings in this pair of picture books. Kelsey’s 
Stardust trains a more panoramic lens on the universe, offering tiny paragraphs that 
explain how an exploding star supplied the atoms that would much later make 
the child, how the water you now drink was once enjoyed by dinosaurs, how a 
soft breath or a hearty sneeze spreads pollen, etc. A final note assures the audience 
that “every example in this book is backed by current science,” but this is a rather 
disjointed project overall, with undefined terms and observations that sometimes 
veer from poetic to cryptic (“You grow at night when your bones are resting, just 
like the sheep you count to help you sleep”). Perhaps more appealing than the 
text are the inventive cut-paper and realia dioramas, with objects anchored by fine 
string into an open framed box. With its tighter focus and clearer trajectory, Parker’s 
title is somewhat more successful. Cast as a bedtime piece, Star! invites children to 
imagine themselves out deep in the starry night sky, where a star burns hotter and 
92 • the bulletin
hotter until it explodes. The takeaway lesson—that the dust from stellar explosions 
reaches earth and becomes the stuff of which we are made—is considerably harder 
to follow, particularly since Rossell portrays the minuscule dust particles as relatively 
hefty balls of light that move “through animals and trees and fruit until . . . You eat 
the fruit, and then the tiny pieces of star are inside you.” Appended “Star Facts” 
add some interesting trivia, so a science-minded youngster might nonetheless enjoy 
this as an intriguing alternative to standard nighttime fare.  EB
key, wAtt Fourmile. Farrar, 2012 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-374-35095-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
Twelve-year-old Foster misses his dad, who had been teaching him about running the 
family farm before he was killed in an accident. His mother’s new boyfriend, Dax, is 
loud-mouthed and creepy; even Foster’s dog, Joe, doesn’t like him, and the feeling 
is mutual. Joe does take to a stranger who appears on the farm, a former soldier 
named Gary who is backpacking his way to Texas. When Gary rightly assesses the 
situation—a farm in need of various repairs and general upkeep, a boy in need of 
attention, and a widow who may have made a very bad choice in a boyfriend—he 
asks if he can stay on and help get the farm in shape to sell. Foster’s mother agrees, 
but Dax doesn’t like the idea, and soon his true nature as an abusive alcoholic be-
comes dangerously evident. Gary takes it as his duty to protect Foster and his mom 
as Dax’s aggression mounts, but staying to help them gives his own past a chance to 
catch up with him. Foster’s fondness and admiration for Gary reveal the depths of 
his loneliness and grief, making his character development a central feature of this 
suspenseful drama; Gary is the strong, honorable man he’s been missing, even if 
that honor turns out to be stained. Key pulls the right emotional strings for young 
boy readers, as the love between a boy and his dog and the grief over losing a father 
are mixed in with chilling hypermasculine violence that puts his mother in danger 
and allows him to participate in her protection. Written in the tradition of classics 
such as Old Yeller and Shiloh but with a decidedly contemporary setting and tone, 
this will appeal to a broad range of readers.  KC
king, A. s. Ask the Passengers. Little, 2012 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-19468-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-21453-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 63, for review.
kristoff, JAy Stormdancer. Dunne/St. Martin’s, 2012 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-00140-5 $24.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-01791-8 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9 up
In an industrial steampunk Japan where the feudal system is still intact, Yukiko 
joins her father on a mission assigned by a power-mad shogun: to find an arashitora, 
a mythical flying creature believed to be extinct. When the impossible happens 
and they succeed, a lightning storm crashes their sky-ship, stranding Yukiko, the 
arashitora, and a young member of the Lotus Guild (a cult that controls produc-
OctOber 2012 • 93
tion of the lotus-derived energy source that poisons the land and its people) on a 
mysterious island, where they fall in with a band of resistance fighters. The world 
here is crafted in loving and impressive detail, from its political complexities to 
its intriguing chronological juxtapositions (samurai and seppuku and a rigid caste 
system coexist with radios and atmos-suits and deadly smog). The friendship that 
develops between Yukiko and her arashitora (who has a fierce, elemental intelligence) 
is a compelling emotional anchor that will have strong appeal to fans of animal 
companion fantasies such as Paolini’s Eragon (BCCB 12/03), and the book is also 
an obvious sell for fans of Uehashi’s Moribito (BCCB 6/08) for its vivid setting and 
tough-as-nails heroine. Kristoff excels at balancing multiple plotlines, and Yukiko’s 
tale transitions from quest to survival story to assassination plot with ease, ending 
with a stirring call to revolution that promises future volumes filled with even more 
excitement. Trumpeting the hopeful message that compassion begets strength, this 
epic, imaginative series opener introduces a cast of flawed, striving characters, a 
perilous and fascinating landscape, and a world in dire need of saving that readers 
will be eager to return to. A glossary translates and contextualizes the Japanese 
terms used, with thematic subsections for clothing, weapons, and religion.  CG
krokos, dAn False Memory. Hyperion, 2012 327p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-4976-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-5457-0 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Miranda’s stranded in a Cleveland mall with no memory of who she is or why 
she’s there, a situation that is further complicated when she accidentally psychi-
cally infects the entire courtyard with deadly panic. Fortunately, fellow teen Peter 
finds her, explains that she’s one of four teens with elite psychic powers and those 
powers can bring memory loss, and brings her back to the secret bunker that is 
their home. As Miranda starts to recover a few scattered, dreamlike memories of 
her life, she and Peter are tasked with recovering the remaining team members, 
Noah and Olive, who disappeared at the same time Miranda did. From there, the 
plot is a wild ride of fighting mysterious doppelgangers, racing to prevent all their 
memories from being wiped, and uncovering the many layers of their origins. The 
book makes full use of its premise, building not just on Miranda’s memory loss but 
on all of the characters’ vulnerabilities to pile on twists, shifting suspicions, and 
game-changing reveals at a frenzied pace. The amnesia also feeds effectively into 
the relationship storylines, as Miranda struggles to balance abstract knowledge of 
past love, friendship, and trust with the blankness she now feels. Fans of Patterson’s 
Maximum Ride series (The Angel Experiment, BCCB 4/05) will enjoy the similar 
dynamic here of a misfit superpowered team-cum-family on the run from inscrutable 
higher-ups, but anyone with a taste for paranoia- and action-packed speculative 
thrillers will tear through this volume and be begging for the promised sequel.  CG
lAndry, leo Trick or Treat; written and illus. by Leo Landry. Houghton, 
2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-24969-8 $12.99  
R 4-6 yrs
Adorable little ghost Oliver prepares for his annual Halloween party by “dusting” 
(as in, applying dust to) the furniture, letting the spiders do their thing, and wak-
ing up a snoozing pile of resident black kitties. When he’s out delivering his party 
invitations, he unwittingly drops one in the street; thus, not only do his usual pals 
94 • the bulletin
the witches, skeletons, and bats come to the festivities, but also a “little cow and a 
little jack o’ lantern”—two children in costumes—arrive on the doorstep. After a 
moment of hesitation, Oliver gladly welcomes them in, and a good time is had by 
all. Adults looking for a sweet, un-scary Halloween story will find this fills the bill 
nicely, and pleasant little Oliver could easily be paired with a title from Bright’s 
classic Georgie series for some friendly ghost fun. Kids will be tickled by the trick-
or-treaters’ failure to realize that the party guests are exactly what they seem rather 
than other kids in costumes, and by the spooky characters’ initial uncertainty about 
the trick-or-treating kids. Landry’s autumn-toned watercolor and pencil illustra-
tions possess an endearing simplicity that is perfectly in keeping with the gentle 
tone of the text. Oliver is a smiley, wide-eyed wee guy, and his basic ghost shape 
is appealingly childlike in its rendering. Schools, libraries, and families that want 
to celebrate Halloween with young and/or timid children will definitely want an 
invitation to Oliver’s party.  JH
leAn, sArAh A Dog Called Homeless. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2012 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212220-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212222-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Middle-grader Cally Fisher has decided to stop speaking altogether, in reaction to 
her father’s refusal to discuss her mother, who passed away last year. She finds a 
friend in a neighbor boy Sam, who is blind and nearly deaf and with whom she 
learns to communicate using tactile fingerspelling (which doesn’t, as far as she’s 
concerned, break her vow of silence). She also befriends Jed, a homeless man, and 
his dog, whom she dubs “Homeless” and whom she often sees in the company of 
the spirit of her dead mother. As time goes on, Cally becomes convinced that if 
she begins to speak again, the visions of her mother will disappear forever, but her 
attempt to save a near-drowning Sam requires that she shout for help. Addition-
ally, Jed reveals that Homeless was actually a gift for Cally that her mother was 
bringing home, and that Cally’s mother made Jed promise to find Cally and give 
the dog to her. The story is thus brought to a satisfying, if contrived, resolution, 
as Cally resumes talking, the family begins healing, and Homeless finds a home. 
The number of plot conveniences ultimately strains credulity, from Cally’s instant 
friendship with Sam to Jed’s surprise announcement about Homeless, and many of 
the characters are rather two-dimensional. Still, the heartbreak of losing a parent is 
palpably portrayed, and the slightly supernatural aspect of Cally’s dead mother and 
her connection with the dog Homeless is intriguing and well drawn. This might 
also be a useful title to introduce kids to deafblind communication.  JH
levinthAl, dAvid Who Pushed Humpty Dumpty?: And Other Notorious Nursery 
Tale Mysteries; illus. by John Nickle. Schwartz & Wade, 2012 [40p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94595-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84195-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 2-4
Binky, a stout, warty police detective toad who looks like he’s downed a few donuts 
over the years, gets the call when things go bad in the forest in this latest entry in the 
flourishing genre of nursery noir. The Three Bears report a housebreaking; Hansel 
OctOber 2012 • 95
and Gretel are acquitted on self-defense in the murder of a witch; a pig chef who 
runs an omelet stand confesses to pushing Humpty Dumpty off the wall; Snow 
White is rushed to the hospital on a 911 call from a dwarf; a boy named Jack caught 
high-tailin’ it away from a scene of devastation proves to be the hero who rescued a 
kidnapped Golden Goose from a giant. The stories are too underdeveloped to carry 
much weight, and they’re not nearly as amusingly manic as episodes in Scieszka’s 
venerable Stinky Cheese Man. Nickle’s acrylic illustrations, however, are more than 
up to the job, with their eerie, other-worldly cast of ne’er-do-wells. Scene setting 
and visual characterization are aimed at kids who know the stories thoroughly and 
can therefore appreciate the unrepentant, blue-eyed glare of Goldilocks behind bars; 
the shell shard and tighty-whities wreckage of Humpty Dumpty; and the rotten 
teeth and distended bellies of the animals who have gorged on the witch’s candy 
house. Readers who are just starting to question all those happily-ever-afters might 
find a few answers here.  EB
lloyd, sAci Momentum. Holiday House, 2012 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2414-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
In the hyper-surveilled, highly stratified London of the future, privileged Citizens, 
who value security and technology, are pitted against disenfranchised Outsiders, who 
value community and freedom and recognize the price of the Citizens’ way of living. 
Hunter longs for a taste of real life that hasn’t been sanitized and sensationalized 
by the virtual reality overlays that heighten Citizen existence, and he falls in with 
Outsider Uma after a police raid on a funeral she’s attending forces her to entrust 
him with an artifact holding codes key to the Outsiders’ underground virtual net-
work. From there, the unlikely allies must work together to locate the next Keeper 
of the Codes to replace Uma’s arrested aunt. Unfortunately, their chemistry doesn’t 
justify the focus on to their budding romance, as both characters are more avatars 
of their respective societies than individuals with unique yearnings. The quest itself 
illuminates the central social conflict but doesn’t move it forward—Uma and Hunter 
are essentially fighting to maintain plans that are already in motion—which makes 
for an unsatisfying arc as all the nail-biting near-misses resolve into a conclusion 
that looks much like the beginning, with the exception of Hunter’s place in it. 
Still, Lloyd is careful to show the cost to the oppressors as well as the oppressed in 
this bleak extrapolated future, and both halves of society are well developed with 
complex dynamics. Hand this to readers who are interested in an action-heavy, 
plugged-in dystopia with a social conscience and who have already exhausted Lloyd’s 
earlier variations on the subject (The Carbon Diaries 2015, BCCB 6/09, etc.).  CG
lodge, Jo Icky Sticky Monster; written and illus. by Jo Lodge. Nosy Crow/
Candlewick, 2012 10p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6173-1 $12.99  
R 5-7 yrs
In rhyming text and with digitally created pop-up illustrations, Lodge describes 
the activities of “Icky Sticky Monster,” who hides in the toilet (“Icky Sticky Mon-
ster/ is being very naughty./ That stinky little monster/ is hiding in the potty!”), 
offers a stream of green snot to the viewer, consumes the contents of a trash can 
and some disgusting “juice,” and, finally, asks the audience for a kiss. The bright 
candy colors and the cartoonish and friendly appearance of Icky Sticky Monster 
96 • the bulletin
(a horned, snaggle-toothed, turquoise critter who looks a bit like a monster ver-
sion of Hargreaves’ Little Miss and Mr. Men characters) ensure that Icky Sticky 
provokes more chortles than nausea. Overall, the pop-up elements are clever, sturdy 
(as are the pages themselves), and well designed; the “toilet lid” that lifts to reveal 
the monster inside, complete with toilet paper remnants, and the movement of 
the monster’s snot-covered finger as he retrieves the livid contents of his nose are 
particular winners. The short, snappy text and the size and boldness of the pop-
ups make this a surefire choice for group sharing, but novice and reluctant readers 
will also enjoy tackling this on their own. This has obvious and wide appeal, and 
the kids who gravitate towards Shel Silverstein’s grosser poetic offerings will be 
particularly pleased by Icky’s actions.  JH
loftin, nikki The Sinister Sweetness of Splendid Academy; illus. by Brenna Eer- 
nisse. Razorbill, 2012 284p
ISBN 978-1-59514-508-6 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Still wrestling with her mother’s death, her own imagined responsibility for it, 
and her father’s quick remarriage, Lorelei makes a wish to start sixth grade at the 
fantastic new school that has sprung up almost overnight near her house. When 
her own school suddenly burns down, her wish comes true, and she finds herself 
in the seemingly perfect Splendid Academy, complete with gourmet lunches, an 
extensive playground, and optional homework. She quickly learns, though, that 
the school’s magnificent surface hides a dangerous, magical threat. Soon her new 
friend Andrew is missing, and Lorelei faces the tasks of saving him from an evil 
spell, her classmates from the witch-teachers who intend to eat them, and herself 
from the witch-principal. Rich with folk and fairy tale elements, with a dash of 
truly sinister magic, this modern-day retelling of Hansel and Gretel provides readers 
with just the right balance of whimsy and fright. Lorelei is a wonderfully average 
heroine, who succeeds as a result of her own determination rather than any inter-
vening force, and her independent, friend-focused adventure will be a draw for 
middle-schoolers who are looking to imagine a world without adult supervision. 
The creepy, fantastical plotline moves quickly, and it effectively combines elements 
of wish-fulfillment, suspense, and real family drama. Fans of Gaiman’s Coraline 
(BCCB 11/02) and Roald Dahl’s The Witches are sure to love this genuinely eerie 
story. Occasional monochromatic illustrations combine soft-lined textures with a 
playful, slightly cartoony style.  AM
long, ruth frAnces The Treachery of Beautiful Things Dial, 2012 363p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3580-4 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Despite having spent the last seven years insisting that her older brother was stolen 
by trees, seventeen-year-old Jenny is finally ready to put the past behind her and 
returns to the woodsy site of Tom’s disappearance to say a final goodbye. Instead, 
however, Jenny hears what she thinks is Tom’s flute, follows the sound, and finds 
herself being attacked by a small group of well-armed faeries. Rescued by Jack, a 
guardian of the border between the faerie realm and the mortal world, Jenny de-
mands to be taken to her brother. Jack acquiesces, but like everything in the faerie 
world, he has his own motivation and he’s willing to put Jenny’s life on the line if 
it means he gets what he wants. The third-person narration is primarily focalized 
through the steadfastly loyal and mostly boring Jenny, but the emphasis sometimes 
OctOber 2012 • 97
shifts to the much more interesting Jack, giving readers a broader sense of a faerie 
world steeped in secrets, magic, and lore. Long builds the foundation of her setting 
on traditional English and Celtic tales, but she also draws on elements from Nordic 
and German stories to create a distinct sense of place. The malice that underlies 
the world’s beauty plays out the title to the fullest and adds a substantial bit of true 
gruesomeness to what is already a suspenseful story. With such a fascinating and 
complex build-up, the tidy ending is therefore disappointing, especially in that it 
takes both Jenny and Jack out of the faerie world completely. Still, readers of the 
genre will no doubt enjoy getting lost here and will find themselves hoping for a 
sequel that ensures a return trip.  KQG
luedeke, lisA Smashed. McElderry, 2012 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2779-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2795-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
The summer before Katie’s senior year, the year where she’s supposed to earn her 
field hockey scholarship to college, she finds herself attracted to Alec. Though one 
of the school’s jock bullies, Alec is kind to Katie, relating to her grief about her 
father’s abandonment. Katie also deals with that pain the same way her negligent 
mother does, by drinking too much, and one night she and Alec are involved in 
a serious car accident. Alec lets people assume that he was driving, but soon he’s 
using the secret truth to blackmail Katie into going further, physically, than she 
wants to. Both Katie’s drinking problem and her problem with Alec spin out of 
control, and she has to come to terms with the drinking that is her fault, and the 
rape that isn’t. Katie is a genuinely sympathetic and realistic character, and her 
relationship with her two best friends demonstrates that it can be difficult to help 
someone break out of a downward spiral, especially when helping feels like judg-
ing someone whose life is so much harder than yours to begin with. Luedeke takes 
Katie beyond crisis all the way through her painful emotional recovery, giving the 
narrative satisfying closure as a credible cautionary tale with cautious, but still 
plausible, hope in the end.  KC 
MAAs, sArAh J. Throne of Glass. Bloomsbury, 2012 404p
ISBN 978-1-59990-695-9 $17.99  
R Gr. 8-12
At just eighteen years old, Celaena Sardothien is already Adarlan’s most notorious 
assassin—a reputation that has earned her a lifetime sentence of hard labor in the 
kingdom’s harsh salt mines after she was betrayed to authorities. A year into her 
sentence, Celaena is offered a chance at freedom by the crown prince himself, on 
the condition that she win a competition against twenty-three other warriors to 
become the king’s champion and then serve out a four-year term as the royal as-
sassin. The contest is fierce and the weekly elimination tests are brutal, but when 
contestants start dying under mysterious circumstances outside of the sanctioned 
fights, Celaena begins to suspect that more powerful and perhaps supernatural 
forces are at play. With her stubborn spirit, playful wit, and wicked weaponry skills, 
Celaena is an entertaining addition to the YA canon of tough heroines, and refer-
ences to her past exploits suggest that she used to be even tougher. There is plenty 
of scandalous court intrigue to fill in the gaps between the weekly sparring, and 
the love triangle that develops between Celaena, the crown prince, and the captain 
98 • the bulletin
of the king’s guard is charming in its innocence as she exchanges flirtatious banter 
with the two men. This doesn’t quite rise to the stellar level of Cashore’s Graceling 
(BCCB 1/09), but it will still be immensely appealing to fans of the genre.  KQG
MAck, Jeff Good News, Bad News; written and illus. by Jeff Mack. Chronicle, 
2012 34p
ISBN 978-1-4521-0110-1 $16.99  
R 3-6 yrs
Two friends, a rabbit and a mouse, have very different ways of seeing the world; 
the rabbit is as enthusiastic and optimistic as the mouse is grouchy and pessimistic. 
This engaging picture book uses only three words to tell a carefully developed tale 
of their half-full/half-empty perspectives on an outing gone awry. It starts when 
Rabbit arrives with a picnic basket (“Good news!”) but turns when it starts to rain 
(“Bad news”). Fortunately, Rabbit has an umbrella (“Good news”); unfortunately, 
the umbrella—along with Mouse—gets blown into a nearby tree (“Bad news”). 
The story continues, with circumstances flip-flopping, until lightning jolts the 
two friends off the top of a flagpole (where they fled to escape a charging bear) 
and sends them plunging into a mud puddle. Mouse can’t take it any more and 
explodes at Rabbit (“BAD BAD BAD BAD BAD BAD BAD NEWS!”), but the 
soon apologetic rodent makes amends by setting up the picnic all over again. There 
is abundant opportunity to involve listeners in the story, since they can parse the 
illustrations to discern why each spread is good or bad news; the extremely simple 
text also makes this a winner for very early readers, who will appreciate the con-
siderable assistance in completing the story. The mixed-media illustrations balance 
flat planes of saturated colors with thick, rumply black lines; the controlled palette 
employs earth tones accented with stronger splashes of green and pink. The play-
fully cartoonish animals are gleefully, relatably expressive; the woebegone rabbit is 
a particular show-stopper. Young listeners are certain to clamor for this one again 
and again . . . and that is good news.  HM
MAckintosh, dAvid The Frank Show; written and illus. by David Mackin-
tosh. Abrams, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0393-5 $16.95  
R 5-8 yrs
When the unnamed boy narrator of this book gets a class assignment to prepare 
a one-minute talk about someone in his family, the only person available is his 
grandpa, Frank, whom the boy considers pretty boring. He nonetheless introduces 
Frank to the class, citing a handful of ordinary things that he knows about him: 
“Frank doesn’t like noise, or today’s music, or gadgets and gizmos (or new things), 
or haircuts, or weather, or doctors, or anything but vanilla.” With time left to fill, 
the boy begins to panic, but Frank comes to the rescue with a fabulous tale “about 
how he led an army in a charge across a muddy battlefield . . . with bullets whistling 
all around like African bees” and the class responds with enthusiasm and delight. 
While the message may be as timeworn as Frank, the boy’s voice and point of view 
are believable, with pithy observations of the small details that make up a child’s 
life. The art is appealing as well; digitally created scenes pulls together planes of 
vivid color, a multitude of small elements outlined in black scrawls, and elements of 
collage. Strong compositions vary from elegantly simple (a nearly monochromatic 
Frank poses against a muted wallpaper-like background) to intriguingly complex 
(a tiny gray Frank and the boy stand in the midst of a busy cityscape with pops of 
OctOber 2012 • 99
bright color). Use this to add some new life to a unit or storytime about elderly 
family members or to inspire some grandparent show-and-tell sessions.  JH
MAclAchlAn, pAtriciA The Boxcar Children Beginning: The Aldens of Fair Meadow 
Farm; illus. by Robert Dunn. Whitman, 2012 [144p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-6616-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Before they found themselves in the titular boxcar, the Alden kids were just four 
siblings happily living on their parents’ farm, doing chores, and going to school. 
This prequel chronicles their pre-boxcar days through four seasons as the children 
welcome a struggling family into their home, make new friends, create secret hide-
aways, and put on plays for their loving parents. Readers familiar with Gertrude 
Chandler Warner’s original iterations of the children’s story will know that tragedy 
brings an end to this idyll, and MacLachlan treats the death of children’s parents 
and the children’s subsequent running away with both compassion and restraint. 
The tone echoes the old-school charm of the original series, while short sentences, 
a straightforward plot, and plenty of dialogue make it an obvious choice for read-
ers just transitioning into chapter books. Fans of the series will be pleased by this 
gentle addition, and others may very well be inspired to discover what lies in store 
for Henry, Violet, Jessie, and Benny. Final illustrations not seen.  KQG 
MAgoon, keklA Fire in the Streets. Aladdin, 2012 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2230-8 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2232-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
In this gripping follow-up to The Rock and the River (BCCB 3/09), fourteen-
year-old Maxie is focused on a single goal: she wants to be a member of the Black 
Panther Party like her brother Raheem, patrolling the streets of Chicago with a 
gun in her hand and making sure the police treat black people fairly and without 
brutality. Everyone, including her two best girlfriends, thinks she’s too young to 
be an official Panther, but she’s sure if she keeps working at the office, making calls 
and stuffing envelopes, they will see things her way. Even after the police attack 
the office with a violent drive-by shooting, where being unarmed makes her feel 
defenseless, the elders in the Party still won’t budge. Meanwhile, things are getting 
bad at home; her mother has lost her job again and the yellow eviction notice has 
appeared on their apartment door. Raheem tells her not to worry, that he will take 
care of things, but she feels increasingly powerless until he finally agrees to take her 
to a shooting range. Maxie feels empowered with a gun in her hand, but it’s not 
until she has to make a fateful decision that her loyalty to the Panthers is tested in 
the most searing way. While The Rock and the River provided an intergenerational 
counternarrative to the methods of the Black Panthers, this book falls solidly on 
the side of their message: all cops are pigs to be distrusted, and the only power 
worth having is the power that comes from being armed and ready to fight and 
die for the Panthers’ cause, which is outlined in the narrative when Maxie and her 
friends try to memorize the Ten Point Program. The ultimate satisfaction she feels 
when she finally gets her own gun may require some historical contextualization 
for contemporary readers, but Maxie’s sense of helplessness and occasional despair 
is made palpable through the powerfully poetic prose.  KC
100 • the bulletin
MAlAspinA, Ann Heart on Fire: Susan B. Anthony Votes for President; illus. by Steve 
James. Whitman, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-3188-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-4
“Outrageous. Unbelievable. True.” Readers have several opportunities to join the 
repeated, indignant chant in this lively picture book account of suffragist Susan B. 
Anthony’s 1872 attempt to take the Fourteenth Amendment at its word and cast 
her vote in a national election. After wearing down her local registration inspectors, 
she musters a cohort of like-minded women to join her at the poll, drops her ballot 
in the box, and dashes off a note to her friend Elizabeth Cady Stanton: “Well I have 
been & gone & done it!!” Within two weeks, she’s under arrest, released on bail, 
and scheduled for trial, which she loses. Malaspina brings Anthony’s crusade to light 
via this tightly focused, fast-paced effort. She opens with a comparison of the text 
of the Fourteenth and Nineteenth Amendments which, with careful reading and 
perhaps a bit of helpful unpacking by an adult, clearly establishes the incongruity of 
an anti-female reading of the earlier amendment. She closes by giving the defeated 
Anthony the last word: “‘I shall never pay a dollar of your unjust penalty.’ And 
Susan B. Anthony never did.” James employs in his illustrations the sedate browns, 
rusts, and deep blues that instinctively connote propriety of times past, but he also 
interjects a strong undertone of subversive whimsicality in his almost photorealistic 
faces, allowing other detail to blur slightly into the background while all attention 
is focused on the unflappable Anthony and her blustering antagonists. A brief his-
torical note, selected bibliography, photograph, political cartoon, and reproduction 
of Anthony’s letter to Stanton (magnifying glass recommended) are included.  EB
MAnzAno, soniA The Revolution of Evelyn Serrano. Scholastic, 2012 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-32505-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46958-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Evelyn is at that point in her life where everything embarrasses her: her overweight, 
subservient mother; her name, Rosa María Evelyn del Carmen Serrano; and her 
abuela, who’s just come to stay with the family. However, it’s the year after Martin 
Luther King, Jr. was assassinated, and bigger things are happening outside of Evelyn’s 
house, that will change her Puerto Rican neighborhood in New York City. First, a 
group called the Young Lords starts cleaning up the garbage on the streets. Then, 
when the city won’t pick it up, they set it on fire. The Young Lords ask the church 
if they can use the fellowship hall to serve breakfasts like the Black Panthers are 
doing, but they are refused, so they persist, eventually occupying the church for 
several days, collecting clothes and distributing them to the poorer members of 
the community, providing health services and political education courses. As these 
events unfold, Evelyn learns more about her own family’s past, finding things to be 
ashamed of as well as things to take pride in. She comes to a new understanding of 
her colorful grandmother, and she warms to her mother, who finally begins to thaw 
herself. Evelyn’s journey combines a coming-of-age story with important lessons 
in Puerto Rican and Nuyorican history. Evelyn is an engaging character, and the 
straightforward prose and easy-to-grasp emotions render this a useful curricular 
addition to a unit on the civil rights movement that extends student’s understand-
ing of Latinos during that struggle. An author’s note clarifies Manzano’s personal 
OctOber 2012 • 101
experiences of the civil rights movement and distinguishes fact from fiction, as well 
as reminding readers that they might know her as Maria from Sesame Street.  KC
MArillier, Juliet Shadowfell. Knopf, 2012 [416p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96954-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86954-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98366-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Neryn is all too aware that her ability to see and talk to the fey folk 
could get her killed by the tyrannical king’s Enforcers, since they already massacred 
her small town for hiding her grandmother from them. She and her father have 
been on the roads of Alban for three years, trying to avoid capture, but when he 
ends up dead and she finds herself in the company of a mysterious (and handsome) 
stranger, Neryn decides to head north in search of a rumored rebel stronghold. As 
her powers grow, the Good Folk share their prophecy that she will be the savior of 
both the kingdom of Alban and of the fey realm, but her journey is fraught with 
danger, betrayals, and self-doubt. Marillier’s fictional world resembles an Arthurian 
Britain, steeped in old-world folklore; wood nymphs, elves, and brollachans all 
make an appearance, but their otherworldliness is tempered with a sense of vulner-
ability and desperation. Neryn’s narration strikes a delicate balance, allowing for 
an intimate look at her personal tragedies without being overwrought, giving an 
expansive overview of Alban through her memories and dreams without falling 
into unnecessary exposition. The brooding love interest is both appropriately angsty 
and compelling, but Neryn joins the growing trend of YA fantasy protagonists in 
setting aside her romantic relationship as she concentrates on saving the world. 
With the promise of more magic, heartache, and triumph in future installment, 
this series opener is ideal for fans of Kristin Cashore and Robin McKinley.  KQG 
MArr, MelissA Carnival of Souls. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-165928-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219006-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Centuries ago, a war between witches and daimons ended with a treaty that gave 
the witches sovereignty over the human realm and left the daimons the City, an 
otherworldly place of beauty, violence, pleasure, and corruption. Unaware of this 
fraught history, seventeen-year-old Mallory knows only that her adoptive father, 
Adam, is a witch who apparently stole something from the daimon realm, so she 
and dear old Dad must constantly be on the run from daimons in the human world. 
Kaleb is a daimon assassin sent to take out Mallory, but upon meeting the girl, he 
falls instantly in love with her and she with him. Their union isn’t that simple, as 
Mallory holds a secret that could potentially destroy the power balance in both 
worlds and Kaleb must negotiate with the worst of the worst to protect those he 
cares about. Marr creates a fascinating setting in the City, a place that teeters at 
the precipice of chaos and where indulgence is not only acceptable but expected, 
although it often comes at a steep price. The motivations of her characters are 
familiar (readers may see similarities here to Taylor’s Daughter of Smoke and Bone, 
BCCB 9/11), but the extremes to which they will go are sometimes shocking, 
blurring the line between nobility and selfishness to near oblivion. Both Adam 
102 • the bulletin
and Kaleb mistake love for possession, but their attempts to protect Mallory are 
entirely understandable even if the ways they go about it are creepily controlling. 
A subplot involving a daimon-witch half-breed is as engrossing as the main story 
and by the end, the machinations of all those involved are so twisted that readers 
may not know who to root for but will certainly be lining up for the next install-
ment of this proposed series. Love, lust, and power? Step right up, folks.  KQG
MAthers, petrA, comp. The McElderry Book of Mother Goose; comp. and illus. 
by Petra Mathers. McElderry, 2012 84p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-689-85605-1 $21.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5314-2 $12.99  
Ad 6-9 yrs
Explaining in a note that this is the “Seldom Heard but Not Forgotten Mother 
Goose,” noted illustrator Mathers has here collected nearly sixty verses, many of 
which are largely absent from contemporary collections. The compilation mixes 
traditional verse with authored material that’s been treated as traditional (“Twinkle, 
Twinkle, Little Star”; “I Do Not Like Thee, Doctor Fell”) and ranges in tone from 
the whimsical and cheerful to the sad and savage. The volume is elegantly designed, 
with a picture book–style layout that gives a poem or two to each spread. Mathers’ 
quirkily flat, vividly toned watercolors set the scene and provide an amusing inter-
pretation of the rhymes: “Dr. Fell” is illustrated by a pooch sporting a bandaged 
paw and a veterinary collar, clearly indignant about his veterinary treatment, while 
“How Many Miles to Babylon?” features a sneaks-and-headband-clad runner check-
ing his progress with a Middle Eastern local. The book is oddly spare on its notes, 
though: it only once identifies a written poem’s author, and it glosses over a couple 
of confusing terms while leaving larger perplexities unexplained (the classic “I Saw 
a Fishpond All on Fire” riddle is going to baffle audiences who don’t know the key). 
Between the tone and the occasional opacity, this is best suited for an older crowd 
than the usual nursery rhyme audience; kids beginning to puzzle out the occasional 
strangeness of poetry (and fans of Opie’s I Saw Esau, BCCB 5/92) will enjoy the 
opportunity for exploration and even memorization. A title index of the verses is 
included, as is a compiler’s note and list of source books.  DS
MckAy, hilAry Lulu and the Duck in the Park; illus. by Priscilla Lamont. Whit-
man, 2012 [104p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-4808-0 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-3
“Animals mattered more to Lulu than anything else in the world.” While Lulu’s 
family has indulged her on this matter, she’s been unsuccessful at convincing her 
Class Three teacher, Mrs. Holiday, how wonderful it would be to have more animals 
than just a class guinea pig. When two rowdy dogs destroy several ducks’ nests on 
a class outing to the park, Lulu secretly salvages an egg, which she tenderly stuffs 
under her sweater to keep safe until she can get it home after school. When the egg 
starts to hatch during the school day, however, Lulu and her best friend, Mellie, 
have to find a way to hide the baby duckling. British author McKay, best known 
for the Casson family chronicles (Saffy’s Angel, BCCB 5/02, etc.), brings her lilting 
domestic style to early chapter books in this first title in a new series. Many kids 
will sympathize with animal-loving Lulu, and McKay’s easygoing, perceptive humor 
adds liveliness to the account. The events are exactly those that loom large in a 
OctOber 2012 • 103
primary-grader’s life: in addition to the inarguably exciting hatching of a duck egg 
under Lulu’s sweater, there’s also the teacher’s threat to trade the class guinea pig 
for another classroom’s stick insect, and the uncontrolled rambunctiousness of two 
loud dogs (who are wonderfully and plausibly cowed by the experienced teacher’s 
stern command). Monochromatic watercolor illustrations show Mrs. Holiday’s 
class as a scruffy, amiable, multicultural group, with dark-skinned Lulu a cute and 
visibly determined heroine. A lighthearted yet eventful outing, this will entice as a 
chaptery readaloud as well as a readalone.  DS
McnAMee, grAhAM Beyond: A Ghost Story. Lamb, 2012 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90687-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73775-3 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89759-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
The incident with the nail gun is just the latest in what looks like a long string of 
self-destructive behaviors for Jane: she’s also drunk drain cleaner, electrocuted her-
self with live wire, and stood in front of an oncoming train. Only she and her best 
friend, Lexi, know that these were not willing acts—instead, these were initiated 
by Jane’s shadow, which compels her to attempt to destroy herself in punishment 
whenever she develops any kind of interest in a boy. As the shadow grows bolder 
and more corporeal, Jane and Lexi begin to uncover its secrets: it’s actually the 
soul of a murdered boy, who entered Jane’s body when she died and was revived 
at birth, who considers her to belong to him, and who’s trying to kill her to make 
her his own permanently. McNamee has established his chops as a writer of thrill-
ers supernatural and otherwise, and Jane’s story is smoothly creepy; the strain is 
heightened by its contrast with her solid and loving family and staunch, unflappable, 
and delightfully gothic best friend. As the horror ramps up, the book takes it into 
the real world as well, with a harrowing Silence of the Lambs–redolent villain who’s 
a serial child molester and murderer, and whom Jane eventually faces in hopes of 
laying her shadow to rest. The pacing is tight and the tension high throughout, and 
the book is particularly gifted at the cinematic trope of terrifying apparitions that 
disappear on awakening or observation by an outsider. With its blend of haunting 
and crime, this actually is a great movie-style summer thriller, so be sure to pull it 
out for display again in summer blockbuster season.  DS
Milford, kAte The Broken Lands; illus. by Andrea Offermann. Clarion, 
2012 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-547-73966-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-547-82266-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-9 
The Brooklyn Bridge is still under construction in 1877, but its potential to connect 
two parts of a growing city and its intersection with East River make it a source 
of great energy—energy that one particularly sadistic entity would like to use to 
create hell on Earth. Fortunately for the residents of New York, Sam, a streetwise 
cardsharp, and his hopefully-more-than-just-a-pal Jin, a Chinese immigrant girl who 
also happens to be a fireworks expert, have cottoned on to the devilish scheme and 
may just have the power to stop it. First, however, the two friends must identify and 
find the five pillars of the city, plan and set off a massive fireworks display (which 
104 • the bulletin
serves as a public announcement), and deal with their own confusing romantic 
feelings—all within a couple of days or else the big bad guy is going to win. Much 
like Bray’s The Diviners (reviewed above), this pays tribute to a time and place in 
U.S. history with vivid detail, capturing both the beauty and the struggle of New 
York in the late nineteenth century. The backstories of Sam and Jin, along with 
those of several secondary cast members, add nuance to their characterizations and 
also imbue the city with a sense of humanity—it is good and bad, gorgeous and 
flawed all at once. The battle for New York’s soul then becomes even more urgent, 
and the race against the clock makes the four-hundred-plus pages fly by. Though 
this is a prequel to Milford’s debut, The Boneshaker, it requires no knowledge of the 
other book, and it will be a true delight to fans of history, fantasy, and the triumph 
of good. Final illustrations not seen.  KQG
MoBley, JeAnnie Katerina’s Wish. McElderry, 2012 248p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3343-4 $15.99 
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3345-8 $9.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Katerina and her family came to America full of dreams, hoping to 
own their own farm. Instead, however, Katerina’s father labors in a Colorado mine, 
the corrupt practices of early twentieth century minework putting him increasingly 
in debt to the company store. When Katerina discovers giant carp inhabiting a 
quiet pool in the nearby river, she remembers a folktale from her youth in which 
a magic fish grants three wishes. After two wishes that her sisters jokingly make 
come true, Trina secretly returns to the pond and makes a third wish for a farm. 
A burgeoning romance with Marek, the neighbor boy, and Katrina’s resourceful 
business purchasing and delivering goods for residents of the mining town add 
further interest to this carefully researched and crafted historical novel about a 
young woman caught between a dream and reality. Folktales from her Bohemian 
home country are woven seamlessly into the narrative, mostly shared by Old Jan, 
Marek’s father, who visits the family every evening and, along with his sons, shares 
many of the family’s trials. The setting is thoughtfully presented, and the book 
presents the challenges faced by the mining town with authentic emotion. Trina 
is an appealing character and narrator, who wants desperately to believe that all 
will end happily for her family but who has lost some of her hope in light of their 
circumstances. As for the carp, in the end Trina realizes that “the magic was in the 
believing and not the other way around,” and she faces the future with a new sense 
of empowerment that is certain to serve her well. The open-ended conclusion to 
the romance thread may disappoint some readers, but they’ll be glad that overall 
things look promising for the Prochazkovas in the end. An author’s note about the 
relevant history is included.  HM
Morel, Alex Survive. Razorbill, 2012 259p
ISBN 978-1-59514-510-9 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-12
The plan looks foolproof: Jane, who’s been in a residential therapy program since 
her suicide attempt, will finally succeed in killing herself by taking pills on her flight 
back home for Christmas. Just as Jane is locked in the plane’s bathroom with her 
weapon of choice, however, the aircraft crashes in the Montana wilderness, and 
there are only two survivors: Jane and Paul, a punky young snowboarder. Since they 
likely won’t be found in the frigid, mountainous wilds before freezing to death, 
OctOber 2012 • 105
Jane must work with Paul to negotiate the forbidding terrain and find a way out. 
Morel knows her survival-story conventions and works them well, with Jane and 
Paul’s growing bond and incipient romance adding a satisfying emotional resonance. 
Layered over that is an exploration of the meaning of survival, with Jane laboring 
under a multigenerational family legacy of suicide attempts and keenly aware of 
the irony of her situation, while Paul struggles with his survivor guilt following 
the death of his beloved brother. Jane’s smooth present-tense narration has age-
appropriate accessibility with touches of plaintive directness (“Why should we carry 
on when the people we love are dead?”), and the book doesn’t belabor her emotions 
toward Paul or her newly tightened grip on life. This is genuinely moving in its 
bittersweet celebration of life, and between its absorbing premise and philosophical 
implications, it would be a great title for a book-club read or class discussion.  DS
Murphy, sAlly Toppling; illus. by Rhian Nest James. Candlewick, 2012 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5921-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Eleven-year-old John has a rather unusual obsession: dominoes. John doesn’t play 
dominoes in the traditional sense; he prefers to line them up in complex arrange-
ments throughout his house then, with a gentle nudge, send the rows toppling down. 
The title of this Australian import takes on a double meaning when John learns 
that his best friend, Dominic, has cancer, and John suddenly feels like the world 
around him is falling down. The story, which is written in ragged-right-margin 
text, directly explores dealing with the illness and potential death of a best friend; 
while John initially responds to the news by withdrawing and creating enormous 
domino arrangements in his room, he then decides to face the situation head on, 
spending countless days at Dominic’s bedside and always thinking of jokes he can 
share with his friend. The story possesses a somewhat adult sensibility, as John and 
Dominic openly talk through the nuances of dying, and there’s not much plot 
here. The storyline about Ky, the new kid in the class who is openly rude about 
Dominic but has a secret of his own, is well drawn, though, and it provides valu-
able enhancement to Dominic’s storyline. Despite the book’s flaws, readers drawn 
to quiet, thoughtful stories with more serious overtones may find it a quick yet 
affecting read.  HM
newMAn, lesléA October Mourning: A Song for Matthew Shepard. Candlewick, 
2012 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5807-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9 up
A week after University of Wyoming student Matthew Shepard was beaten and left 
for dead tied to a fence in Laramie, Wyoming in 1998, Newman arrived in town 
to give the keynote speech for the university’s Gay Awareness Week. Over a decade 
later, she completed this cycle of poems, which offers poignant commentary on the 
tragedy. Verses explores various perspectives (including the attackers, police and 
attorneys, parents, and inanimate witnesses such as the fence and the stars) on the 
attack, the investigation and vigils, and the aftermath. Newman deploys a wide 
range of poetic forms, including pantoums, villanelles, haiku, and concrete poems, 
but all share jagged rhythms and a biting sense of grief and helplessness. While the 
writing quality dips at times, some poems are deeply emotional (“Their truck was 
106 • the bulletin
the last thing he saw/ Tears fell from his unblinking eyes/ I cradled him just like a 
mother/ I held him all night long”). Extensive endnotes discuss the inspiration and 
factual referents for each poem, offer attributions for the epigraphs used throughout 
the book, and, when applicable, describe the poetic forms. Newman’s informative 
preface and afterword and the appended list of resources make this an ideal choice 
to pair with Nelson’s similarly elegiac A Wreath for Emmett Till (BCCB 4/05) for 
a provocative and heart-wrenching exploration of the human cost of hatred.  CG
newquist, h. p. The Book of Blood: From Legends and Leeches to Vampires and 
Veins. Houghton, 2012 [160p] illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-547-31584-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-547-82269-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
With its creepy subtitle, blood-splatter effects, and introduction focused on gen-
eral ickiness, this looks like a parallel to Kyi’s Seeing Red (BCCB 7/12), with a 
dash more traditional nonfiction gravitas. However, Newquist quickly veers from 
folkways and ritual to science, presenting a curriculum-friendly overview of the 
history of the way scientists have come to understand what blood is; the circulatory 
system and how blood interacts with various organs; medical conditions that occur 
when the system breaks down; comparisons of blood in humans and animals. The 
penultimate chapter on “the Undead” offers a few sips of vampire lore, but the 
book wraps up with a return to the more prosaic matter of blood banks and blood 
donation. Newquist’s prose is smooth enough that several chapters could actually 
function as nonfiction readalouds, while the color illustrations range from historical 
engravings to electron microscope photos to textbook-style diagrams. No citations 
are included, but a brief bibliography of books and websites is appended, and an 
index is forthcoming. If you’ve ever hankered to see a close-up of a brain afflicted 
with meningitis, you’ve come to the right place.  EB
oliver, lAuren The Spindlers. Harper/HarperCollins, 2012 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-197808-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219025-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 4-6
At breakfast, young Liza realizes there is something just a bit off about her little 
brother, Patrick; by lunch, she’s convinced that evil spider-like creatures have stolen 
his soul, and by bedtime, she has formulated a plan to venture into the world Below 
(a world only whispered to her in tales by her very favorite babysitter), challenge 
the Spindlers, and retrieve her baby brother’s humanity. Venturing through a hole 
in the wall of her house’s basement, Liza meets Mirabella, a standing, talking rat 
with a newspaper skirt, who offers to be her guide. Good thing, too, because 
besides being filled with unfamiliar creatures such as nids and troglods, the world 
Below is a treacherous, frightening place and its residents—even the apparently 
well-intentioned ones—are quick to betray an outsider to the Spindlers for the 
right price. Fantastic beings are just the start of the imaginative components here; 
Oliver offers a richly developed world with a mythology that positions Liza and 
her unyielding loyalty to her brother with the wise, ethereal good guys as they 
battle the Spindlers for both Patrick’s soul and for Below itself. With her flair for 
the dramatic, Mirabella makes a particularly entertaining tour guide, and Liza’s 
OctOber 2012 • 107
journey plays out much like any good quest tale, with seemingly insurmountable 
obstacles overcome, self-pity vanquished, and the bad guys duly outdone. Oliver’s 
fluid, poetic prose elevates this tale above the genre, often imparting weight to the 
simplest sentences. Similar in its action and pacing to Collins’ Gregor the Overlander 
(BCCB 1/04) but with the emotional resonance of Ursu’s Breadcrumbs (BCCB 
10/11), this is sure to win over middle-grade readers.  KQG
oxley, Jennifer The Chicken Problem; written and illus. by Jennifer Oxley and 
Billy Aronson. Random House, 2012 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96989-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86989-1 $16.99  
R 5-7 yrs
Peg (a girl) and her pal Cat (a cat) are getting ready “to have a perfect picnic with 
a pig” when they realize that they’ve cut one too many pieces of pie. Cat retrieves 
a little chicken (for the little piece of pie) from the nearby chicken coop, but she 
leaves the door to the coop wide open: “There were one hundred chickens going 
crazy all over the place! Chickens leaping! Chickens skipping! . . . Chickens doing 
the chicken dance! Chickens bending over and wiggling their bottoms in the air!” 
Peg and Cat eventually manage to return the errant poultry to the coop, and Peg, 
Cat, the pig, and the little chicken all settle in to finally enjoy their pie. The buoyant 
text and sprightly, detailed illustrations (in a vigorous childlike, sketchy style, often 
against a graph-paper background) work well together, both reflecting a humorous 
approach to the topic of problem-solving. There are some indirect but noticeable 
uses of arithmetic within the text, such as the page numbers, which are written as 
addition problems (“1 + 1 = 2,” “2 + 1 = 3,” and so on), and there is also a lightly 
sketched “100 – 10 = 90” written on the page in which Peg and Cat have placed 
ten of the one hundred chickens back into the coop. Readers-aloud could certainly 
expand upon this usage and tie this title into a math lesson or a lesson on problem-
solving in general. The book is equally enjoyable just as a funny readaloud, though, 
and kids will especially love poring over the illustrations in which the numerous 
gold, jelly-bean-shaped chickens are engaged in various amusing activities.  JH
pArker, MichAel You Are a Star!; illus. by Judith Rossell.
See review under Kelsey, p. 91.
pAtterson, JAMes Confessions of a Murder Suspect; written by James Patterson 
and Maxine Paetro. Little, 2012 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-20698-3 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-20701-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
One fateful night, Tandy Angel opens the door of her family’s luxurious suite in 
New York’s Dakota Hotel to find police responding to a 911 call. When she goes 
to get her parents, she discovers them dead in their room. Tandy’s investigation 
into her parents’ death is interspersed with short “Confession” chapters that of-
fer insight into what drives each of the Angel siblings—and why each of them, 
especially Tandy herself, could easily be the murderer. Since the whole family is 
genius-level smart and maladjusted to the point of sociopathy, their motives include 
a veritable checklist of mystery-genre reveals, from clandestine affairs and suspicious 
108 • the bulletin
past deaths to secret human experimentation and financial malfeasance at the fam-
ily’s pharmaceutical empire. The overload of eccentricity here (in everything from 
Tandy’s parents’ disciplinary practices to the bizarre installation art that fills their 
home to secondary characters named such things as Capricorn Caputo and Royal 
Rampling) will appeal to readers who like their mysteries aggressively quirky, but the 
quirkiness can veer into cutesiness at times, undercutting the genuine creepiness of 
the situation. Furthermore, the numerous red herrings turn out to be significantly 
more interesting than the reality revealed at the end. However, the fun of search-
ing through this onslaught of dysfunction for a workable motive and means can’t 
be beat, and readers will be drawn inexorably into Tandy’s world of paranoia and 
manipulation as they try to put the pieces together.  CG
peArsAll, shelley Jump into the Sky. Knopf, 2012 344p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93699-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83699-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89548-7 $10.99 
 R* Gr. 5-9
After his semi-literate mother abandoned him as a baby on the seat of the car with 
a note saying, “I AM LEVIN,” “leaving” morphed into Levi Battle’s very name. It 
has also become the theme of his life: first his mother takes off, then his father leaves 
him in the keeping of an aunt while he joins the Army to fight in World War II, and 
now Aunt Odella has decided she’s shouldered enough parental responsibility and 
sends thirteen-year-old Levi off to rejoin his father at his posting. Second Lt. Charles 
Battle has kept in touch, boasting about an assignment that seems so resplendent 
and unlikely—he claims to have become a colored paratrooper, despite the army’s 
segregation—that friends and relatives are hesitant to believe his yarn. Yet, when 
Levi arrives after a hellish train ride from Chicago into the Jim Crow South, he finds 
that his father is indeed the paratrooper he claims to be but has just been reassigned 
and shipped out the day before to parts unknown. Calvin Thomas, a young black 
paratrooper, offers Levi a place to stay with him and his pregnant wife until they 
can track down Lt. Battle, and when Calvin gets his orders to rejoin his unit in 
Oregon, Levi accompanies the Thomases west, where he’s reunited with his father. 
There’s plenty of angry rumbling and discord among the paratroopers, though, who 
expected to be deployed into battle but instead find themselves fighting forest fires 
as they “guard” the west coast against rumored attack by Japanese bomb-carrying 
balloons, an idea that sounds so preposterous that the soldiers believe they’ve been 
sidetracked for the duration. Pearsall offers an exquisitely balanced tale of family ties 
and World War II valor, based on the experiences of the 555th Parachute Infantry 
Battalion. Levi’s voice—humorous and acutely insightful—perfectly captures the 
viewpoint of a resilient young man whose feet sting from his first harsh landing 
in the adult world. Fans of Christopher Paul Curtis will fall right into line.  EB
petty, J. t. Bloody Chester; illus. by Hilary Florido. First Second/Roaring 
Brook, 2012 154p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-100-3 $18.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Chester Kates is not any kind of name to have if you want to keep a low profile in 
a Western frontier town. Young “Lady Kate” gets regularly knocked around by the 
local toughs, but his luck may change when Mr. Croghan plucks him out of jail, 
cleans him up, and offers him a well-paid mission—to burn down a nearby town 
OctOber 2012 • 109
that needs to be cleared out for the railroad to come through. Chester saddles right 
up, but when he reaches Whale, there are only three residents and one outlier: a 
drunken boy; his secluded father; a young woman, Caroline, who keeps to her cabin; 
and her father, who lives in a mine on the outskirts of the town. One man claims 
to be dying of a plague known as Coyote Waiting, an illness that eats its victims 
from inside out and that has killed off the rest of the town residents. The miner 
claims to have caused the plague—maybe—but then again, he also claims to have 
a treasure—maybe. By the time Chester untangles the conflicting stories, he’s only 
certain of two things: he loves Caroline, and Caroline’s father is a raging bigot who 
has preyed on Indians in the region. This has the enjoyably twisty weirdness and 
compact punch of a Twilight Zone episode or an Ambrose Bierce short story, and 
the savagely dramatic climax is a compelling moment indeed. The prosaic visuals of 
this graphic novel don’t make the most of the eerie, atmospheric ghost-town setting, 
though, and the book starts slowly, with characters largely undifferentiated until 
Chester gets to Whale. Nonetheless, Chester does his anti-hero thing to perfection, 
doling out grim justice and breaking Caroline’s heart, and patient readers may find 
the saga’s eventual blossoming worth the wait.  EB
phillips, suzAnne MArie Lindsey Lost. Viking, 2012 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78460-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
The Hamilton siblings are noted for their athleticism: junior Micah is a promis-
ing pitcher, and senior Lindsey an Olympic hopeful track star. Lately, though, 
Lindsey has been touchy, overwrought, and disinclined to confide as usual in her 
brother. When her body is found in the woods, suspicion falls first on Micah, who 
was apparently the last person to see her alive. Micah, however, cannot remember 
much of anything past seeing Lindsey quarrel with her track coach, and while 
the police try to be patient as Micah struggles to recover his memory, his father, a 
psychiatrist, pushes him hard to confront the tragedy. As details leak into the open, 
it seems possible that Dr. Hamilton himself could have acted in passion, having 
gone into debt for his daughter’s training. Or was it Coach Kelly, whose shot at 
a job at UCLU hinged on Lindsey’s Olympic success. Or was it a jealous Micah? 
Perhaps the father of Lindsey’s unborn child? How about her suffocating boyfriend? 
The red herrings are cleverly deployed, and the chilly voice of the unseen narrator 
is stylishly effective. Hardcore mystery fans, though, are unlikely to be seduced 
by Phillips’ literary chops when they recognize plot holes big enough to drive an 
SUV through (for instance, what kind of autopsy misses a pregnancy?). While this 
stumbles as a whodunit, it may nonetheless please YAs drawn to the psychological 
theme of recovered memory.  EB
pitcher, AnnABel My Sister Lives on the Mantelpiece. Little, 2012 211p
ISBN 978-0-316-17690-3 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 5-7
It’s been five years since Jamie’s older sister, Rose, was killed in a London terrorist at-
tack, and Rose’s loss has been the center of the family ever since. After Jamie’s mother 
leaves the family, Jamie, his father, and Jasmine—Rose’s surviving twin—move north 
(their newly xenophobic father is intent on “getting away from the Muslims”); there 
ten-year-old Jamie wishes fervently that his father would stop drinking and that 
his incommunicado mother would at least reach out to her son. He does manage 
110 • the bulletin
to make a good friend, though: his sparky, imaginative classmate, Sunya, who’s as 
much as an outsider as he is—and who is a devout Muslim. Pitcher draws a vivid 
picture of Jamie’s family, where Rose is more important than anyone actually alive 
(Jamie’s mother even makes him redo a school essay so that it’s about Rose) and 
the surviving children struggle to be noticed. Sunya is a magnetic character, well 
supplied with the kind of nerve that Jamie lacks, and there are hints that this is a 
relationship that may actually lead toward early romance. The book complicates 
the story’s resolution with several layers of contrivance, though, between the death 
of Jamie’s beloved cat, Jamie and Jasmine’s participation in a television talent show, 
his parents’ sudden turnaround, and the kids’ quick forgiveness for their years of 
abandonment, betraying the emotional honesty of the beginning. Readers willing to 
overlook that reductive conclusion will find Jamie’s predicament moving, however, 
and they’ll support his friendship with Sunya as he tries to find his own way.  DS
plAtt, rAndAll Liberty’s Christmas. Texas Tech University, 2012 [200p]
ISBN 978-0-89672-766-3 $19.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
The repo man has held off as long as he can from stripping possessions from the 
Joneses for their delinquent loan payments—it is the Depression, after all—but 
the day of reckoning is now at hand. After selling off a grove of trees to a wealthy 
lumbering family, the Joneses still don’t have enough to keep their main cash 
crop—a huge stand of Christmas trees they’ve patiently cultivated over the years. 
Sixteen-year-old Liberty, who is a do-it-now/apologize-later kind of girl, still has a 
couple of plans. Running off to Houston to borrow money from a rich relative only 
gets her mugged and dragged home on a freight car; her second attempt, entering 
a tree in an Austin Christmas tree competition, requires some behind-the-scenes 
manipulation and sleight of hand (well, sleight of tree), as well as some help from 
her new pal Rudy Garcia, but it eventually carries the day. Platt’s plot is tall as a 
redwood and smooth as a birch, with dialogue that crackles like fatwood on a fire. 
Some garden-variety cussin‘ may argue against this as a “perfect holiday story” for 
younger readers, but middle-schoolers should find Liberty’s grand escapade to be 
just the right feel-good caper for a winter break wind-down.  EB
reynolds, AAron Creepy Carrots!; illus. by Peter Brown. Simon, 2012 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0297-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5309-8 $12.99  
R 5-8 yrs
“Jasper Rabbit had a passion for carrots. And the carrots that grew in Crackenhopper 
Field were the best.” Young Jasper has therefore developed the habit of snatching 
carrots out of the field whenever he passes by it on the way to school, to baseball, 
to wherever. But then something strange happens: the carrots begin to follow him 
wherever he goes, lurking in the dark corners at night (he hears “terrible, carroty 
breathing”) and disappearing before they can be seen by anyone else. What’s a 
carrot-stalked bunny to do? The book neatly balances menace and absurdity in this 
strange tale of vegetable stalking, playing up the contrast between the genuinely 
spooky elements and the unassuming threat. There’s a little bit of a logical strain in 
the resolution—Jasper fences in the carrots so they can’t get out, which is exactly 
what the carrots, who don’t want him to get in, wished—but it’s still a clever and 
comedic final turn. Glossy black borders and smudgy pencil outlines lightened only 
OctOber 2012 • 111
by paler gray and set off by the orange of the carrots (or carroty-colored lookalikes) 
provide a smoky Halloween flavor to Brown’s nocturnal art, and the scenes are dense 
with creepy silhouettes and foreboding shadows. Brown meticulously controls his 
compositions and balances his spreads, often paralleling or mirroring verso and 
recto or tidily subdividing pages into panels. This would make a lively partner to 
Speed’s Brave Potatoes (BCCB 6/00), and it’ll turn a Halloween storytime into a 
vegan’s nightmare.  DS
rivers, kAren The Encyclopedia of Me. Levine/Scholastic, 2012 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-31028-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46951-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
It’s the summer before eighth grade, and Tink Aaron-Martin has been grounded, so 
naturally she decides to use her newfound wealth of time to write an encyclopedia. 
The entries, whether they’re traditional encyclopedia favorites like “Aardvark” or 
more personal categories like “People Who Don’t Call after Kissing a Person for 
the Second Time and on Purpose, Not by Accident,” combine to tell the story of 
Tink’s summer and autumn of transition. The changes are several: she’s growing 
apart from her best friend, she’s developing a crush on the boy next door, and her 
family’s hyperfocus on Tink’s autistic older brother, Seb, is beginning to take its toll. 
Canadian author Rivers (Surviving Sam, BCCB 6/02) turns what could be a gim-
micky structure into an invitingly episodic narrative that keeps the storyline going 
while allowing Tink to plunge into certain topics when they’re relevant. The book 
is refreshingly up front about Tink’s biracial heritage, Seb’s autism, and the Aaron-
Martin family dynamics, but it’s also nuanced and sympathetic in its treatments; 
character interaction is observed with a particularly keen eye, while Tink’s narration 
is a credible blend of perception and cluelessness. Tink herself is a deeply winning 
protagonist, a girl who’s beginning to figure out her own considerable strengths 
and important interests (she’s just discovered her love of skateboarding) but who 
also wants to stay loyal to her old friend. This sparky and engaging account will 
satisfy readers looking for a bouncier counterpart to Frances O’Roark Dowell.  DS
rockliff, MArA Me and Momma and Big John; illus. by William Low. Candle-
wick, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4359-1 $16.99  
R 6-10 yrs
This fact-based story recalls the work of a group of apprentices hired in the 1970s 
and 1980s to complete New York’s Cathedral Church of Saint John the Divine, 
or “Big John.” This fictionalized account is narrated by a young African-American 
boy, who watches his mother head off to work in the stoneyard and return home 
covered in dust each day. Confused to find that his mother is only working on a 
single stone (“You all done building the cathedral, Momma?”), the boy realizes 
the enormity of the task when she takes her kids to see the project, points to the 
unfinished tower, and explains that her stone is going way up there. The story is 
quiet and serious, honestly showing Momma’s exhaustion at the end of the work 
day and thoughtfully exploring the boy’s growing understanding of the building 
project (“I think about the hands that worked on every stone until it was exactly 
right, knowing that it had to hold up all the rest”). It’s an effective solemnity, un-
derscoring the importance of taking the time to do something right and putting 
112 • the bulletin
effort into ensuring beauty and strength. Low’s digitally rendered illustrations re-
semble gouache and oil pastels in their soft, grainy strokes of color, with full-bleed 
pages and spreads. Juxtaposition of light and darkness add atmosphere in scenes 
of the majestic cathedral, with wide overhead views contrasting with the intimate 
family portraiture. A lengthy author’s note explains the history of Big John, which 
was started in 1892 and is still unfinished, and identifies a young mother named 
Carol Hazel as the inspiration behind the story; no source notes are included.  HM
rosAti, ginA Auracle. Roaring Brook, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-710-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Since astral projection is a pretty unusual gift, Anna has only shared her ability with 
her lifelong friend Rei. It’s therefore Rei she turns to when, after her hovering spirit 
witnesses the accidental death of bitchy new girl Taylor, she returns to her body 
only to discover that Taylor has beaten her there. Taylor uses the hijacking to accuse 
Anna’s friend Seth (who had rejected Taylor’s romantic overtures) of her murder. 
Able to manipulate the physical world only slightly, Anna communicates with Rei 
by typing, and they work together to save Seth and reclaim Anna’s body. Rosati 
hooks readers in with well-drawn protagonists: Anna and Rei’s mutual unvoiced 
longing for each other is sigh-worthy, and Anna’s worry that her mother likes her 
better as the noxious Taylor than as herself will resonate strongly with teen readers. 
Unfortunately, Taylor is a caricature of a vindictive popular girl, and the motivations 
for her grasping, capricious behavior are fuzzy, making her evolution from spite to 
regret unconvincing. Cardboard villain aside, the book proceeds briskly through 
suspense, romance, and extrasensory hijinks, intertwining the courtroom trial and 
body-snatch plotlines for maximum tension. Readers who like their mysteries 
supernaturally tinged and their romantic heroes sweet and protective will enjoy 
this debut novel.  CG
ross, chudney Lone Bean. Amistad/HarperCollins, 2012 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-166011-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-211440-2 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-4 
Bean Gibson can’t wait to start third grade, but when she finds herself abandoned 
by best friend Carla on the first day, things start to go rapidly south: she is targeted 
by bully Tanisha, befriended by stinky Stanley, and, much to her dismay, forced to 
choose an instrument by her music-professor father. As the school year progresses, 
Bean becomes so desperate for friendship that she finds herself attracted to Tanisha’s 
mean tricks (particularly when they are targeted at Carla’s new best friend) and 
even gets involved in a nasty prank or two. Gradually, Bean finds friendship in 
unexpected places, and, following an unfortunate incident on the playground that 
results in a broken finger, even reconciles with Carla. There’s not much originality 
in the plot, and the broken-friendship story that guides the majority of the novel is 
overdrawn; the reading level is also best suited to kids reading above a third-grade 
level, but it’ll be a tough sell to older kids. Still, Bean is an affable character with 
an amusingly dramatic way of speaking and a lot of spunk. Much of the story is 
driven by her inner conflicts, and young readers who have faced friendship issues of 
their own will readily identify with her confusing and conflicting emotions during 
OctOber 2012 • 113
the start of the school year. Offer this debut novel to fans of happily ending stories 
about friendships gone awry.  HM
ruBin, sArAh Someday Dancer. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2012 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-39378-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-49194-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Dancing is everything to Casey; even though she can’t afford ballet lessons (her 
mother brings in the family’s only income since Casey’s father’s death in the Ko-
rean War), she picks up what information she can from listening outside the ballet 
studio. When there’s the possibility of an audition with the New York City Ballet, 
she even takes the bus north to try out; while she doesn’t get in, the NYCB sends 
her to Martha Graham’s famous dance troupe, where Casey gains a scholarship and 
begins to live the dancer’s life she’d always dreamed of. This has the innocence and 
implausibility of classic making-it-big tales such as the movie Stage Door, including 
life in the boardinghouse and friendship and enmity with other young aspirants, 
and Rubin’s writing style is fresh and appealing. It’s a nice touch that Casey ends up 
with a modern dance troupe rather than the more conventional ballet (which really 
would have been a stretch too far), and the details of the Graham company, which 
is dealing with the aging artisan’s refusal to acknowledge her decreasing physical 
abilities, are vivid and enjoyable. Casey’s character, however, is sometimes so self-
absorbed as to be unsympathetic, requiring endless indulgent and largely unearned 
forgiveness from friends and family; the book also overdoes its rags-to-riches (or at 
least stardom) fantasy, giving Casey amazing luck where obstacles would have been 
more interesting (for instance, Casey ends up with a hugely important role in her 
very first performance soon after joining the company). The period setting may 
allow some padding on the sharp edges of disbelief, and youngsters yearning for 
their own leap out of obscurity into the limelight will vicariously thrill to Casey’s 
meteoric rise.  DS
ruMford, JAMes From the Good Mountain: How Gutenberg Changed the World; 
written and illus. by James Rumford. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-542-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Middle-grade children who know absolutely nothing about the titular innovative 
printer will be the ideal audience for this attractive and inviting picture book. 
The volume cleverly casts Gutenberg’s Europe-rocking incunabula as a riddle-
style mystery: “In the city of Mainz in Germany, around the year 1450, there 
appeared a mysterious thing. It was made of rags and bones, soot and seeds. It 
wore a dark brown coat and was filled with gold. It took lead and tin, strong oak, 
and a mountain to make it. What was it?” The answer comes in an ensuing series 
of double-page-spread riddles, each of which highlights a step in the preparation 
for the first book to emerge from Gutenberg’s movable-type press. The rags and 
bones become paper and stiffening glue; the “dark coat” was walnut-husk-dyed 
leather to cover the boards; gold “pounded flat and beaten under layers of strong 
paper until it was thinner than a blade of grass” became gold leaf, etc. The descrip-
tive text is richly embellished with broad, ornamented borders that suggest how 
materials were procured and processed, and each text page faces a detailed view, 
114 • the bulletin
often touched with humor, of the craftsmen at work. The main text concentrates 
solely on bookmaking, but an epilogue supplements the coverage with some bio-
graphical information on Gutenberg and subsequent innovations in printing. In an 
unusual but effective addendum, Rumford steers children toward further reading 
by suggesting several thematic groups of keywords that can lead them to online 
information about various steps in the printing process. Readers who thought they 
were too old for picture-book riddles will be pleasantly surprised as Rumford leads 
them on a lyrical investigation of the high tech world of the fifteenth century.  EB
sAnchez, Jenny torres The Downside of Being Charlie. RP Teens, 2012 266p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-4401-4 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-4532-5 $9.95  
R Gr. 7-10
It’s senior year, and Charlie has returned from fat camp thirty pounds slimmer and 
determined to make the best of it. Odds are against him from the start, however, 
since his mother has disappeared again, and he is assigned the school pariah for a 
locker partner. On the upside, he seems to be attracting positive attention from 
Charlotte, a girl he only dreamed about in his pre-fat-camp days. Her signals are 
confusing, though, as she also seems to enjoy the company of the school bully. As 
Charlie tries to sort out his feelings about his silent dad, his absent mom, and his 
confusing almost-girlfriend, he starts to binge and purge, and his usual outlet of 
photography ceases to work for him. His mom’s return is no cause for joy, as he 
discovers his dad is having an affair, and his mom has a psychotic break. It isn’t 
until he produces a daring sequence of photographs that he is able to process his 
turbulent emotions and begin to heal. In the vein of Chris Crutcher, this story pulls 
no punches when it comes to exploring the ways parents can mess up their kids; 
Charlie’s righteous anger toward his father, who refuses to acknowledge his mother’s 
erratic behavior and instead leaves Charlie to deal with it without any emotional or 
other kind of help, is as searingly honest as it is tragic. Charlie’s responses, though 
destructive and ill-conceived, are all credible and even somehow appropriate given 
the limited resources he has to cope with his wrecked emotions; many readers will 
relate to his sense of anguish and his desire for a girl to be his savior. Readers drawn 
to tales of teens pushed to the breaking point before their lives turn around will 
appreciate Charlie’s plight.  KC 
schlitz, lAurA AMy Splendors and Glooms. Candlewick, 2012 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5380-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-9
Elderly witch Cassandra Sagredo lies on her death bed, steadily succumbing to 
the fire opal she wears around her neck, the source of her power and her downfall. 
Cassandra has power enough to summon Gaspare Grisini, a once-powerful, now 
washed-up magician turned to street puppeteering, who informs her the only way 
out of her predicament is for someone to steal the fire opal away from her. With 
two malleable orphaned apprentices and the ability to transform a live child into 
a puppet, Grisini is just the man to set a theft into motion. He arranges for three 
children to take up residence in Cassandra’s mansion, certain that one of the three 
will steal the gem and then be pressured into using its power for Grisini’s benefit. 
Will it be Lizzie Rose, the kind-hearted apprentice who simply wants enough 
money for a secure future? Will it be Parsefall, the talented puppeteer apprentice 
OctOber 2012 • 115
who is a liar and pickpocket? Or will it be Clara, the last surviving child of wealthy 
parents, whom Grisini kidnapped, made into a puppet, and now holds for ransom? 
An intricate web of backstories binds the three children into an unusual alliance 
and supplies each with a motivation that makes the likelihood of one of them 
perpetrating the theft an even wager. London fog and northern ice, manicured 
parks and suffocating parlors all figure in to the rich Dickensian settings, and a 
supporting cast of suffering parents, a tipsy landlady, a befuddled copper, and a 
staff of envious servants keep the action rolling. Middle-schoolers not quite ready 
for Erin Morgenstern’s The Night Circus can revel in this lusciously atmospheric 
title of rival magicians and the children caught in their crossfire.  EB
schMidt, gAry d. What Came from the Stars. Clarion, 2012 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-547-61213-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Schmidt examines the devastation left in the wake of a mother’s passing in this 
juxtaposition of two stories that take place on different worlds. Since Tommy 
Pepper’s mother was killed in a car accident, his father has stopped painting and 
his little sister has stopped speaking. On a far planet, the evil Lord Mondus has 
raised an army of faceless monsters called the O’Mondim to defeat the peaceful, 
beauty-loving Valorim. The remaining Valorim forge a necklace that contains all 
of their arts and hurl it far from Lord Mondus’s reach, all the way across the gal-
axies into sixth-grader Tommy Pepper’s lunchbox in Plymouth, MA. Now Lord 
Mondus has sent emissaries to retrieve the necklace, but Tommy refuses to give it 
up because it connects him to his mother, enabling him to bring her vividly back 
to his memory. As he battles the encroaching evil, Tommy’s success in Plymouth 
is key to saving both the distant Valorim and his own family, who threaten to 
drown in their grief. Thematic similarities to The Neverending Story wisp through 
this emotionally resonant tale as Schmidt artfully deploys a range of literary ele-
ments, especially setting, to craft Tommy’s story. The account of events on the 
Valorim’s planet is related in the diction of high epic fantasies sprinkled liberally 
with unfamiliar terms (there’s a tongue-in-cheek glossary), but those familiar with 
video game narratives will be able to stay afloat. Tommy’s loyal band of quirky pals 
lighten the melancholic mood without taking the levity too far; indeed, the bal-
ance of emotions is flawless as Tommy moves through grief to acceptance by way 
of heroism in the face of battle.  KC 
schwArtz, AMy Lucy Can’t Sleep; written and illus. by Amy Schwartz. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-543-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Little Lucy can’t sleep. She tries counting sheep, and when that fails she tries count-
ing “baby otters,/ Mountain goats,/ Kangaroos,/ Sailing boats,” but to no avail. 
She then gets up and, after searching for and finding her dolly and stuffed bear, 
tries having a snack, swinging on the back-porch swing, and playing a little dress-
up before finally falling asleep in her bed. The combination of rhymed couplets 
and compact unrhymed text is a little jarring, but there’s a cozy, safe simplicity to 
both Schwartz’s text and her illustrations that makes this an appealingly quiet and 
somnolent story. Schwartz’s line and watercolor illustrations are pleasantly homey, 
116 • the bulletin
and the slightly muted tones and frequent framing of smaller spot illustrations with 
a page-filling bubble of dark blue lend an appropriately nocturnal air to Lucy’s 
proceedings. Although a few of the interior scenes are a little overpatterned, Lucy is 
drafted with appealing simplicity (she has the same sweet, round face and minimal 
features as her rag doll), and her actions are depicted with a warm and easy grace. 
This would make a snug addition to a bedtime or small-group storytime lineup.  JH
selfors, suzAnne The Sweetest Spell. Walker, 2012 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2376-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Teenaged Emmeline doesn’t initially know that she has inherited the ability to churn 
cow’s milk into chocolate; it’s a skill that supposedly only belongs to royals, not 
Emmeline’s poor country clan. When her father is taken away with the other men 
of the Flatlands by the king’s soldiers, Emmeline is taken in by a family of dairy 
farmers in the more prosperous Wanderlands, and that’s where she discovers her 
delicious gift (and falls for the family’s son, Owen). With everyone after Emmeline 
for her unique skill, she eventually ends up in the royal palace, where she learns that 
monarchs have based their rule upon a pack of lies. She finds an ally in the prince, 
and together they work to expose (and change) the royal family’s mishandling of 
funds and of history, while Owen (who returns Emmeline’s feelings) seeks to find 
and free Emmeline’s father from the mines to which he and the other men have been 
sent. Narrated in by Emmeline and Owen in turn, this original tale is as delicious 
as a bar of creamy milk chocolate. While the faux-medieval-England setting and 
magical trappings will draw in the folks who love historical fiction and folkloric 
fantasy, the story also has some contemporary sensibility (the prince turns out to 
be gay) that will appeal to teens who like their fiction more modern. The twists 
and turns of the quick-paced plot and the dynamic cast will keep readers involved 
right to the end of this appetizing adventure.  JH
sheinkin, steve Bomb: The Race to Build—and Steal—the World’s Most Dangerous 
Weapon. Roaring Brook, 2012 [272p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59643-487-5 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-12
It’s probably fair to assume that the young adult readers who grab this title are 
already passingly familiar with the Manhattan Project and its devastating offspring, 
Little Boy and Fat Man. Here, however, Sheinkin sets the now-familiar story of the 
development of the atomic bomb at Los Alamos into the broader context of high-
stakes espionage during World War II, as the United States, Germany, and the Soviet 
Union raced to create or steal plans for the weapon. The three threads of this tale 
are smoothly integrated and delivered at a steadily accelerating pace, culminating 
in a breakneck pastiche of primary-source observation and testimony as time closes 
in around deployment of the bombs. Teen history buffs will be particularly taken 
with Sheinkin’s riveting (and readaloud-worthy) telling of efforts by the Norwegian 
resistance to sabotage German production of heavy water in Norway, and of the 
network of spies who, for varying monetary, political, and even humane interests, 
smuggled detailed bomb-making plans out of Los Alamos and into the hands of 
the Stalin government. This is edge-of-the seat material that will resonate with YAs 
who clamor for true spy stories, and it will undoubtedly engross a cross-market 
OctOber 2012 • 117
audience of adults who dozed through the World War II unit in high school. An 
index, quotation notes, an extensive list of sources, and a modest number of black 
and white photographs are included.  EB
sheinMel, AlyssA B. The Stone Girl. Knopf, 2012 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97080-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87080-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97462-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Although Sethie gets straight As at her competitive girls’ school in New York, she 
finds more satisfaction in smoking pot, having sex with Shaw, and keeping thin. 
When she meets one of Shaw’s friends, Jane, the girls immediately bond, and Jane 
teaches Sethie to purge after eating, not realizing that Sethie has a bigger problem 
than the occasional pizza and chips binge. As Sethie’s relationship with Shaw wanes, 
she steps up her efforts to lose weight, but when he comes clean about how he feels 
(or actually doesn’t feel) about her, controlling her eating is all Sethie has left. The 
third-person narration is so densely focalized through Sethie’s distorted view of 
things that it begins to feel claustrophobic; short, choppy sentences predominate, 
most of them starting with Sethie’s name followed by a present tense verb, a style 
that becomes repetitive. Additionally, the lack of honest self-awareness and reflec-
tion renders Sethie’s motivations a bit fuzzy: for a smart girl who craves control, 
she’s quick to indulge in drugs, lies, and unprotected sex, and there is no textual 
revelation of why she prefers to take refuge in delusions. Her decision to get help 
is a rather quick turnaround; seems all she needed was a good talking-to from a 
sensible friend and a finally concerned mother to snap out of it. While unlike other 
treatments of anorexia and bulimia, this nevertheless touches on what is likely a 
more ordinary experience of girls who tell themselves lies until the truth becomes 
too insistent.  KC
stout, shAwn k. Penelope Crumb; illus. by Valeria Docampo. Philomel, 
2012 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25728-5 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
When her best friend draws her portrait in art class, fourth-grader Penelope Crumb 
discovers for the first time that she has a big nose. After consulting her mother, she 
learns that she has inherited the “Crumb nose” from her grandfather, who aban-
doned the family when his son, Penelope’s father, became sick with his ultimately 
fatal illness. A class assignment about becoming a family history detective gives 
Penelope just the inspiration she needs to track down her missing grandfather. With 
the help of her eleven-year-old neighbor, Penelope manages to find her grandfather, 
a retired photographer who at first isn’t sure he wants to be found, but eventually 
there are hopeful signs of rapprochement. Penelope is an intrepid heroine with a 
unique and frequently amusing narrative voice (while drawing a portrait of her 
best friend, she muses: “Her eyebrow is like a furry caterpillar that might curl up 
in the palm of my hand. It is so cute, I name it. Marge”). Her longing for a con-
nection to her dad’s family is poignantly believable, and her relationship with her 
teenaged brother (whose transformation into prickly teenager she blames on an 
alien abduction) is also both credible and humorous. This would be a natural tie-in 
118 • the bulletin
with a unit on family history or a satisfying readaloud selection, and kids who have 
outgrown the Junie B. Jones series will enjoy Penelope’s equally comical narrative 
style. Final art not seen.  JH
strAhAn, JonAthAn, ed. Under My Hat: Tales from the Cauldron. Random 
House, 2012 413p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96830-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86830-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89881-5 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Eighteen notable authors brew up some real magic in this enchanting collection of 
brief tales about the witchy ways of witches. Strahan’s introductory note explains 
that his inspiration to create such a collection came directly from his fascination 
with Terry Pratchett’s Discworld, and readers who found a friend in Tiffany Ach-
ing will find plenty of kindred spirits here. The tones range from smartly snarky, 
as in Frances Hardinge’s “Payment Due,” in which a teen witch uses her powers to 
harass the repo man, to sweetly romantic, as in Delia Sherman’s “The Witch in the 
Woods” in which a shape-shifting healer must fight for her love’s life. Neil Gaiman 
casts a spell with a possibly funny, possibly melancholy, but definitely odd poem, 
while Holly Black, Tanith Lee, and Charles de Lint play on themes of expectations 
and reality. A few stories are a little overtidily concluded, but several close on an 
enticingly open note: the final scene of Ellen Klages’ “The Education of a Witch,” 
involving a vindictive preschooler, is especially haunting. So grab your hat, your 
wart, and don’t forget the eye of newt—you’ll want to spend the witching hour 
and more with this coven.  KQG
thoMAs, JAn Let’s Sing a Lullaby with the Brave Cowboy; written and illus. by Jan 
Thomas. Beach Lane/Simon, 2012 36p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4276-4 $12.88
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4277-1 $12.99  
R 3-7 yrs
The titular “brave cowboy” is really anything but, as he is frightened by a number 
of ordinary things in the course of singing his cows to sleep. As usual, Thomas 
deftly sets up a predictable and comical pattern of events, and then throws in a 
twist at the end. Here the cowboy keeps singing the same three lines of a lullaby, 
interrupting himself each time to shout “EEEK!” at things like a flower (in the 
dark, he thinks it is a “huge hairy spider”) or a stick (a “slimy slithering snake”), 
only to be reassured by the cows who helpfully identify the objects. Just when the 
cowboy starts to catch on, however, a wolf approaches and the cowboy decides that 
the shaggy, growling shape he notices must be “a big giant bunny rabbit. Right?” 
Fortunately, it turns out that wolves enjoy a good lullaby as much as the rest of us, 
and the cowboy resumes his song with the pajama-clad wolf obligingly finishing 
the last line when the cowboy falls asleep. The digitally created illustrations are ap-
propriately rendered in nocturnal shades of dark blues and purples, and Thomas’ 
depiction of the mistaken objects (the first sighting of the object shows it as a gray 
silhouette against the background, while a page turn shows the object in colored 
detail) invites the audience to guess at the silhouetted object’s identity. The repeated 
song lyrics and “EEEK!”s, the bold simplicity of the illustrations’ compositions, 
and the hilarious facial expressions of the characters all ensure that this will be a hit 
with young audiences, who will also understand the cowboy’s fear of things that 
OctOber 2012 • 119
look “different” in the dark. This is a surefire audience-participation hit for library 
programs, classrooms, and lively bedtime read-aloud sessions.  JH
vAnde velde, viviAn Deadly Pink. Harcourt, 2012 276p
ISBN 978-0-547-73850-5 $16.99  
R Gr. 6-9
Besides being pretty and popular, Grace’s older sister, Emily, is a wunderkind when 
it comes to technology; beside her, Grace has always felt dull and unimpressive. 
Now, however, Emily has inexplicably bypassed safety protocols in a total immer-
sion video game, refusing to leave the game even though she knows that prolonged 
exposure will result in her death. The company that pioneered the total immer-
sion gaming system wants Grace to go into the game and try to talk her sister out. 
When Grace enters the game, she finds herself in a completely insipid world full 
of flowers, unicorns, sprites, and hunky male servants who either can’t talk, or can’t 
speak English—which clues Grace in to the fact that something has gone very 
wrong between Emily and her boyfriend. By the time Grace finds her own strate-
gies to manipulate her way through the game against her sister’s defenses, Emily 
has gotten weaker, and the game itself has started to rebel against Emily’s changes 
to its programming. Now Grace must find a way to get both her and her sister 
out before it’s too late. This fast-paced action/adventure novel sets up a credible 
reason for Emily’s technologically assisted attempted suicide without being overly 
psychological or dark (Grace’s reminder to Emily that her decision will devastate 
the people who love her is enough to dissuade her). This allows the focus to remain 
strictly on Grace’s resourcefulness in performing the rescue, which will appeal to 
readers anxious to shine their own light from under the shadow of more successful 
older siblings. The gaming protocols amp up the reader appeal for experienced 
gamers who have had their fill of assumptions about what girls like in the virtual 
world; there’s even a subtle but sly irony here for budding feminists regarding the 
possibility of being suffocated by sparkles.  KC
voorhees, coert Lucky Fools. Hyperion, 2012 293p
ISBN 978-1-4231-2398-9 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
The students at Oak Field Prep are a hard-charging, ambitious lot, and most of 
them have their sights set on nearby Stanford as their holy grail. When the admis-
sions officer tells them that a new policy means that only one student from their 
high school will be accepted, it’s game on for most of them. Not David, though, 
who’d rather go to Juilliard, despite his father’s dire warnings about how hard it is 
to make a living as an actor. His main concerns, then, are his audition for Juilliard 
and his troubles with his long-term girlfriend, Ellen, from whom he seems to be 
growing apart as he finds himself attracted to a new girl. When the audition tanks, 
and his relationship with Ellen falls apart, he starts to question who he really is 
apart from everyone else’s expectations of him. David’s angst takes him in some 
predictable directions, plotwise, and his character is one we’ve met, repeatedly, since 
Jerry Renault decided to disturb the universe in The Chocolate War. David’s story is 
nowhere near as dark as Jerry’s, however; he suffers and successfully endures some 
public humiliation, does some soul-searching, and miraculously lands at Stanford 
with one of those stunts that only works in books. Certainly, his questions about 
how to remain true to oneself in the face of conflicting desires and expectations 
from peers and parents are important ones, and they will ring true for many teens, 
120 • the bulletin
even ones who don’t have the moneyed support systems that these characters have. 
Readers looking for a strong follow-up with powerful themes similar to The Brothers 
Torres (BCCB 5/08) won’t find it here, but those who like to immerse themselves 
in romantic stories of privileged teen angst where everything works out okay will 
not be disappointed.  KC
wAtts, Jeri Kizzy Ann Stamps. Candlewick, 2012 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5895-3 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6200-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
This epistolary novel opens in the summer of 1963; Kizzy Ann Stamps is about 
to start attending the newly integrated public school and, at the suggestion of her 
long-time teacher at the black school, writes a letter of introduction to her new 
teacher, Miss Anderson. Kizzy continues to write Miss Anderson throughout the 
summer (and Miss Anderson writes her back, though those letters are referenced 
rather than included), and, when school starts, this correspondence continues in 
the form of a journal. This unusual format, in combination with Kizzy’s rather 
direct style (“I believe in telling the truth. So here it is: I don’t want to change to 
a white school. Just so you know. I don’t want to”), works well in giving voice to 
Kizzy’s character, a girl who, as an African-American child living in mid-century 
rural Virginia, ordinarily would not have the opportunity to tell a white woman 
exactly what she is thinking and feeling about the changing times. The novel is 
particularly strong at demonstrating how complicated the start of integration was for 
young people; while the schools were officially integrated, there were huge divides 
among the students, and tremendous inequality continued to permeate their school 
experience. The omnipresence of racism is also vividly depicted (when Kizzy hears 
about the assassination of JFK, she writes, “I hope no black man did this. I’m run-
ning home to my barn to hide, just in case”). Civil rights themes aside, this is also 
the story about Kizzy and her beloved dog Shag; in the end, this relationship adds 
to the integration themes as Kizzy works with a Scottish farmer to train her dog, 
assisted by the white neighbor boy. The novel gets a bit overambitious as multiple 
story elements are introduced to the central theme, but, for the most part, the 
epistolary format carries the central narrative as well as the many side stories. This 
would make an excellent readaloud for a civil rights unit and could also be used to 
explore historical points of view. An author’s note is included.  HM
wiley, MelissA The Prairie Thief; illus. by Erwin Madrid. McElderry, 
2012 216p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4056-2 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4058-6 $9.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Young Louisa Brody has a big problem: her widowed pa has just been arrested for 
robbery, thanks to their unpleasant neighbor Mr. Smirch, who discovered some 
of his family’s missing possessions in the Brodys’ old dugout. Louisa and Pa have 
no idea how their neighbors’ stuff (and some of their own) got into the dugout, 
but that mystery is solved when Louisa and her new friend, Jessamine, discover 
that a Scottish brownie named Mr. O’Gorsebush is responsible. Like the human 
residents of this rural Colorado community, the brownie is an immigrant, and he 
has been stockpiling the Brodys’ and Smirches’ possessions in an attempt to placate 
his absentee wife, who has been distraught since the death of Louisa’s mother. As 
OctOber 2012 • 121
a brownie, he also considers the items “payment” for his magical services rendered 
around the farms, unbeknownst to the Brodys or Smirches. Lousia soon realizes 
that she’s between a rock and a hard place, as she can only save her father by reveal-
ing the identity of the “thief,” which would be disastrous for Mr. O’Gorsebush. 
Luckily, some quick thinking and a sympathetic judge (whose housekeeper turns 
out to be Mr. O’Gorsebush’s missing wife) save the day, and Pa is exonerated 
while the brownies’ secret is kept safe. Frontier fiction and folkloric fantasy are an 
unusual combination, but they actually blend remarkably well here, and Wiley 
does a fine job of staying true to the pioneer inflections of Louisa’s story while 
effectively integrating the magical brownies. Louisa is a strong and sympathetic 
heroine, and the sassy attitude of the brownies makes them good fun as well. The 
effective mashup of popular genres will make this a hit with a variety of readers, so 
try handing it to Little House fans and folktale-lovers alike. Occasional full-page 
black and white illustrations are a little dark and muddy, but their painterly style 
adds depth to the whimsy.  JH
willeMs, Mo Goldilocks and the Three Dinosaurs; written and illus. by Mo Wil-
lems. Balzer + Bray, 2012 34p
ISBN 978-0-06-210418-2 $17.99  
R Gr. 2-4 
Three dinosaurs (Papa, Mama, and “some other Dinosaur who happened to be 
visiting from Norway”) leave out three tempting bowls of chocolate pudding while 
they go “Someplace Else” (they “were definitely not hiding in the woods waiting for 
some unsuspecting kid to come by”). Along comes Goldilocks (a dead ringer for 
Trixie from the Knuffle Bunny books), who promptly enters the Dinosaurs’ house 
and gobbles up all the pudding, even that which is too hot and too cold “because, 
hey, it’s chocolate pudding, right?” She is just checking out the beds when she 
happens to overhear the Dinosaurs gloating outside the window: “DELICIOUS 
CHOCOLATE-FILLED-LITTLE GIRL-BONBONS ARE YUMMIER WHEN 
THEY’RE RESTED!” No dummy, Goldilocks skedaddles out the back door leaving 
the Dinosaurs sadly disappointed. A helpful moral instructs that “if you ever find 
yourself in the wrong story, leave,” while the Dinosaurs’ moral is “Lock the back 
door!” Master of absurdity Willems knows just how to turn a classic on its ear, and 
he does so here with considerable wit. The narrator’s straight-faced insistence that 
the Dinosaurs are on the up and up—when they are clearly not—will be a hit with 
kids who have recently discovered irony, and the numerous humorous illustrative 
details will also provoke plenty of giggles. The Pigeon’s appearance in a few places 
and the endpapers in which a plethora of alternate titles are considered and crossed 
out will also inspire careful and repeated viewing. Adults determined to get more 
educational mileage out of this might pair it with Trivizas’ The Three Little Wolves 
and the Big Bad Pig (BCCB 9/93) for a fractured fairytale fest or use it to inspire 
kids to write their own folktale parodies.  JH
williAMs, MArciA, ad. The Elephant’s Friend and Other Tales from Ancient India; 
ad. and illus. by Marcia Williams. Candlewick, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5916-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
After last year’s exploration of Ancient Egypt (BCCB 9/11), Williams now turns her 
comic-panel-style treatment to stories from ancient India. This illustrated volume 
includes eight animal folktales recounted in the author-illustrator’s characteristic 
122 • the bulletin
style, with the simple, direct narrative enhanced with with humor-laced dialogue, 
asides, and quips in speech balloons. The stories, which range from two to six pages, 
generally offer some type of lesson or moral (“The Talkative Tortoise” warns of the 
dangers of talking too much, “The Foolish Lion” recounts that wit is often more 
powerful than might), though in some stories the morals are more ambiguous (as in 
the titular “The Elephant’s Head,” where the conclusion is merely that friends don’t 
like to be separated). The illustrations, employing a vibrant, hot-pink-dominated 
palette, are rendered in gouache and ink; Indian-style patterns texture backgrounds 
and borders. Elements of visual humor are scattered throughout, and readers will 
enjoy seeking out the finer funny details. For those not yet ready for Arni’s Sita’s 
Ramayana (BCCB 12/11) and other more sophisticated works, this will be an ac-
cessible introduction to Indian folklore. While promotional material indicates that 
the stories are drawn from Hitopadesha Tales, Jataka Tales, and Panchantra Tales, 
no source notes are included.  HM 
zAdoff, Allen Since You Left Me. Egmont, 2012 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-296-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-297-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
When Sanskrit’s flaky mother forgets to show up for a parent/teacher conference 
yet again, he makes up a story that she has been in a terrible car accident and is 
hanging on by a thread. The tight-knit Jewish community of the school immedi-
ately rallies to his side, forgiving his substandard academic performance and his 
reluctance to participate in any religious observances. Truth be told, Sanskrit is 
only going to the prestigious Jewish school so that he can get the trust fund left to 
him by his grandfather, who made a Jewish education a condition of his bequest. 
Sanskrit persists in his lie, managing to keep his mother from finding out while 
his teachers and classmates organize a fundraiser on his behalf. Sanskrit’s voice is 
funny and irreverent as he tries to sort out the complicated relationships in his life 
and decide what he believes in the midst of so many conflicting voices. The premise 
of the book strains credulity, however, as Sanskrit’s lie remains undiscovered until 
the most inconvenient moment, despite the set-up of a school that prides itself on 
the involvement of the entire family. While this could be read as part of a larger 
theme of the hypocrisy Sanskrit finds everywhere he turns, it seems more like overly 
convenient plotting. Still, many truth-seekers will find their questions echoed in 
Sanskrit’s turbulent and exasperated angst.  KC
OctOber 2012 • 123
knuth, reBeccA Children’s Literature and British Identity: Imagining a People and 
a Nation. Scarecrow Press, 2012 209p 
ISBN 978-0-8108-8516-5 $75.00
Analyzing the works of a myriad British authors including J.M. Barrie, Lewis Car-
roll, Charles Dickens, and J.K Rowling, Knuth (LIS professor at the University of 
Hawaii) explores the impact of children’s literature on the shaping of a national 
identity and how children’s books act to normalize social mores and foster national 
unity. Her research covers nearly two and half centuries of British literature and 
history, from the beginnings of books published especially for young people in the 
eighteenth century to modern Harry Potter phenomenon. An extensive bibliography 
and index are both provided.  KQG
McgAvrAn, JAMes holt, Jr., ed. Time of Beauty, Time of Fear: The Romantic 
Legacy in the Literature of Childhood. University of Iowa Press, 2012 237p
ISBN 978-1-60938-100-4 $39.95
Tracing the development of the Romantic notion of the child and childhood in 
Western literature, this collection of essays examines specific texts from three liter-
ary eras: Romantic, Victorian, and modern/postmodern. Contributors include 
familiar names such as Roderick McGillis, Jan Susina, and Claudia Mills (also well 
known as an author of children’s literature), while topics range from the impact of 
Wordsworth on early children’s literature to the contradictory moral standards for 
the Victorian child depending on gender to the influence of Rousseau’s Emile on 
modern homeschooling practices. Each essay concludes with works cited, and an 
overall index is provided.  KQG
Blowing our own horn DeparTmenT:
Mcdowell, kAte “Oh the Places We’ve Been!: The Roots of Evaluation in Youth 
Services, 1882-1930.” Children and Libraries 10.2 (Summer 2012)
GSLIS professor, CCB affiliate, and former Bulletin reviewer Kate McDowell 
presents the work of nineteenth-century librarians who created the earliest national 
standards for children’s librarianship by systematically using survey methods to un-
derstand the emerging field. Her research aims to understand the accomplishments 
of the past and connect it to the challenge of documenting and communicating 
the worth of the work done by youth services librarians in the present day and in 
the future.  KQG
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
124  •  The BulleTin
Activism–fiction: Magoon
Actors and acting–fiction: Calin
Adventure: Gagnon; Krokos; 
Lloyd; Milford; Oliver; vande 
velde
African Americans: Fradin
African Americans–fiction: Amateau; 
Magoon; Pearsall; Watts
African Americans–stories: rockliff
Alaska–fiction: Bania
Alcoholism–fiction: Luedeke
Amish–fiction: Bickle; Grossman
Amnesia–fiction: Krokos
Angels–fiction: ee
Animals: Kehret 
Animals–fiction: Burks
Animals–stories: Hood Spike; Mack
BedtiMe stOries: Hest; 
schwartz
Behavior–stories: Calmenson; Gidali
BiOGrAPHies: Allegra; Fradin; 
Gherman; Malaspina; rumford
Biology: newquist
Biracial people–fiction: rivers
Birds–stories: Best
Blood: newquist 
Books and reading: rumford
Boredom–stories: Black 
Brothers–fiction: Briant; Giff
Brothers and sisters–fiction: den-
nard; Hayles; Long; Oliver; Pat-
terson; Phillips; Pitcher
Brothers and sisters–stories: Hood 
Boo
Brownies–fiction: Wiley
Careers–fiction: voorhees
Carrots–stories: reynolds
Chickens–stories: Oxley
Christmas–fiction: Platt
Civil rights movement–fiction: Man-
zano; Watts
Clothing–poetry: Hoberman
COuntinG BOOKs: Baker; 
Oxley
Cowboys–stories: thomas
Crime and criminals–fiction: Bray; 
Briant; Gagnon; Hogan; Luedeke; 
Patterson; Petty; Phillips
Curses–fiction: Brennan; Fama
dancers and dance–fiction: rubin
death–fiction: MacLachlan; Mur-
phy; Pitcher
demons–fiction: Marr
depression–fiction: Bauer
deteCtive stOries: Levinthal
diaries–fiction: Blume 
dinosaurs–fiction: Willems
disasters–fiction: Morel
dogs–fiction: Bauer; Bigelow; Key; 
Lean 
dogs–stories: Bliss; Hest
dragons–stories: Joosse
dreams–fiction: Coville 
ducks–fiction: McKay
dystopias–fiction: Aguirre; ee; Lloyd
eating disorders–fiction: sanchez; 
sheinmel
enemies–fiction: Han
ePistOLAry FiCtiOn: Blume; 
Watts
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPs 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
OcTOBer 2012  •  125
esP–fiction: Bray; Brennan; George
Ethics and values: Aguirre; Banks; 
Bickle; Branford; durst; Gross-
man; Jackson; Kehret; Luedeke; 
Magoon; Malaspina; voorhees
Fairies–fiction: Long; Marillier
Faith–fiction: durst
Families–fiction: Airgood; Bran-
ford; Cameron; Giff; Heiligman; 
Hogan; Jackson; Key; King; 
MacLachlan; Manzano; Platt; 
sanchez; schmidt; stout
FAntAsy: Barnes; durst; ee; Fama; 
Harvey; Kristoff; Loftin; Long; 
Maas; Marillier; Marr; Milford; 
Oliver; selfors; Wiley
Farms–fiction: Key
Fathers–fiction: Marr; Pearsall
Fear–fiction: Coville
Fear–stories: Hood Boo; thomas
Floods–fiction: Bania
FOLKtALes And FAiry tALes: 
Loftin; Willems; Williams
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: 
Levinthal
Food and eating–stories: reynolds
Foster care–fiction: Bauer
Friends–fiction: Airgood; Bell; Big-
elow; Han; King; Loftin; Milford; 
Murphy; Pitcher; rivers; ross; 
sheinmel
Friends–stories: Joosse; Mack
Frontier life–fiction: Wiley
Future–fiction: Lloyd
Games–fiction: vande velde
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Bigelow; 
Calin; Jackson; King
Gays and lesbians–poetry: newman 
Ghosts–fiction: Hogan; Mcnamee
Ghosts–stories: Landry
Gods and goddesses–fiction: durst
GOtHiC FiCtiOn: Brennan; 
Cameron
Grandparents–fiction: stout
Grandparents–stories: Mackintosh
GrAPHiC nOveLs: Burks; Petty
Grief–fiction: Lean; Morel; Pitcher; 
schmidt
Grief–poetry: newman
Halloween–stories: Hood Boo; Landry
HistOriCAL FiCtiOn: Ama-
teau; Bray; Cameron; MacLach-
lan; Magoon; Manzano; Mobley; 
Pearsall; Petty; Platt; rubin; Watts
History, U.S.: Allegra; Gherman; 
Malaspina
History, world: rumford
HOrrOr: Beaudoin; Brennan; 
Hubbard
HuMOr: Baker; Beaudoin; Black; 
Bliss; Briant; Buckley; Burks; 
Calmenson; Giff; Hood Spike; 
Landry; Levinthal; Lodge; Mack; 
Mackintosh; Oxley; reynolds; 
stout; thomas; Willems; Zadoff
identity–fiction: King
illness–fiction: Murphy
imaginary creatures–fiction: Blume
imagination–stories: Black; Gidali
immigrants–fiction: Mobley
india–folklore: Williams
inventors: rumford
Japan–fiction: Kristoff
Jews–fiction: Heiligman; Zadoff
Language arts: Fletcher
Latinos–fiction: Manzano
Lies–fiction: Zadoff
Literature, American: Burleigh; 
Fradin
Literature, children’s: MacLachlan
Lizards–stories: Hood Spike
Magic–fiction: Marillier; schlitz; 
selfors
Mathematics: Oxley
Memory–fiction: Phillips
Mermaids–fiction: Fama
Miners–fiction: Mobley
Monsters–fiction: Coville
Monsters–stories: Lodge
Mothers: Gherman
Mothers–fiction: Bauer; Lean
Mothers–stories: Gidali; rockliff
Museums–stories: Bliss
Music and musicians–fiction: Briant; 
Long
Mysteries: Briant; dennard; 
Hubbard; Patterson; Phillips; 
stout
126  •  The BulleTin
natural disasters–fiction: Bania
Nature study: Goldstone; Kehret; 
Kelsey; Parker
new york City–fiction: Milford
night–stories: schwartz
nursery rHyMes: Mathers
Oceans–fiction: Bodeen
Orphans–fiction: schlitz
Paleontology–fiction: Blume 
Parents–stories: Harvey
Pets–stories: Best; Harvey; Hest
POetry: Mathers; newman
POP-uP BOOKs: Lodge
Prejudice–fiction: Pitcher
Presidents: Gherman
Puppets–fiction: schlitz 
rabbits–fiction: Bell; Burleigh; reyn-
olds
racism–fiction: Watts
Reading aloud: Branford; newquist; 
sheinkin
Reading, advanced: ross
Reading, beginning: Mack; Willems
Reading, easy: Bell; Branford; Buck-
ley; McKay
relationships–fiction: Bigelow; Calin; 
Hubbard; Jackson; Luedeke; san-
chez; sheinmel
Religious studies: Grossman
revenge–fiction: Han
rHyMinG stOries: Baker; 
Burleigh; Hoberman; Hood Boo; 
Joosse; Lodge
robots–fiction: Bell
romance–fiction: Brennan; Cameron; 
Grossman; Maas; Marr; selfors
royalty–fiction: selfors
runaways–fiction: MacLachlan
sAtire: Levinthal
school–fiction: Airgood; Grossman; 
Han; Loftin; McKay; Murphy; riv-
ers; ross; voorhees; Watts; Zadoff
school–stories: Calmenson; Mackin-
tosh
sCienCe FiCtiOn: Aguirre; 
Gagnon; Krokos; schmidt; vande 
velde
Science: Goldstone; Kelsey; newquist; 
Parker; sheinkin
seasons: Goldstone
secrets–fiction: George; Heiligman
sHOrt stOries: Barnes; strahan
siblings–fiction: Coville
sisters–fiction: vande velde
slavery–fiction: Amateau
spies and spying: sheinkin
stars: Kelsey; Parker
steAMPunK: Kristoff
Storytime: Baker; Calmenson
suicide–fiction: Morel
suPernAturAL stOries: Bray; 
George; Hogan; Mcnamee; Mil-
ford; rosati
survivAL stOries: Bodeen; 
Morel
susPense: Gagnon; George; Hogan; 
Hubbard; Milford; rosati
thanksgiving: Allegra
toddlers–stories: Buckley
tuberculosis–fiction: Hayles 
twins–fiction: Giff; Pitcher
uncles–fiction: Cameron
vampires–fiction: Bickle
voyages and travel–fiction: Banks; 
Blume; Bodeen; Burks; Marillier
voyages and travel–stories: Burleigh
Weather–fiction: Morel 
Westerns: Petty
Wishes–fiction: Mobley
Witches–fiction: Marr; strahan
Women’s studies: Allegra; Gherman; 
Malaspina
Work–stories: rockliff
World War ii: sheinkin
World War ii–fiction: Pearsall
Writers and writing–stories: Burleigh
Writers and writing: Fletcher; Fradin
Zombies–fiction: Beaudoin; dennard
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Published by  
Th e Johns hopkins University press
exploring literature 
for children.
David L. russell, Ferris sTaTe UniversiTy; karin e. 
Westman and naomi J. Wood, Kansas sTaTe UniversiTy, 
Editors 
The Lion and the Unicorn, an international theme- and 
genre-centered journal, is committed to a serious, 
ongoing discussion of literature for children. The 
journal’s coverage includes the state of the publishing 
industry, regional authors, comparative studies of 
significant books and genres, new developments 
in theory, the art of illustration, the mass media, 
and popular culture. It is especially noted for its 
interviews with authors, editors, and other important 
contributors to the field, as well as its outstanding 
book review section. 
Published three times a year in January, April, and September. 
Volume 37 (2013). ISSN 0147-2593; E-ISSN 1080-6563.
the lion and the unicorn
a criTical joUrnal oF children’s liTeraTUre
annUal individUal sUbscripTions
$40.00 (print); $45.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbscripTions
$125.00 (print); $135.00 (online); 
$175.00 (print & online)
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde and Lydia Kokkola, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, 
E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
