ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
Z,
university or Illnois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
~*~i:
;I 
/1 
Lli: i~l 
I__ 
I_
*Jff-jff
.. ·
:I:;~-i
-::.:
* "None of the previous versions [of Lear's ballad] achieves
such a perfect match to the lighthearted nonsense as
Marshall's captivating, droll artwork. This nonsense verse
has delighted generations .. . Marshall has improved
on perfection."
-Starred review I School Library journal
* "Lear's pea-green boat sails again, this time with the
inimitable James Marshall at the helm [as] the famous
poem receives an irreverent, gently playful rendition."
-Starred review I The Horn Book
* "In true Marshall fashion, the artist lifts Lear's quirky duo
to new heights. It would be difficult to imagine a better
couple to set sail with than Marshall's Owl and Pussycat."
-Starred review I Publishers Weekly
All ages. 
$15.95TR (0-06-205010-9) * $15.89LB (0-06-205011-7)
Michael dl Capua Books * HarperCollins Publishers
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
June 1999
Vol. 52 No. 10
44
A LOOK INSIDE
341 THE BIG PICTURE
Tea with Milk written and illus. by Allen Say
342 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
344 * IfIt Doesn't Kill You by Margaret Bechard
349 * 26Fairmount Avenue written and illus. by Tomie dePaola
351 * When I Was Your Age, Volume Two: Original Stories about Growing Up
ed. by Amy Ehrlich
358 * One Two Three Jump! by Penelope Lively; illus. by Jan Ormerod
358 * Dolphin Luck by Hilary McKay
370 * Harry and Lulu by Arthur Yorinks; illus. by Martin Matje
371 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
372 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (JNH)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1999 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Allen Say from Tea with Milk ©1999. Used by permission of Houghton
Mifflin Company.
JUNE 1999 
* 341
THE BIG PICTURE
Tea with Milk
written and illus. by Allen Say
Writing a family history in a manner that interests anyone but blood relations is
surprisingly difficult; putting a family story into a picture-book format is even
more difficult, as picture books require an economy of form and style that is not
necessarily family-story friendly. Allen Say writes family stories for youth, tread-
ing the path of his family's past with a sure step, never slipping into the chasms of
nostalgia that yawn at his feet. A matter-of-fact tone and a certain severity of style
serve to discipline his unsentimental look at his family history, resulting in emo-
tionally resonant stories that are crisp and clean, yet not antiseptic.
Tea with Milk is a love story, and it is a love story in more ways than one.
It is the story of a young Japanese-American woman's love for her country; it is the
story of her parents' love for their country of origin; it is the story of how Say's own
parents met and fell in love; and it is the story of the love between a mother and
child in this son's tribute to his mother's life. The opening sepia-toned, snapshot-
like illustration shows a little girl dressed in her best clothes; behind the girl is the
door to her house where, peeking out from a small window, is the half-hidden face
of an observing adult. The accompanying text states: "From the window of her
room, the girl could see the city of San Francisco. She imagined that it was a city
of many palaces. And one day her father would take her there, he had promised,
riding on a paddle steamer across the shining bay." But the girl Masako's parents
are homesick, and, after she graduates from high school, they return to Japan.
Masako had planned to go to college and get her own apartment. In Japan, how-
ever, she goes back to high school to learn to speak Japanese, and she takes lessons
in flower arranging and calligraphy in order to become "a proper Japanese lady."
When her parents hire a matchmaker to find her a husband and arrange a mar-
riage, Masako realizes that, despite her Japanese parents, she is an "American daugh-
ter." She cannot adjust to the life her parents wish her to live so she moves to
Osaka, where, thanks to her excellent English, she gets a job guiding foreign busi-
nessmen around an exclusive department store. On one such tour, she meets
Joseph, the man who becomes her husband and the author's father.
From the title page illustration of the young Masako standing next to a
baby carriage with a blonde ringleted doll, Say renders his mother's struggle to
maintain her balance on the line between her two cultures with compassionate
insight. The loneliness of the uprooted Masako, her conflicting desires to please
her family and be true to herself, her courage in leavetaking, all are communicated
in a telling combination of words and pictures. The full-page watercolor illustra-
tions are thinly outlined in black with wide white borders, and the spare composi-
tions are elegantly balanced within their frames. The face of the main character
342 
* THE BULLETIN
articulates her changing emotions as her solitary figure stands isolated and apart in
several of the spreads. The faces in the crowds are integral to the action of the
scene; every now and then a character will look out from the pages, seemingly
directly at the viewer, further drawing the reader into Masako's environment. The
illustrations have a translucent, light-infused quality, illuminating both setting and
characters with unremitting honesty. The backgrounds, whether busy street-scenes
or the palatial store interior, serve as uncluttered settings for the story's characters.
There have been several generations of family stories in picture book
format over the last several years; their apparent aim has been to contribute to a
sense of personal and family history, to give young readers and listeners a sense of
where they come from so as to provide them with a sense of where they might go.
Unfortunately, many such books are nostalgia pieces for adults, memory anec-
dotes that require the reader to bring a certain amount of regret or longing for days
gone by to the story in order to appreciate the experience. Say has a gift for de-
scriptive prose that effectively communicates the emotional nuances of his family
stories; that gift lifts his stories above nostalgia and invites young listeners and
readers to an understanding of the passage of time, the impact of distance. Open-
ing with a snapshot-like illustration of Masako and closing with a photorealistic
portrait of his parents, Say's respectful tribute comes full circle, ending with a
gratifying sense of something well-considered and finally understood. (Imprint
information appears on p. 364.)
JaniceM. Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. 
The Babe & I; illus. by Terry Widener. 
Gulliver/Harcourt,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-201378-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
With so promising a title, one might expect a reprise of Adler's Lou Gehrig: The
Luckiest Man (BCCB 4/97), focusing now on Lou Gehrig's stellar teammate, Babe
Ruth. But the Sultan of Swat remains pretty much in the literary dugout in this
earnest but rambling tale of a Depression Era newsie who capitalizes on the Babe's
exploits to keep sales moving briskly. Ruth makes a cameo appearance, flipping
the boy a five-dollar bill for a two-cent paper, thus enabling his young fan to buy a
ticket to a Yankees game and see the hero in action. Baseball action is secondary to
the family story here, as the boy tells of how he discovered his father selling apples
on a street corner and subsequently guarded his guilty secret. Widener's retro-
styled acrylic paintings, strongly reminiscent of his work in Lou Gehrig, cover the
same setting and era but highlight street corners and loading docks and domestic
interiors. Atmospheric street scenes evoke hardscrabble economic times, particu-
JUNE 1999 
* 343
larly Widener's views of Yankee Stadium, which rises like an enticing apparition,
barricaded by the steel piers of the elevated trains. It's a vivid picture of the era,
but if the audience wants a lot more period baseball and a lot less period sentiment,
hand them a copy of Robert Burleigh's book on Ruth, Home Run (BCCB 9/98).
EB
Avi Abigail Takes the Wheel; illus. by Don Bolognese. 
HarperCollins,
1999 
64p 
(I Can Read Chapter Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027663-0 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027662-2 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Abigail is an old hand on her father's freight boat, the Neptune, which plies the
waters between the family's New Jersey home and the New York harbor. On an
ordinary boat-trip to school, the Neptune assists a wounded three-master by giving
her a tow, which requires Abigail's father to handle the towed boat while his first
mate handles the Neptune. First Mate Mr. Oliver falls ill, however, and it sud-
denly becomes Abigail's job to take the Neptune into the busy port without harm-
ing her or the vessel she tows. The text is easy and adventurous, with an appealing
capable heroine and nautical twist. An author's note states that he based the book
on a story from an 1881 St. Nicholas, and it has an old-fashioned flair appropriate
to that old classic; Avi has also managed to keep the events in their original period
without cluttering them up with self-consciousness about that era's since becom-
ing history. Bolognese's line-and-watercolor art is a bit blandly overtidy, especially
in the human figures, but his line-festooned ships and sharp bows slicing through
the green waves convey the milieu effectively. Readers who wish they were ready
for The True Confessions of Charlotte Doyle will find this a pleasing stand-in. DS
BARTOLETTI, SUSAN 
No Man's Land: A Young Soldier's Story. 
Blue Sky/Scho-
lastic, 1999 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-590-38371-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Thrasher Magee, who seems destined to be a continual disappointment to his
father, freezes in fear when an alligator rears up in the Georgia swamp, and he
leaves his father to battle it and sustain all the injuries in their defense. Pushed by
his own depression and pulled by the temptation of battle glory, Thrasher lies his
way into the Confederate army and, with a handful of local men and boys, joins
the Okefinokee Rifles as they push their way into Virginia to reinforce Stonewall
Jackson's troops. A temporary truce between Yank and Reb foot soldiers allows
Thrasher to discover an uncomfortable sense of kinship with the enemy during an
impromptu baseball game, and he is more frightened than ever that putting a
"face" on his foe will seal his cowardice in battle. But after two months of forag-
ing, marching, road building, and burial duty, the Rifles are called into action and
Thrasher charges into the bloodshed at Gaines Mill near Richmond, losing his
cowardice, several comrades, and an arm in battle. There's nothing particularly
new about the boy-tests-his-courage plot line, but Bartoletti's scenes of camp life-
the long stretches of mundane duties and childish skylarking, with altogether too
much time in which to worry about one's adequacy-bring Thrasher's fears viv-
idly to life. Notes on the Shenandoah Valley campaign and a bibliography of
sources are included. Pair this with Paulsen's Soldier's Heart (BCCB 9/98) to view
the war from both sides of the line. EB
344 
* THE BULLETIN
BAUER,JOAN 
Backwater. Putnam, 1999 
[2 24 p]
ISBN 0-399-23141-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
At sixteen, Ivy is keenly aware that her father expects her to join the Breedlove
tradition of lawyering and equally keenly aware that she doesn't want to-she's
much more interested in history, especially family history. To find it, she searches
for her black-sheep aunt, Josephine, who disappeared into the Adirondacks years
ago; with the help of an eccentric mountain guide Ivy finds Jo, now living in happy
wilderness seclusion amid clouds of birds, and attempts to convince her to contrib-
ute to Ivy's gathering of family history. This doesn't have the snappy originality of
Bauer's other literary conceptions (Rules of the Road, BCCB 2/98, etc.), and the
wilderness-rescue climax (Ivy drags her injured aunt to safety on a sled) tips into
cliche, but Bauer's crisp dialogue and engaging characterization still makes the
enterprise a satisfying read. There's a particular pleasure in the female-slanted
overtones of Gary Paulsen here as Ivy accustoms herself to life on the mountain
and tries to find her own role in the family continuum. Readers looking for wil-
derness stories with a wiseacre edge will, along with fans of the author's other
works, appreciate Ivy's travails. DS
BECHARD, MARGARET 
Iflt Doesn't Kill You. 
Viking, 1999 
[176p]
ISBN 0-670-88547-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Ben's an up-and-coming jock, ready to follow in his father's varsity football foot-
steps; the upperclassmen are already starting to include him in hallway goofing-
around and locker-room gossip/lies. Underneath it all, however, Ben's afraid: his
sports-hero father came out six months ago and is living with a boyfriend across
town, and Ben worries what people will think if they find out and what it all means
to him. His identity crisis is complicated by Chynna, a new neighbor who's also
struggling to define herself and who sees Ben as an inside track to the star quarter-
back she's pinned her hopes on attracting. Bechard has a good ear for the rhythms
of high-school dialogue, and her understated style suits her story well. There's also
a realistic absence of cheap binaries here: the girl next door isn't a prospective
girlfriend but she's not a pal, either; the star quarterback is kind of a jerk but not as
much as you think he's going to be; Ben's father is a good enough guy but he has
also weaseled out of telling his own mother the truth about his marriage. Ben's
gradual reconciliation to the change in his family isn't unexpected, but it's also not
forced, and there's an effective imaginative twist in its realization (a rescue from a
difficult situation is performed not by Dad but by Dad's boyfriend, Keith, who
promises not to tell either of Ben's parents). No mere problem novel, this displays
an understanding of high-school pressures and yearnings that will draw young
teens surviving their own particular obstacles. DS
BLACKLOCK, DYAN 
Pankration: The Ultimate Game. Whitman, 1999 
192p
ISBN 0-8075-6323-4 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
As fifth-century-B.c. Athens succumbs to a virulent plague, Nic is abruptly packed
off with a family slave to the distant home of a distant relative. The first day on
board ship the boy is befriended by Gellius, the ship's captain and an Olympic
hopeful training to compete in the pankration (a brutal bare-fisted, no-holds barred,
one-on-one event), but Nic never sees the second day of his voyage. Pirates raid
JUNE 1999 
* 345
the ship, mauling Gellius and leaving him for dead, and selling Nic into slavery
somewhere on the Italian peninsula. Goat herding on the rugged mountain slopes
toughens the once-privileged boy, who eventually seizes the opportunity to escape
and makes his way back to Greece in time for the Games, where he is certain he
will find Gellius alive and poised for victory. Kid-pleasing adventure-story staples
abound-pirates and thieves, treacherous fellow slaves and wild beasts-repack-
aged here in Grecian trappings. But Blacklock manages to raise the tale beyond
simple costume drama by ably incorporating details of lifestyle, terrain, and of
course the Olympic Games themselves without a hint of the history-is-good-for-
you didacticism that too often encumbers historical fiction. Good guys are victo-
rious, villains are punished, an Olympic scandal is resolved, a whiff of love is in the
air for Gellius, and the final scene is set for a reunion at the next Games (and a
possible sequel?). And that's about as satisfying as it gets. EB
BODETT, TOM 
Williwaw! Knopf, 1999 
192p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99030-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89030-0 $16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
September and her younger brother, Ivan, live out in the Alaskan bush, and they're
on their own for days at a time when their father works crew on a fishing boat.
This time there's trouble, however, when videogame-mad Ivan connects to the
radios to power his obsessive playing and thereby shorts out their only means of
contact with the outside world. The kids pile further sins upon the original, dis-
obeying direct parental orders and taking their skiff fourteen miles across the bay
into town to get the equipment fixed before their father tries to call them on radios
that no longer work. Unfortunately, on the trip to pick up the radios, the unac-
customed pleasures of town social life distract September and Ivan from weather-
watching, and they dash to get home before a storm catches them on the water-and
they miscalculate. There are some stock components here-the tragic figure of
the kids' dead mother, the mean neighbor who eventually proves kindly, the jolly
old salt of a mailboat captain-but Bodett's attention to Alaskan detail and the
story's effectively suspenseful undertone keep the book fresh nonetheless. Particu-
larly memorable is the inexorable portrayal of September and Ivan as they, in their
attempt merely to avoid staying with a disliked aunt, get themselves farther and
farther in over their heads; the climactic storm sequence, though dramatically dan-
gerous, is merely the culmination of the siblings' unknowing downhill slide. The
depiction of a life alien to most young readers and the address of the problems of
wilderness hubris make this a pleasing variant on the survival story that will gratify
young Paulsen fans and outdoor dreamers. DS
BORDEN, LOUISE 
Good Luck, Mrs. K!; illus. by Adam Gustavson. 
McElderry,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82147-6 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Mrs. Kempczinski (who mercifully offers her third-graders the alternative of "Mrs.
K.") is a charismatic teacher, adored by her students ("When Mrs. K. let me take
Olga, the class guinea pig, out of her cage and hold her in my hands, I figured third
grade was going to be my best grade yet"). Her emphasis on imagination and
exploration invigorates the class, which watches in awe as Mrs. K. produces worm
earrings ("'It's the third grade way,' said Mrs. K.") and homework dances. Then a
substitute appears and the class receives the bad news: Mrs. K. is in the hospital
346 
* THE BULLETIN
with cancer and Mrs. Dodd will be teaching the rest of the year. While the narrow
topic doesn't really lend itself to pleasure reading or extrapolation to other situa-
tions, Borden's brisk specificity lifts the situation above pat bibliotherapy and pro-
vides a believable portrait of an inspiring teacher. Gustavson's watercolors are as
solid as acrylic, giving the figures a hearty angularity (though the faces tend to
resemble one another) that conveys high-level classroom energy. Readers will be
as happy as the narrator when, at the end of the year, Mrs. K. makes a special
appearance to the classroom chants of "Mrs. K.'s back!" DS
BRAUN, TRUDI 
My Goose Betsy; illus. by John Bendall-Brunello. 
Candlewick,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-0449-6 
$16.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Through spare but lyrical text and friendly, playful art, we are introduced to Betsy,
the young narrator's beloved pet. Braun begins the story with Betsy's physical
description ("My goose Betsy has smooth soft feathers to keep her warm and dry,
wide webby feet to swim with, and a long strong beak for tearing at grass or peck-
ing up corn") and moves on to how she walks ("a stately waddle") and talks ("with
a squawk, or a honk, or a hiss"). Betsy also becomes a mother goose, readying a
nest, laying her eggs, and keeping them warm ("Day after day, she sits very still in
the quiet dark goose house"). Bendall-Brunello's colored pencil and watercolor
art, with its muted yellows, greens, and browns shaded with gentle crosshatching,
complements the cozy text while a plethora of motion lines and the expressive
mama and goslings enhance the narrative. Emerging readers will appreciate the
"goose facts" and accessible index that follow the story. However, the book will be
equally appealing for.boisterous storytimes filled with plenty of squawking and
honking. EAB
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
The Landry News; illus. by Salvatore Murdocca. 
Simon,
1999 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-689-81817-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
New girl Cara Landry yearns to be a journalist, and she takes her opportunity in a
little number she calls The Landry News, in which her editorial accurately points
out that fifth-grade teacher Mr. Larson's "open classroom" is really just a cover for
teacher burnout that leaves him reading the newspaper while students do as they
please. Initially angry, Mr. Larson concedes the justice of Cara's opinion and
backs Cara's paper, encouraging future issues and the expansion of the periodical.
Soon, however, the school principal, suspicious of the project and eager for a rea-
son to dispose of the insufficiently doctrinaire Mr. Larson, demands the closure of
The Landry News, and the classroom finds itself involved in a free-speech contro-
versy. The book starts out with a rather different slant on the old school-newspa-
per plot, with Cara having a history of vindictive journalism and Mr. Larson
sympathetic in his ambivalence between disaffection and dedication. The story
turns fairly predictable, however, when it becomes students vs. the Establishment
and all the class bands together to support their teacher in a school-meeting show-
down; the ostensible cause of the flap is too obviously lame, and Mr. Larson's
complete conversion to inspiring teacher is more convenient than credible. It's
ndnetheless a particularly accessible approach to a challenging issue, and young
Ben Bradlees will get swept up in the drama. DS
JUNE 1999 
* 347
CONFORD, ELLEN 
Diary ofa Monster's Son; illus. by Tom Newsom. 
Little,
1999 
76p
ISBN 0-316-15245-5 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Bradley's dad is a monster (the kind with fangs, claws, and hair, lots and lots of
hair), and young Bradley is very, very fond of him. Conford's premise is silly but
her execution is just dandy as she depicts a loving (if furry) single father raising his
only son. Mr. Fentriss does all the usual parental jobs like taking Bradley shop-
ping for school clothes, going to school on parent-teacher night, and attempting to
fix a huge hole in the ceiling (he gives up and they go spend the night in a motel),
but there is a slight edge added with the knowledge that Mr. Fentriss is a hairy
monster with a tendency to pop his shirt buttons that makes this funnier than
average family fare. Amidst the jocularity there are moments of real tenderness,
allowing readers a glimpse of the loss both Bradley and his father feel at the ab-
sence of Bradley's mother. Bradley, who narrates in diary form, is a realistic wise-
acre of a kid, and Conford unerringly captures the tone of a mischievous
grade-schooler who idolizes his dad, unaware that his unusual father is cause for
any consternation. Newsom's black-and-white drawings depict a cheerfully ram-
bunctious cast of characters, only hinting at Bradley's largely unseen dad with
glimpses of a hairy arm here and clawed fingers there. Bradley has a matter-of-fact,
natural way of narrating the unnatural that is sure to keep readers giggling along
with the outrageous and consistent silliness. JMD
CRIST-EVANS, CRAIG 
Moon over Tennessee: A Boy's Civil War Journal; illus. by
Bonnie Christensen. 
Houghton, 1999 
[64p]
ISBN 0-395-91208-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
While other literary boy heroes lie, cheat, and connive their way into the Reb or
Yank ranks, the narrator of this free-verse poem stoically follows his father from
their Tennessee farm into the heat of Lee's campaign in order to tend the horses
and make camp. At Gettysburg the father takes a fatal shot in full view of his son:
"This morning, while the soldiers fought their last retreat,/ I saw him stand up in
the meadow down by the bloody creek./ He stood and spun as if someone had
punched him in the face./ When I got to him, he couldn't say my name." The
boy must then make the wearying trip back to Tennessee, to break the news to his
mother and try to rebuild their lives. The narrator's undeniably poignant observa-
tions lose some of their impact through the unvarying tone of the verses: groom-
ing a horse, reminiscing about friendships, chatting about home with a young
soldier, and waiting for a beloved father to emerge from a bloody battle pass at the
same measured pace. Still, Crist-Evans offers potent imagery that quietly rivals the
other novelists' more graphically detailed scenes: "I've never heard/ that kind of
wailing, like the dead, the way the preacher/ says they're screaming down in hell."
Full-page wood engravings punctuate the text, and a map and concluding note on
the Confederate campaign are included. EB
DALY, NIa Jamela's Dress; written and illus. by Niki Daly. 
Farrar, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-33667-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Jamela loves the material Mama has picked out to make herself a dress for a wed-
ding, so much so that after Mama washes it and hangs it on the line to dry, Jamela
348 
* 
THE BULLETIN
wraps herself in its soft folds. Down the street she goes in her mother's red high
heels, the beautiful material trailing behind her like a train while the neighbor-
hood children sing "Kwela Jamela African Queen!" Archie the photographer dashes
out of his studio to take a photo of the queenly Jamela and her entourage, and all
is right with the world, until Mama sees what Jamela has done with her new dress
material: "Everyone felt sorry for Mama and cross with Jamela. Even Jamela was
cross with Jamela." Archie shows Jamela his prize-winning photo of Kwela Jamela
African Queen on the front page of the paper; when Jamela tells him about the
ruined material he replaces it with his prize money, and both Jamela and her mama
go to the wedding in style. Daly's tale is set in a South African town, but the story
of a little girl getting carried away by her make-believe games is a universal one.
The watercolors are a happy combination of color and movement that bring to life
the sights and scenes of the busy streets ofJamela's town. The characters are lively
and emotive, their faces alight with the good cheer engendered by Jamela's mas-
querade-parade down the street. Nguni words and phrases, spoken within the
text, are artfully explained in context. Daly's delivery plays out the suspense, and
even as listeners delight in Jamela's make-believe, they will know that the "uh-oh!"
moment is coming. With its rising pace and strong narrative, Jamela's story is a
joyful evocation of community and family that will be a storytime hit-just make
sure you have enough material for your own parade. JMD
DANIELS, TERI 
The Feet in the Gym; illus. by Travis Foster. 
Winslow,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 1-890817-12-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Any child who has watched the school maintenance staff go through their paces
will sympathize with the plight of Handy Bob, the custodian with the unenviable
task of keeping the gym floor gleaming: "At Lakeside School I work each day/ to
wipe each dab of dirt away./ I search for bits of grit and grime,/ specks of mud and
drops of slime." You can be sure he finds plenty of it-a Brownie troop trails
cookie crumbs across the floor, the soccer team tracks in dirt and grass, the art class
drips paint, and a horde of second graders swirls the debris into a janitor's worst
nightmare. Along comes the Lakeside marching band to save the day: "Joy of
joys! My lucky day!/ The children marched the mess away!/ No need to mop the
gym at all./ The floor is clean from wall to wall." Except, that is, for the footprints
left across the final spread by Handy Bob himself. The rhyming text rapidly reaches
the maximum limit for sing-song rhythms, and the cartoony illustrations (featur-
ing smiling, pop-eyed children marching in Stepford order across the pages) gets a
little repetitious. Young listeners probably won't be troubled by these details,
though, and will recognize in Foster's square-chinned, broad-shouldered, proudly
smiling Handy Bob the very figure of their own school's Prince of the Physical
Plant. EB
DEMI 
Kites: Magic Wishes That Fly Up to the Sky; written and illus. by
Demi. Crown, 1999 
36p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-80050-0 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-80049-7 
$17.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
In brilliant colors and on spacious double-page spreads Demi depicts the origin of
the Chinese holiday Ch'ing Yang or The Double Ninth Festival, a festival of kites
JUNE 1999 
* 349
that takes place on September 9, the ninth day of the ninth month. Long ago in
China religious devotees would go to a painter of holy pictures in order to "buy his
pictures and offer them in the temple to their gods.... If someone wanted peace,
he would offer a picture of the peaceful Buddha. If somebody had bad eyesight
and wanted good eyesight, he would offer a picture of himself without his glasses
on." One day a woman requested a picture of a dragon, "a symbol of wealth,
wisdom, power and nobility," but instead of an ordinary holy picture she requested
the painting on a kite, in order to "fly it right up to the sky [so] the gods in heaven
will see it immediately." Soon everyone wanted kites for their wishes and prayers,
and, finally, Ch'ing Yang was born and is celebrated to this day. The kites are
what are important here, and Demi fills the pages with airily desirable kites in the
shapes of birds, insects, reptiles, fish, animals, flowers, gods, and symbols cap-
tioned with their attributes (pandas symbolize happiness, magpies bring joy, etc.).
There are some minor glitches-no dates are included so the time frame is fuzzy,
there are cases where the kites do not literally look like the creatures they are sup-
posed to represent (the mouse looks like a bat, the bumblebee looks like an elabo-
rate butterfly), and some kites are uncaptioned-but overall this is a celebratory
sort of book that is going to inspire some serious kite-making/kite-flying activities.
Four concluding pages with twelve step-by-step cartoon panels give instructions
on how to make a kite. JMD
DEPAOLA, TOMIE 
26 Fairmount Avenue; written and illus. by Tomie
dePaola 
Putnam, 1999 
[6 4p]
ISBN 0-399-23246-X 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Departing from picture books, dePaola here offers an autobiography of his life as a
young boy in Meriden, Connecticut. In nine short chapters, the author talks
about his family, his neighbors, and the excitement of building the new family
house at 26 Fairmount Avenue, where he spent his youth. The book brings events
and people to easy life, and the writing has an understated, unassuming rhythm.
An occasional tendency to fall into tonal sameness undercuts the pace, but the
black and white drawings break up the text and provide a glimpse into an affec-
tionate household full of jolly personalities. Illustrations show comfortably famil-
iar family members and friends amidst period hints like Mae West and Shirley
Temple movies, no-dial phones, and old-model cars. Readers who have enjoyed
dePaola's family stories in picture-book format will happily snuggle up for this
longer visit. JMD
DUNBAR, JOYCE 
The Bowl of Fruit; illus. by Helen Craig. 
Candlewick,
1999 
24p
ISBN 0-7636-0706-1 
$9.99 
R 3-6 yrs
Panda's New Toy; illus. by Helen Craig. 
Candlewick, 1999 
24p
ISBN 0-7636-0724-X 
$9.99 
R 
3-6 yrs
The Secret Friend; illus. by Helen Craig. 
Candlewick, 1999 
24p
ISBN 0-7636-0720-7 
$9.99 
R 
3-6 yrs
These three tales of friendship under pressure feature Panda-slightly greedy and
a bit devious-and his chum Gander-patient, and resilient to Panda's childish
efforts at duplicity. Fruit centers on Panda's attempt to get more than his fair
350 
* THE BULLETIN
portion of their snack of mixed fruit. As Gander patiently slices a pomegranate
and culls the sweet seeds, his friend wolfs down the rest of the fruit, save a few
cherries; Panda is then nonplused to learn that Gander is unwilling to go halvesies
on the hard-won pile of seeds. In New Toy, Panda is equally unwilling to share his
cup/string/ball toy and concocts every excuse imaginable why he should "just have
one last turn." Secret Friend turns the tables on Panda, as Gander teases him with
a mysterious, ornately decorated letter to an unknown addressee, who of course
turns out to be Panda himself. Dunbar has the sounds of preschool conflict down
pat, and listeners may well recall a time when similarly petty diatribes ("See if I
care"; "What about me?" "You've had lots of last turns") poured from their own
lips. (Readalone possibilities, eased by large typeface, make these books doubly
useful.) Printer's stock, subtly grained to resemble construction paper, provides an
apt backdrop against which these obviously inseparable cartoon friends wrangle
for juvenile justice. No need to append a moral here-children will know the rules
and be more than happy to inform Panda of them along the way. EB
EARE, SYLVA A. 
Dive!: My Adventures in the Deep Frontier. National Geo-
graphic, 1999 
[64p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-7144-0 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Marine biologist Earle takes readers on an unusual journey through the last unex-
plored earth frontier, the oceans of the world. From scuba to deep sea diving,
from operating special submersibles and maneuvering inside 1,000-pound dive
suits, she gives an underwater view of the ocean and its occupants. The scientist
explains her work as explorer and observer of oceans and ocean life in a style that
communicates her great love for the sea. Her writing has an enthusiastic quality
that will draw in readers as she describes living for two weeks in an underwater
ocean laboratory and discusses her dives into the darkest regions of the deepest sea.
The author gives her points of view regarding preservation of the oceans and ocean
life, what individuals can do to help preserve the oceans, and what she plans on
doing next. Arrangements of full-page and smaller photographs are a technicolor
invitation to browsing, and the lively combination of subjects (people, marine life,
equipment) is immediately intriguing. This is an insightful look at a scientist who
obviously has enormous passion for her work-use this title next time you're look-
ing for an unusual biography that will appeal to sea-lovers and landlubbers alike.
An index, glossary, timeline of ocean exploration, and a list of resource agencies are
included. JMD
EARLE, SYLVA A. 
Hello, Fish!: Visiting the Coral Reef; illus. with photographs by
Wolcott Henry. 
National Geographic, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-7922-7103-3 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Young readers are invited into an undersea world of fish and other marine life in
this photographic introduction to the coral reefs. Set in boxes against pale yellow
backgrounds dotted with violet fishy silhouettes, Earle's text is simply and suc-
cinctly informative: "You might think that a red fish would be easy to find in a
blue ocean. But against colorful sponges and corals, this scorpionfish blends right
in. His spiny fins are a good defense, but if you don't hurt him, he won't hurt
you." While the enlargements give some of the images a grainy texture, Henry's
superb color photographs ofmorays, brown gobys, sharks, damselfish, and others
JUNE 1999 
* 
351
are composed like portraits, providing a remarkably up-close look at a remarkable
variety of marine life. Both format and layout make this a strong nonfiction choice
for both reading aloud to groups and individual beginning readers; a map showing
the location of the world's coral reefs is included. JMD
EHRLICH, AMY, ed. 
When I Was Your Age, Volume Two: Original Stories about
Growing Up. 
Candlewick, 1999 
187p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7636-0407-0 
$16.99 
R Gr. 5-9
In this followup to volume one (BCCB 4/96), ten more authors tell stories about
childhood, moments where their movement towards adulthood and a different
kind of awareness was palpable. Judging by the authors' notes, there seems to be a
higher ratio of autobiography to fiction in this volume, whether it be in Jane Yolen's
story of her grandfather's death or Joseph Bruchac's tale of catching-and eventu-
ally releasing-a snapping turtle, and there's an effective variation in story tone.
Rita Williams-Garcia's "Food from the Outside" is a hilarious account of young
Rita's realization that, when untainted by her mother's cooking, food could be
genuinely tasty, and E. L. Konigsburg's "How I Lost My Station in Life" is a funny
and sympathetic account of her displacement as family baby. Karen Hesse's "Wait-
ing for Midnight," however, offers the harrowing image of her youthful exposure
to the abuse of the children next door ("I heard every cry they uttered, every rise of
panic, every whimper. Sleepless, I listened in my room, my bed pressed against the
common wall between our two houses"), and Kyoko Mori's "Learning to Swim" is
a compelling story of strength taught by a mother whose own weakness was soon
to become too much. Ultimately, this is an even stronger collection than the first
one; these stories will make prime browsing material, especially for readers pursu-
ing the work of their favorite writers, and they may also serve as a source of vivid
readalouds. DS
GEISERT, BONNIE 
River Town; illus. by Arthur Geisert. 
Lorraine/Houghton,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-395-90891-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
The Geiserts, chroniclers of various aspects of midwestern existence, take their
close scrutiny to a small river town. They start the cycle in fall, noting the traffic of
barges and trains as they take the local products to the world beyond. Winter
brings a slowing of activity, but spring results in an upswing and a threatened
flood as the water rises; flood averted, summer means river-centered work and
play. Clarity and specificity are the main benefits here: the text is deceptively
simple but it explains many aspects of town planning and town life that are often
familiar without really being understood. Arthur Geisert's illustrations move from
distant panoramic views to closer examinations, and they evince an Anno-esque
taste for minutiae that makes them well worth close inspection: a note at the end
points out several of the dramas played out from spread to spread, such as a barn's
burning and subsequent reconstruction and an old house's decay and restoration.
These small storylines keep the study lively and personal, emphasizing the collec-
tion of individual experiences that ultimately creates the town. This will certainly
keep a geography unit from going dry, but the appeal of the detailed miniature
landscapes will also pull in kids who just want to go for a pleasure cruise. DS
352 
* THE BULLETIN
GRAVES, KEITH 
Frank Was a Monster Who Wanted to Dance; written and illus. by
Keith Graves. 
Chronicle, 1999 
28p
ISBN 0-8118-2169-2 
$12.95 
R 
4-9 yrs
When Frank (as in Frankenstein) goes dancing, his lively movements make him
fall to pieces, whereupon his previously appreciative audience runs screaming from
the theater. A humorous rhyming text immediately engages readers: "Frank was a
monster who wanted to dance./ 'I know I could boogie if they gave me a chance.'/
So he put on his hat and his shoes made in France/ and opened a jar and put ants
in his pants." In acrylic and colored pencil, Graves' cartoon-like illustrations, sty-
listically reminiscent of Lane Smith, extend the text with such details as Frank's
mouse slippers (complete with teeth), a bottle of "Le Smell," and a box of "Le
Shooz." The mixture of single and double-page spreads all prominently feature
Frank, except for the climactic scene when only his brain is seen as it falls from his
tragically unzipped head. Graves' palette (purple-grape, electric blue, and lime-
green with cherry-red highlights) makes the details pop without overwhelming the
eye. Young listeners will respond to the comedy, the catchy rhythm, and especially
the yuck factor induced by Frank's dancy disintegration. Use the dance-step dia-
grams on the endpapers for a rowdy storytime (but hold on to your head!). JNH
GRETZ, SUSANNA 
Rabbit Food; written and illus. by Susanna Gretz. 
Candlewick,
1999 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-0731-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Little John the bunny refuses to eat rabbit food, especially mushrooms, so Dad
calls Uncle Bunny for help. On his arrival, the parental units leave for the week-
end, and Uncle Bunny is in charge: "No problem," he says-but the audience will
laugh as Uncle Bunny gives away his own food prejudices by stealthily hiding his
carrots when no one is looking, first under his napkin and then in a nearby flower-
pot. With a day of soccer, high jump, tug-of-war, and mountain climbing, Uncle
Bunny makes Little John so hungry he gobbles up baked potato rabbits complete
with pea eyes, mushroom noses, tomato mouths, celery whiskers, and carrot ears.
But soon an observant John guesses Uncle Bunny's secret: "You don't like carrots,
do you, Uncle?" The kids then pin Uncle Bunny to the floor, echoing their elders
by urging him to take just one bite ("They're good for you! Just try a little! Just
one teeny tiny bite . . . and you'll grow BIG and STRONG like US!"), resulting
finally in an Uncle Bunny with a mouth so stuffed full of carrots he can't even
speak. Expressive watercolor paintings rendered in warm earth tones contrasted
with vivid garden hues capture the playfulness of the text, but the bunny faces are
unevenly articulated, sometimes evincing a certain stiffness. It's also not clear what
the moral is here-if you are hungry enough even carrots taste good? Uncles are
human-er, rabbit-too? Kids will nonetheless appreciate the joke of Uncle Bunny's
solving an eating problem, however, and picky eaters will revel in Little John's
dinner table creations and Uncle Bunny's resistance to root vegetables. EAB
HAHN, MARY DOWNING 
AnnaAll Year Round; illus. by Diane de Groat. 
Clarion,
1999 
[144p]
ISBN 0-395-86975-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Anna is in third grade in early twentieth-century Baltimore, and she's starting to
move beyond the restrictions of early childhood. She saves her aunt's bulldog from
JUNE 1999 
* 353
a dogfight and gets a ride in a limousine as a reward, plays spin the bottle and gets
a kiss from her special friend, Charlie, takes the trolley downtown to meet her
father for lunch, and embarks on various other modest adventures. High drama is
not the point here, though; the charm, in these episodes based on Hahn's mother's
reminiscences of her youth, comes from Hahn's unfussy and natural evocation of
everyday life in a world gone by. The book doesn't make Anna into a quaint relic
or a contemporary heroine with period trappings, however: she's a realistic little
girl unto herself, who relishes her Christmas gift of an Erector set and takes a
daring (and injurious) trip down a hill on rollerskates (mostly because she can
share these things with best buddy Charlie). Her exploration of a bigger world
beyond her block has details evocative of the pre-World-War-I era but also emo-
tional resonance for every child whose limits are expanding. Homey and deco-
rous, this story has American Girls-style appeal with more depth; its episodic nature
makes it eminently suited for reading aloud, but its accessibility, aided by de Groat's
sturdy pencil drawings of a tidy but unprissy Anna, will make it a useful step up
from Molly, Samantha, and friends. DS
HAN, SUZANNE CROWDER, ad. 
The Rabbit's Tail: A Story from Korea; illus. by
Richard Wehrman. 
Holt, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-4580-5 
$15.95 
Ad 4-8 yrs
A case of mistaken identity results in some escalating buffoonery in this tale of a
tiger, a thief, and that terrible monster, a dried persimmon. When a roaming tiger
hears a mother comforting her crying baby, he confuses the dried persimmon she
uses for a pacifier with a dreadful monster and goes into an ox's stall to calm his
nerves; in the dark a thief thinks the tiger an ox and steals him. Discovering his
error, the thief is too terrified to let the tiger go lest the beast eat him, and the tiger
is convinced he is captive of the terrible dried persimmon. A rabbit traps the thief
in a hollow tree by blocking the entrance with his derriere. When the thief grabs
ahold of the rabbit's tail, the rabbit yanks free, leaving his tail, "and that is why to
this day the rabbit has a stumpy tail." The one-joke premise gets stale toward the
end of the lengthy text, the pace lags, and the conclusion is somewhat anticlimac-
tic. Wehrman's acrylics have an animated-cartoon intensity that displays the show-
ily-striped tiger and his imaginary nemesis persimmon to garish perfection; the
faces of the humans (mother, baby, thief) are not rendered with nearly the same
success. Patricia Lampton adapted a more cogent, faster-paced version of this tale
with The Terrible EEK (BCCB 1/92), but the inherent humor of the story still
makes this retelling promising for storytimes and reading aloud. JMD
HOBBS, VALERIE 
Carolina Crow Girl. Foster/Farrar, 1999 
138p
ISBN 0-374-31153-6 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Carolina takes care of a lot of things, including her mother and
baby sister, so when she finds a baby crow fallen from its nest, it's only natural she
should take care of it, too. Carolina, mother Melanie, and baby sister Trinity live
on a refurbished school bus, following Trinity's father, Red, wherever he wanders.
Parked in a field at the edge of a private estate while they wait for Red to find them,
Carolina meets the disabled son of the estate family, Stefan Crouch, a would-be
naturalist. Stefan and Carolina bond over baby Crow, and Carolina gains entree
into the Crouch mansion and a world of privilege she barely knew existed. Stefan
introduces Carolina to his mother, who sees in the young girl the daughter she lost
354 
* 
THE BULLETIN
to a riding accident; when Mrs. Crouch offers Carolina a permanent home, Caro-
lina considers it, believing her mother would have it easier without her. Charac-
terization of the peripheral players is a little sketchy, but Hobbs depicts the
precociously responsible Carolina and her relationships with unerring clarity.
Carolina's attachment to her mother and sister, her love for Crow, and her grow-
ing friendship with Stefan have an emotional center that carries the loosely limned
plot. Unresolved plot bumps are leveled somewhat by Hobbs' smooth writing
style, and by the characterization of Carolina, who is a likable, sympathetic hero-
ine involved in a compelling situation. Her realization that the Crouches cannot
give her what she already has with her mother is subtle but stirring, and the de-
nouement, in which Carolina sets Crow free and goes home, is satisfying and
believable. JMD
ISADORA, RACHEL ABC Pop!; written and illus. by Rachel Isadora. 
Viking,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-670-88329-8 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Isadora moves her art in a new direction here, illustrating the alphabet with a
comic-book-esque palette and coarse-screen dots that offer up a homage to Roy
Lichtenstein and his cohorts. Narrative panels and spelled-out sound effects simi-
larly enhance the Pop Art connection: the Airplane zooms, biz bizzes, and vooms
through four panels of clouded sky, the Frog watches a fly enter the panel and then
peers out with a slight smile when the bug has disappeared, presumably into the
mouth of the frog (and the quartet of identical Pigs in different hues make sure
Warhol gets included in the homage as well). Many of the visuals lack that narra-
tive interest, however, and they sometimes fall short on impact (though the spread
of King Kong climbing up a building is compelling with its encompassing indigo
sky and palely lit moon and skyscraper). Since many illustrations prominently
feature items and words that begin with different letters (the baby is a lot bigger
than its Rattle, for instance), and the alphabetic connections are by no means
obvious, this is really an early art book rather than an ABC primer. The bold
images and clever borrowings keep things lively, though, making this a useful intro
to a particularly child-appealing school of art; consider using it alongside Lou Ann
Walker's Roy Lichtenstein: TheArtist at Work (BCCB 2/94) for a discussion of the
principles in action. DS
JOHNSON, DINAH 
Sunday Week; illus. by Tyrone Geter. 
Holt, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-4911-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Johnson leads readers through the days of the week in this nostalgic tone-poem to
childhood memories. From "true-blue Mondays" when children don't want to go
to school, to Tuesdays when the double Dutch champs "keep on keeping on/
stepping quick,/ stepping high/ as the rest of the world/ passes by," to Fridays,
when "the fishman/ cooks for everybody/ on the block," and there's "happiness in
the hellos,/ music in the air," the story builds to the culmination of the week.
"Come Sunday/ come sunrise,/ the church bells/ make it sound like/ heaven is
right here," and the family has breakfast, attends church services, and goes on a
Sunday drive, until "Come Sunday/ come sunset, / it's about time to get/ on the
way back home,/ waving God be with you/ until we meet again.// Come Sunday."
The days of the week format gives structure to the lengthy text, and while the arc
of the tale is slow and predictable, Johnson uses concrete imagery that adds both
JUNE 1999 
* 
355
color and context. The pastel illustrations capture the yearning for times past in
their burnished orange and gold tones, but the drafting of the human figures is
sometimes disproportionate, the faces unarticulated. Sunday school classes will
make good use of a title that recalls times gone by, when Sunday was indeed a day
of rest and renewal for friends and family. JMD
JOLLEY, MIKE 
Grunter: A Pig with an Attitude!; illus. by Deborah
Allwright. 
Millbrook, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-1308-7 
$18.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-0449-5 
$14.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
Grunter the pig is a lovely little farm's "large pink problem": not only is he (a la
Byron) mad, bad, and dangerous to know, he's "overfed and overweight," with "a
bad attitude and even worse gas!" After Grunter goes on a particularly vexing
rampage of farmer-flattening, dog-dunking, and mice-mashing, the other animals
decide Something Must Be Done. All alone on his forgotten birthday, Grunter is
surprised to find a special present-not, as jaded youngsters might fear, something
that touches Grunter's lonely heart and allows him a fresh start with his
barnyardmates, but a stick of dynamite that fires Grunter into orbit, leaving the
other animals in blissful and unrepentant peace. The text is pithy and flavorful,
containing energetic rhythms and deliciously libelous adjectives (emphatic font
sizes add to the performative allure). Grunter is clearly awful, both when he looms
evilly in the foreground, towering over quivering lambs, and when he appears in
sequences of spot art that comically enumerate his crimes and allow his livid orange-
red to stand out like an angry sore against the white background. The final explosion,
a pop-up BOOM! that sends Grunter flying off the page and literally into space, is
worthy of the paper-engineering twist (and it contrasts entertainingly with the
wide-eyed innocent animals on the next spread). Caring and sharing are all well
and good, but young listeners will understand that shooting an enemy off into
space is real closure. DS
JONES, CHARLOTTE FOLTZ 
Yukon Gold: The Story of the Klondike Gold
Rush. 
Holiday House, 1999 
99p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1403-5 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Nearly fifty years after the 49ers' rush to California, a second outbreak of gold
fever struck the west coast, luring prospective miners ("stampeders") to the frigid
Yukon region, only to find that all promising claims had been taken, food and
other necessities were in short supply, and employment was nonexistent. Several
opening chapters supply little information and considerable confusion concerning
the genesis of this rush; then the text picks up a head of steam as the stampeders
battle their tortuous way north, hauling requisite tons of gear and supplies along
perilously narrow mountain paths, often under the watchful eye of mounted po-
lice and customs takers. An impressive gallery of period photos speaks powerfully
of the stampeders' travails and the miners' backbreaking labor-more powerfully,
all too often, than the choppy, awkward text ("The worst tragedy of the White
Pass trail was the animals"; "Almost everyone on this trail suffered some kind of
physical suffering"). Reports writers, assisted by an appended index, will probably
find all the information they need, but readers panning for literary gold might
want to wade further downstream in this issue-to Schanzer's Gold Fever! EB
356 
* THE BULLETIN
JORDAN, SHERRYL 
The Raging Quiet. Simon, 1999 
[2 7 2 p]
ISBN 0-689-82140-9 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
After two hellish days of marriage (or, more to the point, two hellish nights),
sixteen-year-old Marnie Isherwood returns from market to find she is a widow-
her husband has fallen through the roof he was thatching on their seaside cottage.
Rather than return to her family, Marnie decides to savor her new independence
and privacy by remaining at the cottage, and she quickly finds a consuming new
interest, teaching the wild, handsome, deaf village "raver" how to communicate
through hand signs. However, clever, kind-hearted Marnie is in peril on two
fronts-from superstitious villagers who accuse her of witchcraft for "taming" the
young man they consider to be a lunatic, and from her greedy brother-in-law, who
is out to evict her. Jordan sets her novel, whose hoary plot (and cover) could leap
off the paperback rack of any drugstore (feisty, sexually disappointed beauty tames
gorgeous wild man, to their mutual satisfaction) in an unspecified Long Ago and
Far Away with a distinct Irish flavor. She has the laws of the steamy potboiler
mastered to a nicety, though, and sustains tension adroitly enough to keep the
inevitable happy ending at arm's length. Young adult readers who like their fairy-
tale romances dished up with an extra dash of spice won't be disappointed. EB
KOLAR, BOB 
Do You Want to Play?: A Book about Being Friends; written and
illus. by Bob Kolar. 
Dutton, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45938-3 
$16.99 
M 
5-8 yrs
A pair of friends go off to play in Friendship Park, where they meet other friends
and watch a show that teaches them about friendship; the park also offers "Good
Friend Instructions," "The Friendship Park Adventure Trail" (framed as a board
game), a book with a thematically appropriate short story, and other testaments to
amity. The messages may be laudable, but they're sometimes confusing and often
stunningly platitudinous ("Just be yourself'; "All people are worth knowing");
touches of humor are lost in the heavy didacticism, which offers more generalized
preaching than concrete and useful advice. The artwork invests the premise with
some imagination: mixed-media collage, with a found-object look reminiscent of
Lane Smith's art, pulls scraps of paper together into spiky-edged beings and places
them side-by-side with doodled critters of all kinds; this peanut gallery emits run-
ning comments in a variety of fonts and languages while the toylike main charac-
ters wander through the pages in support of the main text. The design adds
browsability, but the lessons are pitched at the level of kids too young to read the
book to themselves, and the format renders reading aloud an impossibility. Young-
sters may be lured by the layout to page through, but if you really want to teach
them about friendship, send them after George and Martha or Frog and Toad.
DS
Koss, AMY GOLDMAN 
The Ashwater Experiment. Dial, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8037-2391-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 4-7
Hillary's family specializes in being on the move, traveling the country in their old
caniper and living off of the sale of"gizmos," knickknacks sold at flea markets and
county fairs. Hillary is therefore horrified to discover that the family's going to
settle, for nine whole months, in Ashwater, California, where they're housesitting
JUNE 1999 
* 357
for an all-American family (Hillary sleeps in the frilly room of one of the most
popular girls in school). She decides, in a typically seventh-grade brush with epis-
temology, that it doesn't matter because it's all an experiment, wherein people
called "the Watchers" have set everything up to test her and to see her reactions to
these other people who have no inherent reality of their own. This view provides
Hillary with some comfort when she's puzzled by the ways of the natives; friendly
with the popular Serena and her satellites, Hillary is also drawn to the thoughtful
outcast Cass, but the Watchers are apparently testing her with pressure to slot
herself into one category or another. What's refreshing is the book's refusal to slip
into predictability or cliche: Hillary isn't forced to choose between two loyalties,
nor do her friends become one happy group; Serena isn't just a popular ditz with
only power as allure; and despite Hillary's eventual abandonment of the experi-
ment idea and her desire to stay in Ashwater, her parents don't find a reason to stay
and settle down, so she must leave her first real friendships behind. As she did in
The Trouble with Zinny Weston (BCCB 9/98), Koss enlivens the middle-school
social drama with a creative twist, and her sensitive and imaginative depictions of
her characters may encourage readers to emulate Hillary in seeing classmates more
deeply than seventh-grade sometimes allows. DS
KRULL, KATHLEEN 
They Saw the Future: Oracles, Psychics, Scientists, Great Think-
ers, and Pretty Good Guessers; illus. by Kyrsten Brooker. 
Schwartz/Atheneum,
1999 
[11 2p]
ISBN 0-689-81295-7 
$19.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
A shared gift of prescience makes strange bedfellows, as Krull demonstrates in a
dozen chapters spanning the range of subtitular seers from the Oracle at Delphi to
Marshall McLuhan. There are flashes of the intimate, acerbic gossipiness that
make Krull's Lives of series (Lives of the Presidents, BCCB 9/98, etc.) so popular,
but the tone is a trifle more sober in this offering and the accounts less rich.
Hildegard von Bingen remains here hazily transcendent and largely abstruse; Nicho-
las Black Elk seems too noble to admit any jocularity; the Maya are presented as a
cultural group, with no personality on which to hang an anecdote. Although
prophets of many stripes are represented, other favorites are conspicuous by their
absence. (How, for instance, can anyone throw a party for futurists and fail to
invite John of Patmos and his Revelations? If the Mayan calendar is fair game,
why not the Chinese zodiac?) Still, juxtaposing Leonardo Da Vinci and Edgar
Cayce, the Roman sibyls and Jeane Dixon is necessarily thought-provoking, and
Brooker's portraits and vignettes-arresting in their shadowy angularity-handily
evoke a Mysterious Beyond. A bibliography for further reading is included. EB
KVASNOSKY, LAURA McGEE 
Zelda and Ivy and the Boy Next Door; written and
illus. by Laura McGee Kvasnosky. 
Candlewick, 1999 
[40p]
ISBN 0-7636-0672-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
The balance of power between fox sisters Zelda and Ivy is undergoing a slight shift
thanks to the arrival of the new boy next door, Eugene. In this three-chapter
installment in the sisterly saga, the addition of a third party has some serious im-
pact: Eugene falls hard for Zelda but rebounds to Ivy; he is first mate to Zelda's
pirate queen until the shut-out Ivy tells them where the treasure is buried; and
358 
* 
THE BULLETIN
from his window he observes the two sisters wishing on falling stars when camping
outside in the backyard ("Sisters only," says Zelda). The author definitely has a
flair for capturing the group dynamic of these youngsters-the dialogue is pithy
and funny, and Kvasnosky's sense of timing and sense of humor carry over fault-
lessly from the first Zelda and Ivy (BCCB 4/98). There is a plucky charm in the
visual depiction of the sisters and their violet-hued environs. The illustrations
depict a verdant outdoor paradise of sandbox, lemonade stand, treehouse, and
garden that will give young readers (and listeners) something to wish for on a
falling star the next time they're camping out in the backyard. JMD
LIVELY, PENELOPE 
One Two Three Jump!; illus. by Jan Ormerod. McElderry,
1999 
26p
ISBN 0-689-82201-4 
$16.00 
R 3-5 yrs
A young green frog jumps into a garden full of danger when he abandons the
relative safety of his between-rocks home. Lucky for the young frog, "dragonfly
had eyes that could see front, back and sideways," and she gives the frog good
advice about jumping out of harm's way. Frog avoids being stepped on, caught by
a cat, eaten by a crow, and captured by a gardener, finally ending up "with a splash!
in the most wonderful place he could ever have imagined"-a pond. Lively's
refrain ("One, two, three . . . jump!") invites participation, and while the text
doesn't quite have the momentum of Robert Kalan's Jump, Frog, Jump!, it does
have the advantage of Ormerod's sunny garden graphics. Yellow tulips, white
daisies, rainbow dragonfly, green frog, and orange cat are set against a sky-blue
background dotted with fluffy white clouds in spreads that will be a boon to view-
ing groups, while the expressive poses of the participating characters deliver all the
emotion and personality necessary to enhance this brief but ribbeting adventure.
JMD
McKAY, HLARY 
Dolphin Luck. 
McElderry, 1999 
153p
ISBN 0-689-82376-2 $16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Those familiar with Dog Friday (BCCB 10/95) and The Amber Cat (11/97) will
remember the Brogans (Robin and his mother) and their neighbors the Robinsons
(Mr. and Mrs., twins Perry and Ant, the eccentric Sun Dance, and placid Beany),
and they will not be surprised that their collective tendency towards chaos contin-
ues unabated. It's Christmastime, but not a cheery one: Mrs. Robinson has pneu-
monia, the Robinsons' aged pooch Old Blanket has finally passed on, there's a
developing rift between the newly self-conscious Perry and the often-embarrassing
Sun Dance, and the weather is horrendous. Mrs. Brogan tries to keep the young-
sters distracted by telling them a story of a wonderful Viking sword with a dol-
phin-shaped hilt; Beany seizes on this as an attainable prize and finds what she's
sure must be the magic weapon in the attic. Meanwhile, the Robinson parents
having left for vacation in warmer climes, Perry and Ant have been shipped off to
their great-aunt who proves even more eccentric than anticipated, and Sun Dance
is feverishly laying burglar traps in the Robinson's empty house while Mrs. Brogan
valiantly attempts to keep all her charges whole. The past story amid present
goings-on frame works better here than in The Amber Cat; the Robinsons' pell-
mell charm sweeps the sword theme along with it, and the weapon proves instru-
mental in resolving Perry's estrangement from Sun Dance and granting wishes
ranging from burglars to replacement canines to paternal memorabilia. It's the
JUNE 1999 * 359
pellucid logic with which McKay underscores the looniness that makes it so funny
and irresistible, and kids will wish their own hijinks were similarly imbued with
merriment rather than just plain trouble. DS
NASH, GARY B. 
Forbidden Love: The Secret History ofMixed-RaceAmerica. Holt,
1999 
[25 6p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-4953-3 
$21.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
The history of American race relations, racial identity, and miscegenation is inter-
twined with profiles of bi- and multi-racial individuals in this informative discus-
sion of racial categorization. Nash, author of Red, White, andBlack: The Peoples of
Early America, organizes the information under chapter titles such as "The America
That Might Have Been" and "Interracial Renegades"; further divisions within the
chapters include narrower topics like "Race and Power" or "Racialism in the Era of
Reform." Though information about African Americans is preponderant, the dis-
cussion by no means limits itself, containing comparisons between race relations
in North and South American colonies and descriptions of a variety of interracial
relations, including the little-known alliance between Punjabi and Hispanic Ameri-
cans. Anecdotes, excerpts from primary sources, and a clear authorial stance con-
tribute to an engaging style. While the text itself maintains interest, transitions are
sometimes clumsy, as in the leap from Pocahontas to Sam Houston to a definition
of race. Nash presents early history with authority, but his analyses of recent racial
attitudes seem simplistic: "The ultimate seal of approval was conferred on interra-
cial sex in 1985 when Playboy magazine . .. featured Grace Jones ... with her
Swedish boyfriend." In the same vein, he says that "America's resistance to its real
mixed-race character has given way to an open and massive rush toward interracial
relationships and marriage." The book's syntax, vocabulary, and undefined his-
torical concepts will challenge less advanced readers; students wrestling with iden-
tity issues, however, will find the discussion relevant and may conclude, with Nash,
that there is no race but the human race. Clearly captioned illustrations and infor-
mative endnotes extend the text, and an index will be included in the bound vol-
ume. JNH
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Alice on the Outside. Karl/Atheneum,
1999 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-689-80359-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Life-as it tends to-is bringing Alice more thorny challenges as she matures.
Those familiar with earlier episodes of her saga (Achingly Alice, BCCB 4/98, etc.)
will know that she's still with her steady, Patrick, and that she's beginning to ex-
plore the physical side of romance. In this volume, Alice still has questions about
the latter topic (her grown cousin Carol does a magnificent job of giving Alice the
"what's it really like" information that she needs to know, shattering Alice's movie-
instilled conceptions of sex). She's also running into other issues, however: her
school's Consciousness-Raising Week involves an experiment in prejudice that
opens many students' eyes, but perhaps not wide enough to see the bigotry in their
own treatment of a lesbian classmate. Naylor has perfected a winning formula in
the Alice books, with just the right blend of predictability and originality, humor
and seriousness. While Alice is a bit too grandly heroic in defense of her lesbian
360 
* 
THE BULLETIN
friend here (she is in general becoming less representative and more role-modelish),
she's otherwise still the credibly anxious heroine, experimentally testing right and
wrong as best as she can with the help of her loving family and friends. Whether
it's helping big brother Lester fend off an ex-girlfriend by hinting to her that he's
gay, raging at her father for deliberately interrupting an awkward front-porch kiss,
or being moved to tears by the birthday gift of her late mother's locket, Alice
remains a lively original who nonetheless mirrors the growing pains of every ado-
lescent girl. DS
NOLEN, JERDINE 
In My Momma's Kitchen; illus. by Colin Bootman. 
Lothrop,
1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12761-4 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12760-6 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
A little girl describes all the good things that happen in her momma's kitchen: her
sister announces a music scholarship, her elderly aunt plays a practical joke, Momma
chats with her sisters while they cook together, and her father makes sweet corn
pudding. Eight titled anecdotes makes this a sort of picture book-chapter book;
these family anecdotes are told in intimate and inviting language, and they're ren-
dered in visuals that provide a window into the narrator's cozy world. Nolen's
storytelling is simple and direct, the emotions-security, happiness, playfulness-
uncomplicated and loving. This is a child's-eye view of home and family life,
without the high gloss of nostalgia for times past that usually accompanies family
stories. Nolen's language is vibrant and even occasionally lyrical as she talks about
Momma and her aunts singing in the kitchen ("The air is full of humming. Their
hands are flying. I think they cook like hummingbirds") and describes the feeling
engendered by their activity ("All day the kitchen is busy and full and cozy. Even
the African violets are blooming, just like my aunts"). Bootman's full-page realis-
tic oil paintings depict an African-American family in tableaux of happy occupa-
tions and obvious affection. In closing, the young narrator says, "everything good
that happens in my house happens in my momma's kitchen." Readers and listen-
ers will surely agree. JMD
O'MALLEY, KEVIN 
Leo Cockroach ... 
Toy Tester; written and illus. by Kevin
O'Malley. 
Walker, 1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8690-1 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8689-8 
$15.95 
R 6-9 yrs
Leo Cockroach lives and works at Waddatoy Toys, testing toys and leaving the
really good ones on the CEO's desk. While CEO Mildred Splatt is perfectly happy
to accept the anonymous toy recommendations that have made her company fi-
nancially successful, she has no appreciation at all for Leo and spends a lot of her
time chasing him with a shoe and a can of bug spray. Leo decides to offer his
services to Magnus Worm, CEO of Notsogouda Toys across the street, sure that
his life couldn't get any worse. But Worm is a worm, and he cages Leo so as to
have his toy expertise on demand. The ever-inventive Leo convinces Worm to let
him test drive a rocket, and, aiming himself at Splatt's window, he arrives home
bumped but undaunted. Taking the advice of his friend Bernard the cat, Leo
writes Mildred a note explaining his role in her company's success-and she makes
him Employee of the Year. O'Malley has a comic gift that cannot be underesti-
mated. The forthright writing style makes the visual (and other) silliness of the
JUNE 1999 
* 361
story acceptable, even believable, as under the watchful eye of the benign Bernard
the bespectacled Leo tests airplanes, dart guns, and remote control cars. The in-
volving layout varies throughout from free-standing art to cartoon panels to framed
full-page to unframed double-page illustrations. O'Malley's characters, from cock-
roach to cat to CEO, have faces that react to the situation at hand, with exagger-
ated comic demeanors that inform and shape the visual narrative. This is a can't-miss
readaloud, but make sure to leave it where the kids can reach it, because the illus-
trations are another story all by themselves. JMD
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
Ice Cream Larry; illus. by Jill Pinkwater. 
Cavendish,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5043-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
As fans of previous books (Young Larry and At the Hotel Larry, BCCB 9/97) will
know, Larry is a large polar bear who, after saving the proprietor's life, was given a
home at the Hotel Larry in New York and became firm friends with the proprietor's
young daughter, Mildred. Larry has just had a slight contretemps with a local ice
cream vendor, who let Larry sleep in the ice-cream freezer and is now out 1/8 of a
ton of ice cream. The publicity surrounding this incident attracts Mr. I. Berg,
owner of the Iceberg Ice-Cream Company, who invites Larry down to his Mary-
land factory and continues to meet with the lactose-tolerant bruin. All this cozi-
ness results in the production of Larry Bars, ice-cream bars "in many flavors: vanilla,
chocolate, strawberry, blueberry and arctic almond, bearberry, polar pineapple,
and codfish" and with the new motto "I do not feel sick!" (taken from Larry's
postprandial comment on his original ice-cream consumption); in addition to be-
ing a spokesbear, Larry gets a new walk-in freezer and fifty Larry Bars a day. Larry
is an endearing hero in these loopy little sagas; his calm self-possession bespeaks
polar cool on all levels, and his edible exploits here are sure to cause youngsters to
lick their lips in envy. Jill Pinkwater's cheerful rainbow illustrations make snowy
Larry, singled out with sharp black linework, the focus of every scene he's in. Kids
yearning to be the best friend of a polar bear with a lifetime supply of ice-cream
bars will accept that hearing about him is the next best thing. DS
QUATTLEBAUM, MARY Aunt CeeCee, Aunt Belle, and Mama's Surprise; illus. by
Michael Chesworth. 
Doubleday, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-385-32275-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Mama and her two sisters "are forever trading clothes, visits, secrets, dishes. And
you should hear them swap stories! The same long-ago tales get told in three
different ways." It is the daughter and niece of the above mentioned sisters who
recounts the story of the surprise party that almost wasn't. Aunt CeeCee and Aunt
Belle are not nearly as organized about throwing Mama's birthday bash as they
could be, and between Belle, who will "nitpick at the tiniest things" and CeeCee,
who "slapdashes at the very last minute," it looks like the fete is doomed. But
never fear, the narrator is here, and as she says herself, "It's a good thing-a very
good thing-that I'm a take-charge kind of girl." The surprise is successfully car-
ried off, and another voice is added to the family storytelling circle. Quattlebaum's
clever text is complemented by Chesworth's festive line and watercolor illustra-
tions. Setting the scene in the Roaring Twenties, the artist provides an assortment
of flapper fashions, model Ts, and straw toppers that would make Scott and Zelda
362 
* 
THE BULLETIN
proud. Chatty dialogue balloons, a gracefully rendered party-scene silhouette, and
sisters with personality and pizzazz combine into a lighthearted tribute to the women
of a family and a book that will be a real gift to library collections. JMD
QUINTANA, ANTON 
The Baboon King; tr. by John Nieuwenhuizen. 
Walker,
1999 
183p
ISBN 0-8027-8711-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
With the fierce pride and love of hunting of his Masai father and the more sociable
instincts of his Kikuyu mother, Morengaru cannot fit comfortably into either so-
ciety and so chooses to live on the outskirts of both. He somewhat scornfully
accedes to the Kikuyu villagers' plea for aid in tracking and killing a leopard that
has attacked their goats, and thus he reestablishes a tenuous connection with his
mother's people. But when Morengaru accidentally slays a village youth, he is
stripped of his possessions, banished from the community, and forced to wander
within a circumscribed area of the savanna, subsisting like the animals with whom
he must now vie for food and territory. Just when he has nearly abandoned all
hope and even desire to return to tribal life, he is challenged and nearly killed by
the leader of a troop of baboons, but he recovers to find that his survival has launched
him into a position of prominence among the apes. As Morengaru learns to nego-
tiate the social order of this band on which he now depends, he also begins to
understand and appreciate his own unique heritage-part Masai and part Kikuyu-
and to admit to himself that he needs the companionship of a human community.
Quintana handily balances Morengaru's introspective quest with a genuine adven-
ture tale of survival in an unforgiving but austerely beautiful environment. Read-
ers who fashion their image of African adventure around the obviously defined
heroes and villains of Eric Campbell's Papa Tembo (BCCB 9/98) might want to
follow Morengaru on his lonely odyssey of self-discovery. EB
RANDLE, KRISTEN D. 
Breaking Rank. 
Morrow, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-688-16243-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
It isn't that the black-clad young men in the Clan are lawbreakers, or even trouble-
makers; Clan members have simply withdrawn from the normal social interaction
of their small northeastern town and are consequently mistrusted by their neigh-
bors. Discovering that Clan member Thomas Fairbairn, or Baby as he is called,
has the potential to be a top scholar, the Feynman High School principal tempts
him with a guaranteed college scholarship if he will part company with his friends
just enough to join the senior honors class and accept requisite tutoring from a girl
he barely knows, Casey Willardson. Baby reluctantly agrees to her help, and his
life is immediately and precariously suspended between two social worlds-the
Clan, which demands total loyalty but promises camaraderie, employment, and
most importantly his older brother's love-and Casey, to whom he is romantically
attracted, but whose friends threaten him with harm for infiltrating the milieu of
"normal" teens. Randle is deft at probing the tensions between the two sets and
the internal battles within their ranks, and she spins a tender and convincing love
story into the bargain. The concluding rumble between the Clan and the jocks,
though, is pat and predictable, with a too-soft measure of local justice, considering
the gunplay and injuries involved. Baby's story is sufficiently absorbing that read-
ers will excuse a bit of contrivance and be thankful that Fairbairn retains his dig-
nity and quirky values as he carves out a new place in the world. EB
JUNE 1999 
* 363
ROSEN, MICHAEL 
Rover; illus. by Neal Layton. 
Doubleday, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-385-32677-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Rover is a little girl, the "pet human" of the canine narrator; the unnamed narrator
is forgiving of her human frailty ("Her coat only covers her head. ... 
Rover
doesn't eat her food properly. She pokes at it with metal things"). On a trip to the
beach one day, Rover wanders off ("I was sad to see her getting smaller and smaller
until she disappeared"), sending her parents into a panic; they urge the faithful
narrator after her in true bloodhound form, but he, uncomprehending of the hu-
man world, ambles after her for his own reasons and is oblivious to the fuss when
he finds the errant child. The text adheres firmly to the doggy view of events,
employing simple and unassuming phraseology and leaving the joke to the
audience's understanding, which keeps the concept from becoming cutesy. The
art uses the oversized pages to make the most of its childishly scrawled lines; pig-
ment tossed helter-skelter at the figures and speech balloons revealing the humans'
side of the story result in a breezy slapdash look, but the full-bleed sun and sky
hues give warmth to the world of the bug-eyed inhabitants. The joke goes on a
little longer than it needs to, but it's neatly turned and well aimed at its young
audience, who may want to try their hand at writing their own pets' stories. DS
ROUNDS, GLEN 
Beaver; written and illus. by Glen Rounds. 
Holiday House,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1440-X 
$15.95 
R 
4-8 yrs
With its clean design, sans-serif typeface, and full-page illustrations, this is an easy
introduction to the natural sciences that lends itself to reading aloud or beginning
reading alone. Rounds uses simple declarative sentences to succinctly explain the
lifestyle and habits of the beaver, from dam building to treebark chewing. While
the illustrations are sometimes clumsily drafted, the overall design is attractive: a
full-page color illustration on the verso is accompanied by large type and black-
and-white spot art on the recto; the illustrations are sizable enough to be seen by a
group, and the clear typeface will cause just beginning readers to breathe a sigh of
relief. Rounds has delivered an accessible natural science title with a wide range of
possible uses that is even fun to read. A double-page spread with additional infor-
mation on the beaver's life cycle called "Beaver: Fact or Fiction?" concludes the
volume. JMD
SAVAGE, DEBORAH 
Summer Hawk. Houghton, 1999 
298p
ISBN 0-395-91163-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Her sculptor father has moved fifteen-year-old Taylor and her successful psychologist
mother to Hunter's Gap, a small, rural community in Pennsylvania. Taylor's
mother spends most of her time in her Philadelphia office, but the very bright
Taylor is going crazy in the confines of a one-room freshman class and her grades
are suffering. With the help of Rail Bogart, class loner, Taylor rescues a baby red-
tailed hawk from a lightning-struck tree and becomes involved with a university-
sponsored raptor-rehabilitation project. The project is headed by Rhiannon Jeffries,
a woman who apparently fascinates all who meet her, including Rail, Taylor, and
Taylor's father. Against the backdrop of a community that resents both the rap-
tors and the university presence, a saga of soapy proportions plays out: Taylor is
hired by Rhiannon to do some public relations about the rehab center; she figures
364 * THE BULLETIN
out how she feels about the too-good-to-be-true Rail; she takes a stand against her
domineering, perfectionist mother; and she discovers her father's and Rhiannon's
affair. Throw in some child abuse, a shell-shocked Vietnam veteran, and the tragic
death of a child years ago and you have a densely imagined package indeed. Savage
manages to control most of this melodrama by staying tightly focused on the con-
fused and agitated Taylor, and by leaning toward the lyrical image in her prose.
The ending is unfortunately pat, with an unlikely reconciliation between Rhiannon
and Taylor the big bow that ties it all up. Still, there are some intensely involving
moments, especially in those telling instants when Taylor's mask of bias falls from
her eyes and she sees the residents of Hunter's Gap, her parents, and even herself,
through clear eyes. JMD
SAY, ALLEN 
Tea with Milk; written and illus. by Allen Say. 
Lorraine/Hough-
ton, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-395-90495-1 
$17.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 341, for review.
SCHANZER, ROSALYN, comp. 
Gold Fever!: Tales from the California Gold Rush;
comp. and illus. by Rosalyn Schanzer. 
National Geographic Society, 1999 
44p
ISBN 0-7922-7303-6 
$17.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Employing the same approach used to illuminate the Lewis and Clark Expedition
in How We Crossed the West (BCCB 11/97), Schanzer culls primary sources for
brief observations by a broad spectrum of participants in the Gold Rush and ar-
ranges them in admirable order to recreate a cogent account of the raucous event.
James Marshall, who made the fateful discovery at Sutter's Mills, ruefully remarks,
"In a very short time we discovered that the whole country was but one bed of
gold-a discovery that hasn't been of much benefit to me." The race to the West
Coast is on, and the pilgrims of prosperity make their way by ocean via Cape
Horn, across the Isthmus of Panama and Nicaragua, over from China ("Wages are
generous. There is no slavery. All is nice"), or overland from the East ("There may
be fun in camping, but we haven't discovered any"). Claims are staked, and the
panners and sluicers contend with fleas, dirt, and scurvy; lying, cheating, and
scamming; lawlessness, bigotry, and failure ("Funds beautifully reduced. We re-
solved-out of respect for the pocket-to commence the art of living without
eating"). But lucky strikes are made as well, boom towns give way to permanent
settlements, and a brisk mercantile trade lines pockets that never held gold dust.
The riot of detail in the slightly cartoonish (and occasionally questionably goofy
about serious matters) paintings commands nearly as much attention as the lively
textual vignettes. Independent readers who enjoyed Stephen Krensky's Striking It
Rich (BCCB 11/96) will want to hear the tale again, "straight from the horse's
mouth." EB
SCHERTLE, ALICE 
A Lucky Thing; illus. by Wendell Minor. 
Browndeer/Har-
court, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200541-2 
$17.00 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
"Right here/ on this/ clean/ white page/ I'll scatter some words,/ watch them grow,"
says the first poem in this elegantly economical collection, and the theme of inter-
twined, interrelated poetry and pastoral existence reappears periodically as verses
celebrate "The Barn," the weathervane ("Showing the Wind"), sheep ("From a
JUNE 1999 
* 365
Distance . . ."), and other creatures and facets of country life. Schertle's lyrics
(previously appearing in How Now Brown Cow, BCCB 12/94, and other volumes)
have a delicate and imaginative precision reminiscent of Nancy Larrick. Her
unmannered lyricism brings a freshness to oft-elegized subjects (her rabbit poem is
"a pink-eyed poem/ that watches/ from the/ edges/ of the page,/ that nibbles/ at
the /corners/ of my mind") and her creative viewpoints and verse forms will reel in
youngsters who may have thought they didn't like poetry ("A Traditional Frog's
Curse" finishes with the dire wish that "every fly/ stay just beyond/ your tongue").
Minor's double-spreads and full-page portraiture have a solid particularity that
suits the poetry well, with watercolor brushstrokes so focused in their hatchings
that they at times suggest colored pencil; he plays out the blending themes of
poetry and poetic subject by including in every illustration a concrete reference to
the poem qua poem, whether it be the paper it's written on or the pencil it's writ-
ten with, leaving the impression that the verses are traveling through the pages just
as the readers do. This joins Marilyn Singer's Turtle in July (BCCB 9/89) in the
gallery of excellent collections of nature poetry; since these poems would also make
effective readalouds, you might want to take this along on a woodsy or farmish
field trip and read it in between the frog hunts and the cow-pat collecting. DS
SCHROEDER, ALAN, ad. 
The Tale of Willie Monroe; illus. by Andrew
Glass. 
Clarion, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-395-69852-9 
$15.00 
R Gr. 3-5
Schroeder has taken a thirteenth-century Japanese folktale (the best-known retell-
ing of which is probably Claus Stamm's Three Strong Women) and reset it in the
American South. Willie Monroe has "arms as big as stovepipes and a chest as
broad as a barn door," and when he says he "can whip ye with both hands tied
behin' my back," people believe him. He sets out to win "an arm-wrestlin', log-
stackin', cow-milkin', field-plowin', barn-raisin' contest" but on the way is de-
layed by a young woman who proves to be more than his match. Delilah and her
grandmother take pity on Willie and decide to strengthen him up ("Why mister,"
Granny says, "yer weak as water!") and, thanks to their training regimen, he wins
the contest, the land, the money-and Delilah, of course. Glass' oil and pencil
illustrations bring an irreverent slyness to Schroeder's retelling as the red-haired,
muscle-bound hero gets his comeuppance from the beruffled but powerful duo of
Granny and Delilah. The bucolic landscapes have a tilted perspective that in-
creases the visual humor of the varied compositions, and the solid lines of the main
characters add to their considerable vigor. Schroeder has a talent for slapstick
humor, and this retelling (which is a bit more succinct than Stamm's) takes full
advantage. Use the detailed source note for background and then tell both ver-
sions back to back for a comparison of the snortingly and subtly funny. JMD
SEWALL, MARCIA, ad. 
The Green Mist; ad. and illus. by Marcia Sewall. 
Houghton,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-395-90013-1 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Long ago the people of Lincolnshire participated in traditions and rituals they
hoped would propitiate the bogles and other mischievous beings that lived in the
mool (soil) and bogs of the countryside. Families sang the earth to sleep in winter,
and, with the coming of spring, "the Green Mist to awaken the sleeping land,"
they offered the earth bread and salt in order to keep away the "mischancy beings"
366 
* THE BULLETIN
that might do them harm. One winter the young daughter of a family fell ill and
sat "white and shaky by the fire," although "when the sun shone she danced like a
will-o'-the-wisp and stretched her arms as if she lived only in the brightness of the
sun." She believes the Green Mist of spring can cure her, and, finally, it comes: "It
came from the mools and wrapped itself around everything. It was green as grass
in summer sunshine and sweet smelling as the herbs of spring." The girl welcomes
the spring with bread and salt, and from that day onward, she is well. This is a
strange, moody tale full of hidden mystery and magic. Sewall's watercolors play
against the possible darkness of her retelling as she depicts the land through the
seasons that shape it, from the sleepy, snow-covered countryside to the waiting
spring earth to the haycock-dotted summer fields, in a palette that leans heavily
toward the pale yellow-greens of early spring. The sturdy-looking, stoic yeomen
that inhabit this place are just as surely shaped by the forces of nature as the stories
they make up to explain those forces. A note gives the origin of the tale and places
it within the context of an age and society that, unknowing, attempted to affect
nature with magic. This unusual, oddly beautiful tale may be hard to place in
collections that require audience specificity, but Sewall's retelling results in an ef-
fective, intriguing story that treats both natural and unknown forces with respect.
JMD
SIERRA, JUDY, ad. 
Tasty Baby Belly Buttons; illus. by Meilo So. 
Knopf, 1999 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99369-X 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89369-5 
$17.00 
R* 
4-7 yrs
Uriko-hime is a force to be reckoned with almost from the moment her proud
parents discover her inside a melon: "Uriko grew more quickly than other chil-
dren, and by the time she was five years old she was cooking millet dumplings with
her mother and learning sword fighting from her father." When the wicked oni
(huge ogre-like creatures) raid the town and steal all the babies they can find be-
cause they love tasty baby belly-buttons, Uriko grabs a sword and a sack of millet
dumplings and sets off on a rescue mission. With the help of her dog, a pheasant,
and a monkey, she trounces the oni soundly ("Uriko had to give each of the oni a
millet dumpling, too, so they would stop crying") and retrieves the babies, along
with an assortment of stolen treasures. Sierra punctuates this frothy adventure
with a can't-lose refrain ("Belly buttons,/ Belly buttons,/ Tasty Baby Belly But-
tons!") that is bound to have storytimers chanting along. So's light-bright water-
colors never leave the positive outcome of Uriko's quest in doubt. The little heroine's
forceful demeanor is evident from her winglike eyebrows to her aggressive (but
graceful) body-language as she tosses millet dumplings to pheasant and monkey,
races between the legs of a giant oni with her sword drawn, or points an accusatory
finger as she demands the babies' return. Round-bellied oni look too much like
the chubby-cheeked, laughing babies to be really scary, and the scene of their self-
assisted vanquishing is a riotous slapstick of bad aim and mistaken mayhem. A
detailed note provides both sources and context. JMD
SKINNER, DAVID 
Thundershine: Tales of Metakids; illus. by Kevin
Skinner. 
Simon, 1999 
[128p]
ISBN.0-689-80556-X 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-7
This quartet of short stories focuses on extraordinary abilities of contemporary and
JUNE 1999 
* 
367
future adolescents. In "As True as She Wants It," amateur cartographer Jenny
discovers her ability to "dismap" any site on the Earth (or in the solar system, for
that matter) at will by merely sketching it so. The lovestruck narrator of "Walk
This Way" is fascinated by Mae's reluctance to "bop," or teletransport, when she
could walk instead. Meredith, who mentally communicates with the planet Pluto,
insinuates her thoughts into the artistry of Dexter Rigato, mindpainter, in "Poof
Poof Ya Does Me a Favor." Nina, the older sister of Jake's best friend Henry in
"Meta Human," can summon superhuman powers at will, and like an amoral fairy
godmother, she bestows peculiar and dangerous "gifts" upon her brother, Jake,
and Jake's girlfriend. Gimmickry far outweighs plot in the tales, and their conclu-
sions are quick and perfunctory; except in his longest and strongest story, "Meta
Human," Skinner merely describes rather than explores each bizarre ability, and
he leaves the characters' communities (and worlds) mildly annoyed rather than
transformed by the unleashing of these considerable powers. Nonetheless, young
readers may find the notion of youthful superpowers sufficient to sustain their
interest. EB
STOLZ, MARY 
Casebook ofa Private (Cat's) Eye; illus. by Pamela R. Levy. 
Front
Street/Cricket, 1999 
[128p]
ISBN 0-8126-2650-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
"So far as I know," says our heroine, "I am the only female, feline private detective
in Boston," but Eileen O'Kelly is nonetheless soon involved in a variety of cases: a
tiger tom baseball player has lost his lucky ball, a herb-farm owner fears employees
are walking off with catnip, distraught parents search for their missing young kit-
ten, and, most seriously, a gifted chef has been murdered and her recipe book is
missing. The book lavishly creates its humanless period world, with atmospheric
details of 1912 Boston clothes ("It is rose velvet, with a tight bodice, a modest
bustle, a skirt that just tips the tops of my white skates, and delicate white lace at
neck and hem"), ethnic groups (there's the obligatory Irish police sergeant and
some Italian-American clients), and even baseball (Eileen's ball-playing client spring
trains in Cuba and looks forward to the season at Furway Park). The plot gets
somewhat lost amid all the setting, however, and as a detective Eileen is disap-
pointing, more often concentrating on her personal life, ruminating about clients,
or running into a lucky break than performing any actual detecting; nor is the
languid pacing sufficient to carry momentum from chapter to chapter. Those in
search of animal detectives should probably stick to Freddy the Pig, but readers
tickled by the notion of a Bostonian kitty in shirtwaists may wish to delve into
Eileen's exploits. DS
STRETE, CRAIG KEE 
The Lost Boy and the Monster; illus. by Steve Johnson and
Lou Fancher. 
Putnam, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22922-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
The nameless lost boy doesn't realize as he wanders in the wild that a foot-eating
monster has laid a trap for passers-by. Befriending a rattlesnake and a scorpion,
both of which are surprised and grateful when the child doesn't strike them with a
stick as other humans do, the lost boy later relies on their aid to free him from the
monster's cooking pot. Strete's original tale borrows from American Indian folk-
368 
* THE BULLETIN
loric motifs; the image of a lone child, constantly imperiled but instinctively in
harmony with nature, is at once eerie and appealing. The story itself is slight, and
the monster's gastronomical peccadillo is never described in enough detail to evoke
shivers. Strongly influenced by Southwest petroglyphs and other American In-
dian art, Johnson and Fancher's moody illustrations clearly steal the show with
their complex composition, rock painting styled upper borders, and effective con-
trast between luminous golds and shadowy earth tones. When the agenda calls for
a light and gentle ecological message, consider this in its unusual monster-story
packaging. EB
THOMAS, ROB 
Green Thumb. 
Simon, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-81780-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Thomas takes a break from teenage angst and throws himself into an unlikely but
action-packed plot. Thirteen-year-old Grady Jacobs is the winner of two National
Science Fairs for his work on plant life. The boy genius figures his plump phy-
sique and pasty skin are hereditary, but while his nerdiness may make him a social
outcast, it doesn't make him a wimp: though he may not be able to beat the bullies
who pick on him, he never gives them the satisfaction of admitting defeat. Grady
is selected to work with famous botanist Philip Carter on a secret project to restore
the Amazon rainforest; upon discovering that Grady's not a college student but a
high-school freshman, Carter almost sends him home. Making himself useful as
general all-around chief-cook-and-bottle-washer, Grady stays, and he discovers that
Carter is killing off the rainforest ecosystem with his super (but toxic) trees. Flee-
ing crazy Carter's camp, Grady takes refuge with the Urah-wau Indians, and the
pace (and implausibility of the plot) increases: hunting expeditions, trips up river,
skirmishes with the Kel-Ha-Natika (enemies of the Urah-Wau), and a final bloody
confrontation with Carter ensue. Action and violence have a salutary effect on
Grady-he gets a tan, loses weight, and buffs up for his return to the States, where
he flattens the bullies who previously tormented him and becomes a babe in the
eyes of upperclass (high-school sophomore) women. Wish-fulfillment? Light-
weight? Illogically plotted? Sure it is-and reluctant and other readers are going
to greatly enjoy the trip. JMD
TRIPP, WALLACE, comp. 
Rose's Are Red, Violet's Are Blue and Other Silly Poems;
illus. by Wallace Tripp. 
Little, Brown, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-316-85440-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
This collection of a dozen poems mixes the readily found ("Jabberwocky," a pair
of Edward Lear limericks) with the formerly ubiquitous (Longfellow's "Excelsior")
and some verses from hither and yon, including an Oliver Herford entry ("Some
Geese"), an offering from German nonsense writer Christian Morgenstern (de-
spite the fact that the CIP information identifies contributors as "American and
English writers"), and a piece from Tripp himself. Textually, the anthology isn't
particularly well balanced, with some of the poetry (Lyly's "Cupid and Campaspe,"
for instance) more hard than silly going. Tripp's humorous illustrations, however,
sometimes don't just provide comical interpretations but add layers of additional
jokes:" Lear's Moppsikon Floppsikon bear leads Flopsy, Mopsy, and the other two
bunnies, and the bruin carries on his motorized bicycle a "bear bodkin" and a
parcel addressed to "Fardel's Bear"; the pigs acquiring spots (in "Rose's Are Red")
JUNE 1999 
* 369
are, of course, reading Hamlet in addition to the New Porker; the opening
"Jabberwocky" spread is a veritable "Where's Waldo" of comic touches, ranging
from the Lion and the Unicorn sinking in a boat named "Liddell Women" to a
polite sign requesting "No gimbling in the wabing pool." Though some of these
jokes will be out of reach of the book's audience, readers will still enjoy the hunt
and the introduction to a few unfamiliar poems. DS
WARD, HELEN, ad. 
The Hare and the Tortoise: A Fable from Aesop; ad. and illus.
by Helen Ward. 
Millbrook, 1999 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-1318-4 
$23.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-0988-8 
$15.95 
R* 4-8 yrs
Ward (The King of the Birds, BCCB 4/97) renders Aesop's well-known fable in
energetic language and equally robust illustrations. From the opening lines ("There
once was a very fast hare.. . and a very slow tortoise"), Ward tells the story of the
age-old contest in a vigorous style that, coupled with detailed yet uncrowded com-
positions, makes this version a book-sharer's dream. Watercolor and ink illustra-
tions depict elegantly rendered beasties racing across clean white spreads, tumbling
into thorny bushes, and rowing across a blue river; the limpid eyes of the hare,
deer, and other mammals are startlingly vivid. The minimally anthropomorphized
animal characters are the antithesis of cutesiness, resembling zoological illustra-
tions. Ward includes a "Key to the Animals" section that identifies all the in-
cluded fauna, along with tidbits of information about their habits and habitats.
Think you've already got enough Aesop? Not if you don't have this one. JMD
WINTON, TIM 
Lockie Leonard, Scumbuster. McElderry, 1999 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-689-82247-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Lockie Leonard, Aussie surfer-boy and all around good dude, has returned after
being roundly dumped by the love of his life, Vicki. Perhaps pain facilitates growth,
because Lockie crosses the yawning social gulf and makes friends with Egg, an all-
black-wearing, zitfaced metalhead who can't even swim, let alone surf ("I mean,
the golden-haired surfrat walking along all matey with the black-shirted grunt-
monkey... Well, to hell with his rep, but it was still major culture clash"). He and
Egg discover that manufacturing sludge, supposedly subject to recent restrictions,
is still being pumped into the local bay, and they determine to stop it; Lockie,
however, is distracted by falling slam-bang in love again, this time with a girl who,
embarrassingly enough, not only outsurfs him but is only eleven, a full two years
younger than he is. Winton's exuberant style catches the magnificent peaks and
valleys of adolescence as Lockie charges full bore at each new obsession; Lockie's
trials and tribulations sound rather like those of Bingo Brown but with a rowdier
antipodean edge. The book never bogs down in the environmental theme, keep-
ing that a backdrop to casually effective family scenes, Lockie's romantic passion,
and the laconic friendship between Lockie and Egg. Winton doesn't tie things up
overneatly, either, since Lockie's surfer girl ends up disappointing him and Egg
has to move out of town (though at least the polluting manufacturers have pre-
sumably seen the error of their ways). Understanding youthful intensity without
being overawed by it, Lockie's story will provide young readers with some humor-
ous insight into a painful process. DS
370 
* THE BULLETIN
WRIGHT-FRIERSON, VIRGINIA 
A North American Rain Forest Scrapbook; written
and illus. by Virginia Wright-Frierson. 
Walker, 1999 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8680-4 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8679-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Wright-Frierson continues her exploration of ecosystems (A Desert Scrapbook; An
Island Scrapbook) in this look at the temperate rainforest in North America. Lo-
cated in Washington State on the Olympic Peninsula, the rainforest is home to
primeval forest, banana slugs, and a wide variety of flora and fauna. As the title
suggests, the author-illustrator conveys both the environment of the rainforest and
her reaction to it in a scrapbook approach-double-page spreads alternate with
thumbnail drawings, watercolor vignettes, and photo-like depictions of the wide
range of natural sites and sights she encountered. The chatty text is essentially a
journal describing the author's trip and giving background information on her
illustrations of plant and animal life. While the human beings sometimes suffer
from awkward drafting, the plants and animals and their habitats are carefully
rendered. The sometimes cluttered compositions and occasional postcard panora-
mas interfere with what is essentially an invitation to a vicarious experience; still,
Wright-Frierson's love for the natural world is obvious. The author provides a
sense of continuity through references to the age and history of the rainforest and
the current efforts to preserve it, as well as in her concluding lines: "I stand alone
under the trees that were here hundreds of years before Columbus sailed to America,
listening to the eternal waves and watching the same stars appear." Both text and
illustrations provide a gentle introduction to this endangered biosphere. JMD
YORINKS, ARTHUR 
Harry and Lulu; illus. by Martin Matje. 
Hyperion,
1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2276-7 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0335-5 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Lulu is a temperamental tyke who yearns for a dog; Harry is a stuffed red toy
poodle proffered as a (to Lulu, unsatisfactory) solution. Lulu is stunned when
Harry proves to be alive and English-speaking, but she insists he's still no dog. He
takes her to France, but she's still not won over-until he saves her from being hit
by a speeding car, and she realizes that, toy or not, he is her dog. Yorinks' whimsy
occasionally dips into archness or takes off in odd directions leaving the story be-
hind, but the book's eccentricity has genuine style and the unappreciated-pet story
will rouse listeners' sympathies. Matje's line-and-watercolor art is bracingly dry,
with looming verticals (adult figures extend past the tops of the pages) contrasting
with the compact figures of sharp-featured Lulu and fluffy little Harry to create a
Eurocartoonish world for both home and Paris. DS
4^
JUNE 1999 * 371
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Hart-Hewins, Linda. Better Books! Better Readers!: How to Choose, Use and Level
Books for Children in the Primary Grades; written by Linda Hart-Hewins and Jan
Wells. Stenhouse/Pembroke, 1999. Paper ed. ISBN 1-5711-305-8; $17.95. 151p.
It's easy enough to say that children should learn to read from real books, but it
can be rather a more complicated effort to arrange a classroom for doing so. Teach-
ers so inclined and librarians who wish to support them will find this usefully
integrated approach a boon indeed. It's filled with specific examples of books, of
readers, and of kids' beginning writing work, and it offers concrete suggestions
every step of the way for reading plans, methods of evaluation, physical arrange-
ments, activities, and everything else you'll want to know when before you unleash
the primary-graders and the paperbacks on each other. The refreshingly prag-
matic approach links every activity to a larger reading goal, and the book shines
with the thoughtfulness and experience of its authors in such statements as "Learn-
ing how to abandon a book is one of the skills we want to foster" (so they tell you
how to bail out on a bad readaloud midway). A healthy blend of enthusiasm,
demystification, and tools, this will bolster professionals hungry to use more real
books. An extensive bibliography (the Canadian authors have referred to a few
titles that might be less available in the U.S., but most will be readily attainable),
divided by reading stages described in the text, is provided, as are series recommen-
dations and a list of scholarly references. DS
Jobe, Ron. Reluctant Readers: Connecting Students and Booksfor Successful Reading
Experiences; by Ron Jobe and Mary Dayton-Sakari. Pembroke, 1999. Paper ed.
ISBN 1-55138-106-0; $14.95. 160p.
In a cogent and accessible presentation, Jobe and Dayton-Sakari recommend strat-
egies for moving reluctant readers in grades 3-6 toward successful completion of
the reading process and an enjoyment of reading. Aimed at classroom teachers
with a nod toward parents, this title contains both a philosophy of teaching and
how-to ideas that can be successfully utilized in a school or public library. Chap-
ters discuss the why and why not of children's reading, identify types and charac-
teristics of reluctant readers, and look at how reluctant readers feel about their own
abilities and how the confidence of the adults around them, especially their teach-
ers, affects their motivation to succeed. Also included are annotations for books
and other materials that have proven to be successful with the target group (i.e.,
websites, videos, audiobooks, etc.) and a list of popular-interest topics suggested
by reluctant readers. Summaries of recent studies on teaching reading and insight-
ful thoughts about working with reluctant readers add friendly but authoritative
background information. Goals here are concrete and attainable, and the infor-
mation is critical to librarians' understanding of how to reach their patrons and
readers, reluctant or not. There is no index, but there is a detailed table of con-
tents, and a lengthy bibliography is included. JMD
372 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Africa-fiction: Quintana
Africa-stories: Daly
African Americans-fiction: Nolen
African Americans-stories:
Johnson
ALPHABET BOOKS: Isadora
Animals: Rounds
Animals-stories: Dunbar; Han;
Jolley; Ward
Apes-fiction: Quintana
Art appreciation: Isadora
Aunts-fiction: Bauer; Nolen
Aunts-stories: Quattlebaum
Australia-fiction: Winton
Baseball-fiction: Adler
Bears-fiction: Pinkwater
BIOGRAPHIES: dePaola; Earle
Dive!; Krull
Birds-stories: Braun
Birthdays-stories: Quattlebaum
Botany-fiction: Thomas
Brothers and sisters: Bodett
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Lively
Cats-fiction: Stolz
China: Demi
Civil War-fiction: Bartoletti
Civil War-poetry: Crist-Evans
Cockroaches-stories: O'Malley
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Thomas
Dancing-stories: Graves
Depression, the-fiction: Adler
Dogs-stories: Rosen; Yorinks
Ethics and values: Bartoletti;
Clements; Dunbar; Naylor
FABLES: Ward
Families-fiction: Lively; Naylor;
Nolen; Savage; Say
FANTASY: Conford; Skinner;
Stolz
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Avi; Bauer; Nolen; Savage
Fathers and sons-fiction: Adler;
Bartoletti; Bechard; Conford
Fathers and sons-poetry: Crist-
Evans
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Han;
Schroeder; Sewall; Sierra
Food and eating-fiction:
Pinkwater
Food and eating-stories: Gretz;
Strete
Friendship-fiction: Dunbar;
Hahn; Hobbs; Koss; Kvasnosky;
Winton
Friendship: Kolar
Frogs-stories: Lively
FUNNY STORIES: Graves;
O'Malley; Rosen; Winton
Gangs-fiction: Randle
Geography: Geisert
Gold Rush: Jones; Schanzer
Grandmothers-fiction: Schroeder
HISTORICAL FICTION: Avi;
Bartoletti; Blacklock; Hahn
History, U.S.: Jones; Nash;
Schanzer
Holidays: Demi
Homosexuality-fiction: Bechard;
Naylor
Illness-fiction: Borden
Japan-folklore: Sierra
Japan-stories: Say
Journalism-fiction: Clements
Kites: Demi
JUNE 1999 
* 373
Korea-folklore: Han
Marine life: Earle Hello
Monsters-fiction: Conford
Monsters-stories: Graves; Strete
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Hobbs; Nolen
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Daly; Quattlebaum
Moving-fiction: Koss
Nature-poetry: Schanzer
Nature study: Rounds; Wright-
Frierson
Oceans: Earle Hello
Pigs-stories: Jolley
POETRY: Crist-Evans; Schanzer;
Tripp
Rabbits-stories: Gretz
Race relations: Nash
Racism: Nash
Rainforests: Wright-Frierson
Rainforests-fiction: Thomas
Reading aloud: Ehrlich
Reading, beginning: Kvasnosky
Reading, easy: Avi; dePaola
Rivers: Geisert
ROMANCE: Jordan
School-fiction: Bechard; Borden;
Clements; Conford; Naylor;
Randle
School-stories: Daniels
SHORT STORIES: Ehrlich;
Skinner
Sisters-fiction: Kvasnosky
Sisters-stories: Quattlebaum
Slavery-fiction: Blacklock
Social studies: Clements; Nash
Sports-fiction: Bechard
Storytelling: Han; Sewall; Sierra
Storytime: Braun; Daly; Graves; Lively;
Rosen; Sierra
Surfing-fiction: Winton
SURVIVAL STORIES: Bauer; Bodett;
Quintana
Teachers-fiction: Borden; Clements
Town life: Geisert
Toys-stories: O'Malley
Uncles-stories: Gretz
Voyages and travel-fiction: Avi;
Blacklock
Voyages and travel-stories: Yorinks
Writers and writing-fiction: Savage
An American Revival
Joseph Daniel Sobol
Joseph Daniel Sobol explores the social and
psychological roots of the storytelling revival
in this compelling examination of an artistic
movement whose basic program is the search
for myth in a demythologizing age.
Drawing on interviews with storytellers
around the country, Sobol considers the story-
telling revival movement in America as part
of a larger process of cultural revitalization. He shows how the diverse performance
conventions embraced by the movement are reframed in the context of storytelling
revival events to invoke the ancient, unifying art of the storyteller.
Sobol also traces the professionalization of storytelling through the preeminent
revival organization, the National Association for the Preservation and Perpetuation
of Storytelling (NAPPS), and observes the economic forces and organizational politics
that transformed an informal group of enthusiasts into a national and international
network of arts professionals.
"Original, insightful, and leavened with humor and compassion. The brilliance of
this book is that it offers at once a deep exploration of the territory we've traveled
and a glimpse of future possibilities." -
Carol Birch and Melissa Heckler, editors of
Who Says? Essays on Pivotal Issues in Contemporary Storytelling
JOSEPH DANIEL SOBOL, a professional storyteller, folklorist, and musician, is the
composer of In the Deep Heart's Core, a musical theater piece based on texts of
W. B. Yeats, and a coeditor of Jack in Two Worlds: Contemporary North American Tales
and Their Tellers.
FEBRUARY 1999
304 pages. 20 photographs.
Cloth, ISBN 0-252-02436-2. $49.95
Paper, ISBN 0-252-06746-0. $19.95
(800) 545-4703www.press.uillinois
www.press.uillinois.edu/s99/sobol.html
LJ 
I 11 
1) "11 
11 
01 
R 
I1 i 010 
01 
tlct- 
hý1mpagl,1 
612
1=7 
ALA 
Bo 
k 
s 
st 
r 
-
1
The Mystery of the
MAMMOTH
BONES
And How It Was Solved
BY JAMES CROSS GIBLIN
1 
-
U 
I
rnotograpns or
drawings
'An enthralling account
Charles Wilson Peale's
1801 excavation
of two mastodon
skeletons. Through
the immediacy of a
you are there' narrative
readers observe the me
found on a dig, share th
ot each triumph, and cringe with
every disappointment. Packed full of information about a man,
his work, and an exciting period in natural history." -Kirkus Reviews
"The subject may be a little off the beaten path of curriculum, but
Giblin's insights make it well worth the trip." -Starred Review/Booklist
Ages 8-12. * $15.95TR (0-06-027493-X) * $15.89LB (0-06-027494-8)
Among James Cross Giblin's HarperCollins books
THE TRUTH ABOUT 
THE RIDDLE OF THE 
WHEN PLAGUE STRIKES
UNICORNS 
ROSETTA STONE 
The Black Death.
Pictures by 
Key to Ancient Egypt 
Small Pox, AIDS
Michael McDermott 
Photographs, prints, 
Woodcuts by David Frampton
Full-color & black-&- 
and drawings 
Ages 10 up.
white photos & prints 
Ages 10 up. 
$14.95TR (0-06-025854-3)
Ages 10 up. 
$6.95PB (0-06-446137-8) 
$15.89LB (0-06-025864-0)
$6.95PB (0-06-446147-5) 
$6.95PB (0-06-446195-6)
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume I
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling audio- and videotapes
EDITED BY JANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Add to your library this vital compendium of material not regularly
reviewed in other publications. Designed to be a tool for selection and
collection development, the first volume of The Bulletin Storytelling
Review contains:
* 
162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by storytellers such
as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald Davis, Barbara McBride-
Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by type of story
or possible use
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages; paper; $14.95 plus shipping
Available now from The Graduate School of Library and Information
Science Publications Office, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 501
E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820 * Phone: (217) 333-1359 * Fax: (217) 244-
7329 * E-mail: puboff@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu * http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff
* (Prepayment required: VISA, MasterCard, American Express, Discover, and
checks payable to "The University of Illinois"; students, bookstores, and
wholesalers receive a ten percent discount.)
"Glowing with rich color ... the pai
events with excitement and beauty."
itings show the awesome
-
School Library Journal*
"Wildsmith's lush pen-and-watercolor paintings bring vivid detail
to the story. ... A welcome addition to most collections."
-
Booklist
EXODUS
Written and illustrated by
Brian Wildsmith
Ages 5 and up Picture book 
91/2" x 12"
ISBN 0-8028-5175-4 + $20.00
rp.,
£, 
B.
/ 
-
At your bookstore, 
9017L 
EERDMANS BOOKS
or call 800-253-7521 
for Young Readers
FAX: 616-459-6540 
Grand Rapids/Cambridge
E-mail: sales@eerdmans.com 
An imprint ofWM. B. EERDMANS PUBLISHING CO.
!!•
• !•
......
)"i
sli ~
~-;- d?· -n!l~l
"-
li:·
· ·r;
I----~--
""II:` "i
-----
Teach 
Ig
Teaching lr 8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
= 
Every issue of Teaching K-8
S,---- 
provides informative articles on
Tac1ft 
lVn 
.- the cutting edge of education.
You'll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
Flnn't mice not nn thic xalunahli
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
Teachtng8
)x 54808, Boulder, CO 80322-4808
88793
* Outside US. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I 
I
0-399-23225-7
$15.99
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
10089011111
III
0008-9036(199906)52:10*; 1 -X
0S^ 
.^f.
1**i 
'; 
^ 
-
i 
I~ 
I
1
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars 
what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1998
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
;::
