T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
November 2015
Vol. 69   No. 3
Disseminate. Innovate. Collaborate.
A global community of authors, readers, and 
publishing partners align to discover and share 
new knowledge.
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
November 2015
Vol. 69 No. 3
129  the BIg PICture
 
  The Menino  written and illus. by Isol; tr. from the Portuguese by Elisa 
Amado
130  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
144 •  Enchanted Air: Two Cultures, Two Wings  by Margarita Engle
162 •  The Shepherd’s Crown  by Terry Pratchett
166 •  The Marvels written and illus. by Brian Selznick
167 •  Most Dangerous: Daniel Ellsberg and the Secret History of the Vietnam War 
by Steve Sheinkin
172 •  Voice of Freedom: Fannie Lou Hamer: Spirit of the Civil Rights Movement  
by Carole Boston Weatherford; illus. by Ekua Holmes
175  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
176  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $108.00 or electronic $120.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2015 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from The Menino © 2015 by Isol, translation © 2015 by Elisa Amado. Reproduced 
with permission of Groundwood Books Limited.  www.groundwoodbooks.com.
November 2015 • 129
the BIg PICture
The Menino
written and illustrated by Isol; tr. from the Portuguese by Elisa Amado
There are some subjects that appear perennially in children’s literature, and one such 
is the “hey, there’s a new baby!” book. While many of those are warm and endearing, 
few rise beyond that to the genuinely original, so it’s a delight when something like 
The Menino comes along. While Solheim’s hilarious Born Yesterday (BCCB 5/10) 
offered the baby as investigative journalist reporting on his new world, Brazilian 
author/illustrator Isol documents the encounter from the other side, treating the 
baby as a mysterious stranger of unknown origin who has landed in the household.
We all know that babies are strange and wondrous things, and they 
change everything in a family. Isol helpfully provides a nonfiction-style picture-
book explanation of an infant’s arrival and the family’s adjustment (“The Menino 
has been on a long voyage and needs to sleep. . . . The new arrival doesn’t seem to 
know yet how to use his earthly body’s commands”). The book displays a wealth 
of poker-faced humor, especially when dealing with the all-important details about 
pee (“Meninos can also activate a flow of water to purify themselves”) and poop 
(“For thicker waste, all Meninos have the same design”). Yet these descriptions are 
technically valid as well as inventive, bringing a fresh perspective to the miraculous 
workings of a new person’s body (“The Menino has two little windows up high 
that he uses to see what’s going on outside”). There’s even gentle lyricism amid the 
humor (“Night is a thief that steals all the colors”). The approach is deeply funny 
yet also profoundly appreciative of the complexity of the human body and the hard 
work of being a brand new person. 
The art is also original; the earthtoned palette, with a sandy corrugated 
background setting off tan, white, and pumpkin-orange elements with the occasional 
touch of dusty blue, may not initially grab the eye of a child or adult accustomed to 
brightly colored picture books, but the witty illustrations are stealthily appealing. 
Figures are a combination of pen and pencil, with trickly black outlines doubled 
with echoing lines of tan for an out of register effect in drafting that suggests new 
wave comics (Isol is also a writer of comic books); digital planes of subtle color 
and printlike pattern provide the Menino with clothing to wear and household 
items to explore. Illustrations contain humorous emanata (babies do create a lot 
of emanata) and occasional speech elements, and the diagrammatic flavor is at its 
peak in illustrations of the baby breast-feeding (white pigment helpfully traces the 
fluid’s path from Mom’s breast to the Menino’s tummy) and blinking (captions 
helpfully annotate “Open” and “Close”). Stealthy visual variety, especially in hair-
styles, will clue sharp-eyed viewers in to the fact that the documentary follows a 
multitude of families.
130 • The bulleTiN
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
While just about everybody experiencing a new baby will relate to The 
Menino, the sophisticated touches in the vocabulary and longer text make this a 
particularly good choice for slightly older kids than the usual new-sibling book 
audience. It’s tender and funny, a celebration of the hard work that takes place on 
both sides to settle the complicated little traveler into its new world. (See p. 150 
for publication information.)
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Almond, dAvid Half a Creature from the Sea: A Life in Stories; illus. by Eleanor 
Taylor. Candlewick, 2015 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-7877-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
Alternating between snippets of biographical detail and stories embellished with 
Almond’s signature brand of magic realism, this volume demonstrates how ordinary 
life circumstances can become the seeds of well-made stories. Almond begins by 
giving a bit of his origin story as a writer: he was inspired by the humble settings 
of his small town and the fact that his uncle was a printer and an amateur poet. He 
then goes on to recount how he parlayed that setting, his experiences with Catholic 
teaching, and his memory of a particular tramp into a story that Almond fans will 
be familiar with, “Slog’s Dad.” Most of the rest of the stories have also been pub-
lished in other forms and volumes, but the newly written prefaces showcase their 
connections to real life events and local folklore, making this a useful volume for 
creative writing assignments, particularly for students who think that their everyday 
experiences have nothing special to offer. Stories told feature poltergeists, visitations 
by real sports gods and imagined otherworldly folk, nostalgic tales told by dying 
elders, shame and triumph in the cycles of bullying among boys in a small village. 
While the fictional stories are equally invested in the marriage between the mystical 
and the earthy, Almond also brings a luminous quality to the biographical bits that 
will encourage readers to rethink the wonder of their own lives and to see what’s 
just outside their windows with new eyes.  KC
Almond, dAvid A Song for Ella Grey. Delacorte, 2015 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53360-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53359-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53361-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Claire and her friends spend their time talking, dreaming, and 
November 2015 • 131
laughing together on the banks of the Ouseburn in Newcastle. When Ella, a girl 
Claire may be in love with, can’t go with the group on a camping trip, Claire makes 
the best of it, texting Ella as often as she can to share the experience. While there, 
they meet Orpheus, a strange boy who plays enchanting music on a homemade 
instrument, and Claire puts him on the phone with Ella. Orpheus and Ella are 
drawn together as if by magic and, to Claire’s dismay, eventually plan a makeshift 
wedding on the beach during the next holiday. Because this is a modern remake 
of the myth of Orpheus and Eurydice, Ella dies, and Claire tells the story of how 
Orpheus tries unsuccessfully to bring Ella back to him. The choice of Claire as nar-
rator gives readers a romantic picture of Ella but limits access to the development 
of the love between Orpheus and Ella, making their fierce devotion seem unmoti-
vated. Claire’s narration throughout the book is a blend of northern England slang 
dialect and reverent poetic prose; the mix is sometimes jarring, and the lyricism tips 
toward an overly knowing nostalgia for the fleetingness of youth. The evocation 
of the desperate immediacy of adolescence itself, however, is artfully rendered for 
lovers of literary fiction.  KC 
Anderson, r. J. A Pocket Full of Murder. Atheneum, 2015 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3771-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3773-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
The wealthy upper class of Tarreton hoards the more sophisticated magic of Sagery, 
so twelve-year-old Isaveth, a poor girl and a religious minority, must turn to Com-
mon Magic in order to make ends meet after her mother dies and her father loses 
his job. She manages to make and sell a few spell-tablets, but her family’s situation 
only worsens when her father is wrongfully arrested for the murder of the governor 
of Tarreton College. Isaveth is certain of her father’s innocence and sets out to prove 
it; fortunately, she meets Quiz, a freewheeling street kid who’s got access to people 
and information that might just set her father free. The plot zings along much like 
Quiz’s bike through the city, a Victorian-like setting that is fully realized with vivid 
details and careful world building. The real stars are Isaveth and Quiz, though; 
determined, brave, but still age-appropriately vulnerable, Isaveth is an entirely 
likable everyday heroine, while brash and bold Quiz is just a few years short of 
being a true charming rogue, with a sparkling wit and easy charisma. The mystery 
is fraught with twists and turns, and readers will delight in following Isaveth and 
Quiz as they race through the city and crack the case. KQG
Anderson, robert l. Dreamland. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233867-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233869-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
At six years old, Odea Donahue had her first experience traveling through someone 
else’s dream, and her mother, also a dreamwalker, explained three simple rules: 
never interfere with a dream, never be seen, and never walk the same person’s 
dream more than once. A teenager now, Dea has never strayed from her mother’s 
instructions, but when Connor, a handsome boy with a tragic past, moves to Dea’s 
small town, she’s intrigued by their instant connection and tempted to use her 
ability to unearth his secrets. Unfortunately, her breaking of the rules—interfering 
in his dream to get him to kiss her and walking his dreams multiple times—also 
132 • The bulleTiN
weakens the division between dreams and reality, and Dea’s mother is kidnapped 
by faceless monsters who trap her in the dreamworld. Dea must then enter a series 
of nightmares to save her mom and also uncover a truth that will free Connor from 
his burden of guilt. The convergence of the two storylines—Connor’s rumored 
criminal past and Dea’s dreamwalking—is awkward and forced, underlining one 
of the book’s major flaws in its conflation of dreams and memories. Dea’s romance 
with Connor follows the predictable route of lonely girl meeting stunning and im-
mediately interested guy, and the book never addresses Dea’s selfish and unethical 
use of her powers to manipulate their relationship. The dreamscapes, however, are 
at times gorgeously realized, especially when Dea traverses what turns out to be an 
entire kingdom of connected dreams, filled with grotesque monsters and unusual 
beauty. McMann’s Wake trilogy (Wake, BCCB 4/08, etc.) offers a smoother blend 
of dreams and reality, but the headline-worthy nature of Connor’s heartbreaking 
backstory and the fascinating complexities of the dream worlds will likely keep 
readers’ interest.  KQG
Avi Old Wolf; illus. by Brian Floca. Jackson/Atheneum, 2015 147p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9921-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9924-9 $10.99  
R Gr. 4-6 
Nature can be a cruel mistress, and no one understands this better than eight-
year-old wolf Nashoba, who struggles to keep his pack fed and to maintain his 
position as its leader during a tough Colorado winter. Nashoba goes in search of 
meat, begrudgingly accepting the guidance of Merla, a raven, to find a small elk 
herd. Meanwhile, young Casey celebrates his thirteenth birthday and receives a real 
longbow and arrows; an avid player of hunting video games, he can’t wait to shoot 
for real in the woods near his home. The narrative alternates between Nashoba’s 
struggles and Casey’s incautious enthusiasm, with the two threads combining when 
Casey shoots Merla and discovers the emotional reality of deliberately harming 
an animal. He also finds and helps Nashoba, now injured from the elk hunt, but 
when Casey returns to the scene with his father, both the raven and the wolf are 
gone. The uncertain fate of both Nashoba and Merla is a realistic, albeit unsettling, 
ending; the message that real killing is different from virtual killing is a worthwhile 
concept for middle-graders to ponder. The rural mountain setting is capably evoked, 
the writing is clean and crisp, and, while the book seems to favor an anti-hunting 
stance, Casey remains a sympathetic character. Floca’s pencil artwork is subtly de-
tailed, and the nature scenes in particular evoke a quiet restlessness reflected in the 
story. Wilderness enthusiasts will appreciate this slice of outdoor life; pair it with 
Swinburne’s Once a Wolf: How Wildlife Biologists Fought to Bring Back the Gray Wolf 
(BCCB 7/99) for further wolf study.  JH
bArdugo, leigh Six of Crows. Holt, 2015 [480p]
ISBN 978-1-62779-212-7 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12 
The mood and mind-enhancing properties of jurda have made the chewable blos-
soms a popular trade item in the port city of Ketterdam, but a ramped-up version 
called jurda parem, concocted in a lab, is poised to release chaos among the Grisha, 
whose already extraordinary powers to affect human physiology and the natural 
November 2015 • 133
elements become heightened by the drug and threaten control of governments, 
police, or militaries. Ketterdam merchant Van Eck fears the consequences if the 
drug should fall into the wrong hands, and he recruits Kaz, a Ketterdam street 
gang leader, to put together a team to infiltrate the impregnable fortress in Fjerda 
and bring back the captive chemist who is held in its prison. There are heist stories 
with ingenious plotting, and then there are heist stories like this one that raise the 
ante with luminous writing, fully credible characters, a richly developed world, 
and internal dangers as threatening as the enemy the team faces. As leader of the 
six infiltrators, Kaz propels the action, but the other five rise far above the status of 
supporting cast with riveting backstories spun out with exemplary timing. Inej, “the 
Wraith,” is gifted at knifeplay and stealth but can’t sneak into Kaz’s heart; Fjerdan 
soldier and Grisha killer Matthias harbors a shameful passion for Nina, a Heart-
render Grisha who can destroy an enemy with the wave of a hand; sharpshooter 
and gambler Jesper keeps another skill tightly under wraps; Van Eck’s son, Wylan, 
proves his value as more than collateral to ensure his father’s reward money, even 
as he and Jesper find their casual friendship turning into something more. This is 
fully satisfying both as a tale of a completed mission and as a segue into adventure 
to come in a series that promises to be as addictive as jurda parem itself.  EB 
bernstein, JonAthAn Bridget Wilder: Spy-in-Training. Tegen/HarperCollins, 
2015 304p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238266-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238268-9 $9.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Bridget, the adopted child sandwiched between an oh-so-annoying older brother 
and an oh-so-perfect younger sister, is about to write off her thirteenth birthday as a 
lost cause, forgotten by her busy family, when she discovers a trendy gift bag waiting 
for her at the front door. It looks like the theme is gag gifts—a blank-screened smart 
phone, glasses you can’t see through, lip balm that won’t open, and an invite for a 
special item at an upscale boutique. Nobody admits to being the donor, though, 
and upon claiming her freebie at the boutique—a black and gold tracksuit with 
matching shoes—Bridget immediately finds herself endowed with speed, agility, 
and butt-kicking prowess she never had before. Who’s behind all this? Her long-lost 
biological father, a spy from Sector 23, who has now called his almost-grownup 
child into the family business of saving the world. Armed with her swag bag of spy 
goodies, she charges into the fray with misplaced faith in her handler, a charming 
but villainous deceiver who plays on her adolescent dissatisfaction with her loving 
but imperfect adoptive family. There’s tons of fun in Bridget’s confident glee as she 
steps into the role she covets, but it’s tempered by the subplot of family misunder-
standings, which are authentic, if magnified somewhat for seriocomic effect. This 
is an ideal spy romp for tweens on the verge of teens, with a covert invitation to 
self-reflection tucked into a fast-paced plot.  EB
134 • The bulleTiN
blAck, holly The Copper Gauntlet; by Holly Black and Cassandra Clare; illus. 
by Scott Fischer. Scholastic, 2015 [272p] (Magisterium)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-52228-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-52230-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
At the end of his first year at the Magisterium (The Iron Trial, BCCB 10/14), Callum 
learned an unsettling truth about his potential for unleashing world-destroying evil. 
More disturbing, though, is his discovery that his father wants to try an experiment 
that could either prove Callum isn’t destined to become an Evil Overlord or kill 
him. Callum escapes with his wolf, Havoc, and joins his friends Tamara and Aaron 
for their second year at school, but when Callum learns that his father is in danger 
of being killed by the Magisterium mages, he, Tamara, Aaron and Havoc set out to 
warn him. To Callum’s chagrin, they are joined by schoolmate Jasper, who regularly 
tries Callum’s patience and puts his fears of becoming an Evil Overlord to the test. 
Callum proves his mettle, though, and while the question of his future isn’t settled, 
his present is turning out pretty great. As in the first book, Black and Clare manage 
their world building with admirable clarity, evoking a well-defined political situ-
ation while engaging with middle-school dilemmas. Callum’s questioning of his 
motivations is both humorous and credible, and the conflicts he has with Tamara 
and Jasper regarding honesty will resonate with kids negotiating their own secrets 
and jealousies. The magic here has both logic and lyricism; with its combination of 
school story and magical adventure, this is a solid series for middle-school readers 
not yet ready for Black’s or Clare’s older works.  KC
bobet, leAh An Inheritance of Ashes. Clarion, 2015 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-544-28111-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Maintaining the family farm during wartime has been difficult for Hallie and her 
older sister Marthe. Now that the Wicked God Southward has been killed, they’re 
hoping life will get a bit easier, especially when—or if—Marthe’s husband returns 
from soldiering. Hallie hires a passing veteran on to help out, and though Heron 
eases the workload, he only increases the tensions between the two sisters. Mean-
while, Twisted Things, creatures of the Wicked God that were believed to have 
died with it, are showing up around the farm, driving Hallie to take some terrible 
(and often ill-advised) risks to save her land and her family. The grim, oppressive 
setting is carefully constructed (allusions to “old cities” books and weapons reveal 
this as a dystopia), mirroring the bleak desperation that permeates the lives of each 
character. The specifics, however, of the alternate world Hallie discovers and her 
ability to save her brother-in-law from it are less clear, making the twists and turns 
of the plot more confusing than interesting. Hallie herself is enormously unlikable, 
whining at every turn about someone’s mistreatment of her, and while her attitude 
is likely to be a result of her father’s constant abuse during her childhood, her 
complaints becomes repetitive to the point of exasperation. Still, the explanation 
behind the Wicked God makes a compelling interrogation of faith versus science, 
and readers with an interest in either will find this to be an elevation from the 
run-of-the-mill dystopia.  KQG
November 2015 • 135
bodeen, s. A. The Detour. Feiwel, 2015 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-05554-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-07863-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Livvy Flynn is basking in her fame as a seventeen-year-old writer who landed a six-
figure contract for her first YA series. On the way to a writer’s retreat, she flips her 
car, and she wakes up in a basement, locked in by a woman who insists that Livvy 
apologize for a past misdeed. Livvy is clueless and in pain, but she manages to plot 
an escape. Meanwhile, though, she relives her history of being mercilessly bullied 
by classmates until she switched to homeschooling, a fact not in her official bio, 
so she’s disconcerted by the fact that her captor knows her real story. While Livvy 
is slow to put the pieces together even after she has been rescued, readers will be 
quicker to suspect at least part of the motivation behind her captor’s resentment. 
That main motivation (Lizzy’s successful series was built on the woman’s original 
idea) is plausible, but the other details are convenient to the point of contrivance, 
including the fact that Livvy has accidentally landed in the hands of someone with a 
somewhat legitimate grievance against her who happens to have a mentally disturbed 
daughter, a felonious cousin, and a corruptible cop to press into the service of aiding 
and abetting her revenge. The suspense is captivating, but Livvy’s character is not; 
not even her backstory of bullying is enough to render her sympathetic. However, 
her overblown sense of entitlement is fully credible given her circumstances, and 
the premise of being a teenager living every writer’s dream will be enough to garner 
an audience for this title.  KC 
boiger, AlexAndrA Max and Marla; written and illus. by Alexandra Boiger. Put-
nam, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17504-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
While the snow accumulates outside, Max and his best bud, Marla the owl, stretch 
out on a sled in front of the TV watching a luge event. Watching is nowhere near 
as fun as doing for these “real life, honest-to-goodness, cross your heart, W-i-n-t-e-r 
O-l-y-m-p-i-c-s Olympians,” and soon they’re bundled up and out the door, ready 
to take on the formidable slope outside Max’s house. The sled, however, is going 
nowhere, and the true Olympians are soon back indoors waxing the equipment 
(well, Max is waxing, while Marla snoozes after devouring a bag of donuts). On the 
next day’s try, a ferocious gust of wind picks the friends up and tumbles them into 
a tree. This requires a night for recuperation, and on day three, they wrest victory 
from failure by making snow angels, building a snowman, and returning home to 
hang donut medals around their necks. The storyline is wispy as a snowflake, but the 
watercolor illustrations are superb, with the chilly white slopes and blue-shadowed 
houses and trees forming a softly undulating backdrop for the figures of Max and 
Marla, who are crisply outlined in thin ink lines and clad in matching rusty red 
helmets. Marla’s deadpan expression and the tone of do-or-die determination in 
the text provide a touch of humor and encourage the audience to grab their sleds, 
saucers, or lunch trays and hit the slope.  EB 
136 • The bulleTiN
brAllier, mAx The Last Kids on Earth; illus. by Douglas Holgate. Viking, 
2015 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01661-7 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Thirteen-year-old Jack has made good use of the forty-two days since the zombie/
monster apocalypse began. He’s set himself challenges (complete with badges) that 
keep his mind busy while also helping him build survival skills, and he’s never lost 
sight of his key goals of reuniting with his best friend (who is brilliant enough to 
have undoubtedly survived) and saving his crush, who he’s sure is barely hanging 
on without Jack’s help. It’s slightly convenient that Jack didn’t really lose anyone 
important to him (being an orphan comes in handy as a plot device once again), 
but it clears the way for readers to focus on how well Jack has adapted to this new 
world of epic monsters and slavering zombies. Add in a school bully who redeems 
himself, a quick tweak to the damsel-in-distress scenario (she’s been kicking butt 
quite well, thank you), and a fierce battle against a monster smart enough to hold 
a grudge, and you’ve got quite an appealing mix for the middle-grade set. Jack is a 
fantastic narrator, readily admitting to his own quirks while also being savvy enough 
to spot when he’s pegged someone wrong (which is most of the time). The frequent, 
often full-page illustrations are key here, as they highlight dimension, grossness, 
and humor and sometimes directly contradict Jack’s bravado-laced narration. Young 
zombie fans will rejoice in this new series that has all the oozing (by the zombies) 
and heroism (by the kids) that they could hope for.  AS
bunting, eve Forbidden. Clarion, 2015 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-544-39092-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
After influenza takes her parents in 1807, sixteen-year-old Josie Ferguson moves 
from Edinburgh to stay with her aunt and uncle on the Scottish coast. Uncle Caleb 
and Aunt Minnie are less than welcoming, as are the other residents of Brindle, 
who are suspicious and sometimes downright hostile toward Josie. She meets Eli 
Stuart and, despite his initial forwardness (he carries a stockingless Josie to his 
grandmother’s house after Josie is bitten by her aunt’s vicious dog), she finds him a 
kind, albeit odd, companion. Several people, including Eli’s grandmother, tell Josie 
he is “forbidden” but what exactly that means, she does not know. She is certain, 
however, after witnessing a horrific nighttime scene at the beach, that her aunt 
and uncle are up to no good and that Eli knows something about it. An innocent 
heroine, a brooding hero, a gloomy and atmospheric setting—all the elements 
of a classic gothic are superbly deployed here. Bunting uses the Scottish coast to 
great effect, making the lashing rain, gloomy fog, and howling wind characters 
in their own right. The transition of Josie’s opinion of Eli from pearl-clutching 
how-dare-he to ardent love-of-my-life is a bit sudden, but it’s in keeping with the 
novel’s overall tone of heightened drama. In the end, Josie and Eli truly cannot be 
together, but they (and a large number of ghosts) do manage to put a stop to the 
ghastly and murderous deeds committed by Brindle’s citizens. For young readers 
not yet ready for the moors of Wuthering Heights (or even Jamaica Inn) and who 
haven’t yet found Lawrence’s The Wreckers (BCCB 6/98), this would make a fine 
introduction to gothic tropes.  KQG
November 2015 • 137
burt, mArissA A Sliver of Stardust. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229155-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229157-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Wren is a competitive homeschooler who hates to be outdone by her rival, Simon. 
When they both receive a mysterious summons in the form of unfamiliar nursery 
rhymes, they have to work together to find out where and to what they are actually 
being summoned. Soon enough, though, the rivalry is back on, with Simon taking 
easily to his new role as an apprentice Fiddler—someone who uses a combination 
of stardust and nursery rhymes to work a kind of magic that enhances natural 
processes—while as a student Wren is a hot mess. Apparently, though, she has a 
lot more potential power if she can learn to control it. As both a Weather Changer 
and someone who can walk through dreams, she makes the elder Fiddlers nervous, 
because the last apprentice who showed those skills went rogue, started a devastating 
war, and supposedly died, but is now back as a threat. Burt spends her narrative 
energies on creating lush descriptions of the hidden world of the Fiddlers and the 
beauty of their stardust effects rather than on fleshing out her characters, relying 
on clichéd and unmotivated emotional reactions to move the plot forward. Wren’s 
passage through vulnerable uncertainty, mercurial emotions, and clever heroics is 
familiar and rewarding to middle-grade fantasy fans, though, and Burt employs 
highly descriptive world building and plenty of action along with it. Though a 
sequel is planned, this stands alone as a finished adventure.  KC 
butler, emily h. The Case of the Devil’s Interval. Egmont, 2015 [176p] (The 
Drollery Letters)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-601-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-602-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Josephine B. Drollery, her parents, and their guests all drop dead one night after a 
dinner at the Drollerys’ house in eighteenth-century Massachusetts. Upon finding 
her own dead body, Josephine, now a ghost and orphan (given that her parents’ 
spirits have departed), is intent on finding the culprit behind what she assumes to 
be murder. With the help of a few fast-thinking friends, the ghost of a dead profes-
sor, and a buffoonish con man, she uncovers the dastardly plan of a Pukwudgie, a 
troll-like creature of Wampanoag folklore, to use a murderous harp to regain the 
land he believes to be stolen from him. This tale of ghostly mischief and mayhem 
has the wry humor of Klise’s Dying to Meet You (BCCB 7/09), with Josephine’s wit 
providing amusing if anachronistic access to 1784 America. Historical detail and fact 
are sneakily dropped in without force or interruption, and an informative author’s 
note elaborates on some of the ins and outs of the setting. It’s oddly never addressed 
that the Pukwudgie’s view of the Drollerys and other colonist descendants as invad-
ers is pretty accurate, but the book is still an entertaining mix of murder mystery, 
ghost story, and historical fiction and it will likely have a broad audience.  KQG 
138 • The bulleTiN
cArson, mAry kAy Inside Biosphere 2: Earth Science under Glass; illus. with photo-
graphs by Tom Uhlman. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 [80p] (Scientists 
in the Field)
ISBN 978-0-544-41664-2 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
It was an exciting and audacious idea way, way back in 1991: build a closed, self-
sustaining environment just outside of Tuscon, Arizona and seal eight intrepid 
scientist “biospherians” inside for two years to test it out. If it works, we would have 
come far in understanding how to sustain life as colonizers of Mars. Unfortunately, 
it didn’t work; oxygen had to be supplied, and “feuding and fighting among the 
biospherians piled on stress.” The facility, however, was repurposed as a laboratory, 
uniquely adapted to hosting controlled experiments in its varied environments. 
Here Carson highlights the work of three scientists: Joost Van Harten, who stud-
ies oxygen/carbon dioxide exchange in the micro rainforest; Rafe Sagarin, who is 
replicating the Gulf of California in the ocean building in order to study marine 
biodiversity; and Luke Pangle, whose artificial watershed helps scientists understand 
soil creation and erosion. Even the facility itself, under the management of Nate 
Allen, functions as a laboratory for such sustainable technologies as solar panels 
and smarter energy usage. The four main chapters, though interrelated, can be read 
or studied separately, making this a particularly useful title for multiple curricular 
investigations. End matter comprises a glossary, index, and chapter notes with 
selected bibliographies, and suggestions for further research. For readers who are 
more captivated by Biosphere 2’s past, insets on the biospherians and suggestions 
for print and online resources are also included.  EB
chibbAro, Julie Into the Dangerous World; illus. by JM Superville Sovak. Vi-
king, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3910-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Ror’s countercultural commune childhood comes to a screeching halt when her 
troubled father sets the house on fire and loses his life in the flames. Now she, her 
mother, and her newly straitlaced sister are trying to eke out life in the New York 
projects and deal with the realities of Reagan-era America. Attending school for 
the first time, lifelong artist Ror dives into her art class, where she’s impressed by 
her talented classmate Trey. Soon she discovers that Trey is a street artist, who along 
with his crew sprays tags and pieces all over the city, and she’s determined to join 
them, even if her upbringing has left her with a severe deficit in street smarts. Ror’s 
a bit of a desperate tagalong when it comes to Trey’s crew, but it’s understandable, 
and Ror and Trey’s eventual romantic entanglement is effectively developed. The 
street-art scene of 1980s New York is evoked with immersive vividness, as Ror’s 
authentically multicultural crew goes on secret missions to paint up the subway 
trains and embarks on underground graf and dance battles with rival crews. The 
book’s special strength, though, is capturing the technical as well as the emotional 
challenges of a young artist, and the details about Ror’s graffiti art are fascinating 
and knowledgeable. As she did in Deadly (BCCB 1/11), Chibbaro works with artist 
Superville Sovak, here serving to put Ror’s art, from her street style, to her panel 
sequences representing her struggles with her father, to her softly sketched classroom 
November 2015 • 139
work, into visible (if black and white) reality. The closing acknowledgments also 
include a rewarding list of book, music, and art influences and suggest a number 
of films that street-art fans will want to chase down.  DS
cody, mAtthew The Peddler’s Road. Knopf, 2015 [368p] (The Secrets of 
the Pied Piper)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75523-8 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75522-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75524-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Tweenaged Max, who has accompanied her professor father to Hamelin, is mostly 
unimpressed with the place. Her younger brother Carter, however, is fascinated 
by the city and especially the legend of the Pied Piper. A rat infestation at their 
rented house leads their father to call an exterminator who transports the siblings 
to the magical Summer Isle, where they meet most of the 130 children who were 
led away by the piper some seven hundred years ago. The children haven’t aged a 
bit and have created New Hamelin, where they’ve led a near-idyllic existence. Yet 
most of the kids yearn to return home, and their hope lies with Carter, who might 
be able to fulfill a prophecy that would lead him, Max, and the children back to 
where—and possibly when—they came from. While the legend of the Pied Piper 
is the obvious inspiration here, Cody also pulls in creatures and themes from else-
where, including Baba Yaga and Peter Pan, creating a fascinating, dangerous, and 
sometimes perplexing world. The narrative shifts focus among Carter, Max, and 
various other residents of Summer Isle, offering insight into the characters and the 
setting. A final confrontation with the clever piper sets up future installments, and 
readers will happily fall in line to be led further into this story.  KQG
colby, rebeccA It’s Raining Bats and Frogs; illus. by Steven Henry. Feiwel, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-250-04992-6 $16.99  
R 3-5 yrs
When rain threatens the annual Witch Parade, plucky Delia knows what magic to 
work. A few rhyming spells later, and the gray skies literally pour cats and dogs, then 
hats and clogs, and, finally, bats and frogs, before the pitfalls of such precipitation 
puts regular rain in perspective. A shoo-in (or clog-in) for a Halloween storytime, 
this autumn-hued, simple charmer of a story provides ample opportunity for rhym-
ing—and subsequent giggling. The precocious Delia and rotund, snaggle-toothed 
witches are a visual delight, and their responses to the various spells, coupled with 
effective sight gags, will elicit laughter from kids and grownups alike. The only 
trick to this treat? Audiences might just beg for their own rainy day parades.  AA
cole, FrAnk l. The Afterlife Academy. Delacorte, 2015 278p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99186-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74481-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39147-4 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 5-7
Walter is dead, though he wasn’t a few minutes earlier, and before he can even adjust 
to not being a live twelve-year-old anymore, he’s being asked by a grumpy man 
how he wants to spend his afterlife. Spotting something that seems more fun than 
most other options, he opts to become an agent who will protect a living person 
140 • The bulleTiN
from undead forces they can’t see. That’s how he ends up protecting Charlie, his 
agemate and first assignment, from some nefarious elements that want a magical 
book Charlie found. The concept of a richly populated afterlife with all sorts of jobs 
to keep one occupied, and guidance counselors, and demons hovering at the edges, 
is pretty cool, and readers will likely enjoy those descriptive scenes. Unfortunately, 
real-life family dramas, school bullies, and repeat awkwardness caused by Charlie 
speaking to the unseen Walter publicly all slow the pace considerably. In addition, 
while there are suggestions that the demons are capable of horrific violence, most 
of what is directly seen is bumbling mayhem that isn’t scary at all. Even so, there 
is plenty to suggest a sequel will be coming, and one can hope that Walter’s next 
adventure will have more tension and fewer dopey demonic forces.  AS
cottrell boyce, FrAnk The Astounding Broccoli Boy. Walden Pond/Harper-
Collins, 2015 370p
ISBN 978-0-06-240017-8 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-7
When Rory Rooney turns bright green, head to toe, on a class trip, the authorities 
are alarmed—and curious. He’s bundled off to a special unit in a London hos-
pital, where he finds to his horror that his equally green roommate is class bully 
Tommy-Lee Komissky, aka Grim. Tommy-Lee’s sleepwalking leads the boys to a 
miraculous exit via the hospital roof and a window-washer’s platform, which allows 
them to roam through London (and cause havoc) before they sneak back in the 
mornings. Soon they acquire a third green friend in Koko, a girl they meet in their 
wanderings; between their abilities and people’s responses to them, Rory becomes 
convinced that their greenness is a sign that they’ve become superheroes, and the 
trio goes forth to deliver superhero aid to a city in need. Cottrell Boyce (author of 
Millions, BCCB 7/04, etc.) is a practiced master at creating scenarios that are just 
this side of reality, keeping readers guessing about what is and isn’t possible, and 
combining it with touches of cozy British sensibility (the kids smuggle a helpful 
escaped zoo penguin along on their adventures and have an amusing encounter 
with the prime minister). Rory’s superhero conviction is therefore plausible even as 
it’s gently humorous, and the kids’ wild adventures through the city, culminating 
in an epic rescue at the top of the city’s famous Shard, are comedic and exhilarat-
ing. The messagey touches are heavy-handed at times, but that’s a minor quibble 
in what’s otherwise a solid original adventure.  DS
coverly, dAve Night of the Living Worms: A Speed Bump and Slingshot Misadven-
ture; written and illus. by Dave Coverly. Ottaviano/Holt, 2015 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8886-1 $13.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-3
The early bird gets the worm, but what about the younger brother of the early bird? 
Well, he has to cope with feeling inferior to a perfect older brother. Little Speed 
Bump (named after the author/illustrator’s long-running cartoon) would love to, 
just once, get that worm, but he can’t fly very fast and he’s inclined to oversleep. A 
contemplative mood leads to a midnight walk for Speed Bump, who encounters 
a field of angry nightcrawlers cooking up a dastardly plan to take the Early Bird 
out. Can Speed Bump use his birdbrain to thwart the plan, save his brother, and 
maybe get finally get a little respect? Coverly’s goofy humor, rife with bird puns 
November 2015 • 141
(“they hatched plans, but got eggsasperated”) and pop culture references (one bird 
“tweets” on its phone), overlays a thoughtful story of a younger sibling finding 
an identity outside of his older sibling’s shadow. The cartoonish black and white 
illustrations, which take up as much or more space as the big-type print, feature 
plenty of visual gags and include speech bubbles, diagrams, and other imbedded 
text that will give budding readers opportunities to test their skills at every turn. 
Early Bird is a genuinely kind older brother, and Speed Bump’s realization that it’s 
perfectly fine to like him without being like him will appeal to plenty of brothers 
and sisters negotiating their own sibling dynamics.  KQG
cross, gilliAn, ad. The Iliad; illus. by Neil Packer. Candlewick, 2015 160p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7832-6 $19.99  
R Gr. 6-9
With lucid prose and admirable pacing, this handsomely designed followup to 
Cross’ adaptation of The Odyssey (BCCB 11/12) fills in the story for readers who 
may only be familiar with the names of Helen of Troy, Achilles, Apollo, etc. The 
classic tale of the attenuated war is divided into chapters that help readers keep track 
of the battles, quarrels, and interventions by the gods that kept success just out of 
reach for either side until the fateful night when the Greeks tricked the Trojans 
with their wooden-horse ruse. The text is richly illustrated in stylized spreads that 
combine visual metaphor with literal depictions to highlight the more emotional 
moments. The key players are introduced in a set of dramatis personae headshots, 
and battles and arguments maintain a certain visual tidiness through clearly depicted 
face-to-face confrontations and firmly separate battle lines. Attentive readers will 
note Greek words functioning as occasional labels and captions, and a closing guide 
to the Greek alphabet helps those interested in decoding. A historical note is also 
included that discusses the speculation about and archaeological searches for the real 
Troy. Young readers struggling to make sense of humanity’s insatiable lust for war 
will find Cross and Packer’s accessible retelling of this classic a cogent guide.  KC
crowl, m. tArA Eden’s Wish. Disney Hyperion, 2015 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-1185-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-1955-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
A closet full of luxurious clothes, jewel-encrusted furniture, the finest tutor the 
world has to offer, and decadent meals every day—what more could a girl want? 
Well, freedom. Twelve-year-old Eden is the latest of a long line of genies in the lamp, 
and, despite her lavish surroundings, she wants out. She’s nowhere near granting 
the 999 wishes that would free her to remain on Earth, so when she finds a secret 
portal to the mortal world, she follows it, despite her guardians’ warnings. She ends 
up in California, where she manages to enroll in middle school, make some new 
friends, and stay one step ahead of Electric, a group of former genies who seek to 
use Eden for nefarious purposes. Ultimately, though, she’s forced to decide between 
her newfound freedom and the safety of her guardians and the lamp. This is an 
imaginative romp with a smart, snarky protagonist and a humorous interpretation of 
the world as we know it (it turns out most of humanity’s progress is due to wishes). 
Eden’s chafing under her guardians’ rules while still holding a deep affection for 
them will ring true for many tween readers struggling with the authority of their 
caregivers; she’s also just plain entertaining, with a sassy attitude and a clever wit 
142 • The bulleTiN
that saves her on more than one occasion. The “alumni” genies—some of whom 
remain true to the lamp while the members of Electric work against it—are a 
diverse set of characters (one is the President of the United States), and they add 
another layer to the world building. The ending may be a bit too tidy, but it’s also 
pure wish fulfillment—what else could you expect?  KQG
de Fombelle, timothée A Prince without a Kingdom; tr. from the French by 
Sarah Ardizzone. Candlewick, 2015 443p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7950-7 $17.99  
R* Gr. 8-12
Vango, an orphaned boy raised by his devoted guardian, Mademoiselle, on an 
island near Sicily, wanted nothing more than to be ordained and live in a nearby 
monastery. Unfortunately, as readers will know from Vango: Between Sky and Earth 
(BCCB 12/14), he’s being pursued by the Parisian police for a murder, by a cadre 
of unknown assassins, and even by Ethel, the girl who has loved him ever since 
they met as teens aboard the Graf Zeppelin. Clues to Vango’s plight and his true 
identity have been abundant, tantalizing, and disturbing, and it isn’t giving much 
away to state that readers who suspect a connection to Russian royalty are on the 
right track. But Vango’s life is also so tightly intertwined with others, who have been 
drawn into danger simply by simply associating with him, that it’s now imperative 
for Vango to peel away disguises, untangle alliances, and create a future (for himself 
and others), despite the ambiguity of his past. de Fombelle spreads out hints and 
clues like pieces of an intricate clockwork, and although the audience might catch 
satisfying glimpses of what fits where, the pleasure lies in watching the author deftly 
assemble minutiae into a glorious whole. There’s justice, loves at last requited, and, 
even amid the treachery of World War II, the promise of peaceful life on an Aeolian 
island for characters who have proved themselves worthy. After two volumes of 
heart-stopping intrigue, readers will enjoy seeing Vango safely home.  EB
deAcon, Alexis I Am Henry Finch; illus. by Viviane Schwarz. Candlewick, 
2015 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7812-8 $16.99  
Ad 6-9 yrs
In this philosophical picture book, Henry Finch lives with his finch brethren in 
constant cacophony that’s broken only by the occasional invasion of the finch-
consuming Beast. When one day Henry wakes up earlier than the rest of the other 
finches, he’s finally able to hear himself think, and he marvels at his own thoughts. 
One of those thoughts is his desire to defeat the Beast; unfortunately, his attempts 
to do so lead to his being eaten. Henry has another epiphany inside the Beast 
and manages to persuade the creature to go vegetarian and to let Henry back out; 
he relates his escapades to the rest of the finches and convinces them of the joys 
of having thoughts and plans of their own. Having previously partnered on the 
hilarious A Place to Call Home (BCCB 7/11), Deacon and Schwarz show similar 
wit here, with a wry absurdity in the finches’ daily routine. The story’s conceptual 
bent is unfocused and at times awkward, though; the point (silently made by the 
art) when Henry is in the Beast’s stomach seems to be interconnectedness, at other 
times it’s contemplation, and then at the end it seems to be independence and 
individuality. The layout and design are stylish and witty, with the finches each 
a big red thumbprint (a sly nod to uniqueness, since the prints are all different) 
that gains personality from only a few face lines and birdy feet; more elaborate line 
November 2015 • 143
drawings go from black on white to white on black when Henry enters the belly of 
the Beast. Portis’ Wait (BCCB 10/15) is a tighter look at philosophy, but youngsters 
may find this an occasion, with adult prompting, to consider the book’s messages, 
and they will be amused by the witty art.  DS
dicAmillo, kAte Francine Poulet Meets the Ghost Raccoon; illus. by Chris Van 
Dusen. Candlewick, 2015 98p (Tales from Deckawoo Drive)
ISBN 978-0-7636-6886-0 $12.99  
Ad Gr. 2-3 
In this second volume in DiCamillo’s most recent series (a spinoff from her popular 
Mercy Watson series), animal control officer Francine Poulet is called to capture 
a screaming raccoon on Mrs. Bissinger’s roof. Fearless and dependable Francine is 
on the job but gets rattled and fails to capture the critter, whereupon our morti-
fied heroine turns in her animal control uniform. A pair of kids, Frank and Stella, 
convince her to try again when the raccoon reappears, and Francine rallies, captures 
the raccoon, and acquires a new understudy in Frank. The book is sometimes 
excessively wordy (Francine’s boss is particularly rambling), especially for such a 
short chapter book; additionally, the adult protagonist may make this less appeal-
ing to a young audience, though some readers will connect with her experience of 
being temporarily sidelined by her fear. However, DiCamillo’s writing is diverting 
and warmly descriptive, the story has heart, and Francine is an undeniably likable 
character. Even in black and white, Van Dusen’s illustrations evince warmth and 
humor. Fans of the first book in the series, Leroy Ninker Saddles Up (BCCB 9/14), 
and the Mercy Watson books may find similar enjoyment here.  JH
donnelly, JenniFer These Shallow Graves. Delacorte, 2015 [496p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90679-1 $22.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73765-4 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98291-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
The daughter of a wealthy, elite family in 1890s New York, seventeen-year-old 
Josephine Montfort knows her aspirations to be the next Nellie Bly will likely go 
unrealized, pushed aside by expensive dresses, luxurious estates, and an arranged 
marriage to the city’s most sought-after bachelor. When her father unexpectedly 
dies, Jo is certain his death is not an accident as everyone is claiming, and she enlists 
the help of Eddie Gallagher, intrepid reporter and devilishly handsome rogue, to 
uncover the truth. What follows is Jo’s descent into her city’s seedier side and her 
realization that her family’s wealth comes at a terrible cost. Donnelly (author of 
Revolution, BCCB 11/10) perfectly captures the disparity between classes at the 
turn of the century, vividly detailing the sordid excesses of the upper classes and 
their strict social norms and the dog-eat-dog desperation of life on the streets, as 
thieves, prostitutes, and orphaned children struggle to survive. Jo realizes there 
are cruel similarities, however, when ruthless madam helps her understand that Jo 
herself is merely being sold off to the highest bidder, not unlike the girls she meets 
in the brothels. The romantic tension between Eddie and Jo will be pure catnip to 
romance readers, especially as the two verbally spar in between a few brief, stolen 
kisses. Scattered clues and small details come together is a satisfying, albeit heart-
breaking, conclusion.  KQG
144 • The bulleTiN
duFFy, chris, ed. Fable Comics; illus. by Graham Annable, Gregory Benton, R. 
O. Blechman, et al. First Second, 2015 124p
ISBN 978-1-62672-107-4 $19.99 
 R* Gr. 2-5
Following on the heels of the equally vibrant Nursery Rhyme Comics and Fairy Tale 
Comics (BCCB 11/13), this collection tackles twenty-eight fables from almost as 
many graphic artists. In a concluding editor’s note (which might have been more 
useful at the beginning), Duffy defines fables, explains their cross-cultural history 
and popularity, and then lays out the rules of this collection: as long as a “bossy” 
lesson was in there somewhere, cartoonists could do whatever the heck they wanted. 
While many chose an Aesop tale to embellish, there are exceptions, as with Liniers’ 
amusing and pointed adaptation of the medieval European fable “The Mouse 
Council,” which kids may not recognize but will certainly enjoy. Other Aesop tales 
gain new life via stunning illustrations, and Jennifer L. Meyer’s impressively lush 
“Fox & Crow,” created out of few words and dusty greens and violets, is a splendid 
example of the way a known fable can be remade into something diaphanous and 
nuanced, not terms usually associated with the genre. The variety in paneling, text 
length, tone, and art is remarkable, and it invites repeat visits to this collection, as 
it is nearly impossible to soak up the range in one go.  AS
engle, mArgAritA Enchanted Air: Two Cultures, Two Wings. Atheneum, 
2015 193p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3522-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3524-6 $10.99 
 R Gr. 5-8
Engle is familiar to many readers as a verse historian with a strong Cuban focus; 
here she turns her poetic lens to her own history in this memoir of her childhood. 
Young Margarita is torn between the bucolic summers with her mother’s relatives 
in Cuba and life in the U.S. the rest of the year (“Two countries./ Two families./ 
Two sets of words”), a quandary that sharpens as the Cold War hits, the Cuban 
embargo cuts the family off from their Cuban side, and Margarita’s mother is left 
passportless and stateless. Engle’s free-verse poems, each titled and most a page or 
less in length, are prosy and accessible, and they vividly evoke the Cuban agrarian 
life that looks like “luxurious wealth/ to a city girl/ who loves/ farms.” The view 
of the the U.S.’s changing relationship with Cuba, including the Bay of Pigs and 
the Cuban Missile Crisis, gains impact from its personal resonance, and the larger 
story of young Margarita’s attempt to figure out herself and her identity (it’s telling 
that she finds comfort in being a traveler when her family decides to trek through 
Europe) is one with which many readers will sympathize. With books such as 
Woodson’s Brown Girl Dreaming (BCCB 9/14) and Nelson’s How I Discovered 
Poetry (BCCB 3/14), we’re in a rich time for verse memoir, and Engle’s offering 
adds a new dimension.  DS
everett, mikAelA The Unquiet. Greenwillow, 2015 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238127-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-238129-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Two Earths, identical in geography and people and connected by several portals, 
peacefully coexisted until Earth II started slowly disappearing. Trees and city were 
November 2015 • 145
replaced with giant holes, and then people went missing. Since then, the government 
of Earth II has been quietly training “sleeper” assassins, people from Earth II who 
will kill and replace their alternates on Earth I, and then they’ll await a signal from 
the administration to begin an all-out war on Earth I and conquer the territory for 
the Earth II escapees. Lira is one such assassin, and she’s merciless, easily slipping 
into the life of Earth I Lira and gaining the trust of her grandparents and younger 
sister. As years pass with no alert from Earth II, Lira comes to care for her faux fam-
ily, and she struggles with the ethics of her situation; nonetheless, she remains loyal 
to her government’s cause when war arrives, becoming a ruthless killing machine. 
This is a slow-burn type of novel, with much of the tension derived from whether 
Lira can effectively play the role of her alternate as she waits her call to duty. While 
she recognizes the immorality of Earth II’s strategy, she’s pretty sure there will be 
no winners in this game: “I think you just choose your side, and you stay with it 
no matter what happens.” It is this rejection of nobility or principles and her lack 
of any inclination towards heroism that make her a fascinating character, especially 
among the valiant Katniss lookalikes found in so many dystopias. The violence 
of the third act is startling given the mostly blood-free first two parts, but it also 
makes clear to the reader that brute force often wins wars and that the warriors 
often don’t get a chance at redemption.  KQG 
Fry, michAel The Naughty List; by Michael Fry and Bradley Jackson; illus. by 
Michael Fry. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-235475-4 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-235476-1 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Okay, first things first, this is not a great book for true believers in Santa. Now 
that’s out of the way, this is a hilarious look at Christmas from the sarcastic, cranky 
perspective of twelve-year-old Bobbie, who’s decided to skip the whole shebang 
this year. Her pop is working out of town, an inflatable Santa broke her arm, and 
her brother’s wish-list gift is far too expensive to afford. After Bobbie is abducted 
by elves and lands at the North Pole, she realizes that her brother’s actual letter to 
Santa asks for something far more precious, but she also learns that a flawed but 
very dangerous naughty/nice machine is now threatening Christmas altogether. 
This illustrated novel is as told as much through the frequent black and white 
cartoon illustrations and comic strips as it is through text. The humor throughout 
is dry, yet it covers a wealth of topics from farts to training missions gone horribly 
awry. Even with some genuinely sweet moments snuck in here and there (Bobbie’s 
conspiracy-theory-obsessed uncle has a particularly poignant backstory), this is 
mostly going to be perfect for any kid who is utterly sick of the schmaltzy, gotta-
be-nice parts of the Christmas season.  AS
gAle, lAurel Dead Boy. Crown, 2015 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51009-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51008-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-51010-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
In this odd, haunting book, Crow is a dead kid whose very small existence isn’t 
enough for him anymore. His mother is a whiz with sewing parts back on and chal-
146 • The bulleTiN
lenging him educationally, but late-night encounters with a new neighbor, Melody, 
remind him how much he misses eating, sleeping, playing, and just generally being 
alive. When Crow realizes that magic may have caused his situation, he determines 
that it might also be reversible; with Melody as his ally, he’s ready to try undoing 
the process and he’s hopeful of success. Melody’s underlying melancholy is carefully 
addressed, as she clings to Crow’s existence as proof that magic exists (which would 
mean her mother surely got spirited away rather than just leaving her), even while 
genuinely coming to appreciate him. The book may provide maggots in abundance, 
but this really isn’t the expected zombie fare, as Crow is much more interested in 
understanding how he became the way he is and how it can be undone than in 
eating brains. Indeed, the likeliest audience for this book would be those who like 
stories about parent/kid struggles, friendships, and kid to teen transitions; they’ll 
just have to get over Crow’s body parts’ occasional falling off.  AS
greenwAld, tommy Crime Biters!: My Dog Is Better Than Your Dog; illus. by 
Adam Stower. Scholastic, 2015 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-77332-4 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-77333-1 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Readers who like vampires, superheroes, and dogs are finally being offered a series 
that covers it all. Jimmy has wanted a dog forever, and his busy parents eventu-
ally feel guilty enough to get him one, so off to the shelter they go. Abby might 
not be the flashiest dog there, but she’s friendly and she fits all the conditions his 
parent set. Jimmy and Abby are close immediately, even if her undoglike abilities 
make her a bit startling to others, in particular Jimmy’s creepy and mysterious new 
babysitter. A crush, a bit of bullying, and a robbery all play into the plot, but the 
core of this novel is a boy and his (vampiric, crime-fighting, heroic) dog. Readers 
will likely connect with Jimmy quickly as he offers amusing profiles of all of the 
key people in his life, describes his obsession with crime dramas with a knowing 
eyeroll about the kind of kid that makes him, and faces danger with a believably 
modest amount of courage. Stower’s cartoonish, exaggerated illustrations mostly 
emphasize the humor in the text, and they add well-timed breaks for younger read-
ers. Even true dog lovers who usually stick to realistic representations of canines 
may find this irresistible.  AS
hAcohen, deAn Who’s Hungry?; illus. by Sherry Scharschmidt. Candlewick, 
2015 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6586-9 $9.99  
R 1-3 yrs
It all begins with an empty plate and a question: “Who’s hungry?” A turn of the page 
reveals a hungry bunny (“I am! I’m hungry!”) and a flap featuring an illustration 
of a carrot that, when flipped over, “feeds” the bunny (“Crunch, crunch! Yum!”). 
Next up is a hungry seal who requests a fish, then a monkey who wants a banana, 
and so on. Hacohen successfully jumps on the bandwagon of structurally interac-
tive picture books (a genre exemplified by such titles as Schwartz’s There Are Cats 
in This Book, BCCB 12/08, or Cotter’s Don’t Push the Button, BCCB 2/14), and 
while the concept itself is elementary, the brief text is pleasantly varied enough that 
the repeated feedings remain fresh. Scharschmidt’s digital illustrations are large and 
casual, with black outlines loosely accentuating the wide-eyed animal figures against 
November 2015 • 147
their clean, simple backdrops. The size of the pictures and the clear font make this 
a successful choice for group sharing, while the thicker paper and rounded page 
corners render it a fairly sturdy option for lap-sit sessions as well. This will make a 
cheerful addition to baby and toddler storytimes, and it will be a popular title for 
home reading (and an especially nice choice for an older sibling-younger sibling 
readaloud session) as well.  JH
hAhn, mAry downing Took. Clarion, 2015 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-544-55153-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
A rundown old farm in rural West Virginia is the setting for Hahn’s latest horror 
story for young readers. After Daniel’s dad loses his high-paying executive job, his 
family moves to a dilapidated farm in Woodville, a town with boarded-up shops, 
unwelcoming residents, and the legend of Old Auntie and her man-eating hog, 
Bloody Bones. Rumor has it that Old Auntie kidnaps a girl every fifty years to work 
tirelessly as her servant—a rumor that Daniel scoffs at until his own little sister 
(who had started talking ominously to her toy doll) goes missing and Daniel nar-
rowly escapes Bloody Bones in the woods. With the help of a local conjure woman, 
Daniel prepares to face down Old Auntie and her murderous pet in order to get his 
sister back. Occasional chapters narrated by Old Auntie herself give a particularly 
chilling effect to this creepy tale, especially after Daniel’s sister is kidnapped and 
readers witness the abuse that Old Auntie heaps upon her. The classic elements of 
a scary story—a family’s relocation to an eerie town, unexplainable noises in the 
woods, increasing bizarre behavior of family members—are executed perfectly here 
and given a sense of immediacy by Daniel’s narration. Sure, it’s formula, but it’s a 
formula that will particularly appeal to those just discovering the delicious spine 
tingles of creepy urban legends.  KQG 
hAtke, ben Little Robot; written and illus. by Ben Hatke. First Second, 
2015 136p
ISBN 978-1-62672-080-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 2-4
Hatke’s got a knack for early elementary graphic novels, and the unnamed protago-
nist here is just as endearing, memorable, and clever as Zita (from Zita the Spacegirl, 
BCCB 1/11). The tech-savvy little girl finds a broken robot and gets him working 
again, and in short order they are adventuring, unsupervised, through their day. 
Of course, a nifty little robot is sure to be missed eventually, and when a giant, 
much more daunting robot comes to retrieve it, our heroine is going to need more 
than her tiny tool belt to stop her new friend from being sent back. Older kids 
may wonder at this world where a robot is missed while this kiddo appears to be 
essentially on her own, but mostly the attention is so focused on the intricately 
drawn robots (the girl builds more clunky allies to help out) and a surprisingly 
rich friendship between the two that her independence is just part of the fantasy. 
Hatke relies a great deal on the emotionally impactful illustrations to move the 
story; many significant sequences are wordless, since the robot can’t speak and the 
little girl seems accustomed to silence. It’s a delight to let the illustrations take the 
lead, and the diminutive silver robot with the slightly worried eyes is the perfect 
size for his brown-skinned, sturdy companion who displays such moxie that readers 
will likely jump from worrying about her to being certain she’ll save the day.  AS
148 • The bulleTiN
hAutmAn, Pete The Flinkwater Factor: A Novel in Five Thrilling Episodes. Si-
mon, 2015 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3251-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3253-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
This quirky book, set in the near future, offers five episodes (though four and five 
actually blend together) of life in Flinkwater, Iowa, where engineers, sharp intel-
ligence, and wacky adventures are all abundant. Ginger is our guide to this town, 
and she fills us in on its history of in a newsy, gossipy way while also presenting 
the newest emergencies, which involve catatonic townspeople, talking dogs, nano-
technology, and the Department of Homeland Security. You’d think that might 
keep a girl busy, but some of the best scenes are actually Ginger contemplating 
“normal” thirteen-year-old milestones and applying her analytical mind to trying 
to achieve them (“Step 3: Lure Kissable Boy to Kissing Spot”). Hautman’s usual 
deft characterization conveyed on the fly works well here; readers will get to know 
Ginger deeply by the end, even while they zip through madcap scenarios. An 
amusing and informative “Science or Fantasy?” section at the end will help kids 
parse out what’s real, what’s on the way, and what’s rather unlikely from all of the 
technology featured in the book.  AS
hAydu, corey Ann Rules for Stealing Stars. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-235271-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-235274-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 6-9
Eleven-year-old Priscilla, known as Silly, is tired of being treated as if she were, well, 
silly. Her eldest sisters, bossy and protective twins Eleanor and Astrid, have become 
secretive, avoiding their troubled mother by disappearing into their room for hours 
and taking other sister Marla, who is only a year older than Silly, into their room 
with them. It turns out the older girls have discovered that their closets are portals 
to fantasy landscapes that respond to their needs and emotions, but while Astrid 
and Eleanor require props to activate the closets’ powers, Silly can use the portals 
unaided. When Marla uses the magic to become increasingly immersed in harm-
ful emotions, she’s in danger of being drawn out of existence unless her sisters can 
save her. Interwoven into this powerful tale of magic are allusions to the tale of the 
twelve dancing princesses, a story that becomes both metaphor and part of their 
actual family history. The girls’ responses to their mother’s problems are tenderly 
and subtly drawn to match their distinct personalities, but Silly, as narrator, inspires 
the most sympathy and offers the most hope for resilience as the girls fight to keep 
one another close. Her narrative hints at, but never discloses, the full impact of her 
mother’s abuse, protecting younger readers as she protects herself. However, the 
fairy-tale overlay on a serious story of family dysfunction allows a vein of horror 
to interweave with the threads of love and magic that connect the sisters; readers 
will thus find their own level of understanding in this deeply affecting tale.  KC 
November 2015 • 149
holt, k. A. House Arrest. Chronicle, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4521-3477-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Timothy’s baby brother Levi has subglottic stenosis (a too-narrow throat), so clear-
ing his trach tube, dodging snot bullets when he sneezes, and suctioning the gunk 
out of his lungs so he can breathe had become part of Timothy’s normal day. So 
had worrying about money, especially since his father left, so when Timothy saw 
an unattended wallet, he took it, using the credit card to pay for Levi’s meds. He 
got caught, of course, and was sentenced to a year of house arrest and keeping a 
journal. That journal is the book’s narrative, and in it Timothy expresses his anger, 
frustration, and fear in free-verse poems that are not always contrite enough to 
satisfy his court-appointed counselor, Mrs. B., and his probation officer, James. 
Nevertheless, they offer him a chance to tell his side of the situation and work 
through his mercurial yet clearly justified emotions. The straightforward poems rely 
on accessible vocabulary and well-chosen, forceful metaphors that will bear up well 
under the kinds of literary analysis that English teachers favor, but the verses also 
tell a moving story about a kid pushed to his limits where he unexpectedly finds 
help—sometimes because he asks for it, but more often because people are paying 
attention. His fierce commitment to his brother, his cute crush on the girl next 
door, and his evolving ability to appreciate the efforts of the adults who want to 
help him render him utterly likable even when he lashes out; readers will nod their 
heads in sympathy with this guy who breaks the rules for all of the right reasons.  KC
huey, lois miner Forgotten Bones: Uncovering a Slave Cemetery. Millbrook, 
2015 56p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-3393-9 $30.65  
R Gr. 5-8
In 2005, a skull rolled out of the debris dislodged by a backhoe in Albany, New 
York, as a crew dug trenches for new sewer pipe. Work came to a standstill as police 
and archaeologists were called in to estimate the age of the skull and then await the 
coroner’s call to treat the trench as a crime scene or an area of archaeological interest. 
The skull was determined to be African American, and well over a hundred years 
old with no obvious signs of violence, so archaeologists were allowed to investigate 
further, uncovering multiple burials in what was clearly a slave cemetery associated 
with the eighteenth-century Schuyler family. Huey, a New York state archaeolo-
gist, ably guides readers through the excavation, the testing done on the skeletal 
remains, and the documentary evidence that shaped interpretation of the historical 
context. A chapter is also devoted to comparisons with two other excavated burial 
sites in the North which, together with the Albany discovery, shed light on the 
daily lives of slaves outside the South. Although works such as Walker’s Written in 
Bone (BCCB 4/09) offer more detail about archaeological techniques, this book 
manages to convey in a much shorter volume the relationship between field work 
and documentary research and the way comparative studies broaden our perspec-
tive on the rigors of slave life in smaller households as well as in large plantations, 
which have received more scholarly attention. Contemporary photographs of 
the excavation, period reproductions, a glossary, source notes, index, and lists of 
resources are included.  EB
150 • The bulleTiN
inglis, lucy City of Halves. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2015 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82958-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-83054-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Lily Hilyard is accustomed to using her hacking skills and tail-
ing abilities to track criminals for her human-rights lawyer father, but when she 
follows her latest bad guy down a narrow London alley, things get a little weird: 
she’s attacked by a two-headed dog and rescued by the strikingly handsome, half-
human Regan Lupescar. Now aware of a hidden London full of magical Eldritche, 
Lily finds herself drawn into Regan’s nightly battle to protect the city’s walls from 
the encroaching forces of Chaos. Regan needs the help, too, because something 
is tipping the delicate balance toward evil, and it isn’t Chaos itself. The trail soon 
leads to a secret government agency long tasked with monitoring Eldritche folk 
but now using them for secret medical experiments. Reading like a cross between 
Clare’s City of Bones (BCCB 6/07) and Gaiman’s Neverwhere, this novel follows a 
well-worn narrative path, but it’s the style and setting rather than the plot that are 
the real draws here. Fans of urban fantasy will delight in the imaginative use of 
the London setting and enjoy Inglis’ smart, succinct writing. Regan is the typical 
gorgeous, mysterious, super-powered hero, and Lily needs to be rescued a lot, but 
she’s no helpless damsel. Instead she rushes headlong into danger always with the 
intent to save others, human or Eldritche, and she forces Regan to do the same. The 
idea that manmade evil, born of greed and good intentions, can be more dangerous 
than a faceless, magical villain threads its way throughout, giving readers a story 
that will make them think as well as feel.  AM
isol The Menino; written and illus. by Isol; tr. from the Portuguese by Elisa 
Amado. Groundwood, 2015 60p
ISBN 978-1-55498-778-8 $19.95  
R* 5-9 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 129, for review.
John, Antony Imposter. Dial, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4124-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Seth is plucked from the obscurity to star in a new indie film, and just in time too, 
since his family needs the money. Newbies Seth and Annaleigh are playing the leads 
in what’s being called “scripted reality,” where the actors film each other, respond to 
real interruptions, and ad lib as they wish. When big names Sabrina Layton and her 
ex-boyfriend Kris, who’d walked away from the film, return to the picture in other 
roles, Seth gets drawn into the drama of the Lindsay Lohan-esque Sabrina even 
as as he embarks on a relationship with Annaleigh. Meanwhile, weirdly intimate 
photos and secret details about the production keep getting leaked to the tabloids, 
Sabrina and Seth seem to be tailed everywhere they go, and Seth is determined 
to find out who seems to be trying to destroy the film. This lacks the compelling 
originality of John’s earlier works (Five Flavors of Dumb, BCCB 1/11, etc.); the film 
actors are predictable characters, and it’s implausible that the proceedings of what 
seems to be a pretty small and lackluster vehicle would generate such a frenzy of 
tabloid interest. The twist—that this behind-the-scenes story is the real story and 
November 2015 • 151
this is all cinéma verité/reality TV that Seth doesn’t realize he’s consented to—is 
the really interesting part, especially since it means Seth was filmed having sex with 
Annaleigh and that there are interwoven threads of deception by cast and crew (and 
perhaps even family) that he must untangle. Readers who’ve appreciated stories of 
the weirdness of moviemaking or the artifice of making reality may therefore still 
find Seth’s odyssey intriguing.  DS
Jones, gAreth P. No True Echo. Amulet, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-0784-1 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
In this complex British import about time travel and its echoing impacts, a kid, 
Eddie, unfolds a mystery that involves the death of his mother years before, parallel 
echoes of other lives that could have been led, and a company that has been chang-
ing time for years. Eddie’s life goes from dull to exciting in an instant when Scarlett 
hits town, seeming vaguely familiar yet also a bit dangerous in otherwise quiet 
Wellcome Valley. When Eddie follows her, he finds himself embroiled in a bloody, 
confusing, complicated mess, as one should expect when time travel is involved. 
There are occasional bits of preachiness here, but those are easily forgotten against 
the compelling core narrative of a kid whose whole life has played out in ways he 
hasn’t lived yet, will never live, and has lived before, all at once. It is a requirement 
that readers be not only thoroughly interested in time travel but also a bit knowl-
edgeable about the nibbles of real science that shape this novel. For brainy, sci-fi 
oriented teens, however, this is exactly the sort of well-imagined, creative glimpse 
into a world where the most powerful can jump whenever they choose, and the 
startling impact this would have on . . . everything.  AS
kAng, AnnA That’s (Not) Mine; illus. by Christopher Weyant. Two Lions, 
2015 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-2639-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-7638-1 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 2-6 yrs
The critter pairing from You Are (Not) Small (BCCB 10/14) is back, and they’re at 
loggerheads again, this time about possession. When the little purple-gray bear says, 
“That’s my chair,” the big brown bear, who’s sitting in it, responds, “No, it’s mine.” 
The battle that ensues involves claims of precedence, temptation with another chair, 
tickling, and finally a knockdown drag-out fight that leaves both bears upended 
and panting on the floor. Chastened, they apologize to each other and head out 
to play, only for hidden critter number three to seize the chair (“Mine”) in their 
absence. The combatants’ détente is perhaps more hopeful than realistic, but the 
stubborn back-and-forth between the two is utterly believable, as is the escalation 
into outright battle. The simplicity of the text (dialogue plus a few sound effects) 
invites early reading alone, and it’s a natural for comic reading aloud. The thick ink 
outlines and furry watercolor shading have the animated exaggeration of cartoons, 
but they smartly use background white space and page-turn pacing to mete out 
the action. Leave the lessons about sharing to another book: this one is about the 
ridiculousness we get up to in our pursuit of possession.  DS
152 • The bulleTiN
kidd, ronAld Night on Fire. Whitman, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-7024-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Billie Sims’ affection for her family’s black housekeeper, Lavender, is longstanding 
and heartfelt, and therefore it has never occurred to her that racism could figure 
into their relationship. Yes, her father gets snippy with Lavender, and her mother 
may take her for granted a bit, but surely the Sims family are not the nasty kind of 
bigots that go out of their way to make Lavender’s life a misery when she walks into 
an Anniston, Alabama business. However, when the Freedom Riders are mobbed 
and beaten on a bus stop in Anniston, Billie stands on the sidelines with her father 
and does nothing. But neither, for that matter, does Lavender’s daughter, Jarmaine, 
who has already spoken out in public regarding a segregated state spelling bee. Now 
Jarmaine and Billie, each startled by her own lack of courage and commitment, 
form an uneasy alliance and support each other on their own personal freedom ride 
to hear Dr. King speak in Montgomery, Alabama on the night in which Robert 
Kennedy was requested to deploy federal troops to quell segregationists attacking 
the First Baptist Church. Kidd supplies sufficient family backstory to make the girls 
into credible characters; however, it’s their polar views of the world that are really 
on display here, and Kidd’s carefully orchestrated plot points and conversations 
serve as a guided tour through their crises of conscience. This could function well 
as a classroom readaloud and as a step-up book to Bausum’s title Freedom Riders 
(BCCB 4/06).  EB
klAss, dAvid Losers Take All. Farrar, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30136-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Fremont High has always been proud of its stellar sports program, and its football 
team is regarded state-wide as the team to beat. When Principal Gentry dies of a 
heart attack while participating in a Graduation Week track meet, the school board 
appoints a far less principled principal in his stead—football coach Muhldinger, 
whose first order of business is to require all seniors to sign up for a sports team. 
Jack Logan is no athletic misfit, but after a broken jaw and loosened teeth convince 
him he wants no longer wants any part of football, he finds himself in the same 
boat as other resentful seniors, looking for the least stressful sport they can find. A 
lovable misfits plotline ensues, with the part-time Latin teacher agreeing to coach 
a soccer C-team and demanding only that his kids have a good time as they take 
on junior high teams and lose. Losing, in fact, is a matter of pride, and as their 
on-field mishaps circulate via social media, they develop a cult following among 
total strangers who feel scarred from bad P.E. experiences in high school. Unfor-
tunately, both the football players and Muhldinger (who’s been publicly shamed 
for his outrageous rants) are none too pleased with the attention the soccer misfits 
are getting. Although humor and relatively peaceful family acquiescence puts this 
more in the Gordon Korman than the Chris Lynch camp, the themes of covertly 
sanctioned bullying and media frenzy add a thoughtful dimension to the familiar 
underdog story. Even Klass’ single misstep—an unnecessary, flash-in-the-pan subplot 
about a flirtation between the Latin teacher and a female student—can’t sink this 
solidly entertaining effort.  EB
November 2015 • 153
klein, Jen Jillian Cade: (Fake) Paranormal Investigator. 
Soho Teen, 
2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-61695-434-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Jillian’s dad has billed himself as an “expert on all things paranormal” since before 
Jillian was born, and he’s amassed a fair share of diehard ghost-hunting followers. 
Unfortunately, Dad has now taken off to parts unknown, leaving Jillian to fend for 
herself. The electricity is disconnected, and meals are hit or miss, but her prospects 
brighten each time she scores a client as de facto PI for Umbra Investigations, her 
father’s agency for solving dilemmas of supposedly supernatural origin for the 
well-heeled and gullible. The latest mark—er, client—is annoying high school 
classmate Corabelle, whose college boyfriend has gone missing. As Corabelle sees 
it, only a spell or curse could have caused him to stray, and Jillian readily agrees to 
track him down while playing along with Corabelle’s suspicions. More perplexing 
than the case is the determination of Sky Ramsey, a handsome transfer student and 
devotee of Jillian’s scam artist father’s writings, who wants in on the investigation 
and possibly in on Jillian’s life. While Sky tries to figure out the Corabelle case, 
Jillian tries to figure Sky out, and Klein leads readers on a merry chase rife with 
speculation over whether this will turn out to be a mystery story or a horror story. 
There’s a fair amount of heavy breathing and a bit of canoodling, but even when 
the teens pursue their succubus suspect into a kinky nightclub (with Jillian leading 
shirtless Sky around on a chain), a keen sense of absurdity sets the tone and the 
rating never exceeds PG-13. By novel’s end, Jillian can honestly remove the “fake” 
from her professional claim, and the scene is set for a sequel in which Jillian and 
Sky will save the world. Hopefully. Wait and see.  EB
kudlinski, kAthleen v. Boy, Were We Wrong About the Human Body!; illus. by 
Debbie Tilley. Dial, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3792-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-10 yrs
Kudlinski has made previous forays into scientific folly surrounding dinosaurs, the 
solar system, and weather (Boy, Were We Wrong about Dinosaurs, BCCB 1/06, et al.), 
and kids are likely to recognize and embrace her gently snarky format: a trans-global, 
cross-cultural tour through popular and scholarly mumpsimuses. Here children can 
giggle over persistent wrongheadedness regarding issues they understand quite well 
themselves. Egyptian mummy-makers left the heart in the corpse, believing that it 
and not the brain controlled thought and personality. Ancient Greeks thought light 
“shot out of our eyes” to capture the object in sight. Ancient Persians, oblivious to 
the life-sustaining blood vessels and marrow inside, regarded bones as dead mat-
ter. Technological means and social acceptability now, of course, allow us to peek 
inside and put these silly notions to rest—but, as Kudlinski cautions, “our current 
ideas about the human body may someday seem just as strange.” Tilley provides 
some of the most entertaining illustrations in the series to date with a crossed-out 
heart-in-circle reminder to embalmers not to toss out the organ, a general in a brain 
helmet directing the heart to “Keep beating, soldier!!”; a smugly proud medieval 
Ye Olde Science Faire winner posing next to her display on the four humors, and 
a flea waving back through the microscope at a scientist dog who scratches madly 
154 • The bulleTiN
through his lab coat. A timeline highlighting the bloopers and their correctives is 
included, as well as several kid-friendly sources for further exploration.  EB
lAw, ingrid Switch. Dial, 2015 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3862-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Gypsy Beaumont was twelve when readers last saw her in Scumble (BCCB 10/10); 
now she’s thirteen and in full possession of her “savvy,” a special power that members 
of her family acquire on their thirteenth birthdays (introduced in Savvy, BCCB 
9/08). Her main problem now is the loss of her best friend, whose newfound 
junior-high sophistication makes her regard Gypsy’s free-spirited ways as baby-
ish. Additionally, Gypsy finds out that her cranky, non-magical Grandma Pat has 
Alzheimer’s and is coming to live with the Beaumonts. This disturbing turn of 
events has the effect of scrambling everyone’s savvies: her perfect mother suddenly 
becomes clumsy and inept, her reclusive brother Samson swaps invisibility for 
spontaneous combustion that sets everything on fire but him, and Gypsy herself 
is able to stop time altogether. The lively wordplay of the previous books is less in 
evidence here, but clever plotting and amiable characters once again enable Law 
to produce a winning story that ties strong, complex emotions to creatively apt 
superpowers. An action-packed road trip reminiscent of events in the first book 
casually draws in a diverse set of characters and provides some mild romance for 
Samson and for Gypsy, but Gypsy’s main character arc involves completing her 
grief cycle with regard to her beloved, supportive Grandpa Bomba, who died in the 
previous book, and subsequently being able to accept her difficult grandma on her 
own terms. While familiarity with the first two books is not necessarily required, 
sprinkled references to events in those books will inspire readers to investigate the 
exploits of the magical, good-hearted Beaumonts.  KC
leveen, tom Shackled. Simon Pulse, 2015 212p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2249-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2251-2 $10.99  
R Gr. 8-10
Six years ago, Pelly’s best friend, Tara, was abducted from the mall and never seen 
again; now Pelly is sixteen, haunted by anxiety, self-harm, and compulsive think-
ing in the wake of the unsolved tragedy. When a girl she swears is Tara appears 
in the coffee shop where Pelly works, mouthing “Help me” as she’s led away by a 
controlling older man, Pelly is determined to rescue her friend at last. Aided by 
David, her co-worker and possibly boyfriend, Pelly turns sleuth and heads out to 
face a potential kidnapper and her own demons. This is a speedy and suspenseful 
outing, and Pelly is a satisfying blend of unsympathetic (she’s often self-centeredly 
bitchy, and several characters call her on it) and vulnerable. The book also avoids 
a neat tying up of Pelly’s trauma (there is a horrifying abduction involved, but it 
has nothing to do with Tara) while still allowing her to be an unexpectedly tough 
heroine. There are a few plot holes, but it’s not the kind of tale where that matters, 
and ultimately this is a solid and enjoyable quick pick.  DS
November 2015 • 155
liggett, kim Blood and Salt. Putnam, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16648-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Ash is certain her missing mother has returned to Quivira, Kansas, the home of the 
spiritual cult she grew up in and eventually escaped. Ash and her twin brother Rhys 
ditch their New York apartment and road trip it to Quivira. Though their mother 
isn’t there, Ash and Rhys are welcomed by the residents of Quivira as family, and 
they allow themselves to be drawn into the group’s preparations for an upcoming 
ritual in order to find out more information about their mother. Meanwhile Ash’s 
visions of a hanging dead girl become increasingly intense, and her attraction to 
one of the Quivira boys—forbidden by Quivira customs—eventually leads to her 
discovery of the tragic tale of love and revenge that haunts Quivira. Plot twists and 
turns are revealed through Ash’s visions, allowing readers to piece together the bizarre 
and horrific history of the cult, which includes the explorer Francisco Vázquez de 
Coronado, carnivorous corn, heartbreak and bloodshed, along with a whole lot of 
black magic. The character of narrator Ash is too often inconsistent, though, since 
her immediate and warm embrace of the cult clashes with her suspicions they may 
have hurt her mother, and her focus on her romance with Dane, the Quivira boy, 
often eclipses her worries about her and her brother’s safety; additionally, her sarcasm 
and humor are often forced. Nonetheless, the unspooling of Quivira’s fascinating 
backstory may spur readers forward, and complexities introduced at the end could 
keep them around for the hinted-at sequel.  KQG 
lubAr, dAvid Sophomores and Other Oxymorons. Dutton, 2015 [432p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42970-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Having survived a tumultuous freshman year (Sleeping Freshman Never Lie, BCCB 
10/05), Scott Hudson feels more than ready to tackle life as a sophomore. In fact, 
he’s confident enough to pay his hard-won wisdom forward on the first day, leaping 
to the rescue of a hapless freshman named Jeremy who’s waving his nerd flag far too 
boldly. Score one for the power of well-chosen words to defeat bullies, but all too 
soon Scott’s overblown confidence runs smack into the brick walls of two teachers 
bent on reminding him of the true meaning of the word sophomore. He stumbles 
headlong and repeatedly into the traps they set for him, but his sense of humor 
and unflagging belief in his abilities as a writer carry him forward. He continues 
to record life tips for his newborn brother, Sean, strives to keep on an even footing 
in the battle of wits with his crush, Lee, and eventually, with Jeremy’s help, wins 
some real victories over corrupt school officials. Lubar has a canny knack for getting 
the sophomore experience just right; while Scott is certainly more linguistically 
savvy than the average fifteen-year-old, he’s just as emotionally clumsy, and his 
aspirations hit that sweet spot between fantasizing about intellectual, romantic, and 
political heroics, encountering his limits, and pressing on anyway. Fans of the first 
book will enjoy the clever wordplay taken to new heights, and they will be glad to 
see the return of Scott’s enigmatic friend, Wesley, who is as charmingly weird as 
ever. Despite many references to events of the previous year, this can be enjoyed 
as a stand-alone, especially for budding English majors; bone up on your punning 
skills and get ready to learn some new figures of speech right alongside Scott.  KC 
156 • The bulleTiN
mcginnis, mindy A Madness So Discreet. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232086-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232088-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
A telltale growing belly lands Grace Mae in a nineteenth-century insane asylum, 
delivered there by her father, a powerful Massachusetts politician and the man 
responsible for her pregnancy. The asylum is horrible, but the bedroom of her 
own home is far worse, and when her miscarriage means an imminent return to 
her family, she begs Dr. Thornhollow, a young lobotomist who is often called to 
the asylum, to perform the procedure on her. Thornhollow, recognizing Grace’s 
intelligence and observational skills, instead offers Grace a position as his assistant 
as he uses the new field of criminal psychology to solve murders. Secreted off to 
another (less cruel) asylum in Ohio, she must maintain the guise of insanity for 
her own safety, but she is able to join Thornhollow in his investigation of a string 
of suspicious deaths of young women. Several storylines are threaded together in 
this powerful and dark book, examining the line between sanity and insanity and 
often indicting those who get to define that line. Much like Dr. Thornhollow, the 
third-person narration is cool, almost clinical in its study of Grace, but the detached 
tone also lends a legitimacy to her experiences (and those of other asylum residents) 
that will encourage reader sympathy. Indeed, McGinnis extends compassion to the 
asylum’s most helpless patients as well as the most disturbed and violent characters 
here—even the murderer and separately, Grace’s father—but she also makes it clear 
that many of the people deemed insane, especially the women, are locked away 
simply because they became inconvenient. Several of those women, including 
Grace, are able to exact some amount of revenge, but readers will be haunted by 
Grace’s tearful summation of the victims of her father’s and others cruelty: “There 
are many. So many.”  KQG
medinA, meg Mango, Abuela, and Me; illus. by Angela Dominguez. Candle-
wick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6900-3 $15.99  
R 5-8 yrs
“I still feel shy when I meet this far-away grandmother,” says Mia, whose abuela 
has left her home behind to join Mia’s household. Struggling with a language bar-
rier—initially Mia speaks no Spanish and Abuela no English—the two slowly get 
to know each other as Abuela cares for Mia after school. When Mia spots a parrot 
in a pet store, she’s reminded of the wild parrot who roosted in her grandmother’s 
mango tree back home, and she and her mother bring the parrot home for Abuela; 
Mango, as he’s named, turns out to be a chatty model for Abuela’s own English 
skills and a lively point of connection to the neighborhood and Mia. It’s the subtle 
details that make this gentle tale of adaptation so successful. Abuela, for instance, 
is a capable lady who’s clearly a boon to the household (illustrations make her a 
contemporary grandma sporting a sleek bob and cropped skinny jeans), and Mia’s 
mother reminds Mia that her best friend Kim started out with little English too, 
matter-of-factly framing Abuela’s transition as a common one. Dominguez’s easy-
going illustrations (in ink, gouache, and marker) have a casual yet precise style; 
there are touches of humor in Mia’s English labeling of nearly every object in the 
apartment, and the occasional perspectival shift (looking down on a wistful Abuela 
as she sits in the park with her granddaughter) adds emotional resonance. There are 
November 2015 • 157
a lot of families negotiating language and cultural divides, especially with extended 
family, so plenty of kids will sympathize with Mia’s situation and appreciate her 
growing relationship with Abuela.  DS
mesrobiAn, cArrie Cut Both Ways. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234988-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234990-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
Half the time, Will lives with his mother and her new family in a mansion while the 
other half of his time he lives with his alcoholic dad in a house where renovations 
have gotten out of control, leaving a gutted shell of a home. He’s similarly torn 
in two romantically between Angus and Brandy, but that’s even worse as neither 
knows about his relationship with the other. Will’s not sure about his sexual identity 
and what it means that his body responds to both of their advances, but he’s even 
more uncertain about whether or not he’s a good person since he’s been cheating 
emotionally and sexually on both his partners for months. Indeed, the end of the 
novel is open-ended on multiple fronts, as Will’s dad is still struggling, his mom 
is still mostly wrapped up in her new life, and Brandy and Angus are still in the 
dark. While Will isn’t always likable, he is nonetheless a genuinely sympathetic 
character, especially as he comes to some hard realizations. His spare narration 
doesn’t always give room for other characters, but it is an effective reflection of his 
self-absorbed brain and how little room Will gives people to adapt and grow; the 
representations of intimacy as being a lot of fumbling and awkwardness and a bit 
of fun is refreshingly realistic. Readers who can connect with Will in spite of his 
flaws will find this to be a memorable, unflinching look at the way someone can 
passively get themselves into some heavy, life-impacting situations.  AS
murAkAmi, mAsAhiko Nichiren; illus. by Ken Tanaka. Middleway, 2015 272p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-9779245-7-8 $12.95  
R Gr. 9-12
In this solemn, carefully constructed graphic novel, the few known facts about the 
real life of Nichiren, a Buddhist monk who lived in thirteenth-century Japan, are 
woven into a fictional tale of power, religion, and historical drama. The steadfast 
Nichiren, clearly battling against significant corruption in both government and 
religious institutions, is a fascinating figure; the overwhelming injustice his people 
face will feel universal, even without specific historical knowledge. Manga-style il-
lustrations show the extreme emotions of Nichiren’s followers and enemies, creating 
an effective contrast with his seemingly unshakeable placidity. Monochromatic il-
lustrations make effective use of grays and sharp black and white contrasts to provide 
variety in the images, and panels are stretched, made vertical, or skipped altogether 
on occasion to emphasize key scenes. Casual readers might find the amount of 
text and educational information contained in it to be a bit daunting, but fans 
of Japanese history or those interested in Buddhist concepts will find this graphic 
novel to be a surprisingly rich resource, even with the fictionalized elements.  AS
158 • The bulleTiN
nytrA, dAvid Windmill Dragons: A Leah and Alan Adventure; written and illus. 
by David Nytra. Toon Graphics, 2015 117p
ISBN 978-1-935179-88-7 $18.95  
R Gr. 4-6
This second graphic novel featuring Leah and Alan (from The Secret of the Stone 
Frog) brings together bits of Don Quixote, Jewish mythology, medieval legends, and 
even hints of Native American canoe design and mixes all that with two stalwart 
protagonists traveling through a fantastic world and determined to put a suddenly 
chaotic world back to normal. There is stunning intricacy in the monochromatic 
illustrations, which are dense with delicate linework and hatching, that will keep 
readers transfixed as they explore the astonishingly detailed monsters that will please 
even the most demanding monster-crazed audience. Alan and Leah serve mostly 
as visual checkpoints to orient viewers as they negotiate the far more complex and 
sophisticated non-human creatures that the protagonists encounter with alarming 
frequency. Offer this to early artists as aspirational material and to middle-graders 
up for a wonky but exhilarating adventure. End matter gives additional information 
on the literary sources involved.  AS
oliver, lAuren Curiosity House: The Shrunken Head; by Lauren Oliver and H. 
C. Chester; illus. by Benjamin Lacombe. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227081-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-227083-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 4-6
In 1930s New York, Dumfrey’s Dime Museum of Freaks, Oddities, and Wonders 
has made a comfy and accepting home for orphans Sam, Thomas, and Pippa, who 
possess extraordinary abilities. Betty the Bearded Lady, Hugo the Elephant Man, 
Danny the Dwarf, etc. are nice company, and when Mackenzie, aka Max, shows 
up with her knife-wielding skills, the three kids welcome the young girl into their 
group. Mr. Dumfrey’s latest procurement of the shrunken head of an Amazonian 
chief is drawing huge crowds, but unfortunately, the theft of the head, a string 
of suspicious deaths, and a scandal-chasing reporter put the Museum’s future in 
jeopardy. Sam, Thomas, Pippa, and Max use their uncanny abilities (and just plain 
old street smarts) to track down the person behind the Museum’s misfortune. The 
plot moves at an increasingly rapid clip as the kids race through the mean streets 
of Depression-era New York, whose details provide grit to the story while eccentric 
residents provide levity. The quartet of protagonists amiably share the spotlight as 
an ensemble cast, offering several access points for readers. The bad guy is pretty 
easy to spot from the get-go, but his surprising motivations and the subsequent 
implications for Sam, Thomas, Pippa, and Max will have readers lining up for their 
tickets to the next book.  KQG
oPPel, kenneth The Nest; illus. by Jon Klassen. Simon, 2015 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3232-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3234-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 5-8
Steve has always had a fear of wasps, and of the dark shape that stands at the foot 
of his bed in his nightmares. When his brother, Theo, is born with multiple health 
problems, Steve’s dreams become sweeter; in fact, the figure that visits him seems 
November 2015 • 159
like an angel, offering help for the baby. He soon realizes, though, that she is a 
wasp, and her offer is not to heal Theo but to replace him with a baby she and 
her workers grow in a nest outside Steve’s house. Desperate to believe she is just 
a dream, Steve enters into a horrible contract to help the queen take his defec-
tive baby brother and replace him with a perfect one; when it comes time to act, 
however, he fights with all he has to prevent the wasps from taking the baby. This 
horror story manifests the inner conflicts that arise when a new sibling doesn’t enter 
the world easily; Steve is jealous of the attention the new baby demands, angered 
by the sadness Theo’s problems bring his parents, and disappointed in both his 
brother and his own reaction to him. With the help of a babysitter, Steve comes to 
realize that everyone has his or her share of brokenness, and he must face his own 
as he fights for his brother. Broody, atmospheric illustrations by Jon Klassen focus 
attention on important themes by depicting emotionally poignant moments and 
key objects with metaphoric resonance. The story effectively taps into primal fears, 
but readers’ identification with Steve’s brave and resourceful responses mitigate the 
horror enough to provide a vicarious thrill. The book makes an interesting thematic 
pairing with Almond’s Skellig (BCCB 3/99), as both explore otherworldly responses 
to anxiety over a fragile sibling.  KC
PAlAcio, r. J. Auggie & Me: Three Wonder Stories. Knopf, 2015 303p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93486-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-101-93485-2 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 5-7
This followup to Wonder (BCCB 3/12) brings together three stories, each previ-
ously published as e-books, that offer a different perspective to the experiences of 
Auggie, the fifth-grader with craniofacial deformity. The first story, “The Julian 
Chapter,” is narrated by Auggie’s bully, Julian, and gives his take on events; the 
second, “Pluto,” follows Auggie’s childhood friend Chris and the changes in the 
boys’ friendship as they grow older; the final story, “Shingaling,” treats the transi-
tions of Charlotte, Auggie’s classmate, as she finds popularity-crossing friendships 
in a new dance group. The results are, like many story collections, uneven: “The 
Julian Collection” is a talky and contrived story of Julian’s growth of conscience 
(due to his grandmother’s experience in the Holocaust); “Pluto” is a slow-moving 
but thoughtful account of the challenges of being friends with Auggie; “Shingal-
ing” is a lively and nuanced tale of girls’ figuring out their moral centers amid the 
pressures of different friend groups. These are likeliest to be read in conjunction 
with Wonder, which will add considerable value to the first two stories; the last will 
make readers hope that Palacio will go back to these girls or others to write more 
of daily-life friendship struggles.  DS
PAPAdemetriou, lisA A Tale of Highly Unusual Magic. Harper/HarperCollins, 
2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237121-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-237107-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Kai is spending the summer with her eccentric great-aunt in Texas; Leila is visit-
ing her father’s family in Pakistan; the two girls have never met. When Kai finds 
a mostly blank book called The Exquisite Corpse, she writes a single sentence in it. 
On the other side of the world, Leila encounters a book of the same title. To their 
160 • The bulleTiN
astonishment, the book begins to write itself, responding to the sentences that each 
girl adds until the story draws the small Texas town and Lahore, Pakistan, together 
through the characters of the mysteriously appearing tale. The novel gets off to 
a bumpy start as it establishes the two girls and begins the old Surrealist game of 
Exquisite Corpse, but as the story within a story develops, the connections and 
back-and-forth movements become easier to track. An intrusive narrator admits 
to the initially abrupt transitions and continues to provide playful commentary 
throughout the narrative in a chummy way. These energetic interruptions along 
with Kai’s sarcasm contribute humor and a sense of liveliness and intimacy to the 
storytelling, while the developing mystery and the promise of new friendships and 
second chances make for emotionally satisfying engagement. Despite the contem-
porary setting, the book has an old-fashioned quality of domestic fantasy that will 
appeal to fans of E. Nesbit and Edward Eager.  KC
PeArsAll, shelley The Seventh Most Important Thing. Knopf, 2015 278p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49729-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49728-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49730-4 $10.99  
R Gr. 4-6
When thirteen-year old Arthur saw his deceased father’s motorcycle cap on the 
Junk Man’s head, he didn’t think about pitching the brick at the older man—he 
just did it. He’s surprised when the Junk Man, actually James Hampton, appeals to 
the juvenile court where Arthur is being sentenced for the crime and requests that 
Arthur complete his community service helping him. As Arthur spends his Saturdays 
digging through the trash for light bulbs, mirrors, and other sundries from a list 
of seven specific items, Arthur grows to appreciate Mr. Hampton and his artistic 
vision—a large-scale piece of installation art using trash-picked materials to portray 
a gleaming, reflective Heaven—and to move through his own pain in the process. 
This thoughtful novel is based on The Throne of the Third Heaven of the Nations’ 
Millennium General Assembly, an actual art piece by the very real James Hampton 
that’s now housed at the Smithsonian, and it interweaves the power and purpose of 
art with an exploration of a boy’s grief and redemption while sprinkling in details 
of the 1963 setting for added depth. As a character, Hampton unfortunately falls 
into the problematic cliché of the wise black man who helps a white child through 
his pain, but the writing is solid, the plot intriguing, and the protagonist relatable. 
A detailed author’s note, complete with photos, helps round out the backstory.  AA
PoPe, PAul The Fall of the House of West; by Paul Pope and JT Petty; illus. by 
David Rubín. First Second, 2015 158p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-101-7 $9.99  
R Gr. 6-10
This second of a two-part origin story for Aurora West (from Battling Boy, BCCB 
1/14, and The Rise of Aurora West, BCCB 12/14) finds the intrepid monster-hunter 
apprentice still fighting desperately to emerge from the shadow of her superhero 
father, Haggard West. Armed with new secret details about her mother’s violent 
death, she sets out on her first solo patrols. Unfortunately, she is blinded by her 
need for revenge and quickly falls into the hands of the gangster-monsters that rule 
the shadows of Acropolis. Suddenly finding herself bait in a trap for her father, 
Aurora still manages to help save the day, but her dogged pursuit of her mother’s 
killer may ultimately expose a long-held secret that would destroy her father 
November 2015 • 161
forever. Rendered in the same grayscale style as the previous volume, this graphic 
novel continues to blend high-octane action scenes and poignant family drama in 
meticulous visual detail. The myriad chase and combat scenes will draw in readers, 
but it’s the authentic portrayal of adolescence that will truly resonate. As Aurora 
negotiates boundaries and tests limits, she learns hard lessons about adulthood, 
responsibility, and independence and emerges as relatable as she is heroic. Creepy 
yet campy scenes in the monster underworld provide a break from the more seri-
ous primary narrative. The story’s end finds father and daughter at peace and foes 
defeated; there are enough loose ends that further adventures might not be out of 
the question, though, and readers will likely agree that this gritty, self-possessed 
heroine deserves them.  AM
Potter, ellen Piper Green and the Fairy Tree; illus. by Qin Leng. Knopf, 
2015 95p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49924-7 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49923-0 $14.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49926-1 $5.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49925-4 $5.99  
R Gr. 1-3
Instead of taking a school bus to school, Piper Green (like the rest of the kids on 
Peek-a-Boo Island) rides in a lobster boat from her small Maine island to a larger 
one each day for her education. Second grade gets off to a rocky start, though, 
when her teacher tries to make Piper remove the monkey earmuffs that she per-
sists in wearing to class; the earmuffs are a comforting reminder of brother Erik, 
who has moved away to go to school. Piper skips school to avoid more earmuff 
confrontations and hides in a tree, where she’s noticed by a kindly neighbor, Mrs. 
Pennypocket. Peculiar noises lead to Piper’s discovery of two kittens hiding in a 
hole in the tree, and Mrs. Pennypocket informs Piper that this is “fairy tree,” in 
which items are mysteriously exchanged; Piper hesitantly decides to leave the pre-
cious earmuffs in the tree as payment for her new pet kittens, who, along with a 
surprise visit from Erik, restore Piper’s happiness. This is a brief and simple little 
slice-of-life story that manages to evoke both amusement and sympathy. Piper’s 
narrative is often rib-ticklingly funny, and the island setting will intrigue children 
in land-locked locales. Leng’s frequent monochromatic illustrations are tidy and 
well composed, and her Piper looks a bit like a younger Judy Moody. This is a solid 
series beginning and readers of primary-grade chapter books will enjoy it just as 
much as adult readers-aloud and their audiences.  JH
Potter, ellen 
Too Much Good Luck; illus. by Qin Leng. 
Knopf, 
2015 119p (Piper Green and the Fairy Tree)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49928-5 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49927-8 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49929-2 $5.99  
R Gr. 1-3 
In the second entry in this new early chapter book series (Piper Green and the Fairy 
Tree, reviewed above), second-grader Piper is certain it’s her lucky day until she 
discovers that the class bunny has been sent to a new home thanks to new girl Ca-
milla’s allergies. Piper then convincingly tells Camilla that their teacher is actually 
a witch—in the hopes that Camilla will be scared enough to leave school—and 
when the teacher coincidentally pulls a magic wand from her bag in class, Camilla 
162 • The bulleTiN
flees in fear. The two girls bond after Piper apologizes, and when they find a lost 
parakeet, it becomes the new class pet. Piper and her crew of classmates continue 
to humorously entertain (“‘Well, if you do have a baby, don’t feed it a lot of cheese,’ 
Garth said. ‘Because my cousin ate a lot of cheese, and he didn’t go to the bathroom 
for six days. The doctor said he could have exploded’”) and this and the previous 
title would make excellent readaloud selections. Solo readers ready for short chapter 
books will fare equally well, though, thanks to Potter’s straightforward language, 
quick-paced chapters, and the large, clear font. Leng’s attractive monochromatic 
illustrations (about one per chapter) continue to charm as well. Fans of Junie B. 
Jones or Applegate’s Roscoe Riley series may also want to follow Piper.  JH
PrAtchett, terry The Shepherd’s Crown. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 288p
ISBN 978-0-06-242997-1 $18.99  
R* Gr. 8-12
A careful, thoughtful afterword makes clear how much of this final Tiffany Aching 
title was complete before Pratchett’s death, indicating that it was nearly finished 
and that the thinner sections have been left as is, alleviating most concerns that it 
wasn’t something he wanted shared with the world. That said, astute readers will 
spot those places that are rougher or less detailed than usual, and this is a rare, albeit 
tragic, look into this author’s process. This book takes a fifth look at the characters 
of Discworld that surround young witch Tiffany Aching (from The Wee Free Men, 
BCCB 7/08, etc.), the Nac Mac Feegles, who are perpetual havoc, and the people 
who rely on Tiffany and the other witches. Trouble is brewing as changes in the witch 
hierarchy shake things up, changes in the elf hierarchy result in a rapacious new 
leader who will exploit anything to gain power, and changes in Discworld suggest 
a leap into a new, iron-focused era. The humor of the never-changing Feegles, still 
exclaiming absurd rallying cries, drinking far too much, and ready to battle tree 
or foe, lightens what is a fairly dark novel: no one emerges unscathed from such 
upheaval. There is something deeply suitable about the significant focus here on 
legacy and what is left behind when an important member in a community dies, 
both in what they actually leave and in how their impact ripples to others. It never 
becomes a self-indulgent project, though—this moment and these philosophical 
ponderings belong to Tiffany, the elf queen, and the people who face a hole left 
when a key character is gone. Savor this one; it’s literally the last authorized book 
coming.  AS
Preus, mArgi The Bamboo Sword. Amulet, 2015 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-0807-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 4-6
Yoshi, a Japanese peasant with no real hope of raising his status, idolizes the samurai 
and secretly practices the skills he observes at his master’s dojo. Jack, second-to-
lowliest crewman aboard the U.S. steamship Susquehanna, has no notion of the 
political firestorm into which he’s sailing as the ship anchors off the forbidden 
coast of Japan in 1853 on a mission to open Japanese ports to Western trade. The 
two fictional boys, each with an oblique but important view of the diplomatic 
confrontation, go about their private affairs until they are thrown together as ten-
sions escalate, and they must rely on each other to dodge partisans who see them 
as the enemy. Yoshi, who lands in the employ of Manjiro (an historical figure with 
firsthand knowledge of the United States and American language and customs), 
November 2015 • 163
listens carefully to the debates among the samurai, who differ on whether Japan’s 
interests lie in resisting or accommodating the foreigners. Jack, separated from 
his shipmates while attached to a delegation on shore, is targeted as a monstrous 
foreigner and runs for his life. Spying and swordplay, set to the tune of an actual 
historical event, make this a promising storyline for middle-grade readers, but 
Preus overexplains the background through conveniently overheard dialogues and 
breathless rhetorical prompts that betray a heavy authorial hand. Nonetheless, this 
will have appeal as a companion piece to Preus’s Heart of a Samurai; readers whose 
interest is driven by the history rather than the adventure will also appreciate the 
Japanese woodcut reproductions, the glossaries for Japanese and nautical terms, 
and the appended notes on real-life players and political movements. A selected 
bibliography is included.  EB
PullmAn, PhiliP The Golden Compass: The Graphic Novel: Volume One; tr. from 
the French by Annie Easton; ad. by Stéphane Melchior; illus. by Clément Oubre-
rie. Knopf, 2015 80p
ISBN 978-0-553-52371-3 $18.99  
R Gr. 6-10
Twenty years after the original publication of Pullman’s classic, this graphic novel 
focuses on the first third of that book. This volume covers Lyra’s leaving of Jordan 
College and finding out who her mother is, ending with Lyra on a boat heading 
North with her alethiometer and Pan, her daemon. The text is smooth and well 
chosen, capturing the essence of the source novel while also keeping the word count 
reasonable for the format. There isn’t much interplay between text and art, as each 
simply reinforces the other, but the use of dark shading is effective in slowing the 
reader’s eye with regularity, giving the pithy words more time to sink in. For every 
reader who will say that a graphic version wasn’t necessary or sets in stone ele-
ments best left to the imagination (it is difficult, after all, to capture the daemons 
as fluidly as the original novel did), there will be another who is thrilled to meet 
(or revisit) this remarkable book in smaller doses with lushly colored illustrations. 
The two other volumes aren’t due for a year and two years, so readers will have to 
be patient, or go back to the original book and get busy imagining how upcoming 
scenes will be illustrated.  AS
reeF, cAtherine Noah Webster: Man of Many Words. Clarion, 2015 211p il-
lus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-544-12983-2 $18.99  
Ad Gr. 6-10
It’s fair to suppose that teens seeking a biography of Noah Webster are interested, 
narrowly, in his compilation of the dictionary. However, since that most acclaimed 
work, A Compendious Dictionary of the English Language, did not appear in print 
until 1806, when Webster was close to fifty years old, there’s a lot of biography 
to be gotten through before arriving at the main event and Reef is faced with a 
significant challenge in holding attention on a man whose story most teens will 
find less than riveting. Apart from his involvement in the Revolutionary War, 
which raged throughout Webster’s impressionable college years, Webster’s tale is 
marked by frequent moves around the eastern seaboard, attempting to light on a 
career he could find both satisfying and lucrative. While this theme could indeed 
strike a sympathetic chord with YAs trying to envision their own futures, Webster’s 
164 • The bulleTiN
repeated attempts at making an intellectual mark on the new nation—and continu-
ally defaulting to teaching jobs that he disliked—become tedious. When readers 
arrive at the dictionary-making over halfway through the book, Webster’s story 
gains momentum and Reef does a fine job of explaining how his views on language 
related to his hopes for the newborn United States, and how his masterwork differed 
significantly from other English language glosses and dictionaries that preceded 
it. Readers who are interested in this period of American history may appreciate a 
focus on a figure other than statesmen, but many will be happier skipping to the 
dictionary chapters and culling some ideas on why “our” English doesn’t look like 
“their” English, and just who’s in charge of proper spelling anyhow. An index, bib-
liography, source notes, and list of Webster’s major publications are included.  EB
rosen, michAel A Great Big Cuddle: Poems for the Very Young; illus. by Chris 
Riddell. Candlewick, 2015 74p
ISBN 978-0-7636-8116-6 $19.99  
Ad 2-5 yrs
Esteemed poet Rosen offers a collection of thirty-five new poems for very young au-
diences. Subjects range from movement (“Jiggle jiggle, we’re all wriggly”—“Wiggly 
Wiggly”) to emotions (“I am angry • really angry • angry, angry, angry”—“I Am 
Angry”), and poems range from brief stories (“Mo’s in a muddle/ She slipped in 
a puddle”—“Mo”) to noisemaking opportunities “We can do what a bumblebee 
does/ Buzz Buzz Buzz, buzz buzz buzz”—(“We Can”). The oversized volume is 
beautifully designed and laid out, and at his best Rosen writes with echoes of great 
childhood poets such as Milne (as in the domestic simplicity of “Coming Home”) 
and Lear (in the nonsensical joys of “Once”). However, many verses lack the com-
pact payoff of the best nursery poetry, instead just running out of steam; scansion 
is also variable, making some entries bobble and others genuinely challenging to 
read. Riddell’s watercolor and pencil art is softly personable but tilts interestingly 
toward exaggeration and controlled bizarreness in domestic pets and creatures, 
which ensures the rosebud-lipped and rosy-cheeked tots don’t push the visuals into 
the twee. While not all the verse will fly, adults looking for some new readalouds/
chantalongs for use with preschool tykes will likely find some selections to broaden 
their repertory. A table of contents introduces the poems.  DS
rosengren, gAyle Cold War on Maplewood Street. Putnam, 2015 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17183-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
It’s 1962 and Joanna Waterman has a lot on her mind: the concerns of sixth grade 
(boy-girl parties, fake nails, and what to say to the cute boy), the struggles of her 
single mother, and the scary old woman who lives above Joanna’s basement apart-
ment. Heavier on her mind than any of these, though, is the departure of her beloved 
brother Sam, who enlisted in the Navy, breaking a promise to Joanna that he would 
never leave her. Her feelings of hurt and betrayal become ones of intense worry as 
the Cuban Missile Crisis erupts with Sam smack dab in the action. Very much a 
growing child’s view of the world, and very much of an era (Joanna’s love of Top 
40 music adds nice atmospheric detail), this historical novel is both compelling and 
relatable; readers may not know the fear of needing a shelter room in the event of 
nuclear war, but they’ll appreciate Joanna’s determination to create such a space and 
admire her all the more because she does it alone. In uncluttered, almost simplistic 
November 2015 • 165
prose, Rosengren takes complicated issues of abandonment and war and makes 
them approachable while still packing an emotional wallop. Put this in the hands of 
history buffs and fans of serious domestic realism in deceptively simple form.  AA
schmidt, gAry d. Orbiting Jupiter. Clarion, 2015 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-544-46222-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
Jack is something of a stoic sixth-grader, content with his life on his family farm 
and eager to welcome his new foster brother, Joseph, despite Joseph’s history. 
Eighth-grader Joseph has an abusive father, he’s been incarcerated for trying to kill a 
teacher, and he has a three-month-old daughter, Jupiter, whom he’s never seen. Jack 
knows Joseph’s okay, though, when their cow, Rosie, warms to him immediately, 
even though Joseph is pretty terrible at milking her. In fact, it’s Jack’s watchful, 
steadfast love for Joseph that shines in this sad story. While Joseph’s social worker 
and the boys’ vice principal warn Jack not to get too involved in Joseph’s life, Jack 
develops an immediate and fierce loyalty to the troubled boy; that loyalty leads 
him to make some very hard, very brave, and very dangerous decisions that tip 
him from childhood into the beginnings of a strong, compassionate masculinity. 
Joseph’s fate seems designed to wring out maximum emotion from a middle-grade 
audience, but perhaps that is the point; this is a novel that shows that while love and 
compassion can come at great emotional cost, they are also their own reward.  KC 
schulz, heidi Hook’s Revenge: The Pirate Code; illus. by John Hendrix. Disney 
Hyperion, 2015 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-1717-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-1952-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Now that Jocelyn Hook has killed the Neverland Crocodile (in Hook’s Revenge, 
BCCB 11/14), she’s hunting her father’s treasure hoard, which would enable her 
to live on her own terms forever. The problem is that the map is in code, and the 
key lies aboard the Jolly Roger, which Peter Pan has stolen and hidden away. To get 
Peter to cough up the ship’s whereabouts, Jocelyn kidnaps the new mother that 
Peter has secured for his lost boys. Evie, however, is happy to cooperate, viewing 
her precarious situation as a thrilling adventure. As Jocelyn gets to know Evie, she 
has to make a hard choice that turns into a series of hard choices about whether 
or not to grow up and on what terms. While this all seems quite serious, not to 
worry: our narrator remains his acerbic self, scornful of sentiment and determined 
to highlight the cynical implications of Jocelyn’s predicament (though poignancy 
does break through). Moreover, the pirates that Jocelyn has managed to hire are a 
feckless lot that provide more than their share of comic relief. She is also faced with 
some treacherous villains, however, including Gentleman Starkey, whose portrayal 
gives cause to wonder just what his relationship to the narrator really is. Fans of 
Barrie will appreciate the development Neverland; the paradoxes of adults living 
in a place where one never grows up are given an intriguing explanation. On the 
other hand, those who are only interested in a rollicking adventure with a feisty 
heroine, cinematic action, and the cleverness of children pitted against nasty adults 
will also find exactly what they came for. Final illustrations not seen.  KC 
166 • The bulleTiN
seiPle, sAmAnthA Lincoln’s Spymaster: Allan Pinkerton, America’s First Private 
Eye. Scholastic, 2015 224p illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70897-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70901-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
Years before John Wilkes Booth fired the fatal shot at Ford’s Theater, would-be 
assassins plotted the death of president-elect Abraham Lincoln, and the Pinkerton 
National Detective Agency was on the job to foil them. Although himself a political 
fugitive from Scottish law, Allan Pinkerton enjoyed a reputation for high ethical 
standards in this newfangled business of private detection service; he was also re-
markably progressive in his methods, employing female agents and refusing to pay 
for information. No wonder the sixteenth president appointed him spymaster to 
run operatives for the Union. However, when Lincoln replaced ineffective general 
McClellan after a botched military move, Pinkerton, loyal to McClellan, resigned 
and began phase two of his career, chasing down high-profile criminals such as the 
Reno Brothers Gang and the James/Younger outlaws. Fans of true crime stories 
should be delighted to follow in Pinkerton’s footsteps as he and his agents outsmart 
villain after villain while welcoming the two equally driven Pinkerton sons into the 
family business. Of course there’s a chance readers may be aware of the Pinkerton 
Agency’s less heroic reputation—particularly as union busters in the employ of late 
nineteenth century manufacturers. Seiple briefly acknowledges this in an epilogue, 
painting it as something of an aberration after Allan Pinkerton’s death. Both text and 
period photographs focus instead on high-minded crimefighters taking on a rogues’ 
gallery of black hats—and winning. An index and list of sources are included.  EB
selznick, briAn The Marvels; written and illus. by Brian Selznick. Scholastic, 
2015 [672p]
ISBN 978-0-545-44868-0 $32.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-7
Selznick continues his quest to shake up notions of illustrated novels, wordless 
storytelling, and the intersection of text and pictures in this newest volume. The 
first 400 pages or so of the novel are wordless pencil illustrations, featuring his 
familiar careful, soft-textured hatching and cross-hatching and full-bleed spreads. 
In the pictures, a legacy unfolds, as generations of a family, beginning in 1766, 
all participate in theater in varying ways. The text section picks up the narrative 
in 1990 with the story of Joseph, a boy who seeks more home than his absentee 
parents and boarding school provide, so he runs away to his uncle’s magnificent 
residence. It takes Joseph a while to make his uncle warm up to him and to sort 
out what’s going on in this strange house where everything appears chaotic but is 
actually carefully, lovingly curated. The eventual story that emerges, of a beloved 
partner the uncle lost to AIDS and stories shared and created between the men 
while they were together, will likely surprise all but the most careful readers who 
spot very subtle clues in advance. A brief, visual-only epilogue is an effective closer, 
weaving together the two sections and offering a gently warm ending to a story 
that sometimes brims with melancholy. The novel as a whole is exactly the sort of 
theater that is so lovingly described within, and that too won’t be lost on readers. 
An afterword describes the real elements from which the novel was drawn (referenc-
November 2015 • 167
ing the Dennis Severs’ House in England) and includes a full copy of an elegantly 
written obituary for Severs published in the Guardian in 2000.  AS
shAughnessy, AdAm The Entirely True Story of the Unbelievable FIB. Algonquin, 
2015 263p
ISBN 978-1-61620-498-3 $16.95  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Cranky Pru misses her late detective dad and sort of hates most of her life, until she 
stumbles into a mystery that is both distracting (which she needs) and dangerous 
(which she wants). In spite of herself, she’s managed to make a new friend, ABE, and 
the two of them get roped into assisting the Fantasy Investigation Bureau (FIB) as 
they try to keep the Eye of Odin in her town even while Norse beings are sneaking 
in to steal it. Unfortunately, that fantasy/adventure plot doesn’t always mesh well 
with the reality of an angry kid struggling to make peace with her dad’s death. In 
addition, although Norse myth buffs will know all of these characters and revel in 
their clever representations here, readers knowing nobody beyond Thor will miss 
a great deal in the early scenes featuring, for example, Ratatosk, who for a good 
portion of the book seems to just be an oddball talking squirrel. Pru is sympathetic 
when she lets down her wall even a bit, though, and there’s pleasure to be found in 
the fantasy/adventure moments featuring Thor, frost giants, and the head of the 
FIB, the quirky Mr. Fox (evoking more than a bit of Dr. Who in both his dialogue 
and his magical tiny shack). Even with its flaws, this planned series certainly has 
potential, and now that the characters are established, the pieces might all fall into 
place for the next one.  AS
sheinkin, steve Most Dangerous: Daniel Ellsberg and the Secret History of the 
Vietnam War. Roaring Brook, 2015 [384p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59643-952-8 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R* Gr. 7-12
Teens who have never heard the story of Daniel Ellsberg and his exposure of the 
Pentagon Papers—which traced the suppressed information and political oppor-
tunism that drove the escalation of the Vietnam War—are in for a thrilling ride as 
Sheinkin once again finds an ideal entry point for young adult readers to explore an 
historical event and its surrounding ethical issues. Access to documents compiled 
under the direction of his ex-boss, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, allowed 
Ellsberg to assess the gravity of information that had been kept from the public 
by the White House and top military brass and their outright lies about America’s 
chances for victory which were wielded to justify the heavy American and Viet-
namese civilian death tolls. When politicians balked at releasing the information 
Ellsberg covertly put in their hands, he took the documents to the New York Times 
and set off a breakneck chain of events in which he was forced into hiding and 
the press stayed one jump ahead of court injunctions by publishing the Papers in 
pieces through various newspapers. As in Bomb (BCCB 10/12), Sheinkin follows 
multiple threads of this tangled story with a flair that seems effortless, providing 
both information and emotional heft to terms and events that readers may only 
know from textbooks. Source notes, an index, and an extensive bibliography will 
assist students using this material for research, but, as Sheinkin’s epilogue suggests, 
the central issue here is more than a historical footnote. Ellsberg unequivocally 
defends Edward Snowden’s media leaks in the interest of a greater good: “I would 
168 • The bulleTiN
have done just as he has done. . . . I would have broken that law.” Let the First 
Amendment/national security arguments begin.  EB 
shulmAn, Polly The Poe Estate. Paulsen/Penguin, 2015 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16614-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
In this companion to The Grimm Legacy (BCCB 9/10), Sukie and her parents are 
moving into their family’s ancestral home, Thorne Mansion, ostensibly to care for 
Sukie’s ailing cousin Hepzibah but really because the economic downturn of the 
1990s took its toll on Sukie’s family’s financial stability. The creaking stairs, shadowy 
corners, and general spookiness of the mansion don’t faze Sukie, since she’s been 
living with the ghost of her sister, Kitty, for some time now. She’s therefore more 
curious than scared when a spirit shows up on her windowsill demanding that Sukie 
find her treasure. Sukie’s exploration of the mansion’s library, her discussions with 
Cousin Hepzibah, and some helpful assistance from classmate Cole lead Sukie to 
the New-York Circulating Material Repository (familiar from The Grimm Legacy), 
where she learns some surprising secrets about her family’s history, and discovers 
the nature of the ghost’s treasure. Sukie’s pragmatism and unflappability is amusing 
as she encounters one extraordinary situation after another—her relationship with 
her sister, for example, is authentic in its sibling dynamics despite Kitty’s spectral 
form. While several members of the supporting cast are underdeveloped (especially 
Cole), the New-York Circulating Material Repository is a character unto itself, with 
meandering paths and random annexes containing materials and objects from great 
works of literature; Poe’s House of Usher, Hawthorne’s Celestial Railroad, the fly-
ing broomstick from The Wizard of Oz all make an appearance. Whether read as 
a companion to the first book or a standalone, this is a fine outing in supernatural 
shenanigans, haunted family histories, and reclaimed futures.  KQG
smith, lindsAy Dreamstrider. Roaring Brook, 2015 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-62672-042-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
In the capital of the Barstadt Empire, nineteen-year-old Livia has risen through 
the rigid caste system because of her rare gift for dreamstriding: the ability to walk 
the land of dreams and occupy the bodies of others as they sleep. Now a loom-
ing invasion by a neighboring nation and rumors that the long-dead demon-god 
Nightmare may return to life threaten the precarious life Livia has built for herself. 
So with partner Brandt at her side, she must use her skills to uncover their enemy’s 
battle plans, expose traitors among Barstadt’s elite, and keep Nightmare’s minions 
at bay in the dream world. With its intriguing world, taut narrative, and complex 
heroine, this well-wrought fantasy charms from the start. The plot values intrigue 
over action and keeps readers engaged with strong pacing and well-timed reveals. 
The primary draw is Livia herself, a heroine who is a spy rather than a warrior, a girl 
who manages to lose the gift that makes her special and still come out stronger and 
more confident than ever. Subtle references to skin color and secondary character 
sexuality mark this as a novel that strives for diversity without being heavy-handed, 
and the provocative world building will leave the reader wishing this was a series 
rather than a standalone. A lackluster love interest who is outshone by a more charis-
matic rogue and a somewhat clumsy lesson on self-reliance lessen the novel’s overall 
impact, but not enough to derail what is otherwise a deeply satisfying story.  AM
November 2015 • 169
stohl, mArgAret Black Widow: Forever Red. Marvel/Disney, 2015 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-2643-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-3002-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-12
Seven years ago, Natasha Romanov, the Avengers’ Black Widow, saved young Ava 
Orlova from the clutches of the brutal villain Ivan Somodorov, the same man 
whose vicious training turned Natasha into the world’s most deadly assassin. Now 
Somodorov has returned, snatching children for his nefarious scientific experiments, 
and Ava may hold the key to stopping him. Unfortunately, seventeen-year-old Ava 
wants nothing to do with Natasha and her S.H.I.E.L.D. compatriots; she’s desperate 
to move on from her painful past and focus on her strange dreams of a gorgeous 
stranger named Alex Manor. Seventeen-year-old Alex is more than a dream, though, 
and when Ava, Natasha, and Alex finally meet on the streets of Philadelphia, sparks 
and bullets immediately begin to fly. Soon, the supposed strangers are off on a 
worldwide adventure into the darkest points in their histories, where they uncover 
connections deeper, more personal, and more elemental than any of them could 
imagine. This adrenaline-fueled adventure will find a strong reader base in fans of 
the Avenger movie franchise, especially those anxious to see Black Widow with a 
story all her own. In replicating an action film, the novel succeeds admirably, heavy 
on the fights, chases, and snappy dialogue, light on character growth and emotional 
depth. Sadly, the convoluted plot and divided focus, split evenly between the three 
protagonists, each with their own backstory and series of reveals, leave the novel 
cluttered, shallow, and ultimately unfulfilling. The villain meanwhile is reduced 
to a stock character, underdeveloped and old-fashioned, especially compared to 
the more complex, nuanced evil of other recent Marvel-produced fare. This will 
therefore be somewhat disappointing for serious fans, but it still may entertain 
readers who are new to superhero stories or fans who want a little lightweight, 
cameo-filled fun.  AM
strAsser, todd The Beast of Cretacea. Candlewick, 2015 [432p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6901-0 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Ishmael needs to adjust quickly to the new planet on which he’s just arrived, because 
the lives of those he loves back on the dying Earth depend on his earning money 
for their transport by serving on a boat. Ishmael doesn’t know oceans, islands, fish, 
or even fresh food, but he soon becomes the natural leader of his small group of 
newbies. He also rapidly ascertains that his boat is captained by a maniacal man 
whose only focus is finding and killing the Great Terrafin, and he’ll take everyone 
down in his pursuit if necessary. There’s a whole lot of book here: gripping descrip-
tions of an Earth polluted beyond belief, time travel, long passages featuring gory 
sea battles, mystical island folk, and, of course, the overlaps with a very famous 
book, but other than occasionally flat characterization, the mix works quite well. 
Additionally, it won’t take more than a few pages for even the uninitiated to catch 
that this is essentially Moby-Dick in sci-fi form. There is significant richness in 
potential comparisons that will be lost if the reader doesn’t know Moby-Dick, but 
even taken as a standalone title, this is an intriguing, complex book.  AS
170 • The bulleTiN
sturm, JAmes Gryphons Aren’t So Great; written and illus. by James Sturm, Andrew 
Arnold, and Alexis Frederick-Frost. First Second, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-652-7 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 1-3
Despite the title, gryphons actually are so great if you’re the Knight, but if you are his 
best friend and trusty steed, Edward, who is now being ignored, then yeah, they’re 
lame. This intrepid duo, first encountered in the clever Sleepless Knight (BCCB 7/15), 
do a lot of gallivanting and hanging out, which suits them fine, until a gryphon 
comes along, and Knight is spellbound. Edward’s steadfast support comes through 
in the end, though, and Knight realizes the lesson of the book with an appealingly 
melodramatic “What a fool I’ve been!!!” With step by step instructions for drawing 
the main characters, simple panel design, and clear color cues, this graphic novel 
will work for very young fans of the format (and will spark confidence in early 
cartoonists that they can achieve something similar), and they’ll be happy to note 
that two more adventures with Edward and Knight are planned.  AS
thomPson, crAig Space Dumplins; written and illus. by Craig Thomp-
son. Graphix/Scholastic, 2015 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56541-7 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56543-1 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56546-2 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-8
Violet loves her parents and their ragtag life, as she’s never really known anything 
other than living in a trailer park on an asteroid, scrapping for survival like almost 
everyone else. She gets occasional glimpses of how the truly rich live, as her mother 
is a laborer for them, but mostly she knows the sorts of folks her dad works with, 
those who harvest waste from space whales so it can be converted into fuel. It’s 
already dangerous work, and when her dad takes on an impossible (but potentially 
lucrative) job and goes missing, Violet and her mother fear the worst. Violet’s not 
content to hope for the best and wait, however, so she gathers quite the group of 
misfits (a cheerful alien, some of her pop’s old pals, and a brainy rooster) to save him 
herself. This graphic novel is action packed from the first page, with busy panels 
that slant, take up whole pages, overlap, and overflow with imaginative details. The 
slightly dark colors and sophisticated world building will appeal to older readers, 
cueing them that this book is for them in spite of the fairly young protagonist. Fans 
who read Hatke’s Zita the Spacegirl (BCCB 1/11) when it came out a few years 
ago will now be the perfect age for this similar title about a kid who tackles space, 
aliens, and her own doubts with sturdy resolve.  AS
thrAsh, mAggie Honor Girl; written and illus. by Maggie Thrash. Candlewick, 
2015 270p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7382-6 $19.99  
R Gr. 8-10
Maggie’s been attending Camp Bellflower, an all-girls camp in Kentucky (featur-
ing daily Civil War re-enactments and shooting practice), for most of her young 
summers. The summer she turns fifteen, however, camp is startlingly different 
after she falls in love with nineteen-year-old Erin, a camp counselor, who should 
know better but is also clearly interested. Former presumed lesbians at camp were 
ostracized, so Maggie has no interest in being outed. She just wants to shoot her 
November 2015 • 171
gun like a badass, keep pretending to be in love with a dude from the Backstreet 
Boys, and sneak alone time with Erin when she can. Teens will likely find the age 
difference, particularly given Erin’s relative immaturity, not nearly as big a deal as 
adult readers might, but even they will spot that the counselor/camper dynamic is 
fraught with issues. In this graphic novel, deceptively simple drawings in a mostly 
dreamy palette work well to capture big, sweeping emotions of the camp experience, 
while also placing the events (if not the emotional impact) a decade or so in the 
past. A brief author’s note verifies that this is indeed a memoir; this is no surprise 
given the perfect capture of the insecurities, angst, swooning, and electricity that 
accompanies that first overwhelming crush. An intriguing pairing would be with 
Tamaki’s Skim (BCCB 5/08) for two looks at age-gap relationships that may pres-
ent complex ethical quandaries for the reader but are beautifully, mostly fondly, 
remembered.  AS
tolstikovA, dAshA A Year Without Mom; written and illus. by Dasha Tols-
tikova. Groundwood, 2015 168p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-692-7 $19.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-693-4 $16.95  
R Gr. 5-8
Dasha is twelve years old, living in Moscow in 1991, when her mother, an advertis-
ing copywriter, leaves Russia to study in the U.S. Dasha stays with her grandparents 
(her father is in LA) and relates the story of her passing year with quick snapshots 
of each month that speak to deeper running themes: she misses her mom, she’s 
negotiating a changing relationship with her two best friends, and she has a crush 
on a glamorous older boy. Despite her adjustment pains, she’s wrenched when, at 
the end of the year, she must leave Moscow to join her mother in the U.S. As in 
Britt’s Jane, the Fox, and Me (BCCB 11/13), art and text interweave picture-book 
style in this longer memoir, giving it the feel of a freeform graphic novel. Dasha’s 
narration is episodic and diary-style, blending events large (the August 1991 coup 
that attempts to overthrow Gorbachev) and small (the discovery that the boy she 
likes is dating a cool older girl); the result is therefore lacking in overall trajectory, 
but that’s authentic to the quotidian perspective of Dasha’s account. The pencil 
and ink wash illustrations are precise yet slightly edgy in their linework, and the 
predominant grays of the wash, touched with occasional red or blue elements, lend 
a certain chic as well as a slightly subdued mood. Readers who enjoyed Holm’s 
Sunny Side Up (BCCB 10/15) or Telgemeier’s Smile (BCCB 3/10) will find this an 
illuminating take on a girl’s pivotal year.  DS
vernon, ursulA Hamster Princess: Harriet the Invincible; written and illus. by 
Ursula Vernon. Dial, 2015 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3983-3 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
In this humorous twist on “Sleeping Beauty,” a sword-slinging, monster-fighting, 
fraction-calculating hamster princess, Harriet Hamsterbone, manages to outmaneu-
ver the evil fairy Ratshade, tossing her into the splintery hamster wheel intended 
for Harriet and turning the sleeping curse back on the fairy; unfortunately, the 
curse still befalls everyone else in Harriet’s family’s castle. Harriet and her faithful 
quail-steed, Mumfrey, manage to escape unharmed but are then saddled with the 
task of finding a prince to kiss everyone to break the curse. Middle-graders with 
172 • The bulleTiN
a taste for absurdity and snark will find plenty of both here, and sassy Harriet is 
an entertaining heroine. The snappy, funny writing coupled with the plethora of 
comics-style illustrations and quick pace make this an easy sell to the reluctant 
reader crowd (who will find themselves happily devouring the occasional higher-
level vocabulary word). The frequent art in tones of blue and gray often furthers 
the narrative via word-bubble interchanges of dialogue, and the carefully cocked 
angle of an ear or an eye renders the white hamster figures surprisingly expressive. 
Fans of Holm’s Babymouse (Babymouse: Queen of the World, BCCB 12/05) series 
or Vernon’s Dragonbreath (BCCB 9/09) series will definitely want to tag along on 
Harriet’s future adventures.  JH 
wAhl, Phoebe Sonya’s Chickens; written and illus. by Phoebe Wahl. Tundra, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-77049-789-4 $17.99  
R 4-7 yrs 
Young Sonya takes good care of the three little chicks her papa brings home to her, 
and soon she has three fine, egg-laying hens—until a fox steals one away in the night. 
Sonya is understandably devastated, but, after sympathizing with her, her father 
gently explains that the fox was only trying to feed his own babies, just as Sonya 
fed and cared for her chicks. Sonya doesn’t get over her grief immediately, but she 
ponders what her father has said while she cares for her chickens (and reinforces 
the coop in which they live), and she finds some catharsis in welcoming a new 
chick to the coop when one of the hens’ eggs hatches. Wahl’s writing is warm and 
immediate, and though some words or phrases may need a bit of explanation for 
younger listeners, the language is mostly straightforward with a hint of lyricism. 
The book also capably balances sensitivity towards children’s attachments to their 
animals with honesty about the animal food chain, and Papa’s calmly compassion-
ate defense of the fox is broadening without being didactic. Bold lines of colored 
pencil are softened with watercolors to create rich backdrops, while collaged ele-
ments offer quiet details and texture to the scenes. Rosy-cheeked, biracial Sonya is 
a sturdy and attractive heroine with her bright clothing and perpetual yellow boots, 
and the animal characters are equally endearing—even the chicken-stealing fox is 
hard to dislike when he’s curled around his kits in their den. Pet-loving kids may 
struggle a bit with the illustration of the fox with a limp hen in its mouth, but the 
book offers a gentle starting place to encourage kids to consider the bigger picture 
when looking at predator-prey relationships.  JH
weAtherFord, cArole boston Voice of Freedom: Fannie Lou Hamer: Spirit of the 
Civil Rights Movement; illus. by Ekua Holmes. Candlewick, 2015 45p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6531-9 $17.99  
R Gr. 4-7
Twenty-two poems in first-person voice trace the life of civil rights activist Fannie 
Lou Hamer, from her childhood in a Mississippi sharecropping family (“doggone, 
dirt-poor doing-without”), through her initial involvement in voting rights (vol-
unteering to register), and on to dangerous anti-segregation efforts with SNCC 
(arrested and beaten after approaching a whites-only lunch counter) and her runs 
for political office. Cited quotations are interlaced throughout the ragged right 
edge text, adding authenticity to the created voice. Holmes’ mixed-media collages 
are varied and effective: cotton sacks running like tears and sweat down rows in a 
sharecrop farm; delicate lace curtains backlit in a bullet-pocked wall as a shadowy 
November 2015 • 173
pickup truck filled with white vigilantes crosses by; Hamer’s black and white im-
age filling a television screen in a broadcast of the 1964 Democratic Convention. 
Consider this not only as an accessible biography but also as a piece for solo or 
duet performance. An author’s note, timeline, source notes, and bibliography are 
included.  EB
winick, Judd Hilo: The Boy Who Crashed to Earth; written and illus. by Judd 
Winick. Random House, 2015 193p (Hilo)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38618-0 $16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38617-3 $13.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38619-7 $9.99  
R* Gr. 4-6
D. J. is lonely: three years ago, his best friend, Gina, moved away, and he’s still miss-
ing her. He unexpectedly gains a new friend when he discovers a small oddball kid 
who crash-landed on Earth wearing nothing but silver underwear and a contagious 
smile; Hilo remembers almost nothing at first and approaches everything with a 
maniacal enthusiasm (his glee after his first burp will undoubtedly amuse). When 
Gina moves back to town, she and D. J. pick up their friendship and she takes to Hilo 
right away, allowing for a tight threesome of pals. As Hilo’s memory starts coming 
back, he recalls that there’s more coming to Earth than just him, and the others are 
far more dangerous. This is lively and entertaining adventure with enough risk to 
give it heft and plenty of solid friendship to keep readers buoyed. The illustrations 
show a diverse trio, and Winick also effortlessly integrates cultural and social cues, 
reinforcing the fact that these three come from very different homes and revealing 
the way that shapes each of them. Lush, bright colors and a freewheeling approach 
to panels create an immersive environment: it’s clear that this is art, and it’s also 
clear that the art is running the show, not the panels or even the words. Readers 
will likely find it a tough wait for the next volume to come along.  AS
wood, FionA Six Impossible Things. Poppy/Little, 2015 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24216-5 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24217-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
1.) Kiss Estelle, the neighbor and classmate who doesn’t know new kid Dan exists. 
2.) Get a job to help ease the financial strain of his family’s bankruptcy. 3.) Cheer up 
his mother, who is dealing with her divorce from Dan’s dad and from the stress of 
keeping her cake-making business afloat. 4.) Try not to be a complete nerd, avoiding 
bullies by hiding his extraordinary smarts. 5.) Talk to his father, whose revelation 
of his homosexuality—and the aforementioned bankruptcy—precipitated Dan’s 
parents’ divorce, but who keeps trying to make amends. 6.) Figure out how to be 
good; that is, not someone who leaves his family broke and rudderless. These titular 
six impossible things guide the trajectory of this heartfelt Australian novel, wherein 
fourteen-year-old Dan struggles to cope with major life upheavals and find inner 
reserves to build a better outer life, all while falling tenderly in love with the literal 
girl next door. As the list evolves, so does he, redeeming his occasionally petulant 
behavior with determination and an ability to identify and articulate emotions (if 
only to himself) beyond that of your average teenaged boy. Get this into the hands 
of readers who wish they could meet someone as soulful, earnest, and wounded yet 
triumphant as Dan—that’s who this book is really for.  AA
174 • The bulleTiN
wynne-Jones, tim The Emperor of Any Place. Candlewick, 2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6973-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
Evan is stunned by the sudden death of his father. Not knowing what else to do, he 
calls his grandfather, Griff, a severe military man whom his father hated, to come 
help settle his dad’s affairs. Griff had little respect for his son, who fled to Canada 
to evade the draft during the Vietnam War, and it doesn’t initially look like things 
will go any better with his grandson. Meanwhile, a phone call alerts Evan to a 
family mystery involving Griff; prior to his death, his father had received a book 
containing a translation of the diary of a Japanese soldier from World War II who 
was isolated on an island in the Pacific. Evan becomes engrossed in the diary, which 
tells of an American soldier stranded on the island until Griff comes and rescues 
him. Questions remain: how does the story end for the Japanese soldier, and why 
does Griff want the diary to disappear? Evan and Griff walk a knife edge between 
contempt and suspicion in their dealings with each other, and their ultimate method 
of reaching détente is both moving and masterfully tied in with the diary itself. The 
layers of intergenerational strife, savage warfare, lingering suspicion and gradual 
healing are quilted into a warming narrative that is both uncompromisingly tragic 
and holistically redemptive. Readers will carry this haunting story with them for 
a long time.  KC
yAng, gene luen Secret Coders; illus. by Mike Holmes. First Second, 
2015 91p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-276-7 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-075-6 $9.99  
Ad Gr. 3-6
In this graphic novel, Hopper has just transferred into middle school at Stately 
Academy, and although she finds classes boring and friends hard to make, she does 
manage to hit it off with Eni, a big guy who’s willing to peel off from his heckling 
buddies to hang around with a girl. Together they tackle some mysteries that 
Hopper has just noticed and Eni has wondered about for a while: Why are there 
numeral 9s around the campus? Why do the birds have four eyes? And what does 
Mr. Bee, the janitor, keep behind locked doors? Eni takes the first step toward the 
solution when he realizes that the birds’ four eyes open and shut to signal numbers 
in binary code, giving them the number of the combination lock to the janitor’s 
shed. There they discover Mr. Bee’s invention, a turtle robot programmed to clear 
the paths with a leaf blower. But that’s the tip of the iceberg in this first volume 
of a planned mystery series involving family drama, mad scientists, and computer 
programming. The first two coding “lessons” embedded in the story are margin-
ally effective, as far as they go—which isn’t very far. The four-eyed birds can only 
signal up to the number fifteen, while the steps for the robots instructions involve 
much higher numbers, leaving readers to ponder, perhaps, how to write lesson two 
with the limited toolkit of lesson one. The graphic novel format allows Yang and 
Holmes to include helpful diagrams without breaking the story’s rhythm, but the 
black/white/green-hued artwork, while serviceable, is occasionally stiff and generic. 
This is bound to have curricular application, though, and teachers may want to 
keep their eye on the series as it develops.  EB
November 2015 • 175
lAmbert, megAn dowd Reading Picture Books With Children: How to Shake Up 
Storytime and Get Kids Talking about What They See. Charlesbridge, 2015 176p
ISBN 978-1-58089-662-7 $21.95
Lambert, a lecturer at Simmons College, provides a guidebook to the Whole Book 
Approach, a “co-constructed (interactive) storytime model centered on the picture 
book as a visual art form,” an approach developed at the Eric Carle Museum of 
Picture Book Art. Despite the title, the Whole Book Approach is really more child-
centered than book-centered, focusing on the ways children interact with books and 
emphasizing their experiences of what they see and hear during a storytime rather 
than analyzing the text or pictures. Lambert’s thoughtful introduction discusses 
her own struggles with learning to decode pictures and her subsequent education 
in all things picture book, including layout, medium, style, etc. Chapters include 
overviews of trim size, jackets and covers, endpapers, front matter, typography, page 
design, and perhaps most helpfully, a guide to encouraging visual intelligence among 
children and the benefits of her approach. Resources includes tips on creating and 
leading Whole Book storytimes, sample questions for Whole Book storytimes, a 
glossary and further reading.  KQG
scAles, PAt Books under Fire: A Hit List of Banned and Challenged Children’s 
Books. ALA, 2014 232p
ISBN 978-0-8389-1109-9 $47.00 
This title by Pat Scales, past president of ALSC and former chair of ALA’s Intel-
lectual Freedom Committee, includes a rundown, in alphabetical order, of books 
that have been banned or challenged according to the database maintained by the 
ALA Office of Intellectual Freedom. Each entry includes a summary of the book; 
a list of reviews, awards, and accolades; the details of the challenges; the official 
website of the author and/or illustrator; further reading and resources for listening or 
viewing. Two notable additions to each entry include “Talking with Readers about 
the Issues,” a section offering questions for librarians and educators to uses with 
classes, book clubs, etc.; and “Recommended Books That Have Been Challenged 
for Similar Reasons,” which offers readers a chance to look at the progression and 
historical context of book challenges and banned books.  KQG
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
176  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Schmidt
Actors and actresses–fiction: John
Adventure: Bardugo; Bernstein; 
Black; Cottrell Boyce; Cross; 
Inglis; Jones; nytra; Oliver; Pope; 
Pratchett; Preus; Pullman; Stohl; 
Strasser; thompson
African Americans: Weatherford
African Americans–fiction: Pearsall
Afterlife–fiction: Cole
Aliens–fiction: Winick
Anatomy: Kudlinski
Animals–fiction: Avi; diCamillo
Animals–stories: Hacohen
Appearance–fiction: Palacio
Archeology: Huey
Art: Sturm
Art and artists–fiction: Chibbaro; 
Pearsall
Babies–fiction: Oppel
Babies–stories: Isol
BIOgrAPHIeS: engle; reef; 
Seiple; thrash; Weatherford
Biology: Isol
Birds–fiction: Coverly
Books and reading–fiction: Papa-
demetriou
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Cody; 
Hahn; Liggett; Potter Piper
Brothers–fiction: Coverly; Holt; 
Oppel
Bullying–fiction: Klass; Palacio
Camp and camping–fiction: thrash
Cartooning: Sturm
Chickens–stories: Wahl
Christmas–fiction: Fry
Civil rights movement: Weatherford
Civil rights movement–fiction: Kidd
Cold War: engle
Cold War–fiction: rosengren
Computers–fiction: Yang
Creative writing: Almond Half
Crime and criminals: Seiple
Crime and criminals–fiction: Ander-
son, robert; Bardugo; Bodeen; 
Bunting; everett; Holt; Klein; 
Leveen; Mcginnis; Pope; Stohl
Cuban Americans: engle
Cults–fiction: Liggett
death–fiction: Almond Song; gale
demons–fiction: Cole
dictionaries: reef
divorce–fiction: Wood
dogs–fiction: greenwald
dreams–fiction: Anderson, r. J.; 
Smith
drugs–fiction: Bardugo
dystopias–fiction: Bobet; Brallier
Ecology: Wahl
Environmental studies: Carson
Ethics and values: Black; everett; 
John; Mcginnis; Mesrobian; 
Schmidt; Sheinkin
experiments: Carson
FABLeS: duffy
Families–fiction: Law; rosengren
FAntASY: Anderson, r. J.; An-
derson, robert; Bardugo; Black; 
Bobet; Burt; Cody; Cole; Crowl; 
gale; greenwald; Haydu; Inglis; 
Law; nytra; Oppel; Papademe-
triou; Pope; Pratchett; Pullman; 
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
novemBer 2015  •  177
Schultz; Shaughnessy; Shulman; 
Smith; Sturm
Fathers–fiction: Bernstein; Mcginnis; 
Pearsall; Pope; Shaughnessy; Wood
Fear–fiction: diCamillo
Folktales and fairy tales–fiction: Cody
Food and eating–stories: Hacohen
Football–fiction: Klass
Foster families–fiction: Schmidt
Friends–fiction: Almond Song; Burt; 
Cottrell Boyce; Palacio; Winick
Friends–stories: Boiger
genies–fiction: Crowl
ghosts–fiction: Butler; Shulman
gLBtQ people–fiction: thrash; 
Wood
grandparents–fiction: Law; Wynne-
Jones
grandparents–stories: Medina
grAPHIC nOveLS: duffy; Hatke; 
Murakami; nytra; Pope; Pullman; 
Sturm; thompson; thrash; tols-
tikova; vernon; Winick; Yang
grief–fiction: Law
Halloween: Colby
Hamsters–fiction: vernon
HIStOrICAL FICtIOn: Bunting; 
Chibbaro; de Fombelle; donnelly; 
Kidd; Mcginnis; Murakami; Pears-
all; Preus; rosengren; Selznick
History, U.S.: engle; Huey; reef; 
Seiple; Sheinkin
HOrrOr: Hahn; Oppel
HuMOr: Boiger; Brallier; Cottrell 
Boyce; Coverly; deacon; diCa-
millo; Fry; greenwald; Hacohen; 
Hautman; Isol; Kang; Lubar; 
Sturm; vernon
Hunting–fiction: Avi
Identity–stories: deacon
Individuality–stories: deacon
Japan–fiction: Murakami; Preus
Journals–fiction: Holt; Wynne-Jones
Kidnapping–fiction: Bodeen
Language–stories: Medina
Language arts: reef
Latinos: engle
Literature, classical: Cross
Literature, English: Schultz; Strasser
Magic–fiction: Anderson, robert; 
Black; Burt; Haydu; Inglis
Medicine: Kudlinski
Missing persons–fiction: Leveen
Monsters–fiction: Pope
Mothers: tolstikova
Mothers–fiction: Liggett; Wood
Movies–fiction: John
Museums–fiction: Oliver
MYSterIeS: Anderson, robert; But-
ler; de Fombelle; donnelly; Liggett; 
Shaughnessy
Mythology, classical: Almond Song
Nature study: Wahl
Orphans–fiction: de Fombelle
Philosophy–stories: deacon
Pirates–fiction: Bunting; Schultz
POetrY: engle; rosen; Weatherford
racism–fiction: Kidd
Reading aloud: diCamillo; Kidd; 
Potter Piper; Potter Too Much
Reading, beginning: Kang
Reading, easy: Coverly; diCamillo; 
greenwald; Hatke; Potter Piper; 
Potter Too Much; Sturm
Reading, reluctant: Fry; Hatke; 
Leveen
relationships–fiction: John; Mesro-
bian; Wood
robots–fiction: Hatke
romance–fiction: Anderson, r. J.; 
Chibbaro; donnelly; Klein
russia: tolstikova
Santa Claus–fiction: Fry
School–fiction: Klass; Lubar; Potter 
Piper; Potter Too Much; Yang
Science and scientists: Carson; Kudlin-
ski
SCIenCe FICtIOn: Brallier; 
everett; Hatke; Hautman; Jones; 
Strasser; thompson; Winick
Secrets–fiction: Anderson, r. J.
Sharing–stories: Kang
Ships and sailing–fiction: Strasser
SHOrt StOrIeS: Almond Half; 
Palacio
Sisters–fiction: Bobet; Haydu; Shul-
man
Slavery: Huey
178  •  The BulleTin
Snow–stories: Boiger
Space travel–fiction: thompson
Spies and espionage: Seiple; Sheinkin
Spies and espionage–fiction: Bern-
stein; Preus; Smith
Sports–fiction: Klass
Storytime: Hacohen; Kang 
Summer–fiction: Papademetriou
Superheroes–fiction: Cottrell Boyce; 
greenwald; Stohl
SuPernAturAL StOrIeS: Klein; 
Oliver
SuSPenSe: Hahn; Leveen
theater–fiction: Selznick
time travel–fiction: Jones
tOddLer BOOKS: Hacohen; 
rosen
twins–fiction: Liggett
uncles–fiction: Selznick
vampires–fiction: greenwald
verSe nOveLS: Holt
vietnam War: Sheinkin
War–fiction: Cross; everett
Weather–stories: Colby
Wishes–fiction: Crowl
Witches–fiction: Pratchett
Witches–stories: Colby
Wolves–fiction: Avi
World cultures: Medina
World War II–fiction: de Fombelle; 
Wynne-Jones
Writers and writing: Almond Half
Writers and writing–fiction: Bodeen; 
Lubar
Zombies–fiction: gale
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP,
MANAGEMENT, AND CIRCULATION, 10/1/15
Title: Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books. Pub. No. 0008-9036. Frequency: Monthly 
(except August). Eleven issues published annually. Subscription price: $103.00 institutions, 
$55.00 individuals. Location of office of publication: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218. Headquarters of publisher: Same. Publisher: The 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218. Editor: Deborah 
Stevenson, University of Illinois, 501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Owner: 
University of Illinois, 501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. The purpose, function, 
and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status for Federal Income tax purposes 
have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Extent and nature of circulation 
Av. no. copies 
Actual no. copies
 
each issue 
single issue pub.
 
preceding 12 months nearest to filing date
A. Total no. copies printed 
1,221 
1,155
B. Paid circulation, mail subscriptions 
804 
804
C. Total paid distribution 
846 
848
D. Free distribution 
28 
27
F. Total distribution 
874 
875
G. Copies not distributed 
347 
280
H. Total 
1,221 
1,155
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete. William M. Breichner,
Journals Publisher.
