ILLI 
NI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
Sc·: 
-
t 
'~
3
"[Wemberly Worried's heroine] is back in another
winning story... perfectly complemented by adorable
illustrations. The text, art, and design
rnal
"Henkes has 
I
mastered the art of
transferring his mouse children to
the simplicity required for a board book....
A sweet treat worth waiting for." -Kirkus 
Reviews
Ages 2 up. $6.99
C^n /r\ i 
rnA\nr L\
Kevin Henkes's
first picture book-
now back in print!
All Alone
Full-color illustrations
All ages. * $14.99 Tr (0-06-054115-6)
$15.89 Lb (0-06-054116-4)
I 
· ^-LA
I
I
MS 
Greenwillow Books An intprint oj'l firperCollinsPublisbers
135C Avcnuc of the Americas, New York, NY 10101119 
- www.harperchildrms.con-I
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
September 2003
Vol. 57 No. 1
A LOOK INSIDE
3 
THE BIG PICTURE
Boy Meets Boy by David Levithan
4 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
13 
* Fight On!: Mary Church Terrell's Battle for Integration by Dennis
Brindell Fradin and Judith Bloom Fradin
14 
* The Wolves in the Walls by Neil Gaiman; illus. by Dave McKean
31 
* Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix by J. K. Rowling; illus. by
Mary GrandPre
37 
* Inside Out by Terry Trueman
40 
* Zigzag by Ellen Wittlinger
42 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
43 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $70.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2003 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration from Boy Meets Boy ©2003. Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
3
THE BIG PICTURE
Boy Meets Boy
by David Levithan
Ah, love, sweet love. It comes to tenth-grader Paul on an ordinary bookstore
outing with friends when, in the Self-Help section, he meets the boy of his dreams:
"I am aware of my breathing. I am aware of my heartbeat. I am aware that my
shirt is half untucked. . . . There's no way that Self-Help can help me now."
Noah, new to town and Paul's school, reciprocates the interest, and the two em-
bark on the exciting beginnings of an idyllic relationship. In fact, in the tender
prose, the pulsating sentiment, and the slightly embarrassing mutual absorption of
the subject couple, Boy Meets Boy recalls classic romances such as Seventeenth Sum-
mer.
Levithan's master stroke, however, lies in the setting, Paul's fictional,
unnamed hometown, for which Paul has great fondness. It's an interesting place,
operating fully within the rules of reality, but it's a reality that doesn't quite cur-
rently exist. There Infinite Darlene, the transvestite quarterback and Paul's good
friend, is also the homecoming queen; Paul's kindergarten teacher helpfully notes
on his report card that he is "definitely gay" ("and has very good sense of self"); P-
FLAG is "as big a draw as the PTA"; and the local Boy Scouts have renamed
themselves the "Joy Scouts" after renouncing the national association's gay-un-
friendly policies. Nor is this a single-issue or polemical utopia: the school janitors
have made a fortune day-trading and just keep cleaning the school for pleasure;
there's a touching custom in the local cemetery, where each gravestone has a book
attached so that people can read the writing of-or write to-the deceased. The
offbeat location allows the book to contrast the lot of Tony, Paul's good friend
from the less egalitarian world of the next town over, with that of Paul and his
cronies, but it more importantly relieves Paul's relationship with Noah of political
issues and permits the story to revel in being luxuriantly, sparklingly romantic.
All the staring into each other's eyes and civic good fellowship could
become somewhat cloying, but the book musters some powerful weapons against
saccharinity. Firstly, it's adroitly witty ("Conversation is not a strong suit," Paul
says of an annoying upperclassman; "in fact, I'm not sure it's a suit he owns").
Secondly, there are distinct obstacles to bliss: Paul's friend Tony is increasingly
unhappy, Paul's friend Joni is becoming a doormat girlfriend to a jerky guy, and
Paul's ex-boyfriend Kyle (who unconvincingly decided he was straight and conse-
quently cold-shouldered Paul) is reopening lines of communication-and perhaps
more. Since Noah's still recovering from a previous cheating boyfriend, he's un-
easy about Paul's close connections, and when gossip starts to fly about Paul's
closeness with Tony (false) and his reacquaintanceship with Kyle (true), it looks
like Paul and Noah's relationship is doomed.
4 
* THE BULLETIN
It all gets worked out, of course, and it's appropriate to this book that
even the problems come as a result of Paul's affection for people. The love story
actually goes beyond the relationship between Paul and Noah, since Paul's de-
voted to Tony ("More than anything in this strange life, I want Tony to be happy"),
hopeful for Kyle's peace, and determined that Joni deserves a better romantic fate
than the one to which she's currently subjecting herself.
Nor does it stop there: Paul's narration evinces a tremendous delight in
humanity in general and specific, in the many ways people connect with each
other, in how much we can matter to one another. In a genre filled with darkness,
torment, and anxiety, this is a shiningly affirmative and hopeful book; it's fitting
that the final sentence is "And I think to myself, What a wonderful world. " It may
not quite be reality as any of its readers experience it, but, then, that's what fiction's
for. (Imprint information appears on p. 23.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AIKEN, JOAN 
Midwinter Nightingale. Delacorte, 2003 
248p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90103-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73081-0 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Aiken returns her well-traveled heroine Dido Twite to England and drops her
right in the middle of a plot to seize the crown, the throne, and the country after
the death of good King Richard. Dido and her friend Simon, Duke of Battersea
(who is the heir apparent), work separately toward foiling both invasion and assas-
sination in a plot that includes vengeful werewolves, treasonous relatives, and wicked
siblings. Although the novel has many of the elements for which the author is
justly lauded, this is a surprising offering in many ways, not the least of which is its
lack ofjoy. The swift action cannot obscure a dark plot infused with an undercur-
rent of malice: the villains dispatch the innocent with a cold-blooded efficiency
that borders on the sadistic, the hero and heroine are oddly passive in the face of
the politics that is shaping their lives, and the spark of wit that Aiken can usually
be depended upon to provide is almost wholly absent. Dido and Simon are so
shallowly sketched that knowledge of their previous adventures is necessary in or-
der to make their relationship sensible; in contrast, the villains are drawn in sensa-
tional detail. The denouement is clumsy (the villains do each other in in a scene of
enormous contrivance) and the ending (Simon receives the crown while a heart-
broken Dido sobs) is chillingly abrupt. Occasional moments of poesy lift the
prose, but they are few and far between. Those seeking an adventurous read should
look toward Aiken's earlier works, or give Ibbotson (Journey to the River Sea, BCCB
4/02) or Lawrence (The Wreckers, 6/98) a try. JMD
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 5
ALIKI 
Ah, Music!; written and illus. by Aliki. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
[4 8p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028727-6 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028719-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
This friendly, eager introduction to various aspects of music covers a lot of terri-
tory, from what music is ("If you hum a tune, play an instrument, or clap out a
rhythm, you are making music") to who has earned a place in the music pantheon
("Ludwig van Beethoven wrote symphonic masterpieces even after he became deaf').
There's a range of music theory, from definition of musical terms such as "pitch"
and "volume" to an explanation of the components of written music. The book is
also rife with performance information, including a brief overview of instruments
(and a sample orchestral seating chart) and vocal parts, as well as an introduction
to dance across the world and through the ages. Then there's a generous helping
of music history, from classical Greece to contemporary pop and a whole lot in
between. All this is sandwiched between simple, accessible explorations of the
pleasures of music and performance. The sophistication level of the material is
fairly variable, and there's little overall structure, so this is more an easygoing ency-
clopedia than a cohesive narrative (and some adults will object to the fairly lengthy
focus on jazz and pop in the face of the omission of genres such as opera and
country). That being said, however, there are a lot of enticing tidbits invitingly
packaged here, making this browsable and unintimidating, and the juxtaposition
of historical overview and discussion of the reader's own musical exploits makes an
understated but bolstering point about context and tradition. The high-speed
orchestral and historical overviews would make great starting points for curricular
listening sessions or concert-hall visits. Unassuming line-and-watercolor vignettes
make up the majority of the illustrations, leaving the layouts pleasingly energetic
(generous white space and the large trim size keeps them from overbusyness); cap-
tioned illustrative panels and dialogue and thought balloons owe an obvious debt
to comic books and help keep the thumbnail scenes and progressing timelines
organized in a friendly manner. This will strike a sweet chord for many music
teachers looking for a user-friendly companion to practical experience. There is
no index, but a table of contents assists in location. DS
ANDERSON, M. T. 
Strange Mr. Satie; illus. by Petra Mathers. 
Viking,
2003 
[4 2p]
ISBN 0-670-03637-4 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 3-5
Surrealist composer Erik Satie has suffered the avant-gardist's common fate of
becoming widely accepted, so adults may not realize just how ahead of the curve
he was in his day. Kids will, however, after exposure to this succinct biography,
which explores Satie's artistic life and colorful habits. The book starts with his
youthful dreams of music-making and failure at school, then describes his discov-
ery of a brotherhood of artists in Paris and the subsequent blossoming of his music
(including a return to school at age thirty-nine, to learn the rules he wished to
break). There's a tacit linkage of his strange and unpredictable ways ("He did not
take baths, but scraped himself with a piece of stone") with the random and star-
tling aspects of surrealism ("Often he would name his pieces things like 'The Dreamy
Fish,' or maybe 'In a Horse Costume'"), and there's open acknowledgment that
his unpredictable temper undermined his relationships. The prose (set in short
6 
* THE BULLETIN
lines with poetic ragged-right margins) evinces a grave wonderment suitable to its
subject, and the details of Satie's strange life will puzzle and intrigue youngsters,
who may not have realized just how daring grownup music has been at times.
Misty drifts of subtle color shade the pages, against which spruce, wide-eyed fig-
ures execute the everyday and the ridiculous with equal aplomb. Imaginative touches
decorate the spreads, contrasting effectively with the matter-of-fact flatness of the
planes of rich color; the interpretations of Satie's absurdist musical pieces and guide-
lines are faithfully literal yet spiritedly surreal. This provides a logical step up from
de Paola's fictionalized portrait of the Parisian scene, Bonjour Mr. Satie (BCCB 3/
91); it would also pair well with other biographies of twentieth-century artistic
rebels, such as Mordicai Gerstein's What Charlie Heard (BCCB 4/02). An author's
note provides a bit more factual detail, and a few titles are suggested for further
reading. DS
ASHMAN, 
LINDA 
The Essential Worldwide Monster Guide; illus. by David
Small. 
Simon, 2003 
34p
ISBN 0-689-82640-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Thirteen poems treat a baker's dozen of mythical creatures from all over the world,
the better to help travelers with identification and survival ("With this handy mon-
ster guide,/ You can take these beasts in stride"). Subjects range from popular
critters such as the Sasquatch and the Loch Ness monster, folkloric beings such as
Scandinavia's trolls and the domovik of Russia, and less-limned threats such as the
Mimi of Australia and the Adlet of Greenland. The global gallery of threat is an
appealing notion, and the verses are amiably lighthearted and effectively rhythmi-
cal, tripping nicely off the readaloud tongue. Kids hoping for genuine scary mon-
sters will be disappointed with the more mythological approach, however, and the
accounts are sometimes confusing from a mythological standpoint as well: is there
really a proscription against feeding the slender Mimis? how do the Siren-lured
sailors meet their fate? The quick prose definitions boxed at the bases of the pages
add a little more information but still leave many questions unanswered. Small's
illustrations offer specific travelers in the form of a brother and sister who, accom-
panied by their faithful hound, journey around the globe from one monster milieu
to the next. Slender line contrasts with smudgy textured watercolors to depict
various scenes of monstrous mayhem (while our better-informed travelers look
on), and there are some entertainingly imaginative and sometimes satiric portray-
als, with dopey tourists just asking to be trollmeat in Scandinavia and the Sirens a
trio of brassy torch singers. Sometimes, though, the burlesque of old-fashioned
travelogue leans an awful lot on that genre's fondness for stereotype when it comes
to the locals (and what's an Inuit doing up a totem pole anyway?), and some op-
portunities to clear up the text's ambiguities are missed. Scranimals (BCCB 10/
02) is a better poetic tour of the unusual and occasionally ferocious, but this will
still appeal to kids with a taste for lore and mayhem. DS
BARRETT, TRACY 
Cold in Summer. 
Holt, 2003 
203p
ISBN 0-8050-7052-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-7
Ariadne Fellowes and her family have just moved from Florida to Dobbin, Ten-
nessee. While her younger brother, Hector, seems to be adjusting just fine, soon-
to-be seventh-grader Ariadne misses her best friend and the ocean, and she longs
for her old home. School brings some relief in the form of possible new friends,
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
7
but what really keeps Ariadne going is her curiosity about May Butler, an odd girl
she meets in the woods. When a library visit turns up an old book entitled The
Strange Case ofLittle May Butler, Ariadne can come to only one conclusion: May
Butler is a ghost, who needs Ariadne's help to go home. This is a straightforward
ghost tale with a doughty main character, a strong sense of history, and solid sec-
ondary players. Although the conclusion fizzles into a standard wrap-up, overall
the plot has a gently compelling arc. Barrett's ghost is not of the horrific,
goosebump-inducing variety, but the near-fatal consequences ofAriadne's investi-
gation infuse this capably written tale with a pervasive sense of impending danger.
Readers seeking spirited suspense without nightmares should look here. JMD
BATESON, CATHERINE 
Rain May and Captain Daniel. University of Queensland
Press, 2003 
138p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7022-3337-4 
$13.50 
R Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Rain is a resentful transplant from her Melbourne home to her
mother's childhood home in the country after her mother and father separate;
Daniel is her eleven-year-old new neighbor, in his own words "phenomenally
bright," in his classmates' opinion a nerd of the first order. The two form a friend-
ship over the school holiday, casually growing closer over chess and neighborhood
exploration while confiding bits of their lives (Rain still hopes for her parents to
reunite, Daniel tires of his mother's overprotectiveness), but when the beginning
of school acquaints Rain with the fact that her new friend is social poison, Daniel
fears their closeness is at an end. This Australian import is unassuming but deft,
cheerfully weaving together its disparate plot elements and avoiding clich6s in its
treatment of familiar issues such as socially problematic friendships and split par-
ents; even the matter of Daniel's chronic heart problem settles naturally into the
story rather than overpowering it. Language is colloquial and sometimes authen-
tically raucous, while characterization is stealthily complex: Rain's mom isn't the
ditz she initially appears, and even Julia, Rain's father's longtime Other Woman,
redeems herself considerably by revealing herself as a Trekker and cheering Daniel,
whom she barely knows, in the hospital. Though Daniel and Rain alternate narra-
tion, Rain is really the star here, and her ability to not only attain popularity but
also drag Daniel along with her is both credible and a refreshing solution to the
loyalty dilemma; her occasional poetic exchange with her mother via the
refrigerator's poetry magnets manages to be touching but not cloying. This is a
fresh, lively, and readable exploration of a situation with which many readers will
identify. DS
BYNG, GEORGIA 
Molly Moon's Incredible Book of Hypnotism. 
HarperCollins,
2003 
371p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051407-8 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051406-X 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Molly Moon is an orphan at the Hardwick House Orphanage, and her desolate lot
worsens when her only friend, Rocky, gets adopted. When Molly finds a misshelved
book in the library (thanks to an obnoxious Ugly American named Professor
Nockman) called Hypnotism: An Ancient Art Explained, she discovers a talent for
hypnosis and changes her life: she hypnotizes Miss Adderstone's pug dog, Petula,
into liking her, she hypnotizes the cook into making gourmet Italian food, and she
hypnotizes an entire audience at a talent show into awarding her £6000 in prize
8 
* 
THE BULLETIN
money. Off Molly then goes to New York City in search of Rocky, hypnotizing
ticket agents, stewardesses, and hotel clerks at the Waldorf to get her way. What
Molly doesn't know is that she is being followed by the no-good Professor Nockman,
who wants the book-and Molly-so he can become a world-class criminal. Molly's
adventures have the substance of cotton candy, frosted with a dollop of suspense.
The plot is outlandishly convenient, and, since Molly's hypnotic power means her
triumph is never in doubt, the sequence of wishes easily fulfilled gets a bit tedious.
Closure is conveniently achieved: Rocky finds Molly, and they (yes, Rocky has the
power, too) hypnotize Professor Nockman (at least temporarily) into being good.
All ends well with a return to the orphanage to bring happiness and joy to the little
orphans left behind. Although the trajectory loses altitude in the last third, this is
still lightweight, if not mesmerizing, fun. JMD
CERULLO, MARY M. 
Life under Ice; illus. with photographs by Bill
Curtsinger. 
Tilbury House, 2003 
[38p]
ISBN 0-88448-246-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Cerullo, author of various books on marine biology (Octopus: Phantom ofthe Sea,
BCCB 2/97, etc.), now turns her apparently waterproof hand to the denizens of
the coldest water on the planet. Her text follows the work of nature photographer
Bill Curtsinger as he dives beneath several feet of Antarctic ice to snap pictures of
curious Weddell seals, a threatening leopard seal, some teeming krill, and various
other inhabitants of the underside of the ice; there's also plenty of visual documen-
tation of the topside of the ice, whether it be its looming glaciers or its colonies of
waddling penguins. With streamlined prose, the author gives subtle shape to the
account of Curtsinger's exploration while adding information about the ecosys-
tem, its inhabitants, and its changes and challenges. While more caption informa-
tion would have been welcome, the photography is stunning and effectively
arranged, providing an atmospheric mini-tour of Antarctica underneath and on
top of the ice. Even huge sea spiders are gleamingly photogenic in Curtsinger's
pictures, and more immediately attractive subjects, such as appealing penguins
and magnificent ice formations, are given imaginative treatment that provides more
than a cursory pretty view. The immediacy of the photographs makes this a ter-
rific companion to recent Antarctic narratives such as Dewey's Antarctic Journal
(BCCB 2/01), and there's enough weirdness and beauty combined to draw reluc-
tant readers as well as animal lovers and junior ecologists. End matter includes a
list of relevant websites and a very brief bibliography as well as a glossary and a
small map. DS
CHENG, ANDREA 
The Key Collection; illus. byYangsook Choi. 
Holt, 2003 
117p
ISBN 0-8050-7153-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Jimmy's grandmother Ni Ni's increasing frailty is becoming worrisome, so the
family encourages Ni Ni to move to California, where her daughter, Helen, a
doctor, can care for her more easily. Both ten-year-old Jimmy and Ni Ni are
initially shattered by the idea; no longer will Jimmy be able to look out his window
at,3 A.M. to see Ni Ni's light still on, no longer will they makejiao zi (dumplings)
together for an afternoon snack, no longer will Jimmy be able to retreat from peer
friendships by heading for his grandmother's house. Though he misses his grand-
mother, Jimmy does grow from the experience: the new owners of Ni Ni's house
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 9
have children that Jimmy babysits, and he develops other friendships. When Helen
sees how depressed Ni Ni is by the move, however, she sends for Jimmy, and he
and his grandmother make plans to visit her childhood home of Shanghai to-
gether. This is a touching portrait of a particularly affectionate relationship be-
tween a young boy and his grandmother, and the author makes a believable case
for an insecure ten-year-old's preferring his grandmother's company to that of the
neighborhood boys. Unfortunately, the story occasionally drifts into sentimental-
ity, especially regarding the significance of a bottle of discarded keys Ni Ni keeps
in her basement, and the spare prose limps along haltingly; the short sentences that
dominate the text may prove a boon to beginning readers, but they lack the lasting
emotional power of more fluent prose. Soft pencil illustrations are decorative but
literal; a recipe for jiao zi is included. KC
COBB, VICKI 
IFace the Wind; illus. byJulia Gorton. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
34 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17841-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17840-5 
$15.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Timely questions, simple observations, and easy experiments guide preschoolers
and primary graders on an exploration of air pressure. All demonstrations-which,
of course, form the enticing core of this title-are conducted with readily available
materials, from a large plastic bag to "trap the air" that can be felt with a squeeze,
to a pencil and coathanger balance that shows the relative weight of air-filled and
airless balloons, to a ball that simulates the pressure of slow and fast moving mol-
ecules. Streamlined and jargon-free though the text may be, it gets the basics
across in kid-friendly terms: "Air is real stuff. It is just as real as this book or a
bowl of soup. Like all real stuff, AIR is heavier than nothing." Gorton's strong,
angular graphics feature a redheaded little gal with wide-set eyes and a powerful
curiosity who alternately serves as wind-tousled subject of forces real but unseen
and as demonstrator for each experiment. Although an opening note indicates
that the text is intended as a readaloud, attractive hand-lettering and a fairly pre-
dictable vocabulary should encourage able readers within the target audience to
join in. EB
CUETARA, MITTIE 
Baby Business; written and illus. by Mittie Cuetara. 
Dutton,
2003 
28p
ISBN 0-525-47026-3 
$15.99 
R 
3-6yrs
Cuetara offers twenty-four brief verses about what babies do all day, and from
"Waking" to "Crawling," from "Pooping" to "Bathtime," these kids are nothing if
not busy. The first three lines of each four-line stanza is a pithy summation of a
baby's activities; the last line (in colored text) is a description of the baby itself:
"Marcus drops and spills and throws,/ Covers everybody's clothes./ Time for clean-
up-get the hose!/ Messy little baby"; "One step, two steps, what a thrill!/ One
more step and down goes Jill./ Wait, she's up-and at it still./ Spunky little baby."
The verses have an irreverent gusto that will appeal to those readers aloud with less
romantic views of the tyrants of babydom, as well as a bouncy, nursery-rhyme
verve that will make these easy replacements for more traditional verses. The lay-
out has the look of a photo album: each poem gets its own page and its own baby,
the image of which is set smack in the middle, surrounded by white space and
framed by a richly hued border. The illustrations have a slapdash energy that
complements the tongue-in-cheekiness of Cuetara's slyly funny verses. Move over,
Mother Goose; make way for Cuetara's lively lines. JMD
10 
* THE BULLETIN
CUMMINGS, PRISCILLA 
Saving Grace. Dutton, 2003 
24 0p
ISBN 0-525-47123-5 
$16.99 
R Gr. 4-8
With Papa out of work in the middle of the Depression, a new baby on the way, a
son in the hospital, and the hospitality of relatives strained to the breaking point,
the McFarlands have no other choice than to send daughter Grace and her two
younger brothers to a charity asylum. At eleven aware of her parents' predica-
ment, Grace takes the move stoically, but the cold building and colder people
make her wonder if she's really any better off. Soon, however, Grace gets the
opportunity to visit with the Hammond family, who often host poor children over
the holidays, and they take to each other with sincere affection. Grace is lavished
with comforts and attention she's never experienced, and she's encouraged to dis-
cover that her ability to sign letters (learned from a deaf aunt) is a true boon to the
Hammonds' deaf daughter. The only thing standing between her and total hap-
piness is the guilty knowledge that her parents and siblings do not share her good
fortune. When the Hammonds' married daughter asks to formally adopt Grace,
the young girl must weigh the values of opportunity and family and make her own
decision. Cummings bases her tale loosely on the experiences of her own mother-
in-law, who served as a model for the Hammonds, and details of both the good life
and the hard life in Depression-era America ring true. Grace may not be an or-
phan-indeed, she "suffers" from a surfeit of loving families-but she plucks at
the sensitive heartstrings of orphan-story readers. Rest assured there's a happy
ending, but as a loyal orphan fan, I won't give it away. EB
DE LINT, CHARLES 
A Circle of Cats; illus. by Charles Vess. 
Viking, 2003 
4 5p
ISBN 0-670-03647-1 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Twelve-year-old Lillian spends most of her days wandering through the woods
looking for fairies. One day, as the girl naps beneath an ancient beech tree, a snake
bites her. In a delirium and close to death, she hears voices, voices that say they
must change her in order to save her; when she awakens from her swoon, she
discovers she's a kitten-calico, in fact. At first Lillian the kitten wanders the
woods seeking the fairies she believes have transformed her; the Apple Tree Man,
however, informs her that her saviors were the cats of the wood, returning the
kindness she has always shown them. A huge black panther, Father of Cats, re-
stores her to her human self (the Apple Tree Man has a madstone soaked in milk
to counteract the snake's venomous bite) after obtaining her promise to someday
return the favor, and Lillian returns home. The story is too obviously contrived,
and the images are sometimes cliched. Lillian's peril is still suspenseful, however,
and de Lint's magic wood has a deep and dark allure. Vess' human figures are
awkwardly drafted, but his settings (and his cats) are romantically lush. The vol-
ume will likely please seekers of fantasy tales drawn by the promise of feline magic
and the echoes of graphic-novel design. JMD
DESIMINI, LISA 
Policeman Lou and Policewoman Sue; written and illus. by Lisa
Desimini. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-40888-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
NR 3-6 yrs
Here the preschool set can follow a "typical" day in the life of police partners as
they make their rounds-typical, that is, if they patrol one of the sleepiest towns in
the country. In between muffins for breakfast, grilled cheese for lunch, and chicken
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
11
for dinner, Lou and Sue squeeze in a parking ticket, a lost-dog retrieval, and a
purse-snatching incident. "Policeman Lou and Policewoman Sue write up a crime
incident report and give it to their sergeant. 'It's time to call it a day,' says Police-
man Lou. 'Well done,' says Policewoman Sue." Lou and Sue have evidently spent
so much time together that they've even grown to look alike, from their somewhat
androgynous facial features to their stiff, waxy action-toy posture. All residents in
the pasteboard-styled town, in fact, seem to share a zombie-like vacuity, as citizens
point stiff-armed toward a fleeing robber and the sergeant appears to have dozed
off over the paperwork. Although there may be some shred of accuracy to their
respective policing roles, it won't require much gender sensitivity to notice that
Lou checks the merchants' safety and Sue plays crossing guard; Sue comforts the
elderly purse-snatching victim and Lou chases the perp; Lou drives the squad car
and Sue writes the parking ticket; Sue cooks Lou's favorite dinner at day's end; and
Lou even gets the book's front cover, while Sue takes the back. "'Our job is never
boring,' they both say." Most kids will beg to differ. EB
DOWNER, ANN 
Hatching Magic. Atheneum, 2003 
242p 
illus.
ISBN 0-689-83400-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
While searching for a place to lay her egg, Wycca the wyvern (property of Gideon,
"the king's own wizard"), goes through a magical bolt-hole and winds up in mod-
ern-day Cambridge, Massachusetts. Gideon follows, intent on retrieving Wycca
and her offspring before they are captured and co-opted by his longtime enemy,
the evil Kobold. Upon arrival, a lucky Gideon meets Professor Iain Merlin O'Shea,
who, being a wizard himself, recognizes Gideon and takes him under his modern
wing. Theodora Oglethorpe is an eleven-year-old residing in Cambridge, miser-
ably enduring a summer without her best friends (away until August) and her
father (away on business) when she finds something the time-and-space traveling
Gideon has lost: the "Talent" card for the wyvern, part of a magical deck, without
which he cannot call Wycca to him. The text limns the various activities of the
various characters-Theo, Gideon, Wycca, and Kobold-as they move toward
their inevitable, predictable confrontation. The difficulty here is that the everyday
doesn't have quite the same zing as the wizardly-Theo simply isn't a compelling
enough character to balance the allure of Gideon and Wycca. Since all the magical
characters are adult (Theo's own latent magical powers are not revealed until the
conclusion), the novel's focus is skewed towards the grownups, relegating Theo's
own part in the adventure to the peripheral. Downer neatly presents the collision
of things magical and contemporary, however (including a sweet description of
the hungry wyvern's first encounter with chocolate), and although the fact that
good will win over evil is never in doubt, there is enough suspense in the potential
dangers inherent in the wyvern's wanderings to keep would-be wyvern-keepers
turning the pages. JMD
DUPRAU, JEANNE 
The City ofEmber. Random House, 2003 
270p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92274-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82273-9 $15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The Builders of Ember left instructions for its future, but those instructions have
been lost for generations; now Ember has a mistaken memory of its past and no
understanding of its future. Light is artificially generated, food is grown in green-
houses, and order is maintained through a rigid system of rules and regulations,
12 
* 
THE BULLETIN
rites and rituals. Orphan Lina Mayfleet and her classmate Doon Harrow have
turned twelve, and the rules of Ember state that the friends' school days are over
and their work days have begun. A trade with Doon makes Lina a messenger,
speeding through the streets of Ember; Doon goes to the Pipeworks to maintain
the underground substructure that supports the city. The two notice what the
adults apparently do not: Ember's food supply is dwindling, the lights that keep
the darkness at bay often fail, and the mayor's reassurances are specious. When
Lina finds a nearly indecipherable artifact with directions out of the city, she brings
it to Doon, and together they embark on a perilous journey to find the way be-
yond the dark. Lina and Doon's quest for truth has a strong beginning and a solid
pace; unfortunately, the storytelling loses its way, stuttering over coincidence and
hard-to-believe revelations. Characterizations are a bit thin, but while the adults
appear stupefied by the artificial glare, Lina and Doon (despite their single-minded
intensity) are still likable players. The conclusion is overly convenient, but the
opening pages, with images of the lamplit city isolated by impenetrable darkness,
offer a powerful visual that will draw readers into Lina and Doon's adventure.
JMD
FLEMING, CANDACE 
Ben Franklin's Almanac: Being a True Account of the Good
Gentleman's Life. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2003 
120p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-83549-3 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-10
Fleming spreads a smorgasbord of thematically arranged information about the
Founder's life and invites readers to sample their fill and come back for more at
their leisure. Six chapters cover all the expected highlights-boyhood, family,
writings, philanthropy, scientific endeavors, wartime politicking, life abroad, and
miscellaneous remembrances-and the grazers' approach works reasonably well
for topics such as institutional establishments (e.g., library, hospital, fire depart-
ment) and inventions and experiments (such as the "Franklin" stove, bifocal eye-
glasses, the mathematical magic square). Casual browsing, however, is unlikely to
allow readers to integrate dispersed observations on the toll the Revolution took
on Franklin's relationship with his Loyalist son, or to appreciate just how many
irons the Renaissance man kept in his fire at any given period. Although Fleming
dangles promises of some of Franklin's spicier journalistic fare, kids will probably
find his scientific proposal for removing odor from flatulence relatively bland, and
quotes such as "He that is conscious of a stink in his breeches, is jealous of every
wrinkle in another's nose" plain abstruse. Limited attention spans may, nonethe-
less, be tempted by the lavish inclusion of period illustrations (exhaustively cred-
ited), generously quoted documents, easily digestible servings of boxed data, and
varied font and type size, and readers who want to retrieve an item lost in the
patchwork text can generally rely on the detailed index. Consider this an appetizer
for David Adler's B. Franklin, Printer (BCCB 2/02), but not a main course. EB
FLOOD, PANSIE HART 
Secret Holes; illus. by Felicia Marshall. 
Carolrhoda,
2003 
125p
ISBN 0-87614-923-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
W'hen Sylvia Freeman moves from Florida to Wakeview, South Carolina, she real-
izes that her history is full of secret holes. For one thing, she finds a father she
never knew she had, and for another, it turns out that Jonathan, her dad, is grand-
son to Miz Lula Maye, making her one-hundred-year-old best friend her great-
grandmother as well. Miz Lula Maye teaches her about the secret places folks keep
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
13
important stuff, and she uses that information to seek out her mother's hidden
stash of letters, where an even bigger surprise awaits her: it turns out that her
mother isn't her mother after all, but her aunt, her mother having begun cancer
treatments just after Sylvia's birth and dying two years later. With the support of
Miz Lula Maye's wisdom and love, she comes to terms with her new family situa-
tion, and she and her mother find a real home after all. The characters tend to-
ward cliches ofAfrican-American fiction rather than fully drawn persons, from the
ancient progenitrix Miz Lula Maye, to the educated, well-spoken and overly for-
mal Jonathan, to the cutup club-owner Uncle Jack, Jr., to Momma, Sylvia's aunt/
mother, an uneducated fieldworker at the end of her rope. Sylvia is a spunky
character, however, and her first-person narration flows in easy-to-read dialect,
with enough cultural references thrown in to evoke the seventies setting. Her ten-
year-old voice reflects an apt egocentrism, and her retreat into theatrical illness
whenever she is faced with hearing a new secret is as funny as it is touchingly
realistic. Black-and-white illustrations support the text and accentuate the warm
relationships between the characters; readers with their own complex family rela-
tionships will take heart at Sylvia's happy ever after. KC
FLORIAN, 
DOUGLAS 
Autumnblings; written and illus. by Douglas
Florian. 
Greenwillow, 2003 
[4 6 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009279-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009278-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
This is the third in Florian's seasonal series (see Winter Eyes, BCCB 11/99, and
Summersaults, 5/02), but there's no signs of slackening of creativity in these twenty-
nine concise yet frisky poems. As usual with this poet, there's an abundant harvest
of youthfully accessible plays on words mingled with some keen and flavorful ob-
servations and turns of phrase. 
Suffused with affection for the season "when
summer's seams/ have come undone," the verses evoke the autumnal experience
from the end of baseball to the beginning of school, the coloring of leaves to the
migrating of geese, Halloween to Thanksgiving. Short verse lines make the entries
particularly suitable for reading aloud or reciting, while the occasional typographi-
cal play or pattern adds visual interest. The illustrations, luminous watercolors
touched with colored pencils, often move beyond the decorative to witty visual
commentary or elegant, streamlined scenes. This will make a crisp and atmo-
spheric partner to autumnal holiday books, as well as inviting kids to pen their
own seasonal reflections. DS
FRADIN, DENNIS BRINDELL 
Fight On!: Mary Church Terrell's Battlefor Integra-
tion; by Dennis Brindell Fradin and Judith Bloom Fradin. 
Clarion,
2003 
18 1p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-13349-6 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 5-10
As the privileged daughter of a successful African-American businessman, Mary
Church Terrell could probably have spent most of her life shielded from some of
the worst abuses of the post-Reconstruction Jim Crow system. Well educated and
happily married to a judge, Terrell seemed at first confident in and supportive of
the "gradualist" strategies of Booker T. Washington and like-minded black citi-
zens to raise the fortunes of their race. But if she "avoided major controversies as
long as her husband was alive," she came into her own as an octogenarian, ready
14 * THE BULLETIN
and willing to take on discriminatory practices in the nation's capital. Since Terrell's
most famous achievements occurred so late in life, the Fradins could have been
hard pressed to keep the biographical pot simmering through decades of a long
life. Indeed, their final three chapters, which trace her efforts to integrate Wash-
ington D.C. lunch counters and to legally resurrect dormant antidiscrimination
laws, could almost stand alone as a mini-lesson from the Civil Rights movement.
However, coverage of Terrell's early years, in which her attitudes were shaped and
her public positions evolved, are so thoroughly and engrossingly covered that, by
the time readers reach the battle royale, they are well prepared to appreciate her
successes as the culmination of a life of commitment and service. Detailed source
notes, bibliography, and index, as well as a wealth of black-and-white photographs
and document reproductions, are included. EB
FRANKLIN, KRISTINE L. 
Grape Thief. Candlewick, 2003 
295p
ISBN 0-7636-1325-8 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 5-9
1925 in Roslyn, Washington, sees hard times for the Europeans who have come to
work the mines, since decreased demand for coal is causing layoffs and mobsters
from Seattle are trying to take over smaller bootlegging operations. After Slava's
brothers hop the grape train to Napa, California, and plentiful work, Slava is left to
take care of his mother and little brother, responsibilities that endanger his future
at school. Life continues with a wedding for Slava's sister, Mary, and a serious
illness that leaves his younger brother, Philip, deaf, resulting in expenses that may
lead to the loss of the family home. Yearning to find real work so that he can help
his mother, he and his friend Perks, an African-American boy who has similar
dreams, hatch a plan to follow Slava's brothers to California where they are sure
they will succeed. Franklin paints a compassionate and detailed picture of first-
generation American family life, warmly depicting the stubborn faith of mothers
and the equally stubborn love of sons. Slava is dedicated to his family and his idea
of what a man should be, even as he is resolutely a boy with a boy's awkwardness,
fear, and bravado. The book substantially conveys the force of family members
and friends strongly committed to each other; a combination of well-drawn, lik-
able characters and genuine narrative suspense keeps the reader involved to the
end. KC
GAIMAN, NEIL 
The Wolves in the Walls; illus. by Dave McKean. 
HarperCollins,
2003 
56p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-053087-1 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-380-97827-X 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Young Lucy hears noises in the walls ("They were sneaking, creeping, crumpling
noises"), and although her mother, father, and brother tell her the noises are caused
by mice, rats, and bats respectively, Lucy knows what it really is: "There are wolves
in the walls." Of course, they don't believe her, and, of course (this being Gaiman,
author of the eminently creepy Coraline, BCCB 11/02), Lucy is right. When the
wolves come out of the walls, "it's all over," and the family flees into the night.
Inspired by her successful sneak inside to rescue her pink pig-puppet, she leads her
family "up the back steps . .. Through the back door-into the back hall-and
into the walls." Eventually the family gets tired of walls and wolves and comes out
spoiling for a fight; the wolves flee to "somewhere where there would never be any
people in the walls who would come out in the middle of the night whooping and
singing people songs and brandishing chair legs." Though the story runs on too
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
15
long, Gaiman has one creepy imagination, and his goosebump-inducing tale is
given full visual throttle by McKean's mixed-media, graphic-novel-style illustra-
tions. The fragmented images, combining photographic elements and elegant
drafting, are more than slightly off-kilter, and the uneasiness supplied by the dis-
torted perspectives and fluctuating proportions adds an arresting eeriness to
Gaiman's fantasy (the slavering wolves are particularly unnerving). Hand this to a
jaded third or fourth-grader and watch their eyes get big-the better to see you
with, my dear. JMD
GAUTHIER, GAIL 
Saving the Planet er Stuff 
Putnam, 2003 
2 32p
ISBN 0-399-23761-5 
$17.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Michael Racine just got a summer job as chief lackey at the envi-
ronmental magazine The Earth's Wife. Nora Blake and Walt Marcello (husband-
and-wife founders of the journal) are determined to hang on to the principles of
their magazine, despite the slick pretensions of their recently hired managing edi-
tor, Todd Mylnarski. Michael is essentially an eco-idiot, an energy-waster depen-
dent on cable television and air conditioning, who is desperate for a hamburger in
the strictly vegetarian household. Despite himself, Michael finds himself admir-
ing the dedicated Nora, challenged by the blustering Walt, and dubious of the
duplicitous Todd. When the editorial staff splits between principle and style,
Michael steps forward and reveals a sneaky secret, saves the magazine's editorial
direction, and exposes an environmental health hazard. Gauthier (A Year with
Butch andSpike, BCCB 6/98) leaves middle-school madness behind for a message-
driven look at serious issues. The author doesn't have the same handle on high-
school sensibilities that she has on middle-school angst, however; Michael's point
of view is a bit distant and never quite convincing, and characterizations are oddly
unbalanced (Walt and Nora are the most well-rounded characters, which makes
Michael less than effective as the novel's focus). The ecology-based humor is some-
times more forced than natural, and The Earth's Wife and its oddball subscribers
are held up for ridicule so often that it undermines the novel's central conflict.
Still, Michael's change of heart toward both his coworkers and the principles they
espouse is believable, and the humor sometimes works (the scene where Michael
confronts Walt in a diner thinking he is having an affair when he is really there for
baby back ribs is particularly funny). Original fans of Gauthier's previous works
are older now, and they may just find this title to be both reader-friendly and
ecologically sound. JMD
GAY, MARIE-LOUISE 
Good Night Sam; written and illus. by Marie-Louise
Gay. 
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2003 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-88899-530-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
Siblings Sam and Stella (Stella, Star of the Sea, BCCB 5/99, etc.) return in this
satisfying bedtime mini-drama. Sam and his big sister are a-bed ("'Stella,' whis-
pered Sam, 'are you sleeping?' 'Yes,' answered Stella. 'Aren't you?'") when Sam
expresses his need for Fred, the family dog, before he can contentedly close his
eyes. Suggestions by Stella as to Fred's location ("'Did you look under your bed?'
'He's not there,' said Sam. 'Fred sneezes when he's under the bed'") come to
naught, and a reluctant but resigned big sister arises to help Sam locate the wan-
dering Fred. Throughout the house the siblings search to no avail (sharp-eyed
16 
* THE BULLETIN
youngsters will gleefully point to the doggy in the shadows of nearly every spread);
it is only upon returning to bed that Sam joyfully locates Fred burrowed under a
quilt. The dynamic between older sister and younger brother is delicately bal-
anced, with a controlled piquancy that makes their interactions sweet without
being sweetsy. Granted, the interpersonal dynamics are a parental dream-Stella
is supernaturally patient, Sam is cutely questioning, and even Fred is an effective
cog in the relationship machine-but there is a gentle quirkiness and quiet humor
about the siblings that elicits a resonant thump of the heart. A twilight-blue pal-
ette infuses the airy watercolors with a sense of mystery suited to the duo's moon-
light meandering through the hushed house. The back cover calls this "A Small
Stella and Sam Story," but there's nothing small about the satisfaction of a simple
story well told. JMD
HANSEN, JOYCE 
Freedom Roads: Searching for the Underground Railroad; by Joyce
Hansen and Gary McGowan; illus. by James Ransome and with
photographs. 
Cricket/Marcato, 2003 
164p
ISBN 0-8126-2673-7 
$18.95 
R Gr. 5-10
"How can we possibly find proof and evidence of activities that were purposely
clandestine? Is there any way to recover a secret past?" Focusing on better and
lesser known escape routes for runaway slaves from the early eighteenth century
through Emancipation, Hansen examines the techniques and sources of evidence
available to scholars pursuing this elusive trail. Thermal imaging and soil studies
disclose the location of Fort Mose, built and defended by fugitives to St. Augustine
in 1738; ships' inspection lists document ex-slaves' emigration to Canada under
British protection at the end of the Revolution. Laws, architecture, oral histories,
spirituals, Canadian archives, and even cryptic bas-relief in a church tunnel can
shed light on routes and experiences-but only, as Hansen consistently reminds
her readers, when corroborated by evidence from other sources. This title is as
much about the how-to's of historiography as about the UGRR itself, and readers
who want to bask in the romance of narrow escapes, codes buried in spirituals, and
a tightly defined (if secretive) network of dedicated abolitionists will find Hansen
and McGowan opposed to accepting the lore at face value. Their interpretation of
the UGRR encompasses over two centuries of impromptu kindnesses offered,
emergent opportunities seized, and traces necessarily covered. Carefully sourced
and amply illustrated with period pictures, documents, and charts, this is a strong
selection in both slavery studies and domestic archaeology. EB
HARRIS, ROBIE H. 
I Am NOT Going to School Today; illus. by Jan
Ormerod. 
McElderry, 2003 
3 2p
ISBN 0-689-83913-8 
$16.95 
R 4-8 yrs
On the night before the first day of school, a young boy prepares himself, laying
out his clothes and packing his backpack. Then he remembers that on the first day
of school, you don't know any of the important things like the other kids' names,
or what kind of snacks you'll have, or where you'll store your stuff, so he very
sensibly decides that he will not attend school until the second day. His parents, of
course, have other ideas, and they finally convince him that if he takes his stuffed
monkey, Hank, to school with him, then Hank will know him and he will know
Hank. When he gets to school, he meets his teachers and his classmates, one of
whom has a stuffed bear for a companion, and learns all of the important first-day
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
17
stuff. Bright colors, uncluttered compositions, and appealing adult and child fig-
ures warm this safe if rather predictable story of first-day-of-school jitters. The
illustrations offer readable emotions of a kindergartner offering a perfectly reason-
able argument for not going to school, his parents' sleepy but tolerant morning
faces, his classmates' varying degrees of nerves and structured busyness, and the
teachers' open and welcoming postures. This doesn't quite have the pizzazz of
McGhee's Countdown to Kindergarten (BCCB 10/02), and there's nothing sur-
prising or out of the ordinary here, but there is a warm and gentle reassurance that
everything's going to be just fine. KC
HENKES, KEVIN 
Olive's Ocean. 
Greenwillow, 2003 
[22 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-053544-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-053543-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
A rather morbid premise underlies this tender coming-of-age story: the mother of
Olive Barstow, a twelve-year-old girl killed in a bicycle accident, appears at Martha
Boyle's door with a bit of Olive's journal. Apparently, Olive had three unrealized
hopes at the time of her death-to see the ocean, to become a writer, and to be-
friend Martha. Martha is touched by her similarities to the dead girl, as she too
wishes to be a writer, and she is in fact on her way to visit her grandmother who
lives in a cottage overlooking the ocean. Her vacation becomes a meaningful rite
of passage, involving a first crush, a first kiss, and a first betrayal, as well as many
large and small epiphanies about life, love, death, and her place in the universe. If
it sounds thoroughly cliched, that's because it is, from plot to characters, but it is
also affirming and not overly sentimental. Henkes' use of short chapters, many
less than a page long, present much of the story in sensory poetic vignettes that
limn the plot with a contemplative stillness; readers with a view toward the deli-
cate melancholy of growing up, and the even more profound melancholy of not
growing up, will find emotional affirmation here. KC
IBBOTSON, EVA 
Notjusta Witch; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Dutton, 2003 
[192p]
ISBN 0-525-47101-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Heckie (Hecate Tenbury-Smith) is an animal witch; that is, she can change people
into animals with her "Knuckle of Power." After moving to the small town of
Wellbridge, she (logically) takes over its pet shop. Her real reason for being, how-
ever, is to organize the Wellbridge Wickedness Hunters, and in that end she is
aided by local witches, by a dragworm (her wickedness-detecting familiar), and by
a young boy named Daniel. Heckie changes an abusive rest-home owner into a
warthog, an abusive chicken farmer into a fish, and an abusive bank robber into a
mouse, and it's the last that gets her into big trouble. Her metamorphosis of the
would-be robber is observed by sleazy furrier Lionel Knacksap, who proceeds to
court Heckie and win her heart so he can convince her to turn three hundred
prisoners from the local jail into snow leopards (he plans to kill the beasts and sell
the skins to a sheikh who wants matching coats for the wives of his harem). Ibbotson
(author of Journey to the River Sea, BCCB 4/02) has a knack for catchy character-
izations: her players have appealing eccentricities and sympathy-inducing traits
that capture readers' imaginations. Choppy sequencing and a too-episodic plot
hinders cohesion here, however, and the preponderant adult point of view may
18 
* THE BULLETIN
make it difficult for youngsters to stick to the action. Still, the lighter touches-
Heckie's whimsical transformations, the dragworm's stern-uncle demeanor, and
the Cinderella-like charm of the young Daniel-should be enough to hold readers
until the novel's suitably jovial end. The expressive caricatures of Hawkes' black-
and-white illustrations add comic spice. JMD
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
The First Part Last. Simon, 2003 
131p
ISBN 0-689-84922-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Bobby's sixteenth birthday came with some shocking news: his girlfriend, Nia,
was pregnant. Months later he's trying to raise Feather, their baby, without bur-
dening his family any further, without quitting school, without losing touch with
his friends, and without Nia. There's been a resurgence of literary teen parents
and especially teen fathers lately (such as Horniman's Mahalia, BCCB 6/03), and
this tenderly told story is one of the most appealing. There's some sentimentality
to the underpinnings (it's finally revealed that Bobby's adored Nia suffered ec-
lampsia that sent her into an irreversible coma, which is what made Bobby decide
to raise Feather rather than putting her up for adoption), but that'll please some
readers all the more. Even without that backstory, the lyrical expression of Bobby's
devotion to his daughter and his fears about his great responsibilities ("She only
wants Daddy. That scares the shit out of me") is moving indeed, with Johnson's
finely wrought prose breathing intimacy into every line. The story is deepened by
realistic portrayals of Bobby's loving but tough mother, who refuses to raise her
son's child, and his softer, more forgiving father, but mostly it's the unfolding tale
of Bobby and Feather as he tries to find the best way to raise his child, remember
her mother, and live his life. Many readers will be drawn by the photograph on
the cover (handsome young man tenderly holding a small baby), and they'll find
the book well worthy of the cover's promise. DS
JOHNSTON, TONY 
Go Track a Yak!; illus. by Tim Raglin. 
Simon, 2003 
34 p
ISBN 0-689-83789-5 
$15.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
The parents of a big-eyed baby are in a dither because "Baby won't eat!" A crone
with an ulterior motive promises a solution if the parents will give her anything she
wants: "'I'll tell the secret. If-' she smiled slyly, 'if you promise me my heart's
desire.' (She had no heart. She was a liar.)" The desperate (but not too bright)
parents acquiesce, and the crone tells them the baby needs "yak juice." Off Papa
goes ("TREK. TREK. TREK. TRACK. TRACK. TRACK") to find a yak,
which, once located, proves to be a generous and faithful beast. The "yak juice"
("You ninny, yak juice is yak MILK!" hollers the crone) is consumed by the fat and
sassy baby, after which the crone demands payment: "GIVE ME THE BRAT!"
The "big, sweet, black-eyed yak" kicks the crone over the snowy mountain, "And
they lived happily ever after. So did the yak. YUK. 
YUK. YUK." Johnston's
rhythmically bumptious rhyme is given outrageous cartoon caricature treatment
by Raglin, who uses pen and colored ink to render the irreverent images for this
literally wild-eyed visual takeoff on traditional tales. Varied fonts and colors em-
phasize dialogue and action, while thought balloons free-float amongst figures and
snowy terrain (the snow is in piles against white pages; the colors are concentrated
in the pseudo-folkloric costumes and the typefaces). Use this goofily effective tale
for readers' theater as well as storytime and watch the listeners yak it up. (Yuk,
yuk, yuk.) JMD
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
19
JUBY, SUSAN 
Alice, I Think. 
HarperTempest, 2003 
290p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051544-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051543-0 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Now that Alice is fifteen and has been homeschooled since the first grade, her
parents are concerned that she needs to become more socially developed. Though
she's driven her first therapist out of the profession and she's a bit stumped for
development opportunities in her small British Columbia town, Alice is game to
try, carefully making lists of her goals and career possibilities ("I think I will be a
cultural critic.... Living in Smithers and being a home-schooled shut-in may
even be an asset for a cultural critic") and, out of a desperate effort to give her new
therapist some satisfaction, opting to return to public school. It's the unplanned
events that lead to real growth, however: her first romance (with an extremely
annoying boy), her interest following in the footsteps of her fashionable and disso-
lute (female) cousin Frank, her victimization at the hands of her old first-grade
enemy (now a full-grown, if pint-sized, sociopath), a truly fine haircut, and a tri-
umphant visit to a fish show. While the indications of Alice's growth are modest
indeed, the reward here is less protagonist maturation than narrative voice and
unusual incident. Alice's narration has an acerbity that recalls Polly Horvath's
heroines, and her assessments are often acute (of her mother, she says "I think she
thinks that the way I am is something I'm doing to her"). There's also an authen-
tic adolescent cluelessness, however, which is sometimes purely funny but some-
times eerily authentic in its articulation of the distant relationship some young
people have with adult views of reality (after the bully has beaten Alice's face to a
mass of bruises, she thinks, "I kind of liked them because usually most of my
problems are in my head," and she revels in milking her parents for guilt and
sympathy). Like its heroine, the book is quirky, bright, and funny, and readers
will enjoy making their acquaintance. DS
JUNG, REINHARDT 
Dreaming in Black 6e White; tr. from the German by Anthea
Bell. 
Fogelman, 2003 
112p
ISBN 0-8037-2811-5 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-9
The narrator, a contemporary disabled boy, is obsessed by a dream that develops
in installments and places him in Germany during the early 1930s, when Nazis
were targeting "defective" citizens for extermination. Named Hannes Keller in
the dream, he enters it curiously at first but becomes increasingly unable to sepa-
rate it from reality. Hannes' Jewish math teacher is rounded up, his Jewish girl-
friend flees with her family, and a Nazi overseer humiliates him publicly, applying
pressure on his bureaucratic father to sign a consent form dooming him to a "home"
that no one ever survives. The relationship between the two worlds becomes a
central focus of the protagonist's awareness rather than a conventional plot device.
The kaleidoscopic dynamics of time, place, color, and emotion are subject to re-
peated consideration and comments that add a universal dimension to the specific
settings. Especially notable is the author's interweaving of motif-including an
old photo of an injured African lion with which the narrator identifies-into a
surrealistic combination of realities. The clean, minimalist style that delivers this
complex tale-within-a-tale is well supported by veteran translator Bell's practiced
clarity. This is a rare treatment of a different kind of Holocaust victim, a subject
rendered bearable by the distance of a dream--or is it distant after all? By the time
the narrator has left the dream, he, like Hannes, has discovered that his mother
20 
* THE BULLETIN
loves him as he is, but his father would rather not have him at all. Three informa-
tional sections follow the story's conclusion: a description of "The Ideology, Laws,
and Propaganda" developed by the National Socialist Party for racial purity; the
action of "Operation T4" for the "elimination of lives not worth living"; source
notes that describe the chief documentary work on which the author based his
story. BH
KARR, KATHLEEN 
Gilbert & Sullivan Set Me Free. Hyperion, 2003 
[244p]
ISBN 0-7868-1916-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Libby Dodge is all of sixteen and doing time at the Sherborn women's prison in
1914 Massachusetts. Her arrival coincides with that of a new chaplain, Mrs.
Wilkinson, whose notions of justice tend more toward reformation than punish-
ment. She convinces the superintendent that musical diversions will promote
rehabilitation, not to mention harmony among inmates, and after a successful
Easter rendition of Handel's Messiah, she's ready to tackle a full production of The
Pirates ofPenzance. Libby and her close friend Ma McCreary land leading roles,
and Libby begins to imagine possibilities of a life beyond crime that might await
her at her release. Before the curtain falls on Pirates and on Karr's novel, Libby has
to confront her demons in solitary confinement, lock horns with sly baby-killer
Gladys, fend off the amorous advances of a fellow inmate, and rise to status of
teacher's pet for Mrs. Wilkinson, who miraculously arranges for a music academy
faculty to informally audition her rising star. Although Sherborn, the Pirates pro-
duction, and even the saintly Mrs. Wilkinson are, as a note explains, based on fact,
Karr takes every opportunity to direct the curses and benedictions of decidedly
fictional Fate. After keeping Libby's crime a closely guarded secret, the revelation
that she was a mundane thief comes as a bit of a letdown. Still, the jail setting is a
definite draw, and kids hankering for a peek behind bars should agree that the
more melodrama, the better. EB
Koss, AMY GOLDMAN 
Gossip Times Three. 
Dial, 2003 
170p
ISBN 0-8037-2849-2 
$16.99 
M 
Gr. 4-7
The three of the title are three seventh-grade girls, Abby, Bess, and Cristy (or at
least, the narrator explains, that's what she's alphabetically dubbed them for the
purposes of telling this story), whose friendship founders when boy-crazy Bess
takes up with Zack, the boy Abby has publicly adored since third grade. There's
more to the story than this, because the narrator (who drops clues revealing that
she's Bess' older sister, Gilda) explains much of the writing of the story even as she
pens it, offering insights into deleted passages, motivations for digressions, inter-
ventions of her writing teacher, Mr. Wordsmith, etc. Unfortunately, this isn't one
of the more successful self-aware narratives-Gilda's stream of commentary di-
verts attention from a main plot that would otherwise generate a fair bit of interest,
and in itself it's scattered (there are subplots for so many people that it's difficult to
keep them straight, which undercuts humor as well as impact) and often tediously
contrived, leading readers to wish Mr. Wordsmith might have intervened more
often. Underneath it all, there are some accurate perceptions about middle-school
friendships, the strain of changing priorities, and the difficulty of human relation-
ships, but readers will have to dig through the detritus to find the good stuff. DS
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 21
KRAFT, BETSY HARVEY 
Theodore Roosevelt: Champion of the American
Spirit. Clarion, 2003 
180p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-14264-9 
$19.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
If the twenty-sixth president is still in need of a spokesperson, Kraft is a shoo-in for
the job. After a brief introductory litany establishing that T.R. was a "patchwork
of contradictions," she delivers a cradle-to-grave account that adheres closely to
Roosevelt's own press, following his progress from one "bully" job to the next
without much attention to context or consequence. Readers see Roosevelt whip
the New York police force into order, whip the spoils system into order, whip the
Spaniards into order at San Juan Hill, whip up a canal through Panama, wallop
some Western wildlife and then whip up a conservation movement, and generally
whip the nation along in an underexamined (at least by the author) romp of U.S.
hegemony. When Kraft settles down for a closer look, she does a creditable job
explaining such complex issues as intra-party division during T.R.'s stint as gover-
nor, and she wryly observes him as the "fun" parent who lets his children run
rampant while he slips out of town to pursue his political concerns and vigorous
enthusiasms. Reading about this strenuous life is anything but strenuous, as Kraft
capitalizes on Roosevelt's frenetic activity and infuses a strong sense of it into her
text. Middle-schoolers willing to accept a celebration of T.R.'s accomplishment at
face value should find this to be a lively account. Period photographs, quotations
sources, timeline, bibliographic essay, and index are appended. EB
KROSOCZKA, JARRETT J. Annie Was Warned; written and illus. by Jarrett J.
Krosoczka. 
Knopf, 2003 
28p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91567-2 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81567-8 
$15.95 
R 
4-6 yrs
The title will attract young listeners to this offering, and the opening lines will
keep them there: "On Halloween night, Annie sneaked out to the creepy old
Montgomery mansion." Despite warnings from her parents and big sister, Annie
takes a flashlight and dashes through the trick-or-treat streets in response to a dare
from her friend, James. Down the avenues and across the churchyard she goes, to
where "the mansion loomed large in the night. Annie thought she heard whispers.
Was it haunted?" Into the mansion the intrepid heroine goes-straight into a
surprise party for her birthday: "It was the best scare she'd ever had." Krosoczka is
a deft hand at creating suspense in simple words and concrete images. The quick
pace and underlying feeling of delicious dread makes this Halloween adventure a
prime readaloud candidate. The tone is just right-is there danger or isn't there?
Is Annie silly to take the dare, or is she brave? What are the noises in the streets?
Despite a certain flatness in the characterizations, the paintings' contrasts between
dark and light and the varied perspectives add to the atmosphere. Listeners are
certain to demand flashlights for some make-believe nighttime sojourns of their
own. JMD
LAING, KATE 
Best Kind ofBaby; illus. by R. W. Alley. 
Dial, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2662-7 
$15.99 
R 4-6 yrs
Sophie does not take the news of the impending arrival of a sibling with enthusi-
asm; in fact, when her friends ask (in a variety of ways) why her mother is getting
so round, Sophie replies that her mother is having a baby mouse, or puppy, or
22 
* THE BULLETIN
monkey, or dolphin. Her parents gently correct her ("We are having a baby. A
little baby human child") and when the day does arrive, Sophie comes around.
Laing's humorous text has an understated wit, from Sophie's sound effects for
each hoped-for animal sibling to the calm and explicit explanations from each of
Sophie's patient parents. Granted, the conclusion goes predictably soft (Sophie
decides, in scenes that go on too long, that a baby brother may actually be better
than a pet), and the resolution requires unrealistically advanced skills from the
infant, but the visuals keep the book from tipping into treacle. Alley's watercolor
and pencil illustrations are an easy blend of cartoon and realism, with polished
drafting that belies the comfortable look of the uncluttered compositions. Add
this to the readaloud list-young listeners will respond to Laing's cautiously wel-
coming Sophie whether they are facing a soon-to-arrive sibling or not. JMD
LAUBER, PATRICIA 
Who Came First?: New Clues to PrehistoricAmericans. National
Geographic, 2003 
64p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-8228-0 
$18.95 
R Gr. 4-8
To that ever lengthening list of stuff you thought you knew-and now discover
you don't-it's probably time to add the theory that Native Americans descended
from Asians who crossed the Bering land bridge in prehistoric times. Lauber ex-
amines a wealth of new evidence that suggests the story may not be that simple.
Tool types of the presumed "Clovis" people have turned up in Europe; tools and
human remains that seem to predate Clovis point to earlier settlement; new under-
standing of glaciation patterns cast doubt on migration patterns; and there's even
a strong suggestion that migration may have proceeded northward from South
America, or from eastern North America to west. Lauber is careful to distinguish
material "evidence" from theory and to present views of scientists who aren't quite
ready to jump onto a new paleontological bandwagon. Kid-friendly explanations
do, however, show how new applications in linguistics, genetics, and physical an-
thropology cast serious doubt on previous ideas on settlement. Besides discussing
scientific skirmishes over the value of evidence, Lauber looks thoughtfully at im-
plications within Native American communities, whose claim on prehistoric hu-
man remains under NAGPRA (the Native American Graves Protection and
Repatriation Act) becomes ambiguous as the racial origin of the bones is called
into question. Color photos, maps, charts, and timelines enhance the text; a list of
resources (heavy on reputable websites) will help interested readers keep abreast of
the debate. EB
LEUCK, LAURA 
Jeepers Creepers: A Monstrous ABC; illus. by David
Parkins. 
Chronicle, 2003 
2 6p
ISBN 0-8118-3509-X 
$15.95 
R 4-6 yrs
Classrooms full of figurative little monsters may be familiar to many professionals,
but this one's full of real little monsters, all in alphabetical array. From Ann (who
"has alligator skin") through Ed (whose "hair smells like sauerkraut") and Sid (who
"has fifteen purple toes") to Zelda (who is "tall and getting taller"), the rhyming
roll is called, and then the creepy class is assembled for a beastly readaloud. Before
the story's conclusion, the class is fascinated by a particularly bizarre creature ("with
blinking eyes, a bumpless chin,/ roundish ears and furless skin"), who is, of course,
the human viewer. While the final stanzas are rather blandly crafted, the couplets
are generally chirpy, the classroom provides a legitimate excuse for the catalogue,
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
23
and the final reverse-monster twist will be a crowd-pleaser. Each illustration ex-
trapolates from the single textual specific to a complete, consistent, and individu-
ally gruesome monster. Though the visuals are more slick than subtle, there's an
exuberant kindergarten feel to the classroom and schoolyard, enhanced by the
monsters' eye-popping colors and happy participation in traditional activities such
as sandbox play and jumping rope. Youngsters not yet ready for Gorey's
Gashlycrumb Tinies will find this an amiably horrific alphabet. DS
LEVITHAN, DAVID 
Boy Meets Boy. 
Knopf, 2003 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92400-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82400-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
LEWIN, TED 
Lost City: The Discovery ofMachu Picchu; written and illus. by Ted
Lewin. 
Philomel, 2003 
42p
ISBN 0-399-23302-4 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
"Lost" and "Discovery" may not be the best terms for this account of Hiram
Bingham's 1911 exploration of the Inca site; after all, there was nothing "lost"
about it to the Peruvians who farmed the grounds near the ancient buildings. The
find was, however, certainly news to the Yale expedition that sought (and mistak-
enly thought they had found) the fabled "lost city" of Vilcapampa. Lewin indi-
cates in his source notes and afterword that his retelling is based solely on Bingham's
journal and his own exploration and photo documentation of the site and sur-
rounding region; the result skews towards Bingham's now largely superseded mys-
tical interpretation of the site (including a child visionary who seems original to
this work) as well as the breathlessness of period prose (and an inexplicable ten-
dency to punctuate questions with exclamation points). A closing note tells a bit
more about later excavation, but the focus of this title is squarely on the adventurer's
thrill of rediscovery, and on the magnificence of the mountains and jungle that
sheltered and protected the site from Spanish (and archaeologists') pillage. The
watercolor landscapes rely overmuch on some jarringly lurid and unsubtle color
combinations, but there's a fair amount of drama as they articulate dense foliage in
painstaking detail, raise craggy purple heights and drop light-dappled falls, rever-
ing the skillful masonry that withstands centuries of weathering and jungle over-
growth. Although able readers will find a more detailed account in Rebecca Stefoffs
Finding the Lost Cities (BCCB 3/97), there's an old-fashioned archaeological ro-
mance here that should set middle-graders dreaming of khakis, shovels, and fat
research grants. EB
MARKLE, SANDRA 
Outside and Inside Big Cats. Atheneum, 2003 
4 0p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-689-82299-5 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Markle begins her informative exploration of big cats by comparing them to the
more familiar house cats. She compares their sleeping habits, their flexible feet
and retractable claws, their eyes, their rough sticky tongues, and their whiskers,
showing how these features enable them to be adept hunters and savage predators.
Photographs of a partially masticated zebra and descriptions of how male cats take
droplets of female cats' urine into their mouths to determine if a female is ready to
24 
* 
THE BULLETIN
mate will rate high on the middle-graders' cool gross-out list, and the photograph
of a partially skinned house cat is effective as well as riveting in its illustration of
the various inner parts-intestines, lungs, stomach, heart, and windpipe-of her
subject. Explanations are clear, immediate, and bracingly pragmatic, as in the
equation of the human making of a fist with a lion's actions in catching an ante-
lope, or the description of the use of the canine teeth (of which, the author re-
minds us, we have four) to bite and kill prey. This is nature red in tooth, claw,
intentions, and innards-science without apology or euphemism. A glossary, an
index, and questions for guided rereading are included. KC
MAUNER, CLAUDIA 
Zoe Sophia's Scrapbook: An Adventure in Venice; written by
Claudia Mauner and Elisa Smalley; illus. by Claudia Mauner. 
Chronicle,
2003 
34p
ISBN 0-8118-3606-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Nine-year-old Zoe lives in the Antwerp, a door-manned building on the Upper
West Side of Manhattan. She is leaving the activities of her privileged life ("eating
hot pretzels on the steps of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, trying on sunglasses
at the Columbus Avenue flea market and walking my dachshund, Mickey, along
Riverside Drive") to fly to Venice, Italy, to visit her great aunt Dorothy Pomander
(a.k.a. D. P.). Zoe and Mickey land in Venice and are swept away by Dorothy
into a vaporetto, a boat-bus that travels the watery streets. Zoe admires D. P.'s art
collection, visits the sites, and meets a singing gondolier. Somewhere in her travels
Zoe loses Mickey, but Ludovico (the gondolier) finds and returns him, and even-
tually Zoe too must return ("I am majorly bummed that we have to fly home
tomorrow"). The well-off girl has a blissful time exploring Venice with all that
money and an indulgent aunt can provide, but despite the excitement caused by
the temporary loss of Mickey, this is still pointed and travelogue-ish; Zoe tells her
story in the form of a travel journal with days, times, and locations, making this
essentially a sightseeing tour held together by wisps of plot. However, the offbeat
charm of the line-and-watercolor illustrations keep this from becoming offputtingly
self-indulgent: a bereted Zoe slyly resembles her elderly bespectacled aunt, the
dachshund has the built-in absurdity of a walking sausage, and the sites and canals
of Venice are rendered with a splashy, enthusiastic flair. While the audience for
this tale may be limited, it is still a lively (if lengthy) introduction to Venice, and
world-traveling tykes may find a model here for their own vacation journals. JMD
MCCAUGHREAN, GERALDINE 
Stop the Train! HarperCollins, 2003 
28 7p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-050750-0 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-050749-7 
$16.99 
R Gr. 5-8
The hopeful residents of the soon-to-be town of Florence in the newly opened
Oklahoma Territory stalwartly resist robber-baron efforts to con them out of their
land claims; consequently, the railroad owner refuses to allow the train to stop at
Florence, and the teeny burg is in danger of financial collapse. While the townsfolk
watch their meager savings dwindle, they hatch a number of abortive plots to force
the train to stop; their cooperative efforts bond them into a tight-knit community
whose solidarity against the Red Rock Runner seems unbreakable until a traitor is
suspected in their midst. Although the action ostensibly revolves around ten-year-
old Cissy, her dreamer father, and her pessimistic mother, this is truly an ensemble
production, with a large cast of archetypes (from the displaced Ponca chief to the
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
25
gun-totin', illiterate schoolmarm) driving the action. While McCaughrean has
nothing as exotic here as Madagascar piracy (The Pirate's Son, BCCB 9/98) or
Chinese aerialism (The Kite Rider, BCCB 7/02), the Florencers' schemes chug
briskly by in inventively drawn episodes, and their blossoming bonhomie warms
their most outlandish brainstorms. Fans of Kathleen Karr's historical romps will
want to ride along. EB
MURPHY, JIM 
Inside the Alamo. 
Delacorte, 2003 
121p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90092-9 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32574-6 $16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-10
The rallying cry for Texas independence, "Remember the Alamo!", is probably
better known to adolescents than the story behind it, and here Murphy replays the
doomed defense of the makeshift fort and attempts to limn the character of the big
name participants among both the Texas rebels and the Mexican army. Organiza-
tionally, this is not Murphy's finest outing, with a frequently repetitive text, and
sidebar data and intrusive highlighted quotations that could have been more prof-
itably incorporated into the main body of material. Although he pauses to weigh
the evidence for several pervasive Alamo legends (e.g., did Davy Crockett die in-
side the fort, or was he executed later? What was the condition of ailing Jim Bowie
when Mexican soldiers reached his bedside?), his broad-brushed portrayals of de-
fenders and attackers call for cautious reading. "Like many self-centered individu-
als, Travis rarely criticized his own conduct"; "[Santa Anna] was a greedy man, a
political genius, a vain and arrogant fool, a good soldier, a great Mexican patriot, a
cruel and cowardly commander, and an opium addict." There are few nonfiction
writers that rival Murphy as a storyteller, though, and his recreation of the siege is
tense and immediate. A stockpile of period and later illustrations, many captioned
to point out incongruities and anachronisms, are included, as are a list of persons
known to be in the Alamo at the siege, an annotated bibliography, and an index.
EB
MURRAY, MARTINE 
The Slightly True Story of Cedar B. Hartley (Who Planned to
Live an Unusual Life); written and illus. by Martine Murray. 
Levine/Scholastic,
2003 
[240p]
ISBN 0-439-48622-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Cedar B. Hartley, self-proclaimed "stark-raving feminist" and sometime "secret
meanie," has an acrobat's body and a philosopher's soul. Her unusual life, a few
months of which are narrated in this Australian import, consists entirely in the
everyday details of family, friends, and neighbors rendered wise and important by
Cedar's distinctive voice and her small but expressive drawings. An accidental
meeting with a boy named Kite, whose parents are circus trainers, spurs Cedar's
nascent interest in acrobatics. Partly because she likes tumbling, and partly be-
cause she really, really likes Kite, she goes into training. When her neighbor's dog
needs an operation, Cedar decides to mount a show to raise money. The "let's put
on a show" plot may be a familiar one, but Murray imbues Cedar's narration with
individuality as Cedar watches all and records her impressions in such a way that
the reader becomes her friend in the precise way that she defines friendship: "I
know Caramella is my friend, because when we talk it makes me feel that what I
26 
* THE BULLETIN
felt and saw and said in any kind of situation means something." As Cedar says of
her acquaintance Oscar's notebook, this is "odd and small and quiet, not grand,"
but it's both an enjoyable story and a narrative gently filled with wonder. A brief
glossary provides explanation for the Aussie slang. KC
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
A Time to Love: Stories from the Old Testament; illus. by
Christopher Myers. 
Scholastic, 2003 
127p
ISBN 0-439-22000-9 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
The Myerses offer a half dozen retellings of well-known Bible stories, cast in the
first-person narration of a major character. The tales proceed in no discernible
order, leading offwith Delilah's breathy musings about her betrayed lover, Samson,
then back to Reuben and Joseph, further back to Isaac and Abraham, and winding
up in Egypt on the eve of the Exodus with Aser and Gamiel. Stories such as
Abraham's intended sacrifice cling close to Biblical events while delving into pur-
ported thoughts and motivations of individuals, in this case the befuddled victim,
Isaac. Others, such as Samson and Delilah, are more fanciful and uneven; W. D.
Myers limns Delilah as a shaky composite of fifteen-year-old innocent, political
pawn, and remorseful lover, while C. Myers disregards the textual age setting and
depicts her in the more traditional role of worldly-wise seductress. Readers well up
on their Scripture will undoubtedly chuckle at Myers' genteel treatment of Lot's
daughter "Zillah," who ponders the mystery of her mother's transformation into
salt but throws on the literary brakes just short of seducing her father in the cave.
Illustrations range wildly among staged photographs, collage, paintings, and
sketches; golden wash gives the pages a faux-papyrus appearance, a curious affecta-
tion considering that Egyptian sources are maddeningly quiet on the subject of the
Israelites. This is neither as gripping nor imaginative as Peter Dickinson's City of
Gold or Jan Mark's God's Story (BCCB 5/98), but collections featuring a broad
selection of Bible retellings may want a copy on their shelves. EB
NAMIOKA, LENSEY 
Halfand Half. Delacorte, 2003 
136 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90072-4 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73038-1 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 4-7
As the daughter of a Scottish mother and a Chinese father, Fiona Cheng is caught
between two racial heritages that she can't reconcile. Her identity problem comes
to a head when both her Scottish grandparents and her Chinese grandmother
come to visit her, each with their own hopes for her performance at the Seattle folk
festival. Will she join her Grandpa MacMurray's Highland dance troupe, or will
she wear the beautiful silk costume Nainai has made for her to portray the Chinese
heroine of her father's latest picture book? Through conveniently overheard con-
versations, Fiona and her brother Ron realize that Ron is the true object of his
Grandpa's ambitions to have a dancer in the family, so he reluctantly dons the kilt
and attempts to learn the dance routines, while Fiona, equally reluctant because
she loves dancing, preps for her role as dainty, demure Chinese princess. Namioka
makes heavy weather of the theme of "filial duty," a behavior that Fiona disdains
in her father as he regresses to childish behavior whenever his mother is around,
but which ultimately seems to be Fiona's and Ron's only motivation as well. Both
children apparently want nothing other than to please their grandparents (who
offer little motivation beyond cultural fidelity), even if it means mortifying embar-
rassment on Ron's part and crushing disappointment on Fiona's. Despite the
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 27
attempt to explore roles, characterization in this book never really goes beyond
ethnic and gender stereotypes. The resolution is as tidy as the characters are flat,
but perhaps the exaggerated archetypes will help children working out their own
issues of hybrid identities see the issues more clearly. KC
OSA, NANCY 
Cuba 15. Delacorte, 2003 
277p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90086-4 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73021-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
When Violet Paz is selected to perform Original Comedy for her high-school speech
team, she doesn't have to look any further than home for material. Violet's family
features a Polish mother who dreams of opening a Polish/Cuban bistro, a Cuban
father obsessed with ironing and brightly colored shirts, an Abuela with a passion
for fluorescent lipstick, and a dominoes-crazed Abuelo. A weekend-long domino
party which was broken up by the police just as her Abuelo, "looking for all the
world like the Cuban Statue of Liberty," makes a mad dash with a flame-engulfed
roast toward a cooler of beer and Cokes provides just the right occasion for her OC
routine, but she must also muster the energy to prepare for her quinceafiero, a
traditional party for Cuban girls turning fifteen. Violet is determined to keep
control of the planning so that this party doesn't become a nightmare of traditions
she has neither knowledge of nor affinity for, but as the planning progresses, she
realizes that knowing more about Cuba might not be such a bad thing. Osa's
picture of family life is fresh and funny; Violet is a strong, assertive female lead
with a dynamic supporting cast of family and friends. The first-person narration is
a comic delight, blending raucous physical comedy with gentle teasing regarding
the idiosyncrasies of Violet's family and friends ("Our house is decorated in Span-
ish Colonial meets Early Thrift Shop, and so, it seemed, was my mother today").
The issues of assimilation, heritage, and the embargo are all raised in such natural
contexts and with such complex associations and opinions among the characters
that there is never a sense of an agenda, and yet uninitiated readers will surely want
to learn more about Cuba, its music, and its traditions, as well as yearning for a
quince of their own. KC
PAK, SOYUNG 
Sumi's First Day ofSchoolEver; illus. by Joung Un Kim. 
Viking,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-670-03522-X 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
On her first day in her new school, Sumi starts by learning that school is a lonely,
scary, mean place. Her mother leaves her, she doesn't know where she belongs
among the big, noisy children, and a boy taunts her because of her Korean ethnic-
ity. The only words she knows in English are basic greetings, but as she navigates
through her day with the help of her teacher, she begins to make connections with
other students and to revise her original impressions of school. Her love of draw-
ing paves the way for her first friendship, and she realizes that school is a "not-so-
lonely, not-so-scary, not-so-mean" place after all. Naive figures in bright smudgy
schoolroom colors feature body shapes that imply their characters' emotions and
attitudes; they also suggest more similarities than differences among the students,
which may be visually confusing even as it's philosophically good-hearted. This
lacks the subtle humor of Helen Recorvits' My Name Is Yoon (BCCB 4/03), and
the trajectory is completely predictable; however, the effective narrative structure
and simple text provide a satisfying movement from conflict to resolution. KC
28 
* THE BULLETIN
PAULSEN, GARY, ed. 
ShelfLife: Stories by the Book. 
Simon, 2003 
173p
ISBN 0-689-84180-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-8
"Okay," says one of Marion Dane Bauer's characters to another, who has been
doing volunteer work for the wrong reasons, "just so long as it doesn't count as a
good deed." Ironically, this collection has "good deed" generously inscribed all
over it, beginning with Robert Wedgeworth's prefatory description of ProLiteracy
Worldwide-the recipient of partial proceeds from the book-and also with the
opening of editor Gary Paulsen's introduction, "Books saved my life." Fortu-
nately, most of the ten short stories stand on their own despite statements of inten-
tion that may put young readers off or simply delay them from getting at what
happens next. Although each story focuses on a book or writing or reading in
some way, shape, or form, there's no instructive adulation inherent to any of them.
In fact, literacy figures in rather surprising ways, including misleading journals
and letters in M. T. Anderson's creepy tale about a deserted ship; a perjured book
report in Ellen Conford's story of gendered revenge; and an abandoned baby's
rescue by a pickpocket who's been taught "how to read with the Bible" so he can
be a better thief, in Kathleen Karr's story set during the 1893 Columbian Exposi-
tion of Chicago. Other contributors include Margaret Haddix, Jennifer Holm, A.
LaFaye, Gregory Maguire, Ellen Wittlinger, and Joan Bauer, and their stories range
from science fiction to fantasy and sharp-edged realism. The overall tone of the
collection is restrained and somewhat sophisticated, appropriate to the readers who
will be attracted by a book about books. BH
PINCHUK, AMY 
The Best Book ofBikes; illus. by Tina Holdcroft and Allan Moon
and with photographs. 
Maple Tree Press, 2003 
64p 
(Popular Mechanics for
Kids)
Library ed. ISBN 1-894379-43-8 
$21.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-894379-44-6 
$12.95 
R Gr. 3-7
Top to bottom, front to back, across countries, and over time-just about any-
thing related to cycling pops up in this lively introduction. A bit of bicycle history
and trivia kicks it off (450 million bikes in China; is the da Vinci bicycle sketch a
fraud?), then the focus shifts to contemporary rides. Here readers examine in
detail the mechanical arcana, learn standard maintenance and roadside repairs,
and pick up on the physics and strategies behind BMX stunts and long-distance
racing. Diagrams are paragons of clarity, and plenty of color photos dish out extra
eye candy. Pinchuk's frequently overenthusiastic prose ("Get the inside scoop on
the rad and crazy world of BMX racing") suggests a visitor to, rather than a resi-
dent of, the Land of Adolescence, and older readers may wince a little at the chat-
ter. Her information, however, is solid, the overview is thorough, and the index
and glossaries of technological terms and rider jargon could haul many an adult up
from cluelessness. It's sick and phat-and that's a good thing. EB
RANDLE, KRISTEN D. 
Slumming. HarperTempest, 2003 
232p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-001023-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-001022-3 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Seniors Nikki, Alicia, and Sam embark, with varying degrees of enthusiasm, on a
Pygmalion-inspired plan wherein they each take one person "who is obviously un-
tapped" and help him or her blossom. Nikki picks Brian Camarga, a gifted science
nerd; Sam chooses Tia Terraletto, the "Girl Most Likely to Beat You With Chains,"
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 29
in the view of a shocked Nikki; Alicia refuses to acknowledge her choice, secretly
selecting the dangerous and very attractive Morgan Weiss. As each of the trio's
stories unfold, it becomes clear that they have their own individual dramas to play
out that have only the most peripheral connection to the people they've selected:
Nikki finds real respect for Brian (who teaches her more than she teaches him);
Sam comes to grips with his own fortune-blessed life as he gets to know the troubled
Tia; Alicia projects her romantic wishes and her emotions about her recent aban-
donment by her mother onto Morgan (who knows she's out of her league with
him). Randle's characterization makes the somewhat stagey setup believable; each
of the trio's voices ring true, especially chirpy, smarter-than-she-seems Nikki, who
really is the sort of person who'd genuinely want to help others, who'd overlook
the condescension inherent in such a plan, and who'd be honest enough to realize
her mistake. Sam's story is particularly strong in its original and badly needed
exploration of the moral burden of a good life: he's aware that there's no just
reason behind the disparity between his and Tia's fortunes, but does that disparity
make him guilty, obligated, or something else entirely? Readers will also wish to
discuss the ethics of Sam's decision to report to the authorities something Tia has
told him in confidence, which loses him her hard-won trust. A lot of authors
overlook the kids whose lives aren't in turmoil, but Randle sensitively demon-
strates the universal possibilities of growth and the truth in Nikki's own statement:
"happy people, unhappy people-everybody is interesting." DS
RICHARDSON, V. A. 
The House of Windjammer. 
Bloomsbury, 2003 
350p
ISBN 1-58234-811-1 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The seventeenth-century Dutch Windjammer brothers' merchant fleet has been
lost at sea while trying to establish trade with the New World. Uncle Lucien has,
by all accounts, met a watery death; Hercules Windjammer has died of shame,
grief, and stress at the demise of the family business; coldhearted banker Hugo van
Helsen is closing in on what's left of the shipping line and on Hercules' beautiful
widow; and now it's up to fourteen-year-old Adam Windjammer to try to save his
mother, the family's business, and its respected name. As Adam dodges a vicious
cutpurse and a nefarious "preacher" in cahoots with van Helsen, he's undermined
by the apparent treachery of his father's trusted bookkeeper (ah, but is he really a
traitor?) and aided by van Helsen's own feisty daughter (ah, but is she really on his
side?). Whenever the drawn-out plot springs a leak, Richardson caulks it up with
pitch and hokum-none-too-original plot twists, narrow escapes, and a theatrical
climax involving a mysterious, turbaned Turk (hmmm, Sydney Greenstreet in
Casablanca?) and a poor-but-loyal-friends-kick-in-to-save-the-business ending
straight out of It's a Wonderful Life. Richardson does dish up a tasty red herring-
Adam's chase after the elusive Black Pearl won't fool horticulturally minded ado-
lescents, but it's a safe bet most readers will follow the scent. This is a hefty read,
but a brisk one, and a little booktalking will put some wind behind the circulation.
EB
ROBERTS, BETHANY 
May Belle and the Ogre; illus. by Marsha Winborn. 
Dutton,
2003 
4 8p
ISBN 0-525-46855-2 
$14.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Sometimes an ogre just wants to feel pretty. At least, that's so with the furry little
ogre that May Belle meets, who demands that she give him her new hat, and then
30 
* 
THE BULLETIN
her gloves, and finally her feet. This last is the last straw, until May Belle figures
out that what the ogre really wants is pretty pink toenails, which she paints for
him. In their next encounter, May Belle bakes up three blueberry pies that disap-
pear from her windowsill while cooling. Again, she grabs hold of that ogre and
this time makes him bake a pie just for her in return. Finally, the lonely May Belle
invites the equally lonely ogre to be her roommate, and they live and play happily
ever after. May Belle is a feisty little personage, just the sort who would insist that
her friendship with an ogre exist entirely on her terms. Winborn's illustrations
suggest that May Belle is kin to David McPhail's characters; her large head with its
thatch of blonde hair sits atop a diminutive body whose posture and attitudes
imply boundless energy and excitability (the ogre himself appears to be close kin to
May Belle's fuzzy pup). Beginning readers will revel in the way fearless May Belle
turns this scary monster into a dear friend. KC
ROBERTS, WILLO DAVIS 
Rebel. Atheneum, 2003 
153p
ISBN 0-689-85073-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Because her first and favorite word was "no!" Amanda Jane Keeling has been called
nothing but Rebel since she was two years old. When the rest of her family heads
to Europe for a music competition, she decides to stay home and help her
grandmother, from whom she inherited her rebellious tendencies, fix up an old
house for boarders. 
Her grandmother's friend and business partner, Vi, has a
grandson helping her, and soon Moses and Rebel find that they are kindred spirits-
exceptionally tall young people with a passion for mystery, which they conveniently
find. While walking their dogs, they witness a petty theft that turns out to be the
tip of a criminal iceberg. Moses and Rebel follow all of the classical leads-muddy
footprints, discarded jackets, wallets filled with counterfeit bills-and finally devise
a scheme to lure the culprits to their home, even though they know that such a
move is risky. Fortunately, Moses' uncle is a cop, and his late-night return from a
fishing trip tidily corresponds with the counterfeit gang's break-in, resulting in a
messy but ultimately harmless roundup of all the bad guys. More Scooby Doo
than Nancy Drew, this mildly interesting mystery turns on too-convenient
coincidences and fortuitous circumstances. Dialogue is generally stilted and
authorial forecasting painfully intrusive, with chapters ending with lines such as "if
they'd had a crystal ball their response would have been quite different." There is
also a rather strange and persistent subtext of fourteen-year-old Rebel's sizing Moses
up as potential marriage material. Still, there is sufficient action and predictable
enough clue detection to catch the undemanding mystery fan, with the added
bonus of two clever dogs whose detective work deserves some Scooby snacks. KC
ROHMANN, ERIC 
Pumpkinhead; written and illus. by Eric Rohmann. 
Knopf,
2003 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92416-7 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82416-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
"You know the world will always be difficult for a boy with a pumpkin for a head."
So Otho's sage mother reminds him when she has restored his errant pumpkin
head to his otherwise normal (though apparently detachable) body after its adven-
tures. Plucked off its body by a bat who sees its potential as a home with its own
food supply, Otho's head is dropped in the ocean, swallowed by a fish, expelled
through the pressure of a squid, and picked up by a fisherman who has seen an
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
31
impressive array of fish in his day, but never a pumpkinfish. Fortunately, Otho's
mother happens to be shopping in the fish market that day, so this adventure
doesn't take what might have been a very nasty turn, and Otho is instead restored
to wholeness. 
Rohmann returns to the artistic style of multi-color relief prints
and playfully absurd fantasy that earned him the 2002 Caldecott for My Friend
Rabbit, though here both the story and the illustrations are quieter and the humor
less straightforward. The chunky black outlines and limited palette (orange, blue,
and aqua) allow the shapes to take center stage; a comforting roundness rocks
readers along on Otho's adventure. The plot never quite fulfills its enticingly
weird premise, though, remaining blandly sequential rather than really develop-
ing. Be prepared for some very interesting theories from the more literal-minded
about how Otho got a pumpkin for a head; these young folks will likely be very
diligent about spitting out their seeds in future. KC
ROWLING, J. K. Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix; illus. by Mary
GrandPre. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2003 
870p
ISBN 0-439-35806-X $29.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Harry Potter's latest adventure reveals an admirable hero somewhat the worse for
wear: his grief at the death of Cedric, his fear of (and connection to) the evil Lord
Voldemort, and his emotional distance from Professor Dumbledore combine to
make Harry a bit short-tempered, a bit short-sighted, and a bit more recognizably
human. Rowling eases readers back into Harry's world-and Harry's precarious
existence-with nary a ripple: the suburban peace of the Dursleys' manicured
lives is shattered by the intrusion of dementors, sent by a rogue in the Ministry of
Magic and seeking to do Harry serious injury. A wizard rescue party retrieves
Harry from the world of Muggles and sets him down amidst the Order of the
Phoenix, a secret society that plots Voldemort's final downfall. With an escalating
love life, academic complications at school, and a Ministry of Magic determined to
ignore the obvious, Harry is in an adolescent uproar. Revelations about Sirius
Black, Professor Snape, and Harry's late father cause the boy to question all he
holds true, and his confusion clouds his judgment. A roaring set of practical jokes
by Fred and George Weasley against a politically appointed, obnoxious new pro-
fessor at Hogwarts lightens the tone just in time for the Order's tragic confronta-
tion with Voldemort and his malevolent minions. Rowling cheerfully turns her
own conventions on their ears, and the result is a surprising and enjoyable ride.
While Harry's much-touted love interest fizzles before it fires, familiar characters
achieve a bit more depth: Ginny Weasley starts to come into her own, Hermione
employs a dryly wicked wit, and Dumbledore reveals, if not feet, at least a little toe
of clay. It's no longer quite clear that all will work out in the end; the lines are
being drawn, but, as exemplified by Percy Weasley, not everyone is on the right
side. Rowling has managed to make Harry and his fate a bit less predictable,
which, in the fifth of a seven-volume series, is a very good thing. JMD
RUBY, LAURA 
Lily's Ghosts. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
258p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051830-8 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-051829-4 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Lily Crabtree doesn't want to live in Great-Uncle Wesley's Vic-
torian mansion in Cape May, New Jersey, but that's where she and her mother
end up after her mom's latest romance fizzles. It's bad enough that living in a
32 
* THE BULLETIN
seashore community in the winter is deadly dull, but Lily's cat, Julep, is staring at
things that Lily can't see, an old Kewpie doll is following the girl around the drafty
house, and things keep disappearing and reappearing with maddening regularity.
Her mother thinks Lily is making it all up, but Lily knows that something strange
is happening in the family house. A chance meeting with a boy named Vaz (short
for Vasilios) gives Lily a romantic interest and an ally, and the two join forces to
discover the murderous secrets hidden in her family history. Ruby divides her
effectively creepy ghost tale into two parts, the day-to-day activities of the living
and the day-to-day activities of the dead, in serif and sans serif fonts, respectively,
and the actions of individuals present and departed are humorously balanced to
provide both historical context and local color. The foreshadowing is smoky but
discernible, and the cumulative pace is just right for a suspenseful tale of murder-
ous betrayal, vengeful ghosts, and tragic rivalry. The atmospheres of haunted house
and deserted seaside are delicately evoked, and concluding revelations move logi-
cally and inexorably into focus. Ruby doesn't horrify so much as she insinuates, in
gracefully nuanced language that provides chilling support for the action. Make
room for this first novel on that surefire ghost tale shelf. JMD
SAID, SF 
Varjak Paw; illus. by Dave McKean. 
Fickling, 2003 
256p
ISBN 0-385-60415-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Varjak is the middle son in a pampered feline family of Mesopotamian Blues, a
rare breed of cat with an illustrious (and mostly forgotten) history. When the cats'
indulgent owner, the Contessa, dies, her house and her cats are taken over by the
dastardly Gentleman, a wicked character with felonious designs and two unnerv-
ing black cats. Varjak, an enthusiastic listener to stories of the legendary Jalal (folk
hero of the Mesopotamian Blues) told by his grandfather, the Elder Paw, escapes
over the garden wall to seek a dog to help rescue his too-complacent cat family.
Varjak then transforms, as Holly, a savvy alley cat, shows him how to survive on
the streets, and dream visits from Jalal teach Varjak "the Way," a spiritual and
physical discipline that turns him from soft house pet to nearly unbeatable hunter
and fighter. He finally finds his canine ally in Cludge, a terrifying, slobbering,
lonely, monster mutt, who follows Varjak to the Contessa's to save the
Mesopotamian Blues (and, incidentally, discover the fate of disappearing street
cats). The premise has both folkloric and cinematic echoes: an underestimated
outcast achieves spiritual enlightenment through martial arts. While the plot is
derivative, the prose is smooth, and the action is swift (and sometimes even har-
rowing); the setting has a dark, concrete allure that will keep readers roaming the
streets with Varjak and his friends. The conclusion, though murky, is exciting
(the Gentleman is turning real cats into toy cats by means and for reasons un-
known), and the villain's being routed by Cludge is just if not entirely credible.
Give this to feline fantasy lovers looking for a walk on the wild side. Illustrations,
some in scratchy, angular black in white, some in monochrome peach, add to the
atmosphere. JMD
SALKELD, AUDREY 
Climbing Everest: Tales of Triumph and Tragedy on the World's
Highest Mountain. National Geographic, 2003 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-5105-9 
$21.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Both literarily and actually, Everest is no longer the rarefied mountain it used to
be; the spate of recent Everest titles, including Salkeld's own Mystery on Everest: A
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 33
Photobiography of George Mallory (BCCB 9/00) means that there aren't many new
book routes to travel on this peak. Her approach here has a sufficiently fresh focus
to make it worthwhile, however, in its sequential history, focusing on several dif-
ferent expeditions (some successful, some tragic, some both). Her sidebars tackle
head-on some issues that are ignored or briefly alluded to in other Everest vol-
umes: the economic significance of Everest climbing to the Sherpas, who have
endured more losses than the visiting climbers on Everest; the ecological degrada-
tion of the mountain and the problems of measures designed to combat it; the
pressure for boundary-pushers not just to climb Everest but to find ways to make
history doing it. Color and black-and-white photographs sometimes suffer from
unclear captioning, but there are some breathtaking vistas as well as helpful and
informative diagrams of various expeditions' paths. This is usefully complemen-
tary to Stephen Venables' To the Top: The Story ofEverest (BCCB 6/03), and it
could also serve as a standalone introduction to climbing history for readers just
embarking on their literary journeys. There are unfortunately no notes, but exten-
sive end matter includes a detailed chronology, a biographical "hall of fame," a list
of Everest "firsts," a glossary, a list of print and electronic resources, and an index.
DS
SAN Souci, ROBERT D. 
Dare to Be Scared: Thirteen Stories to Chill and Thrill;
illus. by David Ouimet. 
Cricket, 2003 
159p
ISBN 0-8126-2688-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
San Souci, known for his retellings of traditional folktales and the Short and Shiv-
ery series, here offers thirteen original tales. From an urban-legend-type entry
featuring telephone calls from a deceased relative, to a Nightmare on Elm Street
parallel where dreams fuel reality, to a neo-folktale avec boogey woman, to a sad
but satisfying ghost tale, the author provides a smorgasbord of tasty terror treats.
Ouimet provides one creepily evocative, full-page, inky black-and-white illustra-
tion-a stylistic cross between Stephen Gammell and Gahan Wilson-for every
story (the seen-through-the-keyhole image of the little girl with sooty black eyes
clutching a cell phone is particularly memorable); the title page of each tale fea-
tures a thumbnail from the full-page image. The stories are tightly plotted and
pithily told, and the conversational tone of the writing will inspire much reading
aloud and storytelling around the campfire or at sleepovers. The cultural diversity
of the protagonists assures that many readers will see themselves somewhere in this
collection (although given the nature of many of the fates herein, that may not
necessarily be a good thing). JMD
SCHERTLE, 
ALICE 
The Skeleton in the Closet; illus. 
by Curtis
Jobling. 
HarperCollins, 2003 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17739-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17738-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
The red-haired narrator is awakened from his sound sleep by a "BAM! BAM!
BAM!" on his front door, so downstairs he goes to investigate. Discovering that
the would-be intruder is a skeleton, our hero races up the stairs in his "bedroom
slipper bears" and dives under the covers; the skeleton follows, saying, "... I'm
wearin' no skin, so EVERYTHING shows-/ Comin' up to find some skeleton
34 
* THE BULLETIN
clothes!" Our hero is worried: "What did he mean by skeleton clothes?/ Water-
proof skin and a nose that blows?/ Bones out shopping-/Good-bye skin!// The
door burst open/ and BONES walked in!" The skeleton isn't looking for skin,
however, but for sartorial splendor, and to that end he raids the boy's closet ("rat-
tling hangers, banging around,/ trying and tossing whatever he found") and de-
parts in an ectoplasmic, er, eclectic, outfit. Jobling uses a strongly geometric style
and primary-school palette to lighten the tone of this shiver-touched tale. Schertle's
rhymes have an easy scansion and the story a funny payoff, and young storytimers
looking for a little something scary will be happy with this bare-bones book. JMD
SCHREIBER, ELLEN 
Teenage Mermaid. HarperCollins, 2003 
150p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-008205-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-008204-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
After fifteen-year-old California surfer boy Spencer gets whacked in the head with
his board, he is rescued from death by a mermaid's kiss: "Out of nowhere she
appeared--golden yellow and sun-fire orange hair sparkled like tiny stars and flowed
in the glistening water. The most wonderful pink-lipped smile flashed before me."
Of course, Spencer doesn't realize she's a mermaid; he thinks she's a gorgeous babe
who likes to swim in freezing water at 6 A.M. Lilly (short for Waterlilly) is besotted
with Earthdude, as she calls him, and, when she discovers he has somehow gotten
her precious locket in the rescue, she swallows a concoction from Madame Pearl's
Potion Palace, changes her tail to two legs, and arrives at Seaside High to find both
the necklace and the Earthee of her dreams. When they finally meet, Lilly and
Spencer spend a lot of time gazing into each other's souls/eyes; many exclamation
points later, Spencer trades his legs for a tail so he and Lilly can be together forever.
This is mer-legend with a Valley Girl twist; Schreiber's take on the secret mer-
civilization is that it's just as acquisitive and vacuous as Earth, only underwater.
The humor is obvious, depending on effusive, cliched language, and the tone is
coy and self-consciously aware. Still, this title has a catch-of-the-day premise that
makes it a natural high-low choice, and (despite a cover that makes the fifteen-
year-old Lilly look about ten) it is sure to be a frequent floater on the checkout
tide. JMD
SEABROOKE, BRENDA 
The Haunting of Swain's Fancy. Dutton, 2003 
154 p
ISBN 0-525-46938-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
When Taylor is sent to live with her father and his new family for the summer, she
is received with obvious rancor by her stepsister, Nicole. On her first night in the
antebellum house, Taylor sees two ghosts, one a prank played by Nicole and her
friend Cody, but the second a genuine specter. Later, Nicole sees the ghost as
well-a woman who appears to be looking for something. As Nicole, Cody, Tay-
lor, and Nicole's younger brother, Peter, resolve to determine the object of her
search, they are threatened by a sinister male spirit who seems to want to thwart
the children's investigation. The combination of Civil War history, tragic love
story, and murder mystery within a contemporary ghost story is now an estab-
lished pattern for Seabrooke (see The Haunting at Stratton Falls, BCCB 9/00, and
The Haunting ofHolroyd Hill, 6/95). Although the unraveling of the historical
mystery is interesting, the threat posed by the male ghost is never convincing enough
to be really scary; however, as with the author's other books, this might inspire
readers to investigate local haunts. The real plot here is a predictable domestic one
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
35
about sibling rivalry between steps; the energy of Nicole's and Taylor's dislike for
one another is offered as a reason for the appearance of the rivalrous spirits in the
first place, and their working together is what enables them to solve the ancient
mystery. Although this plot is by now formulaic for Seabrooke, it's a formula that
works well enough, and readers already acquainted with her work will find this
book hauntingly familiar. KC
SHUSTERMAN, NEAL 
Full Tilt. 
Simon, 2003 
201p
ISBN 0-689-80374-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Blake, a fifteen-year-old paragon of steadiness and responsibility, has always acted
as a sort of guardian to his younger brother Quinn, a metal-studded wild child
who all too often seems to check out from reality. After a major spat in which
Blake reminds Quinn he was born "an accident," Quinn takes off to a rave amuse-
ment park-"never in the same place twice. Attendance by invitation only." Blake,
with two friends in tow, pursues Quinn to make amends, but the theme park turns
out to be a nightmarish hall of horrors, in which each "amusement" tests the rider's
deepest fears, and from which no fairgoer may leave without completing seven
vicious rides. In the course of the evening, Blake is forced to confront a deeply
buried memory-that he was the sole survivor of a school-bus accident-and come
to grips with the guilt that has plagued him ever since. There's a lot of ersatz-
Freudian hokum in Blake's encounters with his killer-whale mother and Ahab-like
future stepdad, not to mention a dose of didacticism in his run-ins with the house
of mirrors (in which he must literally break through his faulty self-images). The
evening whips by at breakneck pace, though, and even the final revelation that this
was probably all a hallucination brought on by a car accident proves more mild
disappointment than dire letdown. Save this one for a gusty, rainy night and let
the shivers rip. EB
SMITH, CHARLES R., JR. 
Hoop Queens. 
Candlewick, 2003 
34p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-7636-1422-X 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Each of twelve luminaries of the WNBA gets a rhythmic poem describing her
athletic gifts. The verses go the already metaphor-prone game of basketball one
better, interpreting each player's moves in accordance with a particular image or
simile (Margo Dydek is "Fly Swatter," Chamique Holdsclaw is the "Fire Starter,"
Teresa Witherspoon is "Hurricane T"). Some of the metaphors interfere rather
than propel, and not all of the poems evince the sustained focus and energy of the
best, but there's still plenty of enjoyable poetic and hoops action here. Smith has
earned the title of Hoops Poet Laureate and he knows his b-ball, giving praise to a
wide variety of skills and styles; his verses often have a throbbing rhythm that
suggests rap as well as the pounding of players' feet on wooden floors, and he's
often clever with internal rhymes and echoes that intricately structure the lines
("Braids bounce on break/ as ball bounces from shake/ and b-bake moves/ fueled
by Philly-Funkdafied grooves"-"Dawn Staley: Bounce to This"). The multime-
dia-effect compositions and energetic layout evince the vitality of Smith's previous
titles (Short Takes, BCCB 2/01), and the photographs of the athletes themselves
are well chosen, picturing the players in moments of supreme effort, ferocity, and
concentration; unfortunately, though, the matte pages in grayed-out shades and
earthy camouflage hues are disappointingly drab, lessening the impact of the im-
36 
* THE BULLETIN
ages. Sports fans will nonetheless revel in the high-action verses, which will draw
many reluctant readers, and they may wish to work up a public performance of
their favorite or draft their own similar efforts (perhaps featuring themselves?). DS
SMOTHERS, 
ETHEL FOOTMAN 
The Hard-Times Jar; illus. by John
Holyfield. 
Foster/Farrar, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-32852-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Emma and her family are migrant workers, traveling from south to north with the
crops. When they arrive in Pennsylvania to pick apples, Emma is surprised and
more than a little scared to learn that she will be going to school instead of helping
in the orchards; since integrated schools are still against the law in the south, this is
the first time African-American Emma has gone to school with white people. Once
at school, she finds it has its rewards, especially its books; although she knows she
is not allowed to take them home from school, the temptation proves too strong
for her. When her mother finds out that she has brought two books home for the
weekend, she insists that not only must Emma return the illicitly borrowed items,
but she must tell her teacher what she has done. Her mother then rewards her by
sparing some money from the "hard-times jar" for Emma to buy some books of
her own, wisely recognizing that hard times aren't just about physical needs and
that the soul has hard times of its own. Acclaimed African-American gallery artist
John Holyfield's elongated figures and vibrant colors lend grace and elegance to
Smothers' image-rich prose. Emma's heart is in her eyes; Holyfield captures a
dreamy look when she is writing or thinking, a tingling anticipation when she
peers into the library for the first time, and a sad longing as she gazes at the hard-
times jar. This could be an interesting companion to Vera B. Williams' classic A
Chair for My Mother; it also has multiple cross-curricular applications with social
studies units, as well as the potential to reawaken students to the value of a good
book. KC
TARPLEY, NATASHA ANASTASIA 
Joe-Joe's First Flight; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Knopf,
2003 
34 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91053-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81053-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Joe-Joe and his father both yearn to fly the planes at the airport where his father
works, but, as Tarpley points out in her historical note, in the 1920s "the field of
aviation was segregated." Still, Joe-Joe can dream, and that he does one night,
climbing into the cockpit, winging his way up to the moon, and singing a song
that will bring moonlight back to the town of Blind Eye to restore hope to the
"All-Original Flying Men" and keep their flying dreams alive. Tarpley's style is
strong, but the text is lengthy, and the plot structure suffers when a realistic setup
turns to fantasy without a recognizable transition. On one page, Daddy is talking
about the unfairness of racism, and on the next, symbolism suddenly becomes fact
as we learn that "all that lost hope formed a cloud over the town, and now even the
moonlight and the stars can't break through." Despite the moon's disappearance,
ordinary life continues for several days before Joe-Joe falls asleep, whereupon the
rest of the book plays out the dream sequence until Joe-Joe can bring back the
moon to a real town setting. Citing the powerful motif of "the people could fly"
from Virginia Hamilton's adaptation of slave narratives, Tarpley almost-but not
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 37
quite-manages the same magical realism as Faith Ringgold does in Tar Beach
(BCCB 3/91). Lewis' watercolors sweep land and sky, catch bodies in fluid mo-
tion and faces with quick nuance of expression, and offer dramatic contrasts of
silvery light and pitch darkness. With some adult explanation distinguishing be-
tween actual and imagined events in the text, young listeners can lift off with this
story. BH
TIMBERLAKE, AM 
The Dirty Cowboy; illus. by Adam Rex. 
Farrar, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-374-31791-7 
$16.00 
R* Gr. 3-5
The titular cowboy is, as the title suggests, dirty, one might even say filthy ("The
cowboy's stench stuck to passersby like mud splashed up from a wagon wheel"), so
one day ("No one knows for sure what drives a man to it") he up and decides to
take a bath. After traveling to the closest river, he parks his clothes with his trusty
canine companion ("'Dawg!' he said. 'No one touches these clothes but me.
Hear?"') and scrubs himself clean in the water. Unfortunately, the dog is
unconvinced that this clean-smelling individual is his cowboy and refuses to yield
the clothes, whereupon a battle royale ensues-which leaves the cowboy as dirty as
he was in the first place. The text is somewhat long for a readaloud, but readers
will revel in the tall-taling, sagebrush-flavored style, the malodorous situation, and
the slapstick. The illustrations take the considerable comedy of the text and crank
it up several notches: Rex's slickly highlighted figures have the gleeful grotesquerie
of Mad magazine art, with cowboy, his horse, and his dog all bulging-eyed and
spindly-legged. The compositions are creative and the scenes are rife with addi-
tional details, many highly silly; most likely to provoke guffaws, however, is the
combination of the cowboy's obvious nekkidness with the deliberately coy obscur-
ing, a la Austin Powers, of his least public parts with strategically placed critters,
mud, flying articles of clothing, etc. This is a rootin' tootin' good read anytime,
but it might be particularly well suited to the last day of the camping trip when
baths are starting to sound mighty good indeed. DS
TRUEMAN, TERRY 
Inside Out. HarperTempest, 2003 
[128p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623963-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623962-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Teenaged Zach is waiting for his mother in a coffee shop when two other teenagers
appear, brandishing guns and demanding the money from the cash registers. At
the appearance of the cops, the wannabe robbers panic and take the denizens of
the shop, including Zach, hostage in a back room. This would be bad news for
anybody, but it's particularly problematic for Zach, who suffers from schizophre-
nia and who needs to get his medication on time to ensure his worst enemies, the
attackers in his head, don't come back. As the afternoon wears on, Zach's skewed
responses result in a connection with the older of the two invaders, who realizes
that Zach's problems are even more monumental than his own; when the police
negotiate a release of the other hostages, it's Zach who stays with the two fright-
ened youths and who arranges for his psychiatrist to act as mediator for them. In
Stuck in Neutral (BCCB 6/00), Trueman gave eloquent voice to a kid cut off from
everyone by cerebral palsy; here he provides convincing and compelling narration
for a boy who's cut off by his own traitorous mind. Chapter headings offer psychi-
atric notes that provide insight into the official take on Zach's situation (including
38 
* THE BULLETIN
his recent suicide attempt), but they're really superfluous: Zach's a competent
describer and demonstrator of his blunted affect and the pains he must take to
differentiate reality from hallucination ("Their faces look pretty normal: Noses,
eyes, mouths, ears and hair and eyebrows. So far so good. If I were just imagining
them, they'd probably be missing some of those parts. So I think that probably
I'm not imagining them. I think these are real kids with real guns"). There's a fair
amount of contrivance in the story of the two robbers (they want to get money for
their mother's chemotherapy, and their guns are only for show), but it's overshad-
owed by the vividness of Zach's viewpoint and the clear implication that his real
plight outstrips a mere hostage situation any day. Fans of Cormier's high-tension
works will enjoy this thought provoking and nail-biting story. DS
U'REN, ANDREA 
Mary Smith; written and illus. by Andrea U'Ren. 
Farrar,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-374-34842-1 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Mary Smith is a "knocker-up"-it's her job to rouse the town's sleepy citizens
from their beds so that they can go about their daily duties. Starting hours before
dawn at the baker's, she wields her trusty peashooter at his window until he assures
her he's up. As the sun begins to rise, she rouses the train conductor, the laundry
maids, and various other townsfolk, concluding with the grateful mayor. Upon
arriving home, she's scandalized to find her daughter asleep in bed rather than off
at school; it turns out, though, that the girl, clearly a chip off the old knocker-up,
attempted to wake a sleeping classmate at his desk and was sent home after missing
him and hitting the teacher. With all the bedtime stories about, it's refreshing to
see a wakeup story instead, and this has a liveliness suitably tempered to still-
awakening energy levels. The idea is an intriguing one in its own right, and viva-
cious youngsters accustomed to waking up adults will relish the thought of such an
activity's importance (as well as the approved and authorized use of the peashooter).
Textured watercolors suit the thin dawn light and the stony buildings of the vil-
lage, while thicker paints brighten the yawning, folksy faces and describe the tra-
jectory of the all-important pea. Contrasting views of life inside the awakening
houses and the growing bustle of the village (alert viewers will notice Mary's cus-
tomers going about their day) contrast with Mary's purposeful march through the
streets. Use this as an anti-bedtime story or whenever soporific youngsters need a
little rousing (peashooter not included). A note adds information about the his-
tory of knocking-up and the real Mary Smith. DS
VAUPEL, ROBIN 
My Contract with Henry. 
Holiday House, 2003 
[24 4 p]
ISBN 0-8234-1701-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
When the English teacher loads a major research project about Henry Thoreau
onto her uninterested eighth-graders, Beth Gardner ends up in a group of losers
and assumes she'll have to take the helm to carry off a passing grade. However,
Stuart turns out to be a true enthusiast-or at least he recognizes that enthusiasm
will establish him in a position of authority and launch him toward junior-high
stardom-and he steers them all into building a Walden-style cabin in nearby
Wayburn Woods. Skinny, geeky Hollis turns into an avid naturalist, and chunky,
grumpy Rachel takes to frontier housekeeping with a passion. Only Beth seems
odd one out, but she undertakes to record their experiences for her contribution,
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
39
and her sharp observations about their group dynamic are telling indeed. Stuart
loses interest and grabs an opportunity to take over and rebuild the school newspa-
per into his own personal mouthpiece, and Rachel turns into a true friend for
Beth. Their physical and emotional investment in the cabin is threatened, how-
ever, when a local developer starts razing the woods, and help comes from a most
unlikely source: the ever-politicking Stuart. Vaupel incorporates a modest, palat-
able dose of Thoreau philosophy but wisely concentrates on how his thinking
influences the experiences of the teens and, particularly, how their interest shifts
subtly from Thoreau's views on nature to those on civil disobedience. The school
year sprawls a bit, but the plot lines are neatly interwoven and the kids' interrela-
tionships are convincing. Middle-schoolers finding Thoreau rather hard going
will appreciate this accessible and immediate exploration (and demonstration) of
his philosophy. EB
WARNER, SALLY 
A Long Time Ago Today. 
Viking, 2003 
[208p]
ISBN 0-670-03604-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Dilly's mother, Elle, died when she was six, but Dilly still feels as though her
mother is bossing her around from beyond the grave. Every summer, for instance,
she and her dad go to the farm Elle bequeathed to Dilly instead of staying in
California where Dilly's friends are, or would be, she reasons, if she could just stay
home for once and spend her summer playing with them. This summer, Dilly is
dismayed to find that her mother wrote her a letter before she died, leaving it in
the care of Elle's best friend, Libby, who has decided that it is time for Dilly to read
it. Dilly is furious: how dare her mother intrude on her life after all these years?
As the letter has mysteriously gone missing, Dilly searches the old farmhouse, finding
snips of diaries and letters that reveal that Elle was actually just as bossy as Dilly
imagines her to be-and that nonetheless Libby and her father loved her very
much. Dilly also realizes how much she is like her mother, as her relationship with
her friend Sasha begins to echo her mother's with Libby. In the end, Sasha and
Libby help Dilly read her mother's letter with an open heart. It's a three-hanky
moment, but the lengthy buildup doesn't really justify the payoff; the only secret
Elle carries to her grave is that she loved her daughter and she wishes they had
more time together. Dead mothers are pretty standard fare in children's literature,
and the text leans towards the cliched rather than the original. The characters are
honestly drawn, though, and they do show how selfishness and anger are ulti-
mately less powerful than love. KC
WINTER, JEANETTE 
Beatrix: Various Episodes from the Life of Beatrix
Potter. Foster/Farrar, 2003 
64p
ISBN 0-374-30655-9 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
This petite biography (sized only slightly larger than Potter's own books) inter-
weaves Potter's own autobiographical statements (identified by italics) with origi-
nal narrative text in the first person to create an accessible early introduction to a
favorite author. The focus here is on Potter's lonely childhood and her youthful
development as a naturalist (keeping a panoply of small animals in her room) and
artist (drawing her animal friends constantly while bitterly resenting more ortho-
dox drawing lessons). The "various episodes" approach isn't entirely successful,
since it deprives the title of the smoothly conveyed insight of the similarly con-
40 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ceived My Name Is Georgia (BCCB 11/98), but it's a measured and thoughtful
exploration of the popular author's young life. The details add color to the picture
of Potter's development, and the intriguingly grave tone echoes Potter's own poker-
faced expression (thus making this a title suitable for reading aloud to curious
younger children as well). Since the main narrative focuses on feelings rather than
facts, an appended brief biographical note fills out the picture. Instead of deliber-
ately suggesting Potter's artistic style, Winter adheres to her own recent visual
approach, where single-hued watercolor planes are accented with crisp-edged shad-
ows and border shades, while orderly, regimented hatching additionally defines
perspective; the tightly bounded squares of the scenes emphasize the restraints on
young Beatrix' life, and the clear absorption and, often, unhappiness (especially in
the cover picture) of the young artist helps illumine the life described in the text.
Readers just beyond the Peter Rabbit years will be intrigued by this introduction
to its author. DS
WITTLINGER, ELLEN 
Zigzag. 
Simon, 2003 
26 4 p
ISBN 0-689-84996-6 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
It's the end of Robin's junior year, and as far as she's concerned, it may as well be
the end of her life: her boyfriend and reason for living, Chris, is leaving for college
next fall. When his parents send him on a surprise graduation trip to Italy, rob-
bing the couple of their last summer together, Robin reluctantly agrees to join her
newly widowed aunt and hostile younger cousins (Iris, thirteen, and Marshall, ten)
on a meandering summer road trip from Chicago to California; at least that way
she can visit her distant father and satisfy her curiosity about his new family. While
some of the plot developments are on the predictable side (Iris proves to be bulimic,
Robin sees the stresses in her cousins that their mother doesn't), Wittlinger creates
a heroine of believable vulnerability and realistically limited patience ("It certainly
was going to be fun getting to know my relatives a little better, especially the
insane one with the eating disorder"). The road trip has its own loopy appeal, with
visits to some classic highlights of the hinterlands such as the Corn Palace, and
there are some genuine surprises along the way (an accident cuts the trip short,
Robin's father offers her a welcome she never expected). Defter still is the depic-
tion of Robin's gradual evolution from clingy Home Town Honey, combing her
boyfriend's letters for signs of infidelity, to a young woman with a broader view of
life's forward movement and what it means for her (though faithful to Chris, she
realizes there are other possibilities) and for others (her mother is becoming serious
about her first boyfriend since the departure of Robin's father). Fans of Bauer's
Rules of the Road may want to fuel up for this literary journey. DS
YOLEN, JANE 
Roanoke: The Lost Colony: An Unsolved Mystery From History; by
Jane Yolen and Heidi Elisabet Yolen Stemple; illus. by Roger Roth. 
Simon,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82321-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Squeezed in between the textbook chapter on Columbus and the chapter on the
Pilgrims is the tantalizing enigma of the British colonists who ground in their heels
on the (now) North Carolina island of Roanoke and, within three years, had dis-
appeared without a trace. Yolen and Stemple reprise their history mystery format
(The Mary Celeste: An Unsolved Mystery from History, BCCB 11/99) using a fic-
tional girl historian to present the problem in a fairly dry narration, supplementing
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 
41
her overview with spiral-notebook style explanations and post-it style vocabulary
hints as needed. Although the authors have nothing new to offer in the way of
evidence, their recap of theories and the questions designed to help readers sift and
weigh relevant facts could intrigue independent readers or an entire history class.
Roth's pencil and watercolor pictures tend toward overdramatized tableaux, and if
scenes such as settlers fleeing from a barrage of Indian arrows have an air of Road-
Runner comedy rather than historic tragedy, they do handily etch the sequence of
events. Kids intrigued by the whys and how-comes of history should enjoy the
puzzle, as well as the social studies lesson that has questions but no quiz. EB
YOLEN, JANE 
Sword of the Rightful King: A Novel of King Arthur. Harcourt,
2003 
349p
ISBN 0-15-202527-8 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Morgause, Queen of Orkney, has ambitions for all her sons, but her fiercest focus
is on her eldest, Gawaine. He is heir to the throne of Orkney and a knight at King
Arthur's court, and Morgause would have him-or one of his brothers-king of
all Britain. Her machinations thus far have failed, but a plan by Merlinnus, wizard
advisor to Arthur, opens a path for her to achieve her wicked ends. Arthur is king,
but not all Britain swears allegiance to him, and his claim to the throne is tenuous.
Merlinnus has conceived of a legerdemain that will cement Arthur's claim: a sword
thrust into a magical stone, to be drawn only by the rightful king. An exasperated
Arthur goes along with the wizard's plot, but Morgause has a plot of her own, and
it is only through the watchfulness of Merlinnus' mysterious assistant, Gawen,
that she is foiled. Taking license with tradition, Yolen provides a seething combi-
nation of political expedience and magical machinations. The sharply drawn play-
ers jockey for position amidst the Machiavellian magic of witch and wizard, and,
at the end of this episode, the possibility of happily ever after remains: "It was an
old story but a good one." Overlapping chapters drive the precipitous narrative,
and the revelation of the sword as a contrived anointer of kings, along with the
underlying recognition of power as a driving force in moral choices, contribute to
making this a slightly cynical but still poignant piece of Arthuriana. JMD
42 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
SCHON, ISABEL 
The Best ofLatino Heritage 1996-2002: A Guide to the Best uve-
nile Books about Latino People and Cultures. 
Scarecrow, 2003 
269p
ISBN 0-8108-4669-1 
$37.50
In this followup to The Best of the Latino Heritage: A Guide to the Best Juvenile
Books about Latino People and Cultures (BCCB 12/97), Schon offers an annotated
bibliography of judiciously selected recent books. The bibliography is divided
alphabetically by country/region (Argentina, Central America, Chile, Colombia,
etc.), the books within each arranged alphabetically by author. Each entry in-
cludes bibliographic information, a suggested audience level, and a critical and
descriptive annotation of the book. Covered material includes fiction, nonfiction,
folktales, and reference tools; a series roundup identifies series titles that offer "over-
views about the various countries, people, and cultures of Latinos." Author, title,
subject, and suggested grade-level indices are appended; the subject index is par-
ticularly extensive. Schon's qualitative approach results in a trustworthy selection
of available material. While some of the titles also appear in York's book (reviewed
below), a substantial percentage do not, and the stated approaches and purposes of
the authors are different enough to make both titles useful purchases. JMD
YORK, SHERRY 
Children's and Young Adult Literature by Latino Writers: A Guide
for Librarians, Teachers, Parents, and Students. 
Linworth, 2002 
184p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-58683-062-7 
$36.95
York's guide to Latino literature for youth is a selection of in-print (at the time of
publication) titles with publication and plot information "designed to help librar-
ians, teachers, parents, and students learn and teach about Latinos and find appro-
priate reading materials by Latinos." The author emphasizes that she "has not
attempted to rate or disqualify any works based on personal or professional evalu-
ations," but instead hopes to help readers to judge such titles for themselves. Ma-
terials covered include novels and chapter books, short stories, folklore, drama,
poetry and anthologies, and nonfiction; books are arranged alphabetically by title,
except in the nonfiction section where they are arranged by Dewey Decimal num-
ber. Each entry includes essential bibliographic information with a brief sum-
mary, and, where applicable, information about related subjects, setting, interest
and reading levels, review citations, and awards. Notes as to whether or not tests
have been created for titles included in reading programs such as Accelerated Reader
or Reading Counts may be of particular interest. York provides suggestions for
additional books (such as adult narratives and bibliographies), videos, and web-
sites about Latino life and culture, and an alphabetical list of the authors included
in the guide with available author websites. A list of publishers of Latino material
and an author, subject, and title index are also appended. Coverage is a bit shal-
low, but York, a retired teacher, reiterates throughout that this title is an overview,
a place to begin to explore Latino books for youth. Combine this with Schon
(reviewed above) for a complementary approach to this body of literature. JMD
SEPTEMBER 2003 
* 43
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Randle
Adoption-fiction: Cummings
ADVENTURE: Aiken; Richardson;
Salkeld
African Americans: Fradin; Hansen
African Americans-fiction: Flood;
Johnson
African Americans-stories: Smoth-
ers; Tarpley
ALPHABET BOOKS: Leuck
Animals: Markle
ANTHOLOGIES: Paulsen
Anthropology: Lauber
Archaeology-fiction: Lewin
Art and artists: Winter
ARTHURIAN LITERATURE:
Yolen Sword
Asian Americans-fiction: Cheng;
Namioka
Asian Americans-stories: Pak
Aunts-fiction: Mauner
Aviation-stories: Tarpley
Babies-fiction: Johnson
Babies-poetry: Cuetara
Babies-stories: Johnston; Laing
Baths-fiction: Timberlake
BEDTIME STORIES: Gay
BIBLE STORIES: Myers
Bicycles: Pinchuk
BIOGRAPHIES: Anderson;
Fleming; Fradin; Kraft; Winter
Biology: Markle
Books and reading-fiction: Paulsen
Books and reading-stories: Smoth-
ers
Brothers-fiction: Shusterman
Brothers and sisters-stories: Gay;
Laing
Cats: Markle
Cats-fiction: de Lint; Said
Circuses-fiction: Murray
Civics: Desimini
Civil rights movement: Fradin
Clothes-stories: Schertle
Colonial life: Yolen Roanoke
Community helpers: Desimini
Cousins-fiction: Wittlinger
Cowboys-fiction: Timberlake
Crime and criminals-fiction: Aiken;
Richardson; Said; Trueman
Cuban Americans-fiction: Osa
Death and dying-fiction: Henkes;
Warner
Depression, the-fiction: Cummings
Disabilities-fiction: Jung
Dogs-fiction: Murray; Roberts, W.
Dogs-stories: Gay
Ecology-fiction: Gauthier
Environmental studies: Cerullo
Ethics and values: Gauthier;
Randle; Vaupel
Explorers and exploring-fiction:
Lewin
Families-fiction: Flood; Shusterman
FANTASY: Aiken; de Lint;
Downer; DuPrau; Ibbotson;
Jung; Rowling; Said; Schreiber;
Yolen Sword
Fathers-fiction: Bateson; Flood;
Johnson; Wittlinger
Fear-fiction: Shusterman
Fear-stories: Harris
Friends-fiction: Bateson; Koss;
Levithan; Randle; Roberts, B.;
Warner
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Levithan
44 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Gender roles-fiction: Levithan
GHOST STORIES: Barrett; Ruby;
Seabrooke
Grandmothers-fiction: Cheng;
Henkes
Halloween: Krosoczka; Schertle
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Cummings; Flood; Franklin;
Karr; McCaughrean; Richardson;
Smothers
History, U.S.: Fleming; Fradin;
Hansen; Kraft; Yolen Roanoke
History, world: Lauber
Holocaust-fiction: Jung
HUMOR: Gauthier; Ibbotson;
Johnston; Juby; Leuck; Murray;
Osa; Rohmann; Timberlake
Hypnosis-fiction: Byng
Identity-fiction: Namioka; Osa
Illness-fiction: Bateson
Immigrants-fiction: Franklin
Immigrants-stories: Pak
Italy-fiction: Mauner
Journals: Mauner
Kings-fiction: Yolen Sword
Knights and chivalry-fiction: Yolen
Sword
Latinos-fiction: Osa
Literature, American: Vaupel
Literature, children's: Winter
LOVE STORIES: Levithan
Magic-fiction: de Lint; Downer;
Rowling
Marine biology: Cerullo
Mental illness-fiction: Trueman
Mermaids-fiction: Schreiber
Mexico: Murphy
Monsters-fiction: Roberts, B.
Monsters-poetry: Ashman
Monsters-stories: Leuck
Mornings-stories: U'Ren
Mothers-fiction: Flood; Warner
Moving-fiction: Barrett; Bateson
Music and musicians: Aliki;
Anderson
Music and musicians-fiction: Karr
MYSTERIES: Roberts, W.; Yolen
Roanoke
Mythical creatures-fiction: Downer
Mythical creatures-poetry: Ashman
Nature study: Cerullo; Markle
Oceans: Cerullo
Orphans-fiction: Byng
Physical education: Pinchuk;
Salkeld; Smith
POETRY: Ashman; Cuetara;
Florian; Smith
Police-stories: Desimini
Poverty-fiction: Franklin
Pregnancy-stories: Laing
Presidents: Kraft
Prisons and prisoners-fiction: Karr
Reading aloud: Florian; San Souci;
Winter
Reading, beginning: Roberts, B.
Reading, easy: Cheng; Rohmann
Reading, reluctant: Cerullo;
Gaiman; Markle; Pinchuk; Smith
Relationships-fiction: Wittlinger
Religious instruction: Myers
RHYMING STORIES: Schertle
Romance-fiction: Levithan;
Schreiber
SCARY STORIES: Gaiman;
Krosoczka; San Souci; Schertle
School-fiction: Juby; Koss
School-stories: Harris; Pak;
Smothers
Science: Cobb; Lauber
SCIENCE FICTION: DuPrau
Seasons: Florian
Ships and sailing-fiction:
Richardson
SHORT STORIES: Myers;
Paulsen; San Souci
Slavery: Hansen
SPORTS STORIES: Smith
Stepfamilies-fiction: Seabrooke
Storytelling: San Souci
Storytime: Cuetara; Harris;
Krosoczka; Laing; Leuck; U'Ren
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Ruby; Seabrooke
SUSPENSE: Byng; Trueman
Teen parents-fiction: Johnson
Trains-fiction: McCaughrean
Voyages and travel-fiction: Byng;
Mauner; Rohmann; Wittlinger
Voyages and travel-stories: Tarpley
Witches-fiction: Ibbotson
Wolves-fiction: Gaiman
Writers and writing-fiction: Koss
Corn Chowder
J A, 
40s 
BV 
-ay
JAM-6-S S-rO V 
I/s en x/
wi-h i)ltS <kiiois by the ?tmh
'* 
"It's Stevenson's seventh Corn book
and he's at his best, with elemental word
and ink-and-watercolor illustrations that
make you see ordinary city things as
if for the first time. The words and
pictures always extend one another,
opening up new views of what you
thought you knew, [including] the
story of pencil with the eraser gone
('Somebody must keep changing his
mind').... There's much [here] to talk
41
. about at home and to get kids writing
he classroom." -Starred 
review / ALA Bookist
'* "In 25 new observations, cata
and stray thoughts, all as sweet and
the six previous servings ... [Steven
poetry is as pithy and casual as his sketchy, masterful
illustrations."-Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
Ages 8 up. $15.99 Tr (0-06-053059-6); $16.89 Lb (0-06-053060-X)
-
- Jaow es 
i-evewso's Corn Books .
C'andy Corn 
justArournd 
the 
Corner
$15.99 Tr (0-688-15837-4) 
$14.95 Tr (0-688-17303-9)
Corn-Fed 
$15.95 Tr (0-06-000597-1) 
$s15.89 Lb (0-06-029189-3)
$15.89 Lb (0-06-000598-X) 
Popcorn 
$15.99 Tr (0-688-15261-9)
CorInmflaks $15 99 Tr (0-688-~1 6718R-7) 
Snrwet 
Corn $595~ b~ (0-688-1 
_ )n 
I 
.
__ _
i-o,~;
*
I
P
aAOIYR~II~IB~WIII
"Fourteen-year-old Shannon and
her kid brother Cody are staying
[in Seattle] with their uncle, Neal,
an animal rescuer for a shelter called
Jackie's Wild Seattle. When Neal is
hurt, Shannon steps in, putting herself
in danger to save the animals .... 
As
usual in Hobbs' books, this story is
packed with action [and]
authentic detail, especially
about rescued animals.
An especially good choice
for reluctant readers."
- ALA Booklist
"[An] exciting, poignant, and
beautifully developed story. Based
on a real wildlife center and the
experience of some of its denizens, this
will reach deep into the hearts of young
readers."-- School Library Journal
Ages 10 up. $15.99 Tr (0-688-17474-4)
$16.89 Lb (0-06-051631-3)
Among Will Hobbs' novels-
Far North
$15.95 Tr (0-688-14192-7)
$5.99 Pb (0-380-72536-3)
. ... . ... .. 
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
. .
.
.
.
.. 
. .
.
.
.
.
r_ 
1
r learned to speak with
he learned how to turn
o words and sentences.
being a printer."
AUTHOR MYRON UHLBERG
A deadly fire erupts in the
noisy pressroom, and it is up
to the deaf printer to save his
fellow workers. But how will
he tell them of the danger
when they cannot hear him?
THE PRINTER
written by Myron Uhlberg
illustrated by Henri S0rensen
ISBN 1-56145-221-1 / HC / $16.95
Sept/ Ages 4-8
nformation on communicating
ign Language (ASL)
ION UHLBERG...
SFLYING OVER BROOKLYN
ullusti
Asse1- 4ia
Associa
PEACHTRE:
1700 CHATTAHOOCHEE
Phone 800-241-0113 or 404-874
~~li 6 
www.peacrnree-ormne.vom.;
I
-~--~C1I~L~- -. ^l-~L~n~~EXI*B
Books make greatr ifts. but nick-
ing the perfect books for your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Now the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books have created a guide to help
you navigate the bookstore wilderness full of
shiny new children's books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books will be avail-
able in October 2003 as a downloadable PDF
file that you can print out and use for every
holiday, birthday, or other gift-giving occasion
on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from 1999-2003 and are
verified as currently in print. Entries are
divided into age groups and include author,
title, publisher, and the current list price.
Available October 2003 at:
www.lis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
'"·~
Universi
1325 So
Champa
U.S.A.
Aorlle~s
~I
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2003 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccb/
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
~I
;~·d~
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICAL
1325 South Oak Street 
POSA
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A.
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
ILS
NIL
~f~4~·
I0IIII036(III 
l 0309):111Y
0008-9036(200309)57:1 ;1 -Y
Wý
