ILLINOL S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
I 
j 
_ 
; 
_
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 2002
Vol. 56 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
139 THE BIG PICTURE
Leap, Frog by Jane Cutler; illus. by Tracey Campbell Pearson
140 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
147 * All-American Girl by Meg Cabot
148 
* Minnie and Moo: The Night before Christmas written and illus. by
Denys Cazet
160 * Be Boy Buzz by bell hooks; illus. by Chris Raschka
170 * Santa Claustrophobia by Mike Reiss; illus. by David Catrow
178 * Visiting Day by Jacqueline Woodson; illus. by James E. Ransome
179 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
180 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick, Reviewer (MH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette M. Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2002 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Tracey Campbell Pearson from Leap, Frog @2002. Reproduced by permission
of Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
139
THE BIG PICTURE
Leap, Frog
by Jane Cutler; illus. by Tracey Campbell Pearson
It's always good to see old friends again, so it's a fine thing to herald the return of
the amiable Fraser brothers, third-grader Edward and sixth-grader Jason (from
'GatorAid, BCCB 6/99, etc.). As usual, they encounter some slightly larger-than-
life but believable everyday-life trials and tribulations, and as usual they are accom-
panied by their friends and neighbors (Fraser brothers adventures often end up
being group and neighborhood adventures).
Neighbors are particularly important in this outing, as there's a new one:
first-grader Charley, who's an obstreperous little personage who latches onto Ed-
ward with a vengeance. When Elaine and Andrew (the brothers' seventh-grade
friends) turn to Edward for help in personalizing their egg babies, Charley gallops
off with one of the ovoid infants. When the Conroy sisters (twins Marilyn and
Marlene and their older sister, Janice) concoct a jumping-frog contest (and profit-
able frog-rental business in connection), Charley convinces Edward to join him in
entering a secret froggy weapon. When the Frasers plan a trip to the theater to
treat a starstruck Edward and reassure a reluctant Jason, an unwilling thespian
stuck in an acting class, Charley manages to infiltrate the outing (and to kick one
of the Bremen Town Musicians in the shin).
Neither Edward nor Charley can claim sole focus here, however, and the
all-embracing sympathy for characters from first-grader Charley to sixth-grader
Jason, his and Edward's seventh-grade friends, and even a few adults (Mrs. Fraser
is struggling with clown lessons) means that readers of all ages will find someone to
whom to relate (and the title's episodic nature will make it a splendid readaloud).
Like Ann Cameron, whose respectful perception she shares, Cutler manages to
create an engaging and believable kid milieu, where friends of different ages hang
out together and bounce in and out of each other's houses, connecting to each
other in different combinations as the need arises. She's managed to catch in
Charley a particular kind of youthful live wire who may well achieve something
great but will also drive people nuts along the way, and both Edward's generally
patient forbearance and Charley's indifference when it wears thin are credibly drawn.
On the other end, there's the more restrained Jason, horrified at his theatrical
dilemma; when his imaginative family (plus Charley, of course) decides to act out
"The Bremen Town Musicians" before going to see the stage production, here's
how parts are assigned, starting with Mrs. Fraser, the promoter of the idea:
"I'll be the donkey."
"I'll be the cat!" cried Charley.
"I'll be the dog!" Edward joined in.
"I guess I'll be the rooster," said Mr. Fraser.
"I'll be downstairs," said Jason.
140 
* THE BULLETIN
The book is permeated with that kind of rueful humor, evinced particu-
larly in the boys' interactions with their parents and in Edward's relationship with
Charley ("It was bad enough for Edward to be seen after school with a weird first-
grader. But to be seen with one leaping like a frog was unacceptable"). Though a
quieter wit than Hilary McKay's, it has some of her domestic shrewdness, and it's
one of the components that makes this a very useful book in a rather undercrowded
field: the high-end chapter book, last stop before (or break from) those longer, less
episodic novels with smaller print, harder words, and no pictures whatsoever (in
Leap, Frog, illustrator Pearson offers one high-spirited black-and-white illustration
per chapter, just enough to hearten nervous readers). That's a bigger jump for kids
than is often credited, and Cutler deftly and carefully cushions the leap for her
little reading frogs, who'll appreciate this as a solid and attractive literary lily pad,
where they can rest before diving off into the book world's deeper waters. (Im-
print information appears on p. 150.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADA, ALMA FLOR 
Daniel's Pet; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Harcourt,
2002 
20p 
(Green Light Readers)
Library ed. ISBN 0-15-204577-5 
$11.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-204576-7 
$3.95 
R Gr. K-2
Entranced with a small baby chick, Daniel makes her his pet, naming her Jen and
caring for her as she grows ("Jen got very big"). One day she's missing, but not to
worry-Mama finds her in the barn, where she's sitting on a clutch of eggs: "Now
I will have lots of pets!" says Daniel happily. It's unlikely that Jen was actually
missing long enough, under Daniel's watchful eye, to create the large clutch of
now-hatching eggs depicted, but this is still a smooth little story with enough to
keep youthful interest. The vocabulary is minimal and the text brief; the animal
component is enticing, and the straightforward wonder of reproduction is a more
satisfying and believable conclusion than cliched twists such as the old gender
surprise. Karas' homely scratchy lines offer their usual childlike take on the world,
here a rural realm enlivened with spring greens and sunny (though never, of course,
egg-yolky) yellows. Between the cheerful illustrations and the tidily trimmed text,
this will be eminently suitable for newly hatched readers. DS
ALMOND, DAVID 
Secret Heart. Delacorte, 2002 
199p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90065-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72947-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
With imagery fit for a riveting short story, Almond once again brings his readers
the world of magical realism, this time through the eyes of young shape-shifter and
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
141
social outcast Joe Maloney, over the course of three pivotal days in his life. Though
secure in the unconditional love of his single mother, Joe is nonetheless haunted
by a dream vision of a tiger, which he fears but with which he also identifies. Self-
made wilderness survivalist Joff insists the cure is a bit o' toughening up, but Joe
resists. Meanwhile, a circus arrives in town, bringing with it a menagerie of tired
souls-and a tiger. Just as the dream tiger became a guide for Joe, leading him to
the circus, Joe becomes a guide for the spirit of the circus tiger, leading it back into
the wild as the circus closes for good. As in Skellig (BCCB 3/99) and Heaven Eyes
(4/01), Almond's ethereal plot is reflective and atmospheric. Unfortunately, Joe's
quest is less concrete than those of Almond's previous protagonists, and the plot
lacks the drive to carry its esoteric elements to novel length. There's still a host of
interesting characters, and readers may identify with Joe the outsider ("He knew
that no one ever truly understood") as he finds his own path. EAB
ANDERSON, LAURIE HALSE 
Catalyst. Viking, 2002 
[240p]
ISBN 0-670-03566-1 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Kate's a loving daughter (who privately resents being housekeeper for her minister
father and younger brother), driven runner, and diligent science student who's
applied to MIT-and, despite what she's told everyone, only to MIT. When MIT
rejects her, she's stunned into near-collapse, but she's distracted by another event:
her classmate Teri Litch, the school troublemaker and Kate's longtime enemy, and
her little brother, Mikey, have been taken in by Kate's father after the Litches'
house burns down. Struggling secretly with her own dilemma, Kate is ill-equipped
to cope with the frightening (and thieving) Teri in not just her life but her own
room; as Teri's own story evolves, however, Kate finds her life inextricably inter-
woven with Teri's. This is a bravely assembled narrative, with Anderson giving
Kate's troubles perspective but refusing to diminish them in the face of Teri's life
of tragedy; the book's pivotal event (Mikey, now a fixture at Kate's, dies on the
building site of his new house, leading to the realization that he was Teri's son as
well as her brother) is stunning and masterful, with the abrupt unfairness of real-
life tragedy. Characterization is rich as well: the book effectively peels away Kate's
has-it-all-together facade and suggests depths to Teri without ever turning her into
a simple misunderstood victim. This is a compelling treatment of that eternal
question: what do you do when life hands you something you can't bear? DS
ARDAGH, PHILIP 
A House Called Awful End; illus. by David Roberts. 
Holt,
2002 
120p
ISBN 0-8050-6828-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Eddie Dickens is sent to live with his Mad Uncle Jack when his loving, absent-
minded parents (who are apt to forget his real name) come down with a strange,
unknown disease. A series of maddening if not entirely unfortunate events subse-
quently propel him into the company of his Mad Aunt Maud and her stuffed
stoat, Malcolm; Mr. Pumblesnook, a theater manager and player; and Mrs. Cruel-
Streak, the mistress of St. Horrid's Home for Grateful Orphans, before he finally
reaches his ultimate goal of the house called Awful End. While this title lacks the
literary allusions rife in the Lemony Snicket series, it does have a higher gross-out
factor, and that alone will attract some readers. The writing is disjointed and
choppy, however, and the plot apparently has a will of its own; nonetheless, read-
142 
* THE BULLETIN
ers may appreciate the fast action (this is actually a hair closer to Aiken than Snicket)
and the clever if not consistent wordplay. Roberts' black-and-white illustrations,
scattered throughout, have an Edward Goreyish quality that suits the spoofily dark
tone of the novel. A glossary with humorous definitions of terms from the plot is
appended. JMD
ARNOLD, ANN 
The Adventurous Chef. Alexis Soyer; written and illus. by Ann
Arnold. 
Foster/Farrar, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-374-31665-1 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Alexis Soyer is hardly a familiar name to most people, children or adults, but it's
clearly not because he was uninteresting. Arnold traces the history of the flamboy-
ant nineteenth-century figure from his colorful youth in France, where he was a
culinary prodigy, to his brilliant success as a chef in England, where at the Reform
Club he designed not only new and lavish dishes but also the kitchen to produce
them. Yet his interest was not just to feed people interestingly but to feed people
well, and to that end he turned his considerable skills to bettering the arrangement
and cooking in soup kitchens, to providing cookbooks for the poor and the middle
class as well as for the wealthy, and to helping the British military, in conjunction
with Florence Nightingale, reshape the feeding of soldiers into something more
likely to keep them alive than to do the enemy's work for them. Arnold's retelling
is somewhat flat and disjointed, and she's sometimes a little short on explanation
(young readers are unlikely to be sufficiently familiar with supply practices of the
Victorian army to understand a quick reference to "purveyors," for instance); there's
also an inexplicable but total absence of notes for this biography. Soyer himself is
an intriguing figure, though, with his very Victorian blend of elaborate art and
determined innovation, and this will add an unexpected slant to explorations of
cooking, military history, or even the Victorian era. The line-and-watercolor illus-
trations are pleasantly light; a bit more spirit and humor would have seemed more
appropriate to Soyer's character, as they're somewhat flat despite the touches of
interest in the scenes ofvarious kitchens and diagrams of Soyer's innovations. Overall
this is blander than the ingredients would suggest, but there's enough flavor to
make it enjoyable as well as useful. DS
ARRO, LENA 
Good Night, Animals; tr. by Joan Sandin; illus. by Catarina
Kruusval. 
R & S/Farrar, 2002 
26p
ISBN 91-29-65654-0 
$15.00 
R 
3-6 yrs
Bubble and Pearl (either young friends or a young brother and sister) are excited at
the prospect of spending a night outside in a tent, but when they hear a strange
noise they get jittery. Fortunately, it's just a few mice ("Maybe the mice are afraid
of the dark"), so they let the little rodents into the tent. Another noise proves to be
a cat, who's similarly included ("as long as he doesn't bother the mice"); then along
come, sequentially, some rabbits, a dog, some sheep, a hen, and finally a horse,
until the cozy tentful of sleepy critters all drift off to dreamland. Little ones accus-
tomed to The Napping House may be expecting a rowdier finish, but this is none
the worse for being a gentle and quiet little tale. The details of each new animal's
reason for seeking entry (the cat's paws are cold, the dog is lonely outside) are not
only homey and sympathetic, they reflect many youngsters' own nighttime con-
cerns, and there's a poker-faced humor in the rationalizations for inclusion ("If
everybody just scoots over, there will surely be enough room for a horse"). Kruusval's
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
143
washes of color make night a friendly and peaceful place, and her lines are precise
and personable, using the geometry of the tent and occasional overhead perspec-
tives to emphasize the coziness. Maximum drollery is obtained from internal views
of fuzzy faces peeking in wistfully, external views of animals halfway into the tent,
and, finally, a view of the bulging beastie-filled structure. Try this at naptime or
bedtime, realizing, of course, that you've thereby opened the tent flap to all the
stuffed animals on the shelf. DS
BAHR, MARY 
My Brother Loved Snowflakes: The Story of Wilson A. Bentley, the
Snowflake Man; illus. by Laura Jacobsen. 
Boyds Mills, 2002 
34p
ISBN 1-56397-689-7 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 2-4
Wilson Bentley (subject of Martin's Caldecott-winning title, Snowflake Bentley,
BCCB 12/98) is an intriguing subject for juvenile biography, since he was an un-
usual personality who followed his own bliss and only after his death achieved
more than a modicum of fame. Bahr speaks in the fictionalized voice of Wilson
Bentley's brother, Charles, who observed and sometimes assisted his brother in
pursuit of his passions. Putting the obvious problem of the fictionalization of
biography aside, the text is purposive and it lacks narrative momentum; the point
of view is contrived and awkward, and the writing has an old-fashioned, pragmatic
feel. The drafting of the pastel illustrations is uneven and the compositions are
sentimental. The book doesn't offer any new information on Bentley, and in the
end it simply fails to rise to the very high standard set by the text and visuals in
Martin and Azarian's work. A brief note is included. JMD
BARTRAM, SIMON 
Man on the Moon (A Day in the Life ofBob); written and illus.
by Simon Bartram. 
Candlewick, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-1897-7 
$16.99 
R 4-8 yrs
Someone's got to keep the lunar surface tidy, and educate the rockets full of tour-
ists, and sell the souvenirs, and turn on the moon's night light at closing time each
evening. That someone is Bob, dedicated guardian of our own dear satellite. Each
morning he blasts off to work and puts in a full day, patiently reassuring concerned
visitors that there are no aliens on the moon. Then it's back home for a bubble
bath ("sometimes the dust gets inside your suit"), a mug of cocoa, and a good long
snooze. The attentive audience knows, however, that Bob doesn't return alone.
While he carries out his duties to the deadpan accompaniment of Bartram's narra-
tion, extraterrestrial creatures can be spotted lurking on the horizon, hiding in
craters, boarding Bob's rocket, and ultimately mingling comfortably among us
Earthlings. Bob's outer-space milieu, realized in oversized acrylic scenes ofcheddary
gold, cherry red, and alien green, is a Hollywood-esque retro construction of fish-
bowl-helmeted travelers, chubby, dorsal-finned spacecraft, and a worksuit that could
have been designed by the Michelin Man's couturier. If you're looking for an
offbeat bedtime tale or a even giggly break from an elementary unit on space,
Bob's your man. EB
BEALE, FLEUR 
IAm Not Esther. Hyperion, 2002 
250p
ISBN 0-7868-0845-4 
$15.99 
Ad Gr. 6-9
Kirby is stunned when her mother abruptly decides to leave New Zealand for
missionary work in Africa, leaving Kirby installed with relatives of whom she's
never heard. She's beyond stunned when she discovers that Uncle Caleb and Aunt
144 
* THE BULLETIN
Naomi are members of a strict fundamentalist sect, the Children of the Light, and
that they expect Kirby-whom they rename Esther-to abide by the repressive
rules of their faith. Kirby rebels ("He had no right to impose his wacky beliefs on
me. No flaming right at all"), pursuing not just the facts of her mother's disap-
pearance but also, with the aid of a cousin increasingly troubled by his family's
strictures, the fate of a daughter of the family. The setup and situation are absorb-
ing indeed, and readers will immediately empathize with Kirby's anger in the face
of her mother's desertion and her completely and unhappily transformed life.
Unfortunately, the book often resorts to stereotype about the religious commu-
nity, damning its judgmental tendencies while being equally judgmental itself,
and once Kirby breaks free of her relatives the narrative bogs down in talky psy-
chodrama about Kirby's problems with her mother. The premise is still a gripping
one, however, and readers may find their sympathetic horror at Kirby's situation
sufficient to sustain them. DS
BERENSTAIN, STAN 
Down a Sunny Dirt Road: An Autobiography; written and
illus. by Stan and Jan Berenstain and with photographs. 
Random House,
2002 
202p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91403-X 
$21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81403-5 
$20.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Husband and wife collaborators Stan and Jan Berenstain are beloved by children
for their Bear Family books, but readers may be surprised to find that the Bear
Family almost didn't get to be. First, however, they get to find out how the two
grew up to be artists, as Jan and Stan tell the stories of their lives in alternating
chapters. Their childhoods were rife with art-related incidents (Stan had an ap-
parently irresistible urge to draw on walls), and their meeting in art school is the
stuff of which movies (and books) are made. Their collaboration as artists begins
after their marriage, when Stan returns from the service, and their subsequent
success as cartoonists almost keeps them from creating books for children. The
saga of the Berenstain Bears is one that will interest child fans and grownups,
especially when the author/illustrators describe their meeting and subsequent rela-
tionship with Theodore Geisel (Dr. Seuss), then editor-in-chief of Random House
Beginner Books, the series that gave the Berenstains their start in children's books.
There are some phrases that will require explanation for younger readers (e.g., bill
of lading, Cheder), but overall this is an engaging piece of personal and social
history. The Berenstains have been collaborating for a long time, and their ease at
lobbing the narrative back and forth is very clear. Clean and inviting in layout and
profusely illustrated with photographs and with reproductions of Berenstain art,
this will invite budding artists and former Berenstain readers to take a look. A
bibliography, a chronology, and an index are included. JMD
BLACKWOOD, GARY 
The Year ofthe Hangman. Dutton, 2002 
[2 7 2p]
ISBN 0-525-46921-4 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Fifteen-year-old Creighton Brown, already well down the road to becoming a
worthless ne'er-do-well, is such a trial to his widowed mother that she arranges to
have him abducted and shipped off to her brother, a colonial governor in 1777
America. Yes, the pesky little colonial rebellion has been quashed, General Wash-
ington has been hanged, and the remaining leaders rumble in exile in Spanish New
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
145
Orleans. Creighton is separated from his uncle when their ship is attacked en
route to Florida by rebel privateers, and the boy finds himself in the home of
Benjamin Franklin, who cranks out subversive leaflets from his New Orleans print
shop. When he learns of his uncle's perfidy and his late father's conscientious
change in political loyalty, Creighton conspires with the rebels (under the leader-
ship of their now-best hope, Benedict Arnold) to leak counter-information to the
British and, in the process, discovers that his father is still alive in a British colonial
prison. It should come as no surprise that the Patriots lost their war, with their
unconvincing tendency to babble plans in front of this unpromising British young-
ster. Blackwood rattles on a bit longer than strictly necessary among his twisting
plot, wishfully crediting his audience with enough background in Revolutionary
War politics to catch ironic allusions, yet failing to pay much more than lip service
to real-life characters' known traits. Still, there's some fun to be had in a historical
what-if, and a concluding note that sifts fact from fiction also points readers to a
web source for similar "uchronia" gamesmanship. EB
BLUMENTHAL, KAREN 
Six Days in October: The Stock Market Crash of1929. Ath-
eneum, 2002 
156p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-84276-7 
$17.95 
R Gr. 8-12
Blumenthal, the Dallas bureau chief for the Wall Street Journal, reviews the dra-
matic market plunge that, significantly, pulled the fiscal rug out from under Mom
and Pop investors as well as Wall Street high rollers. Economic terms and con-
cepts needed to digest the complex forces at play are admirably presented in timely,
cogent sidebars. Carefully selected case studies ofnonfinanciers who lost it all (an
unnamed car dealer and the famous Groucho Marx) demonstrate the precipitous
slide from paper wealth to destitution, and in-depth examination of the careers of
RCA specialist Michael Meehan and GM president William Durant disclose the
unregulated machinations that paved the way for disaster. The day-by-day ac-
count not only allows Blumenthal to break down issues for a teen audience but
also to examine the administrative decisions that steered the six-day course of the
crash. While the author makes no overt comparisons to the dotcom bubble of
recent memory, to Americans' love affair with overextended credit, or to CEOs
whose financial parachutes open just before their corporations crash, readers with
a driving interest in the stock market can hardly fail to draw their own parallels.
Black-and-white photos, document reproductions, and period cartoons are included;
source notes and an index are appended. EB
BOUCHARD, DAVID 
That's Hockey; illus. by Dean Griffiths. 
Orca, 2002 
32p
ISBN 1-55143-223-4 
$16.95 
R* 
4-8 yrs
Farm boy Etienne brings his visiting cousin along to a street hockey game, and the
city slicker, who s clearly used to more formal rink rituals, is amazed at the raucous
improvisation as players assemble in identical Canadiens sweaters (all with num-
ber 9, for their hero Maurice Richard), set up goal posts of packed snow and boots,
and shuffle into teams. But do they play hard! "I never saw a pro handle a puck
the way these kids handled an old red ball. Mop, the only one who had a chance
of making the NHL, stood in one spot grabbing, knocking, tripping or elbowing
anyone within reach." With a solid shot over the left shoulder of Tooth ("He had
[his front teeth] knocked out twice last year and his dad won't get him new ones
till he quits playing hockey"), Etienne's cousin is officially one of the gang, and the
146 
* THE BULLETIN
match streaks on for hours to oft repeated and roundly ignored chants of "Next
goal wins." Game's over when the teams shrink, the goal posts disappear, and
Etienne gives the nod to head for home. The memory lingers, however, and
Etienne's cousin, now an adult, passes down the treasured Canadiens sweater to
her daughter: "'But Mom, I've never played street hockey.' 'With this sweater,
sweetheart, you'll do just fine.'" Griffiths' homely watercolor cast, with wide-set
eyes and broad-lipped grins, are compact bundles of pure energy, cleverly indi-
viduated by hat shape, boot color, and relative height and bulk. Without the
slightest whiff of pedantry or nostalgia, Bouchard captures the authentic thrill of a
game played simply for the joy of it, and youngsters with their eyes on league play
may find a snow packed lot to be a surprisingly alluring venue. EB
BROWN, DON Far Beyond the Garden Gate: Alexandra David-Neel's Journey to
Lhasa; written and illus. by Don Brown. 
Houghton, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-618-08364-2 
$16.00 
R 
6-10 yrs
Fascinated since girlhood with all things Asian and Buddhist, Alexandra David
took her first steps abroad as an opera singer but longed for places further afield
than European stages. At age forty-three she left her husband, Philip Neel, to
pursue serious study of Buddhist faith and Tibetan culture. Early twentieth-century
Tibetan society, however, only permitted the Western scholar limited freedom
within the country; in order to visit the sacred city of Lhasa, David-Neel disguised
herself as an old woman and trekked with her friend and servant, Yongden, to the
palace of the Dalai Lama. 
Once again Brown's delicate, slightly whimsical
watercolor scenes balance the vastness of the surroundings against the vulnerability
of the explorer, whether David-Neel's dangling over a rocky gorge ("the long towing
rope caused us to dance in the air a most unpleasant kind of jig") or passing by a
rather self-absorbed wolf with the "busy but calm gait of a serious gentleman going
to attend some affair of importance." David-Neel is just the gutsy, envelope-
pushing dame that Brown reliably depicts with skill and obvious delight, and while
her journey across the wind-scoured and snow-encrusted terrains of Tibet may be
as far from Mary Kingsley's West African exploration (Uncommon Traveler, BCCB
7/00) or Ruth Law's aerial feats (Ruth Law Thrills a Nation, 12/93) as you can get,
the kinship of spirit is inescapable. A map introduces the book; an author's note
and bibliography are appended. EB
BYALICK, MARcIA 
Quit It. Delacorte, 2002 
171p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90061-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72997-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
There's a big difference for Carrie between the seventh grade she's starting and last
year's school experience: she's been diagnosed with Tourette's syndrome, which
afflicts her with uncontrollable tics, sniffs, and throat-clearings. She's begun to
realize that her parents are very uncomfortable with her disorder, but she's helped
by her good friend, Clyde, who's got his own oddities (he's petrified of getting the
West Nile virus and therefore phobic about mosquitoes) and some sympathetic
faculty members. She's also bolstered by her growing friendship with glamorous
new girl Rebecca, but it soon becomes clear that that friendship has a price, per-
haps a stiffer one than Carrie is prepared to pay. Byalick lifts this above the stan-
dard disability drama by avoiding clinical overexplanation and instead employing
touches of humor, especially about Carrie's relationship with Clyde, and some real
DECEMBER 2002 
* 147
honesty about Carrie's struggle and people's responses (Carrie's father would "be
more comfortable if he could wear a T-shirt that read MY DAUGHTER'S NOT OBNOX-
IOUS, SHE HAS TOURETTE'S"). Rebecca's complicated friendship with Carrie isn't
oversimplified: while it seems clear that Carrie's ability to annoy Rebecca's possi-
bly prospective stepfather is a plus, there also seems to be a real connection be-
tween the two girls. The book falls below its own standard with a too-neat familial
resolution (Carrie gives a dinnertime speech and her parents promptly right all
their wrongs), but at its heart is still the strong portrait of Carrie, embarrassed but
ultimately unbowed; every reader who's ever known public discomfort (which is
likely to be every reader, period) will empathize with her struggle. DS
CABOT, MEG All-American Girl. HarperCollins, 2002 
247p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029470-1 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029469-8 
$15.99 
R Gr. 6-10
This starts out looking like an enjoyable but standard entry in the current wave of
what one might term "ditz lit," with Samantha Madison an amusingly disaffected
(she's dyed her entire wardrobe black to demonstrate that she's in mourning for
her generation) and gushingly confessional fifteen-year-old yearning after her sister's
boyfriend and angsting over daily life in her wealthy Washington, D.C. neighbor-
hood and school. Then the book tosses in a spin that sets Sam's tale into high
speed and comedy: she instinctively throws herself on a man drawing a gun to
shoot the president (who was picking up a treat at Capitol Cookies), in the process
breaking her wrist and becoming a national hero and media figure. As an outsider
Goth-type artist, Sam is not entirely comfortable with her sudden catapult to popu-
larity and prominence (the president rewards her by making her the teen ambassa-
dor to the UN), and she's even less comfortable about the president's son, David,
who turns out to have been an art-school classmate she'd thought kind of cute, and
who now looks like he might become something more. Cabot cleverly revives
many of the appeals of The Princess Diaries (BCCB 12/00) and its sequels, such as
the high-status glitz and the breathless tone, without making this a rerun of the
earlier titles. Her ability to pillory and sympathize with her protagonist simulta-
neously is still strong: Sam's misguided determination to be deep is well evoked, as
is her capacity for moving from poseur to genuine artist and social conscience (she
takes a stand on the art contest the president asks her to judge), while the details of
her experience remain believable and very funny (it's both authentic and authenti-
cally agonizing that her horrible school-ID photograph would be splashed across
the media). Add to that an enjoyably uncertain romance with the closest thing the
U.S. has to a prince, and you've got a shiny package that's going to be a treat for
readers to open. DS
CALMENSON, STEPHANIE 
Welcome, Baby!: Baby Rhymes for Baby Times; illus. by
Melissa Sweet. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
[6 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000492-4 
$18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17736-0 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6 mos-2 yrs
Rhythmic language combines with familiar imagery to result in baby-pleasing stuff
in this collection of thirty-three simple verses for little listeners. The selections
include poems for knee-bouncing as well as poems that require the illustrations for
full effect (for instance, "Red, Green, Yellow, Blue" is a guessing game that in-
148 
* THE BULLETIN
volves identifying the colors mentioned in the verses and reflected in the pictures).
Irregular rhythms mar the rhymes, however, making the scansion sometimes un-
even. The illustrations are a bit flat: dot-eyed babies have unarticulated faces,
figures are often disproportionate, and compositions lack the strong focus that
helps shape toddler viewing. Still, the brightly hued palette has the vibrancy of a
newly painted nursery, and the illustrations ofmulti-hued kids have a breezy charm.
Despite some flaws, this collection is a good source to dip into, especially for grown-
ups tired of the same old fingerplay fare. JMD
CAZET, DENYS 
Minnie and Moo: The Night before Christmas; written and illus.
by Denys Cazet. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
4 8p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623753-X 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623752-1 $15.99 
R Gr. 2-4
It's Christmas Eve, and heifers Minnie and Moo (heroines of Minnie andMoo Go
Dancing, BCCB 9/98, etc.) are disturbed that the farmer has forgotten he's left his
grandchildren's presents in the barn. Inspired by 'Twas the Night before Christmas
("it's a how-to book on delivering Christmas gifts"), Moo fires up her wild imagi-
nation: dressing Minnie up in a Santa suit, herself as Mrs. Claus, and chickens
with plastic forks on their heads as reindeer, she masterminds a dramatic delivery
of the missing toys. This is gleefully and seasonally silly, and Cazet's addition of a
self-important rooster adds spice to the solidly funny dynamic between Minnie
(largely clueless) and Moo (marginally less clueless and therefore, heaven help them,
the brains of the pair). Though the interpolated verses adapted from Moore's
poem aren't as crisp as the prose, they provide a pleasing tie-in to the familiar
Christmas chestnut and add shape to the story. Cazet's watercolors are sometimes
a little muddier than usual, but they disdain traditional restriction, going for broke
in a palette that pushes Minnie's Santa outfit to the cherry side of red and couples
it with Moo's attractive purple robe and fuchsia fez (which, along with a mustache,
apparently constitute the traditional Mrs. Claus costume); chickens with plastic
forks on their heads look even more wonderfully dorky than they sound. This is a
festive holiday outing that will jingle young readers' bells. DS
CHAMBERS, VERONICA 
Double Dutch: A Celebration ofJump Rope, Rhyme, and
Sisterhood. Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2002 
64p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7868-0512-9 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
This attractively packaged hodgepodge of Double Dutch-iana begins with an ear-
nest introduction by Tonya Lewis Lee and ends with a chapter-long excerpt from
the author's previously published adult memoir. In between, eclectic chapters
provide a brief history of competitive Double Dutch and the story of one success-
ful team; impressionistic answers to the question of what "Double Dutch Is ... "
from successful adults (writers and artists, mostly); the story behind Tahira Reid's
patented "automatic double-Dutch machine"; a fascinating interview with mem-
bers of two championship teams from Japan (college-aged men and women who
love hip-hop culture); and extended comments from some adults who formed
longterm bonds while jumping or turning. Reminiscing grownups unfortunately
dominate the text, but children are seen (though still not heard) in the plethora of
uncaptioned photographs that, along with a series of framed jump-rope rhymes,
give the pastel pages balance and energy. Young readers who have not already
been exposed to the whirling energy of Double Dutch will not get a full or clear
picture of it from this volume, which seems designed to empower an insider audi-
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
149
ence. As a conversation-starter in a multigenerational reading group, however,
this would be hard to beat; folks are sure to jump in with memories of their own
childhood games, rhymes, and friends-from long ago or last week. FK
CHAN, GILLIAN 
A Foreign Field. Kids Can, 2002 
184p
ISBN 1-55337-349-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Although the fighting rages thousands of miles away, fourteen-year-old Ontario
schoolgirl Ellen Logan nonetheless feels the impact of the second World War.
One brother is stationed overseas, another is missing in action, and both parents
are involved in homefront support roles, leaving her to manage both the house-
hold and her war-crazy younger brother, Colin. RAF pilot trainee Stephen Dearborn
tows errant Colin home from a near-mishap on the Service Flight Training School
airfield and soon finds himself part of the Logan family, who embrace the British
visitor as they hope another family might welcome their own boys. Through
Stephen's period of training, and later while serving his tour of duty, he woos and
wins Ellen's affection and her parents' wholehearted approval. His recurrent dreams
of a fatal crash prove prophetic, however, and he dies a hero's death on a mission
over Germany, bequeathing Ellen (now sixteen) enough money to realize her dream
of becoming a teacher and indirectly guiding her toward a new friendship that will
help her rebuild her life. Chan's bittersweet tale unfolds smoothly through narra-
tive focusing on Ellen's view of the war and through Stephen's correspondence to
family and friends, and her vivid observations of a romance advancing by fits and
starts are thoroughly convincing. Although love-story devotees accustomed to
happy endings may find the sudden tragedy jarring, the epilogue's promise of bet-
ter days to come eases the sadness. An appended author's note comments on the
Canadian flight-training school and on the story's roots in Chan's family history.
EB
CHEANEY, J.B. 
The True Prince. Knopf, 2002 
340p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91433-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81433-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Fans of The Playmaker (BCCB 10/00) rejoin narrator Richard Malory, who has
now completed his first year of apprenticeship with Shakespeare's players and who
is still knee-deep in dastardly doings. The troupe, Lord Hunsdon's Men, are forced
by their landlord into rented venues, and their prestige has slipped along with the
changing fortune of their court patron. Far more threatening, however, are the
clandestine activities of star apprentice Kit Glover, whose association with both
shadowy underworld figures and maneuvering aristocrats throws several lives into
jeopardy and leads indirectly to a murder. Cheaney makes a valiant effort to ex-
plain just how the effects of the rivalry between the Earl of Essex and Secretary of
State Lord Burghley trickle down to Kit and his fellow players, but it would take a
determined reader indeed to sift confidently through the details. Fortunately,
total command of court cabal is not required to bask in the more immediate plea-
sures of the apprentices' stage rivalries, Richard's blossoming talent as an actor,
and the enigmatic deviltry of the cherubic young newcomer, David Morgan. Older
readers with a developing interest in matters Shakespearean will particularly de-
light in the genesis of the Globe, the premiere staging of Henry IV and Cheaney's
fanciful realization of the "displeasing play" to which the Bard cryptically alludes
in the epilogue of Henry IV A historical note, a cast of characters, and a London
map are included. EB
150 
* THE BULLETIN
CONNIFF, RICHARD 
Rats!: The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly. 
Crown,
2002 
32p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91207-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81207-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
This book cleverly manages to wed an in-your-face ratness (which will come in
handy when kids want to freak each other out with sudden reveals) to some genu-
ine information about this very successful little mammal. Starting with basic rat
biology and history, the book goes on to discuss the amazing abilities of rats (swim-
ming, jumping, food location) that have allowed them to flourish, their behavior
(they're quite clean animals), their intelligence, their problematic effects (ranging
from spreading of the plague to destroying crops), and their status as pets. Though
the text sometimes seems torn between milking rats' bad rep and refuting it, there's
a wide range of material here, doled out in neat little nibbles per page, and it covers
some of the complications of the rat issue, such as the unintended consequences of
rat abatement and rat use in experiments. The lighthearted style ("Like everybody
else with an occasional rat problem, the president would rather not discuss it")
adds to reading ease without interfering with the information. The star turns in
the ratty photographs, however, will be the real draw-or repulsion, depending on
tastes: rats in hordes appear in closeups and group shots, leaping through the air,
emerging from a toilet (sure to be the page to which this title begins falling open),
or just hanging around; the close trimming of the images against strong-colored
backgrounds accents whiskers and tails as well as the immediacy of the rodent
presence. They'll come to "ew" and they'll stay to learn-and "ew" some more.
An index is included. DS
CUTLER, JANE 
Leap, Frog; illus. by Tracey Campbell Pearson. 
Farrar,
2002 
198p
ISBN 0-374-34362-4 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
See this month's Big Picture, p. 139, for review.
DEFECE, CYNTHIA 
The Rea True Dulcie Campbell illus. by R. W. Alley. 
Farrar,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-374-36220-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Certain that she was switched with a princess in the hospital at her birth, Dulcie-
known to herself as "the extraordinary Princess Dulcinea"-considers life on a
farm to be a horrible comedown. She carefully explains her dilemma to her mother,
father, and brother, just before she takes off to "live the life [she] was born for." A
trip to the barn (transformed into a turreted castle in the imaginative Dulcie's
mind's eye) results in close perusal of a book of fairy tales, in which princesses wear
rags and sleep in ashes, are imprisoned in towers and turned to stone, keep houses
for ogres and kiss frogs. "'Blech,' said Dulcie, snapping the book shut." The now-
shadowy barn seems full of fairy-tale danger (trolls, witches, evil fairies, ogres) and
only a concerted effort by the imaginative Dulcie saves her from their wicked spells.
The moral of this somewhat pointed tale is delivered with a giggle; it is given
further buoyancy by Alley's renderings of the determinedly stolid Dulcie and her
farm family. Images of the everyday are offset by gold-framed paintings of Dulcie's
imaginary life; the forthright juxtaposition of imagination and reality helps boost
the silliness quotient of the illustrations. The palette is a bit muddy, the text is a bit
long, and the ending doesn't quite live up to the promise of its beginning; still, the
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
151
story of Dulcie's discovery that there's no place like home will resonate with many
young listeners. JMD
DE LINT, CHARLES 
Waifi and Strays. 
Viking, 2002 
391p
ISBN 0-670-03584-X 
$17.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Fantasy author de Lint offers sixteen of his previously published short stories about
coming of age, dividing the collection into locations familiar from his previous
works: Tamson House, Ottawa and the Valley, Otherworlds: Past and Future,
Bordertown, and Newford: In and Out of the City. Throughout the stories,
characters confront physical, emotional, and psychological dangers: in "There's
No Such Thing," a teenager confronts her younger sister's child-abusing babysit-
ter; in "A Tattoo on Her Heart," an adolescent discovers her inner self behind a
mask; in "Ghosts of Wind and Shadow," the heroine discovers the truth of the
secret life of the urban faery. The book creates emotionally believable characters
and uses their fantastical settings to deal with powerful archetypal themes such as
abandonment, bereavement, and redemption. The author adds a glimpse behind
the scenes in his section and story introductions, where he discusses his motiva-
tions and inspirations. Older readers ready to immerse themselves in de Lint's
worlds will appreciate this emotionally resonant collection. JMD
DEPAOLA, TOMIE 
Adelita: A Mexican Cinderella Story; written and illus. by Tomie
dePaola. 
Putnam, 2002 
34p
ISBN 0-399-23866-2 
$16.99 
R 
5-9 yrs
Adelita, beloved charge of her nurse, Esperanza, is bereft when her loving father
dies suddenly, leaving her in the care of her coldhearted stepmother. The step-
mother fires Esperanza and orders Adelita to the kitchen, where she does all the
work and suffers abuse from her mean stepsisters. The inevitable invitation comes,
and with the help of Esperanza and a trunk of her deceased mother's clothes Adelita
makes a stunning entrance at the fiesta. There she captures the heart of the host's
son, and true love conquers all. Despite the folkloric-sounding title, this is an
original story based on "Cinderella" motifs. The sentences are often short and
choppy, but the tale is sprinkled with Spanish phrases explained within the text (a
glossary is also included) that add fluidity to the storytelling. The acrylic paintings
feature a romantically idealized Mexico of archways and terraces rendered in cel-
ebratory shades of violet, pink, yellow, and blue; perusal of the images reveals
iconographic images of Catholicism, examples of traditional foods, and even a visit
by Frida Kahlo. dePaola's sometimes flat illustrative style suits his text well here.
His characters' faces are more emotionally revealing than usual: his dark-haired
and doe-eyed Adelita, genuinely sweet instead of moony, is especially affecting.
Cinderella is a remarkably popular tale; this will be, too. JMD
DILLON, LEO 
Rap A Tap Tap: Here's Bojangles--Think of That!; written and
illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-590-47883-4 
$15.95 
R 3-6yrs
Youngsters get an introduction to master tap-dancer Bill "Bojangles" Robinson in
this bouncy picture book. The rhyming text is a string of loosely related images
connected by a repeating refrain: "His feet fairly flew as he tipped his hat./ Rap a
tap tap-think of that!// He briefly paused to pat an old cat./ Rap a tap tap-think
of that!// He danced rain or shine, in all kinds of weather/ Rap a tap tap-think of
152 
* THE BULLETIN
that!/ People listened each day for his toe-tapping clatter./ Rap a tap tap-think of
that!" While the narrative has little tension or momentum, it is driven by the
chantable refrain ("Rap a tap tap-think of that!") and by the visual momentum
of the Dillons' dancing artwork. The collage-like geometrics of the neatly ren-
dered urban scenes are awash with distinctive details; the larger-than-life figure of
Robinson himself, dressed in elegant clothes and drafted in even more elegant
lines, dominates each composition as he dances from spread to spread. There is a
stylized distance to the illustrations and the text that leans toward the static, and,
despite a note, this does little to inform listeners about Bill Robinson's place in the
pantheon of dance and American history. Still, an imaginative reader with some
choreographic initiative should be able to make this a toe-tapping addition to
storytime. JMD
DOHERTY, BERLIE 
Holly Starcross. Greenwillow, 2002 
186p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-001342-7 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-001341-9 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Fourteen-year-old Holly feels very much like a leftover from her mother's earlier
life, the life that she wants to forget: now happily remarried with three new chil-
dren, her mother refuses to speak to Holly about her father, whom Holly last saw
eight years ago, or allow her to contact him in any way. When a strange man
begins lurking around Holly's school, Holly realizes that this must be her father,
trying to see her; when she finally and joyously meets up with him, he spirits her
away from her posh London existence to their old home in the countryside up
north, pleading with her not to contact her mother: "As soon as she knows where
you are, she'll want you back. ... I just want you for a bit longer. That's all I'm
asking." This is an original and interestingly complicated look at familial longings.
Despite what Holly's father says ("I've done it. I've kidnapped you"), it's clearly
not an abduction but a daughter's dream invitation from a beloved father, of whom
she's been unreasonably deprived, and Doherty is particularly deft at depicting
Holly's increasingly complete sense of self with her father and her father's side of
the family as she catches up on her own history and her family's. Though Holly's
mother is a bit reductively characterized, the book also believably treats Holly's
increasing agony at being pulled in two directions and makes her attachment to
her London family, especially her baby half-sister, both credible and credibly prob-
lematic. There's a streak of romanticism at the book's heart, but that will make it
all the more enjoyable to readers when Holly finally makes a choice about her life
and familial ties. DS
DOYLE, MALACHY 
Who IsJesse Flood? Bloomsbury, 2002 
173p
ISBN 1-58234-776-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Jesse Flood lives in Bridgewater in Northern Ireland, "at the arse end of the uni-
verse." He invites the reader into his life from the first page, when "you" join Jesse
in a railroad tunnel, crammed into a recess "like an upright coffin," as the train
thunders past: "There's a filthy black wall slap in front of you and you're pushing
and pushing, up against it.... And you're thinking maybe... there are better ways
to get the constant sound of parental argument out of your head. Slightly more
clever ways to get a cheap thrill." Headings ("Jesse-Age 14") help the reader
navigate from episode to episode as Jesse looks back on his life-from vague, dis-
turbing memories of age eight and his decision to become left-handed ("sinister")
at age nine, to the varied social disasters of the past couple of years and the red-
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
153
letter day his mother finally walked out on his dad, up to the day she comes back.
Jesse finally argues that you have to be a little "mad and misguided" to be yourself
and demonstrates that your dreams don't have to come true for your real life to get
better. Observant enough to communicate the big picture, smart enough to see
life's ironies, self-absorbed enough to resonate authentically, and Irish enough to
show that the teen years-"the slowest years of your life"-are tough all over, Jesse
allows teen readers to see their own concerns about family, friends, society, nature,
and identity refracted through the consciousness of a likable survivor. FK
DUNREA, OLIVIER 
Gossie; ISBN 0-618-17674-8; Gossie & Gertie; ISBN 0-618-
17676-4. Each book: written and illus. by Olivier Dunrea. 
Houghton,
2002 
32p 
$9.95 
R 
2-4 yrs
Gossie-a gosling, what else?-and her shiny red boots are inseparable: "She wears
them when she eats. She wears them when she sleeps. She wears them when she
rides. She wears them when she hides." In her debut appearance, Gossie, these
boots become the occasion for making a new friend: "One morning Gossie could
not find her bright red boots," but a diligent search turns them up on the webbed
feet of a tinier gosling, Gertie. "'Great boots!' said Gertie. Gossie smiled." Of
course such footwear enthusiasm could not fail to bond two gals together, avian
though they be. In Gossie & Gertie, the smaller gosling has acquired her own natty
blue boots, and although she's content at first to follow her slightly bossy elder on
her adventurous rounds ("'Follow me!' cried Gossie. Gossie marched to the barn.
Gertie followed"), Gertie finally strikes out on her own and cleverly shows Gossie
the way to dinner. Dunrea imbues his spare line-and-watercolor compositions
with warm, gentle humor, capturing the goslings in profile (the better to appreci-
ate their scrawny, stretchy necks, exaggerated beaks, and booted feet) and sending
them on pastoral explorations of haystacks and flower patches, ponds and hen
coops. Preschoolers are bound to ask for an encore reading, and they'll probably
ask for new boots, too. EB
ERDRICH, LOUISE 
The Range Eternal; illus. by Steve Johnson and Lou
Fancher. 
Hyperion, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0220-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A little girl recalls growing up in a house in the Turtle Mountains of North Da-
kota, where the family house lacked electricity; a wood-burning stove, "the Range
Eternal," provided heat for cooking and for the house, and also served as the emo-
tional center of the household. Erdrich is an author of considerable skill, and that
skill is evident here; her story is a chain of her narrator's memories, moments
delicately linked together by the effects of the Range Eternal in both its literal and
figurative sense. (The term refers not only to the actual stove but to the ranges of
North Dakota and the memories of times past.) Unfortunately, this lovingly imag-
ined past substitutes nostalgia for immediacy; the sense of loss caused by the re-
placement of the Range Eternal by more modern conveniences may be a notion
that needs maturity to be emotionally resonant, and there's little action to help
young audiences cross the gap of years. The palette is awash with golden light and
dreamlike shades of blue; the dreamy backdrops of cabin and sky act as screens on
which clouds, smoke, and color swirl, insinuating the shapes of buffalo and Windigo.
A concluding note states that the author remembers the stove from visits to her
grandparents' house and from the stories her mother told. JMD
154 
* THE BULETIN
FRANK, LUCY 
The Annoyance Bureau. Jackson/Atheneum, 2002 
169p
ISBN 0-689-84903-6 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Twelve-year-old Lucas is visiting his father and stepfamily in New York City for
the Christmas holidays while his mother jaunts off to the Bahamas. He has a fairly
good if somewhat strained relationship with his dad and stepmother, and a fine
relationship with his toddler stepbrother Calvin, but his stepsister Phoebe is a
sarcastic brat who takes every possible opportunity to put Lucas down. On a trip
to the local Book World for some peace and quiet, Lucas runs into a storefront
Santa Claus, who turns out to be Izzy Gribitz, member of the Annoyance Bureau,
a top-secret agency whose mission is to save the world from annoyances such as
slippery ice, whiny toddlers, and bad smells. Most people can't see the many
members of the Annoyance Bureau roaming the streets of Manhattan, but they're
visible to Lucas, who becomes Izzy's at first unwilling but later enthusiastic accom-
plice after Izzy drops his "irkometer" (a device that measures and corrects annoy-
ances) into Lucas' backpack. Frank starts out with a fairly funny premise that
unfortunately fizzles. Lucas' adjustment to his father's new family is undercut by
his adventures with Izzy, and his adventures with Izzy are interrupted by family
holiday happenings; the two plot threads meet occasionally at some slapstick con-
nection, but they are ineffectively joined. Still, gadget lovers may be intrigued by
the idea ofIzzy's irkometer, and NYC natives will be amused by Lucas' take on the
big city. JMD
FRAUSTINO, LISA ROWE, ed. 
Soul Searching: Thirteen Stories about Faith and
Belief 
Simon, 2002 
267p
ISBN 0-689-83484-5 
$17.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
This collection of commissioned fictional tales addresses teens' spirituality and
struggles with faith. The stories range from the reality based (William Sleator's
account of a young Buddhist monk who joins the community to avoid farm work
and ends up embracing its values) to the purely imaginative (two guys on a dream-
inspired road trip to Graceland encounter a Christlike Elvis), and they are vari-
ously anchored in denominational practice (from Hindu to Pentecostalism) and
personal spirituality (Fraustino's own offering about faith on a heart transplant
ward). A slim measure of stylistic diversity is provided by Jennifer Armstrong's
historical parable of a choir singer who can only achieve angelic vocal perfection
through self-mortification and by Shonto Begay's moving free-verse reflection by
a Navajo who abandons his gift for prophetic stargazing because it became "an
obstacle to my growing up." The authors-well known, lesser known, and previ-
ously unpublished-supply generally redundant commentary following their en-
tries and plug highlights of their other published work into the bargain. This
volume plays to a slightly younger audience than Singer's IBelieve in Water (BCCB
1/01); despite its uneven offerings, it should appeal to adolescents in need of stron-
ger sustenance than Chicken Soup. EB
FREEDMAN, RUSSELL 
Confucius: The Golden Rule; illus. by Frideric
Clement. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2002 
48p
ISBN 0-439-13957-0 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
It is no small achievement to construct a cogent biography of a man about whom
little verifiable fact is known, while concurrently interpreting Eastern philosophy
for a Western middle-school audience and supplying the necessary background in
DECEMBER 2002 
* 155
ancient Chinese history to place the whole into context, all within a few dozen
pages. Freedman's success is due largely to his tight focus on the ironies of Confucius'
life-the reformer who could not find a patron to implement his reforms, the
philosopher who never wrote down his philosophy, the secular thinker whose ideas
later accrued the trappings of religion. Thoughtful examination of Confucius'
failures not only brings the subject to life for a young audience but casts his endur-
ing legacy (albeit one he never intended) into sharp relief. Frequent quotations
from the Analects, meticulously credited in source notes, are skillfully woven
throughout the text, and although Freedman explains that Confucius' words were
documented many decades after their utterance, the brief dialogues ring with au-
thenticity. Clement's illustrations are elegance itself-compositions reminiscent
of ancient Chinese artwork, timeworn around the ornate borders, bearing faint
traces of stamps and seals, and delicately strewn with fruits and flower petals. Closing
notes address extant Confucian sites and the scholarly challenges of reconstructing
Confucius' life; an annotated list for further reading is also included. EB
GALLOWAY, PRISCILA 
The Courtesan's Daughter. Delacorte, 2002 
259p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90052-X 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72907-3 
$16.95 
R Gr. 8-10
Phano is the fourteen-year-old stepdaughter ofNera, a former courtesan and slave
now married to Greek citizen Stephanos, Phano's father. Kidnapped by her mother's
enemy, Phrynion, young Phano barely escapes with her honor, and then only be-
cause Theo, the man to whom Phrynion intends to sell her, is a man of integrity
who believes her denial of Phrynion's ownership. The author bases this action-
filled novel on an actual court case from Ancient Greece; her characters and their
motivations, of course, are imagined, but they're imagined adventurously indeed.
From possible plots to overthrow the government to plots to destroy the family
reputation, from the return of long-lost grandmothers to the return of mislaid
dowries, Galloway keeps the pages turning, lending a perils-of-Pauline sensibility
to Phano's many plights. There is plenty to discuss here, from the position of
women in ancient societies to the death rites and rituals of various cultures to the
organization of levels of Athenian government, and through it all run Galloway's
themes: love conquers all, family is more important than money, and we are all in
the hands of the gods. Hand this off to your historical-fiction readers for a change
of pace as well as costume. JMD
GAY, KATHLYN 
Body Marks: Tattooing, Piercing, and Scarification; written by
Kathlyn Gay and Christine Whittington. 
Twenty-First Century,
2002 
112p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2352-X 
$29.90
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7613-1742-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
This ambitious introduction addresses both the history and current practice of
permanent body decoration, and meets with mixed success. Opening chapters
take a world view of the art, disclosing tidbits of truly fascinating trivia-from a
5300-year-old Tyrolean mummy with medicinal markings, to Coptic Christian
pilgrims with "souvenir" tattoos-but the organization is scattershot and coverage
somewhat shallow. Subsequent chapters on contemporary adornment are, how-
ever, the likely draw here, and teens are offered a nonjudgmental overview of popular
styles of tats (traditional, primitive, gang, cartoon, etc.), pierces (emphasis on head
156 
* THE BULLETIN
and navel, with passing reference to nipple and genital piercing), and the more
radical and risky scarification. Issues of artist competency and certification, post-
marking hygiene, infection risks, and mark removal are smoothly woven into rel-
evant portions of the text. Gay and Whittington offer surprisingly few specifics,
though, on how markings are made or how the tattooing and piercing equipment
actually functions, and a fundamental concern-just how badly does this hurt?-
is never really addressed. Still, readers considering their own parentally sanctioned
or clandestine foray into body art can review many considerations needed to make
an informed decision. FAQs, photo illustrations, an index, thorough source notes,
and a list of books, articles, and websites for further research are included. EB
GEORGE, KRISTINE O'CONNELL 
Swimming Upstream: Middle School Poems; illus.
by Debbie Tilley. 
Clarion, 2002 
80p
ISBN 0-618-15250-4 
$14.00 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
George deftly navigates the speaker of these poems from the first day of middle
school to the last, from the speech given by each teacher in "Each Class" ("You are
not babies/ this is not elementary school/we expect more of you"), through halls
full of strangers (and, miraculously, one "moved-away/ lost-track/ moved-back/
maybe new/ old friend"), until "Textbooks turned in/ backpacks empty./
Homeroom is just/ an empty classroom." Along the way, poetic justice is done to
changing for P.E. ("I Houdini out of my sweatshirt"), the surrealism of the lunch
room ("Kori, eating lunch/ acting like she's not wearing/ a rubber pig snout"), as
well as band rehearsals, friendships-even beginner's romance. Some of the most
effective poems feature similes likely to resonate with George's target audience:
turning over a test paper to see the score is compared to removing a bandage (one
girl does it in a "quick rip"; the speaker peels hers off "slow, slow, slow") and
spending the last hours of the weekend doing homework is "like the end of a
Popsicle:/ instead of one last lick-/ a taste of stick." The consistency of the poetic
voice works with the page design (bubbles and waves surround each poem) to
create a strong flow from episode to episode, avoiding sameness through variation
in the structure and grouping of these free-verse lyrics. A few double-page pen-
and-ink illustrations flesh out the multicultural cast, evoking both the chaos and
the isolation possible in the middle-schooler's habitat. Readers facing this up-
stream swim can get their feet wet here, and those toweling themselves off after-
wards will find much they can relate to in this engaging volume. FK
GIFF, PATRICIA REILLY 
Pictures ofHollis Woods. 
Lamb, 2002 
166p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90070-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32655-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Hollis Woods is a person-a twelve-year-old girl-and also a place, the spot she
was found as an abandoned infant. Now settling in at a new foster home, she finds
herself warmed by the affection and support of elderly Josie Cahill, who encour-
ages Hollis' artistic gifts. Hollis is also plagued by memories of past times, how-
ever: by some bad memories, of chilly and unloving foster parents, but even more
by good ones, of her last summer's visit with the Regan family, with whom Hollis
thought she was going to stay forever-until she made a terrible mistake. As she
settles in with Josie, it becomes increasingly clear that the old lady is no longer as
sharp as she used to be; when Hollis' social worker realizes that Josie's increasing
forgetfulness makes her an unsafe guardian, Hollis convinces Josie to run away
DECEMBER 2002 
* 157
with her to the Regans' now-empty summer cottage. As the abandoned-baby
element suggests, this is a sentimental and romantic production rather than a real-
istic social drama such as Quattlebaum's Grover G. Graham and Me (BCCB 11/
02) and Paterson's The Same Stuffas Stars (10/02); as such, however, it's an emo-
tional and moving reality-based fairy tale. Giffmakes Hollis sufficiently prickly to
have texture yet sufficiently yearning to evoke sympathy, and her adventures with
Josie add an enriching layer and an additional tenderness to the old-fashioned
orphan story. Readers won't be surprised when Hollis ends up back with the
Regans, the family of her dreams, but they don't come to this sort of story for
surprises; Hollis' happy ending will be all that they desire. DS
GRANT, CYNTHIA D. 
The Cannibals: Starring Tiffany Spratt. Roaring Brook,
2002 
14 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2759-2 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1642-6 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Narrator Tiffany is keeping a journal primarily as an assignment for her senior
English class; secondarily, she is keeping a journal in order to record her life for
posterity when she becomes a famous actress/model. Tiffany's life revolves around
her hair, The Girls (the cheerleaders, of which she is Head Yell Leader), new hand-
some hunk Campbell, and the teen vampire movie being filmed at her high school.
Her journal reflects her personality: the writing is air-headed, vacuous, and relent-
lessly upbeat. From the opening kickoff (Tiffany's boyfriend, Wally, breaks into
the Pentagon's computer and is sent to a reform school in the jungle) to the final
revelation (Campbell is gay), this is arch without being funny, farcical without
being clever. Tiffany is so self-absorbed she is nearly unconscious, and her lack of
self-awareness results in a narrative without nuance. Readers hooked on the first-
person journal format that has become ubiquitous in young adult novels of late
may find a few low-key smirks here, but others will beat a rapid retreat to Rennison's
Angus, Thongs, and Full-Frontal Snogging (BCCB 5/00) in order to remind them-
selves what truly clever really is. JMD
GRAVES, KEITH 
Loretta: Ace Pinky Scout; written and illus. by Keith
Graves. 
Scholastic, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-439-36831-6 
$16.95 
R 6-9 yrs
Like her foremothers before her ("perfection ran in her family") Loretta is the
epitome of Pinky Scout-dom, thinking nothing of saving the world solo every
Thursday. She spends a lot of time in the family portrait gallery admiring her
famous scout ancestresses, especially her grandmother, the greatest Pinky Scout of
all. Loretta "earned every merit badge in the known universe" except the Golden
Marshmallow Badge, which she plans on securing during the Annual Tri-county
Marshmallow Trials. On the big day Loretta is "a marshmallow-roasting ma-
chine," but when her aerodynamically angled marshmallows burst into flame, she's
front page news: "Loretta Fails!" read the headlines. A miserable Loretta declares
her failure to her grandmother's portrait, which speaks: "Well, girlfriend, stinking
is a part of life. Everyone stinks at something. Even me." Grandma then proceeds
to tell Loretta how her foremothers stank, after which a revived Loretta goes back
to saving the world. Perfectionism is not always the stuff of humor, but Graves
manages to keep things comically antic while effectively delivering the message.
The continually escalating, almost farcical pace of the story allows for little con-
158 
* THE BULLETIN
templation, and some of the visual humor may have to be caught the second time
through. Nonetheless, masterful drafting (big-headed caricatures of both Loretta
and members of her family matriarchy are both comic and commanding) com-
bines with the mock-serious text for an archly humorous depiction of the
perfectionist's plight. Readers will appreciate Loretta's final revelation: "I'm still
an ace,/ despite my flaw./ Besides, I like my/ marshmallows raw." JMD
GRAY, MARGARET 
The Ugly Princess and the Wise Fool; illus. by Randy
Cecil. 
Holt, 2002 
167p
ISBN 0-8050-6847-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 3-7
In a world full of kingdoms famous for their beautiful princesses (they even have
beautiful-princess beauty pageants), a princess was born who departed from tradi-
tion: "She wasn't even remotely pretty, and the whole kingdom was in deep shock
about it, because in those days just about everyone was beautiful." After the shock
wears off, everyone, including the not-beautiful princess Rose, adjusts, and all goes
along quite swimmingly until Rose falls in infatuation at first sight with the hand-
some Prince Parsley, who won't give her the time of day because (you guessed it)
she isn't beautiful. Rose's wish for beauty is reluctantly granted by her fairly god-
mother, and she wins the heart of the Prince-who turns out to be as vacuous a
square-jawed fellow as you can imagine. Rose wants things back the way they
were, but there are consequences involved with taking back a wish, and so, with
the help of Jasper the wise jester, she sets off to change her fate. This is pretty (no
pun intended) predictable, but Gray manages to keep the foolishness at a high
pitch and the story rolling. Cecil (illustrator of Lowell's Little Red Cowboy Hat,
BCCB 6/97) keeps the visual humor at the same pitch with his deliberately under-
played beauties in the black-and-white illustrations scattered throughout. The fast
pace, lucid storytelling, and short chapters will make this a funny group readaloud,
especially for those classes familiar with fairy-tale traditions. JMD
GRIFFIN, ADELE 
Hannah, Divided. Hyperion, 2002 
264p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2664-9 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0879-9 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Thirteen-year-old Hannah-a mathematical prodigy who can count the number
of "a's" in a poem instantly, but who can't read-is the heroine of this offbeat
historical fiction set in Pennsylvania in the 1930s. Her adventures begin when she
leaves the family dairy farm in Chadds Ford to join two other talented teens (one
musical, the other verbal) in the Philadelphia home of a social-climbing do-gooder
who offers temporary support to students vying for scholarships. Engaging pop-
culture details flesh out the period setting (sources are provided in a lucid author's
note), but the achievement of the novel lies in the complex characterization of
Hannah, whose obsession with numbers is tied to compulsive behaviors (like tap-
ping) and what her best friend at home kindly calls a lack of social "polish." When
Hannah moves to town, she learns the truth of her friend's adage that "it's only
when folks have known each other since birth that we make allowances for pecu-
liarities." In a surprisingly realistic d6nouement, Hannah flubs the scholarship
exam when her compulsions get in her academic way, but in spite of that she
resolves to find a way to continue her studies. Readers who take this opportunity
to look at the past through Hannah's eyes will take comfort in seeing their pas-
sions-and their quirks-reflected here. FK
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
159
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA 
Time Pieces: The Book of Times. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
2002 
191p
ISBN 0-590-28881-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-7
The summer before sixth grade is a time of change for Valena, both in events and
in understanding, in this series ofvignettish episodes that interweave Valena's ex-
periences (some based on Hamilton's) with her mother's tellings of her family
history (based on Hamilton's own heritage). Valena witnesses the Aurora Borealis
and visits a circus; experiences a tornado and grieves at the death of the beloved
family dog; hears stories of family members escaping bondage and family members
struggling with hardships in freedom. The scenes are rich and luminous but ulti-
mately fragmented, offering tantalizing hints of a projected unity for the pieces
that the narrative never quite achieves. Nonetheless, there's a strong emotional
current here and a tender evocation of different kinds of growth, as Valena struggles
with the unflashy but significant changes that shape growth while clinging to the
security of her warm and affectionate family. The historical stories emphasize her
most significant change, her growing awareness that family stories are not about a
detached but fascinating "them" but about an "us" of which Valena herself is part.
That's an undertreated aspect of maturation and a complex one to convey; despite
the want of shaping and cohesion here, it's one that Hamilton eloquently expresses.
DS
HAUTZIG, ESTHER 
A Picture of Grandmother; illus. by Beth Peck. 
Foster/Far-
rar, 2002 
82p
ISBN 0-374-35920-2 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Sara lives in Vilna, Poland, in 1939, in the arms of a close extended family who all
join in the excitement when Sara's mother receives letters and photographs from
her brother Benjamin in Brooklyn, New York. The most recent letter contains
more than photos and news clippings, however: Benjamin has invited Mama and
Grandmother Hanna to the United States to attend the 1939 World's Fair. He
has also asked for a particular photograph of his mother, and Sara embarks on a
search for the artifact that eventually leads her to discover a family secret. The
writing is rather stiff, and the characters are somewhat flat, with Sara never really
becoming more than a dutiful old-fashioned girl. (It's also odd that there's appar-
ently no concern about the rising threat from Hitler, especially since the story
takes place shortly before the invasion of Poland-some readers may wonder what
happens to Sara and her family when her mother returns from the fair.) The
suspense of Sara's search is intriguing, however, and the excitement generated by
the invitation to the United States is sustained throughout, even though the actual
visit takes place after the story ends. Gracefully drafted full-page illustrations open
each chapter. JMD
HODGES, MARGARET, ad. 
The Legend ofSaint Christopher; illus. by Richard Jesse
Watson. 
Eerdmans, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8028-5077-4 
$18.00 
Ad 
5-10 yrs
Hodges adapts William Caxton's fifteenth century account ofOffero, "The Bearer,"
who seeks to serve the greatest of masters. A king is too weak, because he fears the
devil; the devil is too weak, because he cowers at the sight of Christ's cross. Christ,
however, eludes Offero, who can only accept a hermit's suggestion to offer his
services at the river's edge and hope for the best. Offero finally realizes his quest is
160 
* THE BULLETIN
fulfilled when he carries a child of unusual weight across the water: "When you
carried me on your shoulders, you carried the world, for I have the whole world in
my hands. I am Jesus Christ, the King whom you serve." Hodges confines her
telling to the most famous Christopher legend, bypassing any mention of his third-
century martyrdom or his removal from the Roman Calendar, and offering only
the briefest allusion to popular devotion to the saint: "And in memory of him,
travelers to this day carry pictures of him to help them on their journeys." None-
theless, this adaptation makes the most of its folkloric structure. Watson's oil and
acrylic paintings are sometimes stiltedly glamorized, but they invite viewers to
explore the shadowy borderland between religion and myth. EB
HOOKS, BELL 
Be Boy Buzz; illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0814-4 
$16.99 
R 3-6 yrs
In hooks' previous collaboration with Raschka, Happy to Be Nappy (BCCB 1/00),
she concentrated on African-American girlhood; now she focuses on the joys of
being boy: "All bliss boy./ All fine beat./ All beau boy.// Beautiful." hooks' poetry
is rhythmic and rolling, each word finessed to fit the pulse of her verse. The lilt of
the language is contagious, begging to be read aloud: "I be boy/ laughing,/ cry-
ing./ telling/ my story,// talking/ way/ too/ loud." Enormous emotion is commu-
nicated in the poet's few and well-chosen words; the contradictions inherent in
being boy, being human, are clearly and empathetically stated. Raschka's mixed-
media illustrations are an energetic dream, featuring beautiful brown boys with
articulate faces and graceful hands racing all over the pages. Words and images are
so well meshed it's hard to tell which winds around what, the words around the
images or the images around the words. No matter: the result is a harmonious
balance of visual and verbal rhythms that add up to a harmonious whole. Buy it
for the boys and all those who love them. JMD
HOOPER, MARY 
Amy. 
Bloomsbury, 2002 
171p
ISBN 1-58234-793-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Amy's out in the cold after a shift in her school friendships, so she's spending more
time on the Internet, especially in chat rooms. There she meets a young man who
calls himself Zed and who seems to understand her in a way no one else does.
Despite the warnings of her parents, Amy goes to meet him, but the meeting goes
oddly-she becomes drowsy at their picnic and falls unaccountably asleep for sev-
eral hours. Upon returning home, she finds her clothing in disarray and strange
memories resurfacing. With the help of a girl who moves from friend of conve-
nience to real ally, Amy decides to investigate the situation. Hooper credibly cre-
ates the voice ofAmy, jealous and suspicious of her former friends, impatient with
adult denseness, and lonely for understanding, and there are believable implica-
tions about the vulnerability of such a teen. This is, however, every bit the predict-
able, technologically enhanced stranger-danger drama it sounds, complete with
naivet6 all 'round (including the book's, especially about the soundness of pre-
tended seduction as an investigative method), the voice of the law as framework
(the narrative is ostensibly Amy's taped statement to the police), and tasteful re-
strictions on Amy's actual victimization (Zed apparently merely removed her clothes
and looked at her). It's therefore convincing only on the same level as Amy's
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
161
parents' horror stories about what happened to some girl, but since it's equally
juicy, readers will doubtless lap it up with enthusiasm if not belief. DS
JARVIS, ROBIN 
Thorn Ogres ofHagwood. Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2002 
[25 6p]
ISBN 0-15-216752-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Werlings are a peaceful, forgotten group of shape shifters that live in the trees of
Hagwood, close to the forest ruled by the malevolent Rhiannon, fairy queen of the
Hollow Hill. Gamaliel Tumpin is a young werling just beginning his shape-shift-
ing training; he and his companions Tollychook, Liffidia, and twins Mufus and
Bufus Doolan are apprenticed to Finnen Lufkin, the most advanced student in
their class. When the rowdy Doolan brothers slip away, the others fear trouble
and embark on a rescue; the rescue attempt goes awry, and the small band of
students must be rescued themselves, by the Wandering Smith, a dwarf who has
returned to the wood after a long absence to battle Rhiannon. The werlings' en-
counter with the Wandering Smith puts their entire village at risk and results in a
fierce and bloody battle between the werlings and the thorn ogres of Rhiannon.
Jarvis takes a little too much time to get his plot going, and there's a precious tone
to the opening chapters that may put some readers off. Once the deliberate scene-
setting and character-building is past, however, the action and adventure take pre-
cedence. Rhiannon's her army of thorn ogres is literally bloodthirsty, battles and
confrontations are graphically violent, and the death of one of the Doolan broth-
ers adds to the dark feeling of the text. The physical fantasy world is clearly evoked,
supported by a strong sense of community history; the conclusion will leave read-
ers poised on the edge of the continuing adventure. Final illustrations not seen.
JMD
JOHNSON, KATHLEEN JEFFRIE 
The Parallel Universe of Liars. Roaring Brook,
2002 
185p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2854-8 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1746-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 9-12
"Nobody ever tells you what to do when you're hopeless and fat, and your only
friend is moving to Alabama," says Robin the narrator; nobody tells her about
other aspects of her life, either, such as "if you're supposed to let your father know
that his wife is having sex with your next-door neighbor." Between the departure
of her friend Melissa and the fact that Robin's looks-obsessed mother is busy trying
to land a new husband, there really isn't anyone to tell her, so she muddles through
on her own, watching the private reality of human relationships going on behind
the public facade and tremulously embarking on her own first romance. This is a
tender and yet implacably truthful story, with Johnson conveying with great impact
and originality how completely unknown the adult world is to people just starting
to explore it and how little information adults really provide. Robin negotiates
dangerously rocky terrain, from her needy and gorgeous twenty-something
neighbor's sexual requests to her new boyfriend's mixed-race ancestry to her distant
friend's concern about her own sexual awakening, always with realistic mistake-
ridden awkwardness and uncertainty. Her growing awareness of her own sexuality,
in viewing the goings-on next door and in direct encounters with her neighbor
(who will do everything with her but intercourse), is also authentic in its blend of
desire, vanity, and confusion. There's a lot more to coming of age than merely
162 
* 
THE BULLETIN
blossoming, and readers will be glad to see this untraditional heroine survive the
pitfalls and find herself on road to good adulthood. DS
JOHNSTON, TIM Never So Green. 
Farrar, 2002 
228p
ISBN 0-374-35509-6 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 8-10
You'd think Tex Donleavy's biggest problem would be accepting his divorced par-
ents' new relationships: straightlaced lawyer Dad with his young, sexy girlfriend,
and boozy librarian Mom with her somewhat boorish new husband, Farley. Actu-
ally, Tex worships Dad's girlfriend from afar (at least far enough to spy on her
nude sprints from bedroom to bathroom), and he's rapidly coming to terms with
Farley, who's coaching him into a decent Little League pitcher. That's the root of
the problem: just as life seems to be stabilizing, Tex learns that Farley is abusing
his daughter, Jack, and Jack makes Tex promise never to tell anyone about the
household secret. Johnston cagily stalls the revelation of the abuse until well into
the novel, and readers caught up in multiple subplots involving team bullying,
Tex's deformed hand, Tex's tenuous sexual experimentation with Jack, and Dad's
rape trials (just to name a few) may well feel crushed by the emotional overload.
The fortuitous setting in 1970s Iowa seems to simply facilitate an easy "happy"
legal ending in which Farley can get help and just possibly save his little remaining
dignity. Johnston, however, does take a brutally honest view of Tex's crisis of
conscience as the boy tries to reconcile shock, pity, and disgust with shame over his
own "guilty" interest in sex. EB
KACZMAN, JAMES 
A Bird and His Worm; written and illus. by James
Kaczman. 
Houghton, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-618-09460-1 
$15.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
A bird who flutters to his own drummer prefers walking to flying; as a conse-
quence, he's shunned by the other birds. He departs further from convention by
befriending a worm, and the two plan to walk south for the winter. Along the way
they meet a fox-but not to the end that you might think, because the fox finds
them so diverting that he can't bring himself to eat them ("Now that I have gotten
to know you as the charming, funny fellows you are, it is impossible for me to
devour you in one big gulp as I had planned"). A cunning snake is less easily
swayed, however ("'I don't want to get to know you,' hissed the snake. 'I find you
tiresome and annoying'"), and they narrowly escape, deciding that a quick plane
trip south is a suitable compromise. The anticlimactic ending gives a shaggy-dog
flavor to this unusual story, but the offbeat humor is considerable. The text is a
serious stitch, with the eccentric bird's general cluelessness and the comically el-
evated dialogue ("You can't eat us!" cries the bird. "We are charming, funny fel-
lows!") giggle-worthy indeed. The heavily outlined, highly stylized watercolors
have a poker-faced and deliberate simplicity, and the compositions are rhythmic
and effective; changing views, decorative details, and the amusingly elongated fig-
ures of fox and snake add interest. This will suit kids with a taste for Pinkwatery
absurdity and dry humor. DS
KLAss, DAVID 
Home ofthe Braves. 
Foster/Farrar, 2002 
312p
ISBN 0-374-39963-8 
$18.00 
R Gr. 8-12
High-school senior Joe Brickman's at the top of his soccer game, and although he
knows that his team's not made of winning stuff, he's proud to serve as its captain.
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
163
Hope arrives in the guise of Brazilian transfer student Antonio Silva, whose awe-
some reputation precedes him. Joe extends the hand of friendship, but Silva merely
sneers at the bumbling team and arrogantly refuses to lower himself to their level.
Not until he's stolen Joe's hoped-for girlfriend, Kris, and allowed himself to be
fawned over and courted by the school staff will Silva join the team. The soccer
drama plays out against a backdrop of violent, escalating bullying that spills from
the school building out into the community, and Klass skillfully weaves the two
plots together, keeping a tight focus on Joe as he struggles with his personal ani-
mosity toward Silva, his dedication to the game, and his anxiety to protect his best
friend from the hands of "cool" senior thugs. Soccer may be the draw here, but the
school story is equally compelling. Lawndale High's ham-fisted but ineffectual
efforts at vigilance will no doubt resonate with students for whom metal detectors,
staff supervision, and the best administrative intentions cannot provide assurance
of safety. EB
LAVENDER, WILLIAM Just Jane: A Daughter of England Caught in the Struggle of
the American Revolution. Gulliver/Harcourt, 2002 
277p
ISBN 0-15-202587-1 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Lady Jane Prentice, an orphaned teen shipped off to her remaining relatives in the
American colonies, lands in the middle of an extended family rent by their pas-
sionately held views on independence from Great Britain. Jane is determined to
leave all claim of rank behind, asking everyone to address her simply by her first
name, but she remains cautiously loyal to her mother country. The relative starchi-
ness of her Loyalist uncle and the more open affection of her Patriot uncle and
cousins gradually influence her toward the colonial cause, and falling in love with
"gentle schoolmaster" Simon Cordwyn clinches the deal. By the time the fledg-
ling states are up to their collective knee breeches in war, Jane throws her alle-
giance to the rebels despite attempts by her legal guardian, a rabid Tory, to keep
her on the home team. There's a decided soap-opera (All My Colonists?) feel to
the proceedings, with characters straining to fill in needed background and con-
temporary events gaining their spice from catty domestic shenanigans. (In true
soaps fashion, it takes Jane less than half a page to forgive Simon for having an
affair with her aunt.) Still, the innate faux drama that makes soaps appealing
works a little magic here, and readers who wouldn't otherwise touch a lengthy
piece of historical fiction may be willing to tune in for the Revolution. EB
LAWTON, CLIVE A. 
Auschwitz. 
Candlewick, 2002 
48p 
illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 0-7636-1595-1 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 5-10
This photoessay eschews a broader look at the Holocaust for a focused examina-
tion of perhaps the most notorious of the death camps. The book covers the
history of the Polish invasion and the development of the camp at Auschwitz, life
and death within its walls, and post-war consequences and responses, with each
spread treating a step in history or an aspect of camp life. While the writing
occasionally lurches or generalizes, there's an impressive amount of coverage here,
and the book goes beyond mere description of atrocity to acknowledgment of
controversy (the Allies' refusal to bomb the railroad line into the camp) and of the
difficulties of documentation ("We can only estimate the number of people who
were immediately killed by referring to the fact that so many are known to have
164 
* 
THE BULLETIN
been sent to Auschwitz who were never seen alive again"). Comments from survi-
vors and skillful and lavish use of period and contemporary photographs empha-
size the personal dimension of the tragedy as well as contributing to an accessible
format that will reassure readers daunted by more text-heavy approaches. Though
briefer than van der Rol's Anne Frank: Beyond the Diary (BCCB 11/93), this is,
like that title, usefully visual while retaining appropriate maturity, and the two
books would make an effective pairing. The book includes a map (which unfortu-
nately fails to make clear that it's identifying only camps in Poland despite being a
map of all Europe); end matter contains a who's who, glossary, timeline, index,
and somewhat scanty notes on sources. DS
LESTER, 
HELEN 
Tackylocks and the Three Bears; illus. by Lynn
Munsinger. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-618-22490-4 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Tacky the penguin is back, and this time he's on the stage. The penguins are
putting on a play for Mrs. Beakly's school, and Tacky has the starring role: he is
Goldilocks in the penguin production of "The Three Bears." Not surprisingly,
Tacky doesn't always get the big picture, but he manages to have fun anyway: he
eats all the porridge, breaks all the chairs, and reveals the secrets behind the too-
hard bed (ice blocks) and the too-soft bed (a rubber raft). His discovery by the
three bears/penguins in the just-right bed results in an all-play pillow fight that
leaves the audience thoroughly satisfied. While the images are not quite as suc-
cinctly clever as in the earlier Tacky titles (Tacky in Trouble, BCCB 5/98, etc.),
Munsinger's penguins retain their comic charm. Nor does the text have the effec-
tive rhythms of previous outings; the conflict is less distinct, and the plot seems
more an excuse for Tacky's slapstick silliness than the slapstick silliness being a
result of the plot. Still, there's considerable humor in the image of Tacky in a pink
pinafore and gold curly wig, and his fans will welcome his return. JMD
LESTER, JULIUS 
Why Heaven Is Far Away; illus. by Joe Cepeda. 
Scholastic,
2002 
40p
ISBN 0-439-17871-1 
$16.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
In the further adventures of Shaniqua (the angel in charge of everybody's busi-
ness), Bruce (God's secretary), God, and Mrs. God (the cast of What a Truly Cool
World BCCB 2/99), Lester describes how snakes got their venom and why heaven
is so far from earth. Though God admires the beauty of snakes, the creatures and
people on earth either eat them (the creatures "thought their name was Snack") or
try to kill them on sight. At Shaniqua's insistence, God attempts to remedy the
situation by giving the snakes poison to protect themselves, but then the snakes
start biting everyone indiscriminately, sending all of earth fleeing to heaven. Well,
God can't have everything on earth living in heaven (He doesn't like bugs), so
Mrs. God and Shaniqua intercede. Soon everything is back to normal, except that
the ladders connecting heaven and earth are gone (save the one that allows Shaniqua
to travel between heaven and earth, because how else can she keep track of
everybody's business?). Lester's text rolls off the pages in rushing waves of lan-
guage that, read aloud, make a joyful noise, and the rollicking storytelling draws
on an easygoing faith that brings heaven closer. Cepeda's pastel illustrations are a
carnival of color, each intense hue popping off the page, each elongated human
and expressive creature a curious and individual creation. Lester's note links this
DECEMBER 2002 
* 165
piece to two tales he previously retold in Black Folktales (BCCB 2/70) and further
explains additional original elements. Storytellers, readers aloud, and adventurous
educators will quickly include this title in their repertoire; those in values-oriented
curricula will especially appreciate the inclusion of the Zero ("There are ten more
to come") Commandment: "Thou shalt talk to and listen to thy neighbor." JMD
LUBAR, DAVID 
Dunk. Clarion, 2002 
249p
ISBN 0-618-19455-X 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Jersey-shore-dweller Chad loves the summer world of arcades and games on the
boardwalk. The summer before his junior year, he is fixated on the game of Dunk
the Bozo (wherein a clown taunts passersby to try to dunk him with a well-aimed
ball), since this year's Bozo has a caustic and masterful performance that makes
Chad yearn to emulate him ("I wanted to make the marks dance like puppets on a
string. I wanted to shout and scream at the world from the safety of a cage"). He's
stunned to discover that the Bozo he admires is his mother's annoying new tenant,
but he sticks to his goals nonetheless, working as the game's ball boy as he learns
more about the job that compels him. The subplots here aren't as successful as the
main plot: Chad's yearning for a girl who works another booth is at least credible,
but the serious illness of Chad's best friend and Chad's healing of him through
humor are overhastily addressed and insufficiently woven into the main plot. Chad's
fascination with the Bozo, however, makes for a genuinely original story, and Lubar
tactfully and effectively implies a linkage between other aspects of Chad's life and
his desire to control people from a safe distance without painting that ambition as
inappropriate. There's also a vivid picture of the mysterious and somewhat seedy
world of the boardwalk from both in front of and behind the scenes, and readers
will relish that blend of eager hope and slightly sinister cynicism that gives that
world its rich and gamey flavor. DS
LURIE, APRIL 
Dancing in the Streets ofBrooklyn. 
Delacorte, 2002 
194p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90066-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72942-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Narrator Judy Strand looks back on the summer of 1944, when at age thirteen she
discovered that her skinny baseball buddy Jacob had boyfriend possibilities, that
her devoted Pa was in fact her stepfather, that her real father was an alcoholic, and
that among her circle of friends she wasn't the only one with problems. Judy's
crises, romantic and domestic, are thoroughly believable, and Lurie ably avoids
melodrama by setting them firmly among the realistic ebb and flow of neighbor-
hood life-a triumphant relay competition, a long-anticipated vacation in the
Catskills, a thrilling first kiss, a disastrous first dance, the sadness ofJacob's mother's
death, the support of loyal chums, and the unvarying love of her Norwegian immi-
grant parents. Lurie falters somewhat at dialogue, fashioning truncated conversa-
tions that read a bit like comic-strip bubbles, but the young teens' tribulations and
responses are authentic. Sentimental nostalgia never rears its ugly head, and middle-
school readers may find themselves wishing they lived on Judy's street. EB
LYON, GEORGE EuA 
Gina.Jamie.Father.Bear. Jackson/Atheneum, 2002 
135p
ISBN 0-689-84370-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Absent mothers and secretive fathers connect the story told by Gina (a high-school
freshman who lives with her older brother and surgeon father in the here-and-
166 
* THE BULLETIN
now) and the story told in alternating chapters by Jamie (who lives with his younger
sisters and father in a more primitive and fantastic "witching world"). Their sto-
ries merge-and the distinction between the realms of fantasy and realism blurs-
when Gina visits a psychic who guides her to rescue Jamie (tied to a mystical
family tree by his bewitched father), restoring order to the lives of the fathers and
children in both worlds. The comfortable conventionality of the folkloric aspects
ofJamie's story (which involves an animal bride) is unfortunately undercut by the
complex backstory provided near the end of Jamie's narrative. Though Gina's
skepticism and sense of humor help ground her story ("I wasn't in a parallel uni-
verse. I was in Akron"), the book eventually demands a considerable suspension of
disbelief about literal as well as symbolic truths. Fans of conceptually challenging
narratives, however, may be able to relax and enjoy the distinct atmospheres and
voices within this disorienting circle of life. FK
MAYFIELD, SUE 
Drowning Anna. Hyperion, 2002 
316p
ISBN 0-7868-0870-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
It's been over two years since fifteen-year-old Anna Goldsmith moved from Lon-
don to her home in a small Yorkshire town, and much of that time has been pure
hell. That's largely courtesy ofHayley Parkin, queenly rich girl and cunning bully,
who manages first to insinuate herself into Anna's trust and then to reject her
viciously-but intermittently enough to keep Anna hoping for better treatment.
Such is Hayley's thrall that other classmates, including Melanie, Anna's sometime
friend, are easily seduced into rejection of Anna as well, leading eventually to a
depression that sends Anna to attempt suicide. The setup is compelling, and the
plot's unfolding in diary excerpts and flashback (from Melanie's point of view as
well) after Anna's hospitalization is an effective device. Hayley is an impressively
evil figure, and her nastinesses are inventive as well as palpably cumulative, making
her age-mates' wariness of her credible. Hayley's such an absorbing figure, in fact,
that she overbalances the story, and her minor final realization is neither sufficient
nor believable; Anna is interesting largely for her suffering, and the book uninten-
tionally bears out Hayley's charge that neither Anna nor Melanie have all that
much to offer as friends. Melodramatic plotting (Anna suffers a last-minute car-
diac crisis and recovery for no particular reason) and overemphasis on Anna's par-
ents' point ofview further attenuate the book's impact. Griffin's Amandine (BCCB
10/01) or Giles' Shattering Glass (5/02) are more successful explorations of de-
structively controlling acquaintances, but this is an inherently fascinating sub-
ject; readers will sympathize with Anna even as they're secretly drawn to Hayley.
DS
McMULAN, KATE 
Have a Hot Time, Hades!; illus. by David LaFleur. 
Volo/
Hyperion, 2002 
14 4p 
(Myth-o-mania)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0857-8 
$15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-1664-3 
$4.99 
R Gr. 4-6
In this first in a new series, Hades tells the real story of Zeus' acquisition of the post
of head Olympian and ruler of the gods. Zeus is a pathological liar (a "myth-o-
maniac"), Hades is his long-suffering big brother, Demeter is a wild-eyed gar-
dener, Hera is just plain bossy, Poseidon is an enthusiastic water baby, etc. Unlike
the Osborne (reviewed below), which hews close to the traditional grain,
McMullan's slick tongue-in-cheek retelling sounds more like a slapstick television
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
167
comedy than a classical Greek myth. In conversational prose fueled by casual
dialogue and (appropriately) fourth-grade humor, the gods, goddesses, Titans, and
other immortals, monstrous and otherwise, squabble like a bunch of supremely
dysfunctional TV siblings. The writing is sometimes overly glib and it returns a
bit too often to the same jokes (and McMullan is silent about the various incestu-
ous relationships among the gods), but the schoolyard bickering is fascinatingly
appropriate to the endless petty rivalries of the gods. The "Everybody Loves Ha-
des" approach makes this both more fun and more successful in conveying my-
thology than many more decorous traditional retellings. Illustrations are largely
confined to the opening map and the detachable ID cards; a family tree and com-
bined glossary/character guide are appended. JMD
MEYER, L. A. 
Bloody Jack: Being an Account of the Curious Adventures ofMary
"Jacky"Faber, Ship's Boy. 
Harcourt, 2002 
278p
ISBN 0-15-216731-5 
$17.00 
R* Gr. 7-10
It's starvation, the brothels, or street crime and hanging for Mary Faber once the
young gamin learns that her gang's boss and protector, Charlie, has been mur-
dered. Tricked out in Charlie's clothes, hair shorn, and bold attitude in place,
"Jacky" Faber makes her way to the docks, where she fast-talks her way onto His
Majesty's Ship Dolphin, bound to fight pirates, at least until they can fight Napo-
leon. During her two years on the briny she rises from ship's boy to midshipman,
slays a pirate, secures the ship's prize money, and falls hopelessly in love with ship-
mate Jaimy, a slightly more genteel lad who's been put to sea by his down-at-the-
heels father. Although many fictional heroines have sailed in disguise before Jacky
Faber, her coarse, cheeky street voice and naive but observant take on shipboard
life set her apart. She's no prissy miss at heart but a tough urchin who appreciates
the free meals (even horsemeat and weevilly biscuit), can curse with the best of
'em, and is sufficiently inured to the harsh realities of London's dark side to take
bloodshed and death in stride. There's no challenge she can't meet with brash
resourcefulness-from consulting a madam concerning the facts of life while on
shore leave to conniving ways to sneak off with Jaimy under plain sight of the
crew. When her identity comes to light and she's inevitably put ashore (consigned
to a ladies school in Boston until she reaches majority), it's clear there must be a
sequel in the offing. If Meyer dares to leave such a vividly drawn heroine pried
away from her lover, headed down the ship's ladder bravely with "head high, flags
flyin'," and not deliver another installment, readers will have every right to mu-
tiny. EB
MNTERS, FRANCES 
PrincessFishtaik illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Viking, 2002 32p
ISBN 0-670-03529-7 
$15.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
Princess Fishtail loves living beneath the sea with her "kind old Mer-King" daddy,
at least until she falls at first sight for "Burt, the handsome surfer": "Highness saw
him balancing/ On his board above./ 'Can it be?' she whispered./ 'Yes, I think I am
in love.'" When Burt wipes out, the Mer-Princess saves him and, with the help of
a sea troll, trades her tail for legs. Life on land is dandy until Highness starts
missing her daddy, but the troll won't give her back her tail without extracting a
price: her tail in return for her voice. Highness is no fool and decides to learn how
to swim instead, and, with the help of Burt and two diving suits, she is able to have
the best of both worlds. Despite the sometimes singsong, sometimes forced rhyme,
168 
* THE BULLETIN
Minters' take on "The Little Mermaid" is jazzily upbeat. The Mer-Princess is no
self-sacrificing, lovesick silly but an inventive, determined heroine in love with a
worthy dude. Karas takes a lighthearted view of the proceedings in his free-float-
ing, soupy compositions; the watercolor illustrations have a cartoony, innocent
cheer that complements Minters' anti-Andersen-angst retelling. Ocean elements
(shells, starfish, etc.) are scattered like confetti throughout the sunny 'scapes, and
the beachy palette suits the context of the tale. The setting has inherent humor-
the blonde and smiling valley mer-girl and her earringed surfer boy meet in a
cerulean blue Pacific and proceed to the palm-tree spotted Hollywood hills-en-
hanced by the chattering commentary of various sea and land dwellers on the
progress of the romance. Those youngsters who snort at Disney and Andersen
may find this version to be just their cup of chowder. JMD
Moss, MARISSA 
Galen: My Life in Imperial Rome; written and illus. by Marissa
Moss. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt, 2002 
52p 
(Ancient World Journals)
ISBN 0-15-216535-5 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In this new addition to the burgeoning genre of historical faux-journals, a young
Greek slave describes his life at the palace of Augustus, where he, his brother, and
his artist father moved after Augustus bought them all from a provincial knight.
There Galen broadens his worldview as he learns the wonders of Rome, makes
friends, and hopes eventually to free himself and become a Roman citizen. En
route, however, he must evade the anger of bullying young Postumus Agrippa,
Augustus' grandson, and alert Augustus to a plot against his life. There are defi-
nitely some glitches in the book, both in usage (four years past 2 B.C. isn't actually
"the second century A.D.") and in history (the text wrongly states that Caligula
killed his own mother), but there's also a lot of accurate detail; Moss is particularly
good at conveying the Greek/Roman cultural divide and the way Roman slavery
functioned. Though there's some meandering in the text (and the framework of
Galen's grandson's discovery of this narrative is unnecessary), Galen's drive to please
Augustus and to become a man in Roman style are sufficient to drive the story,
and there's nothing like a good old murder plot (especially a fact-based one) for
narrative impact. The hand-lettered font is a little harder going than type, but the
plethora of interpolated thumbnail sketches and sidebar notes makes the square
cream pages inviting and more accessible. An author's note provides information
on sources; some additional historical background, a glossary, and some useful
period maps are included. DS
MYERS, ANNA 
Tulsa Burning. Walker, 2002 
152p
ISBN 0-8027-8829-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Nobe Chase didn't have much before his father died, but after Pa's fatal heart
attack, Nobe and his mother have nothing--no farm, no furniture, no home.
Sheriff Leonard's offer to take on Nobe's mother as housekeeper and companion
to his ailing wife thinly masks his personal designs on the widow, and he makes no
effort to conceal his disdain for her tagalong son. Nobe figures he can rise above
these depressing circumstances, though, with the help of his longtime friends, black
schoolteacher Mrs. Mitchell and her son Isaac, and with the diversion of a part-
time job at the local diner. His plans are promptly upended by a race riot in
nearby Tulsa that involves him in rescuing Isaac from an angry mob and again, in
the superheated aftermath of the turmoil, in preventing a lynching. Myers' aggres-
DECEMBER 2002 
* 169
sive confrontation of a shameful chapter in American race relations will remind
some readers of Mildred Taylor's work, but Myers paints her characters with a
much broader brush. The lecherous sheriff, who orchestrates the attempted lynch-
ing, is evil personified, and his gratuitous shooting of Nobe's dog seems played for
shock value. Saintly Mrs. Mitchell is only a step short of canonization, and the
entire fictional town of Wekiwa, Oklahoma is unbelievably supportive of their
black fellow citizens (racists have to be imported for the lynching) in light of the
fury of neighboring Tulsa. A concluding note indicates that Myers' novel is based
on true events in Tulsa, May 1921, but the melodramatic travails of her fictional
characters cast that reality into the shadows. EB
OSBORN, ELINOR 
Project UltraSwan; written and illus. with photographs by Elinor
Osborn. 
Houghton, 2002 
64p 
(Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 0-618-14528-1 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
By 1900, trumpeter swans were extinct east of the Mississippi River, and close to it
in the west; though the species has come back from the brink in numbers, their
reintroduction to the east is complicated by the fact that the birds haven't been
raised with the necessary knowledge of routes and destinations to migrate success-
fully, as they must, when the seasons change. As this book explains, the Trum-
peter Swan Migration Project attempts to teach young swans Eastern migratory
routes by imprinting them on an ultralight aircraft and then, when the time is
right, leading them in flight from their New York home to their historic wintering
range in the Chesapeake Bay. This account documents the progress of this fasci-
nating project from wild idea to educational but not entirely successful test to full-
flight project, covering obstacles both serious (swans can become injured if they fly
too close to the aircraft, and the aircraft can run into trouble on its own) and
amusing (one swan skewed the ultralight's steering by grabbing onto a wing's bungee
cord and letting the aircraft tow it). Though the organization is unfortunately
somewhat confusing, there's plenty of absorbing information about the swans,
their history, and the project, and Osborn writes with a lively informality. Trum-
peter swans are also immensely photogenic, so they bring a majesty and beauty to
even the most ordinary of photographs, and many of these images rise well above
the ordinary: a swan with wings outstretched is superimposed on the picture of a
seven-year-old girl to demonstrate relative sizes, gray-feathered youngsters leap from
their pens to chase their beloved aircraft; in a view reminiscent of the classic image
from E. T, an ultralight trailed by powerful white birds soars across a huge after-
noon moon. Another imaginative title in an imaginative science series, this will
appeal to nontechnical animal lovers as well as budding biologists, and it will pro-
vide a broad range of curricular opportunities. Extensive end matter includes a
map, a guide to the difference between America's three kinds of swans, more infor-
mation on current swan habitats and resources as well as contact information for
the project, and an index. DS
OSBORNE, MARY POPE 
Tales from the Odyssey: The Land of the Dead; ISBN 0-
7868-0771-7; Tales from the Odyssey: The One-Eyed Giant; ISBN 0-7868-0770-
9. Each book: illus. by Troy Howell. 
Hyperion, 2002 
105p 
$9.99
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Osborne sets sail on a new endeavor with this new series, which tells the story of
Greek hero Odysseus' long voyage home after the Trojan War. The One-Eyed
170 
* THE BULLETIN
Giant follows the mythological mariner and his crew from the fall of Troy to the
disastrous meeting with the cannibalistic Cyclops. The Land ofthe Dead picks up
shortly after, tracking the voyagers from the island of the Cannibal Giants to Circe's
lair to the Land of the Dead, where Odysseus seeks guidance for the next leg of his
journey (to be continued in the third book). Osborne does a yeoman-like job of
condensing Homer for the early grades; the writing is choppy and somewhat bland,
but it is serviceable and cear. The books are designed for use: small trim size,
large font, and short chapters make this an easy sell for youngsters seeking to fulfill
that mythology assignment with as little pain as possible. There is a dearth of
mythological material accessible to this age group, and these will certainly see wide
usage. There are no internal illustrations, but a frontispiece and endpaper art (a
map of Odysseus' travels and a guide to the gods) add information as well as some
visual appeal. Each title opens with a short prologue introducing readers to the
world of Greek mythology; end matter offers more information on Homer, the
Odyssey, and the dramatis personae. JMD
PRINGLE, LAURENCE 
Crows!: Strange and Wonderful; illus. by Bob
Marstall. 
Boyds Mills, 2002 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-899-7 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 2-4
Many kids are familiar with crows, but they may not know much more about
them than what meets the eye; fortunately, nonfiction guru Pringle is on hand to
change all that. The book provides basic information about various members of
the crow family but focuses mainly on the well-known common crow and its be-
havior, covering vocalizations, nesting habits, defense against predators, and food
acquisition. The text is somewhat dry, but it's a useful introduction to the species.
It would be nice if the visuals added a bit more information and if they'd been a bit
more consistent in the matter of eye color (a caption states that crows are born
with blue eyes and they turn black with age, but the illustrations don't adhere to
that), but they have both biological fidelity and a spirited flair. Though there's an
author's note, there are no sources or additional readings provided. DS
REISS, MIKE Santa Claustrophobia; illus. by David Catrow. 
Price Stern Sloan,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8431-7756-X 
$10.99 
R Gr. 3-5
Doc Holiday, resident shrink in the wintry land that all holiday characters call
home in their off-peak seasons, recounts one of his most challenging cases in this
offbeat tale of St. Nick. Plagued by nightmares of tight chimneys and roasting
flesh ("I smell something cooking./ I'm not sure just what./ Is it ham? Is it lamb?/
No, I think it's my butt!"), Santa Claus consults the good doctor, who has the
diagnosis-"All those cookies and milk/ have gone straight to your rear,/ and it's
cear you've developed/ your own special fear"-and the cure: Santa needs a vaca-
tion, and the other holiday creatures must take over his task this year. They're not
much help, each undermining the preparations in his or its own peculiar man-
ner--overlong poetic gift enclosures from Cupid, toys painted in uniform pastels
by the Easter Bunny, you get the picture. Their good intentions do buy Santa
enough time for a restful cruise, though, and he's back in the pink in time for his
annual rounds. There's far more verbiage than plot to this drawn-out tale, and
Catrow's superheated palette of purple, turquoise, and chartreuse threatens to melt
the polar ice cap in a most un-Christmasy way. Nonetheless, the wisecracks flow
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
171
thick and fast, and the cast's demented antics, with lots of sight gags tucked into
the scenes, are quite in keeping with the overall frenetic tone. There's a stretch of
literary lean years for readers who fall between true-believer Christmas picture
books and venerable O. Henry tales; this is gift-tagged just for them. EB
ROBBINS, KEN 
Apples; written and illus. with photographs by Ken
Robbins. 
Atheneum, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83024-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-5
This brief overview of apple cultivation, harvesting, and, most importantly, enjoy-
ment is distinguished more for its arresting illustrations than its workmanlike text.
Robbins traces the fruit's journey from tree grafting and pruning, through bee
pollination and flowering, onward to growth and ripening and harvesting, and
finally to a few of the luscious end products-pressed cider, apple pie, applesauce,
and plain ol' apple eating. The advantage of grafting over seed cultivation is less
than adequately explained ("You can grow apple trees from apple seeds, but you
never know what kind of apples will grow"), but the audience may breeze over
such technicalities in pursuit of Robbins' enticing hand-colored photographs that
capture a graceful cross-section of a fertilized flower, ruddy ripe fruit enhanced by
crimson tinting, and before and after shots of a picture-perfect pie. End materials
include two pages of rambling notes on apple adages and lore, and a pristine iden-
tification chart of nine popular varieties. Well, make that eight varieties, since the
Gala (clearly Robbins' favorite) has been gnawed to the core. Micucci's Life and
Times of the Apple (BCCB 4/92) provides more thorough information, but it's
Robbins' title that will set mouths watering. EB
ROOT, BARRY 
Gumbrella;written and illus. by Barry Root. 
Putnam, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23347-4 
$15.99 
R 5-8 yrs
"Good little elephant" Gumbrella "believed in helping her fellow animals if she
could, especially the cute ones." When her brother, Trumbull, brings home an
injured mouse named Eric, Gumbrella zealously embarks upon a career in critter
convalescent care, sending Trumbull out to collect more animal patients. She
eagerly nurtures her invalid charges, patching them up and medicating them, hap-
pily planning menus and sewing hospital gowns, all the while ignoring the ani-
mals' increasing protests (they brazenly seek to return home once they regain their
health), until finally, in the midst of an evening dance program, a fed-up Eric leads
his fellow patients in a sudden mass exodus. Poor Gumbrella falls apart, refusing
all food (except dessert) and contracting a "rare type of laryngitis that could only
be cured if the animals come back." When Trumbull reports this sad news to the
now-liberated animals, they decide to return and nurse Gumbrella, firmly but
benevolently giving her a taste of her own medicine. There's an appealing wacki-
ness to this droll story of "kindness to animals" carried too far, and Gumbrella's
bossy ways will be familiar to many children who've experienced similar domina-
tion at the hands of overenthusiastic playmates. Root's humorous paint and pastel
illustrations are as solid and cheery as the elephant herself yet pleasantly soft around
the edges. Despite Gumbrella's despotic ways, it's easy to like the stocky, rounded
critter, who beams broadly as she barges through the pages in her flowered yellow
dress and white lab coat; her dot-eyed little patients (victims), all lined up in their
matching blue hospital beds, are darned cute but never cloying. Combine this
with Newman's Mole and the Baby Bird (BCCB 11/02), for a program on the
172 
* THE BULLETIN
perils of keeping wild animals in captivity, or just share it aloud for fun-audi-
ences will undoubtedly find it just what the doctor ordered. JMH
ROOT, PHYLLIS 
Oliver Finds His Way; illus. by Christopher Denise. 
Candlewick,
2002 
34p
ISBN 0-7636-1383-5 
$14.99 
R* 2-4 yrs
In the crisp days of autumn, young bear cub Oliver romps outside while his par-
ents do chores in the yard. His attention drawn to a particular leaf, he follows it as
it flutters away ("down the hill, around a clumpy bush, under a twisty tree, and all
the way to the edge of the woods"). Panic sets in when he realizes that he's no
longer in view of any familiar landmarks and that he's completely lost; fortunately,
he hasn't lost his voice, and his distressed ursine roars elicit answering calls from
his parents, to whom he quickly finds his way back. Root adds a touch of homey
flavor (Mama and Papa greet their returned young'un with "tumble-down hugs")
to the streamlined text, and any kid who's ever clung to the wrong pant leg in a
crowd will immediately recognize Oliver's alarm. Denise's smoky pastels are cozy
but not cutesy, and the autumnal forest glade, with its filtered light and towering
trees, is attractive as well as understandably overwhelming. In his overalls and
plaid jacket and with his short-legged galumphing gait, Oliver is a recognizable
youngster regardless of species, telegraphing his distress with drooping ears and
anxious eyes and his relief with bearish bounce. This will speak eloquently to the
anxieties of roaming little ones, as well as perhaps making them wish they could
trade their parents in for bears. DS
RYAN, PAM Muloz 
When Marian Sang: The True Recital ofMarian Anderson,
the Voice ofa Century; illus. by Brian Selznick. 
Scholastic, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-439-26967-9 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Ryan and Selznick treat the life of African-American contralto Marian Anderson
with appropriate drama: the opening spread shows an opulent stage; the turn of a
page opens the curtains to an urban scene, with the spotlight on a young child in a
second-story window. That child is the young Marian, the featured player in this
author-styled "libretto," in which Ryan traces Anderson's life from her early sing-
ing in church to her study with "the fierce yet famous" Giuseppe Boghetti and to
her performing for appreciative audiences all over Europe. In the United States
she was still considered a second-class citizen because of the color of her skin, and
in 1939, Washington, D.C.'s Constitution Hall refused to allow her to sing in
concert there, setting the stage for an historic event: Anderson's concert for 75,000
people on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. While some spreads are a bit pedes-
trian in choice of subject and the portraits of Anderson are somewhat repetitive,
Selznick's acrylics, in shades of burnt umber and sienna, have a theatrical sweep
that suits Ryan's equally emphatic text. Extensive notes, a timeline, and a selected
discography are appended. JMD
SEULING, BARBARA 
From Head to Toe: The Amazing Human Body and How It
Works; illus. by Edward Miller. 
Holiday House, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1699-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
This overview of the human interior explores all sorts of crucial bits, from bones
(with a special section on joints), muscles, and nerves to systems (cardiovascular,
respiratory, digestive, and excretory) to "outer wrappings" (skin, hair, and nails),
DECEMBER 2002 
* 173
plus a bonus discussion of bodily repair. Each topic gets approximately one spread,
filled with basic, informally styled text, trivial tidbits, the odd diagram, and, usu-
ally, a try-this-at-home experiment. The text is sometimes confusingly brief and it
tends towards overgeneralization, and the complete evasion of the reproductive
system (and any bits of it that do duty in other systems) lessens the book's useful-
ness. There's nonetheless a great deal of good basic information here and there's a
breezy directness about other giggle-inducing aspects of physiology ("gas... comes
out as burps or as farts"). The suggested experiments, both informal ("Keep your
arms and legs straight, without bending them at the elbows and knees, and try to
tie your shoelaces") and formal (ranging from the old make-a-lung-out-of-a-bottle
to a cool fake robotic hand) are lighthearted but also thought-provoking. The
exuberantly overcrowded format is energetic, and though the diagrams sometimes
sacrifice accuracy for style and impact, there's often a surprising amount of detail
in points described (lots of technical names for bones and muscles, which should
please young medicos). Between the appeal of clinical detail and literally insider
knowledge, this should reach a wide audience. DS
SHAIANT, PHYLLIS 
When Pirates Came to Brooklyn. 
Dutton, 2002 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-525-46920-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
In 1960s Brooklyn, the Jewish Lee Bloom meets the Catholic Polly Burke, and the
girls embark on a friendship that includes fantasy battles against Captain Hook
and his pirates, and real batdes against their bigoted mothers. Narrator Lee struggles
to makes sense of her mother's closed mind about Christians as well as about the
African-American super of their building, even as Lee herself struggles with the
overt prejudice of Polly's mother and her own prejudice against an economically
disadvantaged classmate. The characterizations are inconsistent: while Lee is fairly
complex and three-dimensional, the supporting players tend to be more sketchily
drawn, and their lack of definition makes them more plot devices than contribut-
ing characters. The imaginary play of the two girls is not always smoothly inte-
grated into the plot, and the line between fantasy and reality is sometimes confusingly
indistinct. Lee's moral dilemmas still resonate, however, and her desire to do the
right thing is one with which many readers will identify. JMD
SHANGE, NTOZAKE 
MuhammadAli: The Man Who Could Float Like a Butterfly
and Sting Like a Bee; illus. by Edel Rodriguez. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion,
2002 
34p
ISBN 0-7868-0554-4 
$15.99 
R 7-10 yrs
Shange, celebrated author of For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When
the Rainbow Is Enuf turns her powerful way with words to this picture-book biog-
raphy of The Greatest, Muhammad Ali. Unlike Haskins' more traditional ap-
proach (Champion: The Story ofMuhammadAli, BCCB 6/02), Shange's biography
is not so much concerned with the chronology of events as it is with the presenta-
tion of character. Her somewhat adulatory presentation emphasizes the personal
traits and strengths of Ali, the attributes that enabled him to be successful in his
career, and his good works after his boxing career was over. Layout is dramatic,
with the text changing size from one line to the next, some words emphasized by
holding, others set off by bars of stars. The portraiture in Rodriguez' raw mixed-
media (pastel, gouache, spray paint, colored paper, woodblock) illustrations some-
174 
* THE BULLETIN
times falls into caricature, and the impact of the compositions is inconsistent.
Successful high-energy spreads, however, are boldly composed, almost too big for
the pages, featuring a larger-than-life Ali battling his way through hot oranges and
reds contrasting with black outlines and shadows. From the author's opening note
about her feelings for Ali to the closing emphatic words ("FORGET THE REST/'CAUSE
HERE I AM/ THE GREATEST, THE BEST/ THE HEAVYWEIGHT CHAMPION OF THE WORLD/
ALI!"), this picture-book bio is a one-two punch. A timeline and a short list of
biographies of Muhammad Ali are appended. JMD
SHYER, MARLENE FANTA 
The Rainbow Kite. 
Cavendish, 2002 
205p
ISBN 0-7614-5122-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Matthew is a dedicated snoop, so he knows that there's some-
thing troubling his fourteen-year-old brother, Bennett, who wants to quit the swim
team, quit the stamp club, quit his old friendships. Bennett's absorption in a new
project, the building of a huge kite with a neighbor, gives his parents some reassur-
ance; it's clear to Matthew, however, that something is still troubling his brother,
and he's floored when he finally discovers Bennett's secret: he's gay. Shyer's look
at the family repercussions of this news is perceptive and squarely honest, with a
confused Matthew upset ("I found your dirty homo magazines, Bennett," he says
to his brother before bursting into tears) yet loyal (there's a brotherly campaign of
silence that protects their parents both from the news and from the information
about Bennett's harassment at school). The mixed parental reactions ring true, as
does their effect on an increasingly desperate Bennett, who's eventually driven to a
suicide attempt. Only the across-the-board happy ending (including a school cheer-
ing Bennett at his graduation) departs from the authenticity achieved by the narra-
tive, but readers will be so glad for both Bennett and Matthew that they'll be
grateful for the relief. Less subtle but more direct and accessible than Freymann-
Weyr's similarly themed My Heartbeat (BCCB 5/02), this is a tough and effective
look at a family--especially its two boys-under strain. DS
SIERRA, JUDY, ad. 
Silly 6r Sillier: Read-Aloud Tales from Around the World illus.
by Valeri Gorbachev. 
Knopf, 2002 
86p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90609-6 
$21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80609-1 
$19.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
Sillies and tricksters, fools and villains all get their just deserts in tales from the
countries of Iran, Japan, Italy, England, Borneo, Nigeria, and Mexico, among
others, in this collection of twenty-one humorous tales. From Ireland comes "The
Wonderful Pancake," a folktale that starts out like "The Little Red Hen" and turns
into the "Gingerbread Boy"; a tale from Ghana answers the question "Why Do
Monkeys Live in Trees?"; and the Filipino "Don't Wake King Alimango" will
remind the folktale-savvy of "Why Mosquitoes Buzz in People's Ears." The over-
sized collection is illustrated by cartoony watercolor-and-ink illustrations that lack
cultural specificity except for the occasional traditional piece of costuming (som-
brero, burka, etc.), but they are serviceable if not inspired (although the depiction
ofJuan Bobo, described as a boy in his story's text, as a mustachioed middle-aged
man is puzzling). Sierra's smooth storytelling makes this a collection worth add-
ing to even the most crowded folktale shelves; most of the tales have an inherent
momentum that makes them especially useful for reading aloud and storytelling.
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
175
A bibliography of sources is included but not correlated with the individual sto-
ries, for which no specific notes are given. JMD
SINGER, MARILYN 
The Company of Crows: A Book of Poems; illus. by Linda
Saport. 
Clarion, 2002 
48p
ISBN 0-618-08340-5 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Ifyou've provided the facts about crows with Pringle's tite (reviewed above), here's
a complementary dose of poetic fancy. Nearly two dozen poems treat the familiar
birds from a variety of perspectives, such as those of the people below ("The Girl,"
"The Movie Critic," "The Farmer"), other critters ("The Dog," "The Titmouse"),
and various crows themselves ("The Suitor," "The Father"). Singer's language is
as lithe and lively as her subjects, her poems cleverly crafted with gleeful sound-
play, deft rhythms, neat internal and end-rhymes, and forms varied to suit the
speaker: "The Mother" tenderly tells her hatchlings, "But only you/ my newly
eggless/ little beggars/ ever get to hear me/ croon"; "The Birdwatcher" contem-
plates crow knowledge: "Does it ponder/ who are we?/ Or does a crow/ already
know?" Saport's thickly pigmented, expressionistic pastels are a bounty of strong,
contrasting colors and shapes; the art is stronger in its portraits of other animals
than of the crows themselves, but the visual leitmotif of their dark figures punctu-
ates each spread and draws the book together. This is an elegant and evocative
collection that's eminently suitable, should the weather and the local avian popu-
lation oblige, for an outside reading. DS
STOJIC, MANYA 
Snow; written and illus. by Manya Stojic. 
Knopf, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92348-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82348-4 
$15.95 
R* 2-4 yrs
In this simple tale of seasonal change, the animals anticipate the onset of winter.
Owl says, "The snow is coming.... I know snow"; the geese predict the freezing
of the lake; the moose smells snow on the breeze; the bear looks forward to his
sleep, and so on. Then the snow comes, turning everything into a winter wonder-
land that each animal approaches in its own way, while Owl then anticipates the
coming of spring. The text is pared down but moody and effective. The progres-
sion of animal responses provides both a nice continuity and a sweetly lulling
effect that may entice young listeners to follow the bear's example, and the evoca-
tion of snowfall is simple but lyrical. Stojic's oversized figures are soft and fuzzy
but not cutesy, and the feathery brushstrokes add subtle accents to the strong
colors as well as pleasingly varied textures. This gently conveys the coming of
winter in a way that even novices to shifting seasons will find alluring. DS
STUVE-BODEEN, STEPHANIE 
Elizabeti's School illus. by Christy Hale. 
Lee & Low,
2002 
32p
ISBN 1-58430-043-4 
$16.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
The first few minutes of Elizabeti's first day at school provide a little realistic ten-
sion ("All the noise made Elizabeti feel shy. She looked back the way they had
come and wished that she had stayed home"), but a friend soon draws her into the
crowd and teaches her to play "machaura," a Tanzanian game much like jacks.
Still, in spite of the fact that Elizabeti has a good time-learning, dancing, and
helping in the school garden-she misses her home folks and routine so much that
176 
* THE BULLETIN
at first she decides not to return. However, after she gets a chance to show off her
new dance, her new skills (she's able to count the kittens born in her absence), and
her new game (which Mama, to Elizabeti's surprise, "was already very good at"),
she decides to give it another try. A skillful mix of the familiar, the unfamiliar, and
the downright idyllic, this first-day story is told with uncommon clarity and just
the right amount of detail. The expressive, smiling faces of classmates, teachers,
and family add exuberance; the textures and shadows provided by collage and
watercolor add depth and clarity to the muted figures in the skillfully composed
illustrations. Youngsters in Elizabeti's age group will be more than willing to share
her concerns about the home-to-school transition, while those already familiar
with Elizabeti's adventures at home (Mama Elizabeti, BCCB 9/00, etc.) will enjoy
seeing her take this big step. There's a pronunciation guide at the beginning of the
book for the Swahili words. FK
SWAIN, RTH FREEMAN 
Hairdo!: What We Do and Did to Our Hair; illus. by Cat
Bowman Smith. 
Holiday House, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1522-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Swain takes readers on an uninhibited tour of time and place in this rapid-fire
(literally in the case of the scorched King Francis I) look at hair through the ages.
Swain discusses hair-raising details that readers will find appealingly appalling,
from scented wax melting down around ancient Egyptian ears to towering head-
dresses hardened with lard that became homes for bugs and other small critters.
Chinese queues, Iroquois decorated hair ridges, and even the legend about Abe
Lincoln's beard get a quick brush-over in Swain's pithy text. Smith's gouache
illustrations take a slapdash but effective cartoony approach to hirsute history,
with eloquently expressive faces smirking under a variety of coifs. Concluding
pages note that hair is something we can and do change often, to express ourselves,
to tick off our folks, to say who we are. An addenda of "Hairy Information" about
the longest beard, the longest hair, and the way hair grows is included, as is a brief
bibliography. JMD
THOMAS, 
SHELLEY MOORE 
Get Well, Good Knight; illus. by Jennifer
Plecas. 
Dutton, 2002 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-525-46914-1 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. K-2
Hurrah! The Good Knight rides ("Clippety-clop. Clippety-clop") to the rescue
again, but this time it's the little dragons' sniffles that have him galloping through
the forest on a mission of mercy. The local wizard concocts some potent curatives
("It was dark. It was thick. It smelled awful"), but it's the Good Knight's good
mother who knows best, dishing out the chicken soup and restoring health to one
and all. Well, almost all. "'Achoo!' said the Good Knight," who could now use
some tending himself. The bouncy rhythm and supportively predictable triads of
plot threads that distinguished Good Night, Good Knight (BCCB 2/00) are part
and parcel of the chivalrous gent's second adventure, and kids who cut their liter-
ary teeth) on the first title will know just when to chime in with "Oh good. You
have come" and "Away!" on the second. Plecas' little watercolor dragons, plenty
green at their heartiest, are positively bilious here, and the Good Knight's custom-
ary expression of good-natured forbearance is now one of genuine anxiety.
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
177
Methinks-at least mehopes-the Good Knight will become a fixture on the early
reader shelves. EB
VANDE VELDE, VWIAN 
HeirApparent. Harcourt, 2002 
[25 6p]
ISBN 0-15-204560-0 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Fourteen-year-old Giannine Bellisario is hooked up to "Heir Apparent," a virtual
reality role-playing game at Rasmussem Enterprises, when members of CPOC
(Citizens to Protect Our Children) damage the equipment and trap her inside a
computer-generated fantasy kingdom. She has limited time to solve the game and
exit the program before the damage causes the equipment to malfunction and her
to suffer, in the words of Nigel Rasmussem, "fatal overload." After a few false
starts (Giannine makes some wrong choices, she's killed by rivals to the throne,
and she winds up looped back to the beginning of the program), she begins to play
the game in earnest, racing the clock to win the crown and save her own life.
Vande Velde starts with a hot premise and follows up with a fast-paced, cohesive
plot that delivers both action and humor. The novel operates on two levels simul-
taneously, and the author delivers on both fronts; Giannine's real-life danger makes
the suspense of her virtual life credible. The book (which is slightly reminiscent of
Jones' The Dark Lord ofDerkholm, BCCB 11/98) good-naturedly spoofs fantasy
adventure novels and role-playing games while taking the main character's danger
(and the author's own genre) seriously. Characterizations are by necessity some-
what iconographic, but they're fizzy rather than flat, and the virtual world is fully
realized. Vande Velde blends science fiction and fantasy into a frothy concoction;
the reader's thirst for adventure will be thoroughly quenched. JMD
WARNER, SALLY 
This Isn't about the Money. 
Viking, 2002 
209p
ISBN 0-670-03574-2 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Janey wakes up in the hospital on her twelfth birthday to a different existence:
she's injured and disfigured by a car accident that also killed her parents, and she
and her little sister, YoYo, must move in with their great-aunt and grandfather in
California. To add to Janey's bitterness, Aunt Baby is apparently more interested
in a lawsuit against the drunk driver who caused the accident than in Janey's suf-
fering, and five-year-old YoYo is gleefully soaking up all the compensatory atten-
tion she can grab while completely forgetting her parents. This is a dramatic story
indeed, and Warner gives full weight to Janey's complicated emotions, ranging
from anger to embarrassment to resentment; the initial dominance of all those
feelings over grief is an authentic touch. The character dynamics are believable as
well: Janey's continued insistence that YoYo recall details of their former life is
both touching and frustrating, and Aunt Baby's stress in the face of this shocking
change to her life is believably portrayed (after one too many reminders from Janey
of what Mommy would want, she snaps, "Well, Mommy doesn't have a vote any-
more, does she?"). Unfortunately, the story is fairly programmatic, with Janey
processing her grief stages with clinical precision, and the writing lacks the smooth
understatement of the author's How to Be a Real Person (In Just One Day) (BCCB
3/01), sometimes lurching awkwardly and tipping into soap-opera-esque melo-
dramatics ("and finally-finally!-Janey Bishop began to cry"). This is therefore
a less effective tearjerker than Warner's more subtle Sort ofForever (BCCB 5/98),
178 
* THE BULLETIN
but the story of a girl's survival in the face of tragedy will still be sufficiently com-
pelling for many readers. DS
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
Visiting Day; illus. by James E. Ransome. 
Scholastic,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-590-40005-3 
$15.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
A little girl narrates the story of her once-a-month trips to visit her father, who, in
her grandmother's words, is "doing a little time." The book traces the prepara-
tions for that all-important visit (such as the cooking up of travel food and the
doing up of the girl's hair), then follows girl and grandmother on their bus trip and
their final arrival at the prison, where the happy reunion takes place. Woodson's
text is intimate and authentic, infused with her protagonist's yearning and joy,
sensitive to the ceremony and the rollercoaster of emotions surrounding such a
visit. There are also glimpses of the community of visitors (on the bus, "we're all
passing around fried chicken, cornbread, and thick slices of sweet potato pie until
maybe we think we're going to pop") and those who wish they could visit (Grandma
takes presents from Mrs. Tate, who can't afford the trip, for her only son). Mostly,
however, this is focused on the experience and viewpoint of a young girl who
desperately misses her beloved daddy; to this end the book wisely avoids discus-
sions of why and how this situation came about, instead delving into a child's
dealing with the present and hoping for the future. Ransome's strong planes of
color (which will help make the illustrations successful in a group) anchor and
balance the compositions, and strong brushstrokes in oil expressively mold his
subjects. The portraiture is literal but individual and thoughtful, with Grandma's
face a study in dignity and loving hope and the narrator obviously at her sparkling
best during the visit and drooping thereafter. A lot of kids have a Visiting Day in
their lives, and a lot more are distant from parents when they'd rather not be;
they'll all recognize and empathize with the narrator's longing. DS
YEZERSKI, THOMAS F. 
A Full Hand; written and illus. by Thomas F.
Yezerski. 
Farrar, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-374-42502-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When his mule driver abruptly quits, a Pennsylvania canal-boat captain enlists his
young son, Asa, to guide the team along the towpath to collect a load of coal
bound for Eastern ports. The journey takes them through locks, over aqueducts,
up an inclined-plane flume, and along farmland and towns tricked out in autumn's
golden best. Asa manages the team creditably until a storm breaks and the beasts
bolt, crashing their boat into the canal wall and hurling Asa's father into the treach-
erous current. Asa's quick response saves his father, but the damaged boat and
runaway team will just have to wait until tomorrow: "Asa helped his father up.
The Captain leaned on his son as they limped down the towpath." Although
there's plenty of drama in the stormy wreck, it's a long time in arriving, and the
bulk of the tale seems geared toward an audience appreciative of the engineering
feats required to navigate "uphill." Even they may be in for some mild disappoint-
ment, though, as Yezerski's lovely line-and-watercolor scenes focus on panoramic
views of idyllic country landscapes and hydrological apparati, but never zoom in
close enough to adequately capture the pertinent details. Patient viewers (with,
perhaps, the aid of equally patient adults) may nonetheless tease out the mechani-
cal mysteries and find this the very bit of old-time arcana to float their boat. EB
DECEMBER 2002 
* 179
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
CULLINAN, BERNICE E., ed. 
The Continuum Encyclopedia of Children's Literature;
ed. by Bernice E. Cullinan and Diane G. Person. 
Giniger/Continuum,
2001 
863p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8264-1271-8 
$150.00
This massive undertaking boasts a long list of advisers, nearly 100 topical articles,
130 photographs of authors and illustrators, and more than 1,200 biographical
entries. The ambition of this work is also considerable: according to the editors,
it "is intended as a comprehensive single-volume reference source describing the
development and current trends in children's literature throughout the world,"
the qualification being that the emphasis is on books from "English speaking coun-
tries and/or works appearing in English translation." A more precise description
of this volume would be "biographical encyclopedia": the content primarily con-
sists of 1,200 biographical entries on authors and illustrators of children's books,
with ninety-seven topical articles to balance them somewhat. The biographical
entries are sometimes sketchy or outdated, and lists of further works sometimes
fall a little short; bibliographies for entries offer further resources for determined
scholars, however, and there's a lot of detail here. Topical articles on subjects such
as African American Literature, Book Clubs for Children, British Literature, Criti-
cal Theorists, Librarians and Publishing, New Zealand Literature, Professors of
Children's Literature, Visual Literacy, Young Adult Literature, etc. are, by neces-
sity, overviews, but they are a fair source of information for beginning researchers.
The black-and-white photographs are a little washed out, although the insertion of
color plates for some of the represented illustrators is a pleasant surprise. This is
shallower than Anita Silvey's Children's Books and Their Creators, but its broader
reach makes it handy for researchers seeking general information and for kids looking
for biographical information on favorites. JMD
180 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Anderson; Johnston
Accidents-fiction: Warner
Actors and acting-fiction: Cheaney
Actors and acting-stories: Lester, H.
ADVENTURE: Ardagh;
Blackwood; Cheaney; Galloway;
Meyer
Africa-stories: Stuve-Bodeen
African Americans: Dillon; Ryan;
Shange
African Americans-fiction:
Hamilton; Myers
African Americans-stories: hooks
Alcoholism-fiction: Lurie
Animals: Conniff
Animals-stories: Arro; Stojic
ANTHOLOGIES: Fraustino; Sierra
Apples: Robbins
Art and artists: Berenstain
Asia: Brown
Aunts-fiction: Ardagh; Warner
Baseball-fiction: Johnston
Bears-stories: Root, P.
BEDTIME STORIES: Arro;
Bartram; hooks
BIOGRAPHIES: Arnold; Bahr;
Berenstain; Brown; Dillon;
Freedman; Ryan; Shange
Birds: Osborn; Pringle
Birds-poetry: Singer
Birds-stories: Dunrea; Kaczman
Boats and boating: Yezerski
Body art: Gay
Boys-stories: hooks
Brothers-fiction: Cutler; Shyer
Bullying-fiction: Klass; Mayfield
Camps and camping-stories: Arro
Canals-stories: Yezerski
Carnivals-fiction: Lubar
Cheerleaders-fiction: Grant
Chickens-fiction: Ada
Christmas-fiction: Cazet; Frank;
Reiss
Circuses-fiction: Almond
Clowns-fiction: Lubar
Computers-fiction: Hooper; Vande
Velde
Cows-fiction: Cazet
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Hooper
Dancers and dancing: Dillon
Depression, the: Blumenthal;
Griffin
Disabilities-fiction: Byalick
Ecology: Osborn
Economics: Blumenthal
Elephants-fiction: Root, B.
Ethics and values: Anderson; Beale;
Fraustino; Freedman; Gray;
Lester, J.
Explorers: Brown
Fairs-fiction: Hautzig
Fairy tales-fiction: DeFelice; Gray
Families-fiction: Cutler; Doyle;
Giff; Hamilton; Hautzig; Lurie
FANTASY: Almond; de Lint;
Frank; Jarvis; Lyon; Vande Velde
Fathers-fiction: Lyon
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Doherty
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Woodson
Fathers and sons-fiction: Frank
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
dePaola; Lester, J.; Minters; Sierra
DECEMBER 2002 
* 
181
Food and eating: Arnold; Robbins
Foster children-fiction: Giff
Friends and friendship-fiction:
Byalick; Mayfield; Shalant
Games-fiction: Vande Velde
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Shyer
Growing up-fiction: de Lint
Hair: Swain
Health and hygiene: Conniff;
Seuling
Heroism-fiction: Cabot
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Blackwood; Chan; Cheaney;
Erdrich; Galloway; Griffin;
Hautzig; Johnston; Lavender;
Lurie; Meyer; Moss; Myers;
Shalant; Yezerski
History, classical: Galloway; Moss;
Osborne
History, European: Arnold;
Cheaney; Lawton
History, U.S.: Blackwood;
Blumenthal; Lavender; Ryan
Hockey-stories: Bouchard
Holidays: Reiss
Holocaust, the: Lawton
Homosexuality-fiction: Shyer
HUMOR: Ardagh; Cabot; Cazet;
DeFelice; Grant; Graves; Gray;
Kaczman; Lester, H.; Lester, J.;
McMullan; Reiss; Thomas
Illness-fiction: Byalick; Lubar
Illness-stories: Root, B.
Internet-fiction: Hooper
Ireland-fiction: Doyle
Jews: Lawton
Journals-fiction: Grant
Kitchens-stories: Erdrich
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Thomas
Literature, children's: Berenstain
Literature, world: Osborne
Magic-fiction: Lyon
Mathematics-fiction: Griffin
Mermaids-stories: Minters
Moon-stories: Bartram
Mothers-stories: Erdrich
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Beale; Doherty; Johnson
Music and musicians: Ryan
MYTHS, CLASSICAL: McMullan;
Osborne
Native Americans-stories: Erdrich
Nature study: Osborn; Pringle
Nurses and nursing-fiction: Root, B.
Ogres-fiction: Jarvis
Orphans-fiction: Giff; Warner
Orphans-stories: dePaola
Penguins-stories: Lester, H.
Perfection-fiction: Graves
Pets-fiction: Ada
Philosophy: Freedman
Physical appearance: Gay; Swain
Physical education: Bouchard;
Chambers; Klass; Shange
POETRY: Calmenson; George;
Singer
Prejudice-fiction: Shalant; Shyer
Presidents-fiction: Cabot
Princesses-fiction: DeFelice; Gray
Prisons and prisoners-stories:
Woodson
Racism: Ryan
Racism-fiction: Myers
Rats: Conniff
Reading aloud: Cazet; Cutler;
George; Gray; Hautzig;
McMullan; Reiss; Singer
Reading, beginning: Ada; Thomas
Reading, easy: Cazet; Cutler;
Hautzig; Osborne
Reading, reluctant: Chambers;
Conniff; Gay; Hooper; Lawton;
McMullan; Shange
Relationships-fiction: Anderson;
Johnson
Religious communities-fiction: Beale
Religious education: Fraustino;
Hodges; Lester, J.
Revolutionary War-fiction:
Blackwood; Lavender
RHYMING STORIES: Dillon;
Minters; Reiss
Romance-fiction: Cabot; Chan;
Galloway; Lavender; Lubar; Lurie
Runaways-fiction: Giff
Saints-stories: Hodges
School-fiction: Grant; Griffin; Klass;
Mayfield
School-poetry: George
School-stories: Stuve-Bodeen
182 
* THE BULLETIN
Science: Bahr; Seuling
Scouts and scouting-fiction: Graves
Seasons-stories: Stojic
Sex-fiction: Johnson
Ships and sailing-fiction: Meyer
Shoes-stories: Dunrea
SHORT STORIES: de Lint;
Fraustino
Sisters-fiction: Warner
Slavery-fiction: Moss
Snow: Bahr
Snow-stories: Stojic
Soccer-fiction: Klass
Space-stories: Bartram
SPORTS STORIES: Bouchard;
Klass
Stepfamilies-fiction: Frank
Stepfathers-fiction: Johnston
Stepmothers-stories: dePaola
Storytelling: Sierra
Storytelling-fiction: Hamilton
Storytime: Dillon; hooks; Lester,
H.; Minters; Root, B.; Root, P.;
Sierra; Stojic; Woodson
Suicide-fiction: Mayfield; Shyer
SUSPENSE: Vande Velde
Tigers-fiction: Almond
TODDLER BOOKS: Calmenson;
Dunrea
Transportation: Yezerski
Uncles-fiction: Hautzig
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Doherty; Meyer; Osborne
Voyages and travel-stories: Yezerski
War-fiction: Jarvis
Winter-stories: Stojic
Women's studies: Brown; Ryan
World cultures: Gay; Swain
World War II: Lawton
World War II-fiction: Chan
Worms-stories: Kaczman
Writers and writing: Berenstain
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION OF THE
BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN 0008-9036), as
required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is published eleven
times a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is $66.00 (institutional,
domestic), $73.00 (institutional, foreign), $50.00 (individual, domestic), $57.00 (individual,
foreign), $15.00 (student).
The owner and publisher is the Graduate School of Library and Information Science at
the University of Illinois, a nonprofit organization. Office of publication is located at 501
E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6211. The managing editor is Deborah Stevenson,
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820.
There are no stockholders, bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status
for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preceding twelve
months: 3935; number for single issue nearest filing date: 4032. Average number of copies
of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during preceding twelve months: 3181;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 3385. Average number of copies distributed
for free per issue during preceding 12 months: 25; number for single issue nearest to filing
date: 24. Average number of total copies distributed during preceding 12 months: 3206;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 3409. Average number of copies of each issue
not distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after printing) during preceding 12 months:
729; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 623.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Nancy K. Barrett
Business Manager
University of Illinois Press
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
September 25, 2002
icf
ci^FCrrl·n2;tl^A^^T
VL "Few write for YAs with
the skill Jordan has at her
disposal ... she combines the
power of myth with dramatic
characters that resonate with
modern 
fl readers."
i| I/- 
Starred review /
[ut• 
Kliatt\
r Ages 12 up.
$15.95 Tr
(0-06-028902-3)
$15.89 Lb
(0-06-028903-1)
-
----------- 
-- 
-- 
-~---c--- 
-
I 
I
~L 
1I
ADELE 
GR)FI~I~:
~L~AH,
IfPO~YIDEO
ii~ ~3)9
·iir
a
Univers
1325 SE
Champ:
U.S.A.
ADDKESS
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street 
P
Champaign, IL 61820 
P
U.S.A. 
,
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
Books make great gifts, but picking the
perfect books for your favorite youngsters
can be daunting. Now just in time for the
holidays, the expert staff of the review
journal The Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books have created a guide to help you navigate
wilderness full of shiny new children's books.
Offering brief annotations for over 150 of the bt
giving (and receiving), the Guide Book to Gift Book
for only $3.50 as a downloadable PDF file that y
out and use for every holiday, birthday, or other
occasion on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in full
reviews from the last two years and are verified
in print. Entries are divided into age groups and i
title, publisher, and the current list price.
To purchase, go to
www.lis.uiuc.edulgiftbook!
0008-9036(200212)56:4; 1-I
4
I 
L:;~"-ii~~~-;-~ 
~·~iii 
di~i·i: 
·r·-·:i
1325 South Oak Street 
PERIODICALS
Champaign, IL 61820 
POSTAGE
U.S.A. 
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
E DICALS
WGE
IPAIGN, IL
C
~ALS
GNiIL
Books 
make 
~rcat 
p·ift. 
hilt 
nirkincr 
thP
re
r
journal The Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books have created a guide to help you navigate the bookstore
wilderness full of shiny new children's books.
Offering brief annotations for over 150 of the best books for
giving (and receiving), the Guide Book to Gift Books is available
for only $3.50 as a downloadable PDF file that you can print
out and use for every holiday, birthday, or other gift-giving
occasion on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in full Bulletin
reviews from the last two years and are verified as currently
in print. Entries are divided into age groups and include author,
title, publisher, and the current list price.
To purchase, go to
www.lis.uiuc.edulgiftbooks/
