U
ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois Press
-
--- --- 
-- ---
~i~i~swr
;;i;i
·'
- : ;~·rz
B14~,, 
"~3~x ·
A New York Times Best Illustrated Book of 1998
LITTLE
C ARECR 0 xv
0 ).
iCi-IIIOu 
iSii 
1 
0 .u .,CII C.·/I1W ilULl 
ic. 
C.VCIIy 
v
.. I
1
Y 
',.I 
LI IC. WVVIIU
until the time he decides to test his knowledge himself.
A Horn Book Fanfare 1999 Book
"Told with compressed poetry ... this is a clear, strong hymn to
toddler independence and parental security, buoyed by big and sunny
illustrations in brightly autumnal colors." -The Horn Book
"Brown's masterful use of repetition and rhythm creates a fine
read-aloud story. The warm watercolor illustrations evoke a Midwest
summer day in this sunny coming-of-age story." -School Library Journal
"The happy oranges, reds, and yellows bring sunshine to every page
[as this] deceptively simple story conveys a powerful and reassuring
message." -Kirkus Reviews
Ages 3-7 * $15.95 TR 0-06-026284-2 * $15.89 LB 0-06-026290-7
Joanna Cotler Books
1 HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street * New York, NY 10022 
http://www.harperchildrens.com
1 h e
it
/1
i
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
March 1999
Vol. 52 No. 7
A LOOK INSIDE
229 THE BIG PICTURE
Cougar by Helen V. Griffith
230 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
239 * Boundfor America: The Forced Migration of Africans to the New World
by James Haskins and Kathleen Benson; illus. by Floyd Cooper
242 * The Wedding by Angela Johnson; illus. by David Soman
245 * The Bone Keeper by Megan McDonald; illus. by G. Brian Karas
249 * The Journal ofJoshua Loper: A Black Cowboy by Walter Dean Myers
251 * What Have You Lost? comp. by Naomi Shihab Nye; illus. with
photographs by Michael Nye
261 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
264 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (MD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice Harrington, Reviewer (JNH)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1999 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Nina Crews from Cougar ©1999. Used by permission of Greenwillow Books.
MARCH 1999 
* 229
THE BIG PICTURE
Cougar
by Helen V. Griffith
Nickel has recently moved in with his young aunt Starla and her husband Joe, and
he has traveled with them back to Joe's parents' farm, which Joe had left in anger
five years before. Mr. and Mrs. Clendaniel are in favor of rapprochement now,
and Nickel thinks that the quiet welcome in their house may mean a belonging he
hasn't known. He's particularly intrigued by Cougar, the black horse who had
been young Joe's faithful companion but who recently died in a barn fire; since
then Pop Clendaniel and, more recently, Nickel have been catching glimpses of
Cougar galloping around the farm large as life. Then the barn where Cougar died
offers up another treasure of Joe's youth-a bicycle, thought destroyed in the fire,
that Joe, Nickel, and Pop restore and that proves to have a spirit all its own, carry-
ing Nickel to a triumphant routing of the jealous bullies who have plagued him.
Boy meets ghost horse, ghost horse becomes bicycle, boy rides bicycle is
not exactly a well-worn plot, but there's not a gimmicky or labored moment in this
book. Griffith quickly gets readers rooting for Nickel, yet this is a book more
interested in emotion and action than explanatory details-it seems that Nickel's
trying to put a bad foster-care or homeless period behind him, but the book never
states exactly why he's moved in with Starla and Joe, and nor does it need to. It's
clear that he's a good kid who "just wanted to play sports, have friends who made
him laugh, learn a little bit in school, have a family that looked out for him." It's
clear that his school enemy, Robbo, cannot forgive Nickel for outshining him, day
after day, on the soccer field and cannot find Nickel's straightforward joy in play
("Didn't he understand that there would always be a better player coming along?"
wonders Nickel. "There was always somebody better than everybody. It didn't
make the game any less fun"). It's clear, in short, that Nickel is a boy well and truly
deserving of an inspirited bicycle.
The book's quiet craftsmanship carefully lays the foundation for that
imaginative premise. Pop Clendaniel's corroborative viewing of Cougar demon-
strates the reality of the horse's appearances, and Pop himself links the ghost to
Nickel, saying "Cougar'syour horse now." Nickel's horse guides him when Robbo
and his toadies pursue Nickel onto home ground, and his hiding place from his
prospective assailants proves to be Cougar's grave; it is from that grave that Joe's
old bicycle protrudes. Polished up, that bicycle is no longer its original blue but
Cougar's black, and it throws Robbo when he attempts to steal it-just as in real
life Cougar thwarted Robbo's attempts to ride him. Carefully drawn too are the
familial implications behind the phenomena: Joe left Cougar, his bike, and his
place in the family behind; all three wait for Nickel, aided by Joe and Pop-Pop
230 
* 
THE BULLETIN
who sees that Cougar has been waiting for Joe but has shifted his loyalty to Nickel,
Pop who feels he drove Joe from home and plans to do better with Nickel. From
the ashes of the barn fire rises a new and stronger family just when Nickel needs it.
Stylistically, Griffith keeps a tight and effective rein on this unusual fan-
tasy. This premise could have turned cartoonish, hyperdramatic, or grandiose, but
the book's firm grounding in reality makes the events a mysterious but believable
enhancement of daily life. Like Pop Clendaniel, the writing is laconic but warm
and knowing, economical (the book runs just over one hundred pages in length)
but never patronizing. Its accessible language and succinct chapters are expertly
employed to make this rich and rewarding for a host of readers (and listeners-this
would make a stellar readaloud) ranging from middle-graders in search of some-
thing more atmospheric than goofy to teen reluctant readers unwilling to sacrifice
sophistication for approachability. There are some wonderful books where the
brilliance of the author is evident in every polished line; Griffith more modestly
effaces herself entirely, employing her expertise not to draw attention to herself
but to draw inexpert readers into her compelling and imaginative drama. (Imprint
information appears on p. 239.)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AIKEN, JOAN 
Dangerous Games. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[288p]
ISBN 0-385-32661-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Dido Twite has left London behind in order to search for Lord Herodsfoot, a
nobleman seeking new and unusual games to amuse his highness, King Jamie.
Her sea chase leads her to the mysterious island of Aratu, where she becomes em-
broiled in a plan to overthrow the reigning island monarch, a plan that includes
murder, arson, and a variety of treasonous activities. While the details surround-
ing Dido's quest (such as the return of the long-lost daughter of the king, deadly
sting monkeys, and haunted ruins) are exciting in and of themselves, the resultant
plot does not have the drama and cohesion of earlier works. Aiken's evocation of
this tropical paradise is not as clearly rendered as her fantastical English streetlife,
and the secondary characters are somewhat flat; the death of Yorka, a promising
secondary character, seems particularly gratuitous. Still, Aiken's sense of adven-
ture, while not as breathless as in earlier Dido titles, will keep fans turning the
pages. JMD
MARCH 1999 
* 231
ALMOND, DAVID 
Skellig. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-385-32653-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Narrator Michael recounts how he discovered a most remarkable creature-a nearly
desiccated, decidedly grouchy, arthritic man with wings folded under his ragged
jacket and a taste for Chinese food and bluebottles-in the tumbledown garage of
the family's new home. Michael's parents are preoccupied with the precarious
health of his new baby sister, so the boy shares his discovery with a precocious
neighbor, Mina, who handily has been home-schooled in entomology. Together
the pair convince the creature, who eventually admits to the name Skellig, to move
into the empty house that is Mina's inheritance; with food, concern, affection, and
large doses of aspirin, Skellig regains use of his wings, miraculously cures Michael's
sister, and presumably flies off into the great beyond. Almond very nearly pulls off
the fantasy with a masterful evocation of shadow and decay, spinning a series of
encounters that leave the reader psychically approaching the being in the ruins
with nearly the trepidation of the children. Once Skellig's benign nature is re-
vealed, though, the thrill is gone, the child protagonists overindulge in William
Blake's poetry, and there's simply not enough drama in the bug/owl/man plot to
sustain the suspense. EB
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
The Ugly Duckling; ad. and illus. by Jerry
Pinkney. 
Morrow, 1999 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15933-8 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15932-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-9 yrs
Pinkney's adaptation of Andersen's arguably best-loved tale is illustrated with joy-
fully bucolic watercolors that give this old story new life. Double-page spreads are
crowded with the lushness of the natural world as the illustrations follow the sadly
hapless duckling on his quest for self-realization. Pinkney's talent for evocative
natural landscapes is at the forefront here, and the tale provides the opportunity to
illustrate each season in lovingly rendered detail. The watercolors ably capture the
downy gray and spindly little fowl as he travels from heartbreak to heartbreak; the
closing spread of the ugly duckling turned graceful swan set against the waterside
greenery and lilac bushes is satisfyingly triumphant. This is an elegantly accessible
retelling, with illustrations full of lively, emotive animals and the kind of vigorous
movement that young children are bound to find appealing. Make room on your
shelves for this classic rendering of a classic tale. JMD
BARTLETT, SUSAN 
SealIsland School; illus. by Tricia Tusa. 
Viking, 1999 
[80p]
ISBN 0-670-88349-2 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Seal Island School is a one-room schoolhouse with less than a dozen students.
One of them, Pru, is a third grader with a mission: to keep their new teacher, Miss
Sparling, from leaving the island and the school after the end of the term (previous
teachers have returned to the mainland because "it's too lonely here"). In eight
short chapters Pru finds a message in a bottle, earns money to buy Miss Sparling a
dog to keep her company, has a ninth birthday, and gets her wish when Miss
Sparling decides to stay and the island gains some new residents, assuring that the
.232 
* THE BULLETIN
school will stay open. The prose is a bit choppy and the plot is episodic, but Pru is
an energetic character and the island life is affectionately and appealingly drawn.
This isn't your standard year-at-school story, and the unusual setting may make it
attractive to new readers looking for an easy entree to chapter books. Illustrations
not seen. JMD
BECHTOLD, LISZE 
Buster: The Very Shy Dog; written and illus. by Lisze
Bechtold. 
Houghton, 1999 
[48p]
ISBN 0-395-85008-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
"When Buster first came to Roger's house, he was small and shy," and even when
he grows out of puppyhood he struggles with timidity, admiring the boldness and
achievements of Roger's other dog, Phoebe. In three chapter-length adventures,
Buster finds himself a friend at Roger's birthday party despite his misgivings about
the crowd; he attempts to discover his particular talent and ends up finding Roger's
lost hamster; and he joins forces with Phoebe to catch the bandit disturbing Roger's
garbage. The individual stories tend to wander around somewhat, declining away
rather than palpably concluding. The language is simple and accessible, though,
and with his shyness and self-esteem deficit, Buster is an appealing hero. The
illustrations put the real bite in this doggy saga, however: Buster is a Thurberesque
cartoon, a protean mass of black fur with quizzical rabbitty ears and wide eyes, and
he inhabits a cheerful and inviting world of playful line-and-wash. While this
doesn't have quite the zip of Helen Griffith's Alex and the Cat (BCCB 12/97),
another pet-centered early reader, the endearing Buster will set neophyte readers'
tails wagging. DS
BERNIER-GRAND, CARMEN T. 
In the Shade of the Nispero Tree. 
Orchard,
1999 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33154-7 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30154-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Narrator Teresa Giroux recalls her pivotal year in fourth grade, when her mother's
ambitions for her only child's rise in Puerto Rican society result in Teresa's transfer
to an upscale girls' academy, the family's scramble to muster funds to support the
life style change, and Teresa's bitter awakening to the force of racial and class preju-
dices. At first Teresa resists the move, preferring to remain at the local school with
her favorite teacher and her best friend, Ana; when that teacher moves away and
Teresa's own burgeoning pride gets her into a scrape, she agrees to the transfer.
Although she is politely received and even makes a new friend, it soon becomes
dear that the daughter of an auto mechanic will never be able to run with the pack.
Moreover, Teresa realizes that her blonde hair places her in the upper crust, but her
deep skin tone keeps her at arms length from the other academy girls, who snub
her just as she has come to snub her black friend, Ana. Since it is the voice of an
older and wiser Teresa who tells the tale, readers who have left fourth grade behind
will empathize with her confessional memory of past snobbery, now happily laid to
rest. Details of school life and carnival preparations keep the action place specific,
while the theme of social climbing lends Teresa's story universal appeal. EB
MARCH 1999 
* 233
BRISSON, PAT 
Little Sister, Big Sister; illus. by Diana Cain Bluthenthal. 
Holt,
1999 
[56p] 
(Redfeather Chapter Books)
ISBN 0-8050-5887-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Edna and Hester are the little and big sisters of the title, and despite the occasional
setback they are generally a comradely pair in this quartet of episodes. In "Queen,"
Hester attempts to cozen Edna into doing Hester's bidding and cleaning; in "Mer-
maids," Edna comes to Hester's rescue at the local swimming pool; "The Choco-
late Bar" may belong to Edna, but Hester would dearly love a bite; a thunderstorm
initiates Edna into the family history of "Thunder Cookies." The book shifts
sisterly emphases in a way that may disconcert young readers seeking to identify
with one or the other, and the sibling amity is sometimes more rosy than realistic.
There's a solidity to the relationship that makes for engaging reading, however,
and chapter-book tyros will appreciate the cozy security of the accessible text and
sisters' world. Bluthenthal's big-eyed blondes, a humorous blend of prim lines
and lively attitude, add a welcome zip to the proceedings. Youngsters looking for
fictional alternatives to their less charming real-life siblings will enjoy curling up
with Edna and Hester. DS
BROKAW, NANCY STEELE 
Leaving Emma. 
Clarion, 1999 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-395-90699-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Everybody's doing it-leaving Emma, that is. Her orderly fifth-grade life is thrown
into tumult first by the news that her lifelong friend Tem is moving out of town,
then by the blow of her engineer father's departure from the country for five months,
and finally by her mother's joining her father for more than a month. Struggling
to reorder her life, Emma is surprised to find herself enjoying the artistic challenge
and camaraderie of set painting for the show in which Tem is a lead; she also is
surprised to find Great-Aunt Grace, staying with her in her parents' absence, a
source of friendship and insight. Emma's desolation at these successive abandon-
ments is effectively depicted, and the book implies that Emma's assessment of her
mother's decampment as "selfish" isn't altogether wrong. On the other hand, it's
also clear that, despite her love for sameness and order, Emma is gaining some
benefit from her enforced independence. While everything ties up together a little
too optimistically at the end, both the poignancy of Emma's bereft state and her
strengthening as a result are believable. Change is inevitable and inevitably scary-
kids will appreciate Emma's demonstration that it's also survivable. DS
BYRD, ROBERT, ad. 
Finn MacCoul and His Fearless Wife: A Giant ofa Tale from
Ireland; ad. and illus. by Robert Byrd. 
Dutton, 1999
ISBN 0-525-45971-5 
$16.99 
R 
5-9yrs
Finn MacCoul, one of the strongest giants in Ireland, fears for his life when Cucullin,
a fearsome and far stronger Scottish giant, threatens to flatten him like a pancake.
What's a giant to do? Fortunately, Oonagh MacCoul, Finn's wife, is not a hide-
behind-your-man, speak-when-spoken-to sort of wife. She has wit, a sharp tongue,
and her own fairy magic to call upon. Fooled by Oonagh's wiles, Cucullin believes
that a mere babe, Finn MacCoul in disguise, can best his strength. The trick
becomes the truth when the wee "babe" bites offCucullin's magic finger. Strong
234 
* THE BULLETIN
characterization, lively language, and engaging dialogue make this a good choice
for readalouds and dramatization. Byrd's version is more informative than the
earlier, abbreviated retelling by Tomie dePaola, and listeners will find Byrd's Oonagh
sassier and more compelling than her dePaola counterpart. Cartoonish line and
watercolor illustrations in a vigorous palette of gold and green enhance a successful
retelling and provide authentic details from Celtic culture and Ireland's natural
history. Extensive source notes and a glossary follow the text-check the latter
before reading aloud in order to negotiate the Gaelic names. JNH
CARLSON, MARGARET 
The Canning Season; illus. by Kimanne Smith. 
Carolrhoda,
1999 
[40p] 
(First Person Books)
Trade ed. ISBN 1-57505-260-1 
$19.93
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57505-283-0 
$7.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Peggie has long been fascinated by the rituals and kitchen camaraderie ofher mother,
aunt, and grandmother as they put up green beans at canning time: "I strained my
neck, careful not to be seen, and listened quietly in hopes of discovering the nature
of their laughter. I longed for the day when I would stand beside them and share
their secrets." In the summer of 1959, Peggie gets her wish, but only through a
painful break with her white girlfriend, Peggy Nolan, who announces she will no
longer be allowed to stay overnight because, as she nervously giggles, "You've got
brothers" and, "It's just that... you know... you're Negroes." Bitterly stung and
angry, Peggie hurls back that she won't sleep at the Nolans' either, because Peggy,
too, has brothers. When Peggie blurts out the story to her mother and relatives,
they quietly rally around her, offering her her first cup of coffee in the best gold-
rimmed cup. "No more words were spoken on the subject that day. But the
generations of eyes in that room revealed the pain and sorrow of understanding."
Carlson offers a powerful, understated, and affecting tale that, despite confusing
chronology and an occasional stylistic stiffness, would easily stand as a short story
for middle-schoolers and young adults. It is, however, encumbered here with
misleading appended discussion questions on racism and friendship, geared to an
audience probably too young to catch the enormity of the sexual implication.
Smith's boldly brushed paintings of Peggie's family capture the steel behind the
trio of proud faces, but the remainder of the title's illustration is largely superflu-
ous. Since the format suggests a younger audience while the content makes this a
title for older readers, it may take some guidance and salesmanship to place this
thought-provoking picture book into the right hands; it's worth it. EB
CARTER, ALDEN R. Dustin 's Big SchoolDay; illus. with photographs by Dan Young
and Carol S. Carter. 
Whitman, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-1741-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Second-grader Dustin has Down syndrome, but that isn't what this cheerful photo-
essay is really about. Dustin is thrilled because, on this particular day, his friends
Dave and Skippy are coming to visit school. From homeroom to music, from
speech therapist to occupational therapist, Dustin's day is a productive one, and
contrived situational set-ups are avoided. The clear, simple text communicates the
excitement and suspense of waiting as Dustin goes from class to class interacting
with his schoolmates and teachers. Dave and Skippy-a ventriloquist and his
MARCH 1999 
* 235
dummy-finally arrive, and the show begins, much to the waiting schoolchildren's
delight. The color photographs are friendly and natural, offering the look of can-
did photos without the stiff postures and expressions of posed compositions. If
you're looking for a photoessay that addresses mainstreaming with more ease than
coy self-awareness, this is the title for you. JMD
COLEMAN, 
EVELYN 
The Riches of Oseola McCarty; illus. by Daniel
Minter. 
Whitman, 1998 
48p
ISBN 0-8075-6961-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Evelyn Coleman illuminates the life of Oseola (Ola) McCarty, who began helping
her grandmother with a home-based laundry service as a child. Together, with an
aunt, they made between fifty cents to a dollar-fifty per bundle of clothes. What
makes McCarty's life remarkable is that, at the age of eighty-seven, she had saved
enough money to donate $150,000 to the University of Mississippi in Hattiesburg
for student scholarships. Coleman purposefully tells McCarty's story, including
the grueling details of the laundry business before washing machines and Ola's
savvy updating of her procedures as washing machines came into style. Coleman's
passion for her subject is clear, but her delivery is overshadowed by her purpose:
"[to] show that education is a wonderful opportunity that cannot be taken for
granted; that through savings, even small amounts of money can grow to large
sums; and that work, no matter how ordinary, can be a source of great pride and
satisfaction." Minter's black-and-white linocuts are sometimes strong and sweep-
ing but sometimes somewhat slick and cartoonish. A note outlines the author's
intent, and a guide suggests ideas for developing a personal savings plan. An acces-
sible bibliography for children is not included, but primary source material is listed.
Coleman showcases an unusual figure in American history for beginning chapter-
book readers and those looking for strong female role models, especially from the
African-American community. EAB
COWLEY, JOY 
Red-Eyed Tree Frog; illus. with photographs by Nic
Bishop. 
Scholastic, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-87175-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 1-3
When evening comes to the rainforest, the red-eyed tree frog wakes up hungry and
begins its search for sustenance. The frog eyes a succulent black ant, a fierce-
looking katydid, and an exotically colored caterpillar; it escapes a hunting boa, eats
a tasty moth, and "shuts its eyes... and goes to sleep ... as morning comes to the
rainforest." Cowley's spare but attractively declarative text is set in a sans serif font
against grass green panels which feature gloriously sharp color photographs of said
tree frog and other rainforest creatures it encounters in the search for food. Bishop,
whose Secrets ofAnimal Flight appeared on the 1997 Bulletin Blue Ribbon list, is
just as impressive here with his intimate close-up photographs of tropical flora and
fauna. The book's involving design displays an attention to detail that pays off
with a subtle visual feast (for example, as the evening dark deepens, so does the,
color green that serves as the background; as the morning lightens, so does the
green). The photographs practically drip with color, and the crystalline focus
results in precise, articulated images. A concluding double-page spread entitled
"Did You Know?" gives additional information about the life cycle of the red-eyed
tree frog. The combination of high photographic action and lively text makes this
a ribbeting adventure for beginning readers. JMD
236 
* THE BULLETIN
COWLEY, JOY 
The Rusty, Trusty Tractor; illus. by Olivier Dunrea. 
Boyds Mills,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 1-56397-565-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Micah's farmer grandfather considers his old tractor to be an old friend, and he
resists the blandishments of tractor salesman Mr. Hill and refuses to buy a new
machine. The salesman bets the farmer a box of jelly doughnuts that the tractor
won't make it through harvest. With a lot of coaxing and gentle handling, the old
tractor wins the old man and his grandson a box of jelly doughnuts-after which
they pull the salesman's car out of the mud with the trusty tractor. Cowley's
easygoing storytelling style makes the most of the simple story: "When Mr. Hill
saw Granpappy's tractor, he laughed fit to bust his britches. 'Woo-oo!' he cried,
slapping his knee. 'You call that a tractor?' Micah looked at Granpappy to see
what he was thinking, but Granpappy was not letting on." Dunrea illustrates this
satisfying little farm story with low-key gouache art that, despite the occasionally
awkward drafting of the characters, offers a comfortable rusticity. Cowley's old-
fashioned story has charm, and it will make a successful group readaloud and maybe
even a readalone for those beginning readers ready to tackle a little more text-
intensive literature. JMD
CRAFT, CHARLOTTE, ad. King Midas and the Golden Touch; illus. by K. Y.
Craft. Morrow, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13166-2 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13165-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
Based on the version in Nathaniel Hawthorne's Tanglewood Tales, Charlotte Craft's
retelling of this ancient Greek tale is succinct and sleekly abbreviated, making it an
easy choice for a group readaloud. K. Y. Craft's ornate illustrations move the
setting from ancient Greece to the Middle Ages, a change reflected in the medieval
tapestry-like designs with their glowing golden roses, decorative textiles, and illu-
minated manuscript-like capitals that begin each page. The retelling sometimes
seems a bit too abbreviated, punctuated as it is by the occasional abrupt transition,
and Craft does eliminate explanatory details that tie this tale to its culture of ori-
gin, such as the identity of the old man to whom Midas offers hospitality and from
whom he wins his wish for the golden touch. The overall tone is very traditional
and nearly reverent, unlike the more humorous take of Stewig's retelling (reviewed
below). This is an attractive package, however, and the highly ornamental illustra-
tions are sure to attract readers to the solid if slightly skeletal text. An illustrator's
note includes general source information as well as background on the artistic
interpretation. JMD
CURLEE, LYNN 
Rushmore; written and illus. by Lynn Curlee. 
Scholastic,
1999 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-590-22573-1 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Balancing elements of history, biography, politics, and engineering, Curlee re-
counts the efforts required to create Gutzon Borglum's Shrine of Democracy-
commonly referred to as Mt. Rushmore-in the Black Hills of South Dakota.
Readers follow the progress of the gigantic relief from the germ of an idea in the
MARCH 1999 
* 237
mind of a state historian; to the political bravado of a sponsoring state senator; to
the recruitment of brilliant, ambitious, hot-headed sculptor Borglum; through
the planning and labor that Borglum brought near to completion but finally left in
the hands of his son. Curlee's austere style of illustration, previously in service of
sky and snow (Ships of the Air, BCCB 10/96; Into the Ice, BCCB 6/98), is well-
suited to massive spans of granite rock face; human figures, which generally play
downstage to the elements in Curlee's paintings, dangle here from cobweb-thin
rigging to drive home both the audacious scope of the undertaking and the unde-
niable peril involved in its execution. A timeline, bibliography, and source note
on quotations round out this well-crafted narrative. EB
DEFELICE, CYNTHIA 
Nowhere to Call Home. 
Farrar, 1999 
[208p]
ISBN 0-374-35552-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Orphaned when her father commits suicide after losing his wealth during the De-
pression, twelve-year-old Frances despairs as the mansion is slated for sale, the
kindly servants are dismissed, and she is put on a train for Chicago to live with an
aunt whom she barely remembers. At the last minute she rebels, disguising herself
as a boy to become a hobo. The rest of the novel follows "Frankie's" fortunes with
a comrade, fifteen-year-old Stewpot, who takes care of her until he sickens and
dies of pneumonia as a result of the constant cold and hunger riding the rails. The
story is smoothly told, with a mixture of realistic misfortune and mostly credible
good luck. The fact that Frankie has just enough money left from her Philadel-
phia ticket refund (after buying emergency supplies for Stewpot) to get back to
Chicago from a Seattle Hooverville seems contrived. Yet the ending, when she
sees the hoboes' mark of a generous household scratched into her aunt's gate, is
adeptly forecast and aptly realized. Some of the characters are merely functional,
but the relationship between Frankie and Stewpot is well developed. As Frankie
picks up survival skills and learns how the other half lives, she also develops a sense
of herself that renders her final decision satisfying in the classic mode of a poor
little rich girl lost and found. BH
DE YOUNG, C. Coco 
A Letter to Mrs. Roosevelt. Delacorte, 1999 
[112p]
ISBN 0-385-32633-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Margo Bandini sees that the Depression is bringing changes to her Johnstown,
Pennsylvania neighborhood as cuts in the millworkers' hours lead to economic
squeezes all round and SHERIFF SALE signs on the doors of family homes. It's a
shock to her when she discovers that her own family is in trouble, unable to repay
the bank a four-figure loan for her brother's limb-saving surgery and in danger of
losing their house, until Margo uses a school letter-writing assignment as a way to
ask the First Lady for the help to which she feels they're entitled. In both good and
bad ways, this is old-fashioned historical fiction: the events are fairly predictable
and there's a heavy hand with the contrivance (Margo's teacher is also a reporter
and a good friend of Mrs. Roosevelt), but there's also a solid exploration of life
under the Depression, with hoboes wandering by, fathers leaving town in despera-
tion, and everyday life undercut by gnawing uncertainty about the future. A his-
torical note, which explains that the story is based on a real event (De Young's
grandfather wrote, in a somewhat bitterer tone, to Mrs. Roosevelt and saved his
home), is appended. DS
238 
* THE BULLETIN
DON'T READ THIS! AND OTHER TALES OF THE UNNATURAL; illus. by The Tjong
Khing. 
Front Street/Lemniscaat, 1999 
213p
ISBN 1-886910-22-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Eleven stories from eleven different countries treat odd, unusual, and ghostly oc-
currences. There are ghost stories (Susan Cooper writes of a tennis-playing ghost
that coaches a boy to beat his father in a match), fantastical tales (Germany's Klaus
Kordon provides a folklore-perfumed account of a wanderer who meets a house-
hold of shape-changing witches in "The Ravens"), and sci-fi-esque entries (Jordi
Sierra i Fabra, from Spain, tells of a boy cured of his fantasized alien infestation by
a psychologist-who then discovers it was no fantasy). While intriguing concepts
and effective style are both evident in the collection, they're unfortunately rarely
demonstrated by the same stories, so that many of the entries fall short of the
satisfying compact shiver that good supernatural short stories provide; it's also a
pity there isn't much information on the contributors (only country of origin is
listed, and in the case of at least one author it's incorrect). The mixture of doom
and redemption is engaging, however, and the wide representation of authors,
some rarely seen in the U.S., gives the enterprise some pleasing breadth. Khing's
ink-and-wash drawings, one per story, provide an additional view into the strange
worlds evoked. DS
FORD, MIELA My Day in the Garden; illus. by Anita Lobel. 
Greenwillow,
1999 
[24p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15542-1 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15541-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 3-6 yrs
The simple text describes a garden fantasia featuring "breakfast with the morning
glories.// Hide-and-seek with a toad.// Flower-counting with the butterflies" and
other pastoral frolics until finally "fireflies come to say good-night" and the day
ends. Lobel's artwork gives the concept a spin, however, working from the open-
ing line of "It's time// to start// the show": the artwork features an indoor world
bursting with floral and vegetable patterns where kids in costumes impersonate
flowers, birds, and buggy beasties while safe from the pouring rain outside. The
text reads rather more like a list than a shaped story, but its simplicity is engaging.
Lobel's indoor garden unfortunately too often goes beyond the rich variety of the
natural world to an effect that is overbusy and clashing with multiple patterns
(especially in some spreads where the facing pages mutually escalate the pattern-
ing). The joyful exuberance of the colors will cheer up any rainy day, however,
and the imaginative costumes are intricate and infinitely desirable, resulting in
kid-size birds and snails that young viewers will squirm to join. DS
GORDON, AMY 
WhenJFK Was My Father. Houghton, 1999 
[208p]
ISBN 0-395-91364-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
The marriage of Georgia's brittle parents seems to be disintegrating, and she's sent
away from their expatriate Brazilian home (where her father has taken up with a
beautiful young woman) back to the U.S. and to the only boarding school that
seems prepared to accept her. She is far from a success, keeping to herself, finding
companionship in a younger girl, and failing dismally at all of her subjects except
for English. The creative imagination that allows her to excel in writing also pro-
MARCH 1999 
* 239
vides her with a fantasy life, vastly preferable to reality, where she is the secret
daughter of the glamorous new president (with whom she has regular conversa-
tions) sniffing out the Beard School's participation in a gunrunning cartel; Kennedy's
assassination shatters this comforting dream and forces Georgia to find a place in
the world that really is. The seductiveness and usefulness of fantasy has rarely been
depicted so well, and Gordon deftly adds other layers: the ghostly-or also imag-
ined-presence of Miss Beard, the school's founder, who encourages and advises
Georgia; Tim, the boy who seemed to be Georgia's soulmate in Brazil, and who
has run away from his neighboring boarding school. The result is a smooth and
involving portrait of a girl sure only about her discomfort with her place in the
world but who nonetheless realizes that that world is where she must live. DS
GRIFFITH, HELEN V. 
Cougar. Greenwillow, 1999 
[112p]
ISBN 0-688-16337-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 4-7
See this month's Big Picture, p. 229, for review.
HAAS, JESSIE 
Unbroken. Greenwillow, 1999 
[192p]
ISBN 0-688-16260-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Harriet-Harry-and her mother are a tight-knit and happy family until Harry's
mother dies as a result of a buggy accident. Orphaned Harry then goes to live
with her prickly Aunt Sarah on the farm where Harriet's father spent his own
childhood. Acclimatization is difficult: Harry is at loggerheads with her stern
aunt, who still resents her baby brother's marriage to Harry's mother and takes her
resentment out on her niece, and who sees no reason for Harry to continue her
education. Harry's rebellious nature finds a match in a young colt, one of her few
legacies from her mother, that she hopes to train in order to drive to school; like
Aunt Sarah, however, she soon discovers that bending another creature to her will
is not an easy task. Haas displays the same ease with New England life of earlier
days that she demonstrated in Westminster West (BCCB 4/97). Without forcing
the period details, she captures a world just on the verge of change, with horse-
auto encounters a thing of terror, town dwellers a species apart from farm families,
and high-school education for girls optional at best. Yet the setting never over-
powers the human drama: the book doesn't cheapen the dynamics by making
Sarah into a villain, and the eventual aunt-niece rapprochement is realistically gradual
and limited. Fans of strong-minded orphans will find Harriet worth knowing.
DS
HASKINS, JAMES 
Boundfor America: The Forced Migration ofAfricans to the New
Word;- by James Haskins and Kathleen Benson; illus. by Floyd Cooper and with
photographs. Lothrop, 1999 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10259-X 
$17.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10258-1 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-8
Starting with the history of the concept of slavery and overviews of Europe and of
Africa when European enslavement of Africans began, this book compactly exam-
ines the concrete facts of the Middle Passage. Short chapters, some only a page or
two, cover aspects ranging from Africans' capture and journey to the coast from
240 
* THE BULLETIN
inland Africa, to the conditions aboard the slave ships (including feeding and "danc-
ing" the slaves), and to shipboard mutinies, including that on the Amistad. The
authors' combination of larger historical context and localized particulars (often
illustrated by period art or photographs of historical artifacts) is unusually effec-
tive, resulting in a memorable picture of the evolution of slavery into the "peculiar
institution"; the names (the Portuguese sailor who first kidnapped Africans, an
African ruler who sold his war captives but then discovered himself unable to keep
the slavers from seizing his own people, Sir John Hawkins who first created the
Triangle Trade), dates, and numbers add a factual weight to the emotional reality
without interfering with the text's readability. (The three-page appendix on "Mile-
stones in the History of Slavery" is a stellar example of a telling historical timeline.)
There are no footnotes and no sources indicated for much of the historical images,
so support that would bring a point home is sometimes lacking, and the text prompts
some questions without answering them. The combination of accessibility and
smooth synthesis of information, however, makes this a particularly useful coun-
terpart to Paula Fox's novel The Slave Dancer (BCCB 1/74) or even Tom Feelings'
more experiential The Middle Passage (12/95). Portraits by Floyd Cooper keep
things focused on the people, not the statistics; a bibliography and index are in-
cluded. DS
HOWE, JAMES 
Horace and Morris but Mostly Dolores; illus. by Amy
Walrod. Atheneum, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-31874-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
The titular mouse trio have dauntlessly pursued adventure side by side-walking
tightropes over milk-flooded cereal bowls, scaling overturned colanders in the
junkyard, saddling and riding a very toothy cat. But age takes its toll, and one day
Horace announces, "A boy mouse must do what a boy mouse must do" as he and
Morris abandon Dolores to join the Mega-Mice club-"No Girls Aloud Allowed."
Not to be outdone, Dolores signs on with the Cheese Puffs. It doesn't take long
before a steady diet of strictly "guy" and "girl" things to do wears thin, and the trio
is drawn back together, this time with fresh recruits, to form a new band of adven-
ture-seekers, "The Frisky Whisker Club-Everyone Allowed." This heavily ham-
mered message is unlikely to turn the tide of ever-shifting primary grade friendships
and alliances. Walrod leavens the tale considerably, though, with an acrylic and
collage menagerie whose clubhouse exploits are rife with humorous detail (the girls
sedately make cheese sculptures and discuss "How to Get a Fella Using Mozza-
rella" while the boys gleefully wage slingshot and stick sword warfare on each other).
While this title may not hold the key to cross-gender harmony, listeners may at
least pause to reflect before trashing a longstanding friendship. EB
HOWE, NORMA 
TheAdventures ofBlueAvenger: A Novel. Holt, 1999 
[240p]
ISBN 0-8050-6062-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr.7-10
David Schumacher and Omaha Nebraska Brown could easily have been rendered
as bitter and confused as other YA protagonists by the death and desertion of their
respective fathers; instead, the pair turn philosophical and engage in a mutual and
lively inquiry into whether anyone is in control of his or her own life. Kindred
spirits romantically attracted to each other from their first encounter, David wor-
MARCH 1999 
* 241
ships the ground Omaha treads, and she finds nothing the least disconcerting in
David's abrupt decision to change his name to Blue Avenger and follow (or pur-
sue?) his destiny as a small-time superhero. While they search for some Ultimate
Answer, Howe engages readers in their quest by depicting seven seemingly unre-
lated events in places as disparate as Austin, Texas and the "hidden fault" line
under Los Angeles and tracing how these events converge in the friends' lives. And
converge they do, empowering Blue Avenger to save the school principal from
killer bees, bring his friend Mike's acne under control, resolve a school newspaper
controversy over an article on condoms, invent a "weepless" lemon meringue pie,
and establish an equitable gun control policy in Oakland, California. As to the
overriding conundrum of self-determinism vs. destiny-Howe cleverly leaves her
answer in suspension as Blue turns in for the night on the final page. This is at
once ingeniously plotted and howlingly funny, and even readers who'd never be
caught dead in the Dewey 100s may find themselves looking over their shoulder to
see if Fate is dogging their steps. EB
HURWITZ, JOHANNA 
Llama in the Library; illus. by Mark Graham. 
Morrow,
1999 
[12 8p]
ISBN 0-688-16138-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Adam (ofA Llama in the Family, BCCB 9/94) is having an interesting year in fifth
grade: he really likes new girl Alana, he discovers his parents are expecting a new
baby, and he's hoping to involve the family llamas in the celebration of the library's
new renovation. Unfortunately, these plot points (plus a few more, such as a
search for ghosts in a local inn and Adam's brief belief that Alana has been killed in
an accident, that get dropped with disconcerting suddenness) are somewhat rushed
and discrete, never knitting together, and the llamas don't get much chance to
show their star power. Adam's burgeoning friendship with Alana is depicted with
uncutesy sweetness, however, and he and his friend Justin are an engaging literary
pair with which to hang around. Readers in search of undemanding fare that's a
little out of the ordinary may find the llama-enhanced adventures just the thing.
Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. DS
JENDRESEN, ERIK, ad. 
Hanuman: Based on Valmiki's Ramayana; ad. by Erik
Jendresen and Joshua M. Greene; illus. by Li Ming. 
Tricycle, 1998 
40p
ISBN 1-883672-78-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Outlining major incidents that are extensively detailed in the Indian epic Ramayana,
this picture-book version capitalizes on high drama in both text and art. The
narrator is Hanuman himself, the monkey commander who helps Rama defeat
Ravana's evil warriors and recover beautiful Sita from the island fortress of Lanka.
The last battle becomes the primary focus, and Li Ming's paintings hurl intense
images across brooding pages of space with the force of science-fiction cinema
(Planet of the Apes, for example), a sensationalistic style that offers an appealing
alternative to reverently distant depictions of legend. In fact, Indra's flying el-
ephant, Ravana's airship, Sita's dropping her jewelry earthward to mark their pas-
sage after she has been kidnapped, the mighty human King of the Bears (Jambavan),
the eerie evil demons (Rakshasas), and Rama's traditional green visage all project
ancient myth past modern times to a futuristic space. Although the result is some-
times comic-book lurid, it's also effective for group showing. The compositions
242 
* THE BULLETIN
are striking and the text is well-shaped, with a scene-setting introduction: "Listen
now while I tell you a tale of a time long past when the world was menaced by a
ten-headed beast whom the gods could not control. He was called Ravana: He
who makes the universe scream." An author's note describes the scriptural source,
sacred to many Hindus. BH
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Maniac Monkeys on Magnolia Street; illus. by John
Ward. 
Knopf, 1998 
[112p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99053-4 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89053-X 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-4
Charlie (short for Charlene) and her family (Mom, Pop, and big brother Sid)
move across town to Magnolia Street. Though fearful she will never find friends
in this new neighborhood, she and neighbor Billy are soon inseparable (unless
they're grounded). Charlie narrates their adventures, beginning with Sid's warn-
ing to stay away from the Maniac Monkeys who live in the willow grove down the
street. When Charlie and Billy awake under the willows covered with fur and
cherry-scented glue stick, it appears the Maniac Monkeys have indeed attacked
(the culprit turns out to be big brother Sid, who sheared his teddy bear and wielded
the glue). Although honestly childlike, Charlie's narration is choppy and ungrace-
ful. Johnson's writing is disconcertingly episodic, with Charlie and Billy's propen-
sity for getting in and out of trouble the thread that leads readers through the
book. Young readers may nonetheless relish the trouble Charlie and Billy cause in
the name of grand adventures and hidden treasures. Reviewed from an unillus-
trated galley. EAB
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
The Wedding; illus. by David Soman. 
Orchard, 1999. 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33139-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30139-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
As her older sister's wedding approaches, narrator Daisy muses on the parade of
events leading up to the big day, as well as the implications the marriage will have
on her own life. Naturally, preparations include happy times-shopping for dresses
and sampling food for the reception. Beneath the excitement, though, is the bit-
tersweet realization that her sister and Jamal's union will leave a certain emptiness
at home: "I will dance with Jamal there,/ who will take Sister from me/ and us/
and here-/ but leave them together." Soman's mixed-media spreads capture the
apprehension of the young sibling who lingers on the fringe of the festivities: an
exhausted Daisy lies limp in her mother's arms as they search for a banquet hall,
and her melancholy eyes gaze into the distance as her new brother-in-law whirls
her around the dance floor. Although the cut-paper scenes are somewhat flat, the
collection of guests is authentically diverse in costume and emotion, and the out-
lining and detailing of faces renders the African-American principles warm and
expressive. The comical frothiness of Herman's Flower Girl (BCCB 9/96), the
visual opulence of Soto's Snapshots from the Wedding (BCCB 4/97), and the emo-
tional honesty of Johnson's work together offer a trio of delights for prospective
members of the wedding. EB
MARCH 1999 
* 243
JUKE, MAVIs 
Planning the Impossible. Delacorte, 1999 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-385-32243-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
A sequel to Expecting the Unexpected (BCCB 12/96) continues preteen River's
exposure to a sex education course that involves embarrassing discussions and as-
signments on reproduction. Interwoven with these scenes is work on a project
that her team of classmates calls "Guidebook for Sixth-Grade Parents" featuring
words, expressions, and actions which adults are strictly prohibited from using on
pain of citation (forms included with guidebook). River's mind jumps around a
lot, so the narrative is necessarily a bit jumpy as well, but it's also funny in the
inimitably smart-mouth mode that junior high students assume when speaking to
each other. Under it all, River has a good heart and good mind, as opposed to her
obnoxious rivals Kirsten and Stella. The subplot of their sabotaging River's friend-
ships along with several other boy-girl relationships adds authentic angst, and the
surprise ending of a plan to marry off the sex-ed teacher to River's close friend's
father leads to an unexpected twist. Although River's parents show an enviable
degree of understanding-nay, forbearance-the viewpoint is strictly kids'. Fans
of the previous book will get the most out of this, so where the first installment was
popular, stock up. BH
KALMAN, 
MAIRA 
Next Stop Grand Central; written and illus. by Maira
Kalman. 
Putnam, 1999 
34p
ISBN 0-399-22926-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Grand Central Station is such a center of frenetic activity that it's become a defini-
tion all its own, and Kalman, herself no slouch at frenetic, here provides a look at
the Grand Central experience. She mixes in information about the staff required
to run the station ("If you have a question you go to Audrey in the information
booth under the big clock") with whimsical fictions ("Herbert Moosehump is
having fun and so is little Ervin Pil who will grow up to be a famous scientist
because he eats beets every day!"), describing the action from dawn to night and
around to dawn again. The silliness is interwoven so closely with the facts that it's
not clear what, if any, of the information is valid, and the absurdity sometimes
heads off in random directions that don't really add to the book. The packed and
busy spreads, with text in varying sizes, fonts, and colors and speech comments
tucked in among the art, effectively convey the three-ring-circus bustle of the place,
however, and the ridiculousness of the jokes will tickle many young funnybones.
The absence of any overall image of the station and some of the unexplained spe-
cifics mean that kids with a chance for direct acquaintanceship will probably get
more out of this than those outside of New York, but the gallery of eccentricity
and the drama of life at the end-or is it the beginning?-of the line may entice
youngsters aboard. DS
KEHRET, PEG 
I'm Not Who You Think IAm. 
Dutton, 1999 
[144p]
ISBN 0-525-46153-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
A shadow first fell over Ginger's thirteenth birthday, when a strange woman in the
restaurant interrupted the festivities to wish her a happy birthday; since then, Gin-
244 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ger has sensed that the woman has been following her around the neighborhood
on foot and in a white car. And indeed she's right. Joyce Enderly, who lost her
own child long ago and has since been hospitalized following her abduction of
another child, is now fixed on the belief that Ginger is her own lost daughter.
Kehret embellishes a classic stalker plot with subthemes involving a financially
powerful school parent's effort to have the beloved girls' basketball coach fired,
Ginger's crisis of conscience over whether to produce evidence favoring Coach
Wren and thus jeopardize her mother's home business, and work responsibilities
that (of course) call Ginger's parents out of town at a critical moment. It is bla-
tantly obvious throughout that Enderly's nefarious intentions could be foiled at
any moment by a prudent word from Ginger to a responsible adult, but that would
rip the fun right out of watching Enderly closing in on her prey. As Ginger, aided
by her best friend, escapes from the web, readers not quite ready for Lois Duncan
will breathe a satisfied sigh of relief. EB
LASKY, KATHRYN 
The Emperor's Old Clothes; illus. by David Catrow. 
Harcourt,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-200384-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Henry is a simple farmer who loves his simple life, but when he picks up a fashion-
obsessed emperor's carelessly cast-off old clothes he turns himself into a picture of
sartorial splendor. Henry acquires silk stockings, high-heeled shoes, pantaloons,
doublet, and wig. Attired in the royal hand-me-downs, he goes to market to see
the emperor, only to find him parading naked down the street. Henry returns to
the farm and attempts to go about his bucolic business, but the wig curls get tangled,
the heels trip him up, and the pantaloons billow like sails. Henry finally laughs at
his own folly, and he is joined by his farm animals joyfully bleating, mooing, and
cheeping. Listeners familiar with Andersen's "The Emperor's New Clothes" will
appreciate Henry's parallel cautionary tale, especially the fact that the cheerful
Henry learns the emperor's lesson while still managing to keep his clothes on.
Lasky's story is a bit text intensive, but it's lightened by lots of clever asides, excla-
mations, and wordplay-Henry's exclamations of "Well, I'll be a goat in a boat!"
and "Oh, glory to geese!" punctuate his dressy discoveries. Catrow's watercolors
extend the literary hyperbole into the visual, setting a humorous stage on which
Henry discovers the folly of high fashion. Catrow's characters, animal and hu-
man, have remarkably elastic features that twist themselves easily into visages that
suit the verbiage. Hero Henry is an exaggeratedly pear-shaped character with big
ears on a little head and the farm animals are expressively rendered; single and
double-page spreads of fairy-tale rolling hills and verdant surroundings will be
seen easily by small groups. This will be a chuckle-inducer for first and second
grade listeners who appreciate quirkily funny tales. JMD
LEIws, J. PATRICK 
The Bookworm's Feast: A Poduck of Poems; illus. by John
O'Brien. 
Dial, 1999 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1693-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1692-3 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Despite the tide and the sectional arrangement into "Appetizers," "Sherbets," "En-
trees," "Sumptuous Side Dishes," and "Delectable Desserts," this collection isn't
MARCH 1999 
* 245
entirely food (or book) oriented, but the tidbits are tasty enough nonetheless. Poems
here feature ships and armadillos, pigeons and tablespoons, offering rhythmical
nonsense in various forms. Lewis is at his best with compact verses dependent on
dense wordplay or sonorous effects, such as "Home Sweet Home" (" ... But then
we moved to Shapeless, Mass.,/ From there to Reeley, Ill./ And ended up in Sayno,
Mo.,/ Where folks keep mighty still") and "Red Radish, Green Garnish" ("So
reddish/the radish/ that grows/ in my garden// So greenish/ the garnish/ that graces/
my plate... "), and there are plenty of entries here that invite gleeful readalouds or
even memorization. Some of the bookish poems are a bit on the didactic side, but
they're leavened by their fizzier companions, so the overall effect is still ebullient.
O'Brien's line-and-watercolor figures feature black button eyes and lots of textural
hatching, the lines evincing a certain controlled gaiety and contrasting effectively
with the softer dappled backgrounds. Plenty of young bookworms will enjoy a
crawl-even a bounce-through this. DS.
LUM, KATE 
What! Cried Granny: An Almost Bedtime Story; illus. by Adrian
Johnson. 
Dial, 1999 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-8037-2382-2 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
It's Patrick's first sleep-over at Granny's, but when she tells him it's bedtime he
observes she's missing a few crucial items. After he points out he has no bed there,
she chops down a tree and uses it to whip up a bed in her workshop; when he
objects that there's no pillow she charges out to the henhouse for feathers and
concocts a pillow in her sewing room; when he laments the absence of a blanket
she shears some local sheep and turns the wool into a blanket in her basement.
The Supergranny concept and Patrick's perfectly legitimate objections (which en-
able him to evade bedtime completely) make this an energetic and satisfying anti-
soporific. Johnson's acrylic art makes the most of its oversized pages and never
takes the fuzzy way out: top-heavy characters with spindly legs parade through a
milieu whose array of contrasting colors ensures that the cavernous and shadowy
perspectives are interesting rather than sinister, and effervescent touches such as
the dotted line marking Granny's trajectory and the insomniac sheep counting
people keep things lively as well as stylish. Kids trying to squirm out of bedtime
will see Patrick as a hero; readers-aloud may find this un-bedtime book, along with
a chorus ofMary Poppins'anti-lullaby "Stay Awake," a paradoxically perfect sendoff.
DS
MCDONALD, MEGAN 
The Bone Keeper; illus. by G. Brian Karas. 
Jackson/DK
Ink, 1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7894-2559-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
This lyrical tone poem brings us the bone keeper, a creator figure who gathers
bones from the desert sand and breathes life into them: "Some say she has three
heads,/ past, present, and future./ Some say she carries the snake,/ walks with the
wild hare.// Some say Bone Woman brings the dead back to life." McDonald's
Bone Woman sifts and searches the sand for remains ("One by one by one,/ she
collects/ each lonely bone"), reconstructs the creature they come from, and dances,
chants, and moans the bones to life. Mythological images combine into an origi-
nal creation story of power and force. Karas' mixed-media illustrations are pseudo-
246 
* THE BULLETIN
cave paintings, sepia variations on primitive themes, with dark brown lines against
sand backgrounds limning the outline of the bent old Bone Woman, the curve of
white bones seemingly scraped into stone walls and white lines scratched into thick
dark paint to indicate an emerging wolf. There is a primal feeling to Karas' illus-
trations that suits the evocative nature of McDonald's text; combined, they con-
jure ancient images and archetypal possibilities. JMD
MACGILL-CALLAHAN, SHEILA 
The Last Snake in Ireland: A Story about St. Patrick;
illus. by Will Hillenbrand. 
Holiday House, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1425-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
It won't come as news to most listeners that St. Patrick drove the snakes from
Ireland (here, with a magic bell and some Pied Piper-esque tactics), but in MacGill-
Callahan's tale one recalcitrant viper remains to taunt the good bishop with mis-
chief. Patrick employs his own ruse deguerre, nearly luring the snake into a decorative
padded box with a trick lock; a chase scene ensues, replete with lightning-quick
escapes, Patrick's furious oarsmanship, the snake's deliverance from an eagle's tal-
ons, and precious little reference to legend. The snake lands in a Scottish lake;
when Patrick returns to check up on him years later, his old foe, now much grown,
informs him, "I like it here. They call me the Loch Ness Monster." Certainly St.
Patrick's Day provides a green light for all manner of good-natured silliness, but
MacGill-Callahan's wild extrapolation loses sight of its roots in the frantic rush
toward a single gag punch line. Except for his stole, mitre, and cross, Hillenbrand's
jolly protagonist could be any comical fairy-tale hero, dashing through a mixed
media countryside in pursuit of a cartoon critter. Kids will appreciate the head-
long comedy, however; an author's note offers a bit of background on St. Patrick's
legend, the dearth of Irish snakes, and sightings at Loch Ness. EB
McKISSACK, JR., FREDRICK 
Black Hoops: The History of African Americans in
Basketball. Scholastic, 1999 
[176p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-48712-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The first basketball game consisted of tossing a soccer ball into a peach basket, and
it was the direct result of a teacher's desperate attempt to find some indoor sport or
physical activity for his male students to engage in during the intemperate winter
weather of 1891. McKissack discusses the evolution of basketball alongside the
history of the civil rights movement and the place of African Americans in Ameri-
can society and in organized sports. The book chronicles the popularity of the
Harlem Globetrotters, the struggle of black athletes playing for white colleges (Paul
Robeson, an athletic star, was not allowed to live on his segregated college campus
or join the college glee club), the integration of the National Basketball Associa-
tion in 1950, and the rising popularity of basketball in the 1970s, concluding with
a chapter on the history of black women in basketball. Illustrated with captioned
black and white photographs, the book includes a glossary, bibliography, and in-
dex. There is a lot of information here, and all of it is good, but the dense writing
doesn't make information retrieval easy. A timeline would definitely have helped
make sense of the development of college, exhibition, and national teams, and a
little more general history would have provided a frame of reference on which to
build a more cohesive narrative. Still, McKissack has an enthusiastic, conversa-
MARCH 1999 
* 247
tional style that will draw in basketball lovers, and his inclusion of the women will
make this a cross-gender title. JMD
McLAREN, CLEMENCE 
Dance for the Land. Atheneum, 1999 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-82393-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Kathryn Maluhia Kahele is devastated when her lawyer father decides to move the
family to his Hawaiian birthplace and work for the rights of native Hawaiians.
Kate has to leave her dog, her best friend, and her beloved ballet classes, and what
she finds when she reaches Hawaii doesn't reassure her. Her dark-skinned father
and brother look like native Hawaiians, but Kate takes after her deceased Boston-
born mother, and her blonde hair and freckles makes her stand out as obviously
white-haole. Uncle Kimo and her father are constantly fighting over strategies to
restore Hawaii to the native Hawaiians, Kate's haole looks draw hostility and threats
from some of her Hawaiian classmates, and her lack of knowledge of Hawaiian
customs and language makes her feel isolated and frightened. Slowly she begins to
make friends, slowly she begins to learn hula, and slowly she begins to understand
a little of the abiding love her Hawaiian-born relatives have for their land. The
positioning of Kate as the spokesperson for the Hawaiians peacefully demonstrat-
ing at Iolani Palace is somewhat forced, but McLaren pulls it off without over-
whelming contrivance. Politics is secondary to relationships here: characterization
is sharp, with the emotional core of each scene played out honestly and sincerely.
The pace is quick, Kate is a sympathetic character, and the conclusion, though
satisfying, does not assume a rosy future. JMD
MAGUIRE, GREGORY 
The Good Liar. Clarion, 1999 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-395-90697-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Growing up in occupied France, Marcel Delarue and his older brothers, Rene and
Pierre, specialize in telling the hugest, most elaborate lies they can possibly man-
age, much to the horror of their good Catholic mother. The presence of German
soldiers in their small village is a much greater problem, however, especially when
the boys tentatively befriend one young soldier; after discovering this friendship,
their mother insists on its severance, revealing to the boys that she has been the
biggest liar of all by secreting in their house's crawl space the Cauverians, a Jewish
mother and daughter who had been staying with the Delarues until the roundup
of Jews in the area. Maguire effectively conveys the noncomprehending lightness
of a boy in the middle of a war that leaves him largely untouched; this casual and
quotidian flavor makes for an emphatic contrast with the revelation of the
Cauverians' continued presence and Marcel's sharp, sudden understanding of the
danger that friendship with a German soldier (who is at the same time a homesick
young man and the agent of destruction) would bring. The story frame, of con-
temporary kids writing to Mr. Delarue for his recollections, is a tad ungainly, but
it does allow readers a glimpse of Marcel grown and married to the Cauverian
daughter. There's a conspiratorial aspect to the brotherly relationship that has
particular authenticity here, and the book's viewpoint is both unusual and unusu-
ally accessible, presenting a war experience that many kids could see themselves
living. DS
248 
* THE BULLETIN
MARKOE, MERRILL 
The Day My Dogs Became Guys; illus. by Eric Brace. 
Viking,
1999 
32p
ISBN 0-670-85344-5 
$15.99 
R 
5-9 yrs
Carey's three dogs, Butch, Dee Dee, and Ed, are nice, normal canines-they want
to chase cars, eat all the time, and nap, respectively-until a solar eclipse turns
them into the "guys" of the title. Carey's got his hands full trying to keep the
newly humanized mongrels from eating him out of house and home, shouting at
squirrels, and getting run over by cars, and it's only the end of the eclipse that saves
them all from disaster. This tale wags pretty hard, but Brace's illustrations, espe-
cially the offbeat contextual spot art that brightens up the framed text blocks, keep
the text-intensive story amusing despite it being a one-trick doggie. The skewed
perspectives and dog-to-human caricatures enhance the humor with slightly off-
the-wall visuals reminiscent of Ren and Stimpy cartoons, and they will hold read-
ers' attention from page to outrageous page. JMD
MATAS, CAROL 
In My Enemy's House. Simon, 1999 
[176p]
ISBN 0-689-81354-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
The first part of this Holocaust novel recounts the decimation of Jewish teenager
Marisa's family and community in Poland. Its tone is flatly reportorial, as in the
sentence where Marisa tells us that her grandmother and aunt "were both killed in
the latest 'action,' as were my two little cousins"; even the scene where she watches
from the end of a line while her neighbors are shot and shoved into a ditch seems
distant. All of this changes in the second part, when blonde, blue-eyed Marisa
procures false papers proving her Polish and a job as servant to a high-ranking
Nazi family, whose anti-Semitic children she first hates and then learns to care for,
much against her will. Here suspenseful domestic scenes are vividly developed and
the character dynamics convincing, especially between Marisa (now known as Maria)
and the daughter of the house, Charlotte, who wants to be Marisa's "sister" while
at the same time playing board games like "Jews Out." The last part of the book,
when Marisa is sent to a factory in Berlin, is a mix of the generically vague and the
vividly specific. Marisa recalls her story while waiting for transportation to the
displacement camp where she hopes to find her boyfriend, Schmuel, who also
tried to survive the war by passing as a Polish worker. The narration is rushed and
the language uninspired, even though the incidents related are in and of them-
selves intensely dramatic. Marisa's chronic response to stress of any kind-faint-
ing-quickly becomes more silly than affecting, and the suspense generated by her
circumstances is not consistently matched by her storytelling. The semi-happy
ending-Marisa's reunion with Schmuel and possibly her remaining siblings-
has a false cheeriness that belies the horror of what has come before. Still, Matas
has written a Holocaust novel with a point of view not yet frequently seen in
juvenile literature (that of the narrator hiding in plain sight), and it is one that will
easily provoke discussion of the lengths one should go to ensure personal survival.
BH
MORRIS, GERALD 
The Squire, His Knight, &HisLady. Houghton, 1999 
[240p]
ISBN 0-395-91211-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr.6-10
Continuing the adventure begun in The Squire's Tale (BCCB 7/98), Morris fol-
MARCH 1999 
* 249
lows goodly knight Gawain and his squire, Terence, as they go questing. The
humor of the first title is a trifle subdued but still present; Terence is older, wiser,
and slightly bored by the peace and quiet of Arthur's idyllic Camelot, despite the
diversion offered by a simpering Guinevere and a besotted Lancelot. The peace
and quiet doesn't last long, however-a rogue king demands tribute, Arthur de-
clares war, and the adventure is on. The celebratory post-victory feast is inter-
rupted by the entrance of the Green Knight, and, after stepping between Arthur
and the challenger, Gawain is off to his presumed death, with a few knightly ad-
ventures on the side. Those diversions include the rescue of the Lady Eileen (soon
to be beloved of Terence), the defeat of Black Annis, travels in the Other World,
and, ultimately, the confrontation between Gawain and the Green Knight. Mor-
ris' Gawain is the best knight in all the realm; his Lancelot, though brave, is some-
thing of a pompous ass (who calls Guinevere the "Peerless Flower of Maidenhood");
and his Guinevere is a woman beginning to realize just what she gave up when she
turned her back on the noble Arthur for the melodramatic if dashing Lance. There's
a bit more telling than showing in this sequel, but the pace is quick and the char-
acterizations deadpan accurate. The plot's touch of danger spiced with a little love
of the unrequited kind will be more than enough to keep readers involved in the
escapades of the worthy Terence and his noble knight. Morris includes an infor-
mative and humorous note on his sources. JMD
MURPHY, SHIRLEY ROUSSEAU 
Wind Child; illus. by the Dillons. 
HarperCollins,
1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024904-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024903-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Resshie is the daughter of the east wind and his mortal wife. The death of her
mother and the desertion of her father leaves Resshie without clues to her true
identity, only a longing in her heart to be one with the wind. She becomes an
expert weaver whose cloth is inspired by the wild winds; in her longing and lone-
liness she even goes so far as to weave herself two men for companions and the net
to capture a third, but in the end she is alone. One day a prince of the wind comes
to visit, attracted by her weavings; gambling on her skill, she wins the wind prince
as husband. This original fairy tale blusters with romantic winds and mysterious
portents that nearly bury the plot line. The Dillons' graceful watercolor illustra-
tions and sculptural motifs suit the drama of the story, however; a cool teal and
gray palette adds a calmer edge to the slightly overwrought literary motifs. Text
and image boxes separate the words and pictures from the surrounding stark white
space, the center of which, on either side of the gutter, is emphasized by mirror
images of sculptural masks. Murphy's narrative is reminiscent of Jane Yolen's
short romances (The Girl Who Cried Flowers, The Hundredth Dove) but without
the tightness of Yolen's folkloric plots. This tale concentrates more on cool imag-
ery than warm emotions, but it's a lyrically drawn if chilly love story. JMD
MYnER, WALTER DAN 
TheJournalofJoshua Loper: A Black Cowboy. 
Scholastic,
1999 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs 
(My Name is America)
ISBN 0-590-02691-7 
$10.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
It's 1821 when sixteen-year-old Joshua leaves his mother to go on his first cattle
drive and finds that his goal of being a cowboy is a lot tougher to achieve than it is
to dream about. Joshua tells his own story through entries in his journal. His tone
250 
* THE BULLETIN
is open and guileless, and his observations reveal his personality and character as he
goes from an idealistic, inexperienced hand to a young man grimly determined to
complete the difficult task he was hired to do. Myers makes the hardships of
driving cattle on the Chisholm Trail concrete with physical descriptions of saddle
sores, sleepless nights, and frayed tempers, revealing that along with taxing physi-
cal hardships came the very real dangers of cattle rustlers, stampedes, and flooded
river crossings. The hands on the drive are a mixed group of former slaves, free
Negroes, Mexicans, and Irish, with a taciturn trail boss who at first has no use for
the black cowboys, but who later grudgingly gives his respect to men who do their
jobs well. Without sounding forced or contrived, Myers gives a tremendous amount
of information about the life and times of these cowboys, including a look at the
wide open frontier town of Abilene, an encounter with Wild Bill Hickok, and the
sad fact that the cowboys would risk their lives for $80 pay and then blow it all on
a fast two days of high living. Like the other titles in this series, Joshua's story
includes a scrapbook of captioned photographs and relevant facts about the his-
torical world inhabited by this well-rounded fictional character. JMD
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Sweet Strawberries; illus. by Rosalind Charney
Kaye. 
Atheneum, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-81338-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A man (who "wasn't the worst man in the world, but he wasn't the nicest, either")
takes his fish to market; accompanied by his wife, who mildly hopes only for straw-
berries, he finds fault with everything he encounters, grumbling about the impa-
tience, the laziness, the selfishness of the people who interfere with his way of
doing things. When he balks at the purchase of strawberries, his peeved wife gives
him the silent treatment; on the next week's market trip he tries to cheer her up by
greeting politely those he had previously abused in addition to securing her sought-
after strawberries, improving both his wife's mood and his own opinion of the
people he sees. There's a gently folkloric flavor to the account enhanced by the
unpreachy underlying lesson. Kaye's mixed-media art gives the tale particular
resonance, the collage adding depth and texture to the spreads without interfering
with the fluid movement of the line. The springy colors of the landscape make a
delectable contrast to the luscious red berries, and the transformation of the pro-
tagonist from dour-faced to ostentatiously chipper is comic indeed. The easygo-
ing moral here will make this useful for religious and secular examinations of
viewpoint and interpersonal relations-and wherever a story with a modest help-
ing of drollery and an immodest helping of strawberries would be welcome. DS
NEUFELD, JOHN 
Boys Lie. 
Jackson/DK Ink, 1999 
[176p]
ISBN 0-7894-2623-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Eighth-grader Gina and her mother have moved to California, Gina hoping that
she can leave behind the effects of an assault at a city pool, where her early develop-
ing figure made her the target of a sudden and frightening underwater group grope.
Rumors about the incident get out at her new school, however, and twist it into a
rape. A trio of boys decide that this makes her not only sexually experienced but
an appropriate partner/target for their first sexual encounter. Two boys drop out
of the plot, but the third, whose assault Gina repels, lets his schoolmates believe he
MARCH 1999 
* 
251
was gladly received. The dialogue is stilted and some of the logic problematic (it
seems odd that Gina never thought about calling the police or, in the wake of the
first assault, had the possibility suggested to her by her mother or therapist); the
ending, where Gina solves the problem by telling the class what happened and the
boy is expelled, is both unrealistic and unsatisfyingly quick. The book deals seri-
ously with an issue that often isn't associated with junior high despite its relevance,
however, and its portrait of the boys who collectively evade ethics that they indi-
vidually do possess (one of them is essentially the boyfriend of Gina's friend) has
an authentic ring to it. This doesn't have the credibility and smoothness of either
Norma Fox Mazer's Out of Control (BCCB 4/93) or Erika Tamar's Fair Game
(11/93), but its exploration of an issue many preteens grapple with gives it a rel-
evance some young readers may appreciate. DS
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB, comp. 
What Have You Lost?; illus. with photographs by
Michael Nye. 
Greenwillow, 1999 
[224p]
ISBN 0-688-16184-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
Young adult readers in the throes of realizing the infinite possibilities of loss are
bound to connect with these 140 dynamic poems ranging so widely in tone and
style. "You become what you lose," says Diana Der-Hovanessian in "Secrets of
Life"-and there are many things to lose. The protagonist of Carla Hartsfield's
"Shrink-wrapped" fears "losing something to do." The narrator in John Brandi's
"Wilderness Poem" considers "the universe a fragile empire/ dissolved on the
tongue." But there are things to find, as well. Reza Shirazi in "Learning Persian"
recovers "a hibernating language/ lying in the dark corners of my mind." And
there is the search, in every language, to name what has come and gone: "... this
is the difficulty-/ lo que sepierde what gets lost/ no es lo que sepierde en traducion
sinol is not what gets lost in translation but more/ what gets lost in language itself."
This mixture of Spanish and English in Alastair Reid's "What Gets Lost/Lo Que Se
Pierde" is indicative of the many cultures represented here. Michael Nye's photo-
graphic portraits are intensely engaging, though sometimes not as interlinked with
the poems as their placement implies. Rich in quantity, quality, and variety, the
poetic selection is based on a broadly interpreted theme of important losses ex-
pressed by poets who are for the most part not commonly anthologized. May they
find through this an audience as fresh as their own voices. Notes on the contribu-
tors are included. BH
PAULSEN, GARY 
Brian's Return. 
Delacorte, 1999 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-385-32500-2 
$13.50
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 5-8
Brian Robeson (from Hatchet, BCCB 12/87 and The River, BCCB 6/91) has had
difficulties readjusting to his modern teenage life: "Sports and shooting electronic
bullets or rays at imaginary enemies that clomped across screens seemed silly, pale
in comparison to what his real life had been like: having moose attack him, living
on the edge of starving, living only because his thinking, his brain, kept him alive."
After an altercation with a football player, Brian is sent for counseling to the home
of a blind ex-cop named Caleb. Through daily conversations with Caleb, Brian
realizes he needs to return to the Canadian wilderness. Paulsen displays his char-
acteristic familiarity with the natural world as Brian, back in the woods, reassimilates
252 
* THE BULLETIN
into the laws of the wild ("man proposes, nature disposes") and deals with life on
its most basic terms. Initially unsure of what he really searches for, he meets a
stranger who helps him on his way. The book's pacing is considerably slower than
in the previous books, and the didacticism is more pointed and less palatable.
Still, Brian Robeson fans will want to read this latest chapter in his story. EAB
PECK, ROBERT NEWTON 
Cowboy Ghost. HarperCollins, 1999 
[24 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028211-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028168-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
It's 1924, and sixteen-year-old Titus Timothy MacRobertson, second son of the
overpowering Rob Roy MacRobertson, is repeatedly overlooked by his father in
favor of his stronger older brother. Titus soon proves his manhood by joining his
brother on a cattle drive through the Florida wilderness and experiencing adven-
ture after adventure, including a stampede, hostile Seminoles, torrential rain, the
death of his brother, a gunshot wound, and primitive frontier surgery. He returns
home ready to take on his father, assume control of the Spur Box Ranch, and
marry his sweetheart. The imaginative metaphors, salty language, and winning
protagonist will engage readers, but the writing needs, to use Peck's own words,
"more sewing than the stuffed-up butts often Christmas turkeys." Stilted speeches,
hackneyed homilies, jarring ethnic characterizations, and the absence of the title's
promised ghost will frustrate many youngsters. Cover art will attract attention but
also confuse the audience with its portrayal of Titus as a middle-schooler rather
than a teenager on the verge of manhood. JNH
PENNEBAKER, RUTH 
Conditions ofLove. 
Holt, 1999 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-8050-6104-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-10
Sarah feels she doesn't fit in at her upscale Dallas high school: she and her friend
Ellie have more serious concerns, writing letters in defense of death-row inmates
and sharing an interest in human rights. Sarah's real darkness comes from the
death of her adored father a year ago, a loss to which she has still not adjusted. In
her attempts to move on to happier times, she becomes friends with the more
upbeat Stephanie, leaving behind Ellie and her dysfunctional family; when she
clumsily tries to express sympathy for Ellie, her old friend sends her reeling with
truths about Sarah's father (embezzlement, drunkenness) that Sarah had previ-
ously managed to evade but now must face. Pennebaker manages a near-miracu-
lous balance in Sarah's narration, creating an eerily authentic stream of ninth-grade
consciousness that nonetheless possesses enough subtle shape to make for a smoothly
developing plodine. Characterization is effortless and effective, funny and percep-
tive, setting Sarah's milieu in a Texan patchwork of big-haired ex-cheerleaders,
sex-affirmative Christian psychiatrists, and youthful casualties of bitter divorce.
Sarah's veering between fascination with sex, facile but genuine social conscious-
ness, and black despair at her father's abandonment is equally credible. Ultimately,
Sarah's growth is marked by a pair of discoveries, one bitter and one sweet: that
the stories people tell often obscure the truth of their lives, and that her father, for
all his flaws, did indeed love his daughter very much. Many young readers are
making similar discoveries in their own lives, and they'll recognize this novel's
poignant truth. DS
MARCH 1999 
* 
253
PETERS, JULIE ANNE 
Romance ofthe Snob Squad. 
Little, 1999 
[144p]
ISBN 0-316-70627-2 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The unpopular and unlikely quartet-Max, Prairie, Lydia, and narrator Jenny-
who formed the Snob Squad (see Revenge of the Snob Squad, BCCB 9/98) have
returned, this time to create a project for the science fair and, hopefully, to get
Prairie and Jenny together with their respective crushes for the school dance. As
with the previous title, this has only the most tenuous relationship to reality, sub-
stituting instead jokey hijinks and predictable plot as the girls' unpromising sci-
ence experiment (training Max's rat) wins them teacherly approval, the right boys
end up liking the right girls rather than their popular nemeses, and Jenny's troubled
family rights itself just in time for the ending. Peters has a glibly affable style that
assures readers nothing here will be too taxing, and the book delivers with a goofy
and undemanding romp that will be enjoyed by fans of the first book. DS
PETERSON, CRIS 
Century Farm: One Hundred Years on a Family Farm; illus. with
photographs by Alvis Upitis. 
Boyds Mills, 1999 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-710-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
This crisp photoessay is a combination of modern color photographs and antique
black and whites, all of the same family farm in northern Wisconsin. The story of
the farm is narrated by the great-grandson of the original owner (the author is his
wife), and the tone of the text is friendly and congenial. The narrator relates how
new technology has streamlined and simplified the old ways. From horses to trac-
tors, from binders to combines, from hand-milking cows to modern milking par-
lors, Peterson leads readers from the past to the present, giving an easy sense of
history and continuity. The captioned photographs are set against clean white
pages, text blocks of alternating density add variety to the design, and the overall
visual impression is of a squeaky clean, wholesome farm setting, as cheery today as
in days of yore. JMD
PIERCE, TAMORA 
Circle ofMagic: Briar's Book. 
Scholastic, 1999 
[272p]
ISBN 0-590-55359-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-10
This fourth title in Pierce's series about four young adult mages and their educa-
tion at Winding Circle Temple features Briar, pickpocket turned wizard, whose
magical talent involves growing things, in gardens, fields, the wild, and, in this
title, Petri dishes. Briar must assist his mentor, Rosethorn, in locating the source
of and cure for a plague that is decimating Summersea.. A search through the
sewers leads to a plague-stricken friend of Briar's and a quarantine, but it becomes
clear that it is too late for quarantine to prevent the disease from spreading, and the
quest for a cure becomes a race against time as the victims' numbers increase.
Pierce has a magician's touch with this strongly plotted series-the action is rivet-
ing, and she never loses sight of her characters or forgets the importance of charac-
terization in emotionally involving the reader. The pace is fast, the suspense thrilling,
and the conclusion explosively satisfying. Devotees of the series will welcome
Briar's story into the quartet with appreciative fanfare. JMD
254 
* THE BULLETIN
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
Rainy Morning; illus. by Jill Pinkwater. 
Atheneum,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-81143-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
"Mr. and Mrs. Submarine were sitting at the kitchen table on a rainy morning,"
and soon they find themselves inviting in various sodden creatures from outside-
a cat, a dog, a horse, a collection of crows, a coyote, a flock of chickens, a wilde-
beest, Ludwig van Beethoven, the United States Marine Band, and a small European
circus-each of whom receives a nice warm corn muffin. The absurd inflation
will tickle young listeners, and Daniel Pinkwater's poker-faced descriptions ("The
bandsmen shook hands with Ludwig van Beethoven and petted the horse") cheer-
fully enhance the eccentricity. Unfortunately, the enhancement leads to nothing
and the story simply evaporates, with the collection of visitors merely sitting in the
kitchen until the sun comes out rather than offering any climax or conclusion. Jill
Pinkwater's sturdy illustrations (rendered, according to the copyright page, in
"magical markers") depict a kitchen sunny despite the rain, gleaming with Fiestaware
hues and populated with beings dubiously eyeing their corn muffins. Despite the
ending let-down, the cumulative entertainment will provoke giggles from the au-
dience, and perhaps you can encourage them to create their own finale. DS
POHL, PETER IMiss You, IMiss You!; written by Peter Pohl and Kinna Gieth; tr.
by Roger Greenwald. 
R & S/Farrar, 1999 
[256p]
ISBN 91-29-63935-2 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
One of Sweden's best-known children's authors, Pohl has here teamed up with
Kinna Gieth, whose experiences inspired this story of thirteen-year-old identical
twin Tina, whose life changes forever when a car hits and kills her sister, Cilla, as
the girls rush for the school bus on the morning of their mother's birthday. In-
stantly, what had been a normal, high-tension teenage existence becomes a night-
mare of loss: things are terrible at school (where Cilla's adolescent moodiness had
been costing her friends, and where no one knows what to say to Tina), at home
(older brother Jonny, best friend of the driver of the car, leaves home; father Albert
is harsh and demanding of his remaining daughter), and in Tina's dreams (where
Cilia comes back in angry retribution). The book's unhurried pace proves to be
extraordinarily effective, in that the ups and downs of bereavement are given ap-
propriate time. It's understandable when Tina has a happy summer romance and
is convinced that Cilia engineered it; it's also understandable when, months after
Cilia's death, Tina erupts in wounded fury after a teacher calls her by her sister's
name. The narrative voice is that of Tina, who tries to distance herself by writing
in the third person but who sometime slips back; the result is revealing rather than
confusing, and we know Tina as well as Cilia did by the end. The authors also
wisely give the reader a chance to know Cilia before her death, so it's clear that the
differences between the twins and the behaviors Tina regrets aren't all in her mind.
Though there's also some perceptive discussion of the effects of such a tragedy on
people with various relationships with Cilia, the main story is the emotional, some-
times harrowing one of a young woman's learning to define herself in light of an
irrevocable absence. Hankies mandatory. DS
MARCH 1999 
* 
255
RINGGOLD, FAITH 
The Invisible Princess; written and illus. by Faith
Ringgold. 
Crown, 1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-80025-X 
$19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-80024-1 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
4-8 yrs
When slaves Mama and Papa Love learn they are to be parents, their greatest fear
is that their child will be claimed by the master, Captain Pepper. But the Great
Lady of Peace assures them their daughter will be "a princess who would bring
peace, freedom, and love to the slaves' Village of Visible." The baby is whisked
away at birth by the Prince of Night, whose coming in a cataclysmic storm claims
the life of Pepper's wife. Pepper's blind daughter, Patience, later sees the beautiful
black girl in the cotton fields, and her angered father threatens to sell Mama and
Papa Love apart for hiding a child; the Queen of Bees, in cahoots with the Prince
of Night, arranges for the slaves' and Patience's invisibility (via bee stings and
honey cakes), which brings a contrite Pepper to his knees begging for the return of
his daughter and ruing his mistreatment of the slaves. All's forgiven, and everyone
happily ends up in the Invisible Village of Peace, Freedom, and Love. Ringgold's
original fairy tale/parable is surely fraught with pathos, but her symbolic characters
are far too remote to evoke audience empathy. Leaden dialogue ("I am not afraid
of Captain Pepper, because his power to destroy is no match against the creative
Powers of Nature who have come to help us") and John Bunyan-esque nomencla-
ture further chill the proceedings, while the Queen of Bees' mystical maneuverings
smack more of gimmickry than magic. Stylized figures, human and fey, present
frozen, single-expression countenances devoid of the anger, beneficence, joy, or
contrition they are said to feel. Children with a bent for analysis may enjoy pick-
ing the bones of this tale clean, but youngsters seeking promise for the downtrod-
den will be better satisfied with Jacob Lawrence's Harriet and the Promised Land
(BCCB 4/69) or selections from Virginia Hamilton's The People Could Fly (BCCB
7/85). EB
ROCKWELL, ANNE 
Bumblebee, Bumblebee, Do You Know Me?: A Garden Guessing
Game; written and illus. by Anne Rockwell. 
HarperCollins, 1999 
[24p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028212-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-0273330-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Through flower riddles ("Bumblebee, bumblebee, do you know me? Yellow and
green, I wave to the breeze to say that spring is here") directed to different bugs
and insects, Rockwell introduces a plethora of familiar garden inhabitants in this
gentle picture book. The rhythmic and patterned text (the repetitions are reminis-
cent of a less lilting Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See?) appears opposite
a full-page picture of the flower in question, with the answer ("I am a daffodil")
written along the side of the flower. From tulip to poppy to morning glory, Rockwell
continues her riddles, while the background for the text changes to match the
colors appearing in the flower. Rockwell's gouache and watercolor art employs
thick lines and unblended hues, resulting in sturdy florals with a useful clarity.
The pastel shades lack the vividness of a real garden, however, and become a bit
monotonous; the absence of nuance in the art often results in a coloring-book
garishness. Preschoolers will nonetheless enjoy poring over the detailed bugs and
256 * THE BULLETIN
flowers and taking pride in being able to name the individual flowers at the end of
the book ("Little boy, little boy, do you know me? ... Of course I know you,
sunflower! I know all the flowers I see") and on subsequent trips to the garden.
EAB
RODOWSKY, COLBY 
Not My Dog; illus. by Thomas F. Yezerski. 
Farrar,
1999 
[80p]
ISBN 0-374-35531-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Ellie has longed for a puppy for all of her short life, and her parents have promised
that she can have one when she's nine-which will be her next birthday. Unfortu-
nately for Ellie's puppy dreams, however, her parents conceive the idea of acquir-
ing Great-Aunt Margaret's dog Preston, who can't be housed in GAM's new
apartment, and thus dealing with Ellie's canine fixation. Preston is a "sort of
square, boring brown dog with sticking-up ears and a skinny tail," definitely not
the glamorous critter of Ellie's yearnings, and though she'll walk him and care for
him, she refuses to acknowledge him as her dog and still holds out hope for her
ideal puppy. It's no surprise that Preston gradually creeps into Ellie's heart and she
refuses to let her parents give him away again, but the story is still solidly and
believably written. Rodowsky doesn't overdo Preston's capabilities but keeps them
realistically endearing-Ellie finds his warm presence reassuring when a monster
movie gets a little overfrightening, and Preston knows the way back home when
Ellie takes a wrong turn on a walk-and the implications about the difference
between pipe dreams and perfectly satisfactory reality are present but not bela-
bored. Those less dog-privileged than Ellie will be glad that she eventually devel-
ops appropriate appreciation, and those whose parents are trying to steer them to
the animal shelter rather than to the pedigree litter down the block may find this
puts things in perspective. Final illustrations not seen. DS
ROHMER, HARRIET, ed. 
Honoring Our Ancestors: Stories and Pictures by Fourteen
Artists. Children's Book Press, 1999 
[36p] 
illus. and with photographs
ISBN 0-89239-158-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Similar in format to Rohmer's previous compilationJust Like Me: Stories and Self-
Portraits by Fourteen Artists (BCCB 2/98), this volume features fourteen visual
artists discussing those ancestors that had the most impact on their lives and art.
Rohmer's inspiration for this compilation is the approaching millennium-as we
move toward the future, it is important to know and honor those that came before
us. Each artist of the featured fourteen (including George Crespo, Nancy Hom,
and JoeSam., among others) writes a short paragraph about their honored ances-
tors (in most cases they are grandparents or parents) and contributes a painting,
drawing or other artwork featuring them. The full-page art piece is on the verso;
the artists' text is on the recto page, which also includes a photograph of the artist
and of the ancestor (if available), with brief biographical information about the
artist. The prose tends to be a bit dry, lacking the intimate flair of the autobiogra-
phies in the previous book. The premise here is also more contrived, and this title
may need a knowing adult to make the connecting bridge to young readers. Still,
this is an intriguing look at a selection of living artists and their work, and the
format and focus of this piece may well be a springboard to more relevant millen-
MARCH 1999 
* 257
nium projects than guessing games about the future. A list of media used by each
artist for the included artwork is appended. JMD
SCHECTER, ELLEN 
The Family Haggadah; illus. by Neil Waldman. 
Viking,
1999 
[8 0p]
ISBN 0-670-88341-7 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
"Written to help families with children enjoy celebrating their Seder-the ritual
meal on the first and second nights of Passover," this includes suggestions for
preparation, procedure, prayer, song, and storytelling, as well as explanation of
symbolic objects and actions. Although the content is traditional, it's not ortho-
dox. Schecter injects the tone with some flexible new attitudes when she recom-
mends, for example, that participants not "automatically choose the oldest male
for this key role" of leading the celebration, and later introduces "Miriam's Cup"
as a tribute to the part women played in the exodus from Egypt and journey to the
promised land. She "deliberately avoids sexist, patriarchal, or militaristic language,
usage, and customs. The Four Sons are now the Four Children. God is not
described as either male or female but as a Being of limitless creativity and power."
With a spacious format and accessible text, this will be useful in public libraries
serving Jewish populations or in Hebrew school and synagogue libraries. Reviewed
from an unillustrated galley. BH
SETTEL, JOANNE 
Exploding Ants: Amazing Facts about How Animals
Adapt. Atheneum, 1999 
[40p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-81739-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
The introduction to this look at animal behavior is entitled "Why Animals Do
Gross Things," which pretty much sums up the content of the book. Settel ex-
plains that one animal's gross body parts are another animal's happy habitat--or
lunch, as the case might be. Each example, from the swallowtail butterfly larva
that looks like a slimy bird dropping to the liver fluke worm that reprograms an
ant's brain so it will go where a sheep can eat it to the kamikaze exploding soldier
ants of the title, is accompanied by a sharp color photograph or black-and-white
line drawing, just to make sure eager readers don't miss one disgusting tidbit. The
matter-of-fact, kid-pleasing style is going to make this a favorite science-report
starter source. This is Ripley's Believe It Or Not! on a biological and photographic
scale young scientists will adore. A detailed glossary, selected readings, and an
index are included. JMD
SKURZYNSMI, GLORIA 
Spider's Voice. 
Atheneum, 1999 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-82149-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Aran is a peasant boy in the twelfth century, born tongue-tied and thus mute, who
ends up in Paris, sold to a dealer in human monstrosities. He is liberated by
legendary scholar Peter Abelard, who needs a silent servant to keep his affair with
Eloise secret; dubbed Spider, the boy becomes enmeshed in the lovers' intrigue,
traveling with them when they flee the city and witnessing the tragedy when they
return-Abelard castrated by Eloise's uncle in return for the theft of his niece, and
Eloise immured in a convent. His tongue freed by Abelard's own knife, Aran
258 
* THE BULLETIN
serves Abelard again by taking his letters-the writing now known to the world as
Historia Calamitatum-to Abelard's friend and to Eloise, but he also finds pur-
pose in his own life by becoming the instrument of preserving Eloise's letters for
posterity. That's a lot of plot already, and the book gets distractingly involved
with Aran's personal adventures (rescuing the woman who was kind to him in
Paris and her starving child) and self-questioning (he is frustrated with the ab-
stractness of Abelard's theology, unsuccessful in improving the lot of the peasants,
and crushed when he realizes he himself has been effectively rendered a eunuch by
youthful wounds). The book is most successful as a historical romance: Skurzynski
compresses time and polishes up the details to suit the legend, but she's also clearly
versed in the facts of the case, hinting at Abelard's egotism and Eloise's stubborn
refusal to join Abelard in disavowal of earthly passion. It's hard to pass up lovers
still famous nearly nine centuries later; readers who enjoyed The Ramsay Scallop
(BCCB 4/94) might find this sharp-edged medieval tale similarly absorbing. The
frontispiece provides a map; an author's note guides readers to URLs for writings
of both Abelard and Eloise and to CDs of Abelard's music. DS
STEWIG, JOHN WARREN, ad. 
KingMidas; illus. by Omar Rayyan. 
Holiday House,
1999 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-8234-1423-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
The tale of King Midas and the golden touch is given a fantastical setting through
the watercolor art of Omar Rayyan. A bored, gold-obsessed Midas roams amongst
such mythological trappings as Hellenic statuary, centaurs, satyrs, mermaids, and
other legendary beings (Greek and otherwise) as the text plays out the age-old
story of greed gone wrong. The stone face of an enormous statue ofAthena watches
over the proceedings as Midas gains and exploits the golden touch, realizes its
limitations, and longs for a return to his pre-transformative state. The text follows
the familiar plot to its familiar end, the inexorable momentum toward the conclu-
sion strong. Rayyan's watercolors are a phantasmagoria of irreverent details, from
the statue of a fresh minotaur sticking his tongue out to a rubber duck floating in
a fountain to the little man-being fishing in nearly every outdoor double-page
spread. Midas is a morphing caricature of a king, whose rapid changes of psyche
are reflected in his ever-shifting physical presence. Stewig's tone is more casual
than Charlotte Craft's formal one (see review above), and he gives even less expla-
nation for Midas' acquisition of the golden touch; Rayyan's illustrations, despite
the sometimes discordant colors, have more dash than the profusely ornamental
designs of K. Y. Craft. These are two very different renderings of this myth-if
you have room on the shelves, buy both of them. There are no source notes
included. JMD
STURGES, PHILEMON 
I Love Trucks!; illus. by Shari Halpern. 
HarperCollins,
1999 
[32p]
ISBN 0-06-027819-6 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
Spare, rhymed text and boxy, bright pictures of vehicles on the move will rivet the
attention of tykes who'd gladly trade their trikes for a rig: "Trailer trucks, tow
trucks,/ trucks that sweep the street./ Trucks that crawl, trucks that roll,/ trucks
that mix concrete." The parade of trucks rolling by may be exciting, but the exu-
MARCH 1999 
* 259
berant narrator concedes, as his favorite brings up the rear, "... the truck that I
like best/ brings ice cream to my door." Double spreads with simple shapes out-
lined in black and filled with flat, crayon hues (a sixteen-color box full, at most)
should satisfy rug-sitters in preschool settings as well as children sharing the ride at
home with a parent. Endpapers display all the trucks featured in the text and give
slightly more detailed explanations of their functions. Take this one on a car trip,
and spot the big rollers roaring past. EB
TAULBERT, CLIFTON L. 
Little Cliffand the Porch People; illus. by E. B. Lewis. 
Dial,
1999 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2175-7 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2174-9 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
In this simple, folkloric story, Little Cliff is sent to get Miz Callie's butter so that
his grandma can make candied sweet potatoes in her magic skillet. As the boy
journeys through the neighborhood, he is stopped by a succession of porch-sitting
elders, each of whom gives him an ingredient to add to the sweet potatoes. Lewis'
watercolors meet the text more than halfway, portraying a sunny mid-century
existence in a Mississippi Delta African-American community while still investing
the people with vivid individuality. Young readers will identify with Little Cliffs
relationship with his grandma, sympathize with his dislike of old-lady kisses, and
relate to a childhood watched over by an autocracy of elders. The story's cumulative
structure prevails over a slow pace and wordy text; it is reminiscent of that traditional
cooking tale "Stone Soup" in its focus on the sharing of individual strengths for
the communal good. JNH
WOLKSTEIN, DIANE, ad. 
The Glass Mountain; illus. by Louisa Bauer. 
Morrow,
1999 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14848-4 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14847-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Wolkstein fleshes out this Grimm Brothers' tale of a glass mountain and a king's
promise with a sunnily willing princess, a whistling suitor, and, as the concluding
reward, a bird-filled garden instead of riches, splendor, and happily ever after.
When Jared arrives to climb the glass mountain to win Princess Raina's hand, she
climbs with him and falls into a crevasse. Underground she is found by Old
Rinkrank, a miserly hoarder of silver and gold who has her clean and cook for him
until she forgets who she is; only when Raina rebels against her captor does she
remember her identity and find a way to the surface once again. Bauer's water-
color images are light and airy, with even the villainous Old Rinkrank smiling with
benign malevolence. The images are too sugary sweet to be effective; the cotton-
candy colors and toylike figures give no sense of the darkness inherent in this tale,
and the compositions lack the depth necessary to convey the tonal nuances of the
story. Wolkstein's imposition of modern sensibilities over the old tale are fairly
innocuous-Raina and Jared free Raina's pet birds because of her own experiences
with captivity, and the couple use the riches retrieved from the villain to create a
community garden for all to enjoy-but these incidents do little to add to the
tension. The happy outcome of the tale is never in doubt, and without that sus-
pense, any drama in the retelling is lost. Still, those seeking a jollier version of one
of the Grimms' darker tales may take a fancy to this one. JMD
260 
* THE BULLETIN
WYNNE-JONES, TIM 
Lord of the Fries and Other Stories. Kroupa/DK Ink,
1999 
[2 24 p]
ISBN 0-7894-2623-4 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Seven stories-a baker's half-dozen?-from Canadian short-story maven Wynne-
Jones (Some of the Kinder Planets, BCCB 5/95, The Book of Changes, 10/95) pro-
vide some slices of intriguing and offbeat life. "Lord of the Fries" features a pair of
friends who try to penetrate the mysterious past of a legendarily cranky fast-food
entrepreneur; "The Fallen Angel" features a choirboy bedeviled by a new and prob-
lematic arrival in the choir loft; "The Chinese Babies" bring together a Welsh-
speaking English Canadian, a van full of French Canadians, several generations of
moody family, and some important games of chess. The book is fond of literary
allusions both direct and indirect, with the Rumpelstiltskin story providing a basis
for "Lord of the Fries," "The Bermuda Triangle" borrowing names and piratical
presence from Treasure Island, and "The Anne Rehearsals" depicting a young trio's
obsession with the books ofL. M. Montgomery. While the stories are inclined to
be more intellectually than emotionally involving, Wynne-Jones' creative plotting
and faith in the power of imagination (particularly evident in "The Pinhole Cam-
era," where two kids square off over their fantasy worlds) keeps events sparking
along in absorbing and unpredictable ways. Wynne-Jones continues to stand al-
most alone in providing unusual and accessible short stories for middle-grades
readers. DS
YOUNG, KAREN ROMANO 
The Beetle and Me: A Love Story. 
Greenwillow,
1999 
[19 2p]
ISBN 0-688-15922-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Daisy Pandolfi is fixated on restoring her father's 1957 Volkswagen
Beetle. This is not unusual in the Pandolfi family of car fanatics, but Daisy insists
on doing all the work herself, with no outside interference-or help. From June
to December, Daisy works on the car, observes her sister's perfect romance, falls
for the wrong guy, takes auto mechanics at school, and gets to know Billy Hatcher,
all around good guy and possible personal romantic lead. This novel is built more
around character development than action, although the action supports the char-
acters and their relationships quite well. While narrator/protagonist Daisy is the
center of the plot, the secondary characters are well-developed and believable. The
pace, while gentle, is nonetheless involving, with incidents unfolding at their own
appropriate speed set against whatever crisis the VW engine is having at the time.
Young evokes the confusion and passion of a teenage girl's first mad crush, shows
the emotional thud when the infatuation passes, and then carefully delineates the
slow growth from friendship to first real love (maybe) in the developing connec-
tion between Daisy and Billy. And in the background is that purple VW Bug, just
waiting for the right mechanic to put it back on the road. Readers who took
Bauer's Rules ofthe Road (BCCB 2/98) to heart will appreciate this carefully con-
structed tale of a girl and her car. JMD
cl-^^
MARCH 1999 
* 
261
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Barker, Keith. Outstanding Booksfor Children and Young People: The LA Guide to
Carnegie/Greenaway Winners 1937-1997. Bernan Associates/Library Association
Publishing, 1998. Paper ed. ISBN 1-85604-287-1. $35.00. 135p.
For those U.S. librarians accustomed to the relatively austere and respectful treat-
ment of the Newbery and Caldecott awards, this history of their British counter-
parts will be an eyeopener. Barker's introduction tells of two awards long shrouded
in obscurity and of early selection processes devoid of children's librarians; he briefly
discusses controversies, trends, and current status. Annotations of award winners
and "commended books" constitute the bulk of the book, and those annotations,
though sometimes awkwardly written, provide fascinating glimpses into selection
history (Noel Streatfeild's The Circus Is Comingwon the 1938 medal at a meeting
attended by only two of the selection committee), attitude towards awards ("Wil-
liam Mayne's name appeared so frequently in the Medal commendations that it
was only a matter of time before he was awarded the Medal itself"), reaction to
choices ("Westall's second Medal winner caused a good deal of controversy"), and
reaction to reaction ("This provoked an angry response from Westall when he
collected his Medal at the annual conference"). The gossip and strong opinions
(Barker makes no bones about which books he thinks were good choices and which
books he thinks were inferior) makes this survey informative as well as readable,
and it's fascinating to see the trends both in awards and in responses. Each anno-
tation includes publisher and, if the title is currently in print in Britain, ISBN.
Current award criteria are appended, as are author/illustrator and title indices. DS
Jones, Patrick. What's So Scary about R. L. Stine? Scarecrow, 1998. (Studies in
Young Adult Literature) ISBN 0-810803468-5. $32.50. 249p.
Considering that Stine's greatest recent popularity is with kids younger than those
generally considered young adult, he's an interesting choice for the first entry in
this new series. That cavil aside, however, this is an engaging critical study of the
biggest seller in children's literature. The book covers Stine's early life and the
different phases of his writing, providing close readings of individual titles as well
as larger assessments of his style, devices, and impact. Jones embraces his subject
wholeheartedly, objecting to the arm's-length approach some children's literature
professionals take towards Stine's work; this book is as much advocacy as critical
appraisal, and the writer has done an excellent job of supporting that advocacy.
There's a clear understanding of the Stinean milieu evinced in Jones' references to
Stephen King, Steve Martin, and other pop-culture cousins, and his net-savvy
research demonstrates an understanding of the relevance of that medium as well.
His solid support occasionally blinds him to some legitimate points-it never seems
to have occurred to him, for instance, that Stine's works could vary in merit and
that therefore some negative critical response might well come not from bias but
262 
* THE BULLETIN
from Stine's falling below his own standards-and another proofreading run would
have helped clean up errors and typos. Thorough but breezy and accessible, this is
a title that will provide fodder for many librarians grappling with the mass-market
issue; it's also a title an enterprising young adult might wish to use in a Stine
defense or, daringly, a literary analysis. An extensive bibliography (including Stine's
works, secondary sources, background works, and Stine reviews) includes print
and electronic resources, and an index is provided. DS
Knoepflmacher, U. C. Ventures into Childland: Victorians, Fairy Tales, and Femi-
ninity. University of Chicago Press, 1998. ISBN 0-226-44815-0. $35.00 4 44p.
illus. with photographs.
Knoepflmacher, one of the most important scholars of Victorian children's litera-
ture, here turns his attention to the literary fairy tale and fantasy of the era, exam-
ining the conflicts and ambivalence about male and female authority within the
works, the authors, and the genre as a whole. He focuses on seven authors-John
Ruskin, William Thackeray, George MacDonald, Lewis Carroll, Jean Ingelow,
Christina Rossetti, and Juliana Horatia Ewing-and explores, with a particular
eye to biographical influences, the concepts of femininity and masculinity as evinced
in this widely disparate literature. Readers with an interest in gender criticism and
literary history will find this particularly involving, and those who have followed
the folklore side of the issue in the work of Maria Tatar, Betsy Hearne, and others
will want to compare and contrast with Knoepflmacher's exploration of more lit-
erary children's texts. Illustrations are not only reproduced throughout but form a
key point of many of the author's analyses; an index is included. DS
Spagnoli, Cathy, comp. Asian Tales and Tellers. August House, 1998. ISBN 0-
87483-527-5. $24.95. 202p.
Spagnoli, herself a storyteller who has traveled and told extensively in Asia since
1972, has collected stories from tellers in Japan, Indonesia, Vietnam, China, Paki-
stan, India, Korea, the Philippines, Tibet, Sri Lanka, Burma, Cambodia, Laos,
Taiwan, Bangladesh, and Nepal. The first two chapters of this title discuss specific
modern Asian storytellers and their respective performance styles in an effort "to
provide a living cultural context for the tales," including a general discussion of
performance tools-symbolic images, riddles, openings and closings, gestures,
music, props, etc.-that are used to deliver stories effectively to listeners. The final
nine chapters offer fifty folktals and legends (with an occasional true personal
story). The stories are grouped thematically under such headings as Harmony and
Friendship, Hard Work and Study, Faith and Belief, and Wit and Wisdom, among
others; each section and nearly every story is introduced with a brief sentence or
paragraph that places the tales loosely within their cultural context. There are
extensive notes and references, a glossary, a bibliography, and a list of further re-
sources which includes publishers and Internet sites. Spagnoli has provided a rich
starting point for researching Asian folktales, but the true value of this title rests in
the tales themselves. The retellings are succinct and sharp, retold in a stylistically
undecorated, and therefore unimpeded, voice. Her selection includes a wide and
pleasant variety of tales, with a diversity of tones and emotional nuances. Spagnoli's
collection will be an asset to librarians and storytellers looking for an authoritative
resource for traditional and other Asian tales. JMD
MARCH 1999 
* 
263
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS titles published by the University of Illinois Press or
containing contributions from Bulletin staff are noted by announcements instead
of evaluative annotations.
Hearne, Betsy, ed. Story: From Fireplace to Cyberspace: Connecting Children and
Narrative. Ed. by Betsy Hearne, Janice M. Del Negro, Christine Jenkins, et al.
The Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign. 39th Allerton Park Institute Proceedings, No. 39. Paper ed.
ISBN 0-87845-105-6 $21.95. 14 3p.
The proceedings from the thirty-ninth Allerton Park Institute offer a panoply of
approaches to narrative, storytelling, and literature. Anne Shimojima models a
concrete approach to "Storytelling in the School Library Media Center," Betsy
Hearne discusses storytelling and librarianship in "Midwife, Witch, and Woman-
Child: Metaphor for a Matriarchal Profession," and Deborah Stevenson recreates
a presentation by illustrator Arthur Geisert in "Construction, Illustration, and a
Plethora of Pigs: Reflections on a Lecture by Arthur Geisert." Other presenters
included Karen Morgan discussing storytelling on the Internet, Judith O'Malley
on connecting teachers and books, and Christine Jenkins on the market forces
affecting stories and storytelling. A collection of appendices, biographical notes,
and an index are included. JMD
Sobol, Joseph Daniel. The Storytellers'Journey: An American Revival. University
of Illinois Press, 1999. Trade ed. ISBN 0-252-02436-2; $49.95. Paper ed. ISBN
0-252-06746-0; $19.95. 265p. illus. with photographs.
Folklorist Sobol looks at the evolution of the National Storytelling Association in
terms of its definition as a folk group, discussing the origin of the organization and
the social and psychological influences that contributed to the association's in-
creasing complexity. The book includes extensive quotes from interviews with
prominent American storytellers reflecting on the history of the National Story-
telling Association and the American storytelling revival. An index and bibliogra-
phy are appended. JMD
264 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Aiken;
DeFelice; Jendresen; Morris;
Paulsen
African Americans-fiction:
Carlson; Myers
African Americans-stories:
Johnson Wedding; Ringgold;
Taulbert
African Americans: Coleman;
Haskins; McKissack
Agriculture: Peterson
Art and artists: Curlee; Rohmer
Aunts-fiction: Brokaw; Haas
Basketball: McKissack
BEDTIME STORIES: Lum
BIOGRAPHIES: Coleman;
Curlee; Rohmer
Birds-stories: Andersen
Books and reading-fiction:
Wynne-Jones
Brothers-fiction: Maguire
Bullies-fiction: Griffith
Cars-fiction: Young
Commerce: Coleman
Cowboys-fiction: Myers
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Kehret; Neufeld
CUMULATIVE STORIES:
Pinkwater
Death and dying-fiction:
DeFelice; Haas; Pennebaker;
Pohl
Depression, the-fiction: DeFelice;
De Young
Disabilities-fiction: Carter
Dogs-fiction: Bechtold; Rodowsky
Dogs-stories: Markoe
Ethics and values: Andersen;
Bernier-Grand; Carlson; Craft;
Howe, J.; Kehret; Maguire;
McLaren; Naylor; Stewig
Families-fiction: Brokaw; De
Young
FANTASY: Almond; Morris;
Pierce
Farmers-stories: Lasky
Farms: Peterson
Farms-stories: Cowley Rusty
Fate-fiction: Howe, N.
Fathers and daughters-fiction: De
Young; McLaren; Pennebaker;
Young
Fathers and sons-fiction: Peck
Flowers: Rockwell
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Andersen;
Byrd; Craft; Jendresen; Lasky;
MacGill-Callahan; Murphy;
Ringgold; Stewig; Wolkstein
Food and eating-stories: Taulbert
Friends-fiction: Almond; Bartlett;
Bernier-Grand; Brokaw; Howe,
N.; Hurwitz; Johnson Maniac;
Jukes; Pennebaker; Peters;
Young
Friends-stories: Howe, J.
Frogs: Cowley Red-Eyed
FUNNY STORIES: Lasky;
MacGill-Callahan; Markoe
Gardens-stories: Ford
Ghosts-fiction: Gordon; Griffith
Giants-folklore: Byrd
Grandfathers-stories: Cowley
Rusty
Grandmothers-stories: Lum
MARCH 1999 
* 265
Hawaii-fiction: McLaren
HISTORICAL FICTION:
DeFelice; De Young; Gordon;
Haas; Maguire; Matas; Myers;
Peck; Skurzynski
History, U. S.: Curlee; Haskins;
McKissack
Holidays: MacGill-Callahan;
Schecter
Holocaust-fiction: Matas
Horses-fiction: Griffith; Haas
Husbands and wives-stories:
Naylor
India-folklore: Jendresen
Insects-fiction: Almond
Ireland-folklore: Byrd
Ireland-stories: MacGill-Callahan
Islands-fiction: Bartlett
Jews-fiction: Maguire; Matas
Judaism: Schecter
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Morris
Latinos-fiction: Bernier-Grand
LOVE STORIES: Skurzynski
Magicians-fiction: Pierce
Markets-stories: Naylor
Mental illness-fiction: Kehret
MYSTERIES: Kehret
MYTHOLOGY: Craft; Stewig
Orphans-fiction: Haas
Pets-fiction: Bechtold; Rodowsky
Plays-stories: Ford
POETRY: Lewis; McDonald; Nye
Princesses-stories: Wolkstein
Puerto Rico-fiction: Bernier-
Grand
Racism-fiction: Bernier-Grand;
Carlson; McLaren
Rain-stories: Ford; Pinkwater
Rainforest: Cowley Red-Eyed
Rape-fiction: Neufeld
Reading aloud: Griffith; Jendresen; Lewis;
Nye; Settel
Reading, beginning: Bartlett; Bechtold;
Cowley Red-Eyed
Reading, easy: Brisson; Johnson Maniac;
Rodowsky
Reading, reluctant: Griffith; Jendresen;
Settel
RIDDLES: Rockwell
School-fiction: Bartlett; Bernier-Grand;
Brokaw; Carter; Gordon; Hurwitz;
Jukes; Peters
Science: Settel
Science fairs-fiction: Peters
Sexual harassment-fiction: Neufeld
SHORT STORIES: Don't Read This;
Wynne-Jones
Sisters-fiction: Brisson; Pohl
Slavery: Haskins
Slavery-stories: Ringgold
Sports: McKissack
Storytelling: Andersen; Byrd; Craft;
Jendresen; McDonald
Storytime: Sturges
Suicide-fiction: Pennebaker
Superheroes-fiction: Howe, N.
Supernatural-fiction: Don't Read This
SURVIVAL STORIES: Paulsen
Teachers-fiction: Bartlett
Tractors-stories: Cowley Rusty
Transportation: Kalman; Sturges
Trucks: Sturges
Weddings-stories: Johnson Wedding
West, the-fiction: Myers; Peck
Wind-stories: Murphy
Women's studies: Byrd; Coleman
World War II-fiction: Maguire; Matas
IITe
Teaching r8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
Every issue of Teaching K-8
'-i 
provides informative articles on
nTaRhtn 
.
nthe cutting edge of education.
You'll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
r", n't mice 
ftlo 
y rn 
hie 
ial•arnhi-
1LIII 
L 1110O 
V^Ul, l/ll 
LI1JAI 
¥UIUAAU I.71•.
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
TeachngK-8
x 
54808, 
Boulder, 
CO 
80322-4808
0793
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I 
I
More Stars for DK Ink...
by Anthony Browne
*"Browne's expressive and elegany sttured
paintings are ulofs uual sueal asides....
Another handsome and provocative book from a
master."- 
Homrn BoMagaine starred review
*"...quiet, straightforward ext vibrant,
super-realistic paintings.
-School Library ournal strred review
Grades K-5 * ISBN: 0-894-2522-X * $15.95
* A SchoolLibray Journal Best Book of 1998
* A Publishers Weekly Best Book of 1998
* Included in Horn Book Fanfare 1999
* Included in The NY Public Library
Children's Books 1998, One Hundred Titles
for Reading and Sharing
by Angela Johnson
A"A beautiful collection of 1
characters to whom teens wi
-School LibraryJournal star
*"Throughout this remarkabl
on the human soul in all its v
-The Horn Book Magazine
A Richard Jackson Book
Grades 6-12 * ISBN: 0-7894-
by Tim McKee &Anne Blackshaw
*"An informative and timely book."
-School 
ibrary Journal starred review
*"The direct honest voices of 12 South African teens
who had diverse experience under apartheid will engage
reas in this powerful phot-essay.. A wonderful book."
-Booklist starred review
A Melanie Kroupa Book
Grades 6-12 
ISBN: 0-789-2524-6 * $19.95
* A School library ournal Best Book of 1998
* A Bookist Youth Editors' Choice 1998
* One of Book Links Lasting Connections of 1998
I 
an imrint of nK Puhlishinn 
Inr
lWvIg 
-
Z----B, 
".
95 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016
Ink http://www.dk.com
SIn r 
Available from your regular supplier, or call 1-888-DIAL-DKP.
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(199903)52:7*;1 -4
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1997
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
:;r
I,: i
~ 
.. 
: -
~~ia~· 
,·:·
'··RI 
li~"i 
Q:t
_i 
~~o
"
; "
*: 
· · , -~
i; --
;;
~;ai~·e ~r
~Ei~-~*I;
I~
