T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
February 2007
Vol. 60   No. 6
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
February 2007
Vol. 60 No. 6
241  The Big PicTure
 
 Do Not Pass Go  by Kirkpatrick Hill
242  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
244  • The Just-So Woman  by Gary Blackwood; illus. by Jane Manning
253  • John Lewis in the Lead:  A Story of the Civil Rights Movement; by Jim  
 
 Haskins and Kathleen Benson; illus. by Benny Andrews
259  • The White Darkness  by Geraldine McCaughrean
267  • The Treasures of Weatherby  by Zilpha Keatley Snyder
272  • Dog  by Matthew Van Fleet; illus. with photographs by Brian Stanton
275  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
277  suBjeCt And use Index
240 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2007 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Do Not Pass Go ©2007; jacket background photograph © 2007 Image Source/
Alamy; photograph of boy © 2007 Getty Images.  Used by permission of Margaret K. McElderry 
Books.
FeBruary 2007 • 241
the BIg PICture
Do Not Pass Go
by Kirkpatrick Hill
When novels for young people touch on incarceration, they’re usually either 
stories about a parent whose white-collar crime has suddenly lost the family its 
accustomed style of living or about inner-city kids struggling with or succumbing 
to the drift into criminal lives. The story that doesn’t usually get told is that of a 
family getting quietly by before and getting by afterward, of kids incorporating the 
fact of an imprisoned parent into their lives and the visits into their days, and of 
genuine contemplation of the realities and consequences of even a comparatively 
short jail stint.
That’s the story Kirkpatrick Hill tells in Do Not Pass Go. Her protagonist, 
Deet Aafedt, is a serious young guy; he loves his parents and his younger sisters, 
but he’s a little concerned about their hectic lifestyle, which makes him feel “that 
he was surrounded by people who couldn’t organize or plan, and sooner or later 
they always managed to catch him up in their mess.” And this time it’s some mess: 
his father, struggling to work a second job on top of his labors at a garage in their 
small Alaska town, has apparently been leaning on illegal stimulants to keep him 
going, and when a traffic stop by the police catches him with the goods, Mr. Aafedt 
ends up in jail.
At first the news is an ice-cold shock for Deet, making him ashamed and 
fearful of public taunting, but he soon discovers two important facts: that people 
can be wonderfully loyal (his friend Nelson silently makes it his job to stare down 
any schoolmate who seems to evince unseemly curiosity), and that many people have 
their own jail connections or experiences (“Deet thought about people telling you 
about their mistakes. They were giving you something very special, weren’t they?”). 
When he starts visiting his father, he realizes that the difference he’d always assumed 
between ordinary people and prisoners is solely in his imagination—his father’s 
jailmates “looked like anyone else you might see in the streets,” and he begins to get 
to know them through his father’s stories and through acquaintanceship with other 
jail visitors. The book doesn’t shy away from the tougher realities of jail, though: 
Deet’s grandparents essentially disown their son, Deet’s father realizes that he’s 
had a more fortunate life than most of his fellow inmates (his friendly and helpful 
roommate Ronny, who has nobody in the world caring for him, is released only to 
commit a near-fatal assault that sends him right back inside), and Deet is shocked 
to glimpse his father shuffling in shackles as he’s being transported for a hearing. 
Hill is a solid and honest writer, and she’s also a smart and deft one; her 
style remains accessible and her storytelling smooth and well paced even as she’s 
walking Deet through serious contemplation of the issues surrounding incarcera-
tion and his family. Often this exploration takes place in his English assignments, 
242 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
wherein he’s selecting historical quotations and writing essays about them, a device 
that gives some structure to Deet’s considerations and also provokes the reader to 
contemplation along with him. It’s totally in character for thorough, fair-minded 
Deet that those considerations include reexamining his own views, easing up on 
his formerly stern assessments of his parents’ disorganized style once he himself has 
to handle the household while his mother now spends hours at her waitressing job. 
In another change in family dynamics, Deet finds himself sharing new things with 
his father (“Deet could hardly believe he was talking to Dad about books”); it’s also 
clear that, despite his initial embarrassment, Deet retains and even increases his 
respect for his dad as a result of the way his father approaches his incarceration.
It’s reported that there are over two million children in America with 
a parent in prison. Deet’s experiences may not be typical, but they’ll make read-
ers think about what that situation would be like—or, for those who are already 
there, it may give them a new way to think about their own families. “Jail wasn’t 
the end of the world,” a much-wiser Deet realizes; while the book never overtly 
goes beyond that to make the point that many situations are more survivable than 
one might imagine, it’s an extrapolation that perceptive readers will make, and 
they’ll find this illustration of the fact both readable and reassuring. (See p. 254 
for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Barnes, Derrick The Making of Dr. Truelove. Simon Pulse, 2006 233p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4169-1439-0 $7.99   
R Gr. 10-12
Instead of the rapturous mutual virginity loss that Diego and Roxy had planned 
for their afternoon, Diego jumps the gun, so to speak, and he is too embarrassed 
to get back on track, even though Roxy assures him it’s okay. Mortified, he stops 
calling Roxy, and she starts stepping out with John-John MacAfee, Washington, 
D.C.’s hottest high-school basketball star. Faced with such seemingly stiff competi-
tion, Diego lets his lecherous best friend, J, talk him into a crazy plan to launch an 
Internet advice column on love and sex under the pseudonym of Dr. Truelove; when 
he becomes as famous as JJ Mac, they’ll reveal Dr. Truelove’s identity and Roxy will 
see what she’s missing. Catching his concert-promoter uncle in a compromising 
position, J blackmails him into financing a publicity blitz that makes Truelove the 
talk of the city, but Diego slowly realizes that Roxy meant what she said—she loves 
Diego for the math geek/jazz aficionado that he is, not the sex god he longs to be-
come. Meanwhile, J’s working his own angles, using Truelove’s cred to augment his 
already overburdened sex life. Diego’s descriptions of J’s sexploits are as raw as they 
are hilarious; his urban-slang repertoire delivers sharp, witty commentary on the 
aesthetics of black sexuality as he describes the juicy assets of a “perfectly rounded 
phatty,” “breasts the size of Pluto,” or that “heaping layer of ‘pump-fat’ ready to 
explode out of the top of the shoe.” His advice column and narration undeniably 
FeBruary 2007 • 243
normalize rampant teen sexuality, but as with Melvin Burgess in Doing It (BCCB 
7/04), he does so with good humor and within a thoughtful moral framework; when 
he and Roxy decide to get back together but hold off on sex, that seems normal, 
too. Sexy fun with a romantic ending (or funny sex with a romantic ending), this 
delivers unvarnished humor in the Dave Chappelle tradition.  KC
Beam, maTT Getting to First Base with Danalda Chase. Dutton, 
2007 [192p]
ISBN 0-525-47578-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
It used to be that the only pressure Darcy Spillman faced was the self-imposed 
challenge of excelling at baseball. Now in junior high it seems he’s also expected 
to land himself a girlfriend, and his mouthy friend Ralph Peterson and the usually 
aloof ice goddess Kamna Singh are all too ready to help him along in his pursuit 
of elusive beauty Danalda. Darcy credibly occupies the well-populated adolescent 
middle ground between the likes of Ralph, whose preoccupation with the fairer sex 
is constantly and tediously under discussion, and friend Dwight, who still thinks 
girls are yucky, and the complex and arcane rites of junior-high courtship will 
garner some knowing grins. There’s no surprise to the trajectory of Darcy’s trials, 
though (it’s Kamna, not Danalda, who turns out to be the girl of his dreams), and 
there’s far more chemistry between Darcy and his Alzheimer-stricken grandfather 
in a subplot than there is between Darcy and Kamna in the main event. Neverthe-
less, this is right in the strike zone for kids who want a quick read or who need a 
quick book report.  EB
Becker, Bonny Holbrook: A Lizard’s Tale; illus. by Abby Carter. Clarion, 
2006 150p
ISBN 0-618-71458-8 $15.00   
Ad Gr. 4-7
It’s not easy being an artistic lizard in a desert full of non-appreciative reptiles, as 
Holbrook the lizard discovers when he tries to share one of his paintings with the 
residents of Rattler’s Bend. Hoping to find a more welcoming art community, Hol-
brook sets out for an exhibition in Golden City. There he meets Count Rumolde, 
a mink who tricks Holbrook into believing he is the next great thing to hit the art 
scene, then ruthlessly adds him to the minions turning out tourist painting after 
tourist painting in his basement sweatshop. Holbrook manages to escape and, 
determined to tell the world about the horrors of the factory, he enlists a group of 
pigeons to execute his clever plan to save the artist slaves. Finally, Holbrook ends up 
in prison among a group of other artists (including the alluring Margot Frogtayne) 
all destined to become dinner, he cunningly talks the chef out of cooking them, 
Rumolde’s labor abuse is exposed for all to see . . . and Holbrook lands the Most 
Promising Newcomer award for his painting “Starry Night.” Many of Becker’s char-
acters are, as explained in an author’s note, based upon historical figures (Vincent 
Van Gogh, Giacomo Puccini, T. S. Eliot, Rod McKuen), but most of the references 
will go right over the heads of the intended readership. Similarly, while the explo-
ration of artistic intuition is indeed thoughtfully portrayed (“He wasn’t trying to 
show how things looked; he was trying to show how they felt”), it’s somewhat out 
of place among the fast-paced animal capers. It’s the entertaining plotting that is 
the highlight of Holbrook’s quest: time and time again, just when things seem to 
be going Holbrook’s way, the carpet is pulled out from under him and he is left 
244 • The BulleTin
to get himself out of yet another sloppy situation. Carter’s black-and-white pencil 
and wash illustrations, which offer humorous caricatures of the anthropomorphized 
animals, are fluid and dimensional, full of light and shadows. Despite the book’s 
drawbacks, young readers may still cheer for this underdog champion as he wittily 
works his way through the trials of the artist as a young lizard.  HM
Becker, shari Horris Grows Down; illus. by Valeria Petrone. Putnam, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-399-24358-5 $15.99   
Ad 4-7 yrs
“Horris was so big that his mother had to stand on her tiptoes to rock his cradle 
and she had to climb on eleven books just to kiss him goodnight.” Despite Horris’ 
hugeness, his parents try to treat him as a regular child, until at four he reaches a 
size incongruent with regular childhood and his parents decide he needs to get a 
job. Though at first content with his job at the box factory, he finds himself out of 
step with his co-workers, and he loses his job when he can’t count to 100; on the 
way home, he’s entranced by the play of a group of children, and he realizes that’s 
the right job for him. The too-big baby is an enjoyable idea, and the tendency of 
kids to correlate size with age and authority means that they’ll understand the plot’s 
comedic logic. The story bogs down after Horris fails at the factory, though, plod-
ding into a preachy kids-should-be-kids message, and the book shunts aside the 
size issue that got Horris into his predicament in the first place. Computer-created 
illustrations suggest acrylics in their cheery opacity; the palette has a ’60s-revival 
flair in its taste for muted teal enhanced with complementary burnt orange and 
snappy black accents (though the black-circled eyes are a little odd and raccoon-
like) and its mid-mod curves of figures and furniture. Horris, however, lacks the 
size that the text leads one to expect; still shorter than the grownups, he’s mostly 
a slightly oversized kid with a really huge head. James’ Baby Brains (BCCB 1/05) 
is a more crisp and clever exploration of a kid who finally cracks in the face of 
age-inappropriate advancement, but fans of the notion may be amused to watch 
Horris turn his back on being big.  DS
BlackwooD, gary The Just-So Woman; illus. by Jane Manning. HarperCollins, 
2006 48p (I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-057728-2 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-057727-4 $15.99   
R* Gr. 1-3
Set in a rural farming community of the past, this new entry in the I Can Read! 
series features a cast of two: the Just-So Woman, who insists that everything be 
done a certain way, and the Any-Way Man, who makes his plans on the fly. When 
the Just-So Woman sits down to breakfast on this particular day, she finds there 
is no butter for her bread. Thinking the matter is easily solved by getting some 
milk from her cow, she instead is faced with a series of other challenges, including 
a broken milking stool, a dull hatchet, an intrusive cat, a dirty milk spoon, some 
uninvited mice, and the need to borrow salt from the Any-Way Man. Unsurpris-
ingly, lunchtime rolls around before the Just-So Woman has had breakfast, but, 
despite the Any-Way Man’s offer, she insists “it would not do” to eat lunch before 
breakfast. In the end, the Just-So Woman’s cat eats up the freshly made butter while 
she is out borrowing a butter mold. “‘I guess he did not care whether it was molded 
or not,’ says the Any-Way Man. ‘I guess sometimes it is best just to take things as 
they are.’” The Just-So Woman agrees and, despite having missed breakfast and 
FeBruary 2007 • 245
lunch, invites the Any-Way Man to join her for a butterless dinner. This transitional 
chapter book is loaded with domestic charm: the Just-So Woman, whose lamenta-
tions are punctuated with a series of entertaining exclamations (“Oh, bother!” “Oh, 
fiddle!” “Oh, applesauce!”), is both likable and familiar, and young readers will be 
tickled by her overambitious efforts at doing things a particular way. Manning’s 
folksy watercolor paintings feature rosy-cheeked and appealingly young characters 
dressed in period outfits. The pictures offer lots of clues for readers just beginning 
to take on chapter books independently, and the bright, light-filled compositions 
match the airy tone of the text. Share this entertaining life lesson with the just-sos 
and the any-ways in your early elementary set. An author’s note describes some of 
the historical items noted in the text.  HM
Brooks, kevin Being. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2007 [336p]
ISBN 0-439-89973-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
What’s supposed to be a routine medical procedure suddenly upends the life of 
sixteen-year-old Robert Smith: the anesthetized boy hears startled medical personnel 
trying to make sense of his apparently man-made internals (“Some kind of plastic 
. . . silvery filaments”) and then pulls himself out of anesthesia to break away from 
not only doctors but also the mysterious gun-toting authority, Ryan, who is wit-
nessing the endoscopy. Now Robert is on the run, wondering where he came from 
and whether he’s really human. When Ryan plants a story in the newspapers that 
Robert is wanted for murder, Robert turns to Eddi, a criminal acquaintance who 
specializes in phony IDs, and when she accidentally shoots one of Ryan’s colleagues 
she’s inextricably involved with Robert’s drama. The two flee to her secret hideout in 
Spain, but can they really escape whatever plot created and now seeks Robert? British 
author Brooks is well established as a writer of taut and dangerous YA fiction, and 
he’s got an intriguing premise here. The on-the-lam plot has classic thriller appeal, 
and Eddi makes for a sexy and enigmatic compatriot (Robert never fully ’fesses up 
to her about the source of his troubles, but she keeps her own secrets as well). Since 
it’s clear their Spanish idyll can’t be the end, the final violence is predictable, but 
readers will likely be divided on whether the conclusion wherein nobody, includ-
ing Robert and the reader, gets any answers is a let-down or a satisfying nihilistic 
statement. Those who’ve enjoyed the straightforward thriller aspects will hope for a 
sequel that casts some light on the proceedings, while others may find it sufficient 
to enjoy the wild ride and contemplate the questions raised.  DS
caleTTi, DeB  The Nature of Jade. Simon, 2007 [288p]
ISBN 1-4169-1005-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
The Jade of the title is a high-school senior, struggling with an anxiety disorder 
and with irritation at her static life. She breaks her routine by volunteering at the 
zoo’s elephant compound, drawn at first by a young man she’s seen watching the 
creatures; soon she’s enamored of both the elephants and the young man, Sebastian. 
Sebastian has a toddler, Bo, from a previous relationship; though he initially tells 
Jade that Bo’s mother has died, he eventually reveals that he’s actually in hiding from 
her and her parents, who are seeking custody of the child. In Caletti’s careful hands, 
this isn’t just a romance; it’s also a playing out of Jade’s slow-coming independence, 
and the romance is a factor affecting her rich and believable family dynamics. 
246 • The BulleTin
Readers will immediately sympathize with Jade’s frustration with her mother, who 
as dance chaperon and eager school volunteer is trying to have the high-school 
experience she wishes her daughter would have, and with Jade’s irritation with her 
father, who’s demanding and emotionally distant. Her relationship with Sebastian 
credibly becomes her way of bridging the gap to adulthood and the issue on which 
she finally separates from her parents; this means that her mother’s decision, upon 
discovering the truth, to notify Bo’s mother’s family about Bo’s whereabouts is a 
metaphoric grab for her daughter even as it’s an understandable action to take. 
Smooth, perceptive writing adds polish to an already compelling story that’s sure 
to draw teens contemplating their own leaps into independence.  DS
calhoun, Dia Avielle of Rhia. Cavendish, 2006 [400p]
ISBN 0-7614-5320-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7 
Princess Avielle reminds everyone of her great-great grandmother, whose dark magic 
made all the birds leave Rhia. Although people offer her dutiful respect, Avielle 
is largely shunned by her court, feared by the townsfolk, and treated with distant 
affection by her family. A growing tension with nearby Dredonia results in a fierce 
attack on the castle, and Avielle is one of the few to escape. Suddenly free from 
royal responsibility, Avielle takes advantage of this new anonymity to explore her 
magical weaving gifts as an apprentice. Though she adores her new small-town life, 
Avielle cannot ignore the needs of her people, her duty to serve as queen, and her 
family history forever. The hostility between the Rhians and the Dredonians is a 
compelling drama with the manipulated people largely being used as pawns, giving 
the leaders unquestioned power; the citizens become so fearful of their neighbors 
that they acquiesce to heightening restrictions on their own freedom (socially 
minded readers will find historical and current parallels). Readers may, however, 
have a difficult time engaging with Avielle, as she is for much of the book selfish, 
short-sighted, and implausibly naïve. Though she does emerge as a more intriguing 
character as the novel progresses, the triumphant ending when she returns to the 
throne is unrealistic given her initial personality. In addition, the languid pace belies 
the fact that quite a lot is happening to and around Avielle; efficient unfolding of 
events and fewer atmospheric descriptions would have resulted in a more active 
novel. That said, Calhoun’s attention to bit parts and minor setting details helps 
to establish a formidable landscape peopled with engaging characters; even though 
Avielle takes an unreasonable amount of time to become worthy of leading, readers 
may be enchanted enough to forgive her.  AS
carmoDy, isoBelle Little Fur: The Legend Begins. Random House, 
2006 195p illus.
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93854-0 $14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83854-6 $12.95   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Little Fur is half elf, half troll, making her deeply connected to the earth and all 
things that grow on it. When it comes to her attention that people are deliberately 
and maliciously setting trees on fire, she is filled with fear that the tree burners will 
eventually threaten the Old Ones, seven ancient trees that protect the wilderness 
where Little Fur lives. She sets off on a quest to stop the tree burners but soon 
learns that the menace is far greater than she imagines, and that it is ultimately 
her destiny to stop the Troll King from devouring the world. Her bravery and the 
FeBruary 2007 • 247
help of a motley assortment of friends that includes a crow and two cats help her 
win the battle, but she knows that the war is just beginning (and indeed, this title 
is the first of an anticipated series). Ecofantasy is still a comparatively rare genre, 
especially for this age group, and Australian author Carmody makes it a compel-
ling story for a young audience. There’s more than a touch of both didacticism 
and schmaltz, though; a degree of extratextual menace is added by illustrations of 
a demonic-looking sprite dogging Little Fur’s unwitting footsteps, but otherwise 
the illustrations add the expected oversweet icing to this clichéd cake full of sing-
ing trees, dreaming earth spirits, easily duped and uncaring humans, and a wise 
old owl dispensing oracular wisdom. Nevertheless, fans of The Dark Crystal and 
Ferngully, as well as those with a high tolerance for the combination of cute and 
intense, may want to give this a go.  KC
carney, Jeff The Adventures of Michael MacInnes. Farrar, 2006 244p
ISBN 0-374-30146-8 $17.00   
R Gr. 7-12
It’s 1924, and Roger is traveling by train to his third boarding school (he’s been 
dismissed from the previous two) when he meets the outrageous orphan and 
scholarship boy, Michael MacInnes. As entering juniors, they have a lot to prove, 
and Michael soon makes sure they are in the center of scandal. They enter school 
grounds with panache in a stolen car, and set up as chums with a taste for break-
ing the rules. They immediately run afoul of the overweight, morphine-addicted, 
corrupt proctor of their house, but it is Roger’s fondness for boys (one boy in 
particular) and Michael’s fondness for girls (one girl in particular) that spark their 
most dramatic adventures. As they crusade for the freedom to do as they please, they 
end up flying Roger’s homemade zeppelin out of a tight spot, destroying a stash of 
potentially lethal home-brew that the proctor is selling the boys, narrowly escaping 
a showdown on the roof that leaves the proctor paralyzed and disempowered, and 
getting their romantic lives sorted in ways that make them both happy. Carney 
maintains a stylized 1920s sensibility in this densely plotted and well-paced school 
story; while its nostalgic flavor won’t be to everyone’s taste, there are enough twists, 
turns, and fistfights to satisfy old-school Hardy Boys fans, and the writing, plotting, 
and characterizations are solid and satisfying throughout. Occasional visitations 
and revelations to Michael by mystical characters add atmospheric drama without 
overwhelming the plot and they introduce an Indiana Jones/Allan Quatermain feel 
that heightens the sense of the time period; fans of The League of Extraordinary 
Gentlemen may therefore also appreciate this offering.  KC 
cook, sally Hey Batta Batta Swing!: The Wild Old Days of Baseball; by Sally Cook 
and James Charlton; illus. by Ross MacDonald. McElderry, 2007 [56p]
ISBN 1-4169-1207-X $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Spitballs, corked bats, stolen signals—readers certainly won’t be shocked to learn 
that the all-American sport has its shady underside. But how about holding a run-
ner by his belt loops, trading a player for a bag of oysters, or bolting directly from 
first base to third if the ump is looking the other way? Cook and Charlton lead 
fans on a breezy tour of bygone baseball, reveling in evolving uniforms, colorful 
nicknames, antiquated rules, and eccentrically designed stadiums. MacDonald’s 
watercolors, profusely splashed in sunshiny yellow, extend the reminiscent tone 
with a vintage Golden Books look and allow plenty of white space to accommodate 
248 • The BulleTin
comfortably both text and sidebar definitions of arcane terminology. The broad 
humor of the illustrations and the unintimidating prose make this a natural for 
kids who’d, frankly, rather play than read. No notes are appended, and readers may 
suspect that lore occasionally infiltrates fact, but only the crankiest of purists will 
begrudge the authors a juicy legend or two.  EB
cooPer, michael l. Hero of the High Seas: John Paul Jones and the American 
Revolution. National Geographic, 2006 128p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-7922-5548-8 $32.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7922-5547-X $21.95   
R Gr. 5-8
If kids remember anything about maritime hero John Paul Jones from their history 
lessons, it’s probably the quotation, “I have not yet begun to fight!” Not only will 
they have to rethink the veracity of the quote (even Jones could not later recall his 
exact words), but also some of the personal attributes of the icon himself as Cooper 
fills in details about his background and the climactic sea battle that clinched his 
reputation. The textbooks may fail to mention his name changes (from John Paul, 
to Paul Jones, to John Paul Jones), occasioned by being accused of murder for the 
second time; they may also neglect the fiery temper and overarching ambition 
for fame that alienated many of his own countrymen. Replays of the epic battle 
between Jones’ Bonhomme Richard and the British Serapis don’t always cover the 
facts that the convoy under the Serapis’ protection made it to safe harbor and its 
captain was knighted for his heroism, while Jones’ vessel was raked by a ship from 
his own squadron and sank from damages less than two days after the battle. Still, 
Cooper is no iconoclast, and Jones receives due credit for his contribution to the 
Revolutionary War effort: “Safety and personal fortune were less important to Jones 
than his duty of serving his adopted country.” Sepia-toned period illustrations, 
maps, and a photo of Jones’ ornate crypt at Annapolis augment the smoothly nar-
rated text, and a timeline, source notes, brief nautical glossary, index, and reading 
list are useful supplements. Readers with an interest in military history should add 
this to their must-read list.  EB 
Dalecki, linDen Kid B. Graphia/Houghton, 2006 246p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-60566-5 $7.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Breslin’s life is both depressed and depressing: his real mom committed suicide, 
his dad is always on the road, and his stepmom and his older brother are hook-
ing up. He’s a failure at school, and he’s looking at a life of back-breaking work at 
one of the oil refineries in his hometown of Beaumont, Texas, if they’ll take him 
without a diploma. In the cypher, though, that magical circle where break dancers 
defy gravity, Breslin is Kid B, a white b-boy with mad skillz. He and his Krew are 
looking to represent at a Throw Down in Houston, but they’ll settle for beating 
their chief rivals, Magno Clique. The narrative arc seems on the one hand to be a 
Cinderella story for Kid B, but the complications of his realization of the first step 
of his dream (a contract to dance back-up for a famous singer, awarded as much 
for his race as for his talent), and the unfinished business that he leaves behind 
with his Krew make his escape from Beaumont more poignant than jubilant. He 
knows that competitive team break dancing is a substitution for real gang violence, 
and that it sometimes fails; he also knows that it’s a physically demanding sport 
hampered by the misunderstanding of those outside the culture. What makes this 
novel distinctive, though, is the authenticity of Kid’s voice. Some of the expressions 
FeBruary 2007 • 249
and language are local to the east Texas hip-hop community (such as “liquid bar,” 
which refers to a purple mixture of promethazine with codeine cough syrup and 
Sprite, known elsewhere as simply “syrup”), but most of the vocabulary is popular 
urban slang, and Kid B does a good job of describing the various break dance 
moves that he names, such as windmills, bellymills, suicides, etc. Kid’s narration is 
fully stylized insider hip-hop fo’ shizzle, making this an informative ethnography 
of b-boy culture for outsiders, and a great way to entice readers who are more at 
home on cardboard than carpet.  KC 
DarT, iris rainer Larry: The King of Rock and Roll; by Iris Rainer Dart and Joyce 
Brotman. Putnam, 2007 [176p]
ISBN 0-399-24546-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 3-5
Larry is a dog, a Maltese, to be specific, who gets his big break when he completes 
the song of his keyboardist owner, Tom; when Tom figures he must have forgotten 
completing the song himself, an indignant Larry comes clean, revealing to Tom and 
his daughter, Cathy, that he can talk as well as write music. After he bounds onto 
stage to help Tom out with a concert, his talents make him front-page news and 
catapult him into a high-flying career that leaves Tom behind. Soon, though, the 
dog world is concerned that he’s giving away important canine secrets, and even as 
Larry’s heedlessly reveling in stardom he’s missing being Cathy’s beloved dog. This 
story has the potential for some modest Disneyesque hijinks, but it’s too glib and 
muddled to really deliver. The events are cartoonish in their unreality (culminating 
in an offstage halting of Cathy’s mother’s remarriage plans and a likely reconcili-
ation between the divorced parents), undercutting the emotional kick the book 
occasionally aims for—probably a good thing when Larry, the child surrogate, is 
permanently exiled from the home and replaced by his loving family after they are 
piqued by his narcissism. Dog or no, Larry is unsympathetic from the start with his 
unpleasant and relentless self-centeredness that never really becomes funny; where 
his narration is grating, however, Cathy, his partner in the alternating narration, 
never really achieves a convincing voice, tending toward the limp and sentimental. 
The concept is appealing and the reading is easy, but even undemanding readers 
will react to the plot holes by scratching their heads as vigorously as a pup scratches 
for fleas.  DS
DuBle, kaThleen Benner Hearts of Iron. McElderry, 2006 248p
ISBN 1-4169-0850-1 $15.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Jesse Rosseter and Lucy Pettee have been friends since they were four; that’s when 
Lucy and her recently widowed father moved from the city to the Connecticut hills. 
Now that they’re in their mid-teens, Jesse is making secret plans to leave and join 
the navy, despite his father’s demands that he, like the rest of the Rosseters, take his 
place in the ironworks, and Lucy is trying to figure out a way to avoid her father’s 
plans to marry her off to a city gentleman. When Samuel Lernley arrives to work in 
Mr. Pettee’s shop, Lucy learns that he has been invited as an eligible suitor for her. 
Determined to despise him, she instead finds him extremely agreeable; these feelings 
prove tremendously confusing to Lucy, who is beginning to feel a romantic shift 
in her relationship with Jesse. Set in 1820 in a tightly knit mountain community 
whose very existence centers on the ironworks, this is a tenderly composed, carefully 
researched historical love story. The core tension in the novel—Jesse’s determina-
250 • The BulleTin
tion to go vs. Lucy’s determination to stay—is both simple and profound, and the 
class issues (Lucy’s father will not allow her to consider marrying Jesse, as she is 
from a higher class) are realistically developed. Because both the affection between 
Jesse and Lucy and Samuel’s likable nature are so thoughtfully rendered, readers 
will find it difficult deciding which romance to champion, and a surprise ending 
will add further complexity. Fans of contemporary romance are just as likely to 
fall for this tender story as are readers of historical fiction. An author’s note offers 
information on the forge at Mt. Riga, on which the story is based, and a list of 
sources is included.  HM
farnell, chris Mark II. Dufour/Tindal Street, 2006 164p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9547913-9-8 $13.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8 
Losing a best friend at thirteen is almost too much for Phil to endure, and dealing 
with the “physically improved” clone of Mark makes it better and worse at the same 
time. It’s better because socializing the new Mark distracts Phil from his heartbreak, 
worse because, other than sharing Mark’s memories, the wide-eyed and cheerful 
clone is worlds different from the sarcastic, wheelchair-using Mark that Phil knew 
from before. In addition to the clone, Phil must also contend with Mark’s family, 
who are each responding in different ways: Mark’s mother is fiercely determined to 
regain the son she lost, Mark’s father is defeated and depressed, and Mark’s younger 
sister, Lauren, rejects the clone outright. Before everyone can settle into their new 
lives, a terrible tragedy shakes up their worlds again. As an ethical exploration of 
cloning and a philosophical examination of what gives a human his or her identity, 
the book succeeds admirably. Unfortunately, the too-abundant plot twists result in 
a complicated story that almost overwhelms its own intent: once Lauren dies (and 
is, of course, also cloned), thoughtful readers will find that the emotional depth 
and intensity of the first half of the novel is lost under the weight of B-movie red 
herrings and surprises. Although the final unveiling of what actually happened to 
the first Mark will shock some readers, the mystery elements of the book are not 
as well developed as the genetic debate that drives the story. In spite of these is-
sues, however, this is still a powerful novel about love, loss, and the intractability 
of human longing for what is known and familiar.  AS 
flinn, alex Diva. HarperTempest, 2006 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-056845-3 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-056843-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
As part of Caitlin’s recovery from a traumatic year with an abusive boyfriend, Nick 
(described in Breathing Underwater, BCCB 7/01), she decides to audition for a 
spot in the musical theater program at the Miami High School of the Arts. Her 
only support is her voice teacher; she can’t explain her love of opera to her friends, 
who don’t know opera from Oprah and who are really Nick’s friends anyway, and 
her parents are too involved with their own projects—a new family for Dad and 
a quest to stay forever young for Mom—to get behind hers. Thanks to her amaz-
ing voice, she gets into the school, but it seems that Caitlin’s spent so much time 
without friends—all through her fat years and then through her hideous ordeal with 
Nick—that she doesn’t know how to act when she has them. Most of the kids at 
her new school find her standoffish, but she does manage to connect with a former 
pageant-girl-turned-candy-goth singer and dancer named Gigi and a megahot boy 
FeBruary 2007 • 251
named Sean. The latter connection doesn’t go as planned, however, as she figures 
out, not a minute too soon, that he’s gay. Mostly, this is an effective and moving 
sequel to Breathing Underwater, as Caitlin slowly but surely finishes her emotional 
business with Nick, finds peace with her new body, and develops a more mature 
understanding of her outwardly tacky mom, who loves her despite their wildly 
different outlooks on what constitutes both personal style and a good life. There is 
enough reflection, reminiscence, and explanation for readers who haven’t read the 
first installment of Caitlin and Nick’s story; both teens emerge here as characters of 
depth and complexity who have a lot to overcome and the will to do it.  KC
golDenBerg, linDa Little People and a Lost World: An Anthropologi-
cal Mystery. Twenty-First Century, 2007 112p illus. with photo-
graphs (Discovery!)
ISBN 0-8225-5983-8 $29.27   
R Gr. 6-9
Forget CSI; here’s a chance to dive into a real-life scientific investigation that’s in 
peril of being consigned to the cold case file. Just who are these meter-high people 
whose bones were discovered by a team of Australian and Indonesian archaeologists 
in a Flores Island, Indonesia cave in 2003? How did a people so ancient, as multiple 
dating techniques have established, find their way to an island considered too remote 
to be reached by humanoids so primitive? Or were the Floresians primitive at all? 
How could people of such small cranial capacity apparently make sophisticated 
stone tools? Is this a new species that lived alongside Homo sapiens? Or are they 
Homo sapiens who merely suffered from stunted growth and microcephaly? Gold-
enberg not only explores these and myriad related questions, but she also considers 
the equally perplexing array of scientific viewpoints that seem to be influenced by 
professional rivalry and nationalistic tunnel vision and bemoans the fact that the 
most intact skeleton has been severely damaged since its discovery and the cave 
site has since been closed to researchers. This is the kind of scientific mystery writ-
ing that will appeal to fans of Sally Walker’s Fossil Fish Found Alive and Secrets of a 
Civil War Submarine (BCCB 4/02 and 6/05), and although the sidebars are not as 
necessary and the layout is not as attractive as in Walker’s titles, the text is equally 
compelling. Source notes and bibliographies are substantial enough to guide read-
ers through scholarly and popular works representing disparate viewpoints. Color 
photographs, a glossary, and an index are also included.  EB
gourse, leslie Sophisticated Ladies: The Great Women of Jazz; illus. by Martin 
French. Dutton, 2007 [64p]
ISBN 0-525-47198-7 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Gourse throws the spotlight on fourteen jazz singers (and blues/pop crossovers), 
describing their vocal styles and hitting the highlights of personal stories and ca-
reers.  Naturally, Billie Holiday, Ella Fitzgerald, Bessie Smith, and Sarah Vaughan 
make the cut, along with greats with less name recognition among the grade-school 
set—Ethel Waters, Mabel Mercer, Anita O’Day. And there’s an attempt to bring 
current performers into the mix, with Cassandra Wilson and Diana Krall. Of 
course, any title that promises the “Greats” will come under fire for omissions, so 
one may wonder where the print worthy Nina Simone is hiding, as well as Etta 
James and Astrid Gilberto (and are there no Latina jazz singers to be had?), but on 
the whole the selection laudably covers a range of styles. Entries are so short that 
252 • The BulleTin
only a bare minimum of information is included, and with a little too much space 
devoted to pure adulation, readers will probably derive more data from Wikipedia. 
Although the dust-jacket data states that Ms. Gourse died in 2004, her discography 
has been updated for this publication to assure that most, if not all, listening sug-
gestions are currently available (the recent passing of Anita O’Day unfortunately 
dates the title). An occasional glitch may have readers scratching their heads (how 
did “Sweet Mama Stringbean” Ethel Waters turn into a 350-pound diabetic?), 
but French’s energized poster-style portraits are attention grabbers and the list of 
recommended CDs and best-known songs should lead to some fresh tunes for the 
iPods. A bibliography is included.  EB 
hacker, ranDi Life as I Knew It. Simon Pulse, 2006 233p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-4169-0995-8 $6.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Sixteen-year-old Angelina Rossini may have a few obstacles keeping her small-town 
Vermont life from being completely idyllic—there’s friction between her and her 
mother, and she’s yearning in vain for romance with her male best friend, Jax, who’s 
gay—but it’s an acceptably normal existence. That changes when her father, who’s at 
least a generation older than her classmates’ parents, suffers a stroke, which doesn’t 
kill him but robs him of speech (he expresses himself only through inflection of a 
single syllable) and of movement on one side; now her household is focused around 
tending the man who had been the family’s anchor. Though an intense and emo-
tional story, it’s an affectionate one in many different ways—in the portrait of the 
small New England town and the relationship between Jax and Angelina, as well 
as Angelina’s devotion to her father—and it’s made more vivid by the particulars of 
Angelina’s complicated family (she’s the only child of her father’s second marriage, 
resented by her much older half-sister). A subplot about Angelina’s conflict with a 
classmate offers another view of the way human connections can operate (it turns 
out that Celeste has a crush on Angelina, leaving her in the same unrequited and 
unrequitable position as Angelina herself), enhancing the intricacy of the dynam-
ics; the prose, however, remains plainspoken and readable yet smart. Readers who 
appreciate a solid and well-crafted relationship drama will find Angelina’s story an 
absorbing one.  DS
hageruP, klaus Markus + Diana; tr. by Tara Chace. Front Street, 
2006 188p
ISBN 1-932425-59-4 $17.95   
R Gr. 6-9
Markus is convinced he’s the most timid boy in Norway; even though he tries 
to always stay on the safe side, he often doubts that there is one. His overactive 
imagination doesn’t just spin out scenarios of doom, however; he uses it to craft 
identities that he thinks will appeal to his heroes—sports figures, movie stars, 
poets—and then writes letters in these personae asking for autographs. During a 
disastrous school trip full of fears and humiliations, he soothes his ruffled feelings 
by writing a letter to a famous actress, Diana Mortensen. To his surprise, she writes 
back, revealing her own considerable insecurities to one she presumes is a kindred 
spirit. He and his alarmingly intelligent friend Sigmund commence a “Help Diana” 
campaign, which ultimately ends with her arranging to meet Markus as Markus, 
Jr., the mostly fictional son of a fully fictional millionaire, in person. Sigmund’s ec-
centric coaching in etiquette and fashion all come to naught, however, when Markus 
decides, finally, fatefully, and decisively, to simply be himself. The tenderness of this 
FeBruary 2007 • 253
heartwarming shy-guy-makes-good story is balanced by Markus’ self-effacing humor 
and Sigmund’s old-physicist-in-a-kid’s-body quirkiness. Markus’ relationship with 
his father, who shares most of his personality peccadilloes, is deftly drawn in all its 
spiderweb complexity of seeming fragility and subtle strength. The story is sweet in 
the best sense, as the boys demonstrate the gains in sardonic worldly wisdom that 
come from being chronic social misfits. Their developmental curve, from being 
boys who fantasize about movie stars to boys who actually kiss girls, sneaks up on 
the boys and catches them at the perfect moment of readiness as they enter junior 
high. Published in Norway in 1997, this is the first of the Markus adventures to be 
imported to the U.S. (it’s also been made into a film); let’s hope others soon follow, 
since Markus is the kind of character who inspires a cult following.  KC  
haskins, Jim John Lewis in the Lead: A Story of the Civil Rights Movement; 
by Jim Haskins and Kathleen Benson; illus. by Benny Andrews. Lee & Low, 
2006 32p
ISBN 1-58430-250-X $17.95   
R Gr. 3-5
Having been portrayed for older readers in Ann Bausum’s Freedom Riders (BCCB 
4/06), civil rights activist John Lewis here gets the biographical treatment for a 
younger audience. The text describes Lewis’ youth in rural Alabama and his early 
activism when, at fifteen, he deliberately tested the county library’s prohibition 
against black patrons; it goes on to describe his connection with Martin Luther 
King, Jr. and his participation in the Freedom Riders, the March on Washington, 
and the march from Selma to Montgomery. Though the chronicle starts somewhat 
slowly, it takes off soon enough with Lewis’ involvement with the cause. The fact 
that he was one of the youngest activists makes him both an appealing figure and 
somebody who experienced the movement in its full duration (he remains today 
prominent as a congressman from Georgia), and it’s clear that his commitment had 
costs (he’s repeatedly assaulted and beaten) that were unable to turn him from his 
goals. Andrews’ lanky, silent figures exude purpose, and he offers a few stunning 
compositions (the faceoff between the marchers and the state troopers in Selma is 
depicted in a dramatic aerial view) that vividly dramatize the history. This will be 
a compelling introduction for youngsters not yet ready for Bausum’s book, and its 
focus on a still-living activist may encourage kids to start looking around for move-
ment participants in their own families and neighborhoods. A timeline (illustrated 
with photographs, both recent and historic) concludes the volume; though there 
are no source notes, a brief bibliography and an acknowledgment of help from 
Congressman Lewis’ office appear on the copyright page.  DS
haTkoff, isaBella Owen & Mzee: The Language of Friendship; by Isabella Hatkoff, 
Craig Hatkoff, and Dr. Paula Kahumbu; illus. with photographs by Peter Greste 
et al. Scholastic, 2007 [40p]
ISBN 0-439-89959-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Many audiences are now familiar with the story of Owen, the hippopotamus or-
phaned by the 2004 tsunami and now dwelling in a Kenyan wildlife park, and his 
surprising friendship with the Aldabran tortoise Mzee. Though this labels itself a 
sequel to Owen & Mzee: The True Story of a Remarkable Friendship (BCCB 5/06), 
it’s more a revisitation with a slightly different focus. The text briefly recapitulates 
the story of Owen’s sea rescue, travel to Haller Park, and meeting with Mzee, and 
254 • The BulleTin
it then goes on to look in more detail at the relationship between the two, their 
behaviors, and the possible pitfalls of this friendship. This title pushes the bound-
aries of the story’s implications a little harder than its predecessor (the optimistic 
morals seem particularly implausible in light of the multitudes who weren’t spared 
in the tsunami), but it also offers intriguing and closely observed descriptions of 
the two animals’ interactions, noting, for instance, that they’ve developed an oral 
communication that is neither tortoise nor hippo in its nature; the book is also 
straightforward and realistic about issues that the park keepers face, such as Owen’s 
unhealthy tendency to eat a tortoise diet rather than a hippo diet and the risk that 
he might pose to the delicate-shelled Mzee as he continues to increase in size. This 
book is chock full of color photos, a few clearly constrained by circumstances but 
many of them striking and vivid portraits that convey the beauty of the location as 
well as the comradeship of the two animals. Browsers will find much to nibble on 
just in the images, while animal lovers in particular will find the enhanced details 
of this pair’s friendship well worth perusal. A concluding section offers a bit more 
information on subjects ranging from Kenya to hippos to the tsunami.  DS
henDerson, kaThy Look at You!: A Baby Body Book; illus. by Paul Howard. Can-
dlewick, 2007 [40p]
ISBN 0-7636-2745-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 1-3 yrs
Simple jingles easily committed to memory encourage hands-on play between parent 
(or sibling?) and baby: “Fingers and toes wiggle./ Eyes, nose, and mouth giggle./ 
Arms wave, legs kick . . ./ bottoms squirm . . . and tummies tickle.” Okay, maybe 
noses don’t technically giggle, and tummies are more likely to receive than perform 
the tickling, but you get the picture. And if you don’t, Howard supplies it—lots of 
oversized pencil and watercolor close-ups of babies and toddlers in action, rendered 
in updated nursery colors. There’s a spin on peekaboo, suitable for getting dressed, 
a bathtime ritual, and even a hair-brushing activity (“You can brush it this way,/ 
you can brush it that,/ wash it, dry it, tie it up,/ and squash it flat”). Scansion is 
far from predictable, and the chanter may need to invent his/her own groove for 
optimum delivery, but there’s no need to rush through a rhyme when the pictures 
invite lapsitters to linger and examine the multiethnic cast of grinning, yawning, 
hiccuping, wobbling, squalling, cuddling, crawling, and pooping (“Phew!”) tykes. 
Keep this in mind when parents inquire about gift-book suggestions.  EB
hill, kirkPaTrick Do Not Pass Go. McElderry, 2007 [240p]
ISBN 1-4169-1400-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 241, for review.
horowiTz, Dave Five Little Gefiltes; written and illus. by Dave Horowitz. Put-
nam, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-399-24608-8 $12.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Food is getting out and about these days: we had Ahlberg’s The Runaway Dinner 
(BCCB 11/06), and now we’ve got a collection of gefilte fish that “went out one 
day/ out of the jar and far away.” Despite the wounded cry of their mother (“Oy 
vey!”), each time their returning number diminishes by one; fortunately, just as 
FeBruary 2007 • 255
the lonely mother begins to pine away for her absent sons, they all return to her 
loving presence. The story, with its “Ten Little Monkeys” pattern, is mostly just 
a pretext for a cornucopia of delectable Yiddishkeit, with Yiddish terms scattered 
throughout, even in speech-ballooned dialogue, and an inflection that would have 
made Leo Rosten kvell. Visually, the world depicted, fishy or no, is Depression-era 
New York, with the globular little gefiltes sporting black bowlers, period patterns 
evident in the wallpaper, and 1930s prices on display in the deli windows. Some 
of the appeal here is undeniably adult, but this will have the luscious allure of code 
to kids new to the Yiddish, and youthful veterans of that linguistic front will enjoy 
feeling in the know; audiences overall will appreciate the tale’s homey and humorous 
pleasures. A glossary of Yiddish words and phrases is included.  DS 
hursT, carol oTis Terrible Storm; illus. by S. D. Schindler. Greenwillow, 
2007 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009002-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009001-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
The author’s two grandfathers, friends since childhood, like to reminisce about 
their youthful experiences when the Great Blizzard of 1888 hit their small Mas-
sachusetts town. Grandpa Clark, out delivering milk, got taken in by a lively and 
crowded household, a torture to the shy and retiring man; Grandpa Otis, out 
chopping firewood, took cover in a warm barn filled with livestock, a deprivation 
for the lively and social guy. Fortunately, the snow eventually stops, folks dig out, 
and the two grandpas make it back home. The fact-based narrative puts most of the 
story in the two grandpas’ own laconic dialogue, and there’s an easy back-and-forth 
that’s an exact evocation of the way two old friends smoothly take a veteran story 
through its paces. Schindler has established his chops when it comes to convivial 
period snowfall (see Johnston’s The Ghost of Nicholas Greebe, BCCB 10/96, and 
O’Connor’s The Snow Globe Family, 12/06), and he vividly conveys the physical 
challenges of such a blizzard, remaining visually honest without thwarting audience 
yearnings for what seems like a greatly adventurous snow day. The layout cleverly 
counterpoints and interweaves the tales: Grandpa Otis’ story appears on the top 
half of each spread and Grandpa Clark’s on the bottom, with dialogue placement 
indicating the speaker (a few lines providing shared sentiments are placed in the gap 
between top and bottom image). At the end it’s clear that Grandpa Clark spent the 
blizzard with Grandpa Otis’ family, to whom G. O. gladly returns (the crossover 
loses neatness on the other end, since Grandpa Clark goes home to his quiet house 
rather than his barn, where Grandpa Otis waited out the storm). While a choral 
readaloud would probably be its most effective presentation, this would also work 
as a wintry single-hander, if you’re good at differentiating voices, or even as an 
inviting early readalone; use it to get audiences to think about how much worse 
(or better) their snowstorm experiences might be.  DS 
JohnsTon, Julie A Very Fine Line. Tundra, 2006 198p
ISBN 0-88776-746-X $18.95   
R Gr. 5-8
The youngest of the Kemp girls in 1941, thirteen-year-old Rosalind is increasingly 
becoming a trial to her mother, who suspects that she has inherited the family talent 
for “knowing things,” a gift Mrs. Kemp officially refuses to acknowledge. Rosalind 
begins to realize that it’s true, that her flashes of intuition are more than mere lucky 
256 • The BulleTin
coincidence, after discovering that she is indeed the seventh daughter of a seventh 
daughter (her oldest sister, mentally disabled Lucy, has been long passed off as the 
charge of her great aunts) and after foreseeing a sister’s serious accident. Her deter-
mination to avoid her fate leads her to deny her gender and pass as a boy, a ruse that 
seems effective at first, until events lead Rosalind to realize that she’s shutting off 
her life even as she shuts off her destiny. Despite the supernaturally touched plot, 
this is really a story about family and identity, wherein Rosalind must balance her 
mother’s denials and her own reservations with her need to be fully herself. Through 
Rosalind’s narration, Canadian author Johnston excels in perceptive, often quietly 
witty observations of daily life (“Her goal in life,” says Rosalind of her mother, 
“was to have us all turn out to be a credit to her”), and relationships and characters 
are evoked with compact clarity. The war looms as a backdrop, but it’s believably 
treated as a faraway concern that only sharpens into focus when it touches a loved 
one or results in domestic consequences, including a family tragedy. The psychic 
note will appeal to more fantastically inclined readers, but this will find its best 
place with those who appreciate well-crafted and original stories of growing into 
one’s own in the face of a complicated family history.  DS
JuBerT, hervé Devil’s Tango; tr. by Anthea Bell. Eos/HarperCollins, 
2006 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-077721-4 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-077720-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Business has been slow for Roberta Morgenstern and Clément Martineau, sorcer-
ers in the employ of the Basle police force, ever since they helped solve the case 
of the Killer’s Quadrille (Dance of the Assassins, BCCB 9/05), but suddenly there 
are more corpses than they know what to do with since the Baron of the Mists, 
heretofore regarded as an urban myth, has materialized as a serial killer. Roberta 
is quicker than most to discern the true identity of the Baron, but it’s no easy task 
for her to convince her colleagues that he is a construct of the very same nano-
technology that they helped promote to keep down crime in the first place. And 
meanwhile, there are minor complications to attend to, such as a hulking golem 
on the loose, a sorceress creating a baby with the Devil’s DNA, a mayoral candi-
date that turns the population against the gypsies in their midst, an impending 
flood, and Roberta’s missing telepathic hedgehog. Jubert again plucks elements 
from fantasy, police procedurals, sci fi, and, this time around, a little romance to 
create a murder mystery that will pass easily between teen and adults who are less 
concerned with the targeted marketing of the novel than its goofy blend of Terry 
Pratchett humor and Stephen King panache with the macabre. Keep your dance 
card open; with the devil-baby just beginning to show its chops, Jubert is bound 
to be back for another whirl.  EB
kelly, John Scoop!: An Exclusive by Monty Molenski; written and illus. by John 
Kelly and Cathy Tincknell. Candlewick, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-7636-3059-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-5
Kelly and Tincknell offer their second noir adventure (The Mystery of Eatum Hall, 
BCCB 10/04), switching oeuvres from creepy-house thriller to hard-boiled journal-
ist melodrama. Reporter Monty Molenski prowls the night in search of the truth 
FeBruary 2007 • 257
behind his coworkers’ clandestine activities at the F.P. Club, and as the bumbling, 
nearsighted, plaid-clad mole jostles his camera from place to place, he inadver-
tently captures pictures of many of the most elusive figures in legend and urban 
myth. There’s ample entertainment value in following Molenski’s slapstick efforts 
at obtaining ingress to the club, and in sighting Santa Claus, Yeti, Elvis, the Loch 
Ness Monster and their like as they evade his notice. Since readers can easily spot 
the shadowy nightlife by following the angle of the camera, subsequent newspaper 
revelations of the sightings are a letdown, though, as is the discovery that the F.P. 
Club is the Front Page Club that honors reporters for their major scoops. This may 
nonetheless appeal to seek-and-find fans as they investigate the midnight milieu 
of Kelly’s slick, computer-generated artwork, and the visual joke that wraps it up 
will leave kids smiling as they put this issue to bed.  EB
kirkPaTrick, kaTherine The Snow Baby: The Arctic Childhood of Admiral 
Robert E. Peary’s Daring Daughter. Holiday House, 2007 [48p] illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1973-8 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Daughter of the discoverer of the North Pole and his very determined wife, Marie 
Peary was born in a hut in the north of Greenland and spent her first year in the 
Arctic; she returned on trips when she was three, six (a voyage that involved an 
unplanned winter in the Arctic), and finally, for her last childhood journey north, 
at eight. Marie certainly had some experiences that were atypical for a girl of her 
background, and her travels provide an interesting window into her father’s explo-
ration. The narrative bounces abruptly from event to event, though, and there’s 
little authorial questioning of or reflection on the accounts by Marie Peary and 
her mother, which are Kirkpatrick’s principal source material. Lavish use of photo-
graphs helps enliven the chronicle, though the captions don’t always match up to 
the information in the text; there’s no map of Marie’s own travels, unfortunately, 
but there’s one for her father’s travel, though it’s limited to only his polar journeys. 
While serious exploration fans will want to stick to classic Peary biographies, Marie 
is a sufficiently offbeat explorer to elicit youthful interest and offer a chance for 
some vicarious travel. An afterword describes the later life of Marie and the rest of 
the family; a bibliography, endnotes, and an index are appended.  DS
limke, Jeff Isis & Osiris: To the Ends of the Earth; illus. by David Witt. Graphic 
Universe/Lerner, 2006 48p (Graphic Myths and Legends)
ISBN 0-8225-3086-4 $26.60   
Ad Gr. 4-6
This first Egyptian entry in the Graphic Myths and Legends series explores the myth 
of Isis and Osiris in graphic-novel format. A magnificent god and leader, Osiris 
has a loving wife and is surrounded by adoring citizens, but he also has a jealous 
and clever brother who brings about Osiris’ death. Isis, heartbroken and armed 
with the strength of fated love (and unexplained superpowers), travels around the 
world twice in search of her husband (whom his brother hides from her) so that she 
may bring him back to life. This glossy comic-book-style entry is visually arresting 
and appealingly quick, making for an accessible introduction to an Egyptian unit. 
However, this loosely accurate recreation of the Isis and Osiris myth (the sibling 
relationship goes unmentioned here) is marred by oddly informal chapter titles, 
jarring slang, and stilted dialogue. In addition, several elements of the story (the 
258 • The BulleTin
animal-headed children, for example) are presented without explanation, which 
may confuse readers unfamiliar with the myth. Witt’s pencil and ink drawings are 
vividly colored, creating a bright, rich desert-scape and reinforcing the emotionally 
taut lives of the characters. An author’s note, glossary and pronunciation guide, 
and a brief index supplement the text. A list of recommendations for further ex-
ploration is also included, though most (the 1932 film The Mummy starring Boris 
Karloff, for example) are unlikely to be specifically helpful in exploring the myth. 
This won’t offer much assistance to a young researcher, but try passing it along to 
young Egyptologists who can never get enough mummy stories.  AS
linDoP, laurie Cave Sleuths; illus. with photographs by Ron Miller. Twenty-
First Century, 2006 80p (Science on the Edge)
ISBN 0-7613-2702-9 $26.90   
R Gr. 5-8
Spelunkers make a convincing case that theirs is among the few endeavors that can 
still take participants into uncharted territory, and Lindop follows several speleolo-
gists—of both the avid and reluctant variety—who have indeed uncovered remark-
able species and affected current thinking on cave formation. Among the title’s 
highlights are Carlsbad Caverns, once thought to have been formed by hydrological 
forces but now known to have been sculpted at least in part by microorganisms, 
and the ubiquitous presence of extremophiles, organisms that flourish in regions 
of absolute darkness, temperature extremes, or chemical milieus that are toxic or 
corrosive to the scientists who attempt to study them. Lindop extrapolates the find-
ings of cave science to speculate on whether similar conditions on Mars might have 
nurtured (or still nurture) life, and whether hardy and aggressive microorganisms 
might someday deliver treatments for diseases such as cancer. The science is enliv-
ened with plenty of anecdotes about the thrills and dangers of spelunking and with 
lots of color photos that reveal the weird but awesome beauty of the underground 
environments. Index and source notes are included, and a generous list of books, 
videos, and websites will direct readers to related materials.  EB
liPsey, Jennifer I Love to Collage!; written and illus. by Jennifer Lipsey and with 
photographs. Lark/Sterling, 2006 48p (My Very Favorite Art Book)
ISBN 1-57990-770-9 $9.95   
R Gr. 2-6
A quick definition of collage, a list of supplies, and a couple of useful hints, and 
crafters are off to explore twenty projects, most of which require little or no adult 
assistance (ironing tissue paper and crayon shavings encased in wax paper is a 
notable exception). Many of the projects may already be familiar from school art 
classes, but their repackaging here with simple instructions and replicable examples 
will be welcomed by kids who want to try it on their own. Ice cream cones with 
glue-based “chocolate syrup” drizzle, easy circle birds, and photos framed in paper 
shapes will draw in beginners; tissue “stained glass,” woven papers, and coiled-wire 
figures increase the challenge; and shifted and superimposed body-part cutouts from 
human and animal magazine pictures will appeal to the goofy in everyone. Color 
photographs of completed items are clear enough for less inventive kids to copy, 
but Lipsey encourages experimentation throughout and, happily, the collage form 
tends to be forgiving of lapses in precision. A largely dispensable index is included, 
but the table of contents and a flip through the inviting pages will be enough to 
get readers snipping and gluing.  EB
FeBruary 2007 • 259
marsDen, carolyn The Jade Dragon; by Carolyn Marsden and Virginia Shin-Mui 
Loh. Candlewick, 2006 169p
ISBN 0-7636-3012-8 $15.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Ginny is thrilled when Stephanie, another Chinese student, shows up in her 
second-grade classroom, and she is certain they will be best friends. What Ginny 
doesn’t expect is that Stephanie’s parents are not Chinese; she was adopted by an 
American family when she was a baby and she is neither familiar with or, for that 
matter, interested in Chinese culture. Despite that, Ginny is certain the two share 
a deep bond and she works hard to make Stephanie her best friend, even going so 
far as to lend Stephanie the jade dragon that her parents had carved for her when 
she was born. The familiar early elementary topic of securing a best friend is given 
additional depth in this exploration of a young girl’s efforts to be true to herself 
in a culturally complex context. Literally faced with the fact that one cannot base 
expectations on appearances, Ginny finds it an extremely difficult lesson to swal-
low, given her personal longing for a friend who is like her. As in previous Marsden 
novels (The Gold-Threaded Dress, BCCB 6/02, The Quail Club, BCCB 5/06), the 
central conflict is simple but the situations and characters so carefully developed 
as to make it complex. Co-authored with Virginia Shin-Mui Loh, the novel is 
partly autobiographical; though the flavor of the prose is somewhat old-fashioned, 
it has an authentic ring. Stephanie is not hugely likable, but she perfectly fits the 
role intended for her; her determination not to be Chinese is almost seductive to 
the impressionable Ginny, and her insecurities about her identity will be evident 
to the reader long before she confides them to Ginny. Though it’s set in the early 
’80s, this friendship story will resonate with many young readers in today’s diverse 
classroom settings.  HM 
mccaughrean, geralDine The White Darkness. HarperTempest, 
2007 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-089036-3 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-089035-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
Antarctica has long been the obsession of fourteen-year-old Symone, a lonely girl 
who has made an imaginary confidant of Captain “Titus” Oates, who perished on 
the legendary Scott expedition to the coldest continent. She’s therefore thrilled when 
eccentric Uncle Victor, her late father’s business partner, turns a quick trip from 
England to France into a journey to the Antarctic, and she’s shyly pleased when 
handsome young Sigurd, a Norwegian teen traveling with his father on the voyage, 
seems to take a shine to her. Soon, however, it becomes clear that Uncle Victor 
isn’t an all-knowing expert who dotes on Symone but a crackpot who’s pursuing a 
dangerous dream—the finding of secret connections to an interior world through 
Antarctica—and who’s willing to sacrifice anyone and anything to attain it. There 
are touches of familiar genres and tropes here—mystery, survival story, romance, 
fascination with an unobtainable idol—but ultimately this is a wholly original 
piece. Even readers who see beyond Symone’s rose-tinted vision of Uncle Victor 
will be shocked by the consequences of his obsession as Symone gradually uncovers 
both his present intentions and his past deeds. When the situation becomes truly 
dire, Symone’s beloved Titus, who formerly bolstered her in the face of nothing 
more brutal than sniping classmates, becomes a staunch ally who both marshals 
and represents her strength (for extra enjoyment, the book eventually hints that 
260 • The BulleTin
his presence may not be so imaginary after all). McCaughrean has clearly done her 
research and fans of polar travel will certainly want to journey with Symone, while 
the intrigue and the unexpected story will draw a variety of sophisticated readers 
ready for something unusual and compelling.  DS
milgrim, DaviD Another Day in the Milky Way; written and illus. by David 
Milgrim. Putnam, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-399-24548-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
“The other day,” Monty says tiredly, “I woke up on the wrong planet.” His multi-
headed mother there feeds him his liver flakes and sends him off to school with his 
pile of math books (this is not the most inviting of planets). Monty ducks school 
and wanders through the alien landscape hoping for a clue to the way home; he’s 
befriended if not actually aided by several creatures in horse suits, finally reaching 
the observatory of the wise old Starman, where he remembers that he already knows 
the way home. Milgrim hauls out the Old Dream Ending for his conclusion, but 
the story is so obviously a nocturnal fancy from the get-go that the end seems a 
reasonable conclusion rather than a cheap solution. The book makes effective use 
of dreams’ absurd logicality and fences against reality (“I tried to remember how I 
got home the other times. But the harder I tried, the more I forgot”), but it’s the 
illustrations that really capture the randomness of the dream world. Tidily lined yet 
gently organic digital illustrations sport a matter-of-fact array of weirdness, from 
the trumpet-faced dogs that follow Monty around to the penguinlike birds making 
paper airplanes in the orchard. This is somewhat lightweight on the dramatic front, 
but youngsters hoping sleep will bring them otherworldly adventures will find it a 
diverting walk on the weird side.  DS
miller, wiley The Extraordinary Adventures of Ordinary Basil; written and illus. 
by Wiley Miller. Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2006 126p
ISBN 0-439-85665-5 $14.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Miller, an accomplished comic strip artist, moves into children’s books with this 
adaptation of his Sunday comic, “Ordinary Basil,” into a text-based novel. Basil is 
a twelve-year-old who longs for adventure or at least something that will change 
his quiet Maine life, and he gets it in spades when the pilot of a flying balloon 
boat whisks him away to Helios, a floating city. The citizens of Helios, drastically 
more advanced than their 1899 Earth-bound counterparts, have intentionally 
distanced themselves because they find normal humans destructive, short-sighted, 
and regressive. Basil and his new friend, Louise, a pteranodon-owning girl who is 
as disenchanted with Helios as Basil is with his home, end up in a drastically more 
intense and dangerous situation than either would like, however, when a simple 
excursion lands them in the clutches of the evil Von Rottweil, an expelled Helios 
citizen who seeks to bring about a warped version of world peace through fear and 
terrorism. Although the cliffhanger aspects of the comic format are lost in this novel, 
both new readers and established fans will welcome a larger dose of Basil’s trials. 
Basil is an irresistible protagonist, and readers will relish the way he welcomes the 
uncertain and understands that true risk can lead to great rewards.  Miller’s vivid, 
full-color illustrations are nicely varied in size and style: full-page and smaller in-
serted drawings, intricately detailed and blocky washes, giant-headed humans and 
sturdy robot weapons all commingle together to create a true supplement to and 
FeBruary 2007 • 261
interaction with the text. Funny, visually attractive, and chock-full of adventure, 
this novel will be an easy sell to the middle-grades set.  AS 
mochizuki, ken Be Water, My Friend: The Early Years of Bruce Lee; illus. by Dom 
Lee. Lee & Low, 2006 32p
ISBN 1-58430-265-8 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
It is perhaps overly tempting to draw a straight line from a young boy who can-
not sit still and behave to a man who excels in martial arts, and to Mochizuki’s 
credit, he offers here a more complex portrait of Lee’s early life. The antsy boy is 
also a courteous son who won’t let his mother languish without a dance partner; 
the reluctant student is also a child smitten with books of his own choosing; the 
quick-tempered hooligan is also the martial-arts pupil who eventually learns that 
nonresistance can be as powerful a force as simple pugilism. Mochizuki concludes 
his narrative with the eighteen-year-old Lee on route to America—packed off to 
friends by his disappointed family—in the middle of an epiphany: “Bruce watched 
the swirling water from the deck of the ship. He saw how water always found a way 
around an obstacle and continued on.” Mochizuki lacks the lighter touch of a Don 
Brown in dealing with the formative years of a prominent figure, and children who 
come for the exploits of a kung fu master receive instead a rather heavy-handed 
homily on the virtue of self-restraint, with the flashier details of Lee’s career rel-
egated to an endnote. Dom Lee’s acrylic and beeswax illustrations, while no doubt 
fascinating from a technical angle, are stiff in composition and monotonous in 
their unrelieved sepia tone, presenting rigidly posed scenes that seem to have been 
etched on whole-wheat toast. Children who participate in martial arts instruction 
will be particularly drawn to this title, but expect to fill in lots of blanks about the 
second half of Lee’s tragically short life.  EB
morPurgo, michael I Believe in Unicorns; illus. by Gary Blythe. Candlewick, 
2006 66p
ISBN 0-7636-3050-0 $12.99   
R Gr. 3-5
In a nameless European village, eight-year-old Tomas, who much prefers the 
mountains to the library, is spellbound by the new children’s librarian, who shares 
stories while seated beside a life-size carved wooden unicorn. War comes to their 
quiet village one ordinary day, and the town center, which received the brunt of 
the bombing, is on fire. Tomas races through the village searching for his father, 
finally finding him helping the library lady carry armfuls of books out of the blaz-
ing library building. When all the books have been rescued, they carry the wooden 
unicorn out into the safety of the street. Morpurgo’s quiet story is in fact an ex-
tended tribute to the power of stories and storytelling; while there is little plot or 
character development, the slim volume offers resonance nonetheless, reminding 
readers to share stories, to tell stories, and to allow stories to impact them. Tomas 
is a believable little boy, resistant to participate in the story hours and ashamed 
to share a story himself, but the library lady’s tales still captivate him. Neither the 
nation nor the war is ever named, and the abstract history adds to the universality 
of the tale. While this will capture the attention of independent readers, it would 
also work effectively as a class readaloud. Blythe’s pencil illustrations, sometimes 
tinted with watercolor, are abundant; every few pages of narrative are interrupted 
by a two-page color spread. The illustrations themselves are thick with hatch and 
crosshatch detailing, adding a dreamy fuzziness to the compositions. Both pensive 
262 • The BulleTin
and provocative, British author Morpurgo’s short tale is likely to receive a warm 
welcome on this side of the Atlantic.  HM
myers, walTer Dean Jazz; illus. by Christopher Myers. Holiday House, 
2006 40p
ISBN 0-8234-1545-7 $18.95   
R Gr. 5-8
The father/son team follows Blues Journey (BCCB 6/03) with a jazz encore, a 
splashier, if somewhat more uneven, effort. Fifteen poems spotlight a variety of jazz 
forms, from New Orleans funerals to be-bop, from stride piano to blues. W. D. 
Myers goes far to corral the various styles and translate them to the printed page in 
boldly counterpointed alternating lines (the left hand of the stride piano), script-
font asides that weave through the bluesy “Oh, Miss Kitty,” and musical direction 
that changes the pace halfway through the “Good-Bye to Old Bob Johnson.” At 
their best, poems startle with flashes of playful imagery: “Heard a sad song/ Swung 
it into joy/ Heard a bad tune/ Spanked it like a naughty boy.” Others, though, are 
more predictable: “Sweet and gentle, so surprising/ Music fills us, hear it rising/ 
Like a charming angel choir/ Reaching, preaching souls on fire.” C. Myers creates 
a gallery of instrumentalists and divas whose slightly elongated, sinuous forms 
are sometimes contemplative, sometimes snaking in fluid motion, often ignited 
in primary colors, occasionally flanked by deep, moody shadows. Although only 
black performers are visually represented here, Myers’ introduction does address 
the fusion (collision?) of influences from African and European traditions that gave 
birth to this American musical idiom. Additionally, the appended glossary of jazz 
terms is likely to contribute to fuller enjoyment of the poems, and a timeline of jazz 
greats (which does not explicitly coordinate with subjects of the poems) provides 
additional information.  EB
Paul, Dominique The Possibility of Fireflies. Simon, 2006 217p
ISBN 1-4169-1310-6 $15.95   
R Gr. 7-10
Truth is becoming a problem for Ellie; more and more, she finds herself grasping 
at little truths and spinning them out into fictions that cover the larger truths 
she can’t reveal, like the fact that her mother locks her out of the house half the 
time, or that she forgets that they need food, or that she is becoming dangerously 
abusive toward her older sister, Gwen. As Gwen becomes increasingly rebellious, 
Ellie tries (and sometimes fails) to stay in control and keep her emotions on lock-
down, revealing only guarded bits of herself to the cute older guy, Leo, who lives 
next door and who seems to understand that she is in pain. One climactic night 
forces her to confront the truth she’s been avoiding—that her mother is never 
going to change and that there is nothing Ellie can do about it. Fortunately, she 
unexpectedly discovers another truth that was hiding underneath her misguided 
hope—that her mother is wrong about Ellie and Gwen being unwanted and un-
lovable. The language Paul puts in Ellie’s mouth regarding the poignancy of her 
situation sometimes teeters on the brink of overly poetic sentimentality, but she 
pulls back from that cliff with her edgy plotting and the authentic character of 
Ellie’s introspection. The 1980s suburban Baltimore setting provides just the right 
background for the semi-seedy situations through which the girls orchestrate their 
rebellion; back in the day, there were still abandoned barns to party in and boys 
with mullets to party with, and the hair band Kix was still playing local venues 
and didn’t have big bouncers keeping underage girls off the tour bus. The ending 
FeBruary 2007 • 263
does play a little too sweetly, with Ellie landing on her estranged father’s doorstep 
and receiving a warm welcome, but the message that sometimes it’s best to walk 
away from an impossible situation is an important one for teens—if, that is, they’re 
lucky enough to have someplace to go.  KC
Prosek, James The Day My Mother Left; written and illus. by James Prosek. Si-
mon, 2007 [304p]
ISBN 1-4169-0770-X $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
When Jeremy’s mother leaves the family, she completely severs contact with nine-
year-old Jeremy, who’s left to rely on his distant older sister and his alternately 
lachrymose and raging father. Over the next three years, Jeremy negotiates dif-
ficult changes as his mother moves in with the father of a bullying classmate, his 
father remarries and brings a stepmother into the home, and his doting uncle dies; 
eventually, in the biggest change of all, he finally reconnects with his mother. The 
story is shaped more like an adult memoir than a novel, with events conveyed 
through a sequence of vignettes that focus on moments of important realization, 
leaving factual developments (such as both parents’ remarriages) to inference or 
later mention and culminating in an internal resolution hard-won in the face of 
a still-disorganized external situation. The prose moves from quietly thoughtful 
to fluidly descriptive, the viewpoint that of a budding young artist and naturalist 
(Prosek’s finely detailed black-and-white avian portraits stand in for Jeremy’s work). 
Experienced and patient readers willing to read about a younger protagonist will 
find the most reward here, but they’ll be touched by this quietly realistic treatment 
of a boy’s adjustment to family change.  DS
raPPaPorT, Doreen Freedom Ship; illus. by Curtis James. Jump at the Sun/
Hyperion, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-7868-0645-1 $15.99   
Ad 6-10 yrs
In this fictionalized account, Rappaport follows the daring escape from slavery 
of pilot Robert Smalls of the Confederate supply ship Planter as he and a crew 
of runaways and their families sail boldly past the defenses in Charleston, South 
Carolina and surrender their ship to Union forces standing outside the harbor. 
Smalls’ story is an integral entry in the canon of slave narratives, but here it is 
unnecessarily complicated by the addition of a fictional family who sailed with 
Smalls and, layered onto that, opening remarks by an equally fictional descendant 
of that family. This not only makes the story difficult to follow, it also diminishes 
the importance of Smalls himself, whose cunning and heroism are reported from 
an emotional distance. James’ paintings help sort out the action with their literal 
interpretations of important scenes—the hoisting of a makeshift surrender flag, the 
looming mouths of cannon on the nearing Union ship. The author’s concluding note 
and child-oriented reading list are probably even more useful, though, in satisfying 
listeners and independent readers interested in tales of slave resistance.  EB
raPPaPorT, Doreen Nobody Gonna Turn Me ’Round: Stories and Songs of the Civil 
Rights Movement; illus. by Shane W. Evans. Candlewick, 2006 63p
ISBN 0-7636-1927-2 $19.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Prolific biographer and historical writer Rappaport returns to the subject of the civil 
rights movement in this third of her trilogy treating African-American history (see 
264 • The BulleTin
No More!: Stories and Songs of Slave Resistance, BCCB 4/02, and Free at Last!: Stories 
and Songs of Emancipation, BCCB 7/04), emphasizing the stories of several individu-
als and interspersing them with occasional songs important to the movement. The 
episodes are told with maximum drama, so they’ll involve kids who may sometimes 
find history dry and distant. The narrative is consequently choppy, however, and 
the brief scenes will sometimes leave readers wondering how things turned out; 
while it’s an interesting idea to interweave the songs that are the hallmark of the 
movement, not all of the pieces are given historical or musical context. Evans’ oil 
illustrations join the text in a preference for effect over subtlety, but the figures 
are strong and emphatic to the point of monumentality. While the book’s flaws 
preclude its complete success as an introduction to this aspect of American history, 
the episodes might make for vivid readalouds to older listeners, and the format and 
story focus will help entice reluctant readers. The book concludes with notes on the 
present work of a few of the people featured, a timeline of key events, source notes, 
a bibliography and list of books for further reading, and an index.  DS
reeve, PhiliP Larklight: A Rousing Tale of Dauntless Pluck in the Farthest Reaches 
of Space; illus. by David Wyatt. Bloomsbury, 2006 399p
ISBN 1-59990-020-3 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Motherless siblings Art and Myrtle Mumby live comfortably and uneventfully in 
an alternative nineteenth-century universe in their outer space home, Larklight, as 
their icthyomorphologist father busies himself with the study of exotic specimens. 
An upcoming visit by Mr. Webster of the Royal Xenological Society in London 
promises diversion for Art and perhaps some romance for Myrtle, but Mr. Webster 
rather disappointingly turns out to be a giant spider who kills their father, wraps 
Larklight in a web, and leaves them scurrying for safety in an escape barrel. And 
then things get bad. The sibs end up encased in pods of flesh-eating larvae, only 
to be rescued by orphan pirate Jack Havock and his loyal crew of aliens who just 
don’t seem to show the proper respect for a well-bred British miss like Myrtle. But 
Art likes them just fine, and they’re mighty handy at saving the Earth (and even 
more importantly the British Empire), which is exactly what is needed when an evil 
industrialist builds the Crystal Palace out of an automaton spider and sets it on an 
agenda of rampage and conquest. Reeve gleefully plunders everything from Kipling 
(in a wonderful send-up of imperialism) to Star Trek (that has to be Scotty whining 
about the engine) for his zany plot elements and delivers them with deadpan hilarity 
through Art’s stiff-upper-lip narration. Wyatt’s profuse black-and-white pictures 
and spot art are delightfully detailed and extend the humor visually. The motherless 
siblings get their parents back after all, Myrtle gets her guy, lisping space-critter 
engineer Silissa gets a dress that fits her cumbersome tail properly, Queen Victoria 
and Prince Albert regain their temporarily rattled composure, and every villain in 
the galaxy gets its comeuppance. Huzzah!  EB  
reinharDT, Dana Harmless. Lamb, 2007 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90941-1 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74699-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
Anna’s trying not to be left behind by her best friend, Emma; Emma’s getting a taste 
of the popular life with newcomer Mariah; Mariah, shut out of a home centered on 
her young stepsister and the family reputation, is looking for rebellion and external 
FeBruary 2007 • 265
validation. Led by Mariah, the three freshmen start hanging out—and, for Mariah 
and Emma, having sex—with older guys from the local public school; when an 
evening’s outing looks set to reveal their lies to their parents, the trio concocts a 
story of attack and near-rape by an unknown man near the river. Soon things spin 
out of control: the girls become school heroes (well, Mariah and Anna are heroes, 
while Emma is the lucky girl spared victimization), and the police round up a man 
they suspect in another girl’s disappearance as well as in the nonexistent crime, 
hoping the girls will be able to put him away. Reinhardt’s careful craftsmanship 
lifts this above the standard morality drama. Her three narrators are believably 
different in their approach to the situation, and there’s particularly thoughtful 
exploration of Anna’s blossoming under the attention and resistance to yielding 
her newfound importance (“I’d kissed a senior and now we were spending half of 
English class talking about me instead of some boring book”), while Emma is still 
struggling with her regret about having drunken and not entirely intentional sex, 
a situation the false report mirrors even as it disguises. Readers will be absorbed 
in the drama, and they’ll find much to discuss in the way one seemingly small lie 
spins into destruction.  DS 
resau, laura What the Moon Saw. Delacorte, 2006 258p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90360-X $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73343-7 $15.95   
R Gr. 6-9
Clara Luna is on the brink of deciding who she is going to be as a teenage girl—will 
she follow her best friend into a plastic life of trolling the mall, or will she answer 
the call of her own artistic soul? In Baltimore, she doesn’t seem to have much choice, 
but when a letter arrives from a small village called Yucuyoo in Oaxaca, Mexico 
inviting her to spend the summer with grandparents she’s never met, she decides to 
literally fly out of her world and into theirs. After the initial shock of their distance 
from all things modern (no phones, no TV, no plumbing), she begins to enjoy the 
rhythms of life in a simple shack in the mountains, and she learns the story of her 
grandmother’s childhood. She also discovers that she and her grandmother have 
something in common—they are gifted traditional healers, whose spirits can leave 
their bodies and unite with a totem to rescue other spirits lost and separated from 
their bodies. While it might seem a tad incredible to think that a fourteen-year-old 
girl from Baltimore would adjust so quickly and actually learn to value and enjoy the 
primitive living conditions in a sparsely populated rural village, the book does a fine 
job of developing Clara’s character by connecting it to both her father’s quiet love 
of nature and her grandparents’ warmth, compassion, and humor. Resau paints her 
portraits of life in Mexico with a quiet delicacy, taking care to dignify the choices of 
illegal immigrants to leave their homes as well as to challenge them. Though there is 
a fair bit of action, the book proceeds softly and gently, pulling readers along with 
Clara on a voyage of self-discovery through deeply felt ancestral ties.  KC 
sheParD, aaron, ad. One-Eye! Two-Eyes! Three-Eyes!: A Very Grimm Fairy Tale; 
illus. by Gary Clement. Atheneum, 2006 32p
ISBN 0-689-86740-9 $16.95   
Ad 6-9 yrs
In this loose retelling of the Grimm Brothers’ “One-Eye, Two-Eyes, and Three-Eyes,” 
the eldest of three sisters has one eye, the second has three, but “the youngest sister 
was different. Her name was Two-Eyes, and that’s just what she had.” The older 
sisters are ashamed of their two-eyed sister and subsequently treat her very badly, 
266 • The BulleTin
dressing her in rags and only feeding her leftovers. Through a series of brushes with 
a fairy-godmother-esque old woman, Two-Eyes is able to overcome most of her 
troubles, having received one spell that provides food, another that puts her one-
eyed sister to sleep, and still another that makes magic apples fall into her hand. 
When a knight in armor rides up the lane requesting an apple, only Two-Eyes is 
able to satisfy his craving. He pulls back his visor to reveal—you guessed it—two 
eyes, and the knight and Two-Eyes return to his castle for happily ever after. The 
easy patterning and amusing characters in this adaptation folktale make it a good 
choice for a readaloud; the various chants add cadence to the already jaunty text 
and the obvious villains are so despicable as to be funny. Shepard’s retelling is so 
conceptually confusing, however, that its point is unclear: in the Grimms’ tale, 
the sisters (and their mother) despise Two-Eyes because her binocularity makes 
her common and ordinary, but here she’s mistreated by her sisters because she is 
different; since she’s only accepted by the knight and all the two-eyed people of 
his kingdom, the lesson would seem to be that difference is indeed a problem and 
the evil sisters had a point. Moral implications aside, young listeners can never 
have enough stories of evil sisters going down, and the entertaining contemporary 
twists in Clement’s watercolor-and-pencil illustrations (Two-Eyes heats her leftovers 
in a microwave and the old woman carries a box of tissues) are great fun to find. 
An adapter’s note offers no explanation for his alterations, but it provides musical 
notation for the sleeping chant and notes its basis in Grimm.  HM  
sheParD, sara Pretty Little Liars. HarperTempest, 2006 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-088731-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-088730-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In the summer between seventh and eighth grades, Alison is the benevolent but 
slightly dangerous queen bee reigning over her hive of rich private-school girls. 
Emily, Aria, Spencer, and Hanna hold her in awe, not only because of her beauty, 
but also because she is the keeper of their most intimate secrets: Spencer’s habit 
of kissing her sister’s boyfriends, Emily’s budding desire for girls, Hanna’s crush-
ing feelings of inadequacy, Aria’s father’s dalliance with his female students, and 
a powerful secret, known cryptically as The Jenna Thing, that the five of them 
share. Then, one night, Alison disappears. For three years, the girls are plagued by 
both grief and relief; sure, they miss Ali and they don’t want to believe she is dead, 
but if she is, their secrets are forever safe. The friends drift apart in high school, 
but one day they all start receiving disturbing text messages, signed simply “A.” 
Could Alison really be back? When her body is discovered, they realize that isn’t 
possible, but then who else knows their most damning secrets? Though the premise 
here is quite close to that of Nancy Holder’s Pretty Little Devils (BCCB 3/06), the 
character development and writing are infinitely better: think The Sisterhood of 
the Traveling Pants (BCCB 12/01) gone macabre. The individual dilemma of each 
girl is compelling for its pending disaster of inevitable disclosure, and it seems that 
Shepard has closed off her possibilities by actually producing a body, but readers 
will just have to wait for the sequel(s) to find out who killed Ali, and who or what 
is behind the text messages. All in all, it’s a provocative set-up that promises many 
decadent pleasures.  KC 
FeBruary 2007 • 267
smiTh, gorDon The Forest in the Hallway. Clarion, 2006 232p
ISBN 0-618-68847-1 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 5-7
There’s not much fourteen-year-old Beatriz can do to control her own fate after 
her parents mysteriously disappear, and thus she’s shipped off to her uncle’s New 
York apartment. On top of her existing woes, Beatriz has also started hearing voices 
that direct her to the nineteenth floor of the apartment building. When she com-
plies with the orders, Beatriz is transported into an enchanted world and ordered 
by Death to stop a woman who is breaking all of the magical regulations: if she 
does so, he suggests, she will also find her parents. In a well-developed and cool 
twist, two of the companions Beatriz gathers along her journey (every quest needs 
faithful sidekicks) turn out to be much more familiar than she first thought; the 
reader will likely be as shocked as Beatriz to discover that the two amnesiac teens 
are actually her parents. With a bit of luck and some quick thinking, Beatriz will 
be able to save her temporarily youthful parents, restore the magical equilibrium 
in this alternative world, and be back in Iowa in time for bed. Readers will likely 
be confused by several of the story’s plot gaps: how can Beatriz go in from New 
York and emerge in Iowa, how can photographs age some people and make others 
younger, and what are the solutions for all of the unanswered riddles in the text? In 
addition, the endless narrative loops and twists make the novel feel like someone’s 
relation of a complicated dream, with several characters and entire scenes shoehorned 
into the main plot to little effect. However, the setting is intriguing, and Beatriz is 
an appealing protagonist who relies on her own snark, cunning, and acuity more 
than the second-hand magic that surrounds her. Readers may therefore cheer her 
successes, and savvy fantasy fans will enjoy spotting the literary allusions sprinkled 
in throughout the novel.  AS
snyDer, zilPha keaTley The Treasures of Weatherby. Atheneum, 2006 213p
ISBN 1-4169-1398-X $15.95   
R Gr. 4-6
In a foreword, esteemed author Snyder acknowledges that most of her books contain 
large houses in which adventures happen, and in what she states is her last “big, old 
house book,” she promises to deliver the quintessential example of that category. 
Indeed, the intricately described Weatherby estate is almost a character in itself 
in this novel, and it certainly serves as a fascinating backdrop to twelve-year-old 
Harleigh’s story. Harleigh, a boy who has grown up with no mother and a largely 
absent father, has been raised by the various Weatherby relatives who all live in the 
mansion. He is mostly preoccupied with his notably small stature (he is the size of 
a six-year-old), and it takes an unusual meeting with a stranger who snuck onto 
the grounds to shake him out of his navel-gazing and coax him to see the treasures, 
both literal and figurative, that surround him. With the guidance of the mysterious 
Allegra, Harleigh finds himself wrapped up in a mystery, taking charge of his life, 
and finally, while he is distracted by other things, starting to grow. While this is a 
novel full of adventure and intrigue, it is also a quiet and thoughtful exploration 
of human dynamics and the ebbs and flows of family relationships. Before com-
ing to appreciate himself and the potential friends that surround him, Harleigh 
is a profoundly lonely boy who is bullied in school and who misses his constantly 
traveling father, and his revelation that families can be created is a hard-won vic-
tory; this focus on character development is an elegant bonus in a novel that could 
have gotten away with being an exciting but forgettable mystery. Given Snyder’s 
268 • The BulleTin
grasp on the charms of old houses, it’s almost a shame that she will be moving on 
to other settings.  AS
sTeer, DugalD a. Dragonology Chronicles Volume One: The Dragon’s Eye; illus. 
by Douglas Carrel. Candlewick, 2006 221p
ISBN 0-7636-2810-7 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6 
The author and illustrator team that created Dragonology and The Dragonology 
Handbook returns for this first novel of the Dragonology Cronicles. The legend-
ary Dr. Drake from the encyclopedic “nonfiction” titles is explored more fully in 
this series, as are his students and the Secret and Ancient Society of Dragons. In 
the early 1880s, Dr. Drake runs a school for an exclusive group of children (most 
the offspring of dragonologists) studying to understand and protect dragons bet-
ter. Through much of the novel, the first-person perspective of Daniel, raised in 
boarding schools and by an anti-dragon uncle, provides a creative excuse for the 
significant exposition necessary to get readers up to speed on dragon history. Too 
frequently, however, the voice slips into a jarring omniscient narration, bypassing 
Daniel altogether. In addition, the humans (unlike the dragons, who have fascinat-
ing depth) are rather flat: Dr. Drake is endlessly wise, the villains all but twirl their 
mustaches, and the kids mostly blur into one dutiful, well-trained über-student. 
Carrel’s black-and-white illustrations are of mixed quality: his elegant and intricate 
depictions of dragons supplement the descriptions in the story, while his human 
subjects are uninspiring in their wide-eyed blandness. Luckily, the dragons are the 
real stars of this novel and in this area, both Carrel and Steer succeed. Fans who 
already consider themselves budding dragonologists will be familiar with dragon 
diaries, field notes, and the species described herein, while new readers would 
benefit from dipping into the older works to supplement their knowledge: regard-
less of the flaws, all will likely anticipate the continuation of the ’ology books, in 
whatever format.  AS
sTraighT, susan The Friskative Dog. Knopf, 2007 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93777-3 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83777-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
The Friskative Dog is Sharron’s beloved companion, a stuffed dog who has been 
her loyal pet ever since her father bought him for her when she was in kindergarten 
and who has come to school for every Show and Tell or pet-related activity since 
then. Now Sharron’s in fourth grade, and it’s been a year since her father abandoned 
the family without a word, so The Friskative Dog also provides Sharron with an 
important link to her father. She’s therefore devastated when he disappears from 
her bag at school, taken by spiteful classmates to a fate unknown. Straight treats 
Sharron’s attachment with gentle respect in this quiet, easy-reading chapter book, 
making it clear that Sharron’s dog-love isn’t just a childish fancy; in fact, Sharron 
strikes up a friendship with a woman fostering a guide dog puppy and considers 
a future training dogs. Readers will also appreciate Sharron’s successful (if wish-
fulfilling) face-off against the mean girls and clearly demonstrated moral superior-
ity in the face of their bullying, and they’ll be glad to see the quiet and persistent 
heroine rewarded not only with the love of a good dog but with the promise of a 
closer family.  DS
FeBruary 2007 • 269
suTherlanD, Tui T. So This Is How It Ends. Eos/HarperCollins, 
2006 [368p] (Avatars)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-075028-6 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-075024-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10 
For five very different teenagers, Kali, Gus, Tigre, Diana, and Aman, the end of their 
worlds comes with a bang that knocks them unconscious for seventy-five years. When 
they awaken, they each hear a siren call to head for New York, though for some that 
means thousands of miles of traveling. As they journey, each teen gains insight into 
this new world in which humans are unable to reproduce, robots created to be help-
ful have violently rebelled, and the remaining people frantically seek ways to extend 
their lives. It is only after the five arrive in New York that their destiny becomes 
clear: they are to be avatars for gods and goddesses in a war to decide who will have 
dominion over Earth, and the massive destruction was simply a way to clear space 
for this epic battle. The unveiling of their fates as avatars comes rather too late to be 
fully explored or explained in this novel; as this is the first in a series, Sutherland’s clear 
intent was to describe this complex new world and introduce the five protagonists, 
a task successfully achieved. A cliffhanger ending with one teen perhaps gaining an 
unsurpassable advantage over the others all but guarantees continuing interest in and 
anticipation for future volumes. Compelling action melds effectively with religious 
mythology, a well-developed cast, and terrifyingly realistic future world elements, 
making this novel an easy sell to adventure, fantasy, and sci-fi fans.  AS 
sweeney, Joyce Headlock. Holt, 2006 214p
ISBN 0-8050-8018-X $16.95   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Kyle Bailey’s at the end of his high-school career, and he’s just bailed out of gymnas-
tics and into a training program for professional-wrestler wannabes. His outstanding 
quickness and balance give him an edge over most of the competitors in his class, 
and in no time at all he’s hooked up with the nearly-as-fabulous twenty-one-year-
old Ophelia, who’s on the rebound from a series of failed romances. Apart from 
the threats and homophobic smack dished out by jealous rivals, it looks like Kyle’s 
got it made until Chantal, the beloved grandmother who raised him, slides into 
dementia from a series of mini strokes and he hobbles his rising star to care for her. 
By taking readers behind the scenes of pro wrestling, Sweeney conjures consider-
able respect for the sport as part of the entertainment industry, demanding of its 
performers high levels of skill, daring, and acting ability. Her plotting, however, 
is strictly sports fantasy, with Chantal’s income sufficient to keep Kyle going after 
graduation on a pizza-delivery job, Kyle’s absentee mother arriving on the scene to 
take over Chantal’s care, Ophelia putting up with his deferred dreams, and a fairy-
tale ending in which Kyle gets to rub his success in the faces of the bullies while 
Ophelia wrestles on the same bill (but in lingerie). Any reader with half a wit will 
realize that happily ever after between codependent Kyle and alcoholic Ophelia is a 
dicey proposition, but there’s some undeniably sleazy charm to the match up.  EB
Tarshis, lauren Emma-Jean Lazarus Fell Out of a Tree. Dial, 2007 [144p]
ISBN 0-8037-3164-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Seventh grade marks a change for Emma-Jean Lazarus, who has formerly been 
content to observe her illogically behaving classmates from a detached distance and 
270 • The BulleTin
focus on the academic aspect of school; when confronted with a weeping Colleen 
Pomerantz, who’s afraid that the class alpha girl is going to sweep away Colleen’s 
best friend, Emma-Jean decides to intervene. Successful meddling seems to give 
her a taste for the pastime, and she finds herself acting secretly to defend a student 
unjustly accused and berated by a teacher. She’s puzzled, though, when her initial 
intercession, which started out well, seems to be making Colleen increasingly 
unhappy, and she’s keen to understand why. Though Emma-Jean isn’t an entirely 
believable character (her speaking without contractions, for instance, lacks the 
explanation that would make it more than an authorial contrivance), she’s a useful 
lens for examining the difficulties of social interaction, and she’s attractive in her 
self-containment and indifference to peer opinion. The third-person narration 
shifts between her viewpoint and that of sensitive, girly Colleen (who loves practic-
ing her bubble writing and dropping classmates complimentary notes about their 
dress and hair), the two offering a comic study in extremes. The book also quietly 
makes its point that Emma-Jean is as vulnerable to emotions in her own way as 
Colleen, since Emma-Jean becomes jealous of her widowed mother’s friendship 
with their tenant and attempts to intervene in that situation as well. Fans of the 
standard school-and-family story will likely enjoy the quirky spin Emma-Jean’s 
participation puts on normal existence, even as they sympathize with her struggles 
to understand a perplexing world.  DS
Thomas, shelley moore Take Care, Good Knight; illus. by Paul Meisel. Dutton, 
2006 32p
ISBN 0-525-47695-4 $15.99   
R 4-6 yrs
The gallant knight famed in early readers (Good Night, Good Knight, BCCB 2/00, 
et al.), again rides (“clippety-clop, clippety-clop”) to the rescue of his three little 
dragon friends who have recently agreed to do a favor for a wizard by looking after 
his cats. He left detailed instructions—illustrated, no less—on tasks to be performed, 
but since the dragons can’t read, they rely solely on the pictures. As a result, kitties 
are taken for a swim rather than given water, stuffed into a cupboard rather than 
fed, brought on a camping trip rather than tucked in at bedtime. Fortunately, the 
Good Knight intervenes before too much damage is done, and while a grateful 
wizard presents the dragons with a kitten for a job well done, the Good Knight 
gifts them with an ABC book and reading lessons. Previous adventures have been 
formatted for the emergent readers, and with this title’s shift to a larger trim size, 
the audience shifts as well from the readalone to the readaloud set, and children 
who have enjoyed the DIY pleasures of the first books may be reluctant to revert 
to a more “childish” presentation. The “You HAVE to learn to read” message is ef-
fectively and amusingly delivered, though, and with the driving rhythms, frequent 
repetitions, and delightful ink-and-watercolor cartoon-style pictures, this will be a 
fine step-up into a solidly entertaining series.  EB
Tomlinson, Theresa The Moon Riders. Eos/HarperCollins, 2006 387p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-084737-9 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-084736-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 6-9 
Myrina has been preparing for her thirteenth birthday her whole life: her horse-
back-riding, archery, and dancing abilities are all at their peak, and she is desper-
ately hoping she will be accepted to become a Moon Rider. This tribe of nomadic 
warrior women is in large part made up of young adventure-seeking teens, who 
FeBruary 2007 • 271
eagerly join for seven years before settling into adult life. Unfortunately, Myrina’s 
seven years stretch into many more as the concurrent war brewing in Troy threatens 
the entire region, requiring the Moon Riders’ full protective forces. Over the next 
decade, countless citizens and soldiers are lost in a war ostensibly centered around 
one woman, Helen, and many of Myrina’s beloved Moon Riders are among the 
lost. Indeed, Myrina’s life is filled with almost unbearable heartache: after losing her 
family, many friends, and her beloved husband, it is only her finely honed warrior 
skills of resilience and stoicism that help her recover and find joy in life again. The 
unusual time span of the novel offers a rare glimpse into a complete coming of age: 
Myrina’s path from an innocent child to a hardened but compassionate adult is a 
riveting journey, and much of the emotional impact comes from seeing her gradual 
growth and painfully won wisdom. As this British import is the first of two novels, 
there are several questions and plot threads that remain unresolved. However, the 
story also easily functions as a standalone fantasy read: Myrina’s fierce passion and 
gritty determination make for a memorable story even in a half-dose. A cast of 
characters, maps, and an author’s note will aid readers in sorting fiction from clas-
sical-history truth, and in keeping the elaborate geography in order.  AS  
valDes-roDriguez, alisa Haters. Little, 2006 351p
ISBN 0-316-01307-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Pasquala Rumalda Quintana de Archuleta is quite happy with her mellow life in 
Taos: she and her two best friends are the popular girls in their high school, she 
has plenty of mountain trails to bike, and she’s finally gotten a date with the hottie 
she’s been crushing on. When her cartoonist father comes home from L.A. with 
a movie contract for his comic-book superhero and tells her they are moving out 
there, she therefore protests. Her psychic grandmother assures her she’ll be okay as 
long as she doesn’t ignore her own paranormal gifts, which Paski has every inten-
tion of doing—she’ll stick with her gift for mountain biking and keep her scary 
visions to herself. As Paski reluctantly sorts her way through the freaks, geeks, and 
it girls of her new high school, she finds herself hospitalized due to a drugged drink 
and a dunking in a pool, invited into the inner circle of a truly evil trio of hateful 
girls, and hopelessly in love with the ex of the queen hater. Her vision of her rival’s 
serious accident in a motocross competition forces her to refocus her priorities 
and eventually leads to a restructuring of the school’s social hierarchy. The most 
comedic moments of this action-packed chick-lit odyssey are Paski’s exasperated 
descriptions of her father’s transformation from mild-mannered granola-munching 
artist from Taos into a label-conscious, iced Chicano low-rider with a vocabulary 
straight outa BET. Reminiscent of Serros’ Honey Blond Chica (BCCB 9/06) but 
way funnier, the book offers an enlightening side note in the form of insights 
into L.A. teen culture, where everyone’s ethnicity is a mixed jumble and the only 
thing that matters is dollars in the bank, and into the subtle play of differences 
in attitude between the business people and the talent that fuels the Hollywood 
machine. These details, along with Paski’s fresh, humorous voice, take this a step 
beyond typical mean-girl fare.  KC 
272 • The BulleTin
van fleeT, maTThew Dog; illus. with photographs by Brian Stanton. Wiseman/
Simon, 2007 [20p]
ISBN 1-4169-4137-1 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 2-5 yrs
Rhyming verse, paper engineering, and pettable special effects combine here to 
celebrate the appealing canine world. Close-coupled couplets make the most of 
repetition (just about all the lines are “[adjective] dog”) and of conceptual contrasts 
(“Little dog,/ Big dog”), with stanzas culminating in lively exclamations (“Dry 
dog,/ Wet dog—shake, shake, shake!”) or humorous truths (“All dogs poop/ All 
dogs pee”). Each spread offers a photographic kennelful of delectable dogs, with 
die-cut holes filled with fluffy fur offering poke-and-pet opportunities; pull-tabs 
provide participatory opportunities to wag tails, scratch itches, and lift legs, and the 
final foldout spread identifies the participants by name and breed while secreting a 
climactic “Cat!” under a top flap (though it’s too bad that the text, so meticulous 
about its dogs, misidentifies the featured kitty as a calico). Young dog lovers will 
find this absolutely irresistible, and the sturdy mechanics will probably last longer 
under their ministrations than any actual dog would. The simplicity and repeti-
tion of the text will encourage readalong attempts (this would make for a terrific 
readaloud from an older sib, as well), and there’s plenty of enjoyment to be had 
from just petting and kissing the endearing gallery of pooches (and hilarity from 
making Reggie the English bulldog pee, and pee, and pee). Plenty of dog books 
will make gleeful audiences metaphorically wag tails; here’s one that will have them 
doing it literally—and literarily.  DS 
wallingTon, aury Pop! Razorbill, 2006 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59514-092-1 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 7-10
Marit is convinced that she is more than ready for sex, but her body keeps getting 
in her way. Every time things get hot and heavy with a guy, something happens 
to make her recoil and she runs away, repulsed, embarrassed, and still intact. Her 
solution to the problem is to turn her male friend Jamie into a friend-with-benefits. 
Jamie obliges, and after a few rather disappointing sessions, Marit comes to the blithe 
conclusion that sex is really no big deal and that with that hurdle leapt, she can now 
pursue a real relationship with the intriguing new guy, Noah. Unfortunately, Jamie 
has gotten his signals very crossed, and Marit suddenly finds herself without a best 
friend and without a boyfriend, since Noah, too, finds it confusing that Marit is 
dating him and sleeping with Jamie. A cafeteria showdown puts things on the right 
course for a reconciliation, and all’s well, incredibly, that ends well. If Marit seems 
clueless as to the emotional train wreck she has orchestrated, it’s likely because the 
characters here are drawn as thinly as cardboard cutouts; they have all the right 
external features, but no calculable motivations or credible feeling registers. Read-
ers will be as surprised as Marit to find that Jamie actually has more-than-friend 
longings for her, and rereading for subtle clues turns up no new insights or veiled 
intimations. The writing is artless and pedestrian, but the real problem lies in the 
fact that Marit’s problem and its solution are portrayed without emotional nuance 
or gains in self-understanding. Certainly teens deserve more credit for emotional 
complexity than they receive here, and better books as well.  KC 
FeBruary 2007 • 273
wilson, Diane lee Firehorse. McElderry, 2006 325p
ISBN 1-4169-1551-6 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 6-10
Fifteen-year-old Rachel Selby loves to ride horses, much to the consternation of 
her father, who finds her passion completely indecent for a young woman in 1872. 
When Mr. Selby accepts a position as editor of a small Boston newspaper and the 
family leaves rural Illinois, Rachel fears her days with horses are past. It isn’t long, 
however, before she meets the Governor’s Girl, a badly burned firehorse in need of 
care. Unbeknownst to their father, Rachel and her brother James (who works at the 
firehouse) move the Girl into the shed out back. Mr. Stead, a young veterinarian, 
begins dropping by regularly to check on the Girl, and it isn’t long before Rachel 
decides that she wants to study to become a veterinarian, a daunting ambition for 
a Victorian lady. These domestic issues are set against the backdrop of a suspicious 
increase in city fires, a breakout of distemper among the city’s working horses, and 
Mr. Selby’s incendiary journalism that offers commentary on both issues, plus 
side stories about Mr. Selby’s possible involvement in the fires and a burgeoning 
romance between Rachel and the young veterinarian. This is obviously a novel 
that brushes a multitude of genres, and some are more successful than others. The 
romance is standard and predictable from the get-go, the intrigue surrounding the 
fires is difficult to follow, and both these unpersuasive plotlines steal focus from 
the more interesting material. As a writer of historical fiction, though, Wilson’s at 
her best, skillfully evoking the issues of change, resistance, and empowerment with 
which a young woman of the nineteenth century might grapple. As in her previous 
novels (Black Storm Comin’, BCCB 9/05; I Rode a Horse of Milk White Jade, BCCB 
6/98), she deftly captures young people’s fascination with horses, and animal lovers 
will easily relate to Rachel’s passion for and dedication to the Governor’s Girl. An 
author’s note links events in the story to the Great Boston Fire of 1872, as well as 
offering insight into the research behind the writing.  HM 
wu, liz Rosa Farm; illus. by Matt Phelan. Knopf, 2006 134p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93681-5 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83681-0 $15.95   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Rumors spread quickly on Rosa Farm, thanks to its gossipy gaggle of geese. On 
this particular day, the news is that Farmer Rosa is taking Magellan the Rooster to 
compete in the county fair, which means Gallileon, his young son, must welcome 
the sun in his stead. Gallileon is fairly nervous about this—he’s not really sure how 
one goes about waking the sun and he’s afraid of the backlash if he were to mess 
up—but, fortunately, he does a passable job (though it takes quite a few off-key 
croaks before he gets it right). The geese decide to play a trick on Gallileon, chal-
lenging him to prove his ability to cock-a-doodle-doo at high noon before the entire 
barnyard. What Gallileon doesn’t know is that an eclipse is to occur at that very 
moment, and he is thus certain that he ruined everything when his noontime crow 
results in the disappearance of the sun. In the end, a thoughtfully executed coup in 
the coop takes leadership away from the bossy, mean-spirited goose Prattle (who 
planned the trick on Gallileon), and Magellan the Rooster returns home with a blue 
ribbon, none the wiser about his son’s eventful day. This is a little lightweight for 
its length: the central conflict of this barnyard romp is somewhat silly, and the plot 
is at times difficult to follow. The story’s real focus, though, is the way rumors and 
group dynamics function among the animals on the farm, and with elements such 
as eavesdropping, seductive speechmaking, deceit, and even a kidnapping thrown in 
274 • The BulleTin
for good measure, the tale offers plenty of commentary on the power of politicking. 
Phelan’s energetic black-and-white illustrations playfully depict the animals and are 
especially adept at conveying emotions through simply drafted facial expressions. 
Readers who have outgrown Click, Clack, Moo (BCCB 9/00) may appreciate this 
chapter-book version of politics at play on the farm.  HM
yee, Paul What Happened This Summer. Tradewind, 2006 178p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-896580-88-2 $10.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
In a series of short stories, Yee looks at the variety of experiences of nine Chinese-
Canadian teens. Each of them has mixed if not wholly negative feelings about 
their lives as immigrants; for the most part, they understand their parents’ desire 
for them to have a better life and education and in particular to be free from 
Communism, but that desire for their children’s freedom and success does not 
extend to their actual home lives. There, the parents rule with iron wills, and the 
teens chafe under expectations as relatively benign as wanting them to wear mod-
est clothing and get good grades, to forcing them to marry against their wishes in 
order to repay a family debt. The stories are individually compelling, but they are 
similar in their melancholy tone, with the young people’s victories over this sort of 
oppression being small to nonexistent; many simply end up resentful and stuck. 
Yee never signals that what initially appear to be chapters are really separate stories 
that are only loosely connected through passing references to characters from other 
stories—the narrators seem to know of one another, but the stories don’t particu-
larly overlap—leaving the reader expecting a continuous narration thrown for a 
loop. Nonetheless, the collection is poignant, and it points to a serious problem 
of isolation and discontent in Chinese-Canadian teen culture, sadly offering no 
remedy other than the act of storytelling itself.  KC 
yeomans, ellen Rubber Houses. Little, 2007 [160p]
ISBN 0-316-10647-X $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
“Buddy knows pop flies and batting order/ Buddy knows bunting and catcher’s 
signals/ Buddy’s not old enough/ to know chemo.” But he does, much to the 
shock and sorrow of his older sister, Kit, who was finishing junior year, looking at 
maps, and dreaming of the post-graduation getaway until her baseball-mad little 
brother underwent treatment for cancer and succumbed to the disease after only 
a few months. A shattered Kit drifts away from her best friend and mechanically 
attends a bereavement group, observing her family’s inability to help one another 
as they all grieve for Buddy. The free-verse poems that constitute the novel are ac-
cessibly styled without becoming overobvious; the focal images of the map, with 
its attendant possibilities (“Danger is a full tank/ Of gasoline,” thinks Kit as she’s 
tempted by the possibility of escaping her wounded family), and of baseball, the 
game that Buddy and Kit both loved, are effectively employed, and the symbol-
ism of Kit’s growing pleasures in literal repair and rebuilding (she starts working 
at a hardware store and begins volunteer work with a home-building group) isn’t 
lost on Kit herself. This will be a successful four-hankie read for those drawn by 
the unintimidating text as well as the poetic conceit, making it a useful as well as 
a genuinely moving title.  DS
FeBruary 2007 • 275
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
aDa, alma flor Alma Flor Ada and YOU:  Volume 1. Libraries Unlimited, 
2006 119p illus. with photographs (The Author and YOU)
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59158-186-9 $35.00
aylesworTh, Jim Jim Aylesworth and YOU; by Jim Aylesworth and Jennifer 
K. Rotole. Libraries Unlimited, 2006 96p illus. with photographs (The 
Author and YOU)
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59158-256-3 $35.00
marTin, Jacqueline Briggs Jacqueline Briggs Martin and YOU; by Jacqueline 
Briggs Martin and Sharron L. McElmeel. Libraries Unlimited, 2006 109p illus 
with photographs (The Author and YOU)
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59158-257-1 $35.00
sToTT, Jon c. Gerald McDermott and YOU; illus. by Gerald McDermott. Li-
braries Unlimited, 2006 111p illus. with photographs (The Author and 
YOU)
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59158-175-3 $35.00
According to a foreword from series editors Sharon L. McElmeel and Sharon Coat-
ney, this series is designed to “give you the next best thing to a real life visit with 
your favorite children’s authors and illustrators.” Each entry in the series includes 
a brief biography (or autobiography) and an overview of the author or illustrator’s 
works, but the real strength of these titles lies in the direct voices of the subjects and 
their discussions of their own work. Ada’s title contextualizes her books by placing 
them within broad categories such as “The Richness of Children’s Folklore” and 
“In Search of Identity”; Stott focuses on the inspirations for McDermott’s cultur-
ally situated picture books; Aylesworth’s title suggests activities built on his books 
and related to different kinds of intelligences (e.g. “linguistic” or “visual/spatial” 
development); and Martin’s title gives only brief book annotations, instead spend-
ing much of the book encouraging youngsters to write for themselves.  While the 
included activities are somewhat variable, it’s the individual authorial perspective 
that really makes these useful and engaging.  These will therefore enrich curricular 
units and extend the ways children can interact with texts.  CW 
freeman, JuDy Books Kids Will Sit Still For 3:  A Read-Aloud Guide. Libraries 
Unlimited, 2006 915p illus. with photographs (Children’s and Young Adult 
Literature Reference Series)
Library ed. ISBN 1-59158-163-X $70.00
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59158-164-8 $55.00
Librarians and paraprofessionals of all stripes will be pleased as punch at the con-
tents of the third in Freeman’s series, since it is equally a professional guide, an idea 
generator, and a tribute to those who work with children’s books and love them 
as much as Freeman herself. This version, which augments rather than replaces 
the others, covers more than 1,700 titles from 1995 through 2005 and provides a 
plethora of professional development information along with annotations and a trio 
of indices. A little less than a third of the book is taken up with essays on awards, 
skills for librarians, hosts of curricular connections from gym to geometry, and 
276  •  The BulleTin
tons of tips on the art of storytelling and drama. The bulk of the volume consists 
of the selected titles (field-tested on real elementary-school students) with the usual 
bibliographic information and annotation, plus performance suggestions and subject 
listings to aid in creating programs, curricula, or displays.  Freeman also presents an 
extensive professional bibliography along with indices covering author/illustrator, 
title, and more than 1,800 wide-ranging subject categories.  The author’s love for 
reading and connecting readers with books is unmistakable in every line of this 
excellent resource.  CW
Treviño, rose ZerTuche, ed. The Pura Belpré Awards:  Celebrating Latino 
Authors and Illustrators. American Library Association, 2006 86p illus. with 
photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8389-3562-1 $35.00
Treviño and a small group of former Belpré Award committee members have created 
a guide that includes background information about the award and about Belpré, a 
complete list of author and illustrator winners, and activities for creating connec-
tions between the winners and young readers. Lists of winners and honor books 
are presented chronologically within separate author and illustrator sections, and 
annotations and book excerpts enhance the author section while annotations and 
full-color plates from each of the winning books round out the illustrator section. 
There are also short biographical sketches of both authors and illustrators, take-away 
booktalks ready for immediate delivery, and a variety of crafts and activities that 
range in age and complexity from making salsa to discussing a movie, to making a 
piñata. The whole Belpré experience is extended beyond the print guide through 
a bilingual DVD that provides photographs of Pura Belpré herself, interviews with 
award founders, and with winning authors and illustrators. This practical handbook 
will appeal to anyone who wants to feature, work with, or celebrate the growing 
body of high-quality Latino children’s literature.  CW 
February 2007 • 277
Abuse–fiction: Flinn; Paul
Adoption–fiction: Marsden
Adventure: Brooks; Carney; 
Hurst; Jubert; McCaughrean; 
Miller; reeve; valdes-rodriguez
African Americans: Haskins; rappa-
port Freedom; rappaport Nobody
African Americans–fiction: Barnes
Animals: Hatkoff
Animals–fiction: Becker, B.; Wu
Antarctica–fiction: McCaughrean
Anthropology: Goldenberg
Art: Lipsey
Art and artists–fiction: Becker, B.; 
Prosek
Asian Americans: Mochizuki
Asian Americans–fiction: Marsden; 
Yee
Baseball: Cook
BioGrAPHies: Cooper; Haskins; 
Kirkpatrick; Mochizuki
Biology: Lindop
Books and reading–stories: thomas
Brothers and sisters–fiction: reeve; 
Yeomans
Bullies–fiction: straight
Careers–fiction: straight
Civil rights movement: Haskins
Civil War: rappaport Freedom
Cloning–fiction: Farnell
Competition–fiction: dalecki
CrAFt BooKs: Lipsey
Crime and criminals–fiction: Brooks; 
Jubert
dancers and dance–fiction: dalecki
dating–fiction: Beam
death and dying–fiction: Farnell; 
smith; Yeomans
disabilities–fiction: Hacker
divorce–fiction: Prosek
dogs: van Fleet
dogs–fiction: dart; straight
dragons–fiction: steer
dreams–stories: Milgrim
Ecology–fiction: Carmody
egypt: Limke
esP–fiction: Johnston; valdes-ro-
driguez 
Ethics and values: Calhoun; Car-
mody; Farnell; Haskins; rappa-
port Nobody; reinhardt; resau
explorers and exploring: Kirkpatrick
explorers and exploring–fiction: Mc-
Caughrean
Families–fiction: Hill; Johnston; 
Prosek; snyder; straight; tarshis
FAntAsY: Calhoun; Carmody; Ju-
bert; reeve; resau; smith; steer; 
sutherland; tomlinson
Fathers–fiction: Hacker; Hagerup; 
Hill
FoLK-LiKe tALes: Blackwood
FoLKtALes And FAirY tALes: 
shepard, A.
Food and eating–stories: Horowitz
Friends: Hatkoff
Friends–fiction: Hagerup; reinhardt; 
shepard, s.; tarshis
Gangs–fiction: dalecki
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Carney; 
Hacker
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPs 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
278 • The bulleTin
Geology: Lindop
Gods and goddesses–fiction: suther-
land
Grandmothers–fiction: sweeney
Grandparents–fiction: Beam
Grandparents–stories: Hurst
GrAPHiC noveLs: Limke
Grief–fiction: Yeomans
Growing up–fiction: Caletti
HistoriCAL FiCtion: Carney; 
duble; Johnston; Paul; Wilson
History, U.S.: Cooper; Haskins; 
rappaport Nobody
History, world: Goldenberg
Horses–fiction: Wilson
Houses–fiction: snyder
HuMor: Barnes; Becker, B.; Beck-
er, s.; Blackwood; dart; Hagerup; 
Horowitz; Kelly; Milgrim; reeve; 
thomas; valdes-rodriguez; van 
Fleet; Wu
identity–fiction: Johnston; Marsden; 
resau
illness–fiction: Hacker
immigrants–fiction: Yee
Journalists–fiction: Kelly
Latinos: valdes-rodriguez
Latinos–fiction: resau
Letter-writing–fiction: Hagerup
Librarians–fiction: Morpurgo
Lies–fiction: reinhardt
Mexico–fiction: resau
Mothers–fiction: Paul
Music and musicians: Gourse; Myers
Music and musicians–fiction: dart; 
Flinn
MYsteries: Brooks; Jubert; 
Kelly; McCaughrean; shepard, s.; 
snyder
Mythology: Limke
Mythology, classical: tomlinson
Parents–fiction: smith
Physical education: Cook; Mo-
chizuki
Pirates–fiction: reeve
PoetrY: Myers; Yeomans
Prison–fiction: Hill
racism: rappaport Nobody
Reading aloud: Hatkoff; Morpurgo; 
straight
Reading, easy: Blackwood; Kelly; 
straight
Reading, reluctant: Cook
recovery–fiction: Flinn
relationships–fiction: Barnes; 
Brooks; Caletti; sweeney; Wal-
lington
revolutionary War: Cooper
rHYMinG stories: Henderson; 
Horowitz; van Fleet
roMAnCe: Caletti
romance–fiction: duble
school–fiction: Carney; steer; 
tarshis
Science: Goldenberg; Lindop
sCienCe FiCtion: Farnell; 
Miller
secrets–fiction: shepard, s.
sex–fiction: Barnes; reinhardt; Wal-
lington
sexism–fiction: Wilson
sHort stories: Yee
sisters–stories: shepard, A.
size–stories: Becker, s.
slavery: rappaport Freedom
snow–stories: Hurst
sPorts stories: Beam; Cook; 
sweeney
Storytelling–fiction: Morpurgo
Storytime: van Fleet
susPense: Brooks
toddLer BooKs: Henderson
voyages and travel: Kirkpatrick
voyages and travel–fiction: Mc-
Caughrean
voyages and travel–stories: Milgrim
War–fiction: Calhoun; sutherland; 
tomlinson
Weather–stories: Hurst
Women’s studies: Gourse
Work–fiction: duble
Work–stories: Becker, s.
World War ii–fiction: Johnston
Zoos–fiction: Caletti
