T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
September 2015
Vol. 69   No. 1
New perspectives  
that are anything 
but elementary.
JHU Press scholarly journal offerings in  
Children’s Literature:
Bookbird: A Journal of International Children’s Literature
ISSN: 0006-7377 / E-ISSN: 1918-6983
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books  
ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Children’s Literature ISSN: 0092-8208 / E-ISSN: 1543-3374
Children’s Literature Association Quarterly ISSN: 0885-0429 / E-ISSN: 1553-1201
The Lion and the Unicorn ISSN: 0147-2593 / E-ISSN: 1080-6563
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
September 2015
Vol. 69 No. 1
3 
 the BIg PICture
 
  Out of the Woods: A True Story of an Unforgettable Event  written  
and illus. by Rebecca Bond
4 
 new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
7 
• T errible Typhoid Mary: A True Story of the Deadliest Cook in America   
by Susan Campbell Bartoletti
9 
• I Yam a Donkey!  written and illus. by Cece Bell
46 •  Captain Coconut & the Case of the Missing Bananas   
by Anushka Ravishankar; illus. by Priya Sundram
50 • Fuzzy Mud  by Louis Sachar
57 • Goodbye Stranger by Rebecca Stead
67  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
68  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2015 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Out of the Woods: A True Story of an Unforgettable Event by Rebecca Bond, copy-
right ©2015 and used by permission of Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
September 2015 • 3
the BIg PICture
Out of the Woods: A True Story of an  
Unforgettable Event
written and illus. by Rebecca Bond
Most kids are fascinated with nature and particularly with animals, but their real-
life encounters with most wildlife are likely to be constrained and tamed. Books, 
therefore, offer satisfying if vicarious opportunities to encounter wildlife beyond 
the occasional pavement-savvy squirrel or zoo-confined monkey. Bond’s Out of the 
Woods both encapsulates that desire and satisfies it, chronicling the extraordinary 
experience of a young boy in 1914 Ontario. 
Young Antonio Giroux loves living in his mother’s hotel, where the trap-
pers and lumberjacks and travelers stay, surrounded by the Ontario wilderness. There 
are no other children there, so he happily tags along with the hotel workers all day 
and revels in the facility’s fascinating guests, who speak in many languages and carry 
fishing and hunting equipment. In the woods, he’s more conflicted; he knows that 
the animals are smart to stay hidden with the hotel’s guests hunting them, but he 
longs to see more of the bears and deer, moose and foxes that call the wilderness 
home. His wish comes true in an unexpected way: when a fire rages through the 
forest, he, his mother, and the hotel guests all take refuge in the adjacent lake, and 
soon the animals seek safety there as well (“Wolves stood beside deer, foxes beside 
rabbits. And people and moose stood close enough to touch”). Fortunately, the 
hotel is spared, and humans and animals all go back to their regular lives, but little 
Antonio is left with an indelible memory. 
The account, based on the author’s grandfather’s youthful experience, is 
more of a vignette than a plot-rich story, but Bond brings it all vividly alive. Even 
before the drama of the fire, her evocative, gently cadenced prose (“Here it smelled 
wonderful—of sweet tobacco and wood, wool and leather, and sweat”) effectively 
conjures Antonio’s fortunate life at the hotel, unobtrusively sharing adult work 
and camaraderie and enjoying enviable independence. The prose eschews dialogue 
entirely, giving the scenario a touch of distant glamour as well as a silent-movie 
stillness. That effect is most evident in the climactic moment where human and 
animal alike shelter in the lake, an event that is given full haunting magic without 
ever losing sight of the desperation behind the strange accord. 
The line and watercolor art uses dense hatching and cross-hatching so 
extensively that it suggests etching at times, but lines remain fluid; there are some 
echoes, in the soft linework, of Garth Williams’ Little House illustrations. The pal-
ette leans toward vintage tones, whether it be in the earthy wood of the hotel or the 
yellow-to-sepia glow of the lantern, but the detail of the events remains immediate, 
4 • the bulletin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
putting viewers in the middle of the period action. Bond draws smoothly on the 
architecture of the hotel, finding rhythms in the plank flooring and hallways, and 
also finds visual rhythm in the people, whether it’s in the line of suspenders at the 
dining table or the eerie, startlingly vertical formation of the humans in the lake 
against the amorphously blazing forest. 
Use this as a lead-in to Hill’s Bo at Ballard Creek (BCCB 9/13), another 
celebration of period kid life amid captivating wildness, as a dramatic and unex-
pected slice of historical life, or as a creative take on animal stories. An author’s note 
gives background for the story. (See p. 12 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
Allen, elise Gabby Duran and the Unsittables; by Elise Allen and Daryle Con-
nors. Disney Hyperion, 2015 192p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-0935-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-1942-8 $9.99   
 R Gr. 3-5
Any parent would want a sitter like Gabby: she’s responsible, energetic, and not 
afraid of any kid, even alien ones. That’s good, because it turns out there are aliens 
in disguise all over the place, and a fabulous babysitter is exactly what their parents 
have been pining for as they adjust to life on Earth. Of course, there are bad guys 
who want to either exploit the aliens for profit or send them back whence they came, 
but there are also devoted individuals who help them acclimate and blend in. Gabby 
is one of the latter, assisting with that acclimatization and giving quick cultural 
instruction as she goofs off with and protects the extraterrestrial kiddos. The tone is 
snappy and bright, reassuring readers that even when things seem perilous, all will 
end well. Gabby herself is a bit too perfect to allow for deep connection, but luckily 
she is surrounded by memorable characters: a smart, distant sister who deserves a 
book of her own, a mysterious and slightly ominous woman who arranges Gabby’s 
gigs, and the adorable, creatively described alien kiddos themselves. Readers who 
haven’t considered babysitting will find their interest piqued by the possibility of 
watching a sweet shape-shifter or giant slug. The lively layout (borders employing 
hot pink accents and repeated glowing green alien heads) adds appeal.  AS
September 2015 • 5
AmAteAu, GiGi Two for Joy; illus. by Abigail Marble. Candlewick, 2015 89p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3010-2 $14.99   
R Gr. 2-3
When Great-Great-Aunt Tannie breaks her ankle, eight-year old Jenna and her 
mother travel to Tannie’s farm in Mississippi to bring her back to their Virginia 
home for recuperation. Jenna has fond memories of the farm—getting to know the 
orange and white cat named Butt, gathering eggs from the chickens, birdwatch-
ing with her aunt—and she has all kinds of ideas how she and Tannie will spend 
their time. Once in Mississippi, however, Jenna realizes that her aunt is in poorer 
health than she had imagined and has to shelve her big plans for daily baking 
and gardening. Tannie, a formidable woman, is not easily convinced to return to 
Virginia, but she eventually succumbs to her relatives persistence and hesitantly 
agrees. This is a thoughtful: intergenerational story told from the perspective of a 
young person, and Jenna’s voice is both authentic and endearing. Her devotion to 
her aunt allows her to surpass her initial disappointment when she realizes having 
Tannie move in won’t be the round of fun she’d imagined. The slim novel has the 
flavor of a short story; there are very few characters, a simple storyline, and no 
subplots, just the progression of events surrounding Tannie’s fall and relocation. 
The plot moves swiftly from problem to resolution, making it an excellent choice 
for newly independent readers. Fans of Patricia MacLachlan will likely warm to 
this tender family story about learning to help those who have the hardest time 
accepting it. Black and white illustrations have an ink and watercolor informality 
and gentleness suitable to the text.  HM
Anderson, John dAvid The Dungeoneers. Walden Pond/HarperCollins, 
2015 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233814-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233816-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Young Colm, one of a cobbler’s nine children, has spent more than a few nights 
going to bed hungry. Disgusted by the opulence he sees at the market square, he 
decides one day to take matters into his own hands and steals several coin purses 
off wealthy lords and merchants. Colm’s successful pickpocketing catches the eye 
of Finn Argos, who strikes a bargain with Colm’s father, saying that he will mentor 
the boy at the elite dungeoneering school where Colm’s talents will be put to bet-
ter use than robbery. Dungeoneering, however, is just a fancier word for pilfering, 
as Colm learns when he joins Thwodin’s Legions, a collective of thieves. Colm is 
unfazed by the guild’s questionable morals, especially when the treasure they are 
stealing is from nasty goblins or ogres, and he even makes a few friends when he is 
paired with a team of apprentices to train for dungeoneering in the field. Anderson 
has a knack for threading subtle emotional and ethical dilemmas into tried and true 
plots—first with the superhero origin story in Sidekicked (BCCB 9/13) and Minion 
(BCCB 9/14), and now with the traditional quest story. All the elements are here: 
an imposing training school, a ragtag group of kids supported by a wise mentor, 
a McGuffin that spurs them into action. A betrayal near the end, however, reveals 
the Guild’s inherent flaw, and readers who have thus far agreed with Colm’s actions 
will be challenged by notions of trust, loyalty, and ownership. These themes are 
thought-provoking, and they’re also seamlessly interwoven into an action-packed 
story, complete with orc fights and ogre confrontations. For the kid asking what 
to read after Harry Potter, this might very well be the answer.  KQG 
6 • the bulletin
BAker, ChAndler Alive. Hyperion, 2015 360p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-0683-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-0918-4 $9.99   
R Gr. 9-12
A heart transplant gives seventeen-year-old Stella a new lease on life, but she’s still 
troubled by weird visions and ongoing pain, especially a fierce paroxysm that arrives 
at the same time every day. When dreamy new guy Levi Zin shows up, though, 
their budding romantic relationship thrills Stella and also seems to ease her physi-
cal torment. After Levi’s magnetism turns into controlling behavior, Stella sensibly 
breaks it off, only to find that Levi’s still deeply interested in her—and that he may 
be connected to the murder of a girl who was found with her heart torn out. The 
writing occasionally strays into awkwardness or cliché, but in general the story is 
cinematically engaging with some sharp touches amid the enjoyable cheesiness. It’s 
refreshing that Stella dumps Levi despite their intense connection, and loyal Henry 
is a rock-solid friend/ally/wannabe boyfriend. The book keeps things gratifyingly 
ominous for some time, with a teasingly late reveal of the fact that Levi (whose 
name is an anagram for “evil”) is the former owner of Stella’s heart, returned from 
the dead to claim his own. This will be a satisfying gallop of a read for those who 
hold low-gore, high-concept supernatural horror dear to their non-transplanted 
hearts.  DS
BAldwin, kAthleen A School for Unusual Girls. Tor Teen, 2015 351p 
(Stranje House)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7653-7600-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-4927-3 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
After her latest science experiment burns her father’s stables to the ground, Miss 
Georgiana Fitzwilliam is mandated by her parents to attend the School for Unusual 
Girls, devoted to transforming aspiring bluestockings into biddable potential wives 
fit for high society. Rumor has it that headmistress Miss Stranje uses torture to 
meet her objective, but—after a few mishaps—Georgie finds the school quite to 
her liking, especially when Miss Stranje provides her with a fully stocked labora-
tory. As it turns out, Miss Stranje is actually recruiting young female minds to help 
Europe’s efforts to place Louis XVIII on the French throne and secure Napoleon’s 
exile in Elba. Georgie’s experiments with invisible ink make her essential to the 
cause, but her success depends on her ability to partner with the handsome Lord 
Wyatt, whose good looks and teasing banter distract Georgie from her work. Fa-
miliar romantic tropes—the charming rogue, the bookish innocent, the obstacles 
to their love, etc.—all click away reliably, fulfilling genre expectations with an 
easy grace. Though period details enhance the background (elements of history 
are altered, as explained in the author’s note), the Stranje house is unfortunately 
underutilized, giving a physical space to Georgie’s predicament but lacking in at-
mosphere. Characterization of the other girls at the school is also fairly one note, 
with the exception of perhaps Tess, whose mixture of bravado and vulnerability 
(and her fiery romance with a brooding lord) often takes center stage in what is 
supposed to be Georgie’s narration. Still, fans of romantically touched spy stories 
will flock to this, and they’ll be pleased to see that Tess gets a book of her own in 
the upcoming sequel.  KQG 
September 2015 • 7
BArry, dAve The Worst Class Trip Ever; illus. by Jon Cannell. Disney Hyperion, 
2015 214p
ISBN 978-1-4847-0849-1 $13.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Miami native Wyatt Palmer is used to crazy things that only happen in Miami, 
like when his dad goes out to get the morning paper in a pair of holey boxer shorts 
and ends up on the evening news because he got chased by an alligator in their 
yard. However, he isn’t ready for the wild adventure his eighth-grade class trip to 
Washington, DC, turns out to be when his idiot best friend, Matt, convinces him 
that the two men sitting behind them on the plane are terrorists with designs on 
the Capitol. To Matt’s credit, the device he steals from the guys’ backpack is in fact 
a military-grade radar jammer, and they do have a plot that Matt’s theft threatens to 
foil, resulting in them kidnapping Matt in order to get the device back. Fortunately, 
Wyatt’s crush, Suzana, is both fearless and fond of intrigue, and between her and 
a few trusty friends, hair-raising adventure ensues and the day is saved, middle-
school style. Barry’s droll wit, shining through Wyatt’s narration, plays exception-
ally well for a preteen audience, with explicit ironies and eyerolling observations 
about Wyatt’s mercurial Cuban mother, the mortifications of having an idiot best 
friend, and the wistful longings of having an unrequited crush on a popular girl. 
The outrageous plotting is the real draw here, though; this is a savvy integration 
of real-world anxieties with the absurdest of absurd hero fantasies, overlaid with a 
touch of hey-it-could-happen if, you know, you were in a crazy action movie. While 
the story initially plays on stereotypes of people who come from countries that end 
in –stan, it upends those stereotypes in ways both clever and hilarious. This one will 
definitely have action-adventure-obsessed kids looking away from their screens.  KC
BArtoletti, susAn CAmpBell Terrible Typhoid Mary: A True Story of the Deadli-
est Cook in America. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 [240p] illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-0-544-31367-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
“If you’re squeamish and don’t like to read about germs, then you should stop now 
and find some other book to read.” And with that provocative opening comment, 
Bartoletti should have readers ready and riveted for her account of Mary Mallon, 
the early twentieth-century Irish immigrant who, as an asymptomatic carrier of 
typhoid bacteria, infected the well-to-do families that employed her to cook. Bar-
toletti covers much the same ground as Gail Jarrow’s Fatal Fever (BCCB 4/15), but 
with a different emphasis and narrative style. Whereas Jarrow tackled the topic as a 
medical mystery with the germ fighters in lead roles (albeit with explicit sympathy 
for Mallon’s personal plight), Bartoletti delivers a fast-moving biography of Mallon 
herself. The heavy-handed tactics of sanitary engineer, George Soper, and the public 
health officials who twice incarcerated Mallon on a New York island are cast in a 
different and decidedly dimmer view in Bartoletti’s account. This is enthusiastic 
and accessible, but it remains respectful, offering understanding and empathy for 
the numerous people affected by the outbreaks that followed in Mallon’s wake. It’s 
a rare treat for information book readers to happen upon two fresh accounts of 
a fascinating episode in the history of disease control, so be sure to pair this with 
the Jarrow for a compete picture. A gallery of black and white photos, a timeline, 
annotated citations, a topically organized bibliography are appended; the bound 
book will include an index. EB
8 • the bulletin
BeAsley, CAssie Circus Mirandus; illus. by Diana Sudyka. Dial, 2015 292p
ISBN 978-0-525-42843-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Grandpa Ephraim, who has raised Micah Tuttle for most of his ten years, is dy-
ing, but he can’t go in peace until he claims a miracle promised to him by the 
Lightbender, a magician in a mysterious circus Ephraim attended in his youth. 
Micah has been hearing stories of the wondrous Circus Mirandus all his life, and 
he believes that that the Lightbender will restore the old man to health and thereby 
send Ephraim’s officious sister Gertrudis—Micah’s resented and resentful guardian-
in-waiting—packing. With the help of a skeptical schoolmate, Jenny, Micah does 
find the circus and share his grandfather’s awe, but the miracle Grandpa brokers 
with the Lightbender isn’t quite the one Micah wants, even though it’s exactly 
the one he needs. The tender relationship between grandfather and grandson is 
delicately drawn, and the family backstory, with its ties to a dark episode in the 
millennia-old history of Circus Mirandus, is intriguing. Monochromatic illustra-
tions are painterly but robust, neatly enclosing their drama in bordered vignettes. 
At the core of Beasley’s debut novel is the theme of eternal life explored in Babbitt’s 
Tuck Everlasting, and readers will sense the rightness of Grandpa Ephraim’s final 
request even as they share Micah’s reluctance to let the ailing man go the way he 
lived—caring for his grandson to the very end.  EB
BeAton, kAte The Princess and the Pony; written and illus. by Kate Bea-
ton. Levine/Scholastic, 2015 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-545-63708-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
“Most warriors get fantastic birthday presents. . . . Princess Pinecone got a lot of 
cozy sweaters. Warriors do not need cozy sweaters.” This birthday, Pinecone has 
made it clear she wants a glorious warhorse, but what she gets is a weirdly shaped 
little pony (which “ate things it shouldn’t have, and farted too much”). When a 
great battle occurs, Pinecone hovers at the sidelines in hope that she and her pony 
will at least get a chance to participate. Instead, the warriors melt at her pony’s 
cuteness (“That is not how a battle usually goes,” Pinecone accurately notes), and 
when one sadly remarks that they “don’t often get to show our cuddly sides,” Pine-
cone shrewdly unloads her cozy sweaters on the group. This is the first foray into 
picture books for Beaton, author of the popular Hark! A Vagrant webcomic, and 
her signature wit is on display here. Once past the setup, the plot doesn’t always 
make a ton of sense, but the absurdity and gleefully irreverent tone compensate. 
The goofiness is matched by the art, wide-eyed digital cartoons that give Princess 
(biracial daughter of two warrior-looking parents) the vigor of mid-century ani-
mation. The life-transforming pony has a round face, bulging eyes, and dangling 
tongue that recall internet-famous cat Lil Bub, offering a comic contrast to the 
graceful wavy-maned steeds of Pinecone’s imagination. This is a princess book that 
could break gender boundaries, appealing to fans of Scieszka and other irreverent 
authors, and it will provide a stepping stone to early graphic novels, particularly 
Simpson’s Phoebe and Her Unicorn (BCCB 10/14).  DS 
September 2015 • 9
BeAtty, roBert Serafina and the Black Cloak. Disney Hyperion, 2015 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-0901-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-1511-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
It’s 1899, and the Biltmore estate is hosting a number of families. Meanwhile, 
young Serafina has been skulking in the shadows and navigating the dark nooks of 
the house; she and her father have lived undetected in the basement for years, and, 
by the orders of her pa, she cannot allow herself to be seen by any members of the 
household. An encounter in the middle of the night with a man in a black cloak 
and clearly terrified girl leaves Serafina shaken; when she hears that visiting children 
have begun to go missing from the house, she’s certain the man in the cloak is the 
culprit. Joined by Braeden, the young master of Biltmore, Serafina ventures into 
the eerie forest that surrounds the estate—the forest her father has warned her away 
from her entire life—to discover the nature of their enemy. In the process, however, 
she also learns of her own tragic history. Savvy readers will spot the identity of the 
cloaked man pretty readily, but the vast estate with a haunted past and a creepy 
present makes for an atmospheric setting, and Serafina’s multiple narrow escapes 
from her enemy are absolutely thrilling. Serafina herself is an enchanting heroine, 
brave and determined, and her attraction to the dark forest adds another layer of 
suspense and mystery. Pair this with Auxier’s The Night Gardener (BCCB 5/14) to 
introduce young readers to the Gothic tradition.  KQG
Bell, CeCe I Yam a Donkey!; written and illus. by Cece Bell. Clarion, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-544-08720-0 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Donkey introduces himself on the opening page with the less than articulate title 
quote, and an actual Yam, looking aggrieved and pedantic with arched eyebrows 
and pince-nez, immediately corrects him: “The proper way to say that is ‘I am 
a donkey.’” This elicits the ever more grammatically egregious response, “You is 
a donkey, too? You is a funny-looking donkey.” And now Donkey and Yam are 
off to the races with an absurd dialogue rife with misunderstanding in the best 
who’s-on-first tradition. A chorus of supportive vegetables chimes in to help Yam 
drive the lesson home to obtuse Donkey, but, in a deliciously vicious twist that will 
warm the heart of any child corrected by persnickety adults, Donkey eats the whole 
crew for lunch. Bell wraps up with “Moral: If you is going to be eaten, GOOD 
GRAMMAR DON’T MATTER.” Embedded in this frolic is a curricular-friendly 
lesson in pronoun/verb agreement, but don’t count on it to raise any standardized 
test scores. This is a hilarious battle of wits between cleverly anthropomorphized 
cartoon figures, and by the second reading (the request for which you will surely 
anticipate) listeners may even suspect that dim Donkey is purposely leading on his 
adversaries. Grab a teaching partner or fellow librarian for a crowd-pleasing dual 
read, followed by crudités for snacktime.  EB
BenwAy, roBin Emmy & Oliver. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2015 340p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233059-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233061-1 $10.99   
R Gr. 8-12
Neighbors literally since birth, Emmy and Oliver were separated at seven, when 
Oliver’s divorced father took Oliver for the weekend and never came back. Now 
10 • the bulletin
it’s ten years later and Oliver has returned, and Emmy is excited to once again be-
friend the boy she adored in primary school. That’s good for Oliver, who’s unsure 
of how to fit in with his old/new life and appreciates Emmy’s warm welcome. As 
Oliver spends more time with Emmy, learning to surf with her (which her parents 
don’t know about) and attending parties with her (which her parents definitely 
don’t know about), friendship turns into something more. But how does love fit in 
with Oliver’s struggle with his family, Emmy’s yearning to break free of hers, and 
the unknown futures before them? Emmy’s narration is smart and sassy, and the 
romance plot is satisfying. Benway adds dimension to both characters rather than 
making the book simply Emmy’s rescue of damaged Oliver; the story also manages 
to make Emmy’s parents likable even as they’re overprotectively strict (largely in 
response to Oliver’s kidnapping). There’s also genuine poignancy in the fact that 
Emmy’s liberation from her parents, encouraged by Oliver, means she’ll be leav-
ing Oliver behind for a future at college. An unusual blend of a soulmate story, a 
melodramatic plot, and a realistic book about adjustment, growth, and change, this 
will please romance fans as well as pragmatic souls with a sentimental streak.  DS
Berry, lynne Pig and Pug; illus. by Gemma Correll. Simon, 2015 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2131-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2132-4 $12.99   
R 3-6 yrs
Two petite pets, a pig and a pug, meet, and they don’t get off to a great start. That’s 
because Pug insists Pig is a pug named Pig (“Pig the Pudgy Pug!”), and the teasing 
turns swiftly into a scuffle. A time out leads to a momentary ceasefire, but soon 
a fight about who’s copying whom breaks out (“Time in!” cries the enraged Pig). 
When Pug careers down the hill and ends up in the mud, Pig is amused by Pug’s 
pigginess, and when Pug gets the joke, the two become friends (“At least for now”). 
Beyond the playful wordsmithery, this is an apt evocation of preschool and play-
ground squabbles and the accompanying lightning shifts from enmity to friendship. 
The text wields alliteration like a tongue-twisting weapon, making it an irresistible 
challenge to read aloud, and the frequent dialogue exclamations (“Take it back!” 
“I will not!”) offer spirited performance opportunities. Sturdy, thick-lined digital 
art focuses on the pig/pug pairing, with a limited palette (mostly sage green, pig 
peach, and red, with black accents) and only the occasional squiggle or splotch to 
serve as background. The draftsmanship evinces childlike naïveté in its flatness (the 
horizontal layers of the chase scene suggest a comic take on Egyptian hieroglyphics), 
while the visual tension between the two figures and the multitude of lively speech 
bubbles keep the energy level high. Aside from the lip-smacking delight of reading 
this title aloud, the book’s tightly controlled vocabulary and frequent repetition 
will suit emerging readers to a t—or a p.  DS
BertmAn, Jennifer ChAmBliss Book Scavenger; illus. by Sarah Watts. Ottaviano/
Holt, 2015 354p
ISBN 978-1-62779-115-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-6
As part of her parents’ quest to live in all fifty states, twelve-year-old Emily finds 
herself in San Francisco. She thrills to be near her idol: publishing magnate Gar-
rison Griswold, whose whimsy and love of books and puzzles inspired him to create 
interactive games for readers, including the titular Book Scavenger. When Griswold 
is shot in a presumed subway mugging, Emily visits the site of the attack, where she 
September 2015 • 11
discovers a copy of Edgar Allan Poe’s “The Gold-Bug” bearing the seal of Griswold’s 
publishing company and containing a number of curious errors. Sensing something 
odd, Emily enlists the help of James, her new—really, her first—friend and fellow 
puzzle junkie. Together they uncover a multi-layered mystery, part game, part life-
or-death, all unfolding against the richly detailed backdrop of the City by the Bay. A 
love letter to San Francisco and its literary history, this well-paced novel of intrigue 
also provides quite the education, namedropping the likes of Jack Kerouac, Dashiell 
Hammett, and Amy Tan, diving into the world of ciphers, and offering bountiful 
brainteasers with Dickensian naming devices (there’s an explanatory author’s note), 
all while maintaining a skillful and satisfying balance of brains and heart. Emily’s 
struggle to be a friend is authentic and sympathetic, as is her growing dissatisfac-
tion with her family’s transient lifestyle. This will rivet fans of Balliett’s Chasing 
Vermeer (BCCB 7/04) or Raskin’s The Westing Game (BCCB 9/78), which gets an 
in-text shout-out; be prepared to start a Book Scavenger chapter (pun intended) 
in your own library, stat.  AA
BlAkemore, meGAn frAzer The Friendship Riddle. Bloomsbury, 2015 359p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-630-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-631-6 $13.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Middle-schooler Ruth is okay with being a lone wolf now that former best friend 
Charlotte has ditched her for the popular mean girl Melinda; after all, Ruth still 
has her two mothers, Mom and Mum, and her beloved fantasy books about a half-
girl/half-elf knight, Taryn Greenbottom. When Ruth discovers an envelope with a 
mysterious message hidden in a library book, she’s certain it’s the start of her own 
quest in her small Maine town; a budding friendship brings bold, iconoclastic Lena 
in on the sleuthing as well. Meanwhile, Ruth is also studying for the school spelling 
bee with her sweet (and sweet on her) classmate, Coco (a nickname for Christopher), 
and Coco and his sci-fi-loving pals soon expand the group of questers. Will Ruth 
win the spelling bee, finish the quest, and win back Charlotte’s friendship? The 
answers are more complex than one might expect, and that is one of the book’s 
strengths. The multiple threads are adroitly handled by Blakemore, and readers who 
sign on for the quest story may be surprisingly absorbed by the nuanced portrait 
of a (mostly) happily introverted middle-schooler as well. Melinda is a fairly two-
dimensional villain, but Charlotte’s and Ruth’s dynamics and Ruth’s relationships 
with her moms are refreshingly complicated, and the book ends without things 
being completely patched up between the former friends. Kids who like Balliett’s 
Chasing Vermeer (BCCB 7/04) or Raskin’s The Westing Game (BCCB 9/78) will 
enjoy this, and fantasy fans will find a comrade in Ruth as well.  JH
BoeCker, virGiniA The Witch Hunter. Little, 2015 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-32700-8 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-32718-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Magic is outlawed in Boecker’s version of sixteenth-century England, and sixteen-
year-old Elizabeth Grey is the best of the king’s witch hunters, tracking down 
wizards and witches to bring them to the Inquisitor, Lord Blackwell, for justice. 
Blackwell is somewhat of a father figure to Elizabeth but he is also absolutely mer-
ciless, and when Elizabeth is caught with forbidden herbs used to terminate her 
12 • the bulletin
pregnancy (the result of Elizabeth’s being called to the king’s bed), he sends her to 
the dungeons to await her execution. Elizabeth is rescued by Nicholas Perevil, an 
aging but powerful wizard and enemy to the king and Blackwell. Suffering under 
a potent curse, Nicholas asks Elizabeth to join some of his closest allies in rooting 
out the responsible wizard in exchange for Nicholas’ protection against Blackwell 
and his ilk. The world-building here is comprehensive but concise, with Elizabeth’s 
narration effectively conveying the rules of this world without belaboring the 
point. Thrilling action scenes combine with a twisting plot to spur readers forward. 
Perhaps most compelling, however, is Elizabeth’s character arc, which moves her 
from a girl so beholden to the men in her life that she hands her body over both 
physically and sexually, to an autonomous young adult making decisions for her-
self, outside of Blackwell’s and even Nicholas’ influence. Her romance with John, 
a healer capable of both strength and sensitivity, is one of equals, and he makes for 
a refreshing change from the conventional brooding bad boy or charming rogue. 
This will undoubtedly draw comparisons to Cashore’s Graceling (BCCB 1/09), 
and while it lacks that title’s nuance, it will satisfy fans of warrior girls who realize 
their own power.  KQG 
Bond, GwendA Lois Lane: Fallout. Switch, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-63079-005-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Lois Lane may be the new kid at East Metropolis High, but before the first day is 
over, she’s up to her old tricks: defending bullied students and investigating corrupt 
administrators. A new job with the Daily Planet’s online teen newspaper gives her 
just the excuse she needs to pry into the Warheads, a secretive, manipulative clique, 
and their mysterious independent study project with a shadowy local research firm. 
With help from a team of unexpected new friends and an anonymous online crush, 
SmallvilleGuy, Lois uncovers a plot more dangerous than anyone imagined, though, 
including top-secret military experiments in mind control. When her new compa-
triots begin to fall under the sway of the Warheads, Lois must decide if getting the 
scoop is worth risking the lives and minds of the people she cares about. Ultimately 
more Nancy Drew than Smallville, this refocused retelling lacks the nuance of 
other comic book–based stories, but Lois picks up the girl-detective mantle with 
enough sass and spunk to earn her a place among other recent undercover heroines 
(Latham’s Scarlett Undercover, BCCB 7/15 and Giles’ Endangered, BCCB 6/15). 
The story itself is a pleasing, straightforward whodunit with a teen-friendly focus 
that involves virtual worlds, online gaming, bullies, and inept authority figures, 
and the narrative unfolds at a lively pace. The final rescue scene has plenty of ten-
sion, but readers may be disappointed by the lack of showdown or unmasking of a 
villain or punishment for evildoers. Additionally, the nefarious nature of Advanced 
Research Laboratories is underdeveloped throughout, perhaps in an attempt to set 
up sequels. Still, the novel is a possible choice for readers who want to see Lois step 
into the spotlight, and it may be an option for those who want their feisty teen 
mystery with a side of Superman fandom.  AM 
Bond, reBeCCA Out of the Woods: A True Story of an Unforgettable Event; written 
and illus. by Rebecca Bond. Ferguson/Farrar, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-38077-9 $17.99   
R* 6-9 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
September 2015 • 13
BosmA, sAm Fantasy Sports No. 1; written and illus. by Sam Bosma. Nobrow, 
2015 [56p]
ISBN 978-1-907704-80-2 $19.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-12
In this oversized graphic novel, Wiz-Kid, a girl who’s a smart wizard intern, wants 
to work with the massive Mug, who kills first and asks questions later, about as 
little as he wants to be paired with her. Nevertheless, the powers that be think 
the two could be good for each other, so off they go to raid tombs together. They 
soon encounter an ominous and cunning mummy who guards a temple filled 
with untold riches. Wiz is brilliant and Mug is fearless, and the two finally find 
their rhythm, realizing the complementarity of their strengths over the course of 
an epic game of basketball that will result in either their deaths or their glory. This 
offers excitement from the first page and plenty of vigor, crude and otherwise (a 
raised middle finger is a key, if understated, moment), to appeal to readers of a 
wide range of ages and abilities. The expressive illustrations reinforce the dramatic, 
action-driven text; color choices pair perfectly with each of the characters, with 
sizzling reds and oranges for angry, brutish Mug, lighter hues for pages featuring 
the calmer Wiz, and bruised greens for the pages where they encounter the ancient, 
decaying mummy and his minions. A sequel can’t come quickly enough, and fans 
across genres (fantasy, sports buffs, comics fans, and adventure readers) will likely 
all be eagerly waiting for it.  AS
BrAdBury, Jennifer River Runs Deep. Atheneum, 2015 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6824-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6826-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
In the early nineteenth century, both cause and reliable cure for tuberculosis were 
unknown, and any number of nostrums and treatments seemed, for desperate 
sufferers, to be worth a try. Thus twelve-year-old Elias ends up at the “hospital” 
of Dr. Croghan, deep in Kentucky’s Mammoth Cave, where the doctor believes 
patients will benefit from its vapors. Elias does, in fact, get better quickly, but no 
thanks to the vapors. Rather, the slaves who work in the cave as hospital assistants 
and tour guides slip water from a cave river into his diet. While Croghan rejoices 
in his model patient’s rapid recovery and ponders why other sufferers aren’t ex-
periencing the same success, Mr. Pennyrile, a patient in an advanced stage of the 
disease, suspects both the source of the healing water and a community of runaway 
slaves hiding in the caves. He pressures Elias into aiding his plot to secure his cure, 
capitalize financially on the remedy, and claim the bounty on the slaves, all in one 
high-stakes gamble. Although Bradbury’s tale is largely speculative, the possibility 
of each plot point is credible and the cast, from Croghan to the African-American 
tour guides, is drawn from real life. Mr. Pennyrile’s schemes add a fair amount of 
tension to the intriguing story, and Elias’ grappling with the morality of slavery is 
both thoughtful and realistic. The cave itself (map included) enjoys a featured role, 
and readers up for a satisfying fusion of historical fiction, conspiracy, and survival 
will want to explore.  EB 
14 • the bulletin
BrAllier, mAx Galactic Hot Dogs: Cosmoe’s Wiener Getaway; illus. by Rachel 
Maguire and Nichole Kelley. Aladdin, 2015 304p
ISBN 978-1-4814-2494-3 $13.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Cosmoe has a snarky response to every situation, and evil queens, monster worms, 
and killer robots aren’t going to keep him from sharing his perspective. Co-owner 
of the best food truck in the galaxy, the Neon Wiener, he’s cruising along just fine 
without a sidekick princess, thank you very much, but he gets one anyway after 
Princess Dagger decides to break away from her Evil Queen mother. The snappy 
dialogue, quick pace, and compact text (most pages are partially to mostly illustra-
tion, in a format appealing to graphic-novel lovers) keep things moving at the right 
speed for such an outlandish plot. Cosmoe’s tendency to shout irreverent things at 
any opportunity (“Butts!” is a favored exclamation), his fearlessness, and his cool 
alien best friends make him quite the appealing protagonist, and readers will be 
right there with him, hoping he can save the day and get back to making the best 
hot dogs in the galaxy pronto. Alien fact lists, clever sidenotes, and amusing, comic 
book–style art add to the party.  AS
Bross, lee Tangled Webs. Hyperion, 2015 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8423-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8775-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Members of high society in 1725 London have plenty of secrets, and Bones, a sleazy 
criminal, traffics in them, sending the seductive but intimidating Lady A as a cou-
rier on his blackmailing errands. Lady A, however, is really just seventeen-year-old 
Arista, a girl abused into obedience along with the other children Bones “adopted” 
years ago. An attempt to escape Bones lands her in the hands of Jonathan Wild, the 
notorious thief, so Arista must again strike a bargain with an unsavory character 
who wants to use her connections among London’s elite to gain access to their 
wealth. Lady A’s duties bring her into contact with the handsome Grae Sinclair, the 
young heir to a shipping fortune, who seems to want to help free Arista from a life 
of crime instead of further exploiting her. Lady A is a cunning femme fatale, and 
the scenes in which she outwits her various opponents are deliciously entertaining; 
unfortunately, as Arista she comes off as clingy, seeking protection from whoever 
will give it and lacking any of the confidence that makes Lady A fascinating. The 
third-person narration is often melodramatic, while secondary characters are mostly 
one-note; Grae, in particular, is almost too perfect as the flawless hero who swoops 
in to save Arista. Their romance is a sweet counterpart to the life Arista has led up 
until this point, though, and readers will likely be relieved that she ultimately finds 
both safety and happiness in his arms.  KQG 
Brown, mArC Monkey: Not Ready for Kindergarten; written and illus. by Marc 
Brown. Knopf, 2015 26p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49659-8 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49658-1 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49660-4 $9.99   
Ad 4-6 yrs
With the start of kindergarten only a week away, little Monkey has a long list of 
worries, from the logistical (“What if he can’t find the bathroom?”) to the emotional 
September 2015 • 15
(“What if he doesn’t make new friends?”). His supportive family regales him with 
stories of the wonderful things he will do in kindergarten, and he even has the 
opportunity to meet some future classmates (all of whom seem far more confident 
than he is) at a playdate, but on the big day he’s still nervous. The story ends with 
a wordless sequence of Monkey being warmly greeted as he enters the classroom 
and then happily playing on the playground, in what is clearly a successful first 
day. School anxiety is certainly a common thing, and Monkey’s concerns are eas-
ily understandable. While the wordless conclusion may leave the ending open for 
little listeners imagining their own first days of kindergarten, the effect is abrupt 
and unsatisfying, particularly when read aloud, and Monkey’s parents’ anticipation 
of hearing about Monkey’s day dangles unfulfilled. The visual style is a departure 
from Brown’s more familiar work in the Arthur series; colored pencil and gouache 
illustrations, with childlike touches to the draftsmanship, are often intense with 
texture in the full-bleed spreads; there’s an ochre tint to the palette, and soft edges 
replace Brown’s more familiar line drawings. The font is composed in kid-style 
crayon writing, and the endpapers are chock full of kindergarten-esque crayon 
art. Families may find Edwards’ Dinosaur Starts School (BCCB 5/09) a smoother 
selection for addressing first-day jitters, but Monkey’s fears may resonate with some 
incoming students, and the open ending has potential as a talking point.  HM
BuCkley, miChAel Undertow. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 376p
ISBN 978-0-544-34825-7 $18.99   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Lyric has a big secret about her mother’s origins, and the further encroachment of 
the Alpha beings, her mother’s kin who have long been sequestered on the Coney 
Island shoreline, threatens to upend her life. While one might think that sharing 
genetic ties would make Lyric naturally more sympathetic, it isn’t really until she 
begins to fall for one of the human/sea creature hybrids that she begins to show she 
understands nuance, complexity, and cultural relativism. Once she does, however, 
she’s a teen driven to try to forge alliances, save her family (including her beloved 
best friends), and keep tensions between humans and Alphas at a simmer rather 
than full-scale war. The book attempts to make a point by comparing violence 
among the feared Alphas to abuse among the humans, but it’s heavy-handed and 
ineffective, since there’s little insight into what drives the Alphas’ long and diverse 
historical evolution. In addition, the key romance on which much of the novel 
rests is uncomfortable, given the hundreds of years of core social mores thrown 
overboard by the non-human, Fathom, who has been paired from an early age to 
another, to pursue Lyric. Even with the issues, however, this is a gripping story that 
is convincingly told, and astute readers may spot what is almost certainly some 
sharp political commentary about the ways our own nation has addressed “other-
ness” throughout our tumultuous history.  AS
CAllery, seAn Scholastic Discover More: Hurricane Katrina. Scholastic, 
2015 [64p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-545-82956-4 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-5 
Adults contemplating the violence of nature and systemic failures among govern-
ment relief efforts at this tenth anniversary of Hurricane Katrina may be apt to 
overlook the fact that primary and middle-graders hadn’t been born at the time 
16 • the bulletin
of the event. They do, however, have access to fictional and anecdotal retellings of 
the disaster, and this brief overview may be of assistance in helping them quickly 
establish some of the main facts—from geographic vulnerabilities of the region, 
to the infrastructure that inhibited mass evacuation, to the architectural conven-
tions that contributed to home destruction, to the formal and impromptu rescue 
efforts that were hailed as at once heroic and tragically insufficient. Packed with 
color photographs and accompanying insets and annotations, the format seems 
at first glance to be chaotic, but limited topics per spread and overall organization 
of “Coming Storm,” “Landfall,” and “Aftermath” make the presentation reason-
ably easy to follow. The book largely avoids the political fallout of the storm and 
remains distinctly nonpartisan. This quick cram course will draw young readers 
fascinated by disaster as well as historical fiction fans (yes, many will regard this as 
an “historical” event) looking for background for novels such as Rodman Philbrick’s 
Zane and the Hurricane (BCCB 2/14).  EB
CAtrow, dAvid Fun in the Sun; written and illus. by David Catrow. Holiday 
House, 2015 30p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2945-5 $16.95   
R 4-6 yrs
A rotund, Chihuahua-like dog takes a jaunt to the beach with his pet goldfish and, 
once he finds a good spot (after he mistakenly sets up camp on the large tummy 
of a sunbathing man), he enjoys lunch, a dip in the water, and some kite-flying, 
before heading for home. Stripping off his fabulous striped swim trunks he de-
clares, “I hope I didn’t forget anything,” while the readers will notice his intense 
sunburn—highlighted by the white, underwear-shaped patch where his swimsuit 
was—and a bottle of unused sunblock. It’s an amusing story that will make a 
funny readaloud selection, and the simple text (“It’s time to rinse off. We splish, 
we splash, we float like a boat”) is also accessible to beginning readers. Catrow’s 
zany pencil and watercolor illustrations not only help flesh out the narrative but 
also humorously articulate the understated text. The dog’s declaration to a fellow 
beachgoer that “you, sir, have a silly hat” is accompanied by a rib-tickling image 
of a man with a duck floaty ring on his head, while “Fish has made a friend” cap-
tions a large green octopus overflowing the bowl of unfazed Fish. Catrow’s human 
figures are comically grotesque, and their exaggerated absurdity is droll, and the 
pudgy, pop-eyed little canine is endearing. This would make a diverting addition to 
a storytime about beaches or pets, or, shared in an educational setting, an amusing 
way to help primary-graders make that transition from summer to schoolwork.  JH
ChArAipotrA, sonA Tiny Pretty Things; by Sona Charaipotra and Dhonielle 
Clayton. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2015 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234239-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-234241-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Gigi is hoping to break free of the ballet world’s discrimination against African-
American dancers; June wants to regain acceptance with the Korean dancers, who 
resent her for being half-white; Bette is determined to reclaim the starring roles—and 
the boyfriend—she considers stolen from her by Gigi. And that’s just the beginning 
of the melodrama in this ballet-school story, where sabotage past—a leading dancer 
who was deliberately dropped and terribly injured—threatens to recreate itself in 
September 2015 • 17
sabotage present as Gigi receives an escalating pattern of threats and even harm. 
It’s good to see a classic stage soap opera updated to embrace and even champion 
contemporary diversity (Gigi and June both muse on prejudice in ballet); the 
details of ballet life are evocative, the writing propels things along at a brisk clip, 
and the multiple plot threads remain distinct but not overwhelming. As events 
mount, however, the book turns from melodrama into something closer to horror, 
with deliberate emotional torment and physical assaults becoming commonplace 
and burying the ballet story without giving full rein to horror’s frightening joys. 
Additionally, characterization flattens out, so that Gigi’s sweet naïveté gets a little 
tiresome, and Bette moves too often from bully to self-correction to bully again. 
There’s enough deliciously trashy drama to appeal, though, and readers may find 
themselves drawn into the ongoing villainy.  DS
Choldenko, Gennifer Putting the Monkeys to Bed; illus. by Jack E. Davis. Put-
nam, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24623-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
“Sam’s not ready to go to bed, and neither are his monkeys.” Despite Mama’s 
insistence that Sam settle down for the night, he’d much rather “smash and bash 
and crash-crash-crash” with his trio of toy monkeys, who, when Mama is out of 
sight, are as active as Sam himself. Inevitably, a second parental warning comes; 
Sam begins to calm down, but this time his mind is in overdrive, thinking of all 
kinds of questions he has for his mother. After she promises to answer them the 
next day (a clever closing author’s note provides the answers for interested listen-
ers), he really does begins to settle; unfortunately, the monkeys are raring to go, 
and now Sam is the quieter rather than the quietee, going through a series of silly 
songs, recitations, and a book before the monkeys settle. Familiar bedtime themes 
woven into this tale call to mind the simian antics of Christelow’s Five Little Monkeys 
Jumping on the Bed and the energetic-turned-exhausted narrator in Rathmann’s 10 
Minutes Till Bedtime (BCCB 12/98). The narration is a little long, but it offers 
a pleasing progression through the stages of bedtime towards eventual slumber, 
and there’s a frisky tone to the text (“They jump and bump and hop-hop-hop”) 
that makes for enjoyable reading aloud as well as listening. The playful ink and 
watercolor illustrations are reminiscent of David Catrow in their exaggerated lines 
and deliberately intense colors, and the freckle-faced, red-headed protagonist is at 
home in the slightly chaotic spreads. Little ones full of their own bedtime excuses 
will take a shine to Sam’s primate-intensive shift towards slumber.  HM 
Cooney, CAroline B. No Such Person. Delacorte, 2015 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99084-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74291-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97952-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
The peaceful summer at Miranda’s family’s cabin along the Connecticut River is 
disrupted when an accident almost takes the life of a water skier in front of Miranda’s 
eyes. To fifteen-year-old Miranda it looked nothing like an accident, though, and 
she’s certain the boat’s driver deliberately left the skier in the path of the oncom-
ing barge. However, Miranda’s accomplished twenty-two-year-old sister, Lander, 
18 • the bulletin
has fallen completely for handsome Jason, the driver of the boat, so Miranda tells 
herself (and Lander tells her) that she misunderstood what she saw. Within a week, 
however, Lander is in jail, accused of the shooting death of that same water skier 
and of smuggling cocaine; finding that Jason is not who he claims to be, Miranda 
believes that his machinations are behind Lander’s situation and determines to 
find the truth and save her sister. Cooney sucks readers into a story like nobody 
else, and the book ramps up tension by shifting between the third-person view of 
a panicked young woman, soon revealed to be Lander in jail, and Miranda’s uneasy 
contemplation of her sister’s speedy enmeshment with a dubious guy. The author 
displays her usual adroit observations, both positive and negative, about humans 
and their relationships, and she credibly depicts the community’s happily insular 
life in the little river enclave, a life that has, in the case of Miranda’s family, been 
built on overstretched credit. The climax isn’t as gripping as the tautly ominous 
windup, but that’s inherent to the genre, and it’s not going to keep readers from 
relishing Miranda’s turn as an unexpected heroine.  DS
detweiler, kAtelyn Immaculate. Viking, 2015 [464p]
ISBN 978-0-451-46962-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When a strange old lady named Iris comes in to Mina’s work one night and claims 
to know all about her, seventeen-year-old Mina is a little freaked out. She’s also very 
busy waiting tables, so she’s distracted enough to say yes when Iris asks Mina to carry 
a very special child. Indeed, the coming months find the virgin Mina showing all 
the signs of early pregnancy. Once the pregnancy is confirmed, Mina has supporters 
(her mother, her best friend, Hannah, her little sister, Grace, and a coworker named 
Jesse) and detractors (her boyfriend, her father, and her other best friend, Izzy), 
but she sticks by her story that she has never had sex. Detweiler fully imagines the 
complications that would ensue from such a situation; the angry disbelief of her 
father and boyfriend, the implicit faith of her mother and Grace, the unquestion-
ing acceptance of Hannah and Jesse, and Mina’s own wonder at the inexplicable 
new life growing inside her. Despite public shaming and protests spurred by a 
website and media attention, her father’s angry withdrawal, and losing her long-
term boyfriend, Mina remains remarkably grounded throughout the experience, 
as if to say that yes, this is happening, but it’s not the only thing that’s happening; 
she still has her senior year to get through, and a possible budding romance with 
Jesse to consider. Readers are left in the same dark as Mina herself as to why she 
was chosen, who Iris is, and what the baby’s destiny will ultimately be, but they 
will find Mina’s situation compelling and imagine what social relations and inner 
musings may have been like for her more famous virgin mother counterpart.  KC
doCkter, deBrA Deadly Design. Putnam, 2015 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-399-17105-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Kyle has always lived in Connor’s shadow, and although he covers his insecuri-
ties with quippiness and pretend indifference, he cares deeply about the fact that 
his twin (who is two years older, because his parents decided to spread out their 
genetically modified embryos) is perfect at everything. After Connor dies on his 
eighteenth birthday, however, dark secrets emerge about the Genesis Innovations 
September 2015 • 19
Laboratory, where many children were created with modifications to avoid disease 
and enhance positive attributes. These better-than-normal kids are now all dying at 
eighteen, and Kyle knows he isn’t far behind if he can’t figure out why and change 
his fate. Kyle’s narration keeps readers guessing along with him about who can be 
trusted, and his point of view adds urgency when he is running for his life and 
poignancy when he finally realizes that his true love was his best friend all along. 
Unfortunately, the geneticist he is chasing is absurdly evil with absolutely no nu-
ance or ethics, and a brief attempt to give the villain a backstory does nothing to 
make his character more complex. In addition, there are too many twists built into 
the plot, and readers will likely be exhausted before Kyle hits any good luck at all. 
Nevertheless, sci-fi fans who don’t mind a hefty dose of ridiculously improbable 
science may still enjoy Kyle’s race to find answers.  AS
dominy, Amy fellner A Matter of Heart. Delacorte, 2015 306p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99166-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74443-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38993-8 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
In the swimming pool, sixteen-year-old Abby Lipman feels fast, fierce, and impor-
tant. With a shot at the upcoming Olympic trials, she is at the top of her game, 
earning praise from her taciturn coach, kisses from her hot boyfriend, Connor, and 
long late-night conversations with her dad, a former swimmer whose own promising 
career was derailed by an injury. When she faints after a competition, a visit to the 
doctor reveals that she has hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), a heart condition 
that often manifests during adolescence and, if unidentified or untreated, can result 
in death. Abby is lucky: by taking beta blockers daily, she can lead a normal life, 
though she can no longer swim competitively. Unfortunately, Abby fixates on the 
last part, lying to her concerned friends and overly invested father as she concocts a 
plan to swim in the Olympic trials. While her intense identification as a swimmer 
is understandable, her insistence on competing despite both the doctor’s warnings 
and her repeated near-blackouts grows tedious and unrelatable. Luckily, Dominy’s 
prose clips along fast enough to keep readers moving in spite of the occasionally 
ham-fisted exposition, or the implied but never addressed romantic feelings her 
friend, Jen, has for her; Abby’s constant ogling of Connor’s killer bod and the sexual 
tension between her and Alec (Connor’s nemesis) add a steamy touch. Abby’s journey 
is believable enough, and the subject matter will likely pique readers’ interest; an 
author’s note provides useful information on HCM.  AA
durAnGo, JuliA The Leveller. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2015 245p
ISBN 978-0-06-231400-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 8-10
When teens use tricks to get around the time limits to stay in a remarkably developed 
virtual world, parents call Nixy to enter the cyberrealm and drag the kids out. Nixy 
knows a lot of inside information about the gaming company MeaParadisus, since 
both of her parents work there, and she also is clever and determined, making her 
the ideal person to coax her peers back to their unattended bodies. She’s the first 
person called, therefore, when all other official options have been exhausted in 
trying to retrieve the company founder’s son when Wyn seems to have left behind 
a suicide note and abandoned his body for good. Of course, nothing is quite as it 
seems, and Nixy soon finds that Wyn is actually trapped behind elaborate techno-
20 • the bulletin
logical barriers, unable to leave the virtually recreated Cuban childhood home of 
his grandmother (an admittedly odd choice for a teen boy, but an appealing and 
unusual one for reading purposes), and she finds serious sparks with him as well. 
It really doesn’t matter much who the bad guys are and what the backstory is: this 
is a spicy romance set in an intriguing virtual world, and the clock is ticking as the 
teens’ bodies are vegetative without them. Gamers who have looked at the time and 
been startled by how long they just spent immersed in another realm will find the 
descriptions of how real the experience feels to be spot-on, and even non-gamers 
will likely find plenty to appreciate between the romance, Nixy’s sharp, sardonic 
narration, and the fast-paced finale.  AS
eAston, tom Seven Second Delay. Holiday House, 2015 220p
ISBN 978-0-8234-3209-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 9-12
In a future where the world’s wealth is controlled by a few nations, teenage Mila 
tries to sneak into the British Isles but is quickly captured and imprisoned in the 
government facility, where she is implanted with a phone that sends a constant 
but seven-seconds-delayed stream of everything she sees and hears to her handler. 
The process also reveals a bomb-like device in her brain, and Mila is immediately 
declared a terrorist. In a desperate bid to save herself and using her seven-second 
lead to her advantage, Mila makes a daring escape. Now, tracked by drones, deadly 
government assassins, and her handler Adam, Mila struggles to stay one step ahead 
of her pursuers while tracking down answers about the mysterious device in her 
brain. Fast-paced and action-packed, this taut, intense sci-fi adventure is pure cinema 
from cover to cover. There is zero character development, but readers caught up in 
Mila’s nail-biting series of narrow escapes likely won’t expect any. Mila herself is a 
hardcore action heroine, reminiscent of Marvel’s Black Widow, and she’s memorable 
for her wits, strength, skills, and never-say-die attitude. Her tracker and eventual ally 
Adam, meanwhile, plays the able backup in a nice gender switch for the genre. The 
future-building is explained well enough to get interested readers thinking about 
the broader implications of global capitalism, yet it’s easy to ignore for those just 
in it for the action. Fans of summer blockbusters will definitely want to pick this 
up in between movie releases.  AM
eBBeler, Jeffrey Click!; written and illus. by Jeffrey Ebbeler. Holiday House, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-3295-0 $16.95   
R 5-8 yrs
When a boy turns off his bedside lamp, shaped like a kooky hat-wearing bird, that’s 
just the start of the adventure in this picture book narrated only by sound effects. 
The loyal bird/lamp hears a “drip, drop, drop” from down the hall, which is keep-
ing the boy awake, and hunts for the source (in the light of his beam, of course). 
Finding a dripping faucet in the bathroom, he solves the problem, but then there 
are other house noises he must identify and ameliorate. Mission accomplished, he 
returns to the bedroom, only to find the boy’s beloved stuffed animal on the floor; 
he restores the toy to the sleeper, but all too soon the alarm goes “Rrrring!” and 
it’s morning again. The focus on sounds is both inventive and perceptive, since 
audiences will definitely recognize the way ambient noise is magnified in a dark 
room at night. It may take some viewers a minute to decode the bird’s purpose, 
but he’s clearly a helpful, if odd, critter even before his overall plan becomes clear. 
September 2015 • 21
The gleaming acrylics, surreally varying perspectives, and in-art text here recall 
David Shannon. There’s an edge of weirdness to the slightly personified household 
objects (buttons, nuts, and drawer pulls strongly suggest eyes) and to the occasion-
ally vertiginous perspectives that’s suitable to the sudden strangeness of a familiar 
house in the middle of the night. The final sequence, which takes the boy through 
his day sound by sound in a series of lively panels, may encourage youngsters to 
think about their own daily sound narratives.  DS
fleminG, CAndACe Bulldozer’s Big Day; illus. by Eric Rohmann. Atheneum, 
2015 35p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0097-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0098-5 $12.99   
Ad 2-6 yrs
Little yellow Bulldozer is so excited about his upcoming party that his tracks lift 
right off the ground. His earth-moving friends are so busy at the construction site, 
though, that they brush off his greetings of “Guess what today is!” Digger curtly 
answers that it’s a scooping day, Cement Mixer calls it a stirring day, Scraper says 
it’s a filling day, and so on. Bulldozer is a bit more deflated by each response, until 
the site whistles blow and a crane raises from the pit a gigantic three-layer metal 
birthday cake, complete with blazing candles, which the machines had been work-
ing on all day long. Rohmann’s vehicles, with expressive eyes peering from their 
windshields, are as kid-pleasing as ever, heavily outlined in black and touched with 
purposely messy little splatters of ink and color that lend texture and dash to the 
gritty construction scenes. Visual teasers encourage viewers to guess at the surprise 
party finale before Bulldozer does, although the opening announcement that “he 
couldn’t wait to invite all his friends to a party” is a broad tip-off (and it’s not clear 
what happens to that party). The role of the individual construction vehicles, which 
should be a hook for many children, is something of a letdown since it’s difficult 
to see in the coyly staged close-ups exactly how each contributes to the cake. A 
near miss as both a birthday story and a builders book, this may nonetheless find 
favor with young listeners who will enjoy simply pointing at and identifying the 
big trucks.  EB
frAnk, e. r. Dime. Atheneum, 2015 315p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3160-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-3162-0 $10.99   
R Gr. 10-12
Dime is a smart, thirteen-year-old, book-obsessed African-American girl whose 
foster mother has kicked her out. She wanders the street until a girl named L.A. 
invites her home, where Dime meets a handsome man they call Daddy, whose 
attention turns her head and fills an ache in her love-starved heart. When he tells 
her that the price of staying and occasionally having sex with him is turning tricks, 
she gives in. Daddy goes after some real money by bringing in a ten-year-old girl 
named Lollipop, who has lived her entire life in a room doing all her innocent 
little girl activities naked in front of a live internet feed and is now deemed ready 
to entertain customers. Dime casts about for a way to tell people what’s going on 
so that they will listen without being repulsed. Taking her cue from books she’s 
read, she tries Sex as a narrator, then Money, then Truth, before finally giving up 
and making a simple plea that Lollipop’s baby, whom she was forced to deliver so 
that Daddy could sell it, get a better story than her own. This is as gut-wrenching 
22 • the bulletin
as it sounds, reminiscent in its raw power of Sapphire’s Push. Dime is an elegant 
storyteller whether she is speaking in her own voice or the abstract narrators she has 
chosen, each giving a different spin on the horrors of slavery and the sex industry 
in contemporary culture. Daddy is as charming in the beginning as he is vile, and 
Dime’s self-recrimination—“I chose”—is as heartbreaking as her slow realization that 
she was tricked into believing he thought she was special. To readers, though, she 
is never anything but; her passion for books, her desperate need for love, and the 
numbing resignation that drives her to courageous action make her a hero who can’t 
fail to make readers open their eyes, no matter how searing the vision may be.  KC 
freemAn, mArthA The Secret Cookie Club. Wiseman/Simon, 2015 295p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1046-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1048-9 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
The four middle-grade girls in Flowerpot Cabin at Moonlight Ranch Summer Camp 
are not getting along—until they must work together to make cookies. While the 
cookie-making doesn’t fix everything, it helps, and by the end of summer Grace, 
Emma, Olivia, and Lucy decide to stay in touch by taking turns sending each other 
cookies. The cookie, email, and letter exchanges allow each girl to narrate a section 
that elaborates on a particular problem she is facing and its resolution; Grace, for 
example, is having some difficulty getting along with a bossy classmate and Emma 
has misplaced some important family photos. Although the characterizations are 
a bit, well, cookie-cutter and the plot is somewhat contrived, the multicultural 
girls (Grace is half Singaporean, Emma is Jewish, Grace is African-American and 
affluent, Lucy is white and poor) are still an engaging crew and the variety of issues 
and identities ensures that many readers will find a connection point with at least 
one of the characters. The smooth writing and quick pacing make the pages fly by, 
as does Freeman’s clever technique of leaving each girl’s story unfinished until her 
letter to the next girl clears up loose ends. Particularly touching is Emma’s letter 
to Olivia about her older brother who died before Emma was born. Hand this to 
the BFFs who aren’t quite ready for Brashares’ The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants 
(BCCB 12/01). Four cookie recipes are included.  JH
GAuCh, sArAh The Tomb Robber and King Tut; illus. by Allen Garns. Viking, 
2015 36p
ISBN 978-0-670-78452-3 $16.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
In 1922, English archaeologist Howard Carter is on the verge of a great discovery in 
Egypt’s Valley of the Kings, and a young boy, Hassan, has been invited to work on 
the excavation. Hassan’s father is set against it, preferring that his son not become 
involved in activities that are associated with their community’s reputation for tomb 
robbing. Hassan’s exemplary behavior wears his father down, though, and the boy 
joins the dig as a basket carrier, hauling loads of sand from the site. As his father 
predicted, the overseer calls him “tomb robber,” but Hassan persists and manages 
to be right at Carter’s side when he holds his candle to the hole in Tutankhamun’s 
burial antechamber for the first glimpse of “wonderful things.” The story makes 
central an issue little examined in children’s literature, the community at Gurna 
and their reputation for tomb robbery; however, the device to bring Hassan to 
the fore is hackneyed, and the book opens the issue of the Gurnawis without 
really examining it. The illustrations, saturated gouache with pastel textures, are 
September 2015 • 23
atmospheric, but they’re occasionally misleading; Lady Herbert (clearly alluded to 
in the text) is missing from the climactic scene, and an impossible glow emanates 
from the antechamber to illuminate Hassan’s face. An author’s note is included, 
but it too leaves much unsaid. This is therefore an interesting if flawed entry to 
the subject, and alert listeners might propose the uncomfortable question, “Why 
are the Gurnawis grave robbers, but Carter isn’t?”  EB
Gensler, soniA Ghostlight. Knopf, 2015 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52215-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52214-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-52216-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
After being scorned by her older brother, twelve-year-old Avery is left to her own 
devices as she spends the summer with her loving but strict grandmother. When 
a family rents a house on Avery’s grandmother’s farm, Avery finds a kindred spirit 
in new neighbor Julian, a boy whose passion for amateur filmmaking rivals Avery’s 
love of storytelling. Julian is looking to film a ghost story and offers to make Avery 
one of its stars; she’s initially thrilled, but her enthusiasm is dampened when Julian 
insists that the movie be made at Hilliard House, a dilapidated mansion rumored 
to be haunted and strictly forbidden to Avery by her grandmother. Avery eventu-
ally caves to Julian’s pressure, and one night they venture out to the old house to 
discover that the rumors are all too true. The story is deliciously spine tingling, with 
the scenes in the house paying homage to some of the great ghost movies Julian 
expounds upon. Mysteriously slamming doors, shaking chandeliers, and shadowy 
figures in mirrors all work to amp up the chill factor, and the ghost remains tan-
talizingly unseen until near the end. The backstories of Avery’s and Julian’s family 
dramas are a bit underdeveloped, but they eventually make an effective connection 
to the true story behind the house and elaborate on the book’s message that there 
is power in knowing your family’s history. This would make a nice springboard 
for researching local lore and ghost stories, or it can simply be read on a stormy 
night when the shadows start playing tricks and the wind begins to howl.  KQG 
Gerstein, mordiCAi The Night World; written and illus. by Mordicai Ger-
stein. Little, 2015 [36p]
ISBN 978-0-316-18822-7 $18.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
The sky is black when the narrator’s cat, Sylvie, awakens him with a “Meow?” Al-
though he’s initially annoyed (“It’s too late to go out, Sylvie . . . or is it too early?”), 
the boy eventually follows the cat through the darkened house and outside. There 
they join a throng of animals congregating in a yard transformed by starlight and 
shadows, and although the boy is content to marvel at the unfamiliar night, the 
animals are focused on some mystery that eludes him: “‘It’s coming,’ murmur all 
the animals. ‘It’s almost here!’” When the awaited event arrives, it is indeed trans-
formational. Dawn brings colors back to the world, shuffles the nocturnal animals 
off to bed, and sends the energized boy running into the house to rouse his groggy 
family with “Good morning, everyone! It’s going to be a beautiful day!” The trip 
outdoors is a gentle adventure with a trusted feline friend as a guide, and the night 
itself inspires awe rather than terror, making this a cozy, comforting take on the 
24 • the bulletin
dark. Night scenes in sooty black on gray reveal curved shapes and shadow-softened 
angles, with the only tinge of color coming from animal eyes (Sylvie’s are green and 
an owl’s are yellow). Pink-orange clouds, a couple of rosy lights in the windows, and 
the crimson crest of a perching bird signal dawn’s arrival, and as the sun breaks the 
horizon, the following spreads burst into a riot of bright yellows, spring greens, and 
pure blues. Although this could be an effective inoculation against night shivers, 
it would be even better as an invitation to set the alarm clock an hour earlier and 
bring the family outside to watch the sunrise.  EB
Goldstein, lori Becoming Jinn. Feiwel, 2015 [384p]
ISBN 978-1-250-05539-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Azra has dreaded turning sixteen her whole life, because that is the age when she 
will become a Jinn, bound to grant wishes for humans and comply with the many 
rules of Jinn society. Because she’s always resisted her ancestry, Azra is behind on 
the necessary reading, cultural understanding, and even social bonds that will help 
her be successful, in spite of all of her mother’s efforts to get her on board. Birth-
days wait for no one, however, and now Azra is sixteen; her abilities spring from 
somewhere deep within her, and she is given her first assignments. Along the way, 
she uncovers secrets about Jinn history and her own parentage that could shake 
up the traditions that she has spent her life loathing. The Jinn, all female (male 
Jinn are not permitted to live among humans), are a fascinating group; there’s a 
refreshing absence of catty frenemies and instead a strong focus on the sisterly con-
nections and deep woman-friendly bonds. Unfortunately, Azra is extraordinarily 
hard to like: she was predictably gorgeous even before her transformation made 
her flawless, she rejects the Jinn girls who have tried to befriend her for years, and 
she’s unsympathetically selfish and angsty. Even so, genie fans may be intrigued by 
the complexity of Jinn society and ponder what the future might hold for it.  AS
GrAff, lisA Lost in the Sun. Philomel, 2015 289p
ISBN 978-0-399-16406-4 $16.99   
R* Gr. 6-9
Until Trent accidentally hit a hockey puck into his friend Jared’s chest that resulted 
in Jared’s death from an undiagnosed heart defect, he was an athletic, happy guy who 
lived for pulling pranks with his brothers. Between his dad’s blockheaded reaction, 
the ostracism of his former friends, and his own guilt, though, he’s become an angry 
boy who alienates anyone who might help. On the advice of his school counselor, 
he draws his thoughts in a journal, but the practice isn’t helping; if anything, the 
scenarios he draws of all the ways Jared might have nearly died but instead was 
saved by Trent are keeping his obsessions alive. When a girl named Fallon rescues 
him from some bullies, he tries to reject her friendship, but since she’s the only one 
who’ll talk to him, he ends up accepting her company. Fallon is haunted by her 
own demons; her face is marked by a wicked-looking scar, and she makes up stories 
about how she got it, never revealing the truth. As their friendship develops, Trent 
eventually triggers Fallon’s traumatic memories by beating up another kid. This 
catalyzes his road to recovery, however, as he works to find creative ways to make 
amends. Characterization is thoughtful: Graff is highly sensitive to a sixth-grade 
boy’s limited emotional savvy and lack of tools to deal with this kind of pain, and 
Fallon is believably sympathetic in her love of baseball movies and her understand-
September 2015 • 25
ing of the loneliness of trauma. With the exception of Trent’s father, each of the 
secondary characters is wise enough to know that Trent has to work this out on his 
own; their support is subtle and credible, as work it out he does.  KC 
Greenwood, mArk Midnight; illus. by Frané Lessac. Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7466-3 $16.99   
Ad 7-10 yrs
Born on a cattle ranch in Australia, Midnight is a coal-black mare trained by her 
owner, Guy. Come 1914, they each join the cavalry; initially Guy is sent to Turkey 
without a horse, but then he’s deployed to Cairo, where he finds Midnight again. 
Their unit patrols the arid Sinai, and they’re faced with battle at Beersheba. Midnight 
and Guy gallop forward, leaping the trenches filled with Ottoman soldiers, until 
a single bullet fells them both and only Guy survives. Spare, poetic present-tense 
text is more impressionistic than informative (“The wind blows in Midnight’s 
mane. And they ride to join the cavalry”), and each scene is an expressive snapshot 
(“Shrapnel kicks up dust. Bullets clip Guy’s hat”). However, the terseness and artistic 
distance limits the usual involvement of an animal story—perhaps a good thing, 
given the tragic ending—and there’s not enough historical detail to compensate by 
giving the story satisfying completeness as a biography. Lessac’s saturated gouache 
illustrations and folk-art naïve draftsmanship are at their best in crowd scenes, 
with a compelling view of the line of khaki-clad ANZACs tramping diagonally 
through the foggy, swirly muck of Gallipoli toward the bay; the full-bleed spreads 
emphasize the drama of the backdrops, as with the lines of cavalry horses tied up 
and patiently waiting in front of the Pyramids or the orange glow of sunset over 
the desert as the troops prepare their charge. This might be most useful as a facet of 
a larger look at World War I; it may even be more effective than stories of human 
losses at bringing home the war’s toll. End matter includes photographs of Guy 
and Midnight, information about the charge at Beersheba, and source notes.  DS
Guettier, BénédiCte The Chicken Who Had a Toothache; written and illus. by 
Bénédicte Guettier. Scribblers, 2015 42p
ISBN 978-1-909645-82-0 $14.95   
R 4-7 yrs
A happy hen has a happy family of five children, three still in the shell and two 
out, one of whom happens to be a crocodile. When the chicken goes to the dentist, 
she brings the whole brood along. It turns out the chicken forgot something—she 
doesn’t have any teeth—but the kids get examined as well; the crocodile needs a 
bit of a lecture, since he hasn’t been eating right and it’s been bad for his teeth. The 
dentist suggests he should eat meat, such as chicken, but the little crocodile, furious 
at being told to eat his mother, instead chows down on the dentist. The text neatly 
blends the cozy and the absurd; while the dental details are a little heavy for the 
sprightly tone, the story otherwise operates in the impish spirit of early folktale 
parodies and sassy cartoons. The art employs big, broad, irregular black outlines 
around the figures and the spare settings, with high-contrast saturated hues filling 
the shapes in and the simple scenes generally floating against white backgrounds. 
The result is childlike vigor similar to Lucy Cousins’ work but with a little giggle, 
as the eggs trot around on their two legs and the newly hatched chick determinedly 
remains inside his broken shell (even popping a bobble hat on top of it). Pair this 
with Dyckman’s Wolfie the Bunny (BCCB 4/15) for a suite of funny stories about 
loyal cross-species adoptees.  DS
26 • the bulletin
GuiBerson, BrendA z. The Most Amazing Creature in the Sea; illus. by Gennady 
Spirin. Holt, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9961-4 $17.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Kids looking for the weird, the gross, and the generally gasp-worthy might begin 
by looking underwater. A dozen marine creatures make their claims at greatness in 
this accessible exploration of marine life. Covered with slime and able to tie itself 
in a knot: “I am a Hagfish.” A literal headlight to lure prey and enormous jaws 
to accommodate dinner twice its size: “I am an Anglerfish.” No brain, blood, or 
lungs, but plenty of deadly venom: “I am a Box Jellyfish.” Tongue “as heavy as an 
elephant” and a heart “the size of a car”: “I am a Blue Whale.” Before readers pick 
their favorite (undoubtedly based on its ewww factor), Guiberson tosses in a game-
changer: “We are Helpers,” describes the unsung heroes such as wrasse that clean 
the larger fish, oysters that filter the water, coral that shelter the shrimp, and sea 
urchins that control the algae. In colors reminiscent of the Dutch masters, Spirin’s 
paintings capture the murky mystery of the deep sea while supplying the neces-
sary illumination (as if, perhaps, from diver’s flashlight or a bathyscaphe’s beam) 
to spotlight each meticulously detailed creature. Whether as a spark for casual 
browsing, further research, or contentious debate, this quick read will win fans.  EB
hArdstAff, JAne The Executioner’s Daughter. Egmont, 2015 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-562-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-563-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Moss has spent her entire eleven years confined to the grounds of the Tower of 
London under the watchful eye of her father, Tower blacksmith and official execu-
tioner to the court of Henry VIII. He’s a busy man, and he expects his daughter 
to assist him by carrying the basket to collect fallen heads. She’s had enough of the 
bloody business and her own restriction, which her father eventually explains with 
a suspicious story that he has been spared his own beheading on the condition he 
serve the court. When Moss discovers a secret tunnel leading from a garderobe to 
the Thames, she’s off on explorations and imagines a freer life than the one she 
currently resents. However, a curse set by the locally legendary Riverwitch and a 
threat by a very real child snatcher might derail her bid for liberty, and despite her 
newfound friendship with a resourceful river urchin, Salter, she finds out nearly too 
late how her loving father’s lies and vigilance have been keeping her alive. Cameo 
appearances by Henry VIII and his doomed queen Anne Boleyn anchor the novel 
specifically in the early sixteenth century, but lack of informative endnotes will 
leave readers wondering just how much of this is true (were there basket tenders at 
executions?) or even possible (could a child sneak into the royal garden at Hampton 
Court and have a heart-to-heart with the queen?). Fuzzy though historical fiction 
components may be, the supernatural-adventure angle nearly compensates, with 
Moss’ conquest of the Riverwitch satisfyingly clever and poignant. Fans of Carolyn 
Meyer with a taste for the otherworldly will be a target audience.  EB 
September 2015 • 27
hArmon, miChAel Stick. Knopf, 2015 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75437-8 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75436-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75438-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-10
Brett has come by his nickname “Stick” honestly as a sure-handed receiver, but 
lately the fun has gone out of football under the merciless focus and discipline of his 
stepfather, a ex-player whose injuries left him living his dreams vicariously through 
Brett. Preston is an undersized nerd who comes by his reputation for weirdness 
honestly, silently tolerating the bullying he regularly receives from Brett’s teammates 
at school. Brett makes an intervention on Preston’s behalf; Preston offers Brett a 
few observations on the general suckiness of school sports; and despite their polar 
differences, the pair begin to hang out. It’s not long before Brett realizes that Preston 
is the stronger of the two, not only facing his tormenters daily but also donning a 
makeshift superhero costume at night and fearlessly—idiotically—waiting in am-
bush for criminals and charging in to halt their nefarious deeds. If Preston can do 
all this, surely Brett can get his football life in order, and under Preston’s influence, 
he quits his team, transfers to a rival school, and gets the sports joy back into his 
life. Certainly the bones of this novel have given shape to countless other sports 
fantasies, but here Harmon excels in character study, polishing the unlikely-buddies 
trope with a truly touching backstory for Preston, witty dialogue, and a spot-on 
deployment of Batman as both inspiration and archetype. This delivers the feel-
good satisfaction of an afterschool special while forgoing the saccharine aftertaste 
for some solid satisfaction.  EB
heltzel, Anne Charlie, Presumed Dead. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2015 263p
ISBN 978-0-544-38849-9 $17.99   
R Gr. 10-12
Aubrey and Lena were never supposed to meet—at least that appears to have been 
the intention of Charlie, their common, philandering boyfriend, before he crashed 
his parents’ private plane. But eyeing each other at the memorial service, they im-
mediately divine the truth—they’ve been played. Lena has reason to suspect that 
Charlie is not dead, but she’s not forthcoming with her evidence. Aubrey seems 
strangely relieved that he’s gone, and she is more focused on recovering her journal, 
if it still exists among his possessions. Mutually resentful and mistrustful of each 
other, the pair nonetheless agree to trace Charlie’s last days and, if they find him 
alive, make him wish he wasn’t. The trek leads them from London to Mumbai to 
Bangkok, dodging perils and navigating deceits along the way, and slowly coming 
to suspect what the reader has already learned through chapters in Charlie’s increas-
ingly eerie voice—that he’s a psychopathic manipulator pulling their strings. Heltzel 
skids a bit on character development, particularly Aubrey’s supposed Midwestern 
naïveté and Lena’s over-the-top jet-setting skills, but the author’s ability to keep 
readers skipping over logical quicksand is impressive. Teens shouldn’t come here 
looking for a happy ending or even justice delivered but for a creepy race toward 
a bone-wracking shudder.  EB
28 • the bulletin
heppermAnn, Christine Backyard Witch: Sadie’s Story; by Christine Heppermann 
and Ron Koertge; illus. by Deborah Marcero. Greenwillow, 2015 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-06-233838-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Sadie’s best friends head off to Moose Head Lake (or Moose Butt Lake, as Sadie 
now refers to it) for a vacation with their families, and Sadie is left behind, bored, 
lonely, and plenty resentful. Then, however, she encounters a witch who has appar-
ently moved into the old plastic playhouse in Sadie’s backyard. The witch, Ms. M, 
sports the usual black dress and pointy hat, but her brand of magic isn’t so much 
eye of newt, toe of frog as it is about finding enchantment in the world around 
her. With her help, Sadie begins to see magic in the everyday; Ms. M’s “life lists” 
and birdwatching hobby sparks Sadie’s own contemplation of her likes and dislikes 
and her identity when she’s without her friends. Ms. M’s quirkiness and Sadie’s 
immediate likability offset what could have been a heavy-handed message about 
finding oneself, and their cheerful banter keeps the story light and airy. Sadie’s 
simultaneous missing of her friends and wishing them an awful vacation is spot on 
for the age group. Black and white illustrations featuring a multicultural cast pepper 
the text, complementing the story’s humor. Accessible language, a straightforward 
plot, brief chapters, and a charming protagonist put this right within the range of 
transitional readers.  KQG 
holder, nAnCy The Rules; by Nancy Holder and Debbie Viguié. Delacorte, 
2015 339p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98980-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74100-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98347-4 $10.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Robin is one of those steady girls who avoids trouble, but just this one evening 
she accepts an invitation from her estranged friend, Beth, to attend a scavenger 
hunt parties for the A-listers of Callabrese High School. The hunt is hosted by 
the reliably inventive and über-wealthy August DeYoung; the prizes are sure to be 
fabulous, and the opportunities for hook-ups are limitless. The partygoers don’t 
realize, however, that August has been patiently orchestrating this event as revenge 
against the classmates he feels are responsible for the humiliation of his twin sister, 
which led to her suicide. With an unhinged guy on a mission, a secluded setting on 
a craggy California coastline, and a cast of venal characters who’ve spent their teen 
years marching toward comeuppance, the bodies begin to fall fast and furiously. 
But August, it seems, also ranks in the pack of prey—so just who is the murderer? 
Turn on the fog machine and the theremin, and you have yourself a teen slasher 
movie replete with twists, deceits, romance, pyrotechnics, and a cute little dog. 
Holder and Viguié clearly do not adhere to the school of thought that time and 
distance add to terror; the thrills and bloodshed roll along nonstop, and by the 
time most of the nasty teens have been predictably cleared out, the villain becomes 
pretty obvious. Whodunit is hardly the point, though; this is about merciless justice 
deferred, and, of course, the cautionary message to never hand your phone over 
to a party host.  EB
September 2015 • 29
idle, molly Sea Rex; written and illus. by Molly Idle. Viking, 2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78574-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Cordelia and her beloved T. rex, Rex, take to the beach in this latest installment of 
Idle’s unfailingly charming Rex series (Camp Rex, BCCB 5/14, etc.). Continuing the 
ironic relationship between gently guiding prose and whimsical images that subvert 
textual advice, Idle provides plenty of humor, with, for instance, a giggle-inducing 
view of Rex sporting a pool float around his waist and a tiny sailor’s hat on his head 
amidst the hijinks caused by seagulls, cannonball jumps, and little brothers. The 
dynamic illustrations, rendered in color pencil on vellum, make the most of a sunny, 
retro-toned palette, with pinks, corals, and shades of blue sweeping the page in both 
snapshot-like panels and immersive double-page spreads. With the addition of dino 
buddies—a sunbathing, salmon-colored triceratops, a lifeguarding, tangelo-toned 
pterodactyl, and a snorkeling, cerulean stegosaurus—Idle raises the endearing level. 
A perfect primer for summer fun, this is a sweet and silly readaloud.  AA
Jenkins, emily The Fun Book of Scary Stuff; illus. by Hyewon Yum. Foster/
Farrar, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-30000-5 $16.99  
R 5-8 yrs
Our narrator has followed his dad’s instructions to make a list of what scares him 
(“He says it will help me be brave”), and now he’s explaining the plan to his inter-
ested bull terrier and timid pug. Each spread explores a fear, with the cocky terrier 
demolishing them all (“I could take that guy,” he says assuredly about the feared 
shark in the swimming pool) until they get to the ultimate fear: the dark. Not so 
bold now, the pooch panics, but the boy bravely turns the light on and saves the 
doggy day. Jenkins takes a clever route through the topic of childhood fears: there’s 
plenty of witty, kid-friendly humor (“Your dad is weird,” says the terrier; “Tell me 
about it,” responds the boy wryly), while the dogs act as mouthpieces for both 
the confident and nervous voices inside the heads of youngsters negotiating their 
anxieties. Fanciful worries along with plenty of plausible everyday fears—there’s a 
mean crossing guard and big dogs as well as trolls and witches—address the vast 
range of possible scares for children. The book is cannily laid out, with main text 
introducing the concept and the monsters in chapter-type surtitles and the bulk 
of the words appearing in the lively speech balloons. The watercolor and pencil 
artwork has a light touch, with boy and dogs moving smoothly between the real 
foreground and the imagined terrors; the trip into the glossy black dark, illuminated 
only by canine eyes and canine comments, makes for a dramatic climax. Treating 
fears with humor is a great way to get them out into the open, and this could be 
a funny discussion-starter as well as a complement to Halloween spookiness. DS
Jones, kelly Unusual Chickens for the Exceptional Poultry Farmer; illus. by Katie 
Kath. Knopf, 2015 216p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75553-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75552-8 $16.99
E-book ed. 978-0-385-75554-2 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
In this epistolary novel, twelve-year-old L.A. native Sophie and her parents are 
adjusting to life on the rural California farm their family has inherited. Lonely 
30 • the bulletin
Sophie, having written to a catalogue in desperation, begins receiving letters 
from someone named Agnes at Redwood Farm Supply about the farm chickens. 
The chickens are an unusual bunch, from Henrietta, an angry-looking Bantam 
White Leghorn who lays mysterious glass eggs and can make objects levitate, to 
Chameleon, a timid Barred Plymouth Rock hen who has powers of invisibility, to 
Buffy, a Buff Orpington whose progeny have the cockatrice skill of turning living 
creatures to stone by looking at them. Sophie also writes letters to her beloved 
deceased abuelita, and to her late Great-Uncle Jim about learning how to handle 
the chickens, making new friends, and keeping the hens safe from Ms. Griegson, a 
neighboring farmer who covets the chickens for their unusual powers. Sophie, her 
parents, and their neighbor are skillfully drawn and refreshingly diverse (Sophie’s 
mom is Latina; Gregory, Sophie’s mail-carrier buddy, is black; and Jane, the feed-
store clerk, has a girlfriend). The letter-writing device effectively conveys the story, 
and the mystery of who is answering Sophie’s letters at Redwood Farm Supply is 
especially engaging. Kath’s monochromatic illustrations, stylistically somewhere 
between Quentin Blake and Jennifer Plecas, add humor and energy and help tell 
the story in between letters. This will appeal to both the kids who like realistic 
family stories and those who prefer the fantastical, and chicken-lovers will find this 
informative as well as satisfying.  JH
kAtCher, BriAn The Improbable Theory of Ana & Zak. Tegen/HarperCollins, 
2015 328p
ISBN 978-0-06-227277-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Perfect student Ana Watson has never broken a rule, and with the end of senior year 
quickly approaching, she’s nearly out from under the thumb of her terrifyingly strict 
parents. Slacker Zak Duquette has never met a rule worth following, unless it was 
part of a favorite role-playing game, and his plans for the future are amorphous at 
best. Their worlds collide when Ana’s younger brother runs away during an over-
night school trip and ends up at Washingcon, a teeming fan convention Zak knows 
intimately, and Ana enlists Zak’s help. They chase Ana’s wayward brother through 
the costumed crowds, and over the course of a riotous, disaster-and-romance-filled 
night that includes fistfights with drunken Vikings, medieval battle reenactments, 
encounters with a drug dealer, and late-night karaoke, they learn that love might 
just be a reason to step outside your comfort zone. Reading like Nick & Norah’s 
Infinite Playlist (BCCB 6/06) for the sci-fi set, this both hilarious and touching 
novel overflows with geek-savvy insider jokes and fandom-celebrating allusions. 
The narrative follows the formula of opposites who bring out the best in each other, 
but it’s executed well, and Zak emerges as goofy-geeky hero worth swooning over. 
Readers will enjoy watching Ana learn to appreciate all that the comic-con world 
and its inhabitants have to offer. The fast-paced, rollicking all-night escapade may be 
improbable indeed, but for readers willing to roll with the fun, a solid nerd-friendly 
adventure story with a gooey, sweet romance center awaits.  AM
kelly, JACqueline The Curious World of Calpurnia Tate. Holt, 2015 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9744-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
A new century has just arrived, and 1900 seems to promise Calpurnia Tate a host 
of fresh possibilities. Ever since she and her naturalist grandfather discovered a new 
September 2015 • 31
species of vetch (in The Evolution of Calpurnia Tate, BCCB 7/09), their relationship 
has deepened into true friendship, and Calpurnia alone among the grandchildren 
has earned his affection and respect. Under his tutelage, the thirteen-year-old truly 
sees herself aiming for a career in science. As she presses her parents for further 
education and broader opportunities, though, it becomes apparent that the deck 
is stacked against ambitious women striving to enter “men’s” professions. Her luck 
changes unexpectedly when the epic hurricane that levels the city of Galveston 
blows into her life a pair of survivors, who nudge Calpurnia closer to her dream. 
Her cranky older cousin Aggie, living with the Tates until her parents rebuild their 
home, teaches Calpurnia how to type, how to salt money away in a bank, and most 
stunningly, how to deceive and rebel against parents. Dr. Pritzker, a veterinarian, 
sets up a new practice in Calpunia’s community and comes to rely on Calpurnia’s 
assistance at ever more complicated medical interventions. Calpurnia, despite 
her lofty plans for the future, is no feisty fictional anachronism, but a thoughtful 
adolescent who is fully aware that years still span her present and future, and the 
best she can do for now is to shove her foot through every door that opens even a 
crack. As she squabbles here with her siblings, perturbs her parents, and conspires 
with her brother Travis in the care of wild animals, readers can only hope Kelly is 
preparing another installment that will guide Calpurnia toward a career befitting 
her talents.  EB
kennedy, Anne vittur Ragweed’s Farm Dog Handbook; written and illus. by 
Anne Vittur Kennedy. Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7417-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 5-8 yrs
If you’re going to be a farm dog, it’s important to know the ropes; fortunately, 
Ragweed the farm dog extraordinaire is here to guide prospective applicants (“You’ll 
be great. You have the handbook”). Mostly, however, the helpful pup focuses on 
what not to do: “Don’t wake the farmer. You will really, really want to wake the 
farmer. But don’t wake the farmer.” A page turn leads to the inevitable result: “If 
you DO wake the farmer . . . ” Several other helpful lessons in what not to do also 
end up with the pooch succumbing to temptation, and since he usually gets a dog 
biscuit out of it, it usually works out fine anyway. The repetition, the page turn, 
the dive into the forbidden will all be a treat for young audiences, and there’s a 
plunge into mirthful grossness (“If you DO eat grass, you won’t get a biscuit. But 
you will throw up a biscuit and you can eat that one again”) that will detonate 
amid a group of kids like a hilarity bomb. Full-bleed acrylic illustrations use thick, 
opaque strokes to give the frenetic dog a high-impact zing; he’s a scruffy guy with 
a big bulbous nose and even bigger bug eyes, and his chummy direct-to-camera 
grin is irresistible. Kids won’t be able to get enough of this goofy dog who’s smart 
enough to know on which side his biscuit is buttered.  DS
kinsellA, sophie Finding Audrey. Delacorte, 2015 286p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53651-5 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-53652-2 $10.99   
R Gr. 6-9
After being bullied last year, fourteen-year-old Audrey developed a severe anxiety 
disorder, retreating to her room, wearing dark sunglasses all the time (even while at 
home), and basically avoiding any social contact. A stint in a treatment center and 
32 • the bulletin
regular sessions with her therapist have helped her make some progress, but when 
her brother’s friend Linus attempts to talk to her, Audrey suffers a major panic at-
tack. Linus, however, isn’t deterred, and he sends Audrey a note apologizing; from 
there, the two start a correspondence first in notes and then in texts, and eventually 
they meet and even start going out in public places together. Audrey improves by 
leaps and bounds, but when a setback hits, she’s completely unprepared. While it’s 
a little contrived that it’s a boy that lights the fire for Audrey’s recovery, Linus is 
remarkably realistic—he’s encouraging, but he can’t entirely understand Audrey’s 
condition and even at times tells her to “snap out of it.” Her over-the-top family, 
whose absurd antics lend a healthy dose of humor to the story, are similarly sup-
portive but frustrated, and Kinsella makes a point to convey how each of them 
has been affected by Audrey’s illness. The portrait of anxiety is both compassionate 
and utterly authentic, from the way it manifests itself, to its treatment, to Audrey’s 
ever-present fear that she will be like this forever. The fact that the specifics of the 
bullying incident are never described offers an excellent discussion starter: how 
much do you need to know about the cause of someone’s pain to justify its pres-
ence? Pair this with Haydu’s OCD Love Story (BCCB 9/13) for witty, sympathetic 
looks at the fits and starts of living with and recovering from mental illness.  KQG 
krishnAswAmi, umA Bright Sky, Starry City; illus. by Aimée Sicuro. Ground-
wood, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-55498-405-3 $17.95   
R 4-7 yrs
Phoebe, named after one of Saturn’s moons, shares her father’s love for all things 
astronomical, and tonight will be a banner night for sky gazers: Saturn and Mars 
will both be visible at once. Dad sets up some gear outside his telescope shop to 
encourage public viewing, but the sad reality is that the streetlights are bound to 
make viewing difficult. An advancing storm knocks out the power and sends ev-
eryone scurrying indoors, but as soon as the rain passes through, Phoebe and Dad 
emerge into an evening presented just for enthusiasts like them: “Above the newly 
washed city, with the power still out, glowing, sparkling, gleaming lights painted 
the night—some faint, some brilliant, some clustered together and some scattering 
fiercely through the inky darkness.” As Dad guides Phoebe on a tour of the celestial 
highlights, urbanites venture back out to enjoy the view as well—at least until the 
lights come back on. The picture-book story stands sturdily on its own as a gentle 
tale of a shared father/daughter enterprise, and Sicuro’s mixed-media illustrations, 
with their gauzy chalk and translucent watercolor touches, convey both the objec-
tive and emotive pleasures of stargazing. For children (or classroom teachers) who 
want to know more, Krishnaswami appends five pages of notes on the solar system, 
planetary conjunctions, planet moons and rings, telescopes, and light pollution, 
as well as a glossary and several strong picture-book suggestions that lead children 
to explore the night sky from vantage points of science, art, history, and folklore. 
Read in tandem with John Rocco’s Blackout (BCCB 6/11), this could spark lively 
discussion on the upside and downside of life on the grid.  EB 
September 2015 • 33
krull, kAthleen 
Sacajawea; illus. by Matt Collins. 
Bloomsbury, 
2015 48p (Women Who Broke the Rules)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3799-1 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3800-4 $6.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
 
 
 
Sonia Sotomayor; illus. by Angela Dominguez. 
Bloomsbury, 
2015 48p (Women Who Broke the Rules)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3797-7 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3798-4 $6.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Biography maven Krull launches a new middle-grades series, Women Who Broke the 
Rules, for kids just past picture-book biographies. These two titles pose opposite 
challenges for Krull’s craft—Sacajawea, because so little is known about her, and 
that bit arrives filtered through the journals of Lewis and Clark; Sotomayor, because 
so much is known about her (particularly due to Senate confirmation hearings) 
and must be pared down to a few dozen pages. Thus, much of Sacajawea’s story 
is expanded with judicious speculation based on the role of women in Shoshone, 
Hidatsa, and early nineteenth century Anglo-American cultures, and considering 
how the unlikely adventurer may have approached caring for her newborn while 
tending to the needs of her male trekkers. Sotomayor’s story, on the other hand, 
focuses on childhood experiences and dispositions that influenced her goal for a 
career in law and justice, and the Herculean effort to succeed among the Ivy League 
set. Short chapters and chatty text will be a welcome boon to report writers, and 
children’s works noted among the appended sources and further feading lists are 
useful. However, neither volume can boast of distinguished illustration (Sotomayor’s 
childlike cartoonishness misses caricature by a mile, and Sacajawea’s glossy, studied 
poses feel fustily old-fashioned), and Krull is vague about the exact “rules” each 
of her subjects can be said to have broken, leaving these fairly workmanlike but 
unremarkable early biographies. Nonetheless, Krull’s engaging narrative style is 
again on display, and that alone may carry the day.  EB
kuehn, stephAnie Delicate Monsters. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2015 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-06384-7 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-6885-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 10-12
Seventeen-year-old Sadie Su is looking forward to wreaking some havoc when she 
returns to her wealthy family’s estate after being kicked out of her third boarding 
school. Her ex-friend Emerson is horrified by her return; Sadie knows things about 
him, things he’d rather forget, that could derail his blossoming romance with 
a classmate and disgust his family and friends. Meanwhile, Emerson’s younger 
brother Miles suffers from mysterious illnesses and visions of future violence that 
might take place at his school. Surprisingly, Sadie is the one who takes pity on 
Miles while Emerson retreats into a shame spiral; when Miles goes missing after a 
humiliating encounter with bullies, Sadie must confront her past demons as she 
seeks him—and as she realizes his violent intentions. Not one character here, not 
even the put-upon Miles, is particularly likable, but all are nonetheless fascinating to 
watch as they struggle to reconcile their perceptions of themselves with the choices 
they make. Sadie revels in cruelty, so she is therefore shocked by her compassion 
towards Miles, mostly because she’s certain she’s incapable of tenderness. Emerson 
34 • the bulletin
suspects that he is fundamentally bad, and his efforts towards what he sees as good 
behavior are continually thwarted by his own guilt. Miles, meanwhile, believes he 
is fated to be the victim until he steps into the role of victimizer. Each of the three 
could legitimately be considered a psychopath at different points in the book, and 
it’s to Kuehn’s credit that she manages to give them all a bit of humanity even as she 
makes it clear that these are people with very disturbed views about the world. Sex, 
booze, and wealth surround them, but it’s not the high life that ultimately destroys 
these teens but rather their savage belief that destruction—both of themselves and 
others—is inevitable.  KQG 
lAyBourne, emmy Sweet. Feiwel, 2015 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-250-05519-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Overweight but comfortable with her body, seventeen-year-old Laurel Willard is 
still thrilled when her best friend invites her on an elite weight-loss cruise full of 
celebrities and millionaires, even if seasickness keeps her from indulging in the new 
miracle fat-burning sweetener from the cruise’s sponsor. Meanwhile, nineteen-year-
old former child star turned celebrity host Tom Forelli doesn’t feel so lucky, since 
he’s stuck hanging with his shallow Hollywood entourage and shilling a product he 
hates. Tom finds himself drawn to the shy but intriguing Laurel, and the unlikely 
pair begins a flirtation that could lead to something more. This frothy summer 
romance turns quickly to horror when the diet drug proves to have dangerous and 
deadly side effects. Soon the ship is overrun by cadaverous addicts, ravenous for 
their next hit of sweetener and willing to tear apart anyone who gets in their way. 
Outnumbered and trapped at sea, Laurel and Tom must lead the fight for survival 
and get the word out before the product is released worldwide. This entertaining 
dual-narrated novel offers a zombie-esque mini-apocalypse with a dash of social 
commentary and a heavy helping of super-sweet romance. Laurel is a likable hero-
ine, and the blossoming love story with the more stereotypical Tom is charming 
enough that readers may be disappointed when their love boat is blown to bits by 
a drug-fueled catastrophe. Those willing to ride the turn from kisses to murderous 
hordes are in for a thrilling if ludicrous trip, though, and they will be pleased to 
see Laurel use her wits to save the day. Hints that the drug’s impact may not be 
completely contained leave doors open for expected sequels, but the story here 
thoroughly satisfies all on its own: a perfect choice for those who want their sum-
mer love blended with a little adventure and gore.  AM
lewin, ted How to Babysit a Leopard: And Other True Stories from Our Trav-
els across Six Continents; by Ted and Betsy Lewin. Porter/Roaring Brook, 
2015 136p illus. and with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59643-616-9 $22.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
In this cross between a travelogue and photo album, kids who cut their literary 
teeth on the picture books of these author/illustrators now learn about the Lewins’ 
other life as globe-trotting adventurers. Here the Lewins present brief vignettes 
from four decades of travel, arranged loosely by continent and then fine-tuned by 
chronology; almost all the travelers’ tales involve animals. The episodes range in 
tone from funny (Betsy kisses an adorable mongoose, and later discovers it roots 
around for seeds in elephant dung) to contemplative (Ted reflects on how Kalahari 
September 2015 • 35
bushmen’s dependence on “free” water threatens their cultural identity). Some 
are almost eerily dispassionate, such as the objective observation of a bullfight in 
southern France, while others, such as a reflection on the age and experience of 
a centennarian Galápagos tortoise, are particularly empathetic. Ultimately, this is 
more an uneven series of anecdotes rather than a cohesive whole. Many excursions 
take the Lewins to regions of political disturbance and outright war, and although 
the authors convey some sense of the obstacles and fear such travel entails, they 
offer little context for conflicts. Still, kids who accompany the Lewins on their 
entire journey will discern an overarching theme: the fraught relationship between 
human and non-human animals, from culturally sanctioned cruelty to unexpected 
acts of mercy and conscience. An index is included.  EB
lim, reBeCCA The Astrologer’s Daughter. Text Publishing, 2015 321p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-922182-00-5 $11.95   
R Gr. 9-12
Avicenna’s mother, Joanne, has always talked about her “eventuality,” the twist of 
fate that would inevitably lead to her absence from Avicenna’s life. Nonetheless, 
when Joanne, a popular astrologer among the disenfranchised in Melbourne, Aus-
tralia, goes missing, Avicenna—the titular astrologer’s daughter—is stunned. The 
police try to help, but only Avi can interpret Joanne’s most recent star charts, and 
she must reluctantly use the gift she inherited from her mother to determine a set 
of possible suspects. Joined by Simon Thorn, the supposed golden boy at school 
and a surprising ally in Avicenna’s search, Avicenna is thrown headlong into the 
mystery of a decades-old brutal murder. This is a taut, expertly crafted thriller, 
but it is also a devastating examination of grief, both the initial, acute pain of 
loss and the well-worn paths of years of sorrow. Avicenna’s narration is lacerating 
in its despair, conveying a girl who is shocked not only by the loss of her mother 
but also by the terrible rawness of her own emotions. Her pairing with Simon, 
who is the major player in his own unique tragedy, isn’t romantic so much as it is 
necessary for both of them to simply get through the day. The emotion does not 
dampen the tension; though an added layer of horrific criminal activity threatens 
to overshadow the central plot, the mystery of Joanne’s disappearance and the 
unsolved murder compels readers forward. This is a haunting read that will likely 
leave readers searching the stars for their own fates.  KQG
lord, CynthiA A Handful of Stars. Scholastic, 2015 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70027-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70029-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 3-5
It’s a dog that brings Lily and Salma together: when Lucky, Lily’s ancient blind 
Labrador retriever, bolts for the road, Salma, one of the migrant workers picking 
Maine blueberries, lures him to safety with her sandwich. Soon a friendship blossoms 
between the two twelve-year-olds, and artistic Salma helps Lily decorate crafted bee 
houses to sell at the blueberry festival in order to raise funds for cataract surgery 
for Lucky. Salma also decides to enter the Downeast Blueberry Queen pageant, a 
move that breaks racial barriers but puts Lily, whose best friend is trying for a repeat 
victory, in an awkward position. Lord writes with a quiet naturalness that allows 
multiple plot facets to emerge without becoming messagey or heavy-handed. The 
treatment of Salma’s migrant life is matter-of-fact but direct, and Lily plausibly deals 
36 • the bulletin
with possibilities of local racism and swells with indignation on behalf of her new 
friend. Motherless Lily’s occasional longing for a maternal figure (“It made me all 
messed up inside to have someone treat me like a daughter”) is poignant, and her 
eventual Salma-encouraged shift in her approach to Lucky fits smoothly with her 
character growth. It’s the straightforward and unaffected prose (highly suitable for 
a readaloud as well as reading alone) that really allows Lily’s story to shine, though, 
and it’s hard to resist joining her on her journey toward greater maturity.  DS
mABerry, JonAthAn The Orphan Army. Simon, 2015 392p (The Night-
siders)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1575-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1577-4 $10.99   
R Gr. 5-7
Eleven-year-old Milo has gotten used to the way things are since the ravaging giant 
bugs arrived from space six years ago, and he he hardly remembers life from before. 
As long as he has his mother, his camp of survivors, and his dream journal to try to 
write away his disturbing, prescient dreams, he doesn’t think about challenging the 
status quo in this post-apocalyptic world. Then he stumbles upon the Nightsid-
ers, magical creatures who have hidden from people but who are willing to show 
themselves as they too try to reclaim the earth, and begins to change the way he 
thinks; soon he unites Nightsiders and humans against the bug monsters. Mixing 
fantasy sprites and tree people with sci-fi B-movie alien bug killers is a stretch, 
but Maberry pulls it off with aplomb, and genre fans will appreciate the blend of 
fresh and familiar. Relief from the gripping action movie pace comes in the form 
of contemplative conversations among children both human and magical, saving a 
world they never really got to know. A sequel can’t come too soon for readers who 
will be eager to see what this unlikely team can accomplish.  AS
mACiver, Juliette Yak and Gnu; illus. by Cat Chapman. Candlewick, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7561-5 $14.99   
R* 4-7 yrs
In this jaunty rhyming story, Yak (in his kayak) and Gnu (in her canoe) take to the 
water, secure in the notion that “no one else/ but you and me/ can float a boat/ 
or sail the sea.” That notion is sunk when they meet a sailing goat (“A goat in a 
boat?/ That can’t be true”). And then a snail. And a calf. And a succession of other 
sailing animals, culminating in a flotilla of gorillas (each sharing boat space with a 
humpback whale) and “an ocean cruise/ full of yaks and gnus.” Fortunately, Gnu 
points out that friendship matters more than uniqueness, and the two paddle on, 
singing. While the scansion is a little variable, New Zealand author MacIver packs 
her short lines with charm. Audiences will delight in the chipper repetition, comic 
internal rhymes, and rueful cumulative tagline: “There’s nobody else/ like me and 
you! (Well, only Goat, Snail, Calf, Scorpion, Pig, and Rat.)” There’s a touch of 
William Steig in the line and watercolor illustrations; the animal cast is personable 
and buoyant (in both senses), and the art embraces the ridiculousness of the sea-
going critters (the exultant giraffes in hovercrafts, cool in their shades and leather 
gloves, are particularly engaging). The waterway itself is peaceful and uncluttered 
but never dull (birds perch on stumps, windmills dot the banks, fish swim along), 
making it a solid supporting element. The Seussian silliness of the verse makes this 
a sure bet for kids looking for something gnu.  DS
September 2015 • 37
mACkler, CArolyn Best Friend Next Door. Scholastic, 2015 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70944-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70947-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Hannah’s mournful when her best friend moves away from the house next door, 
but into that house moves Emme, who, like Hannah, is going into fifth grade. 
After a prickly start, the two girls become friends, finding weird commonalities in 
their lives (they’re born on the same day, they both love swimming and delight in 
palindromes, they both hate pizza) and sharing Emme’s cat, Butterball. Privately, 
they’ve got their own challenges: Hannah dreads the arrival of her baby half-sibling 
and is starting to question her commitment to the swim team, while Emme struggles 
with bullies in her new class. Will those secret anxieties and insecurities destroy their 
new friendship? The chatty and accessible narration alternates between Hannah 
and Emme, effectively revealing what’s below the surface on both sides; the dilem-
mas, especially Emme’s classroom bullying, are age-authentic and sympathetically 
portrayed. However, the plot too often resorts to contrivances, and events—such 
as such as Hannah’s abrupt departure from sleepaway camp in a fit of jealousy and 
the climactic illness of Emme’s cat—often don’t rise above the formulaic. Friendship 
challenges are familiar to a lot of middle-graders, though, and they may appreciate 
seeing two engaging kids stumble a few times before they eventually succeed.  DS
mAetAni, vAlynne e. Ink and Ashes. Tu/Lee & Low, 2015 386p
ISBN 978-1-62014-211-0 $19.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Claire Takata’s memories of her deceased father have dimmed over the last ten years, 
and although she and her Japanese-American family continue to honor him with 
an annual ritual, her mother has remarried a good man, Claire and her siblings 
have adjusted well, and the house is always filled with her brothers’ boisterous 
friends. About the only thing sixteen-year-old Claire has to complain about is 
everyone’s overprotectiveness, which annoyingly extends to her parents’ reticence 
to talk about the past, and her brothers’ conniving to limit her to dating only guys 
they have pre-approved. Her complacency is disturbed when she discovers some 
hidden family pictures, which reveal that her father and stepfather knew each other 
years ago, and by following a paper and Internet trail, she learns that her father had 
once belonged to a yakuza, a Japanese crime syndicate. When confronted with the 
facts, her parents confirm her suspicions, but Claire’s investigation alerts one of her 
father’s victims to her whereabouts, and she is targeted for revenge. The mystery 
itself is neatly plotted, and although the red herrings reek too strongly at times, the 
slippery identities of several of the main suspects will keep readers involved. The 
problem here is tone, which shifts uneasily between Nancy Drew wholesomeness 
and outright violence, delivered in a narrative style that often sounds outdatedly 
prim. The romance subplot will lure in some readers beyond the mystery set, and 
any middle-school girl who thinks there are worse problems than a houseful of 
attentive, parentally approved boys will also be on board.  EB
38 • the bulletin
mArGolis, leslie If I Were You. Farrar, 2015 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30068-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Melody and Katie, both twelve, were best friends until they had an end-of-summer 
fight about Kevin, the boy Katie likes but who likes Melody instead. Now a magic 
wish has swapped the girls into each other’s bodies and given them the summer back 
to do over. Melody revels in being in Katie’s warm and unpretentious family and in 
taking care of Katie’s little twin brothers, while Katie, at least initially, enjoys being 
a budding beauty, Melody’s mother’s shopping pal, and Kevin’s secret girlfriend. The 
“walk in somebody else’s shoes” device, here enhanced with the girls’ alternating 
narration, is a familiar but engaging one, and the book offers some valid insight into 
the fact that friends can take each other for granted. Additionally, there’s thoughtful 
exploration of the way Melody’s growing body unpleasantly makes her an object 
for public scrutiny. However, the book strongly plays favorites in the exchange: 
Melody’s appearance-focused mother and cold family are superficial clichés, while 
Katie is an interesting but ultimately unsympathetic bossy brat. Though Melody 
does learn to be a little less self-effacing, the resolution disappointingly leaves the 
nice girl stuck back in the unpleasant home, suggesting Katie’s deeper understand-
ing was more important than Melody’s actual life. Nonetheless, the preteen travails 
may speak to readers, and the concept will appeal to fans of Freaky Friday and its 
legion of successors.  DS
mAtA, Julie Kate Walden Directs: Bride of Slug Man. Disney Hyperion, 
2015 279p
ISBN 978-1-4231-9460-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Readers who enjoyed following Kate through friendship drama and cinematic 
triumph in Night of the Zombie Chickens (BCCB 6/14) will be glad to find her 
planning her second film, Bride of Slug Man. This time, however, she’s plagued by 
competition—a new boy named Tristan, who also enjoys making movies, has moved 
to town—and bullies Paul and Blake are sabotaging her auditions. Kate’s stalwart 
band of friends stands behind her, and she enlists the help of her spy-crazy little 
brother, Derek, to make movie magic and outwit the bullies. While the B-movie 
title is misleadingly campy, there are solid gold nuggets of insight here regarding 
the miscues, motivations, and minefields of seventh-grade group dynamics, all 
related with a broadly appealing, self-deprecating wit. Kate makes mistakes and 
claims them, expanding on the hard-won empathy she learned in the previous 
book. This time around, her imagined competition with Tristan nearly costs her 
what matters most in her filmmaking—the joy of it—but a gentle reminder from 
her mother sets her back on the right track. This has become a series to watch, 
with elements that appeal across genders and interest areas; while some readers will 
come for the wisely handled relationships and relatable humor, Kate’s explanations 
of movie-making craft and special effects will have budding auteurs reaching for 
their cameras, Super Soakers, and green-tinted condensed milk.  KC 
mCisAAC, meAGhAn The Boys of Fire and Ash. Delacorte, 2015 327p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99167-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74445-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-39013-2 $10.99   
R Gr. 8-10
The boys in the pit know about mothers, but they have grown up without them 
September 2015 • 39
or any other adult care. Their mentoring system keeps the youngest boys alive and 
the oldest ones busy until they turn sixteen and leave to face an unknown outside 
world. Urgle has a younger kid in his care, Cubby, and all of Urgle’s usual insecurities 
and small concerns fly out the window when Cubby is kidnapped and will almost 
certainly die if Urgle doesn’t leave the Pit to save him. This is a daunting task as 
Urgle is young, unprepared, and absolutely ignorant of the politics that have driven 
the dystopian world above. The pit boys are not always easy to like, having passed 
down generations of rough treatment, distance, and fear-based instruction, but 
they do inspire deep sympathy and curiosity. The politics of how this all came to 
be, with infant sons being left in a pit by apparently healthy mothers, are presented 
in sometimes awkwardly long conversations; however, the why isn’t nearly as much 
the point as the world the boys have made and what happens when its delicate 
balance is upended. Contemplative readers will be left with questions to ponder 
and ethical decisions to mull as well as a satisfying and tense read.  AS
mCkAy, hilAry Binny in Secret; illus. by Micah Player. McElderry, 
2015 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8278-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8280-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 4-7
Binny, from Binny for Short (BCCB 10/13) has returned, and now she and her 
family (mother, calm older sister Clem, and purposeful younger brother James) are 
living in town. Or they were until storm damage meant they had to rent a house out 
in the country, which, Binny is horrified to discover, belongs to the family of the 
girl who’s been bullying Binny at her new school. However, the new house offers 
some interesting compensations as well—there’s a mysterious locked attic room, 
which turns out to hold memorabilia belonging to children who lived there 100 
years ago, and there’s a patch of wild countryside that may hold something even 
rarer and more special. As always, McKay taps into classic British family stories with 
her blend of humor, warm safety, and unsupervised adventure, and even Binny’s 
wretched start at school is solidly counterpointed by her loving home and firm 
friendship with long-distance friend Gareth. The interpolated story of the three 
Penrose children from 1912 to 1914 braids intriguingly with Binny’s and offers its 
own suspense. However, it’s Binny’s anti-hunting bond with the erstwhile bully, 
Clare, and their determined protection of a rare wild lynx that will really engage 
readers, and the book is both credible and suspenseful as it inches its way toward 
the girls’ understated rapprochement. Even those unfamiliar with Binny’s first out-
ing can pick up the thread here, and the mix of history, mystery, and sympathetic 
everyday-life story will captivate a wide variety of young readers. Reviewed from 
an unillustrated galley.  DS
messner, kAte How to Read a Story; illus. by Mark Siegel. Chronicle, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-4521-1233-6 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
A little boy and his dog demonstrate Messner’s ten brief steps of reading a story 
aloud. Steps include selecting a story (the boy’s book is about a princess, a robot, and 
a dragon), a reading buddy, and a “cozy reading spot”; making predictions about the 
book; reading aloud with clarity and expression; decoding unknown words; finishing 
with a triumphant, “The End”; and “if it was a really good story . . . go right back 
40 • the bulletin
to the beginning and start all over again.” This isn’t so much about the skill set as 
the process, and it works well as an entertaining and educational introduction and 
overview to the experience of tackling a new book. The narration balances gentle 
guidance (“Read the story in a loud, clear voice, not too slow and not too fast”) 
with a kid’s-eye sense of what’s enjoyable (“Make sure your reading buddy is nice 
and snuggly”). Messner draws on the boy’s chosen book to make concrete some of 
the suggestions; for example, when predicting “what might happen next,” she offers 
the following questions the boy might pose: “Will the castle catch on fire? Will the 
princess tame the dragon? Will the robot marry the princess?” Siegel’s sunny ink 
and watercolor illustrations are casual but controlled; copious white space gives a 
clean look and allows space for kids to ponder both pictures and text. This could 
work nicely as part of a book- or reading-themed storytime, but it will be of most 
use in an educational setting, where it can be shared and referred to as a guide.  JH
miurA, tAro The Big Princess; written and illus. by Taro Miura; tr. from the 
Japanese. Candlewick, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7459-5 $14.99   
R 5-7 yrs
In this companion book to The Tiny King, Miura gives the backstory of the Tiny 
King’s beloved Big Princess. A king dreams of a white bird, who promises him that 
he will find a child in the royal garden, but also warns that this princess is under a 
spell that must be broken. The king does indeed find a tiny girl on a little leaf in 
his garden, and his wife puts her to bed on a feather. By the next night, the girl has 
grown and needs a bigger bed—a ring box suffices—but the following night she’s 
outgrown that as well. This continuing runaway growth threatens to destroy the 
castle, until the king notices a shiny black seed in the girl’s bellybutton. When he 
pulls out the seed, the princess shrinks to a more normal—but still tall—height, and 
the seed, when planted, spawns a field of sunflowers. This is an intriguing original 
fairy tale, and the language effectively utilizes the mild formality of a classic tale: 
“The king turned around, and there, perched on a dew-speckled leaf, was a lovely, 
tiny princess.” It’s the book’s tall, narrow trim size, though, and the bold graphic 
design of the digital collage illustrations that really take center stage here. Simple 
shapes of solid colors constitute the figures, and the backgrounds, with vintage art 
elements, photographs, and realia occasionally integrated into the mix. The rosy-
cheeked, yellow-pigtailed princess in her vermilion dress appropriately stands out 
against her surroundings, and a giggle-worthy paper foldout displays her consider-
able height, as she outgrows the castle so that her huge head rises above the turret 
and her seed-studded bellybutton peeks out of a castle window. Share this with its 
companion book or perhaps with Pizzoli’s equally sleekly designed The Watermelon 
Seed (BCCB 6/13) for a twist on the seed/tummy theme.  JH
moskowitz, hAnnAh A History of Glitter and Blood. Chronicle, 2015 [280p]
ISBN 978-1-4521-2942-6 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
The fairies of Ferrum have come to an uneasy truce with the city’s gnomes over 
the years—the gnomes work as the fairies’ servants in exchange for the occasional 
sacrificial fairy, whose flesh is gorged upon by the sharp-toothed, carnivorous 
gnomes. When the tightropers, a race of acrobatic creatures, misread the situation 
and invade to “liberate” the fairies from their supposed predatory oppressors, most 
September 2015 • 41
of the fairies simply flee, leaving the two other groups to battle it out for Ferrum’s 
plentiful resources. Sixteen-year-old fairy Beckan and her three friends refuse to 
leave their homes, however, and the ragtag group falls to turning tricks and other 
unsavory activities to survive in a city under siege. Narrative asides, journal entries, 
and occasional sketches reveal that this is not really Beckan’s story but Scrap’s, a boy 
who is helplessly in love with Beckan but who nonetheless leads her into prostitu-
tion and murders a gnome king, putting both her and her friends’ lives in danger. 
The players here may be otherworldly, but the conflict is familiarly human; this 
is an unflinching look at life in a combat zone, from its desperate bleakness to the 
occasional taunting, almost cruel moments of respite. Scrap’s telling of Beckan’s 
story adds a layer of complexity to the structure and an uncertain but comfort-
ing intimacy with each character; leave it to Moskowitz (author of Teeth, BCCB 
2/13) to make a boy who is both a pimp and a killer sympathetic. A strange and 
satisfying mixture of Holly Black and Francesca Lia Block with its own version of 
a happy ending, this will find an audience with fans of dark fantasies that explore 
the atrocities of reality and the sturdiness of hope.  KQG 
niCkerson, sArA The Secrets of Blueberries, Brothers, Moose and Me. Dutton, 
2015 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42654-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
When her older brother lands a summer job picking blueberries at a nearby farm, 
twelve-year old Missy joins him, promising that they’ll stick together. She can’t 
understand his desire for trendier clothes or fixation on fitting in, though, and when 
he becomes sidetracked by the hijinks of the other teen pickers bent on uncovering 
a rumored hidden field (the source of a blood feud between neighboring farmers), 
the siblings’ relationship begins to crack. Simultaneously, her two best friends take 
a turn toward adolescence, leaving Missy afloat in uncertainty and digging in her 
heels against life’s transitions. As tensions between Missy and her brother, Missy 
and her friends, and Missy and her parents all come to a head, Nickerson’s prose 
offers real emotional insight. An admirable nonconformist struggling to navigate 
the limbo between childhood and adolescence—to accept change, to communicate, 
to see situations and people in shades of gray—Missy narrates in a voice both as 
authentic and insightful. Similarly, her sophisticated epiphanies regarding the work 
of blueberry picking and how it connects her to the larger world remain noble and 
thought-provoking: “Food was growing on a bush. I could reach out and touch 
it. I could touch it before anyone else and put it in my bucket. And what I put in 
my bucket would end up in a store for someone to buy and take home and cover 
with cream.” This accessible, enjoyable novel is well suited for those tweens who, 
like Missy, are balking at life’s crossroads.  AA
ohorA, zAChAriAh My Cousin Momo; written and illus. by Zachariah 
OHora. Dial, 2015 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4011-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
The little squirrels are all excited that their glamorous cousin Momo, a flying squir-
rel, is coming to stay, and they’ve been bragging him up to their friends. However, 
Momo turns out to be awkwardly bashful and he doesn’t play games right: when 
42 • the bulletin
they play superheroes, he wants to be Muffin Man, and when they play Acorn-Pong, 
he eats the ball. The kids express their disappointment (“We should have invited 
Stinky George instead!”), and a sad Momo prepares to head home; fortunately the 
kids realize they’ve hurt his feelings and patch things up, going on to try playing 
their games his way. The story’s setup is more vivid than the resolution, but the 
situation exudes authenticity. The notion of Momo as the cool cousin upon whose 
social capital the little kids have been coasting (“We might have told a friend or 
two about Momo’s special ability,” says the main text above a crowd of kids yel-
lowing “Fly, Momo!”) is plausible, but so is his being just a bigger kid who’s kind 
of shy and homesick. OHora’s familiar thick, linocut-style hatching and saturated 
planes of retro color have an appealing vigor; a few slyly contemporary elements 
(Dad sports an ironic mustache and a fedora, even as he cooks) and details of the 
squirrels’ treehouse lives add interest. Momo’s species-appropriate huge eyes are less 
endearing than insect-like, but that works with the notion that his presentation is 
generally a little odd. Many kids have experienced the visitor whose reality differs 
from the fantasy, and the book could encourage youngsters to work through their 
disappointment to find the value in the genuine.  DS
pAGe, roBin A Chicken Followed Me Home!: Questions and Answers about a Fa-
miliar Fowl; written and illus. by Robin Page. Beach Lane/Simon, 2015 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1028-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1029-8 $12.99   
R 5-9 yrs
Sure, kids may know what to do with a stray puppy or kitten, but what if a chicken 
follows them home? Page treats this appealing fictional problem, helpfully giving 
audiences answers to some basic questions (“What kind of chicken is it?”), providing 
information on chickens and their care, highlighting a few of the many breeds, and 
very briefly covering such topics as food, safety and shelter, gender identification, 
egg laying, and chick raising. Further information on chicken history, physical traits, 
and a chick’s development inside the egg, as well as a short list of resources and 
websites, are appended. The information given here isn’t detailed enough to set a 
kid up as a chicken farmer, but it’s a concise and inviting introduction to chickens, 
and the “chicken followed me home” premise is an amusing angle. The layout and 
digital illustrations (rendered in Photoshop) are simple, with rich, marbleized-
looking reds and blacks stunningly creating the plumage of the tagalong chicken (a 
Rhode Island Red hen). Large figures and clean compositions with plenty of white 
space make this great for group sharing, while the brief text, clear fonts, and simple 
vocabulary will put this within readalone range for older primary-graders as well. 
Families considering embarking on the backyard poultry movement or classrooms 
raising chicks would want to supplement this with more detailed resources, but as 
a very first introduction to chickens and their care it would be hard to beat this. 
In addition, its brevity, striking artwork, and question/answer format will make it 
a winner with the storytime crowd.  JH
pArr, mAriA Adventures with Waffles; tr. from the Norwegian by Guy Puzey; illus. 
by Kate Forrester. Candlewick, 2015 232p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7281-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5 
Whether it’s creating a real life Noah’s Ark or getting her umpteenth concussion, 
nine-year-old Lena is a force to be reckoned with. Trille, the boy who’s her accom-
September 2015 • 43
plice in misadventure, saves her skin more than once—all part of his duty to his 
best friend, though Lena’s biting and dispassionate ways leave him wondering if that 
friendship goes both ways in this tender and funny Norwegian import. A sense of 
expansiveness and possibility pervades this celebration of preadolescent childhood, 
with mishaps and merriment unfolding in well-paced succession. Trille’s large and 
loving family, complete with a permissive, fun-loving grandpa and Grandpa’s waffle-
making sister, Auntie Granny, provide a sense of security, making it possible for 
characters and audience alike to embrace exuberance and grapple with grief when 
a beloved character dies. A playful yet sweet story in the tradition of E. Nesbit’s 
The Treasure Seekers, this well-observed novel nimbly explores the balance of friend-
ships and the fear and longing that hides beneath the most prickly personalities as 
it celebrating old-school scrapes and the rewards of mutual best friendship.  AA
pAtent, dorothy hinshAw The Call of the Osprey; illus. with photographs by Wil-
liam Muñoz. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015 80p (Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 978-0-544-23268-6 $18.99   
R Gr. 5-9
To help determine the health of a river, study the birds that nest on its banks. At 
the largest Superfund cleanup site along the Clark Fork River in Montana, the 
Montana Osprey Project monitors the raptors that, at the top of their food chain, 
feed on fish they catch in the river—fish that eat the bottom feeders which, in 
turn, are likely to have been contaminated by heavy metals from mining runoff 
dating back to the nineteenth century. These toxins accumulate on the way up 
the food chain, and therefore the concentration found in the osprey is a good 
indicator of the state of the river and the efficacy of the cleanup. Patent joins the 
scientists who safeguard the osprey nests (the bird frequently nest near electrical 
wires), install webcams used for scientific study and community engagement, and, 
most importantly, briefly capture the birds to gauge their health and to equip them 
with GPS locators to track their migration patterns. There are many threads to 
this particular story in the Scientists in the Field series, and Patent and the book’s 
designer do their best to keep the narrative rolling, while sidebars expand upon 
issues from bird migration to mining, DDT to Superfund sites. Readers who prefer 
to shortcut straight to the birds themselves will be particularly pleased not only 
with the myriad photographs but also with inserts on the nesting pairs (Stanley and 
Iris, and Ozzie and Harriet), tracked by the webcam as they mated and raised their 
chicks. Resources for information on ospreys, western mining, river cleanup, bird 
webcams, and advocacy organizations; a glossary; and an index are included.  EB
pizzoli, GreG Templeton Gets His Wish; written and illus. by Greg Pizzoli. Dis-
ney Hyperion, 2015 [48p]
ISBN 978-1-4847-1274-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Young cat Templeton has had it with his family: his mom is grumpy, his dad is 
cranky, and his little brothers frequently help themselves to his best toys. When he 
sees a magazine ad for a wish-granting magic diamond, he quickly sends away for it 
(using his little brother’s piggy-bank money). With the diamond in hand, Templeton 
wishes his family away and revels in his newfound freedom and autonomy. Being 
alone soon wears thin, though, and Templeton decides to wish for his family’s 
return. A joyous reunion ensues, and Templeton happily returns to a life of taking 
44 • the bulletin
baths, cleaning up, and sharing toys—but he hangs on to that diamond, just in case. 
While the plot isn’t particularly original, there is definite pleasure to be had in the 
wish-fulfillment fantasy of a life sans nagging grownups and annoying younger sibs, 
and the return of Templeton’s family provides satisfying security to the tale as well. 
The straightforward clarity of Pizzoli’s simply told narrative (“Templeton played. 
Templeton sang. Templeton lounged”) is matched by the crisp illustrations and 
the clean, retro styling of the art and the sans serif font. Pizzoli effectively employs 
a palette of tangerine, lime, aqua, charcoal, and white, giving the art an attractive 
of-the-moment retro feel. Use this solid little story in a family- or wish-themed 
story hour, or partner it with other titles by Pizzoli (The Watermelon Seed, BCCB 
6/13, etc.) for an enjoyable author/illustrator study.  JH
pommAux, yvAn Orpheus in the Underworld; written and illus. by Yvan Pommaux; 
tr. from the French by Richard Kutner. Toon Graphics, 2015 53p
ISBN 978-1-935179-84-9 $16.95   
R Gr. 3-5
In this graphic novel version of the Orpheus myth, lush artwork tells the story as 
much as the brief text. The story follows the traditional lines: dreamy Orpheus 
plays his lyre, meets Eurydice, loses her and tries to retrieve her from Hades, and 
then is beheaded by bitter women. Short blocks of text (in small print) and oc-
casional speech bubbles tell the tale, but art is the truly memorable element here. 
Pommaux’s pencil and ink drawings have a formal stillness that’s highly effective for 
the traditional subject. The scenes from the underworld are particularly dramatic, 
with the author/illustrator using dark, rich shading to full effect. The ending is 
a bit baffling in its brevity (clearly the focus in this retelling is the romance, not 
Orpheus’ death), and the pronunciation guides throughout the text would have 
been less distracting as an endnote, but those are fairly minor concerns in what is 
otherwise a thought-provoking, elegant outing that both myth and graphic novel 
fans will appreciate. A map, character guide, and index round out the tale.  AS 
prAp, lilA Dinosaurs?!; written and illus. by Lila Prap; tr. from the Slove-
nian. NorthSouth, 2015 [40p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7358-4022-5 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-8 yrs
In a surprisingly effective literary device, a family of chickens is schooled by a 
knowledgeable red hen on their common ancestry. Improbable as it seems, they are 
descendants of dinosaurs. Each double-page spread features an oversized picture of a 
dino or dino relative, framed by the chickens’ discourse. Confronted with a view of 
Stegosaurus, mother hen marvels at the plates along its spine. Were they ears? The 
rooster posits they may have been fans for cooling. Their chick goes with the idea 
of a backscratcher, and the hatchling just cheeps about great-great-great uncle’s big 
body and tiny head. The red hen, however, has the straight story, and with some 
support from a few lines of text along the bottom of the page, she explains how 
scientists once thought those plates were arranged like roof tiles, but now believe 
they stood upright for heating and cooling. Red hen is admirably up-to-date on 
her info, and although the pictures sport a dopey amiability more toylike than 
scientific, they clearly convey the features under consideration. Issues of feathers 
and coloration, the “Oviraptor” misnomer, probable uses of the Pteranodon’s bony 
crest and Parasaurolophus’ tubelike head gear, and evidence that “birds evolved from 
September 2015 • 45
one of these feathered dinosaurs” are all included in this import (first published in 
the U.S. in 2010), tackling many of the questions that may remain unaddressed 
in older dino books lingering on the shelves.  EB
preus, mArGi Enchantment Lake: A Northwoods Mystery. University of Min-
nesota, 2015 187p
ISBN 978-0-8166-8302-4 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-8 
Seventeen-year-old Francie may have once played a detective as a child actor 
but—despite what her kooky relatives might think—that in no way prepares her 
to catch the culprit behind a string of bizarre murders in her small Minnesota 
town. Nonetheless, when her great aunts Astrid and Jeannette call Francie, who’s 
auditioning in Manhattan, to return to Enchantment Lake because their neighbors 
are “dropping like flies,” Francie hops a bus to the northwoods and discovers that 
the bodies are indeed piling up. A fallen branch, a toxic well, and a mysterious 
snakebite are just a few of the creative ways in which several residents have recently 
bitten the dust, and Francie is determined to find who’s behind it, especially when 
the local sheriff falls prey to a poisoned hot dish. This is very much an updated 
Nancy Drew, with all the appeal and the conventions of that series, including a 
plucky young heroine, conveniently placed plot devices, and a final explanatory 
showdown with the villain; the formula works just as it should here with added 
punch from the quirky cast of secondary characters. Francie plays a very young 
seventeen, and her wide-eyed innocence, along with the book’s gentle humor and 
cozy charm, combine to make a satisfactory mystery that will please fans of Tur-
nage’s Three Times Lucky (BCCB 7/12).  KQG
priest, Cherie I Am Princess X; illus. by Kali Ciesemier. Levine/Scholastic, 
2015 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-545-62085-7 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
May has spent the past three years trying to get over the death of her best friend, 
Libby. When she spots stickers featuring “Princess X,” a character that the two girls 
created together, she is shocked—they had never published any of their comics, 
so no one but Libby and May should know about them. What follows is an epic 
journey involving an online comic with clues left for May, the revelation that Libby 
is alive and hiding, and a murderous kidnapper who will stop at nothing to get 
Libby back. May is lucky indeed that she has a hacker pal, a supportive dad, and the 
assistance of Jackdaw, a gay underground hero of sorts who has been helping Libby 
place her clues and evade her captor. The kidnapper himself is an odd, shadowy 
figure tormented by the death of his own daughter; his relentless determination to 
keep Libby, paired with his exceptional IT skill and apparent brilliance, makes him 
a bit too perfect a villain against which the motley crew of good guys must react, 
but the events still make for pretty gripping stuff. The real stars in this novel are the 
interspersed online comics that Libby created to lead May to her; these purple-hued 
multipage comic strips make all of the real-life heroic quest elements all the more 
believable. Readers will likely swallow this book in a single gulp, and even if all of 
the individual parts don’t quite add up, the whole is compelling and exciting.  AS
46 • the bulletin
rABB, mArGo Kissing in America. Harper/HarperCollins, 2015 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232237-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-232239-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-10
“All this time I’d been searching for true love when I already had it.” That’s perhaps 
a familiar moral, but it’s exquisitely told in this coming-of-age novel of mother and 
daughter relationships. Brainy sixteen-year-old Eva Roth finds her grief over the 
loss of her father bonds her to Will, the gorgeous athlete/popular kid/loner hybrid 
grappling with the death of his brother and his parents’ subsequent divorce. Eva 
especially needs this connection because she has a strained relationship with her 
mother, who has attempted to remove every trace of Eva’s father following his death 
in a plane crash, and who avoids discussing the subject in a misguided attempt 
to move past grief. When Will leaves New York to live with his dad in California, 
Eva is inspired to visit him, roping her best friend into a road trip that gives Eva 
some needed clarity on parent-child relationships and on her hopes for her own 
future. With poetry from Dylan Thomas, Elizabeth Bishop, and Adrienne Rich, 
among others, that punctuate Eva’s feelings, and plentiful humor based on Eva’s 
impression of love from romance novels, this is a well-balanced read that exposes 
readers to weighty ideas and difficult feelings while keeping them entertained and 
emotionally invested. Rabb has done a skillful trick: only after this story ends does 
it become obvious that it wasn’t really about Will or even first love but about Eva, 
her mother, and the many different types of love that exist and that sustain us.  AA
rAvishAnkAr, AnushkA Captain Coconut & the Case of the Missing Bananas; illus. 
by Priya Sundram. Tara, 2015 96p
ISBN 978-93-83145-22-5 $16.95   
R Gr. 2-5
Though Captain Coconut considers himself a remarkable detective, his deductive 
and logical abilities are not exactly Holmesian. Nevertheless, he’s the man called 
in for the job when Mrs. Y notices that some bananas are missing from a large 
bunch purchased the day before. The intrepid detective only takes a moment to 
determine how many bananas are missing (though the book is billed as a number 
mystery, the target audience will gloss over the simple math), but he requires more 
time to determine who the actual culprit is; ultimately an unpleasant bathroom 
situation is the final clue needed to solve the comic mystery. Clever Bollywood 
song interludes, clothing cues, and the rich, brown shades used for the characters 
will give the audience all they need to place this graphic novel in the book’s home 
country of India. The bold and unusual color choices throughout, paired with the 
collage panels, make this a true visual treat, and the subtle, dry humor will keep 
older readers amused as they pore over the sophisticated illustrations. This is the 
first graphic novel in what will be a series; readers will almost certainly find that 
Captain Coconut is worth another read when the next one comes around.  AS
reeve, philip Cakes in Space; illus. by Sarah McIntyre. Random House, 
2015 211p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38795-8 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38792-7 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38794-1 $9.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Astra can’t even think about tucking herself into her sleeping pod on a spaceship 
September 2015 • 47
for 199 years without a decent snack to tide her over. After she gives the food 
machine the daunting task of making the ultimate cake, however, she’s sent to 
bed before she can enjoy the result. When Astra awakes (early, so no one else is 
up), frenzied work robots are trying to ward off sentient monster cakes (the food 
machine has continued to evolve the definition of “ultimate”); additionally, a group 
of alien scavengers assumed the pods contained dead people and have arrived to 
steal whatever spoon-like objects they can find. This British import is goofy fun 
from the first page, and Astra, a perfect mix of ingenious, precocious, and excitable, 
will grab readers right away. Frequent full-page and spot illustrations show off the 
imaginative aliens, robots, and cakes, reinforcing the campy 1960s sci-fi vibe with 
the orange hues and big, clunky machinery. Readers will undoubtedly finish the 
book feeling like they’ve had a ridiculous, satisfying adventure and wishing they 
could have just one try at the Nom-O-Tron to create their own perfect snack.  AS
rhodes, Jewell pArker Bayou Magic. Little, 2015 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-22484-0 $17.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-22486-4  $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Like her sisters before her, ten-year-old Maddy has been summoned from their New 
Orleans home to visit their mysterious Grandmère in the Bon Temps bayou. After 
hearing tales of outhouses and ghosts, Maddy is understandably nervous about 
visiting Grandmère, but the bayou, its people, and even her mystical grandmother 
eventually win her over. Maddy also discovers that, like Grandmère, she also has 
magical gifts: while out on an airboat with her new pal, Bear, Maddy spies what 
looks like a mermaid, one with dark skin like Maddy’s own. Soon, she realizes 
that the mermaid is Mama Wati, an African water spirit who watched over one of 
the family’s ancestors. As Maddy makes friends, explores the bayou, and develops 
her dream-like skill of interacting with Mama Wati, she feels a growing sense of 
dread. Savvy readers will connect Maddy’s visions of black tendrils in the water to 
Bear’s dad’s occupation—worker on a deep water oil rig. An explosion on the rig 
eventually kills Bear’s father and sends oil spewing out into the Gulf, but Maddy 
summons Mama Wati and her fellow mermaids to help save Bon Temps by creat-
ing an underwater levy. Rhodes’ understatedly poetic language keeps the mystical 
bits enchanting but never overblown. While there is a certain contrivance to the 
plot, the oil spill incident is handled without didacticism, the deaths of Bear’s 
unhappy father and multiple oil-covered birds are heart-rending moments, and 
the pacing is thoughtful but agile. Small, black and white spot art (resembling 
woodcut prints) attractively accent the beginnings of each chapter, and an author’s 
note briefly explains some of the sources of inspiration for this tale. Imaginative 
kids who enjoy immersing themselves in a reading experience will take to this like 
a mermaid to water.  JH
48 • the bulletin
rissi, AniCA mrose Anna, Banana, and the Friendship Split; illus. by Meg 
Park. Simon, 2015 110p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1605-4 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1607-8 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
     Anna, Banana, and the Monkey in the Middle; illus. by Meg Park. Simon, 
2015 [128p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1608-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1610-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
This new chapter-book series introduces third-grader Anna, her beloved dachshund 
Banana, and Anna’s friends Sadie and Isabel. In Friendship Split, Anna is bullied 
by her friend Sadie, who insists she’s entitled to the necklace Anna received from 
her grandparents for her birthday and coerces it from her. When Anna resists, 
Sadie turns on her, and the rift between the two friends grows worse before it gets 
better. In the second book, Anna finds herself increasingly caught in the middle 
between Sadie and new friend Isabel, who both expect her to agree with them and 
take their side. When Anna finally tells the other two that she can’t take it anymore 
(“You’re going to rip me apart!”), the three decide to try a new approach wherein 
they all agree on everything so that no one feels left out, an idea that doesn’t work 
out so well. Although Anna is a likable protagonist, both storylines suffer from 
weak plots and rapid resolutions of long-simmering problems. In the first book, 
Sadie is awful to the point of caricature, and the neat resolution doesn’t match the 
depth of the conflict. The second book is stronger, with an actual discussion of and 
reflection on what the problem is and a mutual effort from all three girls to work 
it out. Despite the plotting issues, the familiar trials of middle-grade friendship 
are likely to appeal to same-aged readers looking for a new chapter-book heroine. 
Final illustrations not seen.  HM
roCkwell, lizzy A Bird Is a Bird; written and illus. by Lizzy Rockwell. Holiday 
House, 2015 28p
ISBN 978-0-8234-3042-0 $16.95   
R 2-5 yrs
In this science picture book for the preschool set, Rockwell guides children through 
the characteristics that distinguish birds from other animals. First, there’s a beak, 
adapted for picking fruit, catching fish, pecking insects out of trees, or gathering 
nectar. Of course, there are wings, useful not only for flying and gliding, but also 
for swimming. And, as many listeners will anticipate, birds begin life in eggs, some 
in a tree, and some on the ground. However, as Rockwell pauses to point out, a 
platypus has a beak, a fly has wings, and snakes hatch from eggs. So what gives 
birds exclusive bragging rights? “Only a bird has . . . feathers!” This baby step in 
observation and classification is well suited to early childhood educational settings, 
with colored pencil and watercolor images of birds that look cheerily content but 
not anthropomorphized. Most pages feature a single observation (e.g., “Feathers 
can stand out”; “Feathers can blend in”), which facilitates pauses for comments, 
discussion, and prediction. Birds are shown in their habitats and are tidily, un-
obtrusively labeled. Limited text in oversized sans serif font may even encourage 
emergent readers to attempt a solo flight.  EB
September 2015 • 49
rosen, lev Woundabout; illus. by Ellis Rosen. Little, 2015 [284p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-37078-3 $17.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-37079-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Siblings Connor and Cordelia have barely processed the explosion at the family’s 
training ranch for bomb-sniffing capybara, which tragically took their two dads and 
their whole lives away in an instant. Off they go to live with their well-intentioned 
but strange aunt Marigold in Woundabout, a place that appears cozily quaint but 
is hiding many secrets. The kids shake things up in dramatic ways, adding newness 
and resistance in a place where routines and compliance have long kept things safe: 
if change isn’t permitted, then nothing bad can happen. The lesson that good must 
come at the cost of accepting change and heartbreak is gently, subtly conveyed, and 
the book effectively expresses the way tragedies can make otherwise sensible folks 
go along with a plan to essentially stop all progress and time in their town. The 
Mayor, the villain who used magic to halt this town, is complex and layered, and 
even he is ultimately a sympathetic figure in a book that explores the complexity 
of life in a startlingly sophisticated, thoughtful way. It’s not all harshness, either: 
there is a hint of levity in the absurd setup and the aunt’s complete inability to 
remember the word “capybara,” and the kids are supported by Gray, a man who 
has never stopped believing his beloved town can awaken. Black and white illustra-
tions, with digital lines that suggest quick ink strokes, suggest all will ultimately be 
well in spite of the tragedies the protagonists have endured, as the kids gaze with 
unflinching determination into whatever lies next.  AS
rosenBerG, liz What James Said; illus. by Matt Myers. Porter/Roaring Brook, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-908-5 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
As a result of a multi-kid rumor chain, the young narrator’s feelings are hurt, and 
she isn’t speaking to her best friend, James. She works herself into a defensive lather, 
noting all the ways she knows she isn’t perfect (“I am not the best speller or the best 
at math”); she then describes how James has reached out, trying to figure out what 
is bothering her (“I’m not sure he knows we are in a fight”), and how she continues 
to ignore him. At the school art show, he says he’s been telling everyone that he 
thinks her painting is perfect, and the protagonist realizes the miscommunication 
that has occurred. This useful and thoughtfully presented story about rumors and 
the fragility of faith in one’s friend deftly handles the emotional range of the situ-
ation, from initial anger and sadness to the security and joy the girl feels at having 
her best friend back in her life. The first-person narration lends immediacy to the 
emotions that will resonate with listeners, and the differing personalities of the two-
some make for an interesting friendship dynamic (she is shy and quiet whereas he 
is a bit of a class clown). Myers’ watercolor and pen illustrations effectively capture 
the contrast between the friends: the girl is slight, with withdrawn body language 
that reflects her sadness, whereas James is a bespectacled dark-skinned boy given 
to big smiles and big gestures. Teachers will want to have this one readily on hand 
for class discussion about the problems of rumors—and of believing them.  HM
50 • the bulletin
rundell, kAtherine The Wolf Wilder. Simon, 2015 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-4814-1942-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Feo has literally been raised among wolves; her mother is a trainer, 
who, when the wolves bought by the nobility of czarist Russia “bite off and eat a 
little piece of someone who was not expecting to be eaten,” readies the animals to 
return to the wild. The czar, however, has decided that the wolves should simply be 
killed, and Feo’s mother’s defiance results in her being dragged off to St. Petersburg’s 
prison by the sadistic General Rakov. Feo and her three wolves—Black, White, and 
Gray—narrowly escape his solders. Feo attempts to make it to St. Petersburg with her 
wolves but soon is forced to find refuge and assistance from strangers—an awkward 
effort for a girl largely raised in the wild. This is an excellent blend of historical 
fiction and heroic quest, and Feo is an endearing and lovable protagonist. She suf-
fers considerable heartbreak along her journey to save her mother, but her dogged 
determination inspires others who have suffered under Rakov’s hand; together they 
turn him from predator to prey. A nice dose of levity is provided by the the book’s 
dry wit (“Toddlers, like wolves, are unpredictable”) and Feo’s sometimes bungled 
attempts to interact with humans (“Sorry. I’m used to wolves. They hug with their 
teeth”). Subtle nods to folklore (Feo disguises herself in a brilliant red cloak to get 
into St. Petersburg) and vivid descriptions of Russia’s icy wilderness give a sense of 
place that is both wondrous and dangerous. Feo’s triumph over Rakov, set against 
the background of Russia’s 1917 February Revolution, is entirely satisfying and will 
have readers cheering—or perhaps howling—their approval.  KQG 
sAChAr, louis Fuzzy Mud. Delacorte, 2015 [192p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99129-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74378-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37021-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Pennsylvania’s Woodridge Academy is beloved by fifth-grade student Tamaya 
Dhilwaddi and now hated by seventh-grader Marshall Walsh, who’s become the 
victim of newcomer and bully Chad Hilligas. When Tamaya and Marshall, who 
walk home together, duck through the dense woods by the school so Marshall can 
avoid Chad, the bully nonetheless finds them, and Tamaya defends them by pelting 
mud in Chad’s eyes. Soon Tamaya notices that the skin on her hand that touched 
the weird mud is breaking out in a disturbing and bloody rash, and when it turns 
out no one’s seen Chad since her encounter with him, she realizes his mud-covered 
face must have begun to suppurate just as her hand has. She slips away from school 
and heads into the woods to save him, and Marshall in turn heads into the woods to 
save her. Interpolated dialogue from a fictional Senate committee hearing explains 
the science fiction element of the story—the “mud” is actually microorganisms 
bioengineered to create power and ordinarily confined to tanks, but they’ve now 
escaped and begun to multiply at a frightening rate. Sachar is a master at compact 
and unintimidating plotting; the school story unfolds with swift authenticity in 
its own right and then becomes tautly suspenseful as the mud’s potential lethal-
ity becomes apparent. Characterization is spare but generally effective (especially 
with Tamaya, who’s beginning to see that virtue doesn’t get you much cred from 
September 2015 • 51
your peers but adheres to it anyway) and the dynamics are credible, if a little over-
explained when it comes to Chad’s bullying. The science doesn’t bear too much 
investigation, but that’s not really the point; it’s the unfolding plot, the centrality 
of the young people, and Tamaya’s conviction that doing the right thing may not 
be fashionable, but it’s important.  DS
sAuer, tAmmi Ginny Louise and the School Showdown; illus. by Lynn Mun-
singer. Disney Hyperion, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-4231-6853-9 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
Truman Elementary is plagued by some rootin’, tootin’ troublemakers who turn an 
ordinary classroom into the scene of their crimes. Along comes perky little hedgehog 
Ginny Louise (“Ginny Louise did not scowl. She did not growl. And she warmed 
the heart of her teacher”), who cheerfully mishears her rogue classmates’ threats as 
invitations and gets down to sunny business. She drags them skipping across the 
playground and perkily returns to their owner the toys the dastardly pack had bul-
lied off a little kid. When Make-My-Day May tries to menace Ginny Louise with 
a showdown, GL takes it in as a hoedown and starts up a chirpy little ditty about 
the wonders of May (“I love her more than chocolate cake”), and finally May and 
Co. yield to the irresistible force and join in the dancing. This is an interesting 
departure from the more common bullying/interpersonal dilemma story, and the 
colorful text (“This scowly, growly crowd grew badder and badder”) and flavorful 
dialogue (“Yer sweetness makes me seasick!”) provide delicious opportunities for 
readaloud theater. When it comes to personable furry animals, Munsinger is in a 
league of her own; the line and watercolor classroom of critters (there’s a fox, a rat, 
a squirrel, a pig, a rabbit, and both red and gray squirrels) are adorable while still 
being scruffy, and their charm and the obviously costumey nature of their pirate/
cowboy/superhero getups keeps their threat level comical. Audiences will know 
that real-life dynamics aren’t so simple, but it’s a sweet and funny reminder that 
peer pressure can go both ways.  DS
sCAnlon, liz GArton The Great Good Summer. Beach Lane/Simon, 
2015 218p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1147-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1149-3 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
It’s a rare book that can discuss faith without verging into the preachy and contem-
plating the nature of God while acknowledging some people’s lack of belief—all in 
the voice of an earnest, honest twelve-year old girl. Scanlon manages it in this story 
of Ivy Green, whose world has turned upside down following her mother’s sudden 
departure with a holy rolling preacher, elegantly and non-judgmentally addresses 
belief and non-belief while keeping its focus squarely on the power and mystery 
of human relationships. When narrator Ivy and her classmate, the science-minded 
Paul, concoct a plan to leave their small Texas town and track down Ivy’s mother in 
the Florida panhandle, Ivy struggles to confront the complicated emotions that arise 
within the intricate bonds of family and friendship. She also learns about herself 
and her own strength of character, and the sympathetic and engaging portrayal 
of Ivy avoids advancing a moral and instead celebrates her personal revelations. 
Heartfelt in content and authentic in tone, this will resonate with kids questioning 
their parents, God, or both.  AA
52 • the bulletin
sChiffer, miriAm B. Stella Brings the Family; illus. by Holly Clifton-
Brown. Chronicle, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-4521-1190-2 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Stella, who lives with her two dads, has no mother to bring to the school Mother’s 
Day celebration, and she’s not sure whom to bring. Her classmates try to help her 
by asking questions (“Who packs your lunch?” “Who reads you stories?” “Who 
kisses you when you are hurt?”). As a result, Stella decides to invite all the people 
who care for her: her two dads, her grandmother, her aunt, her uncle, and her cousin 
(“Stella had the biggest crowd of all”). There is nothing didactic in Stella’s tale; it is 
simply the story of a little girl faced with a problem and who, with a little help from 
understanding classmates, comes up with a working solution. It’s implausible that 
Stella’s teacher would not be familiar with and thereby sensitive to Stella’s family 
structure by that point in the school year (and she also wouldn’t be blind to her 
student’s week-long distress), but overall the story matter-of-factly validates a variety 
of family structures. Clifton-Brown’s watercolor illustrations, touched with tiny 
ink details and colored-pencil-style textures, are laden with warmth and character; 
though the faces are all drawn to much the same template, Stella’s classmates are a 
cheerfully diverse lot, and the school day is authentically lively. Ultimately, this is 
a tender story about the variety of people that make children feel loved and sup-
ported, and it will resonate with many young listeners.  HM
sChneider, roByn Extraordinary Means. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2015 324p
ISBN 978-0-06-221716-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
When young people nationwide become infected with a strain of completely 
drug-resistant tuberculosis, a few lucky sufferers are sent to sanatorium schools like 
Latham House. Seventeen-year-old Lane feels more doomed than saved, though, 
as the mandatory break derails his precisely laid plans for the future. Sadie, on the 
other hand, sees Latham House as a chance to reinvent herself as a confident, carefree 
girl with a close-knit circle of rebellious friends. Lane finds their enjoy-the-now 
ways refreshing, and soon he’s goofing off in class, sneaking off campus in search 
of lattes along with them, and falling head over heels for Sadie. Even life-affirming 
love can’t always overcome the realities of illness, though, and when an unexpected 
act of violence puts Sadie’s life in danger, the couple quickly realizes that now may 
be all they’ll ever have. With its free-spirited romance and terminally ill teen cast, 
this is another of the many recent echoes of The Fault in Our Stars; the ill-fated 
love story is sweetly romantic, and the narrative offers just enough fun and frolic 
with friends to draw readers in before breaking their hearts at the anticipated tragic 
ending. The story’s dual narrators are endearing, as are their quirky compatriots, 
and Lane’s desperate attempts to hold on to the future he’s worked so hard to build 
ring particularly true. Schneider adds a twist to the tragedy and overplays the irony 
somewhat, but readers will likely be too busy dashing away tears to care. A solid 
melodrama that manages not to wallow in pathos, it’s the perfect read-next for fans 
of the sick-lit trend and readers looking for a tear-stained romance. AM
sheA, BoB Ballet Cat: The Totally Secret Secret; written and illus. by Bob 
Shea. Disney Hyperion, 2015 50p
ISBN 978-1-4847-1378-5 $9.99   
R Gr. 1-2
Sparkle Pony wants to make crafts or play checkers or have a lemonade stand, but 
September 2015 • 53
Ballet Cat finds fault with each suggestion because none of them work well with her 
preferred activity, ballet. Sparkle Pony grudgingly gives in but finally comes clean 
with his secret secret: “Sometimes I don’t want to play ballet!” She reveals that she 
loves him even more than ballet, and the final illustration finds the friends happily 
playing checkers amidst glasses of lemonade and craft supplies. While the basic idea 
here is not a new one, this is a perennial kid conflict, and the honesty and support 
that Sparkle Pony and Ballet Cat give each other provide an appropriate model. The 
story is told entirely in dialogue, and Shea injects his own brand of humor into the 
text (“Is the secret that you are not so great at ballet? That is not a very secret secret, 
Sparkles”); additionally, the font size is effectively varied to indicate emotion, with 
smaller print used in moments of worry or sarcastic acquiescence and larger print 
indicating excitement or frustration. Shea’s illustrations, with childlike draftsman-
ship in bold, crayon-like outlines and candy hues of pink, purple, turquoise, and 
bright green, humorously underscore the emotional terrain. The vocabulary and 
somewhat lengthier text make this a step up from Willems’ Elephant & Piggie series 
in terms of difficulty, and primary-grade readers ready for that challenge will take 
to this like Ballet Cat to a pirouette.  JH
shreve, susAn The Search for Baby Ruby. Levine/Scholastic, 2015 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-41783-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-82572-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
It’s an indignity when twelve-year-old Jess is asked at the last minute to miss out 
on her sister’s wedding rehearsal dinner to stay in the hotel room and babysit her 
infant niece, Ruby. It’s a horror when Jess emerges from the bathroom after a pro-
tracted session with the bride-to-be’s dress and makeup to find Ruby gone. Panicked 
Jess ropes in her other sister Teddy, a sympathetic ally, and goes off in search of 
Ruby herself, believing that if she solves the crime she’ll be forgiven for the lapse 
that allowed it to happen. The sleuthing/suspense genre is usually an adult one 
for Edgar-winner Shreve, who in children’s lit is a familiar creator of well-honed 
domestic fiction. The mystery here is accompanied by some astute observations 
about character and familial dynamics (Jess, for instance, “played the part of the 
good daughter in the O’Fines family the way Teddy played the part of the bad 
one”). That shrewdness about humanity helps mitigate the deeply implausible 
aspects of the crime story, from the cops’ allowing Teddy and Jess to take charge 
to Jess’ being abducted as well. Ultimately, Jess is so sympathetic and her plight of 
responsibility gone wrong so palpable to young readers that they’ll overlook the 
plot holes to cheer her on.  DS
sieGAl, idA Emma Is on the Air: Big News!; illus. by Karla Peña. Scholastic, 
2015 [128p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-68693-8 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-68692-1 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-68694-5 $4.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Eight-year-old Emma wants to be famous, like the glamorous reporter on the eve-
ning news. When classmate Javier finds a worm on his hamburger at lunch, Emma 
knows she has her big story, and with the help of Papi (her Dominican father, a 
newspaper reporter), she records a newscast, which she uploads to her school’s 
54 • the bulletin
online bulletin board. From there, Emma conducts interviews with classmates 
and school staff to get to the bottom of the “worm-burger” mystery. Eventually, 
Emma digs up the truth when she learns that Javier had a cardboard carton of 
dirt from the school garden next to the cardboard carton with his hamburger in 
it, and inadvertently set his hamburger down in the wrong carton. Emma’s final 
newscast saves the school’s lunchroom staff from the health inspector’s wrath and 
Emma is overjoyed that her reports not only made her “famous” at school but 
also helped people. Emma’s repeated clamoring for fame can get a bit tedious, she 
and her classmates are fairly one-note characterizations, and the monochromatic 
digital illustrations are generically cartoonish. Also, the mystery’s solution is overly 
convenient and unbelievable (wouldn’t a kid notice if he had set his burger in a box 
of dirt, or at least realize it after he’d found a worm on his burger?). Still, Emma’s 
spunk and persistence are appealing, and the book is instructive about news report-
ing. Budding newscasters and detectives will enjoy this the most, and they may 
want to follow this new series.  JH
silverA, AdAm More Happy Than Not. Soho Teen, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-61695-560-1 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
In the Bronx of the near future, the Leteo Institute is happy to help things worth 
forgetting be forgotten. Aaron has heard that the memory-relief procedure improved 
a friend’s life, and he’s certainly had his own share of hardships: he was the first 
to find his father, who committed suicide, and he and his family are struggling to 
get by in a one-bedroom urban apartment. It isn’t, however, until Aaron, officially 
possessed of a great girlfriend, finds his strong, unrequited feelings for another boy 
so painful that he considers the procedure for himself. From there, the novel takes 
an unexpected, complex turn that Silvera ably constructs, resulting in a sharp tonal 
shift from sci-fi exploration to the melancholy, authentically conveyed pain of teen 
realism, even while it is futuristic science that is driving the plot. It is refreshing how 
effortlessly the author works in cultural and ethnic references to convey, without a 
hint of awkwardness, that this is a diverse cast of characters. Sharp social commen-
tary about bullying, homophobia, and myriad potentially devastating impacts of 
poverty is present but not overwhelming. In the end, readers are left with a gripping 
story about one memorable teen, and if it also leaves them pondering how his life 
might have been different if various elements had been improved, that is likely the 
exact takeaway intended.  AS
silvey, AnitA Untamed: The Wild Life of Jane Goodall. National Geographic, 
2015 [96p] illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-1519-0 $28.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-1518-3 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Middle graders who were introduced to scientist Jane Goodall way back in their 
primary years through picture books by Jeannette Winter (The Watcher, BCCB 
4/11) or Patrick McDonnell (Me . . . Jane, BCCB 4/11) may now be ready for a 
more in-depth look at the woman whose observations radically changed the way 
humans view their chimpanzee kin. Silvey offers an enthusiastic overview, explor-
September 2015 • 55
ing Goodall’s animal-crazy childhood; the lucky break that brought her to Africa 
and the attention of Louis Leakey; her groundbreaking approach to observing 
chimpanzee behavior; her career shift into advocacy for the welfare of animals in 
the wild and in science labs; and changes in methodology since Goodall’s career 
began. Although rich in details of Goodall’s experiences in her early years and their 
translation into her professional work, this title is thinner on the particulars of 
her personal adult life, with friends and family given brief mentions throughout 
the text and end matter. An abundance of color illustrations does much to redress 
this shortcoming, though, and kids who are more interested in the chimps than 
in their observer will revel in the intimate, informal snapshots and the “Gombe 
Family Scrapbook” of many of Goodall’s subjects. A closing chapter on Goodall’s 
legacy (possibly a bit premature since she’s still working at eighty) highlights the 
organizations she founded; back matter comprises maps, source notes, reading lists, 
an index, and chimpanzee facts.  EB
sís, peter Ice Cream Summer; written and illus. by Peter Sís. Scholastic, 
2015 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-73161-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
A boy happily reports his summer doings to his grandfather in this amusingly 
broad-ranging treatment of ice cream. Our narrator dutifully reads every day (the 
menu at the ice cream place) and practices his math (when you have 10 scoops 
and 7 fall, how many do you have left?); at camp he makes maps (with sundae 
ingredients as the locations) and goes on field trips (the Statue of Liberty’s torch 
is now a stripey soft-serve cone), and of course he studies history (the origin of ice 
cream and its development into a popular treat). The framing concept is slender, 
but it’s merely an excuse to play with ice cream, so who really cares? The Wonka-
esque world where everything is steeped in dairy sweets is genuinely inviting, and 
the several-page sequence with in-art explanations of ice cream’s history from 2000 
years ago in China to the early 20th century is the cherry on top, making dessert 
feel like a historical tribute. The art’s delicate stippled borders and tranquil intricacy 
is classic Sís, here in a particularly sweet and sunny palette. The layout anchors the 
narrator’s text below the art on each page, slyly setting up the contrast between the 
conventional descriptions and the fantastical reality of the boy’s summer. The real 
fun, of course, is hunting through the art for ice cream cones, which infiltrate every-
thing—the boy’s room is thick with them, from the cone-shaped lamps to the toy 
bird with a cone-shaped head, and the encyclopedia the boy pores over has volume 
after volume of ice-cream-shaped subjects. The in-art text and its intricate vignettes 
makes the book best suited for reading (and digging through the illustrations) alone, 
but art-loving and ice-cream mad kids may also enjoy sharing this with an adult. 
The copyright page includes a brief note and a few ice cream–related sources.  DS
56 • the bulletin
solomons, dAvid My Brother Is a Superhero. Viking, 2015 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-451-47477-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
It’s the ultimate indignity: being a true comic book aficionado, a superhero buff 
through and through, and then finding your brother is the one granted magical 
powers while you were in the bathroom. It is almost too much for Luke to bear, 
and his older brother Zack is darn lucky that Luke is mostly able to set aside his 
jealousy and help him learn to be a true superhero, especially since neither has any 
idea what Nemesis, the terrible thing awaiting Earth, even is. It’s a real treat that 
this superhero adventure, complete with capes, discussions of good and evil, and a 
worthy, if unexpected, villain, is also a thoughtful, kind look at sibling rivalry and 
the ways in which it can be both productive and destructive. Luke’s narration is pitch 
perfect, providing just the right amount of snark, admiration, and cleverness to keep 
readers in the loop without resorting to all of the intellectualizing or overthinking 
his older brother applies to everything. A hinted-at sequel will be eagerly anticipated 
by readers, who will want to return not only for the whizz-bang superhero stuff but 
also for the memorable and carefully developed sibling dynamic.  AS
spinelli, Jerry Mama Seeton’s Whistle; illus. by LeUyen Pham. Little, 
2015 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-316-12217-7 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
“It was not a loud whistle. Or a fancy whistle. Just a simple, two-note whistle,” 
yet when Mama Seeton whistles it reaches the ears of her four children down the 
block, through the neighborhood, and across town, calling them home. After the 
children grow up and leave home for adventurous careers, Papa Seeton encourages 
his wife to try her whistle once more, and a bit of magic wafts her out-of-practice 
tune to her far-flung children, bringing them back for a much-needed visit. Spinelli 
sets his tender tribute to familial bonds square in mid-twentieth-century America, 
celebrating the era without getting bogged down in sentimentality and instead 
noting with gentle candor that the “old days became the new days” and “time 
went by, as time does.” Pham’s line and watercolor illustrations nicely support this 
clear-eyed look at the bittersweet passage of time; chipper vignettes are amusingly 
threaded together with the swelling red line of Mama’s whistle, with the occasional 
overhead perspective lacing the summoned together. Charming detail extends 
beautifully to the last scene, where the grown Seeton brood whistle for their own 
crew, which in modern America means more diverse but no less happy families. 
While the empty-nest trope will appeal to adults more than kids, youngsters will 
understand both the love and the silliness of a family call that reaches even adult 
children instantly, and the book may provide an opportunity for parents to put 
older family relationships into context. An author’s note explains the story is based 
on a real Mama Seeton with a real family-calling whistle.  AA
sprAdlin, miChAel p. Into the Killing Seas. Scholastic, 2015 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-72602-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-72603-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Patrick and his younger brother, Teddy, have been separated from their parents ever 
September 2015 • 57
since the Japanese invasion of the Philippines; the boys were evacuated to Guam, 
but over three years have passed with no word of the parents’ whereabouts. Now in 
July of 1945 the boys seize the opportunity to stow away on a ship headed toward 
the Philippines—the USS Indianapolis. Readers drawn by the cover art will know 
sharks are involved, but many who have not yet studied World War II may not 
realize that this is based on a military tragedy involving the most vicious shark at-
tack in history, which Patrick and Teddy end up in the middle of (and eventually, 
as Patrick’s retrospective narrative indicates, survive it). The boys’ backstory, rapidly 
dispatched in a single chapter, is barely plausible, but it functions mainly as a device 
to put the pair on a raft in shark-infested waters, and the historical event—with its 
grisly death count—enhances the you-are-there thrills. If warding off sharks and 
desperate survivors with a stick and nail from the disintegrating raft isn’t dramatic 
enough, Spradlin adds a couple of further twists. Teddy has become an elective 
mute prone to hysterical outbursts since being separated from his parents, and their 
raftmate, Benny, a Marine who has buoyed Patrick’s spirits throughout the ordeal, 
is not who he seems. An appended interview with the author fills in some historical 
background, but even if readers don’t come away with in-depth knowledge of the 
war in the Philippines, they will definitely remember the Indy.  EB
steAd, reBeCCA Goodbye Stranger. Lamb, 2015 304p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99098-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74317-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98085-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
Seventh-grader Bridge is seeing changes come to her friendship with Tab, who’s 
discovering social justice, and with Emily, who’s burgeoning physically and enjoy-
ing the attention it’s bringing her. Meanwhile, Bridge’s classmate Sherm (to whom 
Bridge is becoming increasingly close) writes letters to his estranged grandfather. 
Then there’s the nameless high-schooler who, on Valentine’s Day, has been pushed 
beyond her limits by social situations at school and skips, trying to figure out how 
to solve her problems. These three narrative strands braid together to tell several 
concrete stories—Emily’s sexting scandal, Bridge’s growing relationship with Sherm, 
the nameless narrator’s betrayal of a new friend to curry approval with an old one—as 
well as the larger story of challenging transitions. That last theme is exemplified 
in Sherm’s writing, “Sometimes I feel like a stranger to myself too. . . . Is the new 
you the stranger? Or is the stranger the person you leave behind?” The author as 
usual deftly interweaves her plot strands into an organic whole, and between the 
multifocal plot and the exploration on growth and self-recognition, this makes an 
impact similar to Perkins’ Newbery-winning Criss Cross (BCCB 9/05). This book, 
however, more deeply explores mistakes, and forgiveness, and growing away from 
people as well as toward them; where Stead’s When You Reach Me (BCCB 9/09) had 
an overt science fiction slant, this is instead the science fiction of human growth, 
probing the strange alchemy between our past, current, and future selves.  DS
58 • the bulletin
steiGer, A. J. Mindwalker. Random House, 2015 [400p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49714-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49713-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-553-49715-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Lain is training to be a Mindwalker, an elite therapist who uses neural linking 
technology to explore the minds of patients and then erase all that troubles them. 
Steven is a teen who has accepted a legal suicide pill but hasn’t taken it yet. In their 
world, your psychological ranking is the key element in determining your status, 
freedom, access, and abilities, and Lain is clearly levels above Steven. She also wants 
to save everyone, however, which is how she ends up trying to help Steven get rid of 
his memories through illicit channels. The disturbing secrets she finds in his brain, 
though, reveal some truths about Lain’s beloved late father and change her forever. 
The world-building is effective and sharp; readers will have a clear sense of how 
the psychological guidelines evolved into mandates. However, there is a numbing 
sameness to the novel’s events that becomes particularly problematic given the 
book’s length: Lain slowly grasps one new thing about society at a time, Lain goes 
into Steven’s brain multiple times, Lain makes the same mistakes repeatedly. This 
makes for an imperfect novel, but it’s one with undeniable creativity and political 
savvy. Readers who have even a little bit of experience with psychological diagnoses 
or inscrutable treatment plans may find this world chillingly familiar; those who 
haven’t may find the notion of one’s psychological health as a determinant of one’s 
status to be a memorable, disturbing concept.  AS
stone, tAnyA lee The House That Jane Built: A Story about Jane Addams; illus. 
by Kathryn Brown. Ottaviano/Holt, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9049-9 $17.99  
R 5-8 yrs
Other well-to-do young American ladies returned from their late nineteenth 
century European tours culturally polished and ready to get down to the serious 
business of husband hunting. Jane Addams, on the other hand, returned with a 
mission—to transplant London’s Toynbee Hall settlement-house movement onto 
American soil. Chicago, near her own hometown, teemed with immigrants in need 
of nonexistent social services, from child care to English language lessons, from 
free meals to sanitation. Though Hull House co-founder Ellen Gates Starr oddly 
receives only passing reference, Stone capably discusses Addams’ early years at Hull 
House, the mansion she converted into a neighborhood center and encircled with 
related enterprises; the book emphasizes the innovations for which Addams would 
become famous, such as public bath houses, morning kindergarten, playgrounds, 
arts programming, and community kitchens. Brown’s ink and watercolor pictures 
complement the hopeful tone of the text, softening the grittiness of the immigrants’ 
milieu in favor of happy Hull House clients enjoying their settlement house. The 
bands of children, in particular, who gather around Addams’ skirts could be kin to 
Patricia Polacco’s multicultural casts. Stone’s endnote expands on Addams’ pacifist 
activism and her Nobel Peace Prize, opening the door for listeners to seek out further 
material about the many progressive causes Addams launched. A bibliography and 
quotation sources are included, and photographs are appended.  EB
September 2015 • 59
thomAs, shelley moore Secrets of Selkie Bay. Farrar, 2015 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-374-36749-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
The sudden disappearance of the Sullivan sisters’ mother has left the three girls 
bereft. Grief won’t make them money, though, so Cordie, the oldest at eleven, takes 
a job with cranky Mr. Doyle to help ease the financial strain on her beloved father. 
Ione, meanwhile, has become obsessed with the selkies that are rumored to swim in 
the waters around Selkie Bay, an Irish tourist trap that exploits the legend to bring 
in much-needed revenue. Ione insists that the gray seal she has seen off shore is the 
girls’ mother, and she manages to wrangle her sisters onto a boat; the three set off 
and find a mysterious island filled with what appear to be selkies. Mr. Doyle has 
found the island too, though, and he’s intent on getting vengeance on the creatures 
he believes to have wronged him in the past. Thomas gives the usual charming 
seaside locale a bit of grit here, depicting people whose financial stability depends 
on the fickle sea or even more fickle tourists. The girls themselves have a similarly 
rough edge about them, particularly Cordie, who is resentful of her mother’s absence 
and about the fact that role of head caretaker has fallen to her. The book carefully 
walks the balance between realism and fantasy, never quite dismissing the legend of 
the selkie but still remaining grounded in the very unmagical elements of the girls’ 
daily lives. While the truth behind her mother’s disappearance is implausible, fans 
of realism will ponder whether Cordie’s mom and dad made the right choice, while 
fantasy buffs will want to take a trip to the folklore section after reading.  KQG
thompson, lAurie Ann My Dog Is the Best; illus. by Paul Schmid. Farrar, 
2015 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30051-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-6 yrs
A round-headed tot spouts encomiums to his wonderful dog (“He does tricks”; 
“He plays tug”; “He scares away monsters”), but the pup himself lies comfortably 
inert and sound asleep throughout. Finally, the dog wakes up ready to play, but now 
the contented boy has conked out. The boy’s wide-eyed love of his canine friend is 
endearing, and the blend of deep affection and humorously ironic relationship be-
tween heroic description and not-so-heroic dog recalls Lindenbaum’s Boodil My Dog 
(12/92). The simple text and clear youth of the human narrator puts this squarely 
in the wheelhouse of preschoolers, while the humorous irony could draw emerging 
readers willing to decode the low-contrast taupe type. Schmid’s illustrations evince 
their familiar softness—thick, cottony penciled lines create the figures, and gentle 
touches of pale digital color (blue in the boy’s overall, beige for the pooch’s ear and 
saddle spot) add interest to them as they float on creamy backgrounds. Decoding 
the art provides audiences with additional amusement—when the narrator says 
the dog “plays ball,” the pup is curled up into a ball; when he “helps the firemen,” 
a toy firetruck is perched on his sleeping body. Audiences will love being in on the 
joke, and they’ll leap to tell anti-heroic tales of their own pets.  DS
60 • the bulletin
trAsler, JAnee Bathtime for Chickies; written and illus. by Janee Trasler. Har-
perFestival/HarperCollins, 2015 22p
ISBN 978-0-06-234229-4 $8.99   
R 1-3 yrs
One mud puddle plus three chickies (from Bedtime for Chickies) equals a mess, and 
a large pig (oh, the irony) insists that the little birds bathe, despite their protests. 
Once they add more toys to the watering trough tub, they’re happy, but it isn’t 
long before they’re in need of another cleaning, after a fragrant run-in with beauty 
products and perfume. A cow then prepares a bath in a bucket and admonishes them 
to “wash your feathers. Wash your wings./ Wash your feet and other things,” which 
the chickies do (after demanding more bubbles). Their cleanliness lasts only until a 
cupcake encounter leaves them “sticky chickies,” and a sheep sets up a watering can 
shower for the trio. After a bit more soap, the chickies are finally all clean, but “once 
they’re clean and shiny too,/ what will little chickies do?” The answer is, of course, 
jump back in the mud puddle, and after a moment’s consideration, sheep, cow, and 
pig join them: “Woo-hooooo!” The buoyant, rhyming text of this board book is a 
hoot to read aloud and there’s plenty of participation opportunities offered by the 
animals’ washing directives (“Wash these tummies. Wash those ears./ Wash your 
fronts, wash your rears”). The tidy illustrations are comical, and the solid, slightly 
mottled backgrounds, chunky figures, and squiggly black outlines lend a chipper 
homespun quality to the art. The chickies themselves, basically yellow spheres with 
wings and feet, are adorable, especially when sporting headgear (a shower cap, a 
sailor hat, an upside-down cupcake). Toss this in a bath-themed storytime lineup, 
or perhaps devote an entire storytime to the chickies’ various adventures.  JH 
trevAyne, emmA The Accidental Afterlife of Thomas Marsden. Simon, 
2015 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9882-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9886-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
The Spiritualism movement is sweeping across England, and a man named Mor-
decai brings people in droves to his shows as he successfully communicates with 
the dead. Unbeknownst to his audience, however, caged faeries are trapped below 
Mordecai’s stage and forced to open the door between the living and the dead so 
Mordecai can continue to make money. Meanwhile, twelve-year-old Thomas has 
spent much of his life digging graves with his father—until they find a burial site 
that contains a dead boy who looks exactly like Thomas, even down to the small 
birthmark on his face. Discovered to be a changeling, Thomas is drawn into the 
efforts of Deadnettle, an elder faerie, to release his kind from Mordecai’s enchant-
ment and return them to their beloved homeland. Rich historical details combine 
with faerie legend to create an engrossing atmosphere—creepy, ugly, but compelling 
nonetheless. Mordecai is a villain of the mustache-twirling variety and he plays it 
well, managing to be both menacing and a bit of a buffoon. The focalization shifts 
between Thomas and Deadnettle, giving readers a broader view of what exactly is 
at stake as more and more faeries die under Mordecai’s abuse. Thomas makes an 
interesting hero, especially in his initial decision to just walk away from the whole 
thing and in his resentment toward a people he believes willingly gave him up to 
the human world. Readers who’re looking for a quieter but still creepy alternative 
to the boldness of Colfer’s Artemis Fowl (BCCB 7/01) will appreciate this histori-
cal fantasy.  KQG
September 2015 • 61
underwood, deBorAh Here Comes the Tooth Fairy Cat; illus. by Claudia 
Rueda. Dial, 2015 [96p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42774-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
After losing a tooth and receiving a coin from the Tooth Fairy, Cat plots to lure her 
back for a visit by leaving the tooth from a comb under the pillow. Needless to say, 
the Tooth Fairy isn’t fooled, but she does leave Cat a tooth fairy costume, a list of 
deliveries to make, and a helper—a mouse in a similar tooth fairy costume—with 
the promise that if all goes well, Cat and Mouse may get to meet her. Cat and 
Mouse alternate tasks, with Cat handling the treetop retrieval of a squirrel’s tooth 
and Mouse collecting a small gopher’s tooth. Ultimately they finish the list, and the 
wait is over as—surprise—the Mouse disappears in a “POOF” only to reappear as 
the Tooth Fairy. Underwood employs the same setup as her previous books Here 
Comes the Easter Cat (BCCB 1/14) and Here Comes Santa Cat (BCCB 12/14), with 
mischievous Cat dialoguing via picture-only signs with a rather droll narrator, this 
time with additional sign input from Mouse. Cat is a delight, thoroughly and ap-
propriately childlike in action and emotion, while the narrator’s understated wit 
(“Cats are very good climbers, Mouse. We won’t need a cannon”) adds an extra 
layer of humor. Rueda’s sassy Cat, rendered in ink and colored pencil on white 
paper, is a hoot in an aqua tutu and fairy wings, as is the droopy-eared, potbellied 
Mouse in similar attire. Fans of the previous books will want to join Cat on this 
latest jaunt, and those looking for a tooth fairy–themed title will find this a pleas-
ant diversion as well.  JH
vAn dolzer, kristA The Sound of Life and Everything. Putnam, 2015 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16775-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Ella Mae, her indomitable mother, and her aunt Mildred go to Caltech to see a 
miracle: the genetic regrowth of Mildred’s son Robby, who died a few years ago 
fighting the Japanese in World War II, from the blood on his dog tags. Instead of 
Robbie, however, what was generated was a young Japanese man, Takuma. Though 
Mildred responds with horror and hatred, Ella Mae finds herself drawn to Takuma, 
and her practical and compassionate mother brings him to their home rather than 
leave him in the facility. Takuma’s arrival causes considerable rifts not only in their 
immediate family but in their town as a whole, isolating Ella Mae and her mother, 
who feel Takuma fills the aching gap left by the death of Ella’s brother in the war. 
Van Dolzer’s discussion of racism, grief, and the effects of war digestibly emerges 
in Ella Mae’s narration of the emotional chaos around her, and the tidbits about 
the ongoing scientific discovery of DNA structure (Linus Pauling even has a cameo 
appearance) provide an intriguing but light-handed backdrop. Ella Mae’s tender, 
serious story is an approachable and meaningful coming of age tale that has con-
nections not only to classroom history lessons but to modern racial tensions and 
their impact on our communities; she’s a brave character well poised to inspire 
brave discussions.  AA
62 • the bulletin
vAuGhAn, m. m. Six. McElderry, 2015 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2069-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2071-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Former Londoner Parker isn’t happy in New York, even if his father and sister, 
Emma, seem to like their new home just fine. Parker’s dad spends long hours at 
work, and the three stay in touch via a special telepathy device designed to improve 
communication with Emma, who is deaf. Dad is clearly hiding some dark secrets, 
though, and there may even be a connection with his missing wife and the new 
company for which he works. Parker and his sis realize things are serious when their 
dad disappears, and they are determined to save him, even if they can’t find many 
adults to help. The bad guys are satisfyingly bad, building a “perfect” planet for 
the über-rich and using brilliant humans as unwilling minds behinds the technol-
ogy. Similarly, the good guys are a scrappy group of oddballs who come together 
to try to save the day; readers will find at least a couple with whom they will likely 
strongly identify. The ending is unexpected but still undoubtedly happy, and it 
might open questions about realism, expectations, and what’s most important when 
you might lose everything.  AS
venditti, roBert Attack of the Alien Horde; illus. by Dusty Higgins. Simon, 
2015 [304p] (Miles Taylor and the Golden Cape)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0542-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0556-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Miles is really just trying to get through seventh grade; he has no aspirations beyond 
surviving bullies and attaining an unattainable girl. When Gilded, the one and 
only true superhero Earth knows, is fatally wounded in front of Miles, however, 
he charges Miles with taking the superhero’s golden cape and the accompanying 
power and responsibility that comes with it. It turns out the fabric itself imparts 
superpowers, and Miles must quickly learn how to use them to solve natural and 
human-created disasters as well as defeat an ominous alien group that is headed 
to destroy Earth. Thank goodness Miles has one friend, the well-informed and 
organized Henry, who helps him keep everything together, and who is enough of 
a comics buff that he can spot trends, tropes, and historical hints from old Gilded 
comics. The villains in this novel (first in a planned series) are a bit cartoonish, but 
their impressively long-running devotion to demolishing all golden capes in the 
universe and their startling destructive force make them ominous. Pair this with 
Solomons’ My Brother Is a Superhero (reviewed above) for two looks at kids who 
suddenly get powers they never dreamed of. Interspersed black and white comic 
strips progress the story and effectively break up the text.  AS
verniCk, Audrey First Grade Dropout; illus. by Matthew Cordell. Clarion, 
2015 32p
ISBN 978-0-544-12985-6 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
“There is no way I can go back to Lakeview Elementary School tomorrow,” says our 
narrator. That’s because he did something stupid today, something that made his 
best friend, Tyler, laugh; something that made the whole class laugh. It’s the classic 
September 2015 • 63
first-grade mistake: “I. Called. My. Teacher. MOMMY!!!” When he encounters 
Tyler at the soccer field, Tyler not only doesn’t snicker but is delighted to drop out 
too; his promise that the two can work on their “junk shots” (Tyler’s malapropism 
of “jump shots”) is an ice-breaking goof, and the pair guffaw together over their 
blunders. The amusingly brassy and exaggerated text is clever, deploying hyperbole 
to make a genuinely humiliating situation into something kids can chuckle at with 
sympathy. It also places the narrator’s experience of being laughed at in a larger 
context where everybody’s been the laugher as well as the laughee, both of which 
are common occurrences at the age where kids are excited about mastery but fre-
quently miss the mark. Cordell’s line and watercolor illustrations have a rakish and 
Quentin Blake-ish charm; the protagonist is a humbled young sophisticate rather 
than a little kid, and the visual interpretations, such as the marching band full of 
musicians loudly guffawing at his gaffe, will ring emotionally true to youngsters 
who’ve experienced similar embarrassments. There’s obvious use potential as well 
as pleasure in this title that humorously teaches a crucial lesson: mistakes happen 
to everybody, and we survive.  DS
vinCent, rAChel The Stars Never Rise. Delacorte, 2015 361p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99153-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74417-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38393-6 $10.99   
R Gr. 8-10
Nina has been trying to keep her sister safe and her useless mother out of the way, 
but once she learns that her mother is actually a soul-sucking demon that has been 
carefully biding its time for years, even her best plans aren’t really going to cut it. 
In this dystopian world, demons are real, as are some who can defeat them. What 
is fake are the church-sanctioned exorcists, who are useless at best and mostly 
murderously intent on keeping the Church in power at any cost; that’s the way it’s 
been for decades since the world as it was known became a losing battle against the 
clever, evil demons. Nina’s teen hormones must be impressively strong indeed, as 
romance still manages to emerge, even with the whole mommy-demon, church-
out-to-kill-you, scarce-resources-in-the-world thing going on. Vincent manages to 
make it all plausible, however, and the gritty world is compellingly presented, with 
hints of what used to be and what is likely to come doled out carefully in descrip-
tions and dialogue. Readers up for a challenging look at the ways in which religion 
can be twisted to become an enemy will find much to consider in this novel.  AS
wAlton, will Anything Could Happen. Push/Scholastic, 2015 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70954-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70955-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 9-12
Fifteen-year-old Tretch is in love with his best friend, Matt, even though Matt is 
clearly straight. Since Matt’s fathers are gay, Tretch knows that coming out won’t 
end the friendship, but he still doesn’t want to risk it. Instead, he goes along with 
whatever Matt wants to do, from tagging along on a date with a girl Matt likes, 
to double-dating with a girl who is obviously interested in Tretch. Meanwhile, 
he fantasizes, and worries, and dances. Matt is certainly lovable, if a bit hard to 
picture as a character; his dialogue settles somewhere between emotionally intense 
and cornball, and his frequent physically affectionate gestures with Tretch make it 
64 • the bulletin
easy to see why Tretch might be attracted to him. However, the plotting falls short 
of coherent. Random incidents follow one another, punctuated by stilted dialogue 
and choppy scenes that neither flow into one another nor connect thematically. For 
instance, after thinking about his great-uncle, a Vietnam vet who took his own life, 
Tretch goes out to stargaze on a frozen lake in the middle of the night and falls in, 
only to be rescued by his father, who happened to follow him. Later, the boys are 
called on to help Tretch’s squeamish farmer grandfather deliver a breech calf in the 
middle of the night, Tretch makes up with a homophobic bully by yelling at him 
for smoking, and he then cuts a fine rug at a New Year’s Eve dance after coming out 
to his date. It’s hard to tell whether the bumpy dialogue is because the characters 
are not realistic or because they are too realistic for art, but ultimately this requires 
readers with a high tolerance for literary and character awkwardness.  KC  
weinGArten, lynn Suicide Notes from Beautiful Girls. Simon Pulse, 2015 325p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1853-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1859-1 $10.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
Despite not having talked to Delia in over a year, June is devastated when she hears 
that her former best friend has committed suicide. She’s also suspicious, though: 
there’s no way that Delia set herself aflame in her stepfather’s shed, since fire was 
the one thing that scared the normally fearless and fierce Delia. She joins Delia’s 
most recent boyfriend, Jeremiah, in a search for clues to what they believe is Delia’s 
murder. Their investigation uncovers some of Delia’s seedier activities over the 
last year, but ultimately, June’s hunt for answers points toward the one person she 
thought she could trust the most. The book earns its dramatic title, both in the 
plot’s hairpin twists and the portrait of an intimately toxic relationship between 
two desperate girls, illuminated through flashbacks that add dimension to both 
characters. Delia seems at first to be a typical manic pixie dream girl, but she is far 
more clever and manipulative than June gives her credit for. June’s also oblivious 
to her own malleability when it comes to Delia—she is comfortably ensconced in 
Delia’s shadow when they are friends; unmoored but relieved in their separation; 
and guiltily determined in the aftermath of Delia’s death, but never once does she 
realize that Delia is always the motivation behind her behavior. Weingarten is acutely 
aware of pacing—each plot turn is followed by a reprieve that allows readers to 
settle into a new theory about Delia’s fate only to have their assumptions upended 
once again. A taut, sophisticated thriller, this will find an audience with teens who 
appreciate labyrinthine plots and ambiguous endings.  KQG 
willems, mo I Will Take a Nap!; written and illus. by Mo Willems. Hyperion/
Disney, 2015 57p (Elephant & Piggie Books)
ISBN 978-1-4847-1630-4 $9.99   
R Gr. K-1
Tired, cranky Gerald wisely recognizes that a nap is just what he needs to feel good 
again, and he quickly settles into sleep with his blankie and Knuffle Bunny (from 
Knuffle Bunny, BCCB 10/04). In his subsequent dream, Piggie disturbs his nap, and 
Gerald’s grouchy response to her interruption makes her so cranky that she, too, 
wants to take a restorative rest. Her “special buddy” for napping is a stuffed elephant 
(which Gerald finds endearing), and soon both pals are off to dreamland—until 
Piggie’s snores keep Gerald from sleeping. When Gerald throws a fit about not 
being able to sleep and declares, “I am NOT enjoying my nap, Piggie! I am NOT 
September 2015 • 65
napping!”, she counters with “But, if you are not napping, how can I be floating?” 
as Gerald’s dream takes a wacky turn. A page turn reveals further slumberous silli-
ness from Piggie: “And WHY is my head a TURNIP?” (“Good question,” agrees 
Knuffle Bunny). Finally Gerald awakens from his dream, and when the real Piggie 
asks if he had a good nap, he can’t resist replying: “I sure did, Turnip Head.” You 
can’t go wrong with Elephant and Piggie, and parents and teachers will especially 
appreciate Willems’ efforts to put a positive spin on naptime, although this title 
is more likely to induce hysterical giggling than sanity-restoring snoozing. Kids 
will be tickled by the crabby outbursts from both Gerald and Piggie but will find 
particularly amusing the “turnip head” scenes (the sight of Knuffle Bunny and the 
stuffed elephant chanting, “She’s a floating TURNIP HEAD!” will slay them). 
Beginning readers will easily be able to tackle this text, and Willems’ illustrations 
remain a perfect blend of slapstick and simplicity. For double the turnip fun, pair 
this with Thomas’ A Birthday for Cow (BCCB 7/08).  JH
winter, JonAh How Jelly Roll Morton Invented Jazz; illus. by Keith Mallett. Por-
ter/Roaring Brook, 2015 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-963-4 $17.99   
R 6-9 yrs
In this picture-book bio, Winter backtracks through the life of Ferdinand Joseph La 
Menthe, aka Jelly Roll, to speculate on how and why he elevated himself as inventor 
of jazz, a contentious claim, to say the least. His early years are recounted here in 
an enticing series of scenarios beginning “Let’s say . . . ” that fairly beg to be read 
aloud: “Let’s say you had a godmother, and she put a spell on you because she was 
a voodoo queen”; “Let’s say [that godmother] got arrested and thrown in jail, and 
you got tossed in the can as well.” Listeners follow closely in the boy’s steps as he 
hangs with a rough set, teaches himself to play piano, makes good money in seedy 
clubs, and gets tossed out by his family. “And only one thing, just one thing in the 
world, could make the crying stop”—jazz. At this point, Winter takes a stylistic 
turn, quoting and expanding on lyrics from rival claimant Buddy Bolden’s “Buddy 
Bolden’s Blues” (a tamer version, here, than Bolden’s original “Funky Butt”), and 
launching an extended metaphor of jazz as a gumbo stew, before returning to 
Morton’s career. An informative endnote expands information, discusses Jelly Roll’s 
boastful ways in more detail, offers a few adult resources, and encourages kids to 
check out an historic recording with music historian Alan Lomax. The fluid lines, 
golden illumination, and atmospheric silhouettes of Mallett’s artwork provide an 
engaging visual accompaniment to Winter’s storytelling.  EB
woollett, lAurA A. Big Top Burning: The True Story of an Arsonist, a Missing 
Girl, and the Greatest Show on Earth. Chicago Review, 2015 167p illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-1-61373-114-7 $18.95   
R Gr. 5-9
It’s July of 1944, the United States is embroiled in a world war, and it’s steaming 
hot in Hartford, Connecticut, but the Ringling Brothers circus is on the way to 
lift spirits. However, the circus arrives late—always a bad omen according to Big 
Top superstition—and with the cancellation forcing crowds into the remaining 
performances, the July 6 matinee is jammed. The animal act is exiting and the 
Flying Wallendas climbing to their platforms when a flame is spotted, and within 
a few minutes the grand tent burns to the ground, leaving 167 people dead. In 
66 • the bulletin
the wake of the tragedy follows two mysteries: What caused the blaze? What 
happened to little Eleanor Cook, who was separated from her family? Woollett is 
adept at handling both the pathos of the tragedy and the legal and forensic issues 
surrounding the double investigations. The first chapters introduce a number of 
circus-goers and workers, leaving readers to wait in suspense to see who survives 
and who doesn’t. Then she subtly shifts gears as fire investigators and courts decree 
the fire an accident, only to have the case reopened under the confession of an 
employee twenty years later. The Cook family story also shifts from personal trag-
edy to the challenges of making positive identifications among intact bodies and 
those burned beyond recognition. Plenty of black and white photographs from the 
event not only suggest the horror of the ten-minute inferno but also help readers 
interpret the site and its limited possibilities for rapid escape. Readers looking for a 
thorough examination of the tragedy that inspired Janeczko’s fictional Worlds Afire 
(BCCB 3/04) will find it here. Source notes, topical bibliography, interview and 
photo credits, and an index are included.  EB
CorreCTion:
In the July/August issue’s review of Liesl Shurtliff’s Jack: The True Story of Jack & 
the Beanstalk, we incorrectly spelled the author’s name as Shurtl. We apologize for 
our unintentionally excessive pruning and again celebrate Ms. Shurtliff’s fine book.
September 2015 • 67
lArson, JeAnette Children’s Services Today: A Practical Guide for Librar-
ians. Rowman & Littlefield, 2015 199p illus. with photographs (Practical 
Guides for Librarians)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8108-9132-6 $65.00
An entry in the Practical Guides for Librarians series, this book focuses on services 
to young people and offers a comprehensive look at the principles behind youth 
services, the day to day practices of children’s librarians, and challenges and issues 
that often come along with the job. That examination, along with the plentiful 
model programs, templates for storytimes, and other resources, could make this 
an excellent text on which to center an introduction to children’s services as part 
of an undergraduate or graduate program. Larson, former youth services manager 
at Austin Public Library, makes a point to remind readers that while youth services 
focuses on kids, the children’s and teen librarians also serve parents, teachers, im-
migrant families, homeschoolers, children with special needs and their families, 
as well as other caregivers. Because of the breadth of coverage—the book tackles 
everything from creating service programs for babies to partnering with local schools 
to applying for grants—the coverage is at times shallow, but significant issues such 
as building a diverse collection and community outreach are given special care. Each 
chapter ends with a summary of key points, references, and further reading. Aspir-
ing and beginning practitioners will find this to be a solid and valuable resource. 
An index is also included.  KQG
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
68  •  The BulleTin
Accidents–fiction: Graff
Adventure: Anderson; Barry; 
Boecker; Bosma; Brallier; dock-
ter; durango; easton; Katcher; 
Spradlin; vaughan
African Americans–fiction: Frank; 
rhodes
Aliens–fiction: Allen
Alligators–stories: Guettier
Animals: Lewin
Animals–stories: Gerstein; MacIver; 
trasler
Anxiety–fiction: Kinsella
Archaeology–fiction: Gauch
Art and artists–stories: rosenberg
Asian Americans–fiction: Maetani
Astrology–fiction: Lim
Astronomy–stores: Krishnaswami
Athletes–fiction: dominy
Babysitting–fiction: Allen
Ballet–fiction: Charaipotra
Baseball–fiction: Graff
Baths–stories: trasler
Beaches–stories: Catrow; Idle
BedtIMe StorIeS: Choldenko; 
ebbeler; Gerstein; Bartoletti; 
Bond, r.; Krull; Silvey; Stone; 
Winter
Biology: rockwell
Biracial people–fiction: rhodes
Birds: Patent; rockwell
Birthdays–fiction: rissi
Birthdays–stories: Fleming
Books and reading–fiction: Bertman
Books and reading–stories: Messner 
Brothers and sisters–fiction: nicker-
son; vaughan
Brothers–fiction: dockter; Katcher; 
Kuehn; Solomons
Bullying–fiction: Mackler; Mata; 
McKay; Sachar; Sauer
Camp and camping–fiction: Free-
man
Cats–stories: Gerstein; Pizzoli; un-
derwood
Chickens: Page
Chickens–fiction: Jones
Circuses: Woollett
Circuses–fiction: Beasley
Comics–fiction: Priest
Competition–fiction: Charaipotra
Conspiracies–fiction: Baldwin
Crime and criminals–fiction: An-
derson; Barry; Beatty; Bond, G.; 
Bross; Cooney; easton; Frank; 
Heltzel; Lim; Maetani; Moskow-
itz; Preus; Priest; Shreve; vaughan
Crime and criminals: Woollett
death–fiction: Parr; Schneider
demons–fiction: vincent
dentists–stories: Guettier
deteCtIve StorIeS: Preus
dinosaurs: Prap
dinosaurs–stories: Idle
dogs–fiction: Lord
dogs–stories: Berry; Catrow; Jen-
kins; Kennedy; thompson
donkeys–stories: Bell
dreams–fiction: Willems
dystopias–fiction: easton; Lim; 
McIsaac; Steiger; vincent
eating and food–stories: Sís
egypt–fiction: Gauch
embarrassment–stories: vernick
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
SepTemBer 2015  •  69
Environmental studies: Lewin
Ethics and values: Buckley; detwei-
ler; dominy; Frank; Gauch; Hep-
permann; McIsaac; Silvera; Stead; 
van dolzer
evolution: Prap
Fairies–fiction: Moskowitz; trevayne
Faith–fiction: detweiler; Scanlon; 
vincent
Families–fiction: Amateau; Jones; 
Kinsella; Mackler; McKay; Parr; 
Walton
Families–stories: oHora; Pizzoli; 
Schiffer; Spinelli
Fandom–fiction: Katcher
FAntASy: Anderson; Boecker; 
Bosma; Goldstein; Heppermann; 
Lim; Moskowitz; rosen; Solomons; 
trevayne; venditti; vincent
Farms–fiction: Amateau; Jones
Farms–stories: Kennedy
Fathers–fiction: Hardstaff
Fathers–stories: Krishnaswami
Fear–stories: Brown; Jenkins
Fires: Bond, r.; Woollett
FoLKLIKe tALeS: Miura
Food and eating–fiction: Freeman; 
reeve
Food and eating–stories: Sís
Frauds–fiction: trevayne
Friends–fiction: Barry; Benway; 
Bertman; Blakemore; Freeman; 
Gensler; Graff; Harmon; Hep-
permann; Kinsella; Lord; Mackler; 
Margolis; Mata; nickerson; Parr; 
Priest; rissi; Shea; Stead; venditti; 
Walton; Weingarten
Friends–stories: Fleming; MacIver; 
rosenberg; Sauer; vernick
Gaming–fiction: durango
Ghosts–fiction: Gensler
Gifts–fiction: rissi
GLBtQ people–fiction: Silvera; 
Walton
GLBtQ people–stories: Schiffer
GotHIC FICtIon: Beatty
Grandparents–fiction: Beasley; Kelly; 
rhodes; Sís
GrAPHIC noveLS: Bosma; Pom-
maux; ravishankar
Grief–fiction: Lim; rabb; rosen
Guilt–fiction: Graff
HIStorICAL FICtIon: Baldwin; 
Bradbury; Bross; Hardstaff; Kelly; 
rundell; Spradlin; van dolzer
History, U.S.: Bartoletti; Callery; 
Krull; Woollett
History, world: Gauch; Greenwood
Horror: Laybourne; Sachar
Horses: Greenwood
HuMor: Allen; Barry; Beaton; 
Bell; Brallier; Catrow; Choldenko; 
Guettier; Idle; Jenkins; Kennedy; 
MacIver; Prap; ravishankar; reeve; 
Shea; Spinelli; thompson; under-
wood; vernick; Willems
Hurricanes: Callery
Ice cream–stories: Sís
Identity–fiction: Margolis; Stead
Illness: Bartoletti
Illness–fiction: Bradbury; dominy; 
Schneider
Imaginary creatures–stories: Jenkins
Individuality–stories: oHora
Insects–fiction: Lim
Japanese Americans–fiction: Maetani
Jazz: Winter
Journalism–fiction: Bond, G.; Siegal
Kidnapping–fiction: McIsaac; Shreve
Kings–stories: Miura
Language arts: Bell; Messner
Latinos–fiction: Lord; Siegal
London–fiction: Hardstaff
Magic–fiction: Beasley; Boecker; 
Goldstein; rhodes; rosen
Marine biology: Guiberson
Memory–fiction: Silvera
Mental illness–fiction: Kinsella; Steiger
Mice–stories: underwood
Minnesota–fiction: Preus
Miracles–fiction: detweiler
Monkeys–stories: Choldenko
Mothers–fiction: Lim; rabb; Scanlon
Mothers–stories: Spinelli
Movies–fiction: Gensler; Mata
Murder–fiction: Holder
Music and musicians: Winter
MySterIeS: Beatty; Bertman; Blake-
more; Bond, G.; Cooney; easton; 
Kuehn; Lim; Maetani; Preus; rav-
ishankar; thomas; Weingarten
70  •  The BulleTin
MytHoLoGy, CLASSICAL: Pom-
maux
naps–fiction: Willems
natural disasters: Callery
naturalists: Silvey
naturalists–fiction: Kelly
Nature study: Guiberson; Patent; 
rockwell
neighbors–fiction: Mackler
new orleans–fiction: rhodes
night–stories: ebbeler; Gerstein
noise–stories: ebbeler
Pets: Page
Pets–stories: thompson
Pigs–stories: Berry
Pollution: Patent
Pregnancy–fiction: detweiler
Primates: Silvey
Princesses–stories: Miura
Prostitution–fiction: Frank
Puzzles–fiction: Bertman
racism–fiction: Charaipotra; Lord; 
van dolzer
Readers’ theater: Sauer 
Reading aloud: Lord
Reading, beginning: Berry; Catrow; 
rockwell; thompson; Willems
Reading, easy: Amateau; Beaton; 
Brallier; Heppermann; Page; reeve; 
rissi; Shea; Siegal
Reading, reluctant: Bosma
relationships–fiction: Baker; Benway; 
Heltzel
revenge–fiction: Holder
rHyMInG StorIeS: MacIver; 
trasler
romance–fiction: Baldwin; Benway; 
Bross; Buckley; durango; Katcher; 
rabb; Schneider
royalty–stories: Miura
rumors–stories: rosenberg
russia–fiction: rundell
School–fiction: Anderson; Baldwin; 
Blakemore; Bond, G.; Sachar; 
Siegal; Stead
School–stories: Brown; Sauer; Schiffer; 
vernick
Science: Guiberson; Patent
Science and scientists–fiction: van 
dolzer
SCIenCe FICtIon: Brallier; Buck-
ley; dockter; durango; Laybourne; 
Lim; reeve; Silvera; Steiger; van 
dolzer; vaughan
Secrets–fiction: McKay; Steiger
Selkies–fiction: thomas
Ships and sailing–fiction: Laybourne
Sisters–fiction: Cooney; Shreve; 
thomas
Slavery–fiction: Bradbury
Sleep–fiction: Willems
Social justice: Stone
Soldiers: Greenwood 
Space travel–fiction: reeve
SPortS StorIeS: Bosma; Graff; 
Harmon
Squirrels–stories: oHora
Stars–stories: Krishnaswami
Stepparents–fiction: Harmon
Storytime: Bell; Berry; Kennedy; 
MacIver; Messner; Page; Pizzoli; 
Sauer; thompson; trasler; under-
wood 
Summer–fiction: nickerson
Summer–stories: Idle
Superheroes–fiction: Bond, G.; Har-
mon ; Solomons; venditti
SuPernAturAL StorIeS: Baker; 
Gensler
SurvIvAL StorIeS: Spradlin
SuSPenSe: Baker; durango; Heltzel; 
Kuehn; Shreve
tHrILLerS: easton; Holder; Wein-
garten
toddLer BooKS: trasler
toys–stories: Choldenko
trucks–stories: Fleming
voyages and travel: Lewin
voyages and travel–fiction: rabb; 
rundell; Scanlon
War–fiction: Moskowitz
Wishes–fiction: Goldstein; Margolis
Wishes–stories: Pizzoli
Witches–fiction: Boecker; Hepper-
mann
Wolves–fiction: rundell
Women’s studies: Kelly; Krull: Stone
World War I: Greenwood
 
To order or To Join
Call 630.571.4520; visit us online at www.childlitassn.org; or 
write ChLA at P.O. Box 138, Battle Creek, MI 49016-0138.
Not  
child’s play.
R. H. W. Dillard, Editor-in-Chief 
Amanda Cockrell, Editor 
Hollins University
Encouraging serious scholarship and research, 
Children’s Literature publishes theoretically-based 
articles that address key issues in the field. Each 
volume includes articles, essays, and abstracts 
of dissertations of note. Children’s Literature is 
the annual publication of the Modern Language 
Association Division on Children’s Literature and the 
Children’s Literature Association (ChLA). 
Published annually in May for the Modern Language Association 
Division on Children’s Literature, the Children’s Literature 
Association, and Hollins University. Volume 43 (2015).  
ISSN 0092-8208; E-ISSN 1543-3374.
childreN’s literature
Individual and institutional 
subscription is one of many benefits of 
membership to the ChLA.
Library and Information Science:
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books ISSN: 0008-9036 / E-ISSN: 1558-6766
Library Trends ISSN: 0024-2594 / E-ISSN: 1559-0682
Portal: Libraries and the Academy ISSN: 1531-2542 / E-ISSN: 1530-7131
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
To us, the role of libraries and the 
future of information science clicks.
