T h e
B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
School of Information Sciences
by Johns Hopkins University Press
February 2022
Vol. 75   No. 6
75 
YEARS
o
f
 
d
e
d
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
 
y
o
u
t
h
 
l
i
t
e
r
a
t
u
r
e
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
TO ORDER
CALL: 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987   FAX: 410.516.3866
E-mail: jrnlcirc@jh.edu 
or visit us online at
Kate Quealy-Gainer / Editor 
University of illinois at Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s 
Books provides concise summaries and 
critical evaluations of current children’s 
books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-
evolving children’s literature field. Reviews 
give an in-depth look at a selected book’s 
content, reading level, strengths and 
weaknesses, and quality of the format, as 
well as suggestions for curricular use.
Published 11 times per year monthly except 
August. 
Volume 75 (2022). 
P-ISSN: 0008-9036; E-ISSN: 1558-6766.
Annual Individual 
Subscriptions
$55.00 (print); 
$65.00 (online)
Annual Institutional 
Subscriptions
$125.00 (print);
$140.00 (online); 
$175.00 (print & online)
International postage fees apply.
FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH
The BulleTin of The CenTer
for Children’s Books
A Look Inside
T h e B u l l e t i n
of the Center for Children’s Books 
February 2022
Vol. 75 No. 6
181  The Big Picture
 
  Squire written by Nadia Shammas and Sara Alfageeh; illus. by  
Sara Alfageeh
182  New Books for Children and Young People
 
 Reviewed titles include
186 • Just Right Jillian by Nicole D. Collier
187 • Bitter by Akwaeke Emezi
190 •  The Tunnel written by Sarah Howden; illus. by Erika Rodriguez Medina
202 • Storm by Nicola Skinner
204 • Sir Ladybug written and illus. by Corey R. Tabor
207  Subject and Use Index
Explanation of code symbols used with reviews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
 Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
© 2022 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois School of Information Sciences by Johns Hopkins University Press, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218-4363, USA. Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, 
MD 21233-9651, and at additional mailing ofﬁces. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The 
Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363.
Reviewing Staff
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Editor (KQG) 
Quinita Balderson, Reviewer (QB) 
Natalie Berglind, Reviewer (NB) 
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB) 
Fiona Hartley-Kroeger, Reviewer (FHK) 
Melanie Kirkwood, Reviewer (MK) 
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM) 
Adam McConville, Reviewer (AMM) 
Kiri Palm, Reviewer (KP) 
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS) 
Aaren Tucker, Reviewer (AT)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
Office Staff
Anna Wiegand, Editorial Assistant
Subscription rates
For up-to-date pricing information, please visit the journal webpage at: http://www.press.jhu.edu/
journals/subscribe. Subscription checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. 
All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising. Or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Kate Quealy-Gainer, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.ischool.illinois.edu
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Sara Alfageeh, from Squire © 2022, used by permission of HarperCollins. 
February 2022 • 181
The Big Picture
Squire 
By Nadia Shammas and Sara Alfageeh; illustrated by Sara Alfageeh 
The push and pull of power—who has it versus who wants it—can motivate or 
defeat. For those feeling particularly powerless, the heady draw of becoming an 
insider can be an invigorating promise. But what happens when the promised land 
turns out to be a metaphorical desert rather than an abundance of inclusion, wealth, 
or status? In Squire, a riveting, timely alternate history of the Middle East, Arab-
American Nadia Shammas and Jordanian-American Sara Alfageeh layer complicated 
power dynamics with a refreshing visual and cultural setting, which stands out in a 
graphic novel field long dominated by white authors and protagonists. 
The Ornu people are considered outsiders in Bayt-Sajji, afforded few 
resources as second-class citizens and easily identifiable by tattoos on their bodies. 
Headstrong and driven to rise above her currently limited circumstances, Aiza aims 
to join a military training program that promises to turn squires into Knights and 
earn her own citizenship in the process. She is surprised her protective parents let 
her go, but they still warn her to hide her tattoos—they worry (correctly) she will 
not be given a fair chance if people know her background. At first, training is all 
she ever hoped for, but things quickly go awry; there are potentially deadly political 
machinations going on in this training camp and Aiza is soon caught in the middle 
of it all, exposed as Ornu and in grave danger.
The lush art strengthens and augments the text rather than mirroring 
it: vibrant color, carefully placed shadows, and judicious use of proportions and 
size between characters deftly convey emotion. Rich crimson and ochre shades are 
particularly effective with the usually wordless, violent battle scenes, heightening 
tension with dramatic colors that reflect the life-threatening action. Meanwhile, 
fluid perspectives and paneling bring more subtleties; for example, Aiza is smaller 
or larger within a panel depending on her emotional and physical vulnerability. 
That vulnerability, along with her righteous anger and relentless ambition, 
make Aiza the heartbeat of this novel, but Shammas and Alfageeh also develop 
nuanced secondary characters who represent good, evil, and a discomforting mix 
of both. The bad guys have reasons and histories, the good guys have certainly 
made their share of mistakes, and the assumed simplicity of haves and have nots 
is revealed to be complexly entrenched in a social hierarchy not so easily toppled. 
Exceptional end matter rewards curious readers with notes from the author 
and illustrator about their own identities, contextualizing the cultural backgrounds 
and knowledge that give the story such indelible roots. Formation details, sample 
illustrations, shared communications between author and illustrator, and an  
182 • The Bulletin
New Books for Children and Young People
Aldridge, ethAn M. The Legend of Brightblade; written and illus. by Ethan M. 
Aldridge. Quill Tree/HarperCollins, 2022 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062995537 $23.99
Paper ed. IBSN 9780062995520 $13.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062995544 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Alto has grown up with the stories of how his heroic mother and her companions  
united a kingdom and slayed a ferocious enemy. Unfortunately, at least as far as 
Alto is concerned, his mother’s current approach of slow and careful diplomacy 
is no way to change the world, so he runs away, leaving his duties as prince and 
betting his and the kingdom’s future on his magical music talents. Alto is certain 
at first that he can be a solo hero, the kind other bards will champion in their 
story songs, but he quickly learns the strength of one is limited. It is only when 
he makes two key allies that he can save the day when an alarming new challenger 
to his mother emerges. The graphic novel format is brilliantly deployed here, 
with perspective and palette coming together to capture the mystical weight of 
music as well as Alto’s bardic talents. Wordless panels position Alto to reflect his 
control—or lack thereof—while distinct colors are assigned to each character: the 
villain’s instrument, for example, emits a bruised purple shade that swirls around 
with menace as the trio’s blue, green, and red identifiers come together to create 
powerful smoke creatures. It’s a little too convenient that Alto immediately finds 
two staunch friends who temper his impulsivity and complement his own abilities 
examination of how some characters evolved during the creation process are all so 
extensive that readers are essentially offered a mini class on how the seed of an idea 
can grow into a full-fledged graphic novel. 
Reconciling noble goals with the unethical choices required to achieve 
them is a perennial struggle, in both fiction and reality, and Aiza’s journey will leave 
readers with much to contemplate long after they close the book.
(See p. 202 for publication information.)
—April Spisak, Reviewer
February 2022 • 183
so perfectly, but Aldridge establishes this as a world where the worthy have and 
deserve good luck. This full and rich story, told in a scant 200 or so illustrated 
pages, is a treat, and readers will likely be left wishing for more—any bard would 
tell you that’s a great way to end.  AS 
ApplebAuM, Kirsty Lifeling. Holt, 2022 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250317353 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250317360 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Lonny has the power to bring creatures back from the brink of 
death, but only at the expense of his own life: whatever time they gain, he loses. 
Saving a butterfly only costs him a few days, but restoring health to a dying person 
could age him by decades in an instant. This is the key reason Lonny has always 
been hidden away, warned by his father to avoid the nearby town because even 
well-intentioned people may abuse the power of a lifeling, and indeed his first foray 
out confirms those suspicions. There are terrific people too, however, ones who are 
not drawn to how Lonnie’s abilities might help them but are instead just happy 
to know Lonny, telling him he is far more than his power. Secondary characters 
are well-written and carefully developed, but Lonny is the spotlight here: his good 
intentions, earnest curiosity, and optimism even in the face of significant obstacles 
make him an easy protagonist to root for. His quest to understand his place in the 
world—whether being a lifeling is indeed his purpose or just one part of his iden-
tity—encourages readers to understand Lonny’s choices while inviting reflection 
on whether they would do the same.  AS
ArenA, Jen Acorn Was a Little Wild; illus. by Jessica Gibson. Simon, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534483156 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534483163 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Despite his tree’s warning that he’ll surely be eaten by squirrels, our little acorn 
protagonist merrily jumps off the branches, ready to roll to adventure. The open 
world is as thrilling as he thought it would be, and even when he is (predictably)
caught by a squirrel, he enjoys bouncing through the trees with it—until, of course, 
the bushy-tailed creature takes a nibble out of him. Fortunately, Acorn manages 
to escape, only to later be buried in the ground by yet another squirrel. Months 
pass and Acorn realizes he’s put roots down, and soon he’s a beautiful tree, happily 
encouraging his own acorns to go out and see the world. The narrative’s conver-
sational tone has a sassy playfulness, enthusiastically relaying some giggle-worthy 
comic moments (“And if a fox peed on his trunk? He dropped a stick on his nog-
gin”). Autumnal hues dominate the digital art, and saturating tones and dynamic 
compositions match Acorn’s vim and vigor; expressions are spot-on, with Acorn 
mischievously side-eyeing the squirrels, who respond with either a predatory glare 
or pure annoyance. This would pair well with Litwin’s The Nuts: Keep Rolling! or 
serve as a silly start to a nature walk.  KQG
184 • The Bulletin
bArnett, MAc The Great Zapfino; illus. by Marla Frazee. Beach Lane/Simon, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534411548 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534411555 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-8 yrs
Join the crowd, hold your breath, and thrill to the ringmaster’s ballyhoo as The Great 
Zapfino ascends the impossibly high ladder and prepares to make the ten-story Leap 
For Life onto an impossibly tiny trampoline, defying fate “for your entertainment.” 
It’s a feat no rational person would attempt—and it seems that Zapfino thinks so 
too. He’s out of the big top in a flash and on an airplane to a palm-tree lined beach, 
where he snags a job and a dingy top floor room in a Miami-esque mid-century 
modern apartment building, making a new life for himself as an elevator operator. 
He likes the tenants and the tenants like him, and life rolls along until the evening he 
falls asleep waiting for his nightly bread slice to toast and dinner catches fire. What 
Zapfino wouldn’t do “for your entertainment” he now does for self-preservation, 
delighting onlookers as he leaps off the ledge and tumbles acrobatically through the 
air, bouncing onto the firefighters’ trampoline and sticking a perfect landing with a 
theatrical flourish. Apart from some well-placed signage and the ringmaster’s initial 
patter, the story proceeds wordlessly, allowing viewers to pore over the variety of 
elevator riders and their gear and to recognize Zapfino’s air of contentment as he 
settles into a humble but satisfying routine. Frazee’s black pencil drawings capture 
the action in a slightly ambiguous temporal setting, in which elevator operators ply 
their trade and men can be spotted in ties and fedoras, while airline passengers drag 
wheeled suitcases and hipsters carry coffee cups and yoga mats. Slight but delightful, 
this title easily withstands multiple readings, and unprepossessing Zapfino earns 
the big Z on the front of his uniform.  EB
brown, eriK J. All That’s Left in the World. Balzer + Bray, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063054974 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063054998 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Most of the world is dead, victim to a horrifying pathogen, and the small popula-
tion that remains faces a choice between pooling resources or brutally ensuring 
individual survival. Teens Andrew and Jamie find each other by accident, and 
they quickly discover that even in this newly ravaged, untrustworthy world, they 
feel comfortable with each other. In fact, love slowly builds between the two as 
they head south, after Jamie decides to join Andrew on a mission despite Andrew’s 
reluctance to reveal the trip’s true nature. Their romance is endearing and hopeful, 
the world is well-built, albeit bleak, and the exploration of how humanity reacts 
after the sudden loss of society is thoughtful and intelligent. It is disheartening if 
not surprising that this new world’s tiny population contains just as many homo-
phobic, ruthless, and cruel people as our current one, but that is leavened by the 
fact that most people who were kind before remain so, and some folks have even 
evolved into better versions of themselves as they moved through shocking losses. 
It’s difficult to say Andrew and Jamie are lucky, as each lost everyone they knew, 
but love like this—a small ember carefully tended until it erupts into a sustaining 
flame—is rare even when there are millions of people around you.  AS
February 2022 • 185
bryAnt, MegAn e. Ready or Not! Penguin Workshop, 2022 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593226520 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593226544 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
In every realm of Abby’s life, things are changing: Zoe, her cousin and best friend, 
is moving away to California, her stay-at-home mom is returning to the workforce, 
and—perhaps most confusing—her body is changing in all sorts of different ways 
as puberty begins. Things go from bad to worse when her mom signs Abby up for 
the school’s running club instead of art club, and, more disappointing, her letters 
to Zoe remain unanswered. Though Abby wants everything in her life to stay the 
same, she finds perspective with a closer look into her city’s housing crisis and 
ultimately uses the changes she thought would upend her life to make a differ-
ence in the lives of others. Bryant delicately captures the shock, embarrassment, 
and self-consciousness of a young girl at the onset of puberty and writes with true 
compassion for a preteen yearning for independence while still needing emotional 
support. Abby’s inner angst is countered by an authentic representation of a larger 
community struggle, emphasizing the large-scale impact youth can make in the 
world as Abby struggles to help in a direct way with the housing crisis in Winston-
Salem. This could predictably turn into a series for the budding adolescent girl, 
though readers of any gender will connect to Abby’s experience in the rapidly 
changing world of middle grades and beyond.  MK
cAstellAnos, Alexis Isla to Island; written and illus. by Alexis Castellanos. Ath-
eneum, 2022 [192p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534469242 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9781534469235 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534469259 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
The factionalism and violence that followed Fidel Castro’s overthrow of the Batista 
regime has inched ever closer to young Marisol’s tight-knit family. When shots are 
fired at them in the park (possibly partisan payback for their poetry book shopping) 
and an explosion rocks Marisol’s bedroom window, her distraught parents arrange for 
her to take refuge with a foster family in the United States through Catholic Relief 
Services. Soon, Marisol is whisked onto a plane with other dispirited children and 
finds herself welcomed by the Delfinos, an older couple with good intentions but 
few parenting skills. Her room is austere, the kids at school are distant, language is 
a barrier at school and at home, and her parents are far too far away. But time and 
opportunities slowly coax Marisol out of her shell: the school library is a treasured 
resource for her to improve English independently, and the belated arrival of a let-
ter from Cuba puts her mind at ease. Home life gets easier too, as Mrs. Delfino’s 
(pretty hilarious) assistance when Marisol gets her first period brings them closer 
together, and the Delfinos enthusiastically support Marisol’s passion for horticulture. 
Castellanos opens her wordless graphic novel with a flood of color in Cuba, which 
morphs into gray (with discrete touches of blood red that signal an epicenter of 
intense emotion) in Brooklyn and then reverts to color as her life with the Delfinos 
fills with warmth and comfort. A series of “snapshots” marks Marisol’s reunion with 
her parents in Brooklyn and hints about her adult life. End matter comments on 
186 • The Bulletin
inspiration for Marisol’s story from the author’s family sources, historical notes on 
Operation Peter Pan, and a short list for further reading.  EB
collier, nicole d. Just Right Jillian. Versify/HarperCollins, 2022 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780358434610 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780358436386 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Jillian is a brilliant student and an amazing friend, but she’s often overwhelmed by 
her own shyness. Still mourning the passing of her Grammy Ruby almost a year 
ago, Jillian finds comfort in the sea of conformity at her school, though not without 
taking envious notice of Rashida—the prettiest, most popular, and smartest girl in 
the fifth grade. When Jillian’s shyness costs her a spot in the school’s Mind Bender 
competition, however, she embarks on a journey to finally break out of her shell. 
Collier’s treatment of the middle grade years is beautifully textured, expertly weav-
ing together elements of friendship and family with personal growth, grief, and 
the importance of a supportive community. Jillian’s strong and nuanced narration 
reveals her gifts of observation and empathy for others, despite how her shyness 
might interrupt her life. Though many will anticipate the final result of the Mind 
Bender competition, there is settled assurance that regardless of the outcome, Jillian 
has won. A tender tale of self-acceptance and friendship, this title is an excellent 
pick for middle graders grappling with the big questions surrounding identity, 
expression, and the beauty of our different paths of growth.  MK
elliott, l. M. Louisa June and the Nazis in the Waves. Tegen/HarperCollins, 
2022 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063056565 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063056589 $7.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
America has just entered World War II, and thirteen-year-old Louisa Brookes and 
her family are quick to do their bit, especially when they learn that German U-boats 
are targeting commercial shipping along the Atlantic coast near their Virginia home, 
a development the government is reticent to discuss publicly. Louisa’s father and 
two eldest brothers, seamen all, take on riskier military and civilian jobs while her 
older sister becomes a welder in a shipyard. Even college-bound Butler, her closest 
brother in age and affection, agrees to spend the summer helping on his father’s tug, 
earning a little extra to supplement his scholarship. On Butler’s first run, though, an 
ill-advised phone call to reassure Mama that they’re safe is monitored by a U-boat, 
and the tanker they’re accompanying out to sea is torpedoed, killing Butler, injuring 
his father, and sending Mama into a debilitating depression. Now Louisa begins 
to take risks herself, conspiring with a friend to conduct ad hoc surveillance from 
a nearby island, only to be injured by friendly fire from a training base. Necessary 
historical context is delivered through family conversations that are more instructive 
than organic, and the presence of a wealthy and politically influential relative who 
solves many domestic problems is fortuitous, to say the least. Nonetheless, Elliott 
convincingly limns a moment of WWII when an underinformed population naive 
to the unimagined dangers of war on their doorstep was prone to fumble in their 
self-defense. An author’s note is included.  EB
February 2022 • 187
eMezi, AKwAeKe Bitter. Knopf, 2022 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 9780593309049 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593309032 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593309056 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Bitter is in art school amidst the height of societal disfunction, 
and she’s angry at not only the state of the world but also the expectation that her 
generation will save it. She’d rather focus on her art and on a newly forming relation-
ship with Aloe, but all her friends are involved in Assata, the group protesting the 
system. When a particularly brutal protest backlash injures a friend, Bitter draws a 
monster with her rage and brings it to life with her blood. The creature says it is an 
angel named Vengeance sent to destroy the true monsters—police and billionaires 
running society—but its intentions don’t turn out to be as pure as they seem. Set 
a generation before the events of Pet (BCCB 9/19), this novel feels just as timely, 
with its mostly Black cast and escalating protests against an unjust world. Bitter 
is an understandably reluctant protagonist who doesn’t want to give her youth to 
battling the system but ultimately can’t avoid it. The arguments between Assata 
members about the angel’s violence echo contemporary discourse around the means 
of disrupting long held power dynamics; Emezi gives no easy answers to these 
problems, only raising questions that will surely spark lively, thoughtful discussion. 
Though the ending is abrupt, this offers tempered optimism to the teen who, like 
Bitter, feels immense frustration with a world unconcerned about their future.  NB
esbAuM, Jill Jack Knight’s Brave Flight: How One Gutsy Pilot Saved the U.S. Air 
Mail Service; illus. by Stacy Innerst. Calkins Creek, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781684379811 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781635925678 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
On the night of February 22, 1921, hundreds of Nebraskans turn out to watch 
Jack Knight take off on his assigned leg of an aerial relay race—not to break speed 
records, not to win prizes, not even to wow a crowd, but to convince government 
bean counters that newly popular air mail delivery is a worthy investment, despite 
its dangers and its demand for replacement planes. Bitterly cold and already ex-
hausted from flying his daytime route, he arrives at his destination in Omaha only 
to learn that storms and a fatal crash force him to fly on to Chicago. The journey’s 
second leg takes him through a blizzard to a dicey refueling in Iowa City, through 
a fog bank at the Mississippi River, and finally to the welcome sight of industrial 
smoke over Chicago. Esbaum retraces Knight’s night with breathtaking pacing and 
a touch of humor, deftly underscored by Innerst’s equally taut yet waggish mixed 
media artwork. End matter comprises author and illustrator notes that expand on 
the adventure and a Postal Service timeline chock full of tidbits with smarty-pants 
appeal. Expect reader interest to be piqued with the 1920 fiat that “they will no 
longer allow children to be sent through the mail (by train)” and have a copy of 
Michael Tunnell’s Mailing May as a follow-up to this postal adventure.  EB
188 • The Bulletin
FAgAn, devA The Mirrorwood. Atheneum, 2022 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534497146 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534497160 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Her uncontrollable blight—a result of cursed magic from the nearby Mirrorwood—
has forced twelve-year-old Fable into hiding, but she’s found out anyway, narrowly 
escaping a blighthunter only because his daughter hesitated when told to kill her. 
The daughter, Vycorax, is determined to find Fable and right her own failing, but 
the two instead become unlikely (and uneasy) allies against a demon-prince when 
they realize his presence is tied to the curses, beasts, and blighted lands that harm 
them all. Fable, having been surrounded by love and support all of her life, wants 
her curse removed but quickly sees that there are worthier goals at play and that 
truth is swirling grays rather than sharp black and white. Vycorax, however, has 
been raised to be ruthless and punishing, so her damaged self takes far longer to 
accept that she has value and that kindness is as valid an option as mercilessness. 
The deities who have messed up everything with their blessings, curses, and med-
dling make up a delightfully strange supporting cast, and droll humor is brought 
by a bardic skull who loudly inserts himself even when his opinion isn’t asked for. 
Mirrorwood itself is so well-described that the cursed realm itself almost becomes 
a character itself. Realistic fans will have plenty to appreciate, as the girls’ slowly 
building friendship and their struggles to find their own cores independent of 
family influence or enchantments feel just as vital to the novel as the magic.  AS 
Forler, nAn Rodney Was a Tortoise; illus. by Yong Ling Kang. Tundra, 
2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780735266629 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780735266636 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Bernadette’s pet tortoise is old (“practically prehistoric!” she tells her classmates), 
but she doesn’t mind. He’s an ace at staring contests, a decent partner for Go Fish 
(if Bernadette takes his turns), and an unflappable fashion model for dress-up. His 
age begins to catch up with him, though, as he moves slower and slower (even for 
a tortoise) until one night, he doesn’t move at all. In the days that follow Rodney’s 
death, Bernadette walks around in a haze of grief, withdrawing completely into 
her green hoodie. Classmate Amar, however, spots her sitting on a rock one day 
and quietly approaches, asking about Rodney and eventually sharing his own story 
of losing his pet bird. The firm directness here makes this more an authentic ex-
ploration of grief than an assured comfort, and the focus on Bernadette’s ongoing 
sorrow, especially as it contrasts with the bustle of an ongoing world, will resonate 
with readers who have suffered a recent loss or are still mourning one long past. 
Her disbelief at Rodney’s death is especially moving, as she desperately tries to 
convince herself everything is fine: “Maybe he’s just holding his breath to be funny 
. . . He’s such a joker.” The watercolor and pencil art expertly conveys the weight 
of Bernadette’s heartache, as the blues and grays of her room follow her out into 
sunshiny streets and playground, much too bright for her dark feelings. Cats and 
dogs have cornered the market on dead pet books, so this might make a useful pick 
for kids missing non-furry friends.  KQG
February 2022 • 189
Frost, MAddie Capybara is Friends with Everyone; written and illus. by Maddie 
Frost. HarperCollins, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063021020 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Capybara has 4,382 friends, and he’s willing to go the extra mile for every one of 
them: he snags a few oranges for the monkey, gathers sticks for the toucan’s nest, and 
brings lunch to the anteaters, just to name a few of his helpful deeds. He’s shocked, 
then, to find Sloth, whom he has never met and who seems to want nothing from 
him. Sloth stays silent and still amidst all of Capybara’s frantic efforts to prove his 
friendliness, which include bringing a gift basket full of bathroom essentials, carving 
a wooden replica of Sloth, and creating a huge Zen garden. Eventually, however, 
Sloth slowly creeps down the tree to meet an exhausted Capybara and produces a 
kazoo for the “new-w-w-w-w-w friend so-o-o-o-ong.” Like DiPucchio’s Oona and 
the Shark (BCCB 12/21), this is a sweet reminder that friends have different needs 
and wants, and that it’s important to both respect and set boundaries. Fortunately, 
the book’s silliness mitigates any preachiness on the subject, and Capybara is simply 
a hoot. The slick digital art is a riot of colors and motion that tracks his boundless 
energy on every page, foiled by Sloth’s complete stillness and seeming bewilderment. 
This might pair nicely with Higgins’ Norman Didn’t Do It (Yes, He Did) (BCCB 
7/21) for some solo readers’ theater about the pitfalls of making assumptions based 
on insecurities. 
herricK, AMy The Tiltersmith. Algonquin, 2022 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781643750996 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 9781643752884 $15.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Brooklyn winters are rough, and classmates Edward, Feenix, Danton, and Brigit 
are having to slog through a particularly long one that seems to be going on weeks 
after it should have ended. Their science teacher believes climate change explains 
it, but the four teens discover supernatural elements are at play instead, and 
winter will continue endlessly if they don’t discover a way to change things. The 
Lady of Spring has tools to bring about the turn of seasons, and now the friends 
must race against Tiltersmith, their creepy new superintendent who clearly has ill 
intentions, to get to the Lady and restore balance to nature. This stand-alone novel 
takes place in the same world and with the same core four protagonists as Herrick’s 
similarly world-driven Time Fetch, and the author proves to have a keen eye for 
developing wonderfully dastardly villains. Tiltersmith is a fantastic bad guy who 
oozes disarming charm while also being deeply unsettling, and the specifics of his 
vile nature compensate for the broad strokes of his heroic foils. Exposition is also 
cleverly handled: the magic at play here erases memory as soon as the protagonists 
are distracted by anything else, so their subsequent efforts to reconstruct what they 
know gives the reader a fuller picture of the world. It’s a compelling tale that will 
likely point readers toward its 2013 predecessor.  AS
190 • The Bulletin
higginbothAM, AnAstAsiA You Ruined It; written and illus. by Anastasia Hig-
ginbotham. Dottir, 2022 [96p]
Paper ed. ISBN 9781948340304 $19.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-8 
In this searing, sensitive portrayal of sexual assault, eleven-year-old Dawn writes in 
a journal-like format about her rape by an older cousin. Few details of the actual 
assault are offered, a purposeful choice by the author, who explains in the opening 
that she wanted to give a gentle but honest look at one of the “ordinary, terrible 
things” that can happen to a child. The focus on the aftermath allows Higginbotham 
to examine the complicated feelings Dawn has toward her abuser, as well as the 
layers of trauma for both her and her family members. Dawn adored her cousin 
and fought for his attention, and now she’s left wondering if the assault was her 
fault: “Why’d you wear that? Why’d you smile? Why did you LOVE him so much?” 
Even more troubling to her, however, is her continued yearning for his approval 
and grieving for the trust he broke. Fortunately, her mom and sister believe her, 
but even their reactions aren’t fully helpful. Her mom takes a self-defense class and 
her sister wants to beat the cousin up, but Dawn doesn’t want anyone else to get 
hurt—she just wants to figure out if she can ever trust again. The collage artwork, 
with scattered images and colorful cut paper scraps backgrounded by the yellow lines 
of a legal pad, brings a sense of believable messiness and compassionate intimacy 
to Dawn’s first-person narration. Spirograph drawings pepper the pages, offering a 
visual metaphor for setting boundaries, and Higginbotham’s note in the back matter 
explains they let her “create borders that are beautiful, colorful, and imperfect.” A 
wealth of additional front and back matter guides readers with questions, resources, 
and support; while obviously useful in a therapeutic setting, this could also offer 
insight to kids with friends who have been assaulted.  KQG 
howden, sArAh The Tunnel; illus. by Erika Rodriguez Medina. Owlkids, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781771474276 $18.95
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* 5-8 yrs
If the shadowed room, wilted flowers, and downcast faces in this picture book’s 
opening spread don’t fully relay our narrator’s sadness, then his simple statement 
surely will: “Something bad happened. I don’t like to think about it. Now it’s just 
me and my mom in the quiet house.” He doesn’t want to talk, he doesn’t want his 
mom’s hugs, and he certainly doesn’t want Aunt Cheryl’s well-meaning questions, 
so tonight he decides to dig a tunnel to escape. Deep in the soil he goes, past worms 
and moles, emerging in his backyard, where he watches his mother through the 
window. “Something shifts inside me,” he says and, reconsidering his plan, he 
crawls back through the tunnel to sit with his mom, wrapped in her arms. This is 
a quiet, subtle exploration of loss, and while we’re never told what happened, the 
lack of specifics makes the book even more powerful, inviting readers to sympathize 
with the boy’s pain and not linger in its cause. The minimalist palette and shady 
textures are brilliantly employed, with a dull crayon-like gray coating the pages, 
often contrasting only with deeper blacks; subtle red linework and the scarlet pop 
of the boy’s shirt bring depth but no reprieve. The tunnel makes a gut-wrenching 
visual metaphor for an all-encompassing pain so terrible that sinking into the earth 
February 2022 • 191
seems more welcoming than enduring one more day. The boy’s return to his home 
is sweet but by no means offered as a solution; he and his mom will have to sit 
with this heartache for a while, if not forever. This could be useful both as a choice 
for a mourning child and for kids wanting to understand a grieving friend.  KQG
hutchings, MAggie Your Birthday Was the Best!; illus. by Felicita Sala. Tundra, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780735271623 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780735271630 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-7 yrs
Unbeknownst to the partygoers, our cockroach narrator gleefully crashes a kid’s 
birthday celebration, playing party games and dancing until he’s discovered asleep 
on the cake: “You were so excited to see me you screamed.” When Dad pulls out 
the vacuum cleaner, the cockroach knows what it is, because Uncle Larry, Auntie 
Sharon, and Grandma were sucked up into the device. Our cockroach narrator is 
an optimist, however, noting that the vacuum cleaner is “full of delicious things like 
hairy cheese and cat poo and your toe nails.” Despite a reunion with his missing 
family members in the garbage bin, the little bug doesn’t want to let the birthday 
boy down, so he crawls back into the house and elicits more screaming. In this 
Australian import, Sala brilliantly contrasts the pastels of the party against the 
putrescent greens and browns of the cockroach’s body, highlighting the quite gross 
and very much unwanted intrusion to what is otherwise a delightful celebration. 
Sketchy linework depicts the chaos of the party, the horror of the birthday boy, and 
the excitement of the cartoonish cockroach, whose eyes go hilariously wide at the 
vacuum contents and wonders of the party in turns. Viewers who appreciate the 
more disgusting side of life will get plenty of laughs out of this chipper cockroach 
protagonist.  NB
hutchinson, shAun dAvid Howl. Simon, 2022 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534470927 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534470941 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Yanked from his life in Seattle, where he had a fantastic boyfriend, a great best friend, 
and still-married parents, Virgil now must deal with being the new kid in the small 
southern town of Merritt with his workaholic father. It does not begin well: while 
attending a party he is sexually assaulted by Jarrett, a boy who lures Virgil into an 
empty room, and that same night on his way home Virgil is brutally attacked by 
a monster—though everyone assures him it was a gator, bear, badger, or wild cat. 
Virgil stumbles through the next few months, haunted by scenes from Jarrett’s 
assault and the party as well as memories of the monster’s attack. Unfortunately, 
any support he had is crashing spectacularly: his long-distance boyfriend dumps 
him, his father retreats into his own depression, his strict grandparents offer little 
comfort, and his classmates torment him with cruel pranks, all too happy to riff 
on his trauma. There is strength to be found in hitting rock bottom, though, and 
Virgil eventually emerges scathed but newly aware of his own power, deciding to 
plumb those depths for tenacity and endurance rather than allowing the trauma 
to define him. If that seems a bit rosy and optimistic, particularly for Hutchinson, 
who brilliantly revels in unreliable narrators and tortured protagonists, rest assured 
192 • The Bulletin
that Virgil’s path to this new version of himself is a compelling one that readers 
will find authentic and insightful.  AS
JAcKson, KosoKo Survive the Dome. Sourcebooks Fire, 2022 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781728239088 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781728239095 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
High school journalist Jamal knows he has to be in the action to get the real story, 
so he coaxes his reluctant mother into letting him participate in a BLM march 
despite her concerns that he will be under heightened scrutiny as a Black gay teen 
with a camera. Things quickly go awry as Maryland’s governor uses this protest as a 
symbolic moment to try out her new security system that not only locks down the 
city of Baltimore under an energy field dome but also blocks all digital signals from 
going in or out of the region. To skew the fight even more in the police’s favor, all 
officers have futuristic robot suits that make them super strong, and they are given 
a free pass to exert whatever force they deem necessary. Just as he needs saving, 
Jamal is helped by Marco, an incredibly handsome expert hacker, and Catherine, 
a snarky, highly trained soldier who is on a mission to rescue her missing parents. 
As a narrator, Jamal is exasperatingly naive on occasion: stopping Marco’s initial 
attempt to rescue him, correcting the grammar of a man with a gun, and putting 
his closest allies at risk multiple times because he thinks his (usually flawed) plan 
is best. It’s Marco and Catherine who steal the show here with their grit, flamboy-
ance, and determination honed by loss, and their stories bring complexity to Jamal’s 
self-assured takes. Despite a startling amount of blood shed, a hopeful ending is 
painstakingly earned, and frankly these smart, brave, and loyal Latinx and Black 
kids flat out deserve this win and then some.  AS
KAMins, heAther The Moth Girl. Putnam, 2022 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593109366 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593109373 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
High school sophomore Anna was happy enough with her life until she started 
floating. She’s diagnosed with Lepidopsy, which is one of several conditions in 
this fictional world where cells can defy the laws of nature, and life is now a series 
of tests, medications that have startling side effects, and group therapy with other 
teens who share similar conditions. Her social structure is completely upended as 
her best friend struggles with how to support her, and a new friend pushes her to 
explore her new abilities despite doctors’ warnings of life-threatening consequences. 
Readers are only offered a glimpse of how these conditions are treated, but the lack 
of details might be the point—Lepidopsy could easily be replaced with any real-
world chronic illness. A note from author Kamins describes her own experience of 
being diagnosed with lupus and living in a world where literature and media seem 
to take one of two paths in reporting on chronic illnesses: the tragic march toward 
death or a hero’s triumph over their own bodies. While teens may not relate to the 
specifics of Anna’s or Kamins’ experiences, they might see a compelling counterpart 
in the challenges of adolescence, during which it can be hard to see the other side 
where things will likely be better.  AS
February 2022 • 193
Kelly, erin entrAdA Those Kids from Fawn Creek. Greenwillow, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062970350 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062970374 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
There are a whopping twelve seventh graders in Fawn Creek, Louisiana, and they’ve 
all grown up together, so it’s big news when Orchid Mason shows up as the new 
kid, especially when it turns out she’s quite the globetrotter. Always outsiders, 
friends Greyson and Dorothy are surprised and then thrilled when Orchid wants 
to hang out with them; Greyson is intrigued by her stories, and Dorothy is simply 
appreciative of her attention and kindness. Class queen Janie, however, is both 
annoyed and jealous, so when her BFF Renni—who has a particularly cruel mean 
streak—devises a plan to humiliate Orchid in front of everyone, she enthusiastically 
agrees. Both plot and characters are disappointingly formulaic here, with Janie and 
Orchid developed little beyond standard mean girl and mysterious ingénue. It’s 
Greyson and Dorothy who give the story more emotional depth, as each contends 
with struggles at home. Thoughtful, quiet Greyson is the direct opposite of his 
macho, show-off brother (who is adolescent toxic masculinity in its purest form), 
while Dorothy feels at best ignored and at worst unloved by her aloof parents. 
Readers occasionally get perspectives from other characters, but we never hear 
from Orchid herself as the focus mainly stays on the Greyson, Dorothy, and Janie, 
leaning especially hard into Janie’s huffy, petulant narration. Nonetheless, the scene 
in which the class comes to Orchid’s defense has a fist-pumping, vindicating glee, 
and readers who like to see bullies get their comeuppance will find satisfaction in 
Fawn Creek.  KQG
KuleKJiAn, JessicA First Notes of Spring; illus. by Jennifer Bower. Bloomsbury, 
2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781547604739 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781547604746 $12.59
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
Juniper the badger crashes an audition for the First Notes of Spring, the animal-
run musical event that will coax the new season out of winter. However, Juniper’s 
“thumpity toadstool” music isn’t well-received by the other gentle-instrument play-
ers, who “whoo” and “hum hum” and “ringy ring” instead of “BOOMEY BOOM 
BOOM!” After Mr. Moose rejects her musical efforts, a disheartened Juniper finds 
Holly, a woodpecker, tapping away at a tree, a beaver named Darby slapping her 
dam, and a rabbit named Dash thumping the ground. The force of their percussive 
group noises melts the snow and wakes the hibernating creatures of the forest, but 
they still need the softer sounds to wake the delicate flowers, and soon all the ani-
mals are playing in harmony. This could make a rollicking storytime suitable to the 
changing of the seasons, with plenty of opportunity for each kid to jump in with the 
sound that suits them most, soft or loud. The textured linework of Bower’s digital 
art creates a snowy forest backdrop that subtly changes green whenever Juniper uses 
her toadstool, and the animals’ exaggerated, cartoonish posing humorously depicts 
their moods: Juniper’s head thrown up in bliss at her loud noises while Mr. Moose 
sticks out his tongue and plugs his ears. Viewers will delight in choosing their own 
roles in the First Notes of Spring, and this can also serve as a reminder that it can 
be good to shake things up and try something new.  NB
194 • The Bulletin
lAure, estelle Remember Me. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 2022 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250261939 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250261946 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
On the morning of her seventeenth birthday, Blue follows the direction of a mys-
terious note to meet someone on the “little blue bus.” Unfortunately, she doesn’t 
actually remember that a such a thing exists in her town, despite having lived 
in Owl Nook, New Mexico, for her entire life. As it turns out, there’s a lot Blue 
doesn’t remember, but she is sure she’s connected to the strange boy she encounters 
on the bus even though they’ve never met. She soon discovers that she has had 
all her memories of him erased; to learn why, Blue must be willing to face all the 
pain she was trying to forget. The near-future setting is just familiar enough to be 
unsettling, further connecting readers to Blue’s disorientation, and the engaging 
first-person narration and the thrum of secrets behind Blue’s past will keep readers 
turning the pages despite a slow beginning. The gender- and racially-diverse cast 
of characters is believable and grounded, and while the realism is at times ugly—
including several dismissive references of Blue’s grief and mental health struggles 
as “drama”—the ultimate message is that life is about taking the good along with 
the bad. The ending doesn’t fully explore all the philosophical questions the book 
presents, but this is still an ambitious, heart-wrenching, and thoughtful novel that 
will appeal to fans of Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind and E. Lockhart’s We 
Were Liars (BCCB 6/14).  AT
lin, Judy i. A Magic Steeped in Poison. Feiwel, 2022 [384p] (The Book 
of Tea)
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250767080 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250767097 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
The unrest in the empire of Dàxī became all too personal for Zhang Ning when 
she brewed tea from a poisoned tea brick, which killed her mother and sickened 
her sister. Now the imperial princess is holding a competition to bring a new 
shénnóng-shī—a master of tea magic—to her court. If Ning is to have any hope 
of saving her sister, she must enter and win the competition, following in her 
mother’s footsteps by becoming a practitioner of Shénnóng. Ning finds the capital 
city beautiful and lavish but also rife with danger and political intrigues. The plot 
tracks a familiar path: Ning enters an unfamiliar setting that both thrills and in-
timidates her, where she has new experiences and makes new friends and enemies 
from the cast of fully developed side characters. Vivid descriptions of foods and 
scents of tea delight the senses, while cinematic prose captures the beauty of the 
landscapes, including the family’s provincial pomelo orchard and the dizzying 
markets of the capital. The magic system is unique, and the tea competition, with 
its well-established importance to the protagonist, adds tension. Although a rushed 
romance and palace gamesmanship threaten to trip up the plot, the book finds 
its footing once Ning enters into the princess’ confidence and the stakes become 
clearer. Overall, this sophisticated fantasy is as refreshing as a freshly brewed pot 
of tea, and readers will eagerly await the sequel. Back matter includes a glossary 
of Chinese terms, pronunciation guides for character and place names, as well as 
medicinal ingredients, and an author’s note.  AT
February 2022 • 195
liu, MArJorie Wingbearer; illus. by Teny Issakhanian. Quill Tree/HarperCol-
lins, 2022 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062741165 $22.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780062741158 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062741172 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-6 
Zuli doesn’t realize growing up with bird spirits is unusual until she is forced to 
venture into the mortal world, searching for answers when souls cease to return to 
the epic tree where she lives. Accompanied by her very hesitant guardian owl, Zuli 
discovers a world populated by all sorts of creatures, not all of them as kind and 
wise as the spirits that raised her. Encountering unimagined dangers and an impres-
sively terrifying Witch-Queen, Zuli is aided by a reluctant goblin who helps with 
both her quest and her processing of a startling revelation about who she is. This 
fantasy graphic novel hits all the right notes of excitement, danger, and cool magical 
elements in one short volume, with an ending that points toward an anticipated 
series. The format is deftly employed, with dramatic color shifts signaling transi-
tions and establishing tone, rare full-page illustrations highlighting key moments, 
and scale changes reflecting Zuli’s emotions. Liu brings an intriguing exploration 
of spirituality, weaving thoughtful diversity into each aspect of this story, so there is 
much to ponder once the thrilling action subsides, and middle graders will eagerly 
anticipate the next outing.  AS
McleMore, AnnA-MArie Lakelore. Feiwel, 2022 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250624147 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250624154 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
Bastián Silvano and Lore Garcia—both brown, trans, they/them, and neurodiver-
gent—met once as children, when Bastián took Lore through the legendary world 
under the lake to escape from bullies on a field trip. Years later, when dyslexic Lore 
moves to town in search of a fresh start, Bastián has filled the world under the lake 
with the alebrijes (painted papier-mâché creations that come to life in the lake) they 
make to release the anxieties of living with ADHD. When the lake and Bastián’s 
creatures begin to cross over to the everyday world, the resulting manifestations are 
both frightening and strangely beautiful as waters flood their homes, glitter bursts 
in the air, and eerie laughter echoes in the walls. Bastián and Lore make their way 
toward each other by discovering the relationship between these happenings and 
their own anxieties, traumas, and flawed coping mechanisms. The meandering plot 
may slow some readers, but there’s plenty of appeal in the gothic turn of McLemore’s 
magical realism and in the interweaving of emotional and external landscapes. As 
they navigate their neurodivergent, nonbinary identities, Bastián and Lore realize 
together that “once you get past the fear of being seen, you can get to the part 
where you know you’re not alone.” An author’s note is included about McLemore’s 
autobiographical experiences that inform the novel.  FHK 
196 • The Bulletin
Miller, pAt zietlow In Our Garden; illus. by Melissa Crowton. Putnam, 
2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781984812100 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781984812117 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Everything feels gray in Millie’s new home, where tall buildings loom over drab 
streets and concrete makes up most of the landscape. She’s struck with a brilliant 
idea, though: to begin a garden on the rooftop of her school, much like the garden 
she once had at her now faraway home. Her classmates and teacher are hesitant when 
she lays out her plan but soon agree to make it an entire class project, reading up on 
best gardening practices, gathering supplies, preparing the rooftop, and—finally—
planting. The hardest part is waiting for those seeds to sprout, but soon their work 
and patience pay off with enough veggies to share with the whole neighborhood. 
This has echoes of Fogliano’s And Then It’s Spring (BCCB 3/12) but with an urban 
twist, and the act of gardening is as much the focus here as the community that 
builds around it. The text is on the heavier side but is often leavened by rhythmic 
patterning (“We’re in class. Science Class. What-a-plant-needs-besides-seeds class”), 
while Millie’s voice rings true, both in her sadness over moving and her joy in starting 
something new. The mixed media art also has an appealing blend of solid realism 
and fanciful whimsy, with buildings anchored by clean lines and neat angles while 
cheery hues and sketches of veggies, hearts, and smiling faces background the girl’s 
imaginings. The diverse cast features a range of skin tones and ages, which makes 
the unfortunate lack of representation of people with physical disabilities rather 
noticeable. Still, this is an obvious read before taking on a school garden; pair it 
with the Fogliano for an excellent way to welcome spring.  KQG
Morrison, FrAnK Kick Push; written and illus. by Frank Morrison. Blooms-
bury, 2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781547605927 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781547605934 $13.29
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-8 yrs
“Epic” Ivan is the new kid in town, missing his skateboarding crew but determined 
to make a fresh circle of friends. He tries to fit in with kids who play football, 
basketball, and soccer, but those activities simply aren’t his strong suit. When he 
decides to just stick with his talent and his passion, some deftly executed moves 
soon attract a new group of appreciative kids, and his new city is looking like a 
place he’ll be happy. The text, with predictable parental nudging and advice to Ivan 
to just be himself, is reductive, but master illustrator Morrison’s artwork handily 
carries the story. Viewers can focus on the dizzying angles and color intensity of 
Ivan’s airborne maneuvers, the graffiti vibe that permeates his vibrant urban milieu, 
and the carefully, credibly cultivated cool of his diverse new crew. One read-through 
should suffice to lock in the story line; from there even pre- and emerging readers 
can step in and personalize their own adventures in awesomeness.  EB
February 2022 • 197
nAzeMiAn, Abdi The Chandler Legacies. Balzer + Bray, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063039322 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063039346 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
At the prestigious Chandler boarding school, five students have been accepted into 
the Circle, an exclusive writing group under the tutelage of an enigmatic mentor. 
On the surface, the teens could not be more different or less likely to be friends: 
perfect Spence, looking for more than her next achievement; athlete Freddy, whose 
Olympic focus is starting to drift; heartbroken Ramin, newly arrived from Iran and 
seeking a safe space to express his sexuality; outwardly confident Brunson, strug-
gling to hide a recent trauma; and anxious wallflower Beth, desperate to reinvent 
herself. As the writing exercises force them to explore their authentic selves, painful 
experiences come to the surface, and the writers find not just common ground but 
also deep friendships and strength to help each other seek justice and redemption. 
The overlaps and connections between the teens weave a compelling narrative that 
examines the realities of hidden abuse and the power of storytelling and unexpected 
friendship. Detailed accounts of hazing violence and homophobia are more direct 
than the slow-build reveal of sexual abuse, but both strands will leave readers 
thinking about the naivete that comes with privilege and the value of listening to 
others. And if the fallout is a little unrealistically just, readers will likely appreciate 
the final note of optimism.  AM
oh, Axie The Girl Who Fell Beneath the Sea. Feiwel, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250780867 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250780874 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Every year, a maiden is sacrificed to the Sea God to appease the storms that ravage 
the land. Defying the dictates of fate, Mina jumps into the sea in the place of her 
older brother’s beloved, Shim Cheong, whose name signals the novel’s legendary 
premise. Mina enters the spirit world as the Sea God’s Bride only to find the Sea God 
helpless, lost in slumber while other gods, mythical creatures, and spirits jockey for 
power. The novel boasts a plucky heroine, heart-tugging family relationships, and 
a fraying, compellingly fraught relationship between gods and the mortal world. 
The mystery of how to break the curse on the Sea God (if it is a curse) and put an 
end to the sacrifices takes up the bulk of the plot, but the action gets tangled by 
assassination attempts and the vicissitudes of the Red String of Fate that binds first 
Mina and the Sea God, then Mina and faithful guardian Lord Shin. The draw here 
for most readers will be the fascinatingly detailed spirit world and Oh’s riffs on the 
Shim Cheong legend; fans of supernatural K-dramas and Lim’s Six Crimson Cranes 
(BCCB 7/21) will eat it up.  FHK
peterson, J. c. Being Mary Bennet. HarperTeen, 2022 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063060135 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063060159 $11.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
The middle child of five sisters, eighteen-year-old Marnie Barnes has always felt 
distinctly unspecial, especially in the shadow of two seemingly perfect older sisters. 
198 • The Bulletin
Desperate for her own share of limelight and fatherly affection, otherwise unsocial 
Marnie competes for the prestigious community-focused Hunt Prize. She recruits 
boarding school roommate Adhira and local volunteer Whit to help her create 
Bark Books, a program involving young children reading to shelter dogs. Marnie’s 
desperation to impress soon brings out her pedantic, controlling side; called out as 
a sanctimonious kill-joy, akin to Pride & Prejudice’s unlikable Mary Bennet, Marnie 
is inspired to reinvent herself but soon learns that will take more than pretense. 
With its blend of insight-driven personal growth, heartwarming friendship-turned-
romance, and dashes of vicarious embarrassment, this is the perfect novel for any 
reader who wishes they were a heroine but secretly identifies more with background 
characters. Marnie is compellingly real, even at her most unlikable, and the story 
cleverly balances her most disagreeable moments with insights into the familial 
slights and self-doubt that created them. Classic literature readers, meanwhile, 
will appreciate the many character name-drops, and Austen fans in particular will 
appreciate the chance to read a long-established un-heroine in a new light. An ut-
terly authentic, captivating story, this novel will reward readers with a well-earned 
happy ending full of family, friends, and romance.  AM
price, KAthy z. Mardi Gras Almost Didn’t Come This Year; illus. by Carl Joe 
Williams. Atheneum, 2022 [48p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781534444256 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781534444263 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 7-10 yrs
Months have passed since Hurricane Katrina swept narrator Lala’s family from the 
New Orleans home their father had built: “Wind threw Water into Sky,/ snatched 
the Blue out./ Blue sputtered, then died.” Although Lala, Mamma, Pop-Pop, and 
younger brother Babyboy made it through safely to shelter in an aunt’s abandoned 
house, so much has been lost—Lala’s beloved persimmon tree, Mamma’s smile and 
dancing, Pop-Pop’s trumpet playing, and now it seems Mardi Gras as well. Lala, 
however, dredges up some dressy clothes, Babyboy reveals that he’s been making 
impressive progress on the trumpet, and Momma and Pop-Pop emerge from their 
gloom; together, they discover they aren’t the only resilient survivors taking to the 
streets ready to reclaim a celebration central to their community’s—the whole 
city’s—spirit. Williams’ intricately composed, intensely hued mixed media scenes 
accompany Price’s complex rhymes, carrying the tension and sadness of a family 
that can’t see a clear path forward while conveying their fierce joy in a buoyant 
tradition that keeps their spirits afloat. A glossary and an author’s note on her family 
connection to Katrina are included.  EB
redgAte, riley Alone Out Here. Disney Hyperion, 2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781368064729 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781368065344 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Leigh is a quintessential politician’s daughter: she can respond to any question 
without truly answering it, soothe strife between discordant groups, and take charge 
when emergencies arise. In 2072, it’s almost all emergencies all the time as an up-
coming volcanic eruption will mean the end of life on Earth, and countries around 
the world squabble over how to save as many people as possible via generational 
February 2022 • 199
ships headed out to a planet hundreds of Earth years away. The apocalypse comes 
earlier than expected, however, and only 50 or so teens make it onto the Lazarus. 
Rather than create a bold new world on the starship intended to hold hundreds, 
the teens seem doomed to repeat the discrimination, mistrust, and alienation that 
made humans such crummy stewards of each other and the Earth in the first place. 
Leigh wants something far better for the tiny crew, but a lack of food and expertise 
paired with a disastrous fumble into what is essentially a dictatorship does not bode 
well. The book takes an even darker turn with two horrifying moments near the 
end of the novel (one that impacts everyone on the ship, one that happens specifi-
cally to Leigh), but Redgate’s eye for lyricism in her descriptions and vulnerability 
in her protagonists make this a satisfying, provocative, and memorable read.  AS
roeder, vAnessA The Stack; written and illus. by Vanessa Roeder. Dial, 
2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593324387 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593324394 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Luna is terrified of the dark, and the little red chair she stands on isn’t tall enough to 
reach the light. She adds a stool, then twenty books, then her own bed, then “a claw-
foot tub that held her tallest friend.” As Luna’s stack begins to reach the heavens, it’s 
apparent she’s not aiming for a regular light switch to stave off darkness, and things 
quickly become ridiculous when she launches her neighbor’s house onto the stack, 
followed by Grandpa’s station wagon, various large animals, a dragon, and a pirate 
ship. Luna finally ascends the teetering tower to reach her goal—a star—which she 
stores in a jar before parachuting down to her bedroom. This fanciful picture book 
has a charming nighttime setting made of intricate mixed-media art, and Roeder’s 
night sky is resplendent with multi-colored stars and a glowing crescent moon. 
Rhyming verse gives this story a lulling, peaceful effect, but viewers will have a lot 
to watch for in background details, as Grandpa blames the GPS for being thrown 
off-track, pirates complain of airsickness, and Luna returns to her bed completely 
unconcerned with all the drama she’s caused. There’s an element of mischief here 
that will please antsy viewers, and it might also pair well with Kim’s Star Fishing 
(BCCB 1/22) as a welcome distraction for sleepless kids.  NB
roux, MAdeleine The Book of Living Secrets. Quill Tree/HarperCollins, 
2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062941428 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062941435 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
Adelle and Connie are best friends, bonded over their mutual love of a book, even 
though each is smitten with different protagonists (Connie has not yet admitted 
to Adelle that the heroine is much more her style than the dashing male character 
Adelle adores). When Adelle finds a way into the book, set in the 1885 version 
of their Boston home, Connie goes after her, reluctant and far less swept into the 
romance of it all but unwilling to let her bestie be alone. While they are looking for 
one another, it becomes clear almost immediately that their presence is changing 
the content of the book itself, and it is entirely uncertain whether they will ever 
be able to leave. The bond between Adelle and Connie is authentic and vibrant, 
200 • The Bulletin
and their standout friendship is a shining example of pals who have each other’s 
backs unfailingly. Unfortunately, the plot is convoluted and twisty to the point 
of obfuscation, and the focus never solidifies, making it unclear if this is a witchy 
book, a Lovecraftian nod, a star-crossed romance, or a best friends quest. The shock 
ending feels a bit cruel after readers will likely have invested emotional energy into 
both protagonists, but perhaps a sequel (the conclusion certainly suggests one) will 
offer some justice or remedy.  AS 
sAFi, AMinAh MAe Travelers Along the Way: A Robin Hood Remix. Feiwel, 
2022 [352p] (Remixed Classics)
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250771278 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250771285 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Rahma al-Hud follows her righteous older sister right into the thick of Crusade 
politics of Jerusalem in 1192. The sisters slowly accumulate a team of misfits: Teni, a 
tall Mongolian fighter; Viva, a Jewish alchemist; John, an outcast from the Knights 
Templar; and Majid Mirza, gender-bent Maid Marian who serves as a spy (and 
eventually needs to be rescued). Rahma gains her reputation as the Green Hood as 
she steals the false Queen Isabella’s abused horse, gives money from Faranji knights 
to the poor, and robs caravans to feed the needy. This take on Robin Hood from 
the Remixed Classics series is truly original, positing the Robin Hood figure in 
and around Jerusalem from a Muslim perspective. Fans of the legend have plenty 
of references to indulge in, from Rahma al-Hud’s similar-sounding name to the 
roles of her “merry misfits” and the attempts by Queen Isabella to lure her out, and 
readers who appreciate historical accuracy will delight in the many mentions of real 
people, places, and events from the past. Add in some heart-pumping adventure, 
characters who outwit enemies, and found families from diverse backgrounds, and 
this is crowd-pleaser with a broad audience. A timeline of the Third Crusade is 
included for reference.  NB
sAFt, Allison A Far Wilder Magic. Wednesday/St. Martin’s, 2022 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250623652 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250623669 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Having failed out of every previous apprenticeship, Weston Winters knows his 
last chance to study alchemy is under Master Evelyn Welty, but when he arrives 
at Evelyn’s home, he is met by her stern and sour daughter, Margaret. Margaret 
doesn’t trust the smooth-talking Wes, but reluctantly allows him to stay until 
Evelyn returns—unfortunately, Margaret doesn’t know quite know when that will 
be. However, with the appearance of the fox demiurge—the key to her mother’s 
research—the Halfmoon Hunt has come to town, and Margaret needs an alchemist 
partner in order to participate. Can she convince Wes to enter with her, and can 
they succeed if it means they will have to open their hearts to each other? Aside 
from the alchemy and mythical god-beasts, this fantasy reads much like historical 
fiction, including the oppression and ostracization Margaret and Wes both face as 
cultural outsiders. The world of New Albion is richly detailed and feels fantastical 
but familiar; unfortunately, parallels to the United States are too on the nose for 
the absence of any indigenous peoples not to be conspicuous. Nevertheless, Wes 
February 2022 • 201
and Margaret’s unfolding romance is subtle and satisfying, and Saft’s prose is vivid 
and dryly humorous. The narrative culminates in the stark violence of the foxhunt, 
but the emotional climax is when Margaret finally confronts her neglectful mother. 
Fans of Leigh Bardugo’s original Shadow & Bone trilogy will likely enjoy this hon-
est, evocative romance.  AT
sAngster, cAitlin A Baker’s Guide to Robber Pie. Feiwel, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781250793317 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781250793324 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Evie is the twelve-year-old daughter of bakers in the country of Paline, where people 
fear the Fel, giant crow-like fairy creatures. When adventurous Evie stumbles upon 
robbers in the woods summoned by her raspberry tart, she’s whisked away for her 
safety by royal guards, posing as a baker for the Hollows, a noble family, while 
the location of the Robber Lord is identified. Something isn’t right about the way 
everyone is acting toward the robbers, though, and the cunning, manipulative 
daughter in the Hollow house isn’t helping things as Evie searches for answers. This 
middle grade novel is as charming as it is mouthwatering, with Evie’s storytelling 
inclinations giving zest to even the less thrilling elements. Savvy readers will see 
plot twists in advance due to some heavy-handed foreshadowing, but the end 
result is still satisfying. Here, the power of friendship is a driving force, as Evie 
overcomes her biases to befriend Gisa, another girl in the Hollow household, and 
uses her connection to hometown friend Cece to save the day. Readers who are 
as adventure-seeking as Evie will want to join her as she takes on magical enemies 
with only her wits and baking skills.  NB
sAntAt, dAn The Aquanaut; written and illus. by Dan Santat. Graphix/Scho-
lastic, 2022 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780545497602 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780545497619 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780545500548 $12.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
When noted ocean researcher Michel Revoy goes down with his ship, four marine 
animals—a sea turtle, a hermit crab, a teeny Blanket octopus, and a much larger 
Dumbo octopus—discover his journal, in which he’s written about Aqualand, a 
safe haven for all ocean animals. Five years later, the creatures head to land in an 
old diving suit they’ve refurbished, and things predictably get crazy: people don’t 
react particularly well to what looks like an ancient walking robot, but even worse, 
Aqualand turns out to be more of an amusement park than a refuge. Fortunately, 
they get help from Revoy’s teenage daughter, but can they work together to stop 
Aqualand’s greedy investors and finally turn it into Revoy’s conservation dream? A 
disjointed plot moves awkwardly through several anti-climactic storylines, but the 
overarching theme is consistent: loss—of a person, an animal, or a home—leaves 
an unfillable hole that permanently shifts both physical and emotional landscapes 
for all things in the natural world. Santat takes a measured tone to his normally 
exaggerated style, balancing panels of motion with off-kilter angles and vibrant 
hues against more contemplative moments that focus on characters’ expressions. 
An author’s note explains Santat’s admiration for and inspiration from Jacques 
Cousteau, and, movingly, how the passing of his father affected the ending.  KQG
202 • The Bulletin
sAvAryn, lorelei The Edge of In Between. Viking, 2022 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593202098 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593202111 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Lottie has doting parents, a gift of seeing a magical core in each person, and in-
credible talent as a painter at only twelve years old. Her world is upended when 
her parents die and she is requested at the home of a distant uncle, whose magic 
has splintered in ways that could be dangerous—but he could also help locate her 
parents in a world between the living and the Ever After, so Lottie ignores her res-
ervations. She befriends her uncle’s neglected son, as well as a ghost long trapped 
in an extraordinary garden, all while trying to avoid the home’s ominous caretaker. 
In this retelling of The Secret Garden, Lottie evolves from indulged and sheltered to 
empathetic and self-assured, choosing to move through her shocking losses rather 
than drown in grief alone. While character development is minimal, with most 
people serving as opportunities for Lottie to grow, the thoughtful and detailed care 
given to Lottie and the terrifying Mrs. Hale, the caretaker of this tragic home, easily 
compensates for that. Of course, Burnett fans will find familiarity and appeal here, 
but knowledge of the influencing novel is not necessary; magical realism buffs will 
be quickly drawn into this world where people can bounce back from sorrow and 
regain their supernatural gifts, as long as they have the right help.  AS
shAMMAs, nAdiA Squire; by Nadia Shammas and Sara Alfageeh; illus. by Sara 
Alfageeh. Quill Tree/HarperCollins, 2022 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780062945853 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 9780062945846 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780062945860 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 5-8
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 181, for review.
sKinner, nicolA Storm. HarperCollins, 2022 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063071681 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063071704 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Frankie Ripley was born in a storm and died in a natural disas-
ter—along with everyone else in her small town. Now a ghost, Frankie wakes up 
over a hundred years in the future to find her home has become a tourist attraction. 
Trapped there, unseen by all the visitors, and with a slowly degrading memory, 
Frankie is facing a lonely, boring afterlife until she realizes she can affect the living 
world by wreaking havoc as a poltergeist. Her destructive antics eventually lead her 
to Scanlon, who can see her and whom she befriends, but she unfortunately also 
attracts the attention of his ghost hunter father, who wants Frankie to be the star 
attraction of his new haunted house. Skinner’s poignant story of Frankie’s ordinary 
and heartbreaking afterlife tackles grand themes of love, forgiveness, friendship, and 
even the meaning of life. As Frankie begins to lose herself in anger and monotony, 
it is her friendship with the unhappy Scanlon (whose thoughts eventually turn 
suicidal) that ultimately reminds her of the profound and simple joys of her life. 
The heavy subject matter is tempered by a light tone, carefully balancing humor and 
February 2022 • 203
tragedy, and the topic of suicide is approached gently and without judgment. The 
narrative builds steadily to a powerful climax, and an insightful conclusion makes 
this a perfect book for fans of Neil Gaiman’s Coraline and The Graveyard Book.  AT
sMith, AMber Code Name: Serendipity. Razorbill, 2022 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593204917 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593204924 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Fifth grade is off to a rough start for Sadie: she’s still reeling from a learning dis-
ability diagnosis, bestie Jude has moved to Utah, and something’s wrong with 
Gramps, no matter what her moms keep saying. One morning Sadie’s feeling 
especially frustrated but then hears a strange voice calling to her for help, a voice 
that belongs to an equally lonely pup named Dewey, who’s as surprised as Sadie 
that she can understand her. When Dewey is brought to the shelter where Mom 
works and labeled a bite risk, the race is on to save her before she’s euthanized. At 
least Gramps believes in Sadie’s connection to Dewey, and Macy, a former bully 
who could use a friend, offers help too. Smith’s ambitious middle grade debut runs 
a gamut of difficult topics, with everything from changing friendships to parental 
death. However, Sadie’s first-person narration, full of asides and frequent focus 
changes, keeps heavy worries from feeling insurmountable, and Sadie’s family is a 
wholesome, hopeful clan, if a bit chaotic. The slow slip of affable, loving Gramps 
into anger and confusion is painful for everyone, but especially Mom, who admits 
to Sadie that she can’t make her feel better right now. Fortunately, Mama offers 
oodles of warmth and comic relief while being the first to lay down boundaries 
and hard truths. Brother Noah’s “butthead” antics are all too real to anyone who 
has lived with a teenager, and while he takes a turn for the nicer in the third act, 
the change is cleverly orchestrated and genuine, quietly promising that he’ll get 
on Sadie’s nerves again soon. Most readers will know a happy ending is inevitable, 
but this journey is truly greater than the destination.  KP
stevens, court We Were Kings. Thomas Nelson, 2022 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780785238485 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780785238478 $9.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
One fact has defined eighteen-year-old Nyla’s life: her mother’s best friend Frankie 
killed Cora King twenty years ago. Frankie is set to be executed for it in mere weeks, 
but new facts have suddenly up-ended Nyla’s world: the victim was her mother’s 
own sister, her mom’s been hiding connections to a wealthy, powerful Kentucky 
family, and Frankie may just be innocent. Now, in a possibly ill-advised attempt 
to understand the past and save Frankie, Nyla will dig up long buried secrets and 
expose rot at the core of a small, rural community that wants the past to stay gone. 
At her side is gorgeous local boy Sam, with his own connections to the crime, but 
as their online video coverage goes viral, they quickly learn some people might kill 
to keep truths hidden. Stevens deftly weaves multiple threads, including diamonds, 
meth, national politics, and human trafficking, into a riveting narrative of betrayed 
friendships and fraught family ties. Pairing old-fashioned amateur sleuthing with 
a decidedly on-trend, online true crime investigation, this taut mystery unspools 
with a chillingly calibrated pace, and the violent, stunning payoff is sure to surprise 
204 • The Bulletin
even the most genre-familiar reader. The all-white cast is less well-developed than 
the plot, with many stock characters, but readers looking for their next addictive 
page-turner can mine this well-crafted whodunit for every worthy twist.  AM
stoKes, stAcy Remember Me Gone. Viking, 2022 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780593327661 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780593327678 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Tumble Tree, Texas, is a small rundown town only surviving because of one thing: 
the Memory House, where Lucy’s dad helps people with their sadness by taking 
away their memories. Lucy has supposedly inherited the ability to manipulate 
memories like the generations before her, but her gift isn’t manifesting quite like 
the rest of her family, and she’s worried she won’t be able to take over the family 
business. Meanwhile, the town’s shady mayor is acting even shadier, forcing her 
dad to go to the local mines in the middle of the night, and she continues to feel 
a strange connection to the mayor’s nephew Marco, whom she barely knows. It’s 
clear early on that Lucy’s memory has been tampered with, and so the reliability 
of her narration is quickly thrown into doubt, leaving readers to intuit clues from 
what might otherwise be casual interactions with other characters. From his first 
appearance, the mayor is the obvious bad guy, but the extent of his villainy is 
breathtaking—and surprisingly familiar. The material he’s forcing people to mine 
might be magical, but his violent methods of control and focus on personal gain 
and profit mirror real world corporate organizations uncomfortably well, and the 
book approaches the idea of happiness at any cost on multiple provocative levels. 
The resolution is murky on the details, especially when it comes to the nature 
of Lucy’s powers, but the magical realism elements and vividly described setting 
will sweep readers into Tumble Tree, and few will forget the strange town and its 
intriguing, resilient residents.  KQG
tAbor, corey r. Sir Ladybug; written and illus. by Corey R. Tabor. Balzer + 
Bray, 2022 [72p] (Sir Ladybug)
Trade ed. ISBN 9780063069060 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780063069084 $7.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 1-3
Sir Ladybug might prefer videogames and baking to heroics, but he’s got a knightly 
reputation to hold up, if only because his best pal Pell the roly-poly goes on and on 
about Sir Ladybug’s good deeds. When a yellow caterpillar is attacked by a hungry 
chickadee, our spotted hero heads out to the rescue, donning his shiny armor and 
helmet. Sir Ladybug’s swordplay fails to impress the bird, however, and soon he, 
the caterpillar, and a few friends find refuge in Sterling the snail’s shell, where they 
bake a cake so delicious it serves as a delectable substitution to satiate the famished 
chickadee. Tabor (Mel Fell, BCCB 1/21, etc.) brings his characteristic wit and silli-
ness to this early graphic novel reader with five breezy chapters and two humorous 
interludes exalting the legendary Sir Ladybug (and the legendary cake). Chatty 
dialogue makes up most of the text, and each character brings a distinct kind of 
comedy, but it’s the bird that really steals the show. Frustrated, hungry, and a bit 
self-righteous, the ravenous avian becomes increasingly dramatic (“WOULD YOU 
HAVE ME STARVE? IS THAT WHAT YOU WANT?”) and by the time it tastes 
February 2022 • 205
Sir Ladybug’s epic lemon cake, its histrionics will ensure giggles from young readers. 
Straightforward paneling and minimal background keep the compositions simple 
and the focus on the dialogue, which includes some stealthy repetition along with 
vocabulary that adds a sophistication to further stretch readers’ skills. With a sequel 
already announced, this makes a promising beginning to an expected series.  KQG
tinn-disbury, toM Brian the Dancing Lion; written and illus. by Tom Tinn-
Disbury. Capstone, 2022 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781684464241 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Brian the lion loves to dance, but he keeps it to himself: “nobody would think a 
dancing lion was brave or strong or fierce,” an idea re-enforced by some cha-chaing 
gazelles preparing for a dance competition. But when Brian and his friends congre-
gate in earshot of the competition, he can’t help himself; the music makes him break 
out into a big, twirling dance. Ashamed, he runs home, but his friends follow after 
him. They share their hobbies, from sewing to crafts to singing opera, and Brian 
realizes everyone can simply like what they like, without judgment or shame. The 
friends then put on a dance spectacular to make up for the missed competition, 
and Brian gets to finally show off his moves in public. Scratchy pencil work and 
golden hues make Brian the central focus here, while watercolors create textured 
backgrounds; Tinn-Disbury’s anthropomorphic animals have a cartoony, dynamic 
energy in their expressive body language. An open allegory for toxic masculinity 
keeping people from their passions, this story offers a touching and accessible way 
to encourage viewers to look beyond the gendered limits society imposes on certain 
activities. This book will likely fit in with other LGBTQ+ friendly reads at Drag 
Queen Story Hours.  NB
vAn riJcKegheM, JeAn-clAude Ironhead, or, Once a Young Lady; tr. by Kristen 
Gehrman. Levine Querido, 2022 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781646140480 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781646141500 $18.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R* Gr. 10 up
Constance or “Stance” is at the marriageable age at eighteen in 1808, and so her 
father plans to pair her with his 45-year-old former classmate as part of a business 
deal. But married life isn’t well-suited for boisterous Stance, so she runs away from 
their home in Ghent, borrowing her husband’s clothes and then switching places 
with a boy drafted into Napoléon’s army. Dressed as a boy, Stance finds freedom in 
her new army adventures, flirting with women, learning to load a musket in under a 
minute, and challenging an enemy to a duel. Meanwhile, her younger brother Pier 
faces the backlash of her disappearance: their father is jailed due to his newfound 
debt, but he insists Pier hand off plans for a magnificent cannon to Napoléon 
himself, prying Pier away from his elite education. Stance is a delightfully chaotic 
protagonist, who is (scandalously) free with her affection and kisses and whose easy 
charm gets her out of more than little trouble. Pier is more unsympathetic, but as he 
comes up against a series of obstacles, some of his prickliness softens and he sees his 
sister in a new light. Thrilling, often hilarious, and sometimes tear-jerking, this romp 
of a story is reminiscent of classic adventure tales such as The Three Musketeers.  NB
206 • The Bulletin
vo, young Gibberish; written and illus. by Young Vo. Levine Querido, 
2022 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9781646141104 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9781646141869 $17.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R 4-8 yrs
A boat and a plane brought Dat to America, and now a bus will take him to school, 
where, as Mah forewarns him, everybody will speak gibberish, and he’ll just have 
to try to do his best. Sure enough, neither the bus driver nor his teacher say his 
name correctly, and without English fluency he can’t land a place to sit or a buddy 
to hang with at lunch. One little girl knows just how to cut through the gibberish, 
however, hauling him off to the playground equipment and bringing out a notebook 
and crayons so they can draw together and exchange words. By the time the pair 
bound off the bus (for which Dat now has a word), he proudly introduces Julie (for 
whom Dat now has a name) to Mah. Vo keeps the storyline simple and the details 
of Dat’s country of origin vague to universalize immigrant experience for a young 
audience. Artwork, though, fills in much of the emotional experience from Dat’s 
side of the language divide. He ideates the gibberish-spewing school community 
as black and white cartoon characters that stylistically recall George Herriman’s 
language-challenged Krazy Kat. In one heart-wrenching passage, Dat tries to puzzle 
out a nursery rhyme in which a few correctly placed English letters are embedded 
amid random symbols and vignettes—a visual exercise that tacitly invites viewers 
to struggle along with him to figure out the quote. As communication blossoms 
between Dat and Julie, she sheds her cartoonish persona and transitions into full 
color. Pair this with Minh Lê and Dan Santat’s Drawn Together (BCCB 6/18) for 
a discussion starter on cultivating empathy and finding common ground.  EB
ziegler, JenniFer Worser. Ferguson/Holiday House, 2022 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 9780823449569 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 9780823452835 $10.99
Reviewed from digital galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Seventh grader William didn’t have a choice when he was nicknamed Worser, and 
he’s similarly powerless now against far more devastating circumstances: his mother 
just had a serious stroke and all the stabilizing elements that made his orderly and 
practical brain feel more comfortable in the world are suddenly upended. Most 
disorienting is the fact that his intellectual, brilliant mother has not only lost her 
speech and independence but has also changed in less expected ways; she is more 
open to joy, art, silliness, and affection than Worser has ever experienced (or, in 
most cases, wanted). Although he does find community at school and refuge in a 
used bookstore with a cantankerous owner, none of this is an instant fix. Worser still 
feels angry, disillusioned with the world, and unwilling (perhaps unable) to accept 
that life almost never proceeds as planned: sometimes the longed-for neighbor girl is 
going to like someone else, your exceptional mother may never again fit your just-so 
memory of her, and your mistakes really do have lasting consequences even if you 
wish they didn’t. It’s that discomfort with reality that renders Worser surprisingly 
sympathetic—he’s so baffled by the world and so alone in his own rigid orbit that 
readers will likely be far more accommodating to and willing to forgive him than 
he is for himself and everyone around him.  AS
February 2022 • 207
Acrobats—stories: Barnett
ADVENTURE: Fagan; Safi; Sangster; 
Shammas
Anger—fiction: Skinner
Animals—stories: Frost
Anxiety—stories: Tinn-Disbury
Art and artists—fiction: McLemore
Asian people—fiction: Lin
Badgers—stories: Kulekjian
BEDTIME STORIES: Roeder
Birds—fiction: Liu
Birthdays—stories: Hutchings
Black people—fiction: Collier; Emezi; 
Jackson; Liu; Morrison; Price; 
Roeder
Boarding school—fiction: Nazemian
Boars—stories: Kolomycka
Books and reading—fiction: Roux
Cities—stories: Miller
Cliques—fiction: Kelly 
Communication—stories: Frost; Vo
Conservation—fiction: Santat
Crime and criminals—fiction: Stevens
Crusades—fiction: Safi
Cuban Americans—fiction: Castel-
lanos 
Curses—fiction: Fagan
Dancing—stories: Tinn-Disbury
Death—stories: Forler
Disease—fiction: Brown
Dogs—fiction: Smith
Ethics and values: Applebaum; Bry-
ant; Nazemian; Shammas; Smith
Families—fiction: Elliott; Higginbo-
tham; Savaryn; Smith; Stevens
FANTASY: Aldridge; Applebaum; 
Emezi; Fagan; Herrick; Liu; 
McLemore; Oh; Saft; Sangster; 
Savaryn; Stokes
Food and eating—fiction: Sangster
Foxes—stories: Kolomycka
Friends—fiction: Kamins; Bryant; 
Collier; Fagan; Herrick; Kelly; 
Nazemian; Roux; Sangster; Ziegler
Friends—stories: Frost; Morrison; Vo
Gardens and gardening—fiction: 
Savaryn
Gardens and gardening—stories: 
Miller
Gender roles—fiction: van Rijckeg-
hem
Ghosts—fiction: Skinner
Gods and goddesses—fiction: Oh
GOTHIC FICTION: Roux
Grandfathers—fiction: Smith
GRAPHIC NOVEL: Aldridge; Cas-
tellanos; Kolomycka; Liu; Santat; 
Shammas; Tabor
Grief—fiction: Santat
Grief—stories: Forler; Howden
HISTORICAL FICTION: Elliott; 
Safi; van Rijckeghem
History, U.S.: Esbaum
Holidays—stories: Price
HORROR: Hutchinson
HUMOR: Arena; Barnett; Frost; 
Hutchings; Kulekjian; Roeder
Hunting—fiction: Saft
Hurricanes—stories: Price
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
208 • The Bulletin
Identity—fiction: Bryant; Kamins; 
Shammas
Illness—fiction: Kamins 
Immigrants—fiction: Castellanos
Immigrants—stories: Vo
Incest—fiction: Higginbotham
Insects—stories: Hutchings; Tabor
Kentucky—fiction: Stevens
Knights—fiction: Shammas
Knights—stories: Tabor
LGBTQIA people—fiction: Brown; 
Hutchinson; Jackson; McLemore
Lions—stories: Tinn-Disbury
Literature, classic: Safi
Literature, English: Peterson; Savaryn
Louisiana—fiction: Kelly
Magic—fiction: Aldridge; Applebaum; 
Herrick; Lin; Liu; Saft
Mail: Esbaum
Marine life—fiction: Santat
Medicine—fiction: Kamins
Memory—fiction: Laure; Stokes
Mental illness—fiction: Laure
Mexican Americans—fiction: 
McLemore
Mining—fiction: Stokes
Monsters—fiction: Emezi; Hutchin-
son
Mothers—fiction: Ziegler
Mothers—stories: Howden
Music and musicians—fiction: Al-
dridge
Music and musicians—stories: Kule-
kjian
Muslims—fiction: Safi
MYSTERY: Stevens
Mythology, Korean: Oh
Natural disasters—fiction: Skinner
New Orleans—stories: Price
Night—stories: Howden
Oceans—fiction: Oh
Performers—stories: Barnett
Pets—stories: Forler
Pilots: Esbaum
Plants—stories: Arena
POETRY: Price 
Protests—fiction: Jackson
Reading, aloud: Hutchings; Morrison
Reading, beginning: Kolomycka; 
Tabor
Resistance movements—fiction: Cas-
tellanos; Emezi
Romance—fiction: Brown; Laure; Lin; 
Peterson; Saft
Running—fiction: Bryant
Schools—fiction: Herrick; Kelly
Schools—stories: Miller; Vo
SCIENCE FICTION: Brown; Jack-
son; Redgate
Seasons—fiction: Herrick
Seasons—stories: Kulekjian
Sexual assault—fiction: Higginbo-
tham; Hutchinson
Ships and sailing—fiction: Elliott
Shyness—fiction: Collier
Siblings—fiction: van Rijckeghem
Sisters—fiction: Peterson
Skateboarding—stories: Morrison
Sleep—stories: Roeder
Space travel—fiction: Redgate
Stars—stories: Roeder
Storms—fiction: Skinner
Storytime: Arena; Kulekjian; Hutch-
ings; Roeder
Strokes—fiction: Ziegler
SURVIVAL STORIES: Redgate
Tea—fiction: Lin
Texas—fiction: Stokes
Turtles—stories: Forler
War—fiction: van Rijckeghem
Winter: Esbaum
WORDLESS STORIES: Castellanos
World War II—fiction: Elliott
Writers and writing—fiction: Nazem-
ian
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
Bookbird:
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
The Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books
Children’s Literature
Children’s Literature 
Association Quarterly
Journal of the History of 
Childhood and Youth
The Lion and the Unicorn
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
TO ORDER
CALL: 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987   FAX: 410.516.3866
E-mail: jrnlcirc@jh.edu 
or visit us online at
David L. Russell, Ferris state University; 
Karin E. Westman, Kansas state University; 
and Naomi J. Wood, Kansas state University
/ Editors 
The Lion and the Unicorn , an international 
theme- and genre-centered journal, 
is committed to a serious, ongoing 
discussion of literature for children. The 
journal’s coverage includes the state of 
the publishing industry, regional authors, 
comparative studies of significant books 
and genres, new developments in theory, 
the art of illustration, the mass media, and 
popular culture. It is especially noted for its 
interviews with authors, editors, and other 
important contributors to the field, as well 
as its outstanding book review section.
Published 3 times per year in January, April, 
and September. 
Volume 45-46 (2022). 
P-ISSN: 0147-2593; E-ISSN: 1080-6563.
Annual Individual 
Subscriptions
$40.00 (print); 
$50.00 (online)
Annual Institutional 
Subscriptions
$145.00 (print);
$165.00 (online); 
$203.00 (print & online)
International postage fees apply.
OH, THE PLACES YOU’LL GO! 
OH, THE PAPERS YOU’LL READ!
The Lion and The Unicorn
