ILLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
K
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
44
4~5A_
ISBN 0-87845-105-6;
Number 39; 143 pages;
paper; $21.95*
STORY: FROM FIREPIACE TO CYBERSPACE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 39th Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their development
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
ture-and information in all forms.
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSOI
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin Storytelling Review contains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
F_ 
Availablefrom the
Graduale School ofLibrary & Mformatiou Science
L 
Publications Office 
-A
'ýcnd ()idcr,, to: G'ýW, 1)oil)ltk ýItjoll", (M , i(c, k()()Ill -1 1, ý01 F D:lilicl "liccl, Cklllipýligil. It,
01820.
(jvý 
to ti lk, I nivcl-sm lit fflill(is) ý1(vq*'J
It 11()i I I 1ý1601) 
1-dil I" ()tl 1(_ý) 
pý lhli(ýtl i('l I", -ýItl N, ohtýl im'd h\ \\ I itiil'ý To) t1 it ý ý11)()vc ad-
(11 
()1. ('ýt I I N. ý1((k 
I ý 11 ()1 it V d) 'itc 
I Ittp: \\ N\ \\ I i,.t liolc.t -du I)[ IN)i f,
h I, " Iloc, \ý )'I lildtld" ,I lippiný " A 4 1 lill 11 w t [)]I, ýý I 
I I Ic '] lippil I,-, (' ,I 
I , ()I I Iw lin'l
I)()( 1,ý I fl q týý I, I l ýI( I( I ilioll:1 I I )I 1( 111 (11c ýt I) Iý (m cl. ( )1jtidc ( It [I Ic I I lit (lI 
i I w shipping
i, 
I I )I It it ý I il ýl I)()( )1\ , , I, 
I( 'I (Lý 
I k'I I ý I ý 1, j j [ o )[ Jý 
11 j 
)1, ;11 [11( ill 1ý ý ('I( J( 
11 ij) F Lirl I I
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 2003
Vol. 57 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
137 
THE BIG PICTURE
Snow Music written and illus. by Lynne Rae Perkins
138 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
150 * The Several Lives of Orphan Jack by Sarah Ellis; illus. by Bruno
St-Aubin
152 * The Man Who Walked between the Towers written and illus. by Mordicai
Gerstein
160 * I'm Mighty! by Kate McMullan; illus. by Jim McMullan
161 * When We Were Saints by Han Nolan
166 * The Tree ofLife: A Book Depicting the Life of Charles Darwin: Naturalist,
Geologist & Thinker written and illus. by Peter Sfs
171 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
172 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
9,0 
or<*
^&D~ 
d
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Molly Dolan
Krista Hutley
Hope Morrison
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $70.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2003 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Lynne Rae Perkins from Snow Music ©2003. Used by permission of
Greenwillow Books.
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
137
THE BIG PICTURE
Snow Music
written and illus. by Lynne Rae Perkins
There's something magical about the way snow changes a world, softening the
edges of the familiar landscape and inviting adventure, and a host of picture books,
including most famously Ezra Jack Keats' The Snowy Day (BCCB 12/62), have
explored the phenomenon. Lynne Rae Perkins' Snow Music is a splendid addition
to that frosty gallery, making its own original contribution to the subject in its
unassuming yet imaginative depiction of the way snow affects the sound of the
world, resulting in, of course, snow music.
The setting is a small town, wherein the landscape changed when "snow
came singing a silent song" last night; come morning all has been transformed.
When a boy opens his kitchen door to marvel at the view, his dog slips past him
out into the neighborhood. As the bundled-and-booted child searches for his
busily wandering dog, he traverses a countryside filled with other animals (and a
few vehicles) also out exploring, and he meets a friend who helps him dog-track.
Eventually, after the sun has warmed the earth and begun to melt the snow, the
boy finds and retrieves his dog and returns home; come nightfall, soft snow begins
to fall again, covering up the brown grass exposed by the day's thaw.
The low-anxiety wandering-dog plot serves as a useful focus, but the real
point here is, as the title suggests, the sound of a world newly blanketed in snow.
Perkins conducts her snow music like a symphony, providing the audience with
sound-effect parts: "Everyone whisper: peth peth peth ... " begins the book in an
evocation of the sound of falling snow, and cleverly notated musical staves docu-
ment the music of the exploring dog (his panting breath punctuated by his jin-
gling tags) and passing vehicles (with their crunching wheels and muffled radio).
Smaller melodies, such as the sound of a falling leaf on bared pavement, are also
carefully observed, and the steps of animals (including the pair of boys) are given
an auditory evocation that combines with the visual: the squirrel's busy, darting
path ("I think-/I think/ I left it-/I think/ I left it/ here-/ somewhere . .. / I
think") trickles across the page in shaped text on one side of the spread laid out to
mirror the illustrated pawprints on the other. Against this music is set softly rhyth-
mic text couplets, lullingly documenting the changing weather and foraging ani-
mals, and brief dialogue, ringing in the chill air, from the boys searching for the
dog.
Perkins' watercolors aren't just backdrop but are active players in this
symphony. Her style is deft yet sturdily earthbound, with authentically nubbly
and rumpled textures. As usual, she focuses not on dreamily picturesque neigh-
borhoods rife with architectural gingerbread but on a modest collection of every-
day houses, laced with utility lines and mesh fencing; this is therefore not a fairy-tale
138 
* THE BULLETIN
mist of snow but a more recognizable variety, with leftover tomato cages sticking
up through the frosting and tire tread forming its own magical patterns. The
artistic details have the same homely warmth as the style: a deer browses amid the
frostbitten vegetables, a rabbit hops over the white lines on the asphalt road (search-
ing for little critters in every spread is an entertaining pursuit in its own right), a
child traces patterns in the breath-made fog on the inside of the car window. All
together, this is an extraordinarily accurate expression of the winter experience,
which will elicit immediate recognition from winter veterans and convey the spe-
cial quality of a newly snow-tempered world to youngsters who've never experi-
enced it. Read it aloud for the pure pleasure, or to inspire audiences to listen to
their own seasonal music. (Imprint information appears on p. 164.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AESOP Aesop's Fables; ad. and illus. by Brad Sneed. 
Dial, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-8037-2751-8 
$16.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Using colloquial language and dialogue mixed with classic plots and morals, Sneed
makes fifteen of Aesop's fables witty, contemporary, and accessible. Watercolor,
colored pencil, and acrylic illustrations erupt across spreads alive with exaggerated
(not cutesified) fowls and beasts: pompous roosters, sneaky mice, sly foxes, and
boastful bullfrogs are uniquely caricatured, with expressions and body language
that indicate the personality quirks that may bring about their eventual downfall.
The pictures swirl with action, from the flaunting feathers of the posturing rooster
to the submissive grin of the obsequious fox. Individual fables begin with themati-
cally decorated capital letters, a classic detail that humorously contrasts with the
good-natured irreverence of the text. Many favorites (such as "The Ant and the
Grasshopper," "The Ox and the Frog," and "The Lion and the Mouse") are in-
cluded; Aesop's perhaps most well-known tale ("The Tortoise and the Hare") is
told sans text on the front and back covers, endpapers, and title spread. For those
introducing Aesop in the classroom or library, this rollicking revision will be a
welcome alternative to versions staid in prose and static in image. JMD
ALBERT, LOUISE 
Less than Perfect. Holiday House, 2003 
[188p]
ISBN 0-8234-1688-7 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Laura's sophomore year brings some changes to her life. Some are good: a meet-
ing with an affectionate golden retriever, Folly, nets her a dog-walking job for the
Rosen family and a budding romance with young Paul Rosen. Some are not: a
biopsy reveals that her mother is suffering from breast cancer, and she must un-
dergo a mastectomy and chemotherapy. Laura's therefore drawn to the cheerful
Rosen home, where she doesn't have to think about her mother's frightening situ-
I
I
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
139
ation, but even there shadows threaten happiness: cancer takes Folly's life, and
Mr. Rosen's ill health forces the family to move across the country. While Albert
never really weaves her plot strands together, she's keenly perceptive about the
confusion of a young woman in such a position, and especially about Laura's si-
multaneous desires to treat her mother better and to have some respite from think-
ing about her. What's particularly refreshing is that the novel is understanding
rather than prescriptive, sympathizing with Laura without suggesting that there is
some ideal behavior in which she should be engaging. The romance with Paul is
depicted with unusual perspicacity, following Laura's minute-by-minute shifts from
joy to puzzlement to disappointment without overemphasizing their import, and
it's also unusual to see a book that recognizes that one family's danger doesn't
preclude another's tragedy. The understanding focus on the young person's point
of view makes this a reassuring read for teens whose family is undergoing its own
challenges. DS
ANDERSEN, 
HANS 
CHRISTIAN 
Thumbelina; ad. and illus. by Brian
Pinkney. 
Greenwillow, 2003 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17477-9 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17476-0 
$16.99 
M 
4-7 yrs
Brian Pinkney here retells classic Andersen in abbreviated though accessible lan-
guage for the younger listener. Unfortunately, the tale of the tiny heroine's adven-
tures loses much of its poetry in this bare-bones condensation, and the lost charm
is not balanced by the accompanying colored-ink illustrations. The depiction of
the title character as a dark-haired, dark-eyed, dark-skinned gamine will certainly
be welcomed by many viewers as an alternative to the ubiquitous golden blondes
of many illustrated fairy tales, but a studied naYvet6 results in unsophisticated im-
ages that have little visual appeal. The palette leans heavily on clashing hues that
alternate between garish warm colors and washed-out cool ones; the diminutive
characters are overpowered by undifferentiated backgrounds. Lackluster compo-
sitions hindered by careless drafting and an inconsistent sense of proportion fail to
evoke the magic of this well-loved tale. Those seeking to introduce youngsters to
Andersen's miniature marvel will do better with more lyrical adaptations by Amy
Ehrlich (BCCB 4/80) or Adrienne Adams (2/62). JMD
ARNOLD, CAROLINE 
Uluru: Australia's Aboriginal Heart; illus. with photographs
by Arthur Arnold. 
Clarion, 2003 
[64p]
ISBN 0-618-18181-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
This is no simple bus tour of the stunning geological phenomenon Uluru, long
referred to in Western cultures as Ayers Rock; interests in and of the Anangu
(Aboriginal culture) permeate every aspect of this title. Arnold hits all the bases-
from description of the earth tilting that shifted horizontal sediments into vertical
rock, to the flora and fauna of the surrounding National Park region. However,
the constant integration of the Anangu into the discussion reminds readers that
naturalist pursuits cannot be carried out in an asocial vacuum; every aspect of the
landscape has been and continues to be affected by human decisions regarding
"ownership" and use. Thus, readers learn about water conservation from the view-
point of Anangu skill at locating remote sources and about ecology through expla-
nation of how European-introduced species upset the floral and faunal balance.
140 
* THE BULLETIN
Uluru is, of course, a photogenic subject, and Arthur Arnold makes the most of his
sitter. The rich purples and blues of the Mutitjulu water hole, the pockmarked
and striated surfaces that recall animal mythologies, and the crimson sunset shim-
mer of the oxidized rock all show to advantage. Although Caroline Arnold com-
ments on the spiritual relationship between mythical stories and landforms, she
carefully explains the cultural restrictions on storytelling that limit outsider knowl-
edge ofUluru's significance; likewise, Arthur Arnold never includes Anangu in his
photos but instead pictures tourists at the rock's base to lend a sense of scale. The
glossary and pronunciation guide is a welcome resource, and an index and author's
note round out the volume. EB
ARONSON, MARc 
Witch-Hunt: Mysteries of the Salem Witch Trials. Atheneum,
2003 
[288p] 
illus. and with photographs
ISBN 0-689-84864-1 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-12
Aronson holds forth at considerable length on a bleak chapter in colonial history,
producing a work that is part myth debunking, part scholarly survey, and a gener-
ous helping of speculation. After a slow start through preliminary notes, an intro-
duction, and a prologue (which establish Aronson's recurrent theme of how beliefs
we now consider folklore shaped the colonial Puritans' worldview), the witchcraft
accusations finally fly and the trial gets underway. Sort of. Readers will not find a
neatly structured account of the trial, but rather chronological highlights punctu-
ated by scholarly theories on the psychological, political, and social motivations of
various players and by Aronson's homiletic analogies between Puritan behavior
and our own times ("They were like those fundamentalists of all religions today
who can justify extreme measures against others-whether that be attacking U.S.
cities, killing doctors who perform abortions, or settling in occupied territories-
on the grounds that they have a divine right to take them"). Within the extensively
annotated source notes are buried valuable observations that could have profitably
appeared within the text; an epilogue reviews the current state of research (and
offhandedly dismisses medical explanations as "fruitless"); an appendix, not in-
cluded in the galley, is slated to discuss The Crucible and its limitations to histori-
cal understanding of the Salem trial. This is not the place for novices to begin
sorting through the tangled story of the trial, but readers with an established and
avid interest should appreciate Aronson's infectious enthusiasm and his proposed
path for further study. EB
Avi 
The Mayor of Central Park; illus. by Brian Floca. 
HarperCollins,
2003 
193p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-051556-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000682-X 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-7
It's 1900, and Oscar Westerwit, dapper squirrel and unofficial mayor of Central
Park, has a good life until Big Daddy Duds, a rat (literally) gangster from down-
town decides to move uptown and muscle in on Oscar's territory. Oscar finds
himself-and his few brave followers--on the brink of disaster, until Maud, Duds'
straight-arrow daughter, suggests a winner-take-all compromise: a baseball game
between Oscar's Central Park Green Sox and Duds' downtowners. It's hard to
predict whether young readers will recognize the genre that Avi expertly carica-
tures, and adult concerns are, despite the animal characters, still adult concerns.
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
141
Nevertheless, the momentum is swift and the details unerring: Avi sets up and
sends up his critter society with flair and wit. The language, even without the
context provided by knowledge of Runyon (or the viewing of Guys and Dolls), is
fresh and funny, and it may well start a new trend in slang. The settling of a
territory score with a baseball score has a simple justice that will appeal to sports
fans; the settling of the romantic score-a spurned Maud uses the pitching tricks
taught her by her ex to save the day-has the same sort of resonant clout. Floca's
full-page black-and-white illustrations give amiable faces to refined gents, gang-
sters, and molls. As the book itself says, "You got yourself a story busting to trot
itself up Broadway like a tap-dancing centipede." And that's the straight skinny,
dollars to doughnuts. JMD
AYLESWORTH, JIM, ad. 
Goldilocks and the Three Bears; illus. by Barbara
McClintock. 
Scholastic, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-439-39545-3 
$15.95 
R 4-6yrs
Continuing their successful partnership (The GingerbreadMan, BCCB 2/98, and
The Tale of Tricky Fox, 3/01), Aylesworth and McClintock team up for a tongue-
in-cheek look at this classic tale. Aylesworth's retelling concentrates on Goldilocks'
behavior ("But once in a while, Goldilocks would forget not to do things that her
mother told her not to do, and that kind of forgetting would lead to much more
serious trouble"), employing a calm intensity that makes the prose effective either
as a straightforward readaloud or in a hammily overexpressive performance. The
mischievous sense of caricature in the illustrations suggests the latter; the etching-
like line of McClintock's old-fashioned images emphasizes the heroine's overabun-
dance of lustrous curls and overly angelic demeanor, balanced by expressions that
indicate a child intent on serious deviltry. The bears' house boasts gorgeously de-
tailed furnishings in orderly arrangements, a background that only emphasizes the
deceptively amiable appearance of the actually destructive Goldilocks. While the
text is not as crisp as Aylesworth and McClintock's previous collaborations, it is
still lively, and the images are definitely worth making room on the shelf for this
version of the favorite nursery tale. A source note is included. JMD
BEAMES, MARGARET 
Night Cat; illus. by Sue Hitchcock. 
Orchard, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-439-38576-8 
$15.95 
R 
3-6yrs
Oliver the cat doesn't want to go inside: "The garden was full of light and shad-
ows, lamplight and moonlight-full of things that danced and fluttered, leaves
and moths and trees. It was exciting." He therefore resists owner Mrs. Bundy's
repeated calls, staying out to explore a garden made mysterious by darkness. The
cat jumps at "fat, furry moths," and he is startled by an owl just as he's preparing to
pounce on a mouse; an encounter with an intimidating opossum and a splattering
of raindrops complete his adventure, and he opts to head home ("He was tired.
The garden was dark and wet and lonely"). Beames' text is a readaloud dream; the
combination of action verbs and unexpected language makes the images lively and
fresh. Hitchcock's computer-generated illustrations occasionally become slick and
the colors somewhat lurid, but they take full advantage of the mystery provided by
a blue-violet garden shadowed in moonlight. Black silhouettes and white cut-outs
combine with gleams of golden eyes, slashes of white teeth, and splashes of red
collar and tongue to startle the viewer with intense flashes of color. The conclud-
ing scene-wherein the curl of cat settles into a fuzzy-blanketed basket in front of
142 
* THE BULLETIN
a raging fire-is the purrfect ending to this nighttime walk on the (almost) wild
side. This is a tale just spooky enough for Halloween, but fine for storytime any-
time. JMD
BENTON, JIM 
Franny K Stein, Mad Scientist: Lunch Walks among Us; written
and illus. by Jim Benton. 
Simon, 2003 
102p
ISBN 0-689-86291-1 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-5
Franny's a young mad scientist, happily coexisting with bats and sending voltage
through whatever's lying around the house, which makes her the odd one out at
school ("The other kids weren't mean; they just had never known anybody like
Franny"). After careful experimentation, Franny devises a method for improved
social relations, which basically involves rejecting her mad-scientist side; when
careless trash-can use results in the creation of a Giant Monstrous Fiend who kidnaps
the class teacher, Franny must call on the skills she's hidden in order to defeat it.
This has the glib, kid-appealing insouciance of Captain Underpants with an
intelligence all its own: kids may not get why Franny's teacher is named Miss
Shelly, but they'll adore the generously flowing jokes about everything from pants-
wetting to "unstable industrial waste," Franny's quandary of self-presentation
("Deep down she knew the game would have been much more fun with a skull or
giant squid eyeball"), and her defensive Lunch-Meat Monster, who defeats the
Giant Monstrous Fiend. What's more, Franny's dilemma actually gives the
effervescent tale a genuine plot and theme, which are carefully restrained to avoid
overshadowing the humor but give the hijinks some shape and point. Broadly
scrawled art has an animated flair; occasional special-effects pages that invite readers
to cut on dotted lines will likely incur some maimage, but that won't impair readerly
enjoyment of the book. This is both smart and snork-worthy, an easy read that
will appeal particularly to young cynics and goths-to-be. DS
BLUMENTHAL, DEBORAH 
Ice Palace; illus. by Ted Rand. 
Clarion, 2003 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-15960-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
In this fact-based tale, Blumenthal introduces readers to the plans and prepara-
tions for the annual winter carnival in Saranac Lake, New York. The fictional
narrator's father is on the planning committee, and she dogs his steps as he and
fellow residents arrange for snowshoe volleyball courts, an ice chute, and, most
important, an ice palace constructed from blocks of ice sawn from the lake. Much
of the labor is undertaken by inmates on work release from the nearby minimum-
and medium-security correctional facility, and this long standing cooperative ar-
rangement is as much a source of community pride as the century-old carnival
itself. The narrator has her own stake in the carnival's success; her uncle is one of
the inmates building the ice palace, and she hopes he will be with them again next
year "to celebrate winter, the outdoors, and a free life." Blumenthal dangles three
enticing subjects before her listeners-the carnival, the ice creation, and the prison
program-but never develops any of these themes in satisfying depth. Likewise,
Rand's watercolor and acrylic illustrations zip through the massive and potentially
fascinating construction project that, when finished, appears less like ice than an
uneasy cross between Lego blocks and Lite Brite pegs. Still, this is an offbeat
winter story with a positive message on community-building that should have
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
143
considerable appeal among kids approaching snowsuit season. Notes on the festi-
val and the work-release program are appended. EB
BROOME, ERROL 
Drusilla the Lucky Duck; illus. by Sharon Thompson. 
Annick,
2003 
[72p]
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55037-799-X 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55037-798-1 
$4.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Ten-year-old Carrie "went to the breeders' market to buy a kitten, and came home
with a duck," whom she names Drusilla. Though her family is skeptical, Carrie
proves a devoted and wise caretaker of Drusilla even after the latter turns from
fuzzy duckling to sleek adult duck. It's therefore a strain for Carrie to be separated
from her beloved charge when the family goes on vacation, leaving Drusilla with
friends; strain turns to horror when she returns to discover that Drusilla has been
passed from house to house, ending up with a man who spoke gleefully of "fatten-
ing her up." This Australian import (arriving via Canada) combines a lively, per-
sonable style, a sympathetic protagonist, and an involving and even suspenseful
plot, making for an inviting and enjoyable early chapter book. The realistic depic-
tion of family friction and family affection gives the story a solid background that
adds to its credibility without detracting from the main plot, and there are plenty
of concrete details about duck-keeping as well; Carrie's heroic rescue of her appro-
priated and endangered duck adds an unusual touch of drama as well as providing
a satisfying conclusion. Thompson's droll, tidily lined drawings catch the story's
quirky charm, and early readers will take to this one like the proverbial duck to
water. DS
BROWN, DON 
American Boy: The Adventures ofMark Twain; written and illus.
by Don Brown. 
Houghton, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-17997-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
In a significant departure from his previous picture-book bios, Brown focuses not
on adult accomplishment but on childhood promise, even though the subject's
own mother "could see no promise in him." After stringing together kid-pleasing
anecdotes from Samuel Clemens' boyhood (beginning in 1849, reverting to 1835,
and carrying on from there), Brown does get around to explaining to little listeners
just who the featured scamp turns out to be and recaps how these episodes relate to
his Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn novels: "Tom Blankenship became Huck
Finn. Sweetheart Laura Hawkins was in the books as Becky Thatcher. And a part
of Uncle Dan'l was there as the big-hearted slave, Jim." All well and good, if the
intended picture book audience knows or cares about novels with which they are
probably yet unacquainted. Still, if children are willing to accept that this is some-
one they should know, they may find some amusement watching Sam and his
friends sneak out on midnight larks, explore a spooky cave with bats and "a dead
body-a teenage girl who had been placed there, instead of in a cemetery, by her
eccentric father" (the accompanying picture has plenty of bats but no corpse-
sorry), and nearly drown in Bear Creek. Watercolor scenes, while energetic and
literal, do not offer the lush coloration of Uncommon Traveler (BCCB 7/00), breadth
of landscape of Across a Dark and Wild Sea (5/02), or variety of countenances of
Mack Made Movies (5/03). Use this as a pleasant intro to an important American,
but plan on supplying your own sidebar data. EB
144 
* THE BULLETIN
BYRD, ROBERT 
Leonardo: Beautiful Dreamer; written and illus. by Robert
Byrd. 
Dutton, 2003 
48p
ISBN 0-525-47033-6 
$17.99 
R Gr. 4-8
Leonardo da Vinci lived a rich life wherein he moved quickly from project to
project, intellectual exploration to intellectual exploration, and this treatment of
his life reflects that. The text follows the traditional biographical components and
achievements but devotes itself particularly to his technological and imaginative
endeavors. Though it's less delicate and creative, the format recalls Peter Sis' Starry
Messenger (BCCB 11/96): each spread is densely packed, with a title indicating its
thematic or chronological focus, sidebars, thumbnail images, decorative details,
and stylized borders weaving through the main text and illustrations. Byrd adds to
the pageantry by opting for a carnivalesque palette that defies picture-book prece-
dent by eschewing the darker hues of period art in favor of the brightness of the
Renaissance itself; delicate, spidery lines add imaginative texture to the scenes.
This is a bit more like a series of overstuffed posters than a genuine chronicle, since
the design sometimes overwhelms the narrative and the collected tidbits are some-
times short of context or connection to one another. There's a tasty smorgasbord
of Leonardo facts and insights (and even amusements, such as the page that uses
Leonardo's mirror writing for a sampling of his insights), though, and the result
vividly conveys the breadth and color of one of the great minds of the millennium,
making this a useful complement to Diane Stanley's Leonardo (BCCB 9/06). An
author's note briefly discusses Leonardo's influence; a detailed timeline helps round
out the picture, and an extensive bibliography gives readers additional resources
for deeper investigation. DS
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
Daughter ofthe Wind. Orchard, 2003 
26 6p
ISBN 0-439-35224-X 
$17.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Gauk, a young hunter, witnesses the mauling death of his friend by a bear, but he
slays the beast and becomes a berserker, a fearsome fighter imbued with the bear's
spirit. Hego, a somewhat slow-witted blade sharpener, stays in his village, resigned
to the fact he will never be a hunter or warrior. Hallgerd, privileged daughter of
the local jarl, is abducted from her father's house to forge a political alliance as
stolen bride to the son of a powerful Danish jarl. There's a tacit promise that the
stories will eventually merge as, shifting by chapter among the three plot threads,
Cadnum follows each player's movements. Hallgerd stalls for time with her polite
but steely captors, waiting for the rescue that's sure to come; Gauk, a kind of
Viking Odysseus, makes a slow odyssey back to his village, pausing here and there
for a good fight, a visit to a seer, and a run-in with the gods; Hego grabs an oppor-
tunity to become a warrior by joining Gauk on a mission to reclaim Hallgerd.
Each tale independently sustains interest, but it takes awhile to catch the rhythm
of the plot shifts, and real momentum only begins to build halfway into the novel.
While the title and the busty blonde cover girl seem to court female adventure
readers, the blood-and-guts detail is at least as likely to amuse a testosterone-charged
readership. This doesn't quite reach the bar set by Cadnum's Crusaders in Book of
the Lion and The Leopard Sword (BCCB 2/00 and 1/03), but action-hungry teens
should by pleased with these pugnacious, lusty Norsemen. EB
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
145
CANN, KATE 
Hard Cash. 
Simon Pulse, 2003 
[336p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-85905-8 
$5.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Rich knows he's a talented artist, and at seventeen he's tired of stupid drawing
assignments in art class-and he's even more tired of being broke. He's therefore
thrilled when some of his sketches elicit interest from an advertising company,
interest made tangible in the form of considerable payments for his assistance and
some storyboard work thrown his way; perhaps more important is the personal
interest of Nick, the director, who casually shares his life with Rich and clearly sees
exactly the future for Rich that Rich has desired. As if better clothes, spending
money, and artsy social circles weren't heady enough, the influx of cash means that
Rich can finally ask out the seductive Portia, whose high-priced tastes have hith-
erto put her out of Rich's reach. Some of the elements in this British import,
which is the first of a projected trilogy, may sound fairly predictable, but they're
executed with freshness and intelligence. Rich is headstrong but not so much
wrong as trying to spread his wings, and Nick isn't a Lucifer leading Rich astray
after financially seducing him but a nice guy who hasn't quite grasped that the
world to which he's introducing his young protege is currently well out of his
league. While readers are probably betting that Rich will eventually end up with
Bonny (a nice, artistic girl who ends up Rich's roommate after he's kicked out of
his house and she leaves hers), his fascination with Portia is credible ("Now I know
she's not real and she pisses me off, does it mean I can't sleep with her?"), and he's
doubtless not as through with her as he thinks at the end of the book. Cann salts
the young adult's traditional longing for financial and social independence with a
glamorous setting and alluring details, giving this the glittery charms of a soap
opera with a solid underpinning of genuine understanding. This will be an easy
one to sell, and there will doubtless be YAs waiting impatiently for the next install-
ment. DS
CAZET, DENYS Minnie 6& Moo and the Seven Wonders of the World; written and
illus. by Denys Cazet. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2003 
134p
ISBN 0-689-85330-0 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
The two hapless bovines (from Minnie and Moo: The Night before Christmas,
BCCB 12/02, etc.) have returned, and they've got weighty matters on their not-
oversized brains: an overheard conversation suggests that their farmer is being
forced to sell up. Once they realize the horrible consequences of such an action
(no more chocolate creams, espresso machine, or electric hair dryer), they decide
to hurl themselves into impressive action and save the farm. Tourist attractions
are their method of choice, and they're sure they'll make a mint with the Presiden-
tial Bunion, the Rock that Never Moves, and five other local wonders of equally
dubious merit. Unfortunately, pickings are slim until a wandering rhinoceros, the
intervention of Elvis the Rooster, and a timely misunderstanding on the part of
the rhinoceros' kindly and not-too-sharp pursuers net them a bonanza-which it
turns out the farmer didn't need in the first place. The energy isn't as effectively
sustained here as it is in the earlier, considerably shorter outings, but this is still a
barnyardful of laughs. The absurdity of the cows' peculiar reality gets expanded
for a cornucopia of silliness that will entertain readers or listeners, and there are
146 
* 
THE BULLETIN
plenty of fresh laugh-out-loud lines. Cazet's illustrations are black and white rather
than the color of the previous volumes, but don't worry, he hasn't suddenly gone
sophisticated: there's still a joyously chaotic array of overdressed livestock on hand.
The chapter-book format makes a sequential readaloud to a younger audience a
promising possibility, and readers who've kept touch with the high-stepping heif-
ers will appreciate a longer outing that suits their developing reading stamina. DS
COLFER, EOIN 
The Wish List. 
Miramax/Hyperion, 2003 
252p
ISBN 0-7868-1863-8 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Meg arrives at her final reckoning, having literally been blown to Kingdom Come
in a failed robbery attempt, dead-even on points for goodness and badness; St.
Peter has no choice but to send her back to earth to decisively tip the balance.
Belch, mastermind behind the robbery, slides straight into perdition, but in order
to make his eternity in hell less, well, hellish, he's sent back as well to make sure
Meg keeps to her criminal ways. Meg's atonement mission involves helping their
victim, Mr. Lowrie McCall, accomplish a list of things he wants to do before he
dies, and it takes all a spirit can give to get the old geezer to kiss his lost love, kick
a soccer goal, redress an old wrong, and spit off the Cliffs of Moher. A large
measure of goodness is, of course, unavoidable since readers will want Meg to
squeak through the Pearly Gates at last, but this ride is altogether more exciting
when evil's at the wheel. Colfer has a wonderful way with wickedness, as fans of
his Artemis Fowl series know, and his metaphysical cast steals the show. Beelzebub
and St. Peter operate under a sly detente (each has some quibbles with his respec-
tive employer), Flit scrapes soul residue off the tunnel into the afterlife and nudges
the odd spirit off in the right direction, and much of the mayhem on earth is
orchestrated by a (again, literally) damned computer programmer. The triumph
of Good is a foregone conclusion, but the deviltry is great while it lasts. EB
COLLINS, PAT LOWERY 
The Fattening Hut. Houghton, 2003 
186p
ISBN 0-618-30955-1 
$15.00 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Helen has entered the fattening hut. Here, according to the time-honored cus-
toms of her tribe, she will eat until she is fat enough to wed Esenu, an older man in
her village. Although her sister is also in the hut, nursing her first child and assur-
ing her that things will be fine, Helen feels a vague mistrust of the fattening cus-
tom. Her body is even more adamant in its resistance; she finds that even though
she is presented with her favorite foods, she cannot eat, and she throws up what
she does manage to swallow. Her aunt Margaret, a village outcast, brings her a
book that alludes to a "cutting" ceremony that culminates the fattening ritual.
Uncertain as to what the cutting means but horrified nonetheless, Helen flees in
the nick of time, wandering the island until she is rescued by some English scien-
tists who grant her asylum. Collins writes in an afterword that she was compelled
to write the story when she learned of the custom of fattening huts and female
circumcision; because she could not do the requisite research into specific cultures
where these practices took place, she acted on the advice of friends to set the book
in a "mythical" culture of her own making. It was bad advice. Though the author
attempts to establish a specific history for the tribe, scattered references make that
history hard to sort out, and while the writing is often sensitive, the ragged-right
margins strain to establish poetry rather than fact. Even Margaret's convenient
Anglophilia doesn't fully account for Helen's strong preference for English culture
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
147
or her visceral refusal of her people's customs (she doesn't know about the cutting
at all when she begins throwing up her food). In the end, Helen's flight into the
hands of the enlightened English turns the narrative experience into little more
than a wish-fulfilling colonial fantasy. KC
CROCKER, CARTER 
The Tale of the Swamp Rat; written and illus. by Carter
Crocker. 
Philomel, 2003 
232p
ISBN 0-399-23964-2 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Ossie is the runt of the swamp-rat litter, not expected to live, never mind amount
to much. After Mr. Took, a vicious rattlesnake, attacks the family nest and gobbles
up his parents and siblings, Ossie is fostered by Uncle Will, an ancient alligator
who shows the rat all there is to see and tells him much of what there is to know
about survival in the great swamp. Ossie's Kiplingesque saga is a combination
coming-of-age story and hero's journey tale; the little rat grows in confidence and
strength, finds friends, survives loss, and saves lives. Characterizations of the play-
ers are memorable, from the Prophet, an old ironhead stork whose pompous self-
importance nearly destroys Ossie; to Stubb, a swamp turtle whose bravery is as
great as his speed is slow; to Preacher, a faded heron whose practical voice hides
unexpected wisdom. The episodic chapters are united by smooth prose, but they
are still effective when independently read, making this a good readaloud. The
plot is full of incident, with a masterful rise and fall of suspense and relief, and
seasonal rhythms (the book is divided into seasonal sections) help drive the narra-
tive. Each chapter opens with a black-and-white drawing, most followed by a
"swamp saying" or a quote from "The Song of the Swamp." 
Crocker's lyrical
prose is a combination of alligator dreams, swamp lore, and adventure tale that is
sure to inspire readers and readers aloud to seek out more information on the
secret beauty of the Southern swamp. JMD
DAVIS, JILL, ed. 
Open Your Eyes: Extraordinary Experiences in Faraway
Places. Viking, 2003 
203p
ISBN 0-670-03616-1 
$16.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Eleven contributors, most of them well-known authors for young people, offer ten
entries (one is jointly written) describing their experiences with travel or travelers.
Most take place abroad but some occur within America, and all of them focus on
American cross-cultural experiences; the realizations range from the importance of
one's home to the complicated identity of those with attachments to different
places. Even more than most anthologies, this is a mixed bag, with a few of the
entries about as uninterestingly anecdotal as somebody's vacation slides rather than
reflective, or requiring of a good whack of historical knowledge to understand the
implications of the narrative; there's also a tendency towards condescension in
some of the entries. Balance this, however, with the meritorious majority, includ-
ing M. T. Anderson's penetrating and rueful chronicle of his youthful British aspi-
rations ("When I decided to go to England, it was because I was tired of who I had
to be in America"), Graham Salisbury's Italian idyll (where he slowly comes to an
understanding of the length of European history), and Piper Dellums' account of
her family's 1977 experience with a South African exchange student (the African-
American family had been expecting a black African visitor, and the white South
African girl was stunned to find herself living with a black family). Travel and
148 
* THE BULLETIN
national identity are topics near and dear to the hearts of many young people, and
many of these accounts will indeed open their eyes. DS
DICKINSON, PETER 
The Tears of the Salamander. Lamb, 2003 
197p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90125-9 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73098-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In this historical fantasy, Alfredo, a musically talented twelve-year-old, loses his
family in a fire, whereupon his uncle Giorgio takes responsibility for the boy, re-
moves him from the cathedral choir, and saves him from the operation that would
make him a castrato. There is mystery in Alfredo's talent for singing, and even
more in his secretive uncle's life on Sicily, under the shadow of volcanic Mt. Etna.
The only other members of the household are a mute housekeeper, Annetta, and
her son, Toni, who was "born with his mind deformed." Uncle Giorgio tells Alfredo
that he is part of a long tradition of musical masters of the mountain, that the men
ofAlfredo's family have controlled the fiery Mt. Etna for centuries, and that Giorgio's
plan is to train Alfredo to do the same-or is it? Alfredo's discovery that Annetta
is Giorgio's wife and Toni is their son is overshadowed by the discovery that his
uncle plans to trade his old body for Alfredo's healthy young one in an ancient
ceremony involving the fire salamanders of the volcano. Dickinson's evocation of
the setting is thickly sensual; his depictions of music, fire, and ceremonial magic
are delivered in sumptuous layered prose rife with metaphor. Much of the action
is internal, however, and the momentum moves slowly through Alfredo's discover-
ies. The language has a distancing formality, the characterizations are limited, and
the closed world ofAlfredo's uncle eventually becomes claustrophobic. The too-
measured pace reaches a thundering crescendo in the climactic conclusion (com-
plete with earthquake and near-volcanic eruption), however, ending the book on a
strong note. Dickinson gives readers the space to wrestle with ethical dilemmas
through the contrast between the Machiavellian plotting of Uncle Giorgio and the
determined goodness of Alfredo. The novel provides a forum for a thoughtful
discussion of the nearly irresistible temptation offered by the promise of unlimited
power. JMD
DOYLE, MALACHY 
Antonio on the Other Side of the World, Getting Smaller; illus.
by Carll Cneut. 
Candlewick, 2003 
28p
ISBN 0-7636-2173-0 
$15.99 
R 4-6 yrs
Antonio visits "his wonderful gran" on the other side of the world: "They had a
whale of a time, paddling around in Granny's boat and tossing jam sandwiches to
the snippy-snappy sea monsters." Despite the pleasures of the visit, something
strange is happening: day by day, he is getting smaller. His wise grandmother says,
"You miss your mom-that's the problem. You miss your mom, and it's time to
go home." Antonio travels by ship, by train, and by horse, getting smaller and
smaller. When he finally arrives home it takes more than one diminutive try to get
his mother's attention; when he does, she sweeps him up into her arms, exclaim-
ing, "It's great to have you back, dear, but you could do with some fattening up."
So she cooks and the boy eats, and "in time Antonio was so tall that he could sit on
his roof, shout, 'IT'S GOOD TO BE HOME!' and wave to his wonderful gran on the
other side of the world." Doyle's tall tale about a small boy is both silly and touch-
ing; the humorous content is offset by the boy's sincere longing for his faraway
mother, and kids will readily understand how distance from home can indeed be
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
149
diminishing. Cneut's acrylic paintings are smoothly drafted, with a solid whimsy
reinforced by the earthy, rainbow-clay-like colors. The jungle flora smacks of
Henri Rousseau, and the oversized figures dominate the compositions (and Anto-
nio) with a fanciful concreteness. Antonio engages in some favorite fantasies of
small boys-being cabin boy on a ship, blowing the whistle on a train, riding a
cowboy's horse-all in the process of returning to safe harbor, home, and mother's
arms. Antonio's mother is obviously where the heart is, from her heart-patterned
dress to her heart-shaped hairdo to the heart-prints on the window curtains. Young-
sters returned from their own voyaging will recognize themselves in Antonio's
journey. JMD
DRISCOLL, LAURA 
Apples andHow They Grow; illus. by Tammy Smith. 
Grosset,
2003 
32p 
(All Aboard Science Reader)
Library ed. ISBN 0-448-43276-5 
$13.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-43275-7 
$3.99 
Ad 
Gr. 1-2
Set aside all those lovely books about the legacy of seed-grown apple trees, as there's
finally one that tells young readers the tart truth: that ain't how it happens. Driscoll's
simple text effuses briefly about apple-picking time and the wonders of different
kinds of apples and then explains that planting seeds isn't actually a reliable way to
grow apples true to type. She then describes the process of grafting (the apple
grower "finds a baby apple tree" and "joins the branch to it") and the subsequent
growth of the graft into a tree that blooms and bears fruit. This process will be
news to many youngsters, and the straightforward text doesn't overcomplicate the
matter. It would be helpful, however, to have had a little more explanation, espe-
cially in light of the illustrations' failure to clarify (and occasional tendency to
confuse) the issue: readers can't see exactly how the branch is joined, and the
suggestion that the tree takes its type from the grafted branch may leave some
youngsters thinking that the graft actually changes the original rootstock. Though
the faces in the art have a computer-generated similarity, the richly colored scenes
are cheerful and vivid, making good designerly use of the bright red apples. This
doesn't make the most out of what could be revelatory news, but hungry young
readers not up to Micucci's Life and Times ofthe Apple (BCCB 4/92) may want to
take a quick bite. DS
EGAN, TIM 
Serious Farm; written and illus. by Tim Egan. 
Houghton,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-618-22694-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Farmer Fred is a serious man. "Nothing funny about corn," he thinks. "There's no
humor in tomatoes." His animals adopt his stoic attitudes, until one day they've
decided enough is enough (Bernie the goat can't even smile convincingly any more).
The animals try various antics to make the farmer smile, but nothing works, and
they finally decide to run away. Farmer Fred is distressed-after all, "it was one
thing to be serious, but it was another to be sad"-he takes off after his animals
and convinces them to return. In so doing, he finds the idea of chickens and cows
running loose in the woods mildly funny. That's good enough for the animals,
and they come home where they are loved and cared for, if not wildly amused.
The chunky figures of both Farmer Fred and the animals call to mind Fisher-Price
toys; their mutual expressions of seriousness are rendered through identical slit
eyes and glum chins, and they seem to invite the reader to mimic the expressions
150 
* THE BULLETIN
just to fit in. Even the colors-teals, emeralds, brickish reds and clay pinks-seem
serious. The staid countenances and the grim solidity of the figures work so well
that their foolish antics occasionally miss their potential as visual comedy, and the
poker-faced final payoff may prove a bit too subtle for more than an eye-roll from
a young reader. Drollery has its own rewards, however, and this book certainly
provides a more low-key kind of comedy for young readers. KC
ELLIS, SARAH 
The Several Lives of Orphan Jack; illus. by Bruno St-
Aubin. 
Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2003 
88p
ISBN 0-88899-529-6 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Otherjack, so named because there was already a Jack in the Opportunities School
for Orphans and Foundlings when he arrived, is thrilled to hear that he is to be-
come a bookkeeper's apprentice, which he imagines means he'll be a protector of
books and a friend to scholars. When the job turns out to be not quite what he
expected, he takes the advice of his constant companion-a voice emanating from
somewhere in the vicinity of his stomach-and strikes out on the lam. Armed
with a dictionary that is missing the letters A and B (after all, who needs "aggrava-
tion and ague and boils and bombardment"?), aided and abetted by a man who
prefers life's "flitters" to its "fetchers," he makes his escape to the sea. There he
finds himself in the midst of a market with nothing to sell. As a joke, he tells a
prissy girl that he sells whims. The joke's on him, however, when she buys, and
soon he expands his trade to include thoughts, concepts, plans, impressions, no-
tions, hunches, fancies, and so on. The people of the idea-starved town ofAberbog
pay generously for his wares, which makes the mayor suspicious indeed. When he
threatens to imprison poor Jack, a friendly miller offers him succor, and Jack has
to decide whether to give up his life on the road or peddle his wares abroad. Ellis
offers delightfully quirky play with language and ideas in this brief, funny fable.
She gives tidy definitions of Jack's favorite words (" . . . bereft. Like lonely, but
more so") and sums up each chapter with a series of apt alliteratives to describe
present circumstances ("Plans and pumpkin pie, he said to himself. That's the life
of a fellow of fortune"). This is a pleasure to read to oneself, but it's also an
irresistible and infectious readaloud-warm, winning, and winsome, that's the
story of Orphan Jack. KC
FALCONER, IAN 
Olivia ... 
and the Missing Toy; written and illus. by Ian
Falconer. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-689-85291-6 
$16.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
Now in her third outing, Olivia (from Olivia, BCCB 11/00, and Olivia Saves the
Circus, 11/01), determined as always, insists that her mother make her a new soc-
cer shirt ("Olivia's uniform comes in a really unattractive green"). By the time the
shirt is ready, however, Olivia's attention has been diverted by another problem:
the disappearance of her beloved toy. The intrepid piglet uses all the best detective
skills ("She asked her little brother, Ian, 'WHAT DID YOU DO WITH MY
TOY?'"), but the toy remains unfound; come that night, Olivia hears "an awful
sound... coming from behind the door" ("So, of course, Olivia went inside") and
finds the family dog with Olivia's sadly chewed-up toy. Olivia's cheered by her
father's promise to get her the "very best toy in the whole world," but she also fixes
up her old toy and puts him in bed next to her, forgivingly allowing the dog in on
the other side. The digressive tendencies of the narrative are a bit more evident
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
151
here, since there's an actual plot that's being unfolded, and the different motifs
and plots don't quite cohere; nonetheless, there's plenty of recognizable reality,
and Olivia's still suffused with self-centered charm as she struts through her world.
As usual, it's the illustrations that really showcase her charm as the top-heavy Olivia
scampers about her apartment on the tips of her trotters, interrogating and man-
handling (pighandling?) anything that she chooses with a high-snouted imperi-
ousness that reliably resembles that of strong-willed small children. The trichromatic
palette, which adds green to Olivia's traditional red and black, helps Olivia's poor
battered toy stand out visually (he looks like he's had a pretty wild existence even
before the dog got him, so Olivia's ham-handed repair job isn't that much of an
aesthetic come-down), but it's the smoky blacks that provide the real drama here,
especially in the foldout that reveals the source of the slavering shadowed head on
the wall (the mischievously chewing pup, of course). The tender-hearted may find
it hard to recover from the toy trauma, but Olivia's legions of fans will still get a
kick out of watching the piggy princess go through her paces. DS
FLOWERS, PAM 
Big-Enough Anna: The Little Sled Dog Who Braved the Arctic; by
Pam Flowers and Ann Dixon; illus. by Bill Farnsworth. 
Alaska Northwest,
2003 
32p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-88240-577-2 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-88240-580-2 
$8.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Ever since she was a puppy, Anna was both the smallest and the most adventurous
of her siblings, and her dog-musher owner, Pam, decides to include her in the dog
team she's taking on a trans-Arctic expedition. Though little Anna is inexperi-
enced, she quickly learns the ropes, and when the veteran lead dog is incapacitated,
it's the young novice who takes over the job and sees the team through. The
writing has a few glitches, but there's a satisfying shape to the story of Anna's
growth and development, and the engaging tale of the doughty little dog is a hard
one to resist. The illustrations offer some imaginative compositions and lively
views of Anna peering out at the viewer, and the textured paint-strokes give drama
to the Arctic landscape as well as a furry reality to the dogs; unfortunately, they
squander the story's point by making Anna's size indistinguishable from that of
the other dogs, and the figures, both human and animal, tend to be stiff. This will
nonetheless make a useful, more contemporary complement to the kennelful of
Balto stories, and fans of dog heroism will want to mush along with Anna. DS
FRAME, JERON ASHFORD 
Yesterday I Had the Blues; illus. by R. Gregory
Christie. 
Tricycle, 2003 
28p
ISBN 1-58246-084-1 
$14.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
The African-American boy narrator explains, "Yesterday I had the/ blues./ Not the
rain on the sidewalk blues,/ or the broken skateboard blues, or the/ outgrew my
favorite football jersey blues.// Not even the Monday mornin'/ cold cereal instead
of pancakes blues./ Uh-uh,/ I had those deep down in my shoes blues,/ the go
away, Mr. Sun, quit smilin' at me blues." The kid-friendly, rhythmic verse utilizes
familiar, everyday words in surprising combinations that make the featured emo-
tions resonate as they're described in terms of color. The dominant hue of each
spread mirrors the sensibilities of the text: when "Sasha says she got the/ pinks./
The shiny tights,/ ballet after school,/ glitter on her cheeks pinks./ The where's my
butterfly/ hair clip? pinks," the rosy background suffuses all objects on the page.
152 
* THE BULLETIN
Christie's acrylic and gouache illustrations are powerfully composed, the balance
maintained by the juxtaposition of geometric shapes, diagonal lines, and color
blocks. Figures bisect the compositions with a powerful angularity that makes
them stand out from the background. This is a dramatic partnership of text and
images with strong curricular uses, and it will give young readers and listeners a
simple way to express feelings and emotions that may often leave them wordless.
JMD
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI 
The Man Who Walked between the Towers; written and
illus. by Mordicai Gerstein. 
Roaring Brook, 2003 
36p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2868-8 
$24.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1791-0 
$17.95 
R* 
5-9 yrs
Before the World Trade Center towers were quite complete, French acrobat and
wire walker Philippe Petit had marked them for his next stunt. He had already
traversed the span between the towers of Notre Dame Cathedral; this was surely
the next logical step. With permission out of the question, he and his friends
snuck into the buildings in disguise and rigged the wire in the night, and Petit
greeted the morning from a five-eighths-inch cable high above New York. Defy-
ing police attempts to talk him down, Petit walked into custody in his own sweet
time, was taken to court, and was sentenced "to perform in the park for the chil-
dren of the city." Although Gerstein takes no official position on the rectitude or
sanity of Petit's stunt, his line-and-watercolor pictures follow the adventure with
gleeful approbation. The midnight setup is an exciting, mysterious antic in deep-
est blues and teals, the early morning stroll a stomach-churning marvel viewed in
foldouts that capture Petit's perspective from on high and the crowd's perspective
from the ground. Even the black-robed judge beams bemusement as he delivers
the sentence from his lofty bench onto the now-grounded aerialist. There are
bound to be adults who will shudder at the thought of celebrating with a picture-
book audience an illegal, dangerous accomplishment, but Gerstein recognizes and
taps into that pervasive love/hate regard for outlaws and daredevils and bad boys
that has been observed to run through American culture. Any collection that
includes Jesse James, Harry Houdini, and the Montgolfier brothers had better
make room for Philippe Petit as well. EB
HALLIDAY, JOHN 
Predicktions. McElderry, 2003 
183p
ISBN 0-689-84564-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Josh Jolly believes that "JOSH JOLLY'S MYSTIC BOARD" (a handmade Ouija
board given to him by his fortune-telling aunt) can predict the future; unfortu-
nately, the board can't spell, so sometimes its pronouncements are difficult to
interpret. The board's prediction about Josh's first day at Westlake Middle School
is obscure to say the least, and Josh finds himself in some strange company: former
homeschooler Rainy Day, Band-AidTM sniffing Kate Haskell, and gentle giant Bill
Dumper. The four children become surprising allies: Bill steers the chess team to
a championship (despite Josh's spectacular lack of talent); Rainy and Kate ace the
swim meet; and Josh, thanks to some super-powered pumpkin seeds obtained from
Rainy's grandfather, manages to put the fading town of Westlake on the tourist
map. There are a lot of sweet ingredients in this story, but they never quite froth
into a proper dessert. The plotting is a bit haphazard, and the chapters are dis-
tractingly episodic; subplots are introduced but never really go anywhere, and
DECEMBER 2003 
* 153
middle-school angst is unrealistically absent. Still, the characters are memorable if
meringue-light: Rainy, the thoughtful one in a cheerfully anarchic family; Bill,
the romantic but shy sixth grader; and Kate, who's edgy, but not quite as awful as
first glance might imply. Strangely enough, it is Josh, the main character, who
needs more to define him. There is nonetheless definite allure in the trappings of
carnival, Ouija board, and unlikely but welcome developing friendships to keep
the pages flipping. Prediction? An eventful light read with a solid shelf life. JMD
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA, ad. 
Bruh Rabbit and the Tar Baby Girl; illus. by James E.
Ransome. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-590-47376-X 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The story of Bruh Rabbit and the tar baby is found in hundreds of versions; here
Virginia Hamilton offers a retelling based on a Gullah version from the Sea Islands
of South Carolina. Bruh Rabbit is lazy: he steals from hard-working Bruh Wolfs
garden to keep his bunny-belly full without doing a lick of work. Bruh Wolf
makes a "scarey-crow" to keep his garden safe, but Bruh Rabbit is unimpressed by
the effigy ("You are a bundle of old rags! Fool, Wolf, if he thinks this rabbit is
afraid of you!"). Bruh Wolf isn't licked, though-he makes himself "one baby girl
rabbit outta tar" and sets it in the middle of the garden. Deceived by the lissome
lapine in a classic confrontation, Bruh Rabbit gets his limbs and his nose stuck fast
to the tar. Bruh Wolf announces his plan to eat Bruh Rabbit; Bruh Rabbit offers
the anything-but-the-briar patch response and tricks his way to freedom. Hamilton's
retelling chuckles across the pages with a loose, easy rhythm that makes it prime
readaloud material. Ransome's paintings anthropomorphize these characters from
Southern folklore and set them in a bucolic, domesticated countryside: Bruh Wolf
is a hard-laboring farmer in work clothes and bandanna, and Bruh Rabbit is a red-
vested ne'er-do-well. Although the drafting is inconsistent (and sometimes the
green of Wolf s vegetable patch threatens to overcome everything else in the spreads)
Bruh Rabbit looks out from the pages with expressive eyes and draws the viewer
into the simple compositions. Buff-colored text blocks are surrounded by a subtle
orange-and-white checked border that adds to the underlying sunniness of the
illustrations. No specific source is provided, but a concluding note gives some
historical and cultural context. JMD
HESSE, KAREN 
Aleutian Sparrow. McElderry, 2003 
156 p
ISBN 0-689-86189-3 
$16.95 
R* 
Gr. 6-10
The devastation of indigenous resettlement finds expression here in a fictional
Aleutian girl's account of her people's removal from their islands to the southeast
Alaska forests as U.S. troops fight against the Japanese during World War II.
Confined in camps without adequate shelter or sanitation and deprived of both
traditional and modern medical treatment, many Native Aleutians die while oth-
ers succumb to depression and alcoholism: "We never thought who we were was
so dependent on where/ we were." Young adult Vera is the voice of hope, the
mythological Aleutian sparrow symbolizing the strength of the past for survival
into the future. Through five sections of one-page poems readers follow her jour-
ney from the ominous moment when the elderly couple for whom she keeps house
on Kaskega Island urge her to visit her mother and friends in Unalaska Village:
"'It is only for the summer,' they say./ 'Go. Nothing will happen to us.'" Three
years later, the couple and Vera's best friend are dead and her mother has assimi-
154 
* THE BULLETIN
lated into a racist mainstream culture, but Vera manages to return to the islands
with a young man whom she has long loved. The situation itself is powerful
enough to call for spare narrative, and Hesse has wisely understated her stylistic
effects. There are lyrical moments: "Dark eyes slowly shut: Hard wooden floors/
Become the hulls of boats floating in a sea of lullaby." There are unexpected
flashes of rhyme: "The air is fur thick, damp and green./ I sit on the sand in the
rain,/ and I scream." And there is bitter humor in Vera's comparing their own
dreary conditions, as U.S. citizens, with the relatively well-provisioned German
prisoners-of-war nearby. The brief author's note refers to true events upon which
the story is based but does not mention sources. Endpaper maps are helpful,
black-and-white linocuts introducing each section are quietly decorative, and a
glossary clarifies Aleut terms. BH
KAY, ELIZABETH 
The Divide. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2003 
320p
ISBN 0-439-45696-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Thirteen-year-old Felix has a rare heart condition that dooms him to early death.
On a Costa Rican vacation with his concerned parents, he straddles the Continen-
tal Divide and suddenly slips through a rift between worlds. Upon awakening, he
finds himself in a land where magic reigns and where sickness can be banished by
the ministrations of unicorns. The boy teams up with Betony, an elf with some-
what unorthodox interests, in a dual attempt to cure his illness permanently and to
prevent a sleazy pharmacologist from foisting untested potions on an unsuspecting
public. Mythological beasts and magical beings in a world without mass-market
advertising collide with corporate avarice in this story of a boy who just wants to
live long enough to have a life. The plot is convoluted, and there's a dissonance
between the ancient magic and contemporary venality that the book never quite
overcomes. It's an involving story, however, and lively, humorous characteriza-
tions and the interweaving of the relationships between key players make it easy to
follow the plot along its careening trajectory. The conclusion may be predict-
able-a cured Felix returns to his own world-but it ends the book on a joyous
note that readers who've followed Felix's adventures will appreciate. JMD
KOLLER, JACKIE FRENCH 
Horace the Horrible: A Knight Meets His Match; illus. by
Jackie Urbanovic. 
Cavendish, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5150-1 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The king's got the flu, and someone's got to keep on eye on his young daughter,
Princess Minuette. Enter Uncle Horace, fondly known as "Horace the Horrible"
around the kingdom. From the moment Friar Tim drops her at the front door of
her uncle's castle, Minuette, clad in a blue tunic, her tousled red hair pulled back
in a braid, begins to miss her daddy. In a series of entertaining knightly episodes,
from dragon slaying to army vanquishing to damsel rescuing, Horace sets out to
prove that he's better than "the Royal Big Wig." Minuette is wholly unimpressed
by his bravado and instead seeks the one thing Daddy can do better-hug. Armor
removed, Horace is no longer "hard and prickly" nor is he horrible . .. and with
little Minuette in his arms and the sun on his shoulders, he decides that perhaps
there is something to be said for a good snuggle. Minuette shines as the sassy,
secure protagonist in this glimpse at extended royal relations, pointing out Horace's
mistakes ("'Uncle,' she said. 'This is our flag. You just vanquished our army!'")
and holding out for the hugs to which she is accustomed. The highly caricatured
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
155
depiction of Sir Horace is all the more extended by his bewildered response to
Minuette's request for affection, and the hug that follows made all the sweeter by
his dissolving discomfort. Illustrated in watercolor and pencil, the broad compo-
sitions excel in highlighting facial expressions-from Minuette's shy longing to
Horace's dirt-smudged countenance. Use this one as your next good "knight"
story and enjoy the cuddles that follow. HM
KURZWEIL, 
ALLEN 
Leon and the Spitting Image; illus. 
by Bret
Bertholf. Greenwillow, 2003 
302p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-053931-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-053930-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Leon is a klutz, partly due to lack of natural talent and partly due to the nightly
sleep-interrupting tantrums of "the Ice Queen," the noisy icemaker outside his
room at the Trimore Towers, where he lives with his night-manager mother. Un-
fortunately, Leon attends the Ethical School, where the motto is "Nimble fingers
make for nimble minds," and his new fourth-grade teacher, Miss Hagmeyer (a.k.a.
the Hag) has only one thing on her mind-sewing. Her classroom revolves around
"The Heavenly Stitches of Virtue," and every lesson has a sewing project attached
to it. Between dealing with sewing projects and dealing with the class bully, Henry
Lumpkin, Leon is pretty busy, but things really get snarly when he sews his final
masterpiece-a spitting image of Miss Hagmeyer-and gains control over the doll's
model due to some mistakenly but fortuitously applied spit. A considerable sus-
pension of disbelief is required to make this contrived and somewhat disjointed
plot go down easily, but Kurzweil manages to make his main characters likable
enough that most readers will be willing to swallow the story whole. There is no
real lead-in to the magic-making, characters of various ethnic stripes (a Latina
hotel maid, a Haitian cab driver, etc.) appear and disappear with sit-com regular-
ity, and Miss Hagmeyer's switch from creepy creature to charitable benefactress is
a bit of a stretch. Still, Leon's adventure is a pretty satisfying example of wish-
fulfillment through fiction, and the knowledge that bully Lumpkin is about to get
his just reward is a fancy finish that neatly sews up the conclusion. JMD
KUSHNER, TONY, ad. 
Brundibar; illus. by Maurice Sendak. 
di Capua/Hype-
rion, 2003 
56p
ISBN 0-7868-0904-3 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Award-winning playwright Kushner and preeminent illustrator Sendak join tal-
ents in this adaptation of the Czech children's opera Brundibar, known histori-
cally for its repeated performances in the concentration camp at Terezin, where its
composer was incarcerated. The story features a brother and sister who must ac-
quire milk for their ailing mother, so they grab a bucket and run to town. They
decide to sing for passersby to earn milk money, but the dreadful music of Brundibar,
the hurdy-gurdy man, drowns out their song. Fortunately, they find assistance
from a collection of talking animals and hundreds of schoolchildren, who help
them face down Brundibar, charm the townspeople with a lullaby, and acquire the
funds to bring milk home to their mother. Kushner's humor-touched text has a
poetic lilt, and he's condensed the events effectively; the folkloric themes and the
defeat of the obstructionist villain have an eternal appeal. Sendak's illustrations
use Terezin as the setting for the plot: the sugary prettiness of the pictured town
offers deliberate artifice, a sardonic contrast to the prevalence of yellow stars, the
156 
* THE BULLETIN
"Arbeit Macht Frei" legend in the background, and the dilapidated Hitler that is
Brundibar. Ragged blackbirds flutter through the pages, and following the children's
blackbird-themed song, a textless scene (unfortunately somewhat dramatically un-
dercut by the tonal sameness of its colors) depicts the birds spiriting children away
on their backs as mothers grieve below, presumably a reference to the fate of the
children acting in the opera (most of whom were transported to their deaths in
Auschwitz). Though the softened shades on the siblings' clothes give the children
a numinous air, the brighter colors add theatricality to proceedings (Punch ap-
pears as the ice-cream seller). There's ultimately a wide gulf between text and
subtext here that results in questions of audience: the text is too lengthy for a
picture-book audience and they'll miss the point of the book without extensive
adult explanation; on the other hand, older readers looking for insight into the
Terezin experience will find the center-stage opera itself an obstruction and will
also need to bring considerable external information to unpack the layers of mean-
ing. This is nonetheless an unusual and resonant evocation of history that brings
genuine poignancy to its operatic retrospection, and it would make a dramatic
contribution to an exploration of Terezin and other concentration camps. DS
LA FEVERS, R. L. 
The Falconmaster. Dutton, 2003 
167p
ISBN 0-525-46993-1 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
The village where Wat lives has been under the dominion of the cruel Normans
for two years. Wat himself is doubly oppressed, since his deformed foot and miss-
ing eye are sure signs of the devil to the superstitious villagers. After witnessing
Hugh, the sadistic master of the hunt, steal two young falcons for taming ("All
ours for the taking. And the breaking"), Wat rescues the pair and hides out in the
nearby forest. He's found by an old man named Griswold who, in a move that
most fantasy fans will see coming well in advance, reveals himself to be the mysti-
cal keeper of the forest-"It is my charge to tend to it, maintain its balance, clear it
when fouled, and protect it when threatened"-a task which requires tapping into
elemental pathways. Wat also possesses this natural magic, and, in a not-so-sur-
prising coincidence, Griswold turns out to be Wat's grandfather. Before Wat can
participate in the family business, however, he must use his newfound magic to
chase Hugh and his hunters away from the forest for good. La Fevers' writing is
straightforward and simple, befitting Wat's practical nature, and her portrayal of
the way Wat sees himself in the young falcons-fierce and independent but need-
ing care and protection-is touching. The difference between those who are a
part of the natural world and those who seek only to control it is successfully
embodied in Wat and his antithesis Hugh. Both are called evil, Wat because of his
deformed body, Hugh because of his deformed spirit, but La Fevers makes it clear
which one is deserving of the title. Unfortunately, the mishmash of generic fan-
tasy elements turns this into a mostly contrived story with predictable characters
despite its stylistic strengths. Still, it is a tale that many fantasy lovers will enjoy
and finish with satisfaction at the happy outcome. KH
LESTER, JULIUS 
Shining; illus. by John Clapp. 
Silver Whistle/Harcourt,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200773-3 
$17.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When a baby girl "so black her skin shines bright like the sun" is born in a small
mountain village, her parents name the child "Shining." A completely silent child,
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
157
Shining incurs the suspicion of her father, who sends the girl and her mother to see
"The One," the woman who "guarded and tended the souls of the living and the
dead." Shining and the wise woman have a joyful meeting ("Without hesitation,
Shining ran to The One, as if meeting her true mother"), but despite being found
free of taint by The One, Shining is still feared. When the village girls prepare to
leave for a year to learn the ways of women from the Council of Women, Shining
is not permitted to go because the council believes her silence "steals people's souls."
The misunderstood girl falls into a year-long sleep, awakening only when the girls
return to the village. The One comes down from the mountain seeking her daughter,
and the villagers back away in fear. Shining appears, "wearing a robe as yellow as
noon-her black skin shining like jewels," and The One claims her, declaring her
"The One who will be." The narrative is shaped by unusual combinations of
language, in similes that are sometimes strained but sometimes dramatic and pow-
erful. The lyrical imagery is not enough to carry the mystical happenings of this
tale, however. The obscure story leaves too much to mystery, and neither Shining's
silence nor her origin is satisfactorily explained. Clapp's mixed-media illustrations
(graphite, charcoal, chalk, pastels, watercolor, gouache, and acrylics) have a smoky
otherworldliness, but there's also a glistening immediacy to the figure of Shining.
Figures emerge from cloudy backgrounds, their forms and faces rendered with
exquisite emotional nuance. Lester's note says that he "wanted to create figures of
speech in which the color black would be associated with goodness and beauty,"
and this he does, with notable skill; audiences may overlook the abstruseness of the
plot as they find satisfaction in the resonance of his words. JMD
LISLE, JANET TAYLOR 
The Crying Rocks. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2003 
199p
ISBN 0-689-85319-X 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Joelle's striking looks and mysterious past attract attention in her small Rhode
Island town, but she deflects it with a bad attitude and a caustic tongue. When
Carlos, a boy from her class, suggests that she may be descended from the local
Narragansett people who were slaughtered by early settlers, her interest is piqued.
Her adoptive mother, Aunt Mary Louise, has told Joelle fragmented bits of her
past, but she's never sure whether they are fact or fiction. It isn't until Aunt Mary
Louise's unexpected death that she gets to meet some of her birth family, as a
group of tall Native American men show up at the funeral to get a look at their
niece, Joelle, whom they rescued from social services when she was five. Through
a halting collective effort, Joelle's uncles tell her the story of her origin, which
includes her mother's enacting a murder/suicide with Joelle's twin when that twin
becomes too sick to live, the subtext being that her inability to let her daughter die
alone somehow redeems the Narragansett practice of leaving deformed or sickly
children to die among the "crying rocks," boulders near Joelle's hometown that are
supposedly haunted with the spirits of these children. As in The Art of Keeping
Cool (BCCB 1/01), Lisle contextualizes the horrors of an "other" time and place
by showing their parallels in a more familiar setting, but here the circumstances are
overly strained. In drawing a parallel between a single mother who makes a de-
structive choice and a horrific cultural practice, Lisle leaves readers, if not Joelle,
with an ultimately unsatisfying context in which to situate her mother's (and her
father's) actions. However, the book is well plotted as the mystery unfolds its
layers. Joelle is an appealing character and her relationships with Carlos, Aunt
Mary Louise, and her little-girl fan club are enough to keep readers engaged even
as they question the choices adults make. KC
158 
* THE BULLETIN
LUPTON, HUGH, ad. 
Riddle Me This!: Riddles and Stories to Challenge Your Mind;
illus. by Sophie Fatus. 
Barefoot, 2003 
64p
ISBN 1-84148-169-6 
$19.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
British storyteller Lupton offers a collection of riddles, riddle-poems, and riddle-
stories to challenge even the most riddle-wise reader. The riddles range from the
elegant ("What is it that you will break,/ Even when you name it?" Answer: Si-
lence) to the silly ("As soon as they enter the house,/ They stick their heads out of
the windows./ What are they?" Answer: Buttons) to the nearly naughty ("What
has a bottom at the top?" Answer: A leg). The entries are accompanied by witty
china ink and watercolor illustrations that provide hints to the solutions. The
figures have an enthusiastic simplicity that lends the naive compositions a carni-
val-like flair. The design of the book is eye-catching and varied, although the print
size on the folktales is a bit small. Each riddle is isolated in a block of ribbon-candy
color that acts as the backdrop for its visual clue, making the pages with more than
one riddle a jigsaw puzzle of different hues. This volume is an unusual and clever
collection that will add some welcome depth to often shallow riddle fare. Notes
and sources (Lupton's selections come from children mnet in his travels, from fel-
low storytellers, and from collections of riddle-lore) and an answer key are pro-
vided. JMD
MARSDEN, 
CAROLYN 
Mama Had to Work on Christmas; illus. by Robert
Casilla. 
Viking, 2003 
73p
ISBN 0-670-03635-8 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Gloria knows that her mama works in a beautiful hotel, but she still doesn't fancy
spending Christmas day there. However, Papi is working Christmas as well, so she
has to go to work with Mama. At first, the hotel is a feast for Gloria's eyes, from
the luxurious gardens, to the enormous Christmas tree in the lobby, to the elegant
bathroom that her mother attends, to the huge buffet in the dining room. Her
enchantment ends when she discovers that she is to spend her day immured in the
kitchen, where everyone is in a bad mood-no Christmas spirit here. As she re-
members last year's Christmas, which she spent with Mama, Papi, and Nana on
the beach, she bemoans this year's disastrous holiday; mostly, she's bitter at the
differences between the guests and the "have-nots," a word she learns from a little
girl in the dining room who gives her a stuffed dog, saying, "Take her. Grandma
Barrett said we should give to the have-nots." Later, when she and her mother
have crossed the border to celebrate at her Nana's colonia in Mexico, Gloria con-
fesses her resentment; her Nana responds, "But you have us, Gloria. How can you
be a have-not?" Gloria simply wonders how "what had once been plenty now
wasn't enough." Of course she comes around in the end, discovering that the
warmth of family, the glow of candles, a beautiful view, and the hope of next time
are enough for a Feliz Navidad. Marsden manages enough prickly sentiment
throughout and enough ambivalence in an epiphanal line-"Gloria's voice came
out a little shaky, like the flame of her heart"-to cut most of the sticky out of the
sweetness of the message-driven story. The didactic predictability remains, but
that seems to be a sustaining and welcome feature of Christmas books for this age,
so audiences may warm as much to the point as to the girl whose Christmas doesn't
match her dreams. KC
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
159
MASON, SIMON 
The Quigleys at Large; illus. by Helen Stephens. 
Fickling,
2003 
14 9p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75031-5 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75022-6 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
The Quigley family (from The Quigleys, BCCB 9/02), comprising Mum, Dad,
older brother Will, and younger sister Lucy (sometimes known as Poodlefish),
return here in four episodic chapters of family life, each emphasizing a different
family member. First, Dad loses Will's beloved parakeet; then Will's attempt to
demonstrate his responsibility ends up with his getting locked into the school;
Mum gets her wisdom teeth out and tires of her family's attempts to make her life
easy; Lucy finally manages to make a new friend on her family's holiday in France.
As with the previous title, the book puts everyday life into amusing focus, allowing
the comfortable (if sometimes exasperated) family dynamics, realistically earthy
maneuvers and utterances, and the well-turned yet believable dialogue to give nor-
mal life the full flavor it deserves. The narration prioritizes the kids' reality while
conveying it humorously ("Will and Lucy had been quiet ever since they came in
from school, and by bedtime they didn't have any more quietness in them"), and
there's real charm in the underlying affection of the family, even if they don't
always get every interaction Father Knows Best right. As an enjoyably gentle reada-
lone or satisfying readaloud, the Quigleys' exploits will be popular with fans of
Ahlberg's Gaskitt family. Stephens' bold, childlike scrawls are pert yet sympa-
thetic, perfectly attuned to the text; there's no glossary, but British terms are gen-
erally sufficiently clear in context. DS
MCDONALD, MEGAN 
The Sisters Club. American Girl, 2003 
196p
ISBN 1-58485-782-X 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Each of the three Reel sisters-Alex, Stevie, and Joey-gets a chance to speak her
piece: Stevie, middle sister and family peacemaker, writes the main narration,
Joey, youngest sister and precocious third-grader, writes in her "Secret Homework
Notebook," since she's not getting enough homework from school, and Alex, el-
dest sister and budding actress, writes entirely in screenplays. The sections are
formatted accordingly, with Stevie's entries in an ordinary typeface, Joey's in a
naive font on notebook paper accompanied by doodles, and Alex's typed in a Cou-
rier font with stage directions. The interaction of the three voices gives multiple
perspectives on some rather overblown mishaps of family life, which include disas-
trous dinners, bungled auditions, and a boyfriend sabotage that threatens to dis-
band the Sisters Club forever. The book is organized around the family's obsession
with acting; instead of chapters, there are acts and intermissions, and the girls
pepper their dialogue with allusions to Shakespeare and theatrical cliches. Stevie is
the only member of the family immune to the theater bug, and so of course she
ends up having to save the day by standing in for Alex in the final act of Beauty and
the Beast after Alex has broken her foot (not her leg?) on stage. Though mildly
amusing, the microplots have predictable, platitudinous endings, reinforcing the
well-worn theme that no matter how bratty a sister may be, she's still a lifelong
friend. The characters never achieve the quirky distinction of McDonald's more
memorable Judy Moody (BCCB 5/00), but they're perky and positive, just right
for fans of the American Girls industry. KC
160 
* THE BULLETIN
McMuLLAN, KATE 
I'm Mighty!; illus. by Jim McMullan. 
Cotler/HarperCol-
lins, 2003 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009291-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009290-4 
$15.99 
R 4-7 yrs
Our boastful narrator Tugboat must be kin to Garbage Truck (I Stink, BCCB 6/
02); there's no mistaking the resemblance, from their stocky, brawny builds to the
toothy grins that beam from their bumpers. They've got that family pride in com-
mon, too; Tugboat is more than willing to demonstrate why the harbor can't get
along without him: "I can nudge, bump, butt, shove, ram, push, and pull 'em in."
An oil tanker, a six-decker auto ferry, and the "super-duper cruiser" Queen Justine
nuzzle up to their docks under Tugboat's expert guidance. Tugboat's got himself
a day job, so he tends to look a bit less dramatic than his headlight-beaming rela-
tive in the midnight sanitation trade. Our mighty guy operates, though, in an
equally animated milieu, where buoys bob a welcome, dockside vehicles regard the
approach of a tanker with wide-eyed alarm, small watercraft go about their tasks
with determination, and "tuggered out" Tugboat himself droops a bit on his way
home for some shut-eye. Clever anthropomorphization may be the attention grab-
ber, but there's a fair amount of information stealthily tucked in, too. A cutaway
scene of the trash-strewn channel clearly shows why Tugboat needs brains as well
as muscle to keep his charges in deep water, and the intricacies of the fictional port
are realistically laid out. Tugboat's sure to be as indispensable in the community-
helper collection as he is in the harbor. EB
MUTiN, BURLEIGH 
Goddesses: A World of Myth and Magic; illus. by Rebecca
Guay. 
Barefoot, 2003 
80p
ISBN 1-84148-075-4 
$19.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
An alphabetical compilation of goddesses from many traditions and cultures make
up this lushly illustrated title. Over one hundred goddesses are described in brief
but informative paragraphs that mention their origins, powers, and other relevant
details. The layout is appealingly decorative: boxes frame the names of each god-
dess and the paragraph about her impact; each spread is framed right and left by
ornate border decorations that set off the spot-art portraits and full- and half-page
illustrations of selected deities. The combination of the visual images of the god-
desses and the mighty beings described by the author results in a troubling disso-
nance, however; the women in these watercolor and acryla-gouache paintings are
fantasy-art ideals, consistent examples of a western, Barbie-doll-like beauty largely
dependent on long flowing locks, comely features, and slender bodies (unless they
are old, in which case they look rosy, motherly, and friendly). Still, the range of
cultures represented and the mix of well-known and obscure divinities makes this
a useful resource, and as a browsing book it will certainly be appetizing. An index
of goddesses by country, culture, and domain is appended, as is a list of sources.
JMD
NELSON, S.D. 
The Star People: A Lakota Story; written and illus. by S.D.
Nelson. Abrams, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-8109-4584-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Caught in a prairie fire, Sister Girl and her younger brother, Young Wolf, are
saved when they stumble, literally, onto a stream. Since the fire has burned the
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
161
land beyond familiarity, the girl realizes she cannot find the way home. The children
huddle together under a night sky that suddenly comes alive with dancing stars in
the shapes of coyote, bear, and hawk, "the spirits of the Old Ones who once walked
on this earth." Among the dancing Star People is the children's deceased
grandmother, Elk Tooth Woman, who gathers them in her arms and rocks them
to sleep. In the morning she leads the children home, to the great relief of their
worried parents and the eternal reassurance of her grandchildren: "But ever after,
when my little brother and I walked beneath the star-filled heavens, we felt comfort.
For we knew our grandmother and all of the Star People were watching over us."
Nelson, a member of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe, states that he based this
original story on traditional Lakota teachings and that the art is inspired by the
traditional ledger-book art of the nineteenth-century Plains Indians. The story is
a well-crafted adventure, but it bogs down occasionally in preachiness. The visuals
vary in effectiveness: sometimes the art tips into a overpatterned heavy-handedness
far from the spareness of ledger-book art, but there are also lyrical images that
soften the unforgiving terrain and overwhelming skies with mottled textures and
rich hues. Despite the drawbacks, much use might be made of this simple and
spiritually resonant tale. JMD
NIMMO, JENNY 
Charlie Bone and the Time Twister. 
Orchard/Scholastic,
2003 
402p
ISBN 0-439-49687-X $9.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Charlie Bone (from Midnight for Charlie Bone, BCCB 5/03) returns in a time-
travel adventure, but it's not Charlie traveling through time. Instead it's his ances-
tor, Henry Yewbeam, who, having fallen afoul of Ezekiel Bloor in 1916, is catapulted
into the present day, "to a year when most of the people he knew would be dead."
Luckily the still-eleven-year-old Henry is discovered by Charlie Bone, instead of
the still-living, still-wicked Ezekiel, who still seeks to do Henry dirt. Charlie and
his friends (magical and otherwise) try to keep Henry a secret, but they are be-
trayed, and Henry is captured and imprisoned by Ezekiel's willingly wicked
henchfolk. Charlie risks life and limb to rescue his "sort of cousin," and in the
process uncovers new allies, reveals old secrets, and reunites Henry and his now
much older younger brother. Nimmo has a light hand with traditional fantasy
elements, and her fresh approach juxtaposes humor and mystery with well-rounded
characters with whom readers can empathize. Characterizations are lively and
memorable, with a tidy balance among ages and genders. The suspense is compel-
ling, moving readers easily from scene to scene, any necessary explanation built
into the text without slowing the pace. Nimmo's hero is a bit younger than
Rowling's Harry, and her accessibility level is, too. Nascent fantasy readers seek-
ing to settle in with a slightly less physically intimidating volume would therefore
do well to give Charlie Bone a try. JMD
NoLAN, HAN 
When We Were Saints. Harcourt, 2003 
291p
ISBN 0-15-216371-9 $17.00 
R 
Gr. 7-12
"Young man, you are a saint!"-with that, Silas Benjamin dies, leaving his grand-
son Archibald unsure whether his grandfather's last words are a blessing, a curse, a
cruel irony, or merely the confused ramblings of a dying man. Then Archibald
meets Clare, whose face radiates the saint-like love Archie is seeking and who in-
vites Archie to share in the ecstasies of her all-absorbing faith. Clare is as con-
162 
* THE BULLETIN
vinced of Archie's calling as she is of her own-a call to pray without ceasing, give
up their worldly possessions and live simply, and finally, to make a pilgrimage to
The Cloisters in New York. Archie, though tortured by insecurities about his own
worthiness, nonetheless feels compelled to do anything for the charismatic Clare.
He is flattered that he is part of her seemingly crystal-clear vision, and he desires
above all else to share her certainty of the constancy of God's presence. When the
marks of Christ's suffering appear on Clare, Archie is understandably frightened,
especially when he realizes that she hasn't been eating. He seeks help from the
friends they have made on their pilgrimage, but his journey isn't quite over, and
Clare helps him find his path at last, even as her own takes the detour she most
feared. Nolan makes considerable demands on her readers as they have to sift
through some complex issues. Clare's joy and her salutary effects on people are as
real as her mental instability; her stigmata are as real as her anorexia. The reader is
kept only one step ahead of Archibald's confusion, and even that only because of a
certain kind of uneasiness born of genre expectations. In the end, Nolan gently
allows Archibald's "failures" at saintliness to effect a bittersweet salvation for them
both. The deep moral and theological questions taken up here beg careful, critical,
nondefensive discussion for saints and sinners alike. KC
O'MALLEY, KEVIN 
Straight to the Pole; written and illus. by Kevin
O'Malley. 
Walker, 2003 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8868-8 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8866-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
4-7 yrs
"Frozen and alone. Pressing on through the snow," the histrionic narrator delivers
a breathless second-by-second account of his trek to the pole. Amundsen's South
Pole? Peary's North Pole? Actually, it's the Bus Stop sign pole, but you'd think
from his complaint and exhaustion levels ("The ice and snow have filled up my
boots .... CAN'T ... GO ... on" ) that, at the very least, he was setting a new
world record. When things couldn't look worse, a wolf attacks. Well, okay, a
puppy greets him with friendly slobber. Finally, from a distance, comes "A RES-
CUE," as friends appear to inform him that school's been called off on account of
the snow. Not only does O'Malley display complete mastery of tongue-in-cheek,
he's got the martyred attitude of reluctant schoolgoers nailed, from the suffering
slouch to the dire last words, "I told Mom this would happen." The drama plays
out across pages of unrelenting blue-gray watercolor storm and whipping snow-
flakes, with the only hint of setting being the tree, a fire hydrant, and the aforesaid
pole. The narrator, though, is an oasis of color, only his eyeballs visible in a bulky
swathing of green snow pants, blue boots and jacket, red cap, green scarf, and a
multi-hued backpack big enough for several days' survival. Naturally, when his
equally colorful rescuers arrive, the narrator miraculously arises from collapsed
despair to dancing joy. Yep, we've all been there. EB
ORLEV, URI 
Run, Boy, Run; tr. by Hillel Halkin. 
Lorraine/Houghton,
2003 
186p
ISBN 0-618-16465-0 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-9
Once again, renowned author Orlev draws on a Holocaust survivor's account for
his fiction, this time to relate the harrowing existence of an eight-year-old Jewish
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
163
escapee from the Warsaw Ghetto. Of the many Polish Christians whom Srulik
encounters, some aid and some betray him, but his determination, intelligence,
and luck allow him to survive despite all odds. He alternately hides in the forest,
forages in villages and fields, and finds odd jobs before being threatened or pur-
sued by those who would turn him in for payment by the Nazis. At one point,
while working for a Gestapo-run farm, Srulik's arm is mangled in a threshing
machine, and gangrene sets in because the surgeon won't operate on a Jew. Al-
though he loses the arm, he jumps from the hospital window, goes on the run
again, and learns to manage with one arm. There is a pattern of incredible coinci-
dences and events in the story, yet it is just such incidents that characterize true
stories of the few Jewish orphans who survived Nazis' or anti-Semitic Poles' perse-
cution. A factual epilogue tells what happened to Srulik Frydman, or Yoram
Fridman, the name he took after immigrating to Israel after the war. Although the
novel has the pace of a picaresque adventure tale, the life-and-death stakes are
always foregrounded in unmistakably straightforward terms: from his immediate
family of seven, only Srulik and his older sister, who escaped to Russia before the
war, survive. This is one of the better examples of Holocaust fiction in depicting
the vagaries of human nature as villainous and heroic acts emerge unexpectedly,
even casually, from a shifting wartime population threatened with catastrophe.
BH
PAOLINI, CHRISTOPHER 
Eragon. Knopf, 2003 
509p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92668-2 
$20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82668-8 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Eragon, "less than a year from manhood," discovers a strange
stone that proves to be a dragon egg, which eventually hatches. Saphira, the dragon,
chooses Eragon to be her companion, making the unsuspecting and unready boy a
Dragon Rider, the only one of a legendary breed wiped out by the kingdom's
ruthless tyrant, King Galbatorix, years before. Galbatorix has been searching for
this particular egg for some time, and his evil minions, the Ra'zac, are closing in.
With the help of local storyteller Brom, Eragon flees his village with Saphira, and
begins his quest to avenge his murdered uncle, join the rebel Varden, and defeat
Galbatorix. This is a lengthy and derivative fantasy novel that often suffers from
cliched language and sputtering momentum. Characterizations (especially the
women) are shallow without being necessarily archetypal, and the preponderance
of magical convenience is repetitive and contrived. Despite pacing problems caused
by a lengthy setup and an overly explanatory text (especially in the book's first 300
pages), this first novel follows a classic trajectory: a young, untried boy is tapped as
reluctant hero in an epic battle against evil. His allies are a mysterious dragon with
whom he is psychically linked, a mysterious old man who teaches him how to
fight, a mysterious adventurer who turns out to be the son of a notorious traitor,
and a mysterious, impossibly beautiful elf woman warrior who just happens to
need rescuing. Echoes of McCaffrey's dragonriders, Tolkien's Urukai, and other
by-now-standard fantasy tropes abound, but Paolini manages to combine his own
characters with prototypical plot developments in relatively original ways, and makes
up for all the scene-setting with a rousing battlefield payoff. That should be enough
to satisfy the insatiable appetites of hardcore fantasy readers, who will certainly be
on the lookout for the upcoming sequel. JMD
164 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PERKINS, LYNNE RAE 
Snow Music; written and illus. by Lynne Rae
Perkins. 
Greenwillow, 2003 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623958-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623956-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 137, for review.
RATHMANN, PEGGY 
The Day the Babies CrawledAway; written and illus. by Peggy
Rathmann. 
Putnam, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23196-X 
$16.99 
R 
3-6 yrs
Bouncy rhyme and comic silhouettes carry the tale of a young hero who diligently
tracks a group of errant babies who crawl away from a festival. While their parents
busy themselves with pie-eating contests and balloon tosses, the babies traverse
dangerous terrain-up and down steep wooded hills, in and out of caves filled
with bats, and finally, over a precipice. Some land in a bird's nest, but eventually
all fall into the arms of our intrepid hero, who feeds them with blackberries and
fashions a sling, MacGyver-style, out of diapers and vines, to haul them back up
the cliff and to safety. Glossy black silhouettes of the characters and the terrain are
set against brilliantly washed skies that progress from daytime blues and yellows,
to a fiery orange sunset, to the deep blue-purple hues of evening with warm yellow
interiors. Young children will delight at the details, tracing the fireman's hat worn
by the hero, the finely articulated insects, a tagalong frog, and one baby in particu-
lar who always seems to find herself upside down throughout the story. The rhyming
text bops along quickly in its direct address to the listener-"Remember the way/
You tried to save the day?/ You hollered, "HEY!/ You babies, STAY!"-building
to its climax and then calming gently-"You told me your story,/ I brewed you
some tea,/ Then you fell/ Fast asleep/ In a small pile on me." This is sure to be an
oft-requested title for a readaloud, equally prized when it can be read alone. KC
SALTZBERG, 
BARNEY 
Crazy Hair Day; written and illus. by Barney
Saltzberg. 
Candlewick, 2003 
28p
ISBN 0-7636-1954-X 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
What could be worse than getting the date wrong for Crazy Hair Day? Confusing
it with school picture day! Such is Stanley Birdbaum's crisis. It is only after he and
his mother fashion an absolutely fab hairdo out of rubber bands, styling gel, and
orange and blue hairspray that Stanley realizes his mistake. What makes matters
worse is that his best friend, Larry Finchfeather, makes fun of him. Their teacher
allows Larry to go try to make amends with his humiliated friend in the bathroom,
and also allows Stanley to stay there until the end of math. This wise and sensitive
teacher has apparently created quite a sense of community among these school
chums, because when the unfortunately coiffed Stanley returns for the picture, his
classmates have a surprise for him-a solidarity of outrageous hair fashions to
make their school picture one they won't forget. Though one might expect such a
topic to be accompanied by over-the-top zaniness in the illustrations, Saltzberg
keeps a lid on the hilarity, preferring plausible (though cartoonish) headgear for
his characters. The colors, faces, and style evoke Marc Brown, although there is
less variety among the characters-they are all tidy, nondescript rodents with simi-
larly friendly features, going about the ordinary business of a school day. The
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
165
book offers a nice way to talk about the role community can play in managing
embarrassment-to both perpetrate and mitigate its effects. KC
SCHAEFER, CAROLE LEXA 
Full Moon Barnyard Dance; illus. by Christine
Davenier. 
Candlewick, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-1878-0 
$15.99 
R 3-5 yrs
One night "the barnyard animals just could not settle down," and so "they sashayed
all the way to the pond," where they terpsichorally indulge themselves to their
hearts' content, dancing, each with their own kind, in the moonlight. When a
"rowdy wind" blows clouds over the moon, the dancers unknowingly switch part-
ners; the dancing almost stops when the moon comes out and the animals discover
their mistakes, but the frog says "Twirl, swirl again-don't stop so soon. Do some
new partner dancing, by the light of the moon." The dancers take the frog's ad-
vice, resulting in a neighborly promenade where everyone dances with everyone
else. Schaefer's non-rhyming but rhythmic text is rife with participation possibili-
ties, and the barnyard dance focus lends itself to a rousing thematic storytime.
Davenier's line-and-watercolor illustrations are rendered in buff and blue-violet
hues appropriate for an elegant moonlight ball, and her barnyard dancers boast
sweepingly energetic lines that make the samba-shaking, jiggedy-jogging animals
move eloquently across the pages. Combine this with Bill Martin Jr.'s Barn Dance
(BCCB 2/87), add Van Morrison's "Moondance" for background music, and host
your own preschool dance party. JMD
SHEA, PEGI DEITZ 
Tangled Threads: A Hmong Girl's Story. 
Clarion,
2003 
[240p]
ISBN 0-618-24748-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
After ten years in an overcrowded refugee camp, Mai and her grandmother are
finally leaving to join what is left of their family in America. Upon arriving in
Providence, Rhode Island, Mai threads a delicate path through a maze of ambiva-
lent feelings toward Hmong customs and American opportunity. Her way be-
comes harder when she realizes that her grandmother could have brought her to
America five years earlier, but refused. Angry yet silenced due to a lifetime of
enforced respect for elders, she longs for some of her cousin Heather's spunk, even
as she disapproves of Heather's deceit and open disrespect for her father. Mai
works hard to learn American customs and language, especially the art of the white
lie, made alarmingly easy for her by her role as translator for her grandmother.
When Heather runs away to be with her boyfriend and her grandmother suffers a
heart attack, Mai has to reassess what she values. Shea captures the complicated
emotions of a thirteen-year-old girl in the midst of enormous personal change.
Through various characters, she offers Mai a full platter of responses and conse-
quences for the decisions she must make. Her friend from the camps has returned
to a traditional life in Laos, Heather has opted for a fully American transforma-
tion, her other cousin, Lisa, walks a middle ground by secretly developing a rela-
tionship with a Hmong boy (when their parents find out, they negotiate a marriage,
even though Lisa is only sixteen), her school friends attempt to keep their Hmong
heritage alive through participating in festivals and practicing traditional arts, and
her teachers and doctor model for her the joys of pursuing a profession. The
166 
* THE BULLETIN
details of Mai's journey move the story off the page into multiple curricular possi-
bilities for cross-cultural study and understanding. KC
Sfs, PETER 
The Tree of Life: A Book Depicting the Life of Charles Darwin: Natu-
ralist, Geologist &r Thinker; written and illus. by Peter Sis. 
Foster/Farrar,
2003 
40p
ISBN 0-374-45628-3 $18.00 
R Gr. 4-8
In the conflated schoolbook version of Darwin's life, the naturalist sails off on the
Beagle, comes home with a theory of evolution, and creates scientific and religious
havoc. There's more to it than that, as Sis demonstrates in lavish picture-book
format. Readers meet Darwin as a boy who seems to delight in pigheadedly resist-
ing his father's every wish; as an emergent scientist with a wry sense of humor
that's directed as easily at himself as others; as an original theorist who's terrified to
release his work for fear of personal backlash. Sis's discussion of Darwin's post-
Beagle career is particularly effective, dividing Darwin's endeavors into Public (bold
font), Private (normal font), and Secret (small, light font) realms. Intricate layouts
(a whimsical pastiche of boxes and circles and labyrinths of maps, portraits, land-
scapes, and vignettes), tiny, crabbed manuscript, and arty text design almost defy
readers to excavate the information, and there are bound to be science aficionados
who'd prefer not to jump through hoops to learn about the naturalist. However
eccentric the presentation, though, the material itself is comprehensive and often
very witty, and children willing to follow Sfs's lead should find themselves re-
warded. EB
SPINNER, STEPHANIE 
It's a Miracle!: A Hanukkah Storybook; illus. by Jill
McElmurry. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2003 
48p
ISBN 0-689-84493-X 
$16.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
Owen's job over the eight nights of Hanukkah is to light the menorah; Grandma's
job is to tuck Owen into bed with a story. Each evening's tale features a protago-
nist that Owen correctly identifies as a family member in his/her younger days
(except for night four, with a space alien about whom Owen has his doubts) and
each illuminates a small miracle that happened very close to home. Stories detail
how community prayers saved Aunt Edna's life when there was little hope for her
recovery after childbirth, and how convincing young Uncle Izzie to move his comic
antics from classroom to home not only saved his grades but brightened the lives
of his gloomy parents; they describe how Grandpa Harold's trained parrot eased
his patients' pain during dental work, and how clever child psychology broke Owen's
father of his babyish ways. At Hanukkah's end, when the menorah is fully ablaze,
Owen sees his extended family in a new light and is more proud than ever to be
named O.C.L. (Official Candle Lighter) for his clan. Grandma's stories, whether
touching or goofy, are short, simple, and believable; logical breaks in the text allow
readers-aloud to husband the narrative through eight nights of their own, if they
choose. Family scenes, though set in the here-and-now, are rendered in a mid-
twentieth-century cartoon style, with exaggerated expanses of domestic space, a
slightly muddy palette, and affectionate caricatures. While the focus is on family
celebration, religious and cultural aspects of the holy season are explored in end
materials, including the Hanukkah legend; Hanukkah blessings in Hebrew script,
transliterated Hebrew, and English translation; and a glossary of Yiddish and He-
brew terms used throughout the text. EB
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
167
SUZUKI, DAVID 
Salmon Forest; by David Suzuki and Sarah Ellis; illus. by Sheena
Lott. 
Greystone/Douglas & McIntyre, 2003 
36p
ISBN 1-55054-937-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Any kid who has seen Disney's The Lion King knows about the circle of life, but
few of them will have thought to extend that circle to the sockeye salmon. Suzuki
and Ellis close that gap with this story of a girl and her father hiking in what he
calls the "salmon forest." The storyline, that of Kate and Dad's hike and the
creatures and people they meet, is incidental; the real story is the interconnectedness
of natural life, revolving around the spawning salmon. Kate learns several salmon
facts during her forest ecology lesson, leading her to make remarks like, "'Seems
like everybody needs salmon.'" As such, the story is contrived, and there are a few
oversights that could have provided useful information (the jacket flap says the
location is the Pacific rainforest, but this is not mentioned in the story; the friends
Kate and Dad run into are rainforest natives, but this is not clear in the text or
pictures). Nonetheless, the relationship between Kate and Dad is familiar and
easygoing, and the scientific information is integrated smoothly into the story.
The real life of this book is in Lott's watercolors of cheery Kate and her yellow-
coated father, dappled sunshine on water and trees, and animal portraits that are
suggestive without sacrificing realism. Lott balances both sides of nature, giving
equal attention to the decaying, bug-infested salmon and the lively salmon swim-
ming downstream; by doing this, she echoes the lesson that death is as integral to
the life cycle as birth. Overall, the story is full of accessible salmon science, useful
for readalouds and classroom projects on ecology and biology. A short glossary
and a recipe for baked salmon round out the scientific story. KH
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
The Small World of Binky Braverman; illus. by Richard
Egielski. 
Viking, 2003 
40p
ISBN 0-670-03636-6 $15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Binky Braverman, outdoor boy and swamp explorer, gets sent off to his aunt and
uncle while his parents await the arrival of a new baby. Aunt Fran and Uncle
Julius mean well, but they are into "the Clean Plate Club," "the Wonderful World
of Fractions," and "tight and itchy clothes." Binky is one miserable kid until he
discovers a bunch of new friends on various boxes of household goods. The "crowd
of inch-high folks" leaps from their various domestic domiciles to help Binky
through the summer, some by eating his leftovers (the four bears from the Yellow
Bears syrup can), one by tutoring him in math (the nun from the Blue Nun ink
bottle), and another by making sure his clothes are clean (St. Joan, from St. Joan
Washing Powder). The magic fails when Binky returns home, however; a final
communication from Ike the pilot (from the deck of Pilot playing cards) that
promises to "read [Binky's] signal loud and clear" if he ever really needs his sum-
mer friends must suffice. The introduction (Binky, an old man, flashes back on
that summer) is an unnecessary complication, but there is a winning magic to
Wells' story. The contrast between Binky's carefree homelife and the nearly anti-
septic world of his aunt and uncle is a study in the difference between what kids
really like and what well-intentioned grownups wish kids liked. Egielski's retro-
style art evokes a nostalgic but not sentimental sense of a happy then, visually
reminiscent of Sendak's In the Night Kitchen (BCCB 1/71). The clean lines and
uncluttered compositions are rendered in a sepia-toned palette that suits the old-
168 
* THE BULLETIN
fashioned flavor of the tale. Audiences will emulate Binky's willing and eager
suspension of disbelief and enter into this agreeable picture-book fantasy. JMD
WHEELER, LISA 
Fitch and Chip: New Pig in Town; illus. by Frank
Ansley. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2003 
48p 
(Ready to Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-689-84950-8 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 1-2
The new pig in town is Chip, and he's startled to find that his classroom neighbor,
Fitch, is a wolf; while he's trying to find out if Fitch is a danger to him ("Are you
a big, bad wolf?"), Fitch is just trying to get through the school day. Soon the pig
and the wolf are hanging out together and exchanging their family stories (Chip
lives with his parents and a passel of siblings, while Fitch lives with just his grand-
mother), and they decide they're a good pair: "'One lone wolf,' said Chip. 'Plus
one lone pig.' 'Two together,' said Fitch." The folkloric references add a knowing
humor to the new-friends story (kids will be particularly amused when Chip stretches
out with an apple in his mouth to test Fitch's temptability) while offering an acces-
sible but understated framework for the concept of difference. Wheeler is deft at
using easy-reader vocabulary in fresh and interesting patterns, allowing repetition
to add texture and help with exposition as well as smoothing the way for the reader.
Ansley's line-and-watercolor art has a light and engaging touch, cheerfully per-
sonifying the animals without turning them into cartoons; the critters are authen-
tically childlike in pose and feature, and pudgy Chip is especially appealing with
his extra chin and eternally exposed belly button. This is a lighthearted and funny
look at friendship in the face of obstacles. DS
WILIARD, NANCY 
Cinderella's Dress; illus. by Jane Dyer. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic,
2003 
32p
ISBN 0-590-56927-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Willard (author of A Visit to William Blake's Inn, BCCB 11/81, and The Tale I
Told Sasha, 7/99) here retells the perennial favorite "Cinderella" through the eyes
of two magpies living in a tree outside the fairy-tale heroine's house. The birds,
collectors of all things glittery, adopt Cinderella as their own and watch her with
fond eyes. When the invitation to the ball arrives, the two birds gather up their
bits of shiny paper, glass beads, and lacy doilies and make her a party dress; alas,
the dress is swiftly torn to shreds by the jealous stepsisters. The fortuitous return
of a magical ring left to Cinderella by her mother brings the girl's fairy godmother,
who conjures dress, coach, and glass slippers for the traditional happy ending. The
avian point of view here gives a new slant to the old tale, and Willard has a way
with evocative language; unfortunately, the irregular rhyming text has a some-
times awkward cadence, and the rushed conclusion is surprisingly abrupt. The
watercolors are too softly rendered to be consistent: some of the spreads are com-
positionally harmonious and effectively misty, while others are awkwardly bal-
anced, washed out, and faded. The fanciful rendering of the magpie-designed
dress is the stuff of which fairy tales are made, but the concluding illustration is a
disappointment, which is surprising given the fact that the end is the climax of the
tale both visually and textually. Still, "Cinderella" is an infinitely popular fairy
tale, and youngsters sated with traditional versions may well find themselves in-
trigued by this bird's-eye view. JMD
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
169
WILLEMS, Mo 
Time to Pee!; written and illus. by Mo Willems. 
Hyperion,
2003 
40p
ISBN 0-7868-1868-9 
$12.99 
R 2-4 yrs
With the enthusiastic help of a troop of mice, toddlers learn the rudiments of
going to the bathroom, from the first funny feeling to proper form ("Boys can
stand. Girls should sit") to finishing up. Along the way, Willems acknowledges
the common impediments to toilet teaching in subtle and understated ways. Us-
ing direct address, he enjoins the child characters not to panic, fret, or ignore the
funny feeling, assuring them that "everything will still be right where it was" when
they are done, and that if they aren't successful right at first, they'll always have
another chance. The mice are exuberant cheerleaders, holding up the spare, straight-
forward words of the text as banners, balloons, and signs, giving the activity a
parade-like atmosphere. As in Don't Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus! (BCCB 5/03),
Willems' strength as an animator shows clearly here; his drafting is clean and lean
against white backgrounds, his compositions are linear and progressive, and his
characters emote with their whole bodies. The face of the boy as he is actually
peeing is particularly effective in its comic "relief." There's not as much general
silliness and appeal in this book as in Pigeon, but then, this is a more serious subject
with a more focused audience. The book does its work with a light and comic
hand, and it will prove a useful tool in the toilet-teaching stall. Stickers and a
success chart are included. KC
WINTERS, KAY 
Voices ofAncient Egypt; illus. by Barry Moser. 
National Geo-
graphic, 2003 
32p
ISBN 0-7922-7560-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
While pharaohs turn their attentions to nation building, god appeasement, and
securing a comfortable afterlife, someone has to keep the country running. Win-
ters gives voice to the laborers-herdsmen, washerwomen, metal smiths, sailors,
and their like whose work, overshadowed by royalty, is attested in Egyptian art and
text. Each single-page free-verse poem briefly describes the job but, apart from a
tacit pride that runs quietly through all the verses, gives little heed to how the
laborers really feel about their tasks. Entries are handsomely presented-cleanly
displayed on an expanse of creamy space and accompanied by a cartouche and a
facing illustration. 
Moser's line-and-watercolor scenes are brawny and
unromanticized, often supplying hints of the workers' techniques, such as the
goldsmith's tools and the weavers strap loom. The voices themselves, though, are
undifferentiated and tend to drone in a stately rhythm that soon becomes wearing.
Still, this could be a valuable counterbalance in collections top-heavy with mum-
mies. Concluding notes supplement the content of each entry, and a bibliography
is included. EB
YANSKY, BRIAN 
My Road Trip to the Pretty Girl Capital of the World. Cricket,
2003 
178p
ISBN 0-8126-2691-5 
$16.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Simon finally tires of just about everything, especially his father's belief that he's a
screw-up, and drives off in his dad's car with the intention of leaving Iowa to find
his biological parents in Texas. This isn't a straightforward journey, however,
since on the way Simon picks up Elvis Presley (who insists he's no impersonator
170 
* THE BULLETIN
despite the fact of his well-documented death); Elvis in turn picks up Cookie and
Andy, two homeless guys, and Charley, a young woman whom Elvis saves from an
abusive husband. After a few misdirections, the bizarre party finally does make it
to Texas, where Elvis and Charley take off together, Andy visits the family he
abandoned years ago, and Simon finds his birth father, enterprises which meet
with varying degrees of success. In the real world, it's not possible for Simon to
have obtained his adoption information as he did, and other plot points are might-
ily contrived, but in a book where a post-deceased Elvis (the story is set in 1979) is
sharing the wheel with a runaway teenager it's clear we're looking to standards
other than reality anyway. The book's real strengths are imagination and appeal,
and there Yansky delivers in spades. The quirky road trip recalls Bauer's Rules of
the Road (BCCB 2/98) and Watts' Finding H. F. (1/02) but manages to forge its
own original path as well. Simon's disaffection is compellingly and believably
expressed, but the understated, very dryly humorous tone of his narration keeps
the angst from being overwhelming and recalls Flannery O'Connor in its matter-
of-fact observations of a very strange world ("He was crazy, I guess, but he liked
being crazy. Maybe I was crazy, too, but I couldn't get his enjoyment out of it").
There's some brutal reality but also tenderness in the fates of the characters, and
while it's not surprising that Simon returns home to Iowa, readers will be glad to
see him back even as they reveled in watching him go. DS
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
171
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
GANGI, JANE M. 
Encountering Children's Literature: An Arts Approach. Pearson,
2004 
338p 
illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-205-39240-7 
$44.00
Gangi, a professor of education, offers field-tested techniques for connecting stu-
dents to literature through the arts in this information-packed volume. The book
makes its case for the arts approach and gives an overview of literary history and
selection principles, then provides a chapter-by-by-chapter focus on specific genres.
Each chapter opens with an "encounter," an arts exercise to connect the student
(adult or juvenile) to a specific text or form of text; most close with suggested
activities, recommendations for further research, and websites. The author takes a
richly multicultural approach to the literature and seasons her literary suggestions
with practitioners' anecdotes and with references to child development, classroom
management, and education research. Appendices include a section on standards
and assessments for teacher education, a list of professional literature, a children's
literature bibliography organized by genre and chapter; a list of multicultural and
international authors and illustrators arranged by geographic region; and name
and subject indices. This is an impressive, well-organized, and unusual approach
to a continually growing field. While the primary audience for this title is future
classroom teachers, librarians and others interested in literature for youth will find
much to engage them here. JMD
HEILMAN, ELIZABETH E., ed. 
Harry Potter's World: Multidisciplinary Critical
Perspectives. RoutledgeFalmer, 2003 
308p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-415-93373-0 
$90.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-415-93374-9 
$24.95
Heilman's compilation of fourteen critical essays on the phenomenon that is Harry
Potter examines Rowling's creation from a variety of approaches. The book is
divided into four sections: Cultural Studies Perspectives; Reader Response and
Interpretive Perspectives; Literary Perspectives: The Hero, Myth, and Genre; and
Critical and Sociological Perspectives. Deborah J. Taub and Heather L. Servaty
look at religious and other objections to the Harry Potter books in "Controversial
Content in Children's Literature: Is Harry Potter Harmful to Children?"; Hollie
Anderson brings a cultural perspective to Hogwarts in "Reading Harry Potter with
Navajo Eyes"; Maria Nikolajeva sees Harry Potter as a traditional figure in "Harry
Potter-A Return to the Romantic Hero"; and Heilman herself discusses gender
bias in "Blue Wizards and Pink Witches: Representations of Gender Identity and
Power." Contributors come from such disparate fields as curriculum theory, soci-
ology, gender studies, and English; each essay concludes with references and/or
notes. The compilation has a breadth of approaches that should stimulate aca-
demic discussion of Harry Potter as more than a singular literary event, while re-
maining accessible and useful to the parents and teachers that Heilman also wants
to reach. An index is appended. JMD
172 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Acrobats: Gerstein
Actors and acting-fiction:
McDonald
Adoption-fiction: Lisle; Yansky
ADVENTURE: Cadnum; Colfer;
Flowers; Gerstein; Paolini
Agriculture: Driscoll
Animals-fiction: Avi; Crocker
Animals-stories: Hamilton
ANTHOLOGIES: Davis
Art and artists: Byrd
Art and artists-fiction: Cann
Australia: Arnold
Babies-stories: Rathmann
Bears-stories: Aylesworth
BEDTIME STORIES: Spinner
BIOGRAPHIES: Brown; Byrd;
Davis; Sis
Biology: Sis
Birds-fiction: La Fevers
Boats-stories: McMullan
Brothers and sisters-stories: Nelson
Careers-fiction: Cann
Carnivals-stories: Blumenthal
Cats-stories: Beames
Christmas-fiction: Marsden
Clothing-stories: Willard
Cows-fiction: Cazet
Crime and criminals-fiction: Avi
Cultural studies: Arnold; Collins
Dancers and dancing-stories:
Schaefer
Dating-fiction: Albert; Cann
Death and dying-fiction: Colfer;
Lisle
Disabilities-fiction: La Fevers
Dogs-stories: Flowers
Dragons-fiction: Paolini
Drama-stories: Kushner
Ducks-fiction: Broome
Ecology: Arnold; Suzuki
Egypt-fiction: Winters
Emotions-stories: Frame
Ethics and values: Aronson; Colfer;
Collins; Nolan
FABLES: Aesop
Faith-fiction: Nolan
Families-stories: Mason
FANTASY: Colfer; Dickinson; Kay;
Kurzweil; La Fevers; Nimmo;
Paolini; Wells
Farms-fiction: Cazet; Egan
Farms-stories: Schaefer
Fathers-fiction: Suzuki; Yansky
Fish-fiction: Suzuki
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Andersen; Aylesworth; Hamilton;
Lester; Nelson; Willard
Food and eating: Driscoll
Friends-fiction: Wheeler
Geography: Arnold
Gods and goddesses: Muten
Grandmothers-stories: Spinner
Hair-stories: Saltzberg
Hanukkah-stories: Spinner
Health and hygiene: Willems
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Cadnum; Hesse; Orlev
History, European: Byrd
History, U.S.: Aronson
History, world: Winters
Holocaust-fiction: Orlev
Holocaust-stories: Kushner
HUMOR: Aesop; Benton; Cazet;
Egan; Falconer; Koller; Mason;
O'Malley; Saltzberg; Willems
DECEMBER 2003 
* 
173
Identity-fiction: Shea
Illness-fiction: Albert; Kay
Immigrants-fiction: Shea
Inventors and inventing: Byrd
Italy-fiction: Dickinson
Jews-fiction: Orlev
Knights and chivalry-stories: Koller
Latinos-fiction: Marsden
Literature, American: Brown
Magic-fiction: Kay; Kurzweil; La
Fevers
Magic-stories: Wells; Willard
Mothers-fiction: Albert
Music and musicians-fiction:
Dickinson
MYSTERIES: Nimmo
Native Americans-fiction: Hesse;
Lisle; Nelson
Night-stories: Beames
Orphans-fiction: Ellis
Parties-stories: Schaefer
Pets-fiction: Broome
Pigs-stories: Falconer
POETRY: Winters
Prejudice-stories: Lester
Prisons and prisoners-stories:
Blumenthal
Reading aloud: Crocker; Ellis;
Mason
Reading, advanced: Crocker
Reading, beginning: Driscoll;
Wheeler
Reading, easy: Benton; Broome;
Cazet; Ellis; Lupton; Marsden
Reading, reluctant: Lupton
Religious instruction: Mutin
RHYMING STORIES: Frame;
Rathmann
RIDDLES: Lupton
School-fiction: Benton; Halliday;
Kurzweil; Wheeler
School-stories: O'Malley; Saltzberg
Science: Driscoll; Sis
Sisters-fiction: McDonald
Snow-stories: Perkins
Sports-fiction: Avi
Storytime: Aesop; Andersen;
Aylesworth; Beames; Doyle;
Flowers; Gerstein; Hamilton;
Koller; McMullan; O'Malley;
Perkins; Rathmann; Schaefer
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Halliday
Teachers-fiction: Kurzweil
Time travel-fiction: Nimmo
Toys-stories: Falconer
Transportation: McMullan
Uncles-stories: Blumenthal; Koller
Vacations-stories: Wells
Voyages and travel: Davis
Voyages and travel-fiction: Ellis;
Yansky
Voyages and travel-stories: Doyle;
Flowers; O'Malley; Rathmann
Vikings-fiction: Cadnum
Weather-stories: Perkins
Winter-stories: Blumenthal; Perkins
Women's studies: Collins; Mut6n
Work-fiction: Winters
World War II-fiction: Hesse; Orlev
174 
* 
THE BULLETIN
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION OF THE
BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN 0008-9036), as
required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is published eleven
times a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is $70.00 (institutional,
domestic), $77.00 (institutional, foreign), $50.00 (individual, domestic), $57.00 (individual,
foreign), $15.00 (student).
The owner and publisher is the Graduate School of Library and Information Science at
the University of Illinois, a nonprofit organization. Office of publication is located at 501
E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6211. The managing editor is Deborah Stevenson,
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820.
There are no stockholders, bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status
for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preceding twelve
months: 3686.6; number for single issue nearest filing date: 3897. Average number of
copies of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during preceding twelve months:
2959.1; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 3154. Average number of copies
distributed for free per issue during preceding 12 months: 76.2; number for single issue
nearest to filing date: 120. Average number of total copies distributed during preceding 12
months: 3035.3; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 3274. Average number of
copies of each issue not distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after printing) during
preceding 12 months: 651.3; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 623.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Cheryl Jestis
Journals Manager
University of Illinois Press
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
October 3, 2003
A 
"'wninq eiglt"~ -Booklist
DOn' t
Let the
pigeon
Drive
the
Bus !
*"Wildly expressive..."
-Kirkus Reviews,
starred review
*"Brilliantly
simple... hilarious..."
-The Horn Book,
starred review
Six-time
EmmT" 
Award winner
Mo Willems's
hilarious
picture book
debut
*"Preschoolers will
howl." 
-Booklist,
starred review
hyperionbooksforchildren.com
I
re-school through g
:A Uay at uIl i
de Escuela
ving orres
4-8,32 pp
[|fAva 
l 
[ilafrom -
Ir&lar,| oIhIeIm 
Im 0 
istib ua 
IIIII IJi l
For orders and inquiries:
Harves Sun Press -PO Box 826 - Fairacres, NM 88033
Phone479-283-4000 * Fax: 505-526-6930
Website www.havestsunpress.com 
E-mail: info@harvestsunpress.com
Harvest Sun
PRESS
Cfooe RigMt
Writing Fictiol
Stories
"[The exercises] will help both novices an
insight and move forward with their writing
author of Crazy Lady!
www.press
Choosing 
THIRD
Booksfor 
-'
Betsy Hearne 
.
[ 
ILLIN OI S
www.press.uillinois.edu
-mark 
edoffAutr^ho
Childre^^n 
ofa eserGo
I-
1
i T
-^- 
DAVE MKNEA*N
for middle-grade readers with last year's Coraline"
-
Starred review I Kirkus Reviews
"Gaiman and McKean deftly pair text and illustrations to convey a strange,
vivid story evolving from a child's worst, credible fear upon hearing a house
creak and groan. Children will delight in the'scary, creepy tone' and in the
brave behavior displayed by the intrepid young heroine."- 
School Libraryjoumal
"A picture book for the twenty-first-century child: visually and emotionally
sophisticated, accessible, and inspired by both literary and popular themes
and imagery" 
-ALA 
Booklist
-
-
-L-EU 
$17.89 Lb(0-06-053087-1) 
i
S "Suner!
Marvelous!
VMagnificent!
" 
WOW! "
'Much applause for Clorinda."
Tr• 
1; "I 
• 
i
-Boolclis
t, 
starred 
review
Never stand
between
a cow
and her
dream.
A
CHILD
SMAGAZINE
SBEST BOOK
of 2003
'i Robe Km
#1 New York Times best-seller
VUIA 
I OF A
m•
r
William C. Morris
October 4, 1928 -
September 29, 2003
Colleague, mentor, friend.
We will miss you now,
and always.
- HarperCollins Children's Books
L
Keep Up
with the
Latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Children's Books * Teaching in the Library * Plus...
The Parent Connection * Interviews with Children's Book Authors
and Illustrators * Science * Technology and MORE!
If you decide to subscribe,
you'll get one full year
(7 more issues) for just
$12.50. That's 47% off the
regular rate of $23.97 per
year. If you decide not to
subscribe, just return the
invoice marked "cancel"
and owe nothing.
Don't miss this valuable resource for your library!
I
II-ii 
II 
1 
31 
11 
I 
·eal
FRE Tria issLue
University ot Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street 
PIODALS
Champaign, IL 61820 
PSTAGE
U.S.A.
CHAMPAIGN, IL
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
Ronkcs make ~rrrit ~ifi- 
hult rsiclinr the
perfect books for your favorite youngsters
can be daunting.Just in time for the holidays,
the expert staff of The Bulletin of the Center for
0008-9036(200312)57:4; 1 -E
Children's Books have created a guide to help
you navigate the bookstore wilderness full of shiny new
children's books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edition, the Guide Book
to Gift Books contains annotations for over 225 of the best
books for giving (and receiving), the Guide Book to Gift Books is
available for only $3.50 as a downloadable PDF file that you
can print out and use for every holiday, birthday, or other gift-
giving occasion on your calendar this year.
Listed books have all been recommended in full Bulletin
reviews from the last three years and are verified as currently
in print. Entries are divided into age groups and include author,
title, publisher, and the current list price.
To purchase, go to
www.lis.uiuc.edu/giftbooks/
