T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
January 2012
Vol. 65   No. 5
T
he Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and 
critical evaluations of current children’s 
books. T is invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding 
the ever-evolving children’s literature ﬁ eld. 
Reviews give an in-depth look at a selected book’s content, reading 
level, strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, as well as 
suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August).  
To order:
Volume  (). 
Call: -- or --
., individuals (print or online) 
Fax: --
., institutions (print or online)  
Email: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu
., institutions (print & online) 
Online: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ISSN - / E-ISSN -
Published by 
T H E JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER 
FOR CHILDREN’S BOOKS:
ESSENTIAL.
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
January 2012
Vol. 65 No. 5
239  the BIg PICture
 
 The Worst of Friends  by Suzanne Tripp Jurmain; illus. by Larry Day
 
  Those Rebels, John and Tom  by Barbara Kerley; illus. by Edwin Fotheringham
241  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
245 • Liar’s Moon  by Elizabeth Bunce
260 •  Looking at Lincoln  written and illus. by Maira Kalman
266 •  13 Gifts  by Wendy Mass
270 •  The Third Gift  by Linda Park; illus. by Bagram Ibatoulline
277 • Freedom’s A-Callin Me  by Ntozake Shange; illus. by Rod Brown
283  Bulletin Blue RiBBons 2011
285  suBject and use index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $12.00. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2012 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Worst of Friends ©2011 by Larry Day and used by permission of Dutton Chil-
dren’s Books.
January 2012 • 239
the BIg PICture
Worst of Friends: Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, 
and the True Story of an American Feud
by Suzanne Tripp Jurmain; illus. by Larry Day
Those Rebels, John & Tom
by Barbara Kerley; illus. by Edwin Fotheringham
Well before children understand the intricacies of the American Revolution and 
the early Federalist period, they understand quite a bit about friendship. The un-
likeliest people can bond over a shared project; disagreements between friends can 
boil over when others fire up the drama; distance and pride make reconciliation 
difficult; restoring a broken friendship feels great. Kids who hold these truths to be 
self-evident will be cheered to learn through this pair of picture-book histories that 
even two of our celebrated presidents, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, found 
managing a friendship as hard as launching a nation.
Kerley’s Those Rebels, John & Tom tracks the friendship through its glory 
days. When the men initially meet at the first Continental Congress, John Adams—a 
short, rotund, disputatious New Englander of modest means—is initially skeptical 
of Thomas Jefferson—the tall, reticent, well-to-do Virginian (“How could anyone 
who cared that much about American sit silently by?”). Jefferson, in turn, can’t 
understand how anyone could love to argue as much as Adams. Nonetheless, each 
quickly recognizes the other’s commitment to the Colonial cause, and they are 
soon lauding each other’s character and amiability. They agree that by combining 
their skills of written and oral persuasion they could bring an indecisive Congress 
around to a vote for independence from England. Jefferson handles the writing, 
Adams supplies the oratory, and after some significant editing by the delegates, the 
Declaration of Independence is adopted. The newly minted statesmen had “formed 
a surprising alliance, committed treason, and helped launch a new nation.”
In Worst of Friends, Jurmain picks up the story—of Adams and Jefferson, 
and of the newborn country—almost exactly where Kerley leaves off. For children 
who haven’t gotten much beyond Fourth of July fireworks and George Washing-
ton, this should be the proper ending to the patriotic tale. We defy King George, 
we win the Revolution, Adams and Jefferson get to be president, and American 
lives pretty happily ever after, at least until the Civil War. Sorry, no. While George 
Washington (who, incidentally, does not even make a cameo appearance here) 
conducts his presidency, good friends Adams and Jefferson arrive back home after 
240 • The BulleTin
diplomatic missions in Europe with very different ideas on how their great project, 
the United States, should be governed. Adams supports a strong central government, 
while Jefferson favors states’ rights. The Federalist and Republican parties diverge 
similarly, and the erstwhile friends’ private quarrels turn to nasty name-calling (Jef-
ferson deems Adams “vain, suspicious, irritable, stubborn, and wrong” while Adams 
counters by labeling Jefferson as “weak, confused, uninformed, and ignorant”). 
Vilification turns to violence (“Some Republicans and Federalists actually battled 
in the streets”). The friendship that had spurred independence falls into shambles 
as each man takes on the presidency and publicly criticizes the wrong-headedness of 
his rival. Years of silence follow, and finally, as the men settle into retirement away 
from the turbulence of political life, Adams sends Jefferson a New Year’s greeting, 
which is warmly received and leads to renewed correspondence: “After eleven years 
there was so much to say, and Tom and John could hardly write letters fast enough.”
It’s unusual to find such happy synergy in a pair of picture books released 
within a few months of each other. Kerley and Jurmain use the theme of friendship as 
an entry point for exploring the hard, messy work of nation building, both in build-
ing colonial consensus for independence and in taking its first steps on the world 
stage. Each author approaches her respective chapter of the Adams/Jefferson story 
with a light-hearted but eminently humane touch, allowing the books to be read 
in tandem with scarcely a tonal shift. Both titles boast illustrations that underscore 
the odd-couple humor of the texts. For Those Rebels, Fotheringham employs a style 
reminiscent of political cartooning, with colonists lining up to drop their taxes in a 
bucket labeled “Royal Tariff,” while King George shakes a windfall of coins out of 
his piggy bank; Jefferson attacks the king with a feather pen the size of a spear. The 
broadly comedic style is marred only by the overbearing use of red, white, navy and 
powder blues, and dull gold which, when relentlessly juxtaposed, seem strangely 
muddied. Day fares better, overall, with his line-and-watercolor paintings in Worst 
of Friends, which pay thorough attention to period details even as they capture the 
humor of Adams sneaking his furniture out of the White House to avoid meeting 
up with his incoming ex-friend, and Jefferson pulling on his Adams’ coattail to 
keep him from pummeling a haughty, rude King George at court. 
George Washington, Abraham Lincoln, and Theodore Roosevelt tend 
to monopolize the picture-book spotlight. If they have reached their term limits 
in your Presidents Day celebrations, here’s your opportunity to put Adams and 
Jefferson on the ballot. (Publication information appears on p. 260 and p. 261.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
January 2012 • 241
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
aBBott, ellen jensen The Centaur’s Daughter. Cavendish, 2011 320p
ISBN 978-0-7614-5978-1 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 6-10
Despite victory over the evil White Worm (in Watersmeet, BCCB 6/09), the town of 
Watersmeet hasn’t returned to its idyllic state. Refugees from the war-torn lands of 
southern Vrania are flooding into town, bringing attacks from vicious überwolves, 
while the town is already struggling to feed its native residents. As the daughter of 
a Vranian healer and Watersmeet’s recently fallen hero, Abisina is intent on uniting 
the southern and northern lands, but when her efforts to keep the border open are 
opposed by Watersmeet’s leaders, she decides to return to Vrania to try a different 
tactic. Complicating matters is her sudden ability to shapeshift into a centaur, a 
transformation that will make her discussions with the human-centric leaders of 
Vrania even more tense. Knowledge of the first installment is a must in this case, 
as readers unfamiliar with the book’s predecessor will struggle to understand the 
complicated politics of Vrania and Watersmeet as well as Abisina’s place in it. As 
it is, the message-laden narrative gets off to a choppy start with our protagonist 
dramatically lamenting the ills of discrimination, but it falls into a smoother pace 
once Abisina’s journey south results in more action and less talking. The support-
ing cast of dwarves, fauns, and centaurs is quirkily endearing, and the camaraderie 
among Abisina’s ragtag group of friends is a warm—if somewhat obvious—touch. 
Readers looking for a more nuanced look at the politics of the Other may want to 
check out Lena Coakley’s recent Witchlanders (BCCB 9/11), but fans of Watersmeet 
will be pleased to see its sequel.  KQG
adams, s. j. Sparks: The Epic, Completely True Blue, (Almost) Holy Quest of Deb-
bie. Flux, 2011 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7387-2676-2 $9.95   
M Gr. 7-10 
Ever since Debbie realized that she was hopelessly (and secretly) in love with her 
best friend, she has been adjusting her life in hopes of pleasing Lisa. She attends 
Active Christian Teens meetings and abstinence rallies, watches Full House DVDs on 
weekends, and curbs both her language and her behavior so that someday she might 
have a hope of winning Lisa’s straitlaced heart. When Lisa starts dating Norman, 
however, Debbie decides she has to confess her love before Lisa and Norman take 
things too far. She’s supported by two misfit classmates who have made up their 
own religion, called Bluedaism; they accept her crush on Lisa and fold her quest 
to stop Lisa and Norman from having sex into their own activity, a combination 
scavenger hunt and prankfest. As the trio tries to catch up with Norman and Lisa, 
the night becomes a series of near-misses, interspersed with Lisa’s self-examination 
in light of Blueda doctrine and with zany hijinks involving colorful characters. 
The story is clearly in love with its own weirdness even as it tries unsuccessfully to 
pull off a tone of blasé normality. Meanwhile, there is the sound of an axe being 
ground in the by-now-tired ideological cliché of pitting hypocritical Christian teens 
against gay ones; the Active Christian Teens here should be more properly called 
Sexually Active Christian Teens, as they are all portrayed as horndogs who justify 
their promiscuity because it will lead to heterosexual marriage. Debbie’s hope that 
242 • The BulleTin
Lisa will fall out of Norman’s arms into hers just as soon as she knows the truth 
wears thin as a driving motivation of the night’s activities, especially as neither 
girl, nor any other of the ensemble cast for that matter, is particularly compelling 
as an emotionally developed character. There are better books about crushes and 
about the sometimes flawed reality of teen life in faith, and readers will be better 
off with those.  KC
atkins, catheRine The File on Angelyn Stark. Knopf, 2011 250p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96906-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86906-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89989-8 $10.99   
R* Gr. 8-12
At fifteen, Angelyn has mastered the tough, indifferent alpha-girl thing, complete 
with a high-status boyfriend, Steve; though Mr. Rossi, her World Cultures teacher, 
seems to see genuine potential in her beyond high school, his is clearly a minority 
opinion. Underneath her posing, however, is turmoil, expressed in her reluctance 
to have sex with Steve, her yearning for closeness with Mr. Rossi, and her angry 
separation from former friends. While it’s revealed fairly early on that Angelyn is 
responding to past sexual molestation by her mother’s boyfriend (who still lives 
with Angelyn and her mother), this isn’t a book about the discovery of a shocking 
event but rather the way people’s responses to it affect the protagonist’s life. Atkins 
limns with precise and awful authenticity how Angelyn’s sexualized relationship 
with a father figure has led to her both seeking approval through sexuality and being 
unable to interpret male interest any other way, and how her reputation at school 
has defined her. The other human dynamics here are equally plausible, with Mr. 
Rossi and Steve interestingly mixed characters (Angelyn in fact rails at Steve, “Why 
can’t you be an ass all the time? So I’d know”); particularly heart-rending is the 
failure of Angelyn’s mother, who was too afraid of financial insecurity to kick her 
boyfriend to the curb and subsequently negotiated a tortured path between denial 
and self-justification. Spare and taut where Anderson’s Speak (BCCB 10/99) was 
richly intense, this will resonate with many readers, especially those many teens 
struggling with the implications of their own identity and sexuality.  DS
austen, catheRine All Good Children. Orca, 2011 300p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55469-824-0 $19.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55469-826-4 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Amid the crime and poverty-riddled streets of the future United States, only six 
cities remain safe enough to raise a family, and each of these gated communities 
(run by the friendly folks at ChemRose International) play host to the wealthy elite 
and their genetically engineered children. Max and his friends, residents there, still 
manage to get into a fair amount of mild trouble, pulling pranks at school and 
occasionally fighting. The leaders of New Middletown have had enough, however, 
and under the guise of a new treatment, they are rolling out mandatory inoculations 
to subdue the under-eighteen population. When Max’s nurse mother realizes the 
shot is turning kids into mindless sheep, she manages to fake the documentation 
for both Max’s and his best friend’s treatment, forcing them to play a dangerous 
game of play-acting until the family can find a way across the Canadian border. 
Kids with a grudge against authority will love every bit of this anti-establishment 
tale from its grim portrayal of the adults as despotic enforcers of conformity to 
January 2012 • 243
the snarky, smarter-than-everybody protagonist. With casual references to genetic 
engineering and corporate control, Austen creates a world in which grownups 
bent on total obedience are entirely believable. The book’s stark view of humanity 
is buoyed by Max’s witty commentary and his warm relationships with both his 
best friend and his little sister. The optimistic ending is a bit predictable, but given 
Max’s knack for getting out of a tight spot, it’s an organic and satisfying conclusion 
to a harrowing tale.  KQG
BaRnes, jennifeR lynn Every Other Day. Egmont, 2011 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-169-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-267-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In Barnes’ fictional world, it’s two hundred years since Darwin discovered the hydra 
in the Galapagos Islands, and thirty-nine species of preternatural creatures have 
subsequently been documented and classified. Kali D’Angelo knows she may very 
well be the fortieth, but she also knows she is at least part human, since she shifts 
between being a normal, vulnerable sixteen-year-old girl and being the Other, a 
bloodthirsty creature with extraordinary strength and a burning desire to hunt and 
kill other preternaturals. An attempt to save a fellow classmate from a chupacabra 
eventually leads Kali to uncover a vast corporate conspiracy that has shadowy entities 
breeding monsters and experimenting on teenagers, and the mastermind behind 
it all, Kali’s long-estranged mother, may be the only person who can tell Kali what 
she truly is. The pace is lightning quick, with Kali turning from the hunter to the 
hunted in just a few days, and readers will find themselves gasping at more than 
a few of the chapters’ cliffhanger endings. There’s a distinct Buffy-like girl-power 
edge to Kali’s battles, both in her literal fights with dragons and manticores and 
her more figurative struggles with her identity and notions of good and evil. The 
fact that her potential romance with another preternatural takes a backseat to her 
developing friendships with two empowered female friends makes this a particularly 
refreshing and welcome change from the genre’s typical tropes. Questions remain 
at the book’s close and a series seems almost certain, which will please ensnared 
readers; be sure to have this one on hand for fans of Jackson Pearce’s Sisters Red 
(BCCB 9/10).  KQG
BaRnett, mac Extra Yarn; illus. by Jon Klassen. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 
2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-06-195338-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
When happenstance delivers Annabelle a “box filled with yarn of every color,” she 
fashions herself a nice sweater. When there’s yarn left over, she then creates a gar-
ment for her dog, Mars; as she continues to find ways to use the wonderful yarn 
(“She made sweaters for all the dogs, and all the cats, and for other animals, too”), 
she’s always left with extra yarn for new projects. But what will happen when a 
wealthy visiting archduke covets Annabelle’s magical yarn? The ending is a little 
low-impact (Annabelle gets her box back from the thieving archduke and continues 
to knit), but there’s plenty of appeal in the quietly matter-of-fact yet humorous tone 
(“So Annabelle made sweaters for things that didn’t even wear sweaters”) and in 
the folkloric premise, which is reminiscent of stories ranging from the Hanukkah 
244 • The BulleTin
miracle to Gilman’s Something from Nothing (BCCB 2/94). Klassen’s art, however, 
really steals the show. The sharply edged figures with slyly comic, slightly skewed 
geometry recall his work in I Want My Hat Back (BCCB 9/11); the bleak wintry 
landscape is virtually monochromatic, with almost everything—kids, houses, 
pets—shades of a murky brown against the snow, save for Annabelle’s varicolored 
creations (and a touch of pink in chilled cheeks and noses). The knitted elements 
are cleverly printed in a stockinette-style pattern, their colors subtly varying as the 
yarn unspools. Slide this into a winter or folklore unit, or just use it to introduce 
the craft of knitting and let kids hope for magic.  DS
BeaRd, alex Crocodile’s Tears; written and illus. by Alex Beard. Abrams, 
2012 38p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0008-8 $17.95   
R 5-8 yrs
A black rhino and a tickbird are intrigued when they observe a crocodile crying on 
the banks of the Mburu River, so much so that they set off on a quest to learn just 
what it is that causes the crocodile to cry. They harvest a multitude of explanations 
from a variety of sources, most of which refer in some way to declining animal 
population patterns in Africa, from missing the trumpeting of the elephant herds 
to missing the silhouettes of giraffes. In the end, Rhino decides to ask the croco-
dile directly and, in a somewhat twisted but perfectly natural ending, Crocodile 
explains that he cries “to keep his eyes moist and healthy” but also “because I’m 
going to miss you,” then swallows the rhino whole. Though the rhino and tick-
bird’s search for information proves fruitless, it allows Beard to present facts about 
African ecology, and a glossary of animals in the back presents even more detailed 
information about the state of species survival for each of the described creatures. 
While the story is lengthy and a bit heavy-handed at times, it provides accessible 
intro to a somewhat lofty topic, and young listeners will likely come away having 
learned more than they expected. The pen, ink, and watercolor illustrations rely on 
strong lines and designerly balance; each spread is framed by a thick black box that 
leaves wide borders for additional decoration, which sometimes playfully crosses 
the boundary. The crossover appeal makes this suitable both for nonfiction animal 
kids wary of fiction and vice versa, and the title could also serve as a companion 
piece for other stories about African flora and fauna. In addition to the glossary, a 
note about crocodile tears and animal endangerment is included.  HM
BeRne, emma caRlson Still Waters. Simon Pulse, 2011 [240p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2114-1 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2115-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Hannah’s boyfriend is college bound come Monday morning, and she is intent on 
making their last weekend together one to remember. She’s certain that Colin’s old 
family vacation spot is the perfect setting for a romantic getaway, so after playfully 
“kidnapping” him, she sets off for the lake house with Colin in tow. When Hannah 
finally reveals their destination mid-trip, he becomes moody and morose, saying only 
that the place doesn’t hold any good memories; Hannah insists, however, and the 
two eventually make it to the house. There Colin’s behavior becomes increasingly 
erratic, reaching homicidal proportions after he discovers an old newspaper clipping 
featuring a picture of his dead brother. A quick pace and compact size leave little 
room for character development in this thriller, so the motivations of Hannah and 
January 2012 • 245
Colin are sometimes questionable, especially Hannah’s persistence in light of Colin’s 
obvious discomfort with the location of their romantic rendezvous. Teens familiar 
with the genre, however, will recognize that the reasons for getting to the scary 
place aren’t nearly as important as the actual terrors that await our protagonists, and 
Berne delivers the chills in spades. A gloomy, claustrophobic forest, a centuries-old 
graveyard, and an abandoned town ratchet up the creep factor, and the climactic 
pursuit of Hannah by a maniacal Colin is nearly cinematic in its heart-pounding 
detail. The ambiguous ending allows audiences the choice between a psychological 
explanation or a supernatural one for Colin’s sudden personality change, but since 
both are equally terrifying, readers will find themselves satisfactorily scared.  KQG
BReitRose, PRudence Mousenet; illus. by Stephanie Yue. Disney Hyperion, 
2011 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-2489-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
After spending years in remote locations with her scientist mother, ten-year-old 
Megan must now move in with her father and stepmother in Oregon while her mom 
goes off to Australia. Her inventor uncle gives her a gift—a computer so tiny they 
name it “the Thumbtop”—but it doesn’t help Megan make new friends or build 
a relationship with her stepmother. However, the world’s mice (who have learned 
to read, write, and use computers after the Silicon Valley boom) have their beady 
little eyes on the Thumbtop, which is just their size. The mice send an emissary, 
Trey, one of the few mice who have learned how to speak (most mice use MSL—
Mouse Sign Language—to communicate with one another) to make contact with 
Megan. Megan quickly gets over her initial startlement and befriends Trey and his 
partner mice, and together they embark upon a plan that will enable the mice to 
manufacture the Thumbtop while also creating an alliance between the mouse and 
human worlds and improving the lives of Megan’s various (and mostly unwitting) 
family members. Although the characterizations (with the exception of Megan) are 
less well developed than the plot, Breitrose has created a fascinating and amusing 
parallel mouse world, in which mice thoughtfully put their poop in plastic zip-top 
bags when stowing away in human luggage and employ an elaborate multi-mouse 
system for using human-sized computers. The book’s almost 400-page length 
may seem intimidating, but the kids who love this kind of human-animal fantasy 
interaction will fly through the accessible, quick-paced text that is punctuated with 
Yue’s simple, attractively tidy black-and-white illustrations.  JH
Bunce, elizaBeth c. Liar’s Moon. Levine/Scholastic, 2011 356p
ISBN 978-0-545-13608-2 $17.99   
R* Gr. 7-10
The civil war that Digger helped start (in Starcrossed, BCCB 10/10) hasn’t yet 
reached the city of Gerse, where she has returned after her sojourn with a group 
of nobles, hoping to regain some semblance of her old life as a thief. She’s having 
trouble finding her feet, though, as the death of her boyfriend and partner, Tegen, 
has marked her as bad luck among her suspicious underworld friends. The nobles, 
however, know her worth as a devotee of Tiboran, the god of those who must lie 
for a living, and they arrange to embroil her in yet another of their intrigues. This 
time she is drawn into a murder investigation; the sweet, good-natured Durrel 
Decath, who saved her from the Greenmen on the night of Tegen’s death, has been 
accused of murdering his much older, ill-tempered wife. At first more than willing 
246 • The BulleTin
to help clear his name, she soon begins to wonder if her faith in him is misplaced, 
as the evidence she gathers becomes more and more confusing and seems in fact 
to point to his guilt. Digger’s feisty spirit and clever wit, limned as it is with a deep 
vein of grief and loneliness, render her an irresistible character as she navigates the 
social and spiritual eccentricities of her world. A subtle but extremely effective 
parsing of that world according to its various gods allows strange dealings between 
rich and poor, law-abiding and not, as Digger the thief, for instance, blends in 
as easily with the nobles as she does with other thieves and actually finds herself 
feeling guilty when she tells the truth. Familiarity with the first book is absolutely 
essential for re-entering Digger’s life with its complicated connections and loyal-
ties, but the re-immersion is every bit as engrossing and satisfying as the initial 
plunge and the breathtaking surprise ending will leave readers aching for the next 
installment. With its compelling and complex characters and political intrigues, 
this series will especially appeal to devotees of Turner’s Queen’s Thief series (The 
Thief, BCCB 11/96, etc.).  KC
caRd, oRson scott Laddertop; by Orson Scott Card and Emily Janice Card with 
Zina Margaret Card; illus. by Honoel A. Ibardolaza. Seven Seas/Tor, 2011 192p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7653-2460-3 $10.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Competition to get into Laddertop Academy can be fierce, so when Azure and her 
best friend, Robbi, both gain admission to the elite school, they are thrilled. The 
academy is a training ground for a select group of young people who are then chosen 
to perform maintenance on the alien-constructed Laddertop space stations. Brash 
and bold, Azure takes to the cutthroat environment immediately, but sensitive Robbi 
is a bit more anxious about her new home, especially after she is bitten by a strange 
creature and begins having bizarre dreams that involve the creators of Laddertop. 
In the end, however, Robbi is chosen to go into space while Azure is left behind, 
forcing the two girls to sort out the mystery of Robbi’s visions across the distance. 
Between the elite academy and the young age of its space-bound students, certain 
aspects of this graphic novel are bound to feel familiar to fans of Card’s Ender’s 
Game, but there is enough here that is fresh and new to maintain the interest of 
both avid Card fans and sci-fi novices. The focus on two female protagonists in a 
science fiction setting is a refreshing addition to the genre, and while Card doesn’t 
quite get into the more philosophical musings found in his other works, there’s 
an underlying hint of adult malice that will compel readers forward. The visually 
dynamic illustrations are heavily influenced by manga, with its characteristic doe-
eyed heroines and abundance of speed lines and over-the-top expressions. Sci-fi 
buffs and comic-book geeks will be pleased.  KQG
caRman, PatRick Dark Eden; written and illus. by Patrick Carman. Tegen/
HarperCollins, 2011 322p
ISBN 978-0-06-200970-8 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Desperate to help their seventeen-year-old son overcome his acute fear of crowds, 
Will Besting’s parents decide to ship Will off for a week of intense psychotherapy 
per the advice of his current counselor, Dr. Stevens. Will joins six other teens, all 
patients of Dr. Stevens and all suffering from their own set of phobias, as they 
make the trek to Fort Eden, an isolated camp miles away from civilization. Already 
January 2012 • 247
suspicious, Will sneaks away, finding the perfect hideout in a nearby bunker where 
he discovers a panel of computer screens that allows him to monitor the goings-on 
at Fort Eden and the brutal but effective treatments performed by Stevens and her 
mysterious partner, Rainsford. From the surrounding oppressive forest to the quite 
possibly insane staff, Fort Eden oozes atmosphere, but the full menacing effect is 
hindered by too many plot conveniences. Will’s role as the primary narrator requires 
his contrived presence for significant events when all logic points him elsewhere, and 
the authorial intervention needed to make him a witness is considerable, not only 
with the convenience of the security monitors but also when Will steals the audio 
files of the other teens’ former therapy sessions, allowing readers a full picture of 
the others’ fears and their origins. Still, the fact that treatment is effective even as it 
seems utterly inhumane will no doubt spark discussion, and the added supernatural 
twist that has each of the patients paying a physical price for their psychological 
comfort maintains Fort Eden’s air of doom and gloom to the very end.  KQG 
childs, teRa lynn Sweet Venom. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2011 345p
ISBN 978-0-06-200181-8 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
When high-school junior, computer whiz, and adoptee Grace Whitfield has an 
encounter with a repulsive Minotaur in a dim sum parlor, she realizes that mytho-
logical monsters are real. Then Grace meets Gretchen, her identical sister and a 
monster-slayer extraordinaire, who teaches Grace how to defend herself against the 
monsters who are showing up in the city, and who informs Grace that she belongs 
to a set of identical sisters who are mortal descendants of the Gorgon Medusa 
(who was not in fact a monster but a guardian who kept monsters in check until 
jealous Athena intervened and bad-mouthed her). When Grace stumbles upon 
information that suggests that they have a third sister and that together they have 
an important and mysterious task, the duo goes looking for the last of the triplets. 
Greer completes the trio, and the triplets prepare to help Gretchen’s mentor (the 
Gorgon Euryale, now imprisoned somewhere), find Euryale’s sister (posing as a 
counselor at Grace’s school), kick some monster butt, and ascertain their task. There 
isn’t much depth to Childs’ characterizations of the sisters, and their voices are at 
times clichéd and stiff. Still, the premise is genuinely intriguing, and the lingering 
mysteries are compelling enough to encourage readers to carry on to the dramatic 
conclusion (and set-up for the sequel). Readers who like their fiction served up with 
a generous helping of Greek mythology may skim through some of the clunkier 
bits but will likely be sufficiently entertained.  JH
cochRan, molly Legacy. Wiseman/Simon, 2011 [432p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1739-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1741-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Katy Jessevar is descended from a long line of witches, but she 
doesn’t know it until her father, occupied with his latest blonde conquest, sends 
her packing to an old boarding school in rural Whitfield, Massachusetts. In just the 
first few days of attending Ainsworth, Katy learns that her mother was a powerful 
sorceress who may have been insane or demonically possessed when she attempted 
to murder her best friend’s adopted baby and then set fire to herself, successfully 
ending her life. Yikes. That’s a lot to take in as the new girl, and her classmates’ ven-
248 • The BulleTin
omous looks and pointed mutterings about “the Darkness” aren’t helping, especially 
those originating from the stunningly handsome and accordingly brooding Peter 
Shaw. Katy and Peter are soon brought together in an effort to save the town from 
the aforementioned Darkness, and, wouldn’t you know it, romance ensues, evil is 
defeated, and our heroine lives on to fight the good fight. Overall, this is an agree-
able, engaging journey into an intriguing setting that will most certainly appeal to 
readers fascinated by Salem (Whitfield is supposedly founded by Salem’s castoffs) 
and witch hunts in general. The holes in the plot are large enough that the charac-
ters often have to take huge leaps in logic to hurdle them, but the speedy pace and 
action-driven scenes will help the readers brush over them as well. Unfortunately, 
the inclusion of several tired stereotypes, such the disabled ingénu and the magi-
cal minority elder, are a bit more difficult to overlook. Rachel Hawkins’ Hex Hall 
(BCCB 5/10) outweighs this one in both storyline and wit, but the witch-obsessed 
will find this a suitable fix.  KQG
comPestine, ying chang Crouching Tiger; illus. by Yan Nascimbene. Candle-
wick, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4642-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
Vinson can’t seem to find a way to connect with his grandfather, visiting from China; 
he can’t manage the discipline of Grandpa’s tai chi, for instance, but Grandpa isn’t 
impressed with Vinson’s movie-style kung fu. When he sees Grandpa in action, 
however (kicking a board away before it hits an unwary passerby), he changes his 
mind and studies with his new mentor, eventually earning himself a place in the 
Chinese New Year parade. While Compestine’s story is fairly straightforward in-
tergenerational/intercultural conflict fare, the specifics of the tale, especially the tai 
chi practice (with poses modeled and identified on each page) make this an inviting 
take on the issue. The narrative speaks to many issues (a boy embarrassed by his 
culture and his elders, a young person’s inability to recognize the values of focus and 
patience) that may be familiar to listeners. Nascimbene’s illustrations are cool and 
clean, with full-page, tidily bordered ink and watercolor compositions facing pages 
of text; creative viewpoints—looking into the yard from the living room window, 
watching Vinson and his grandfather walk home from a far distance—add interest. 
While an obvious selection for marking the celebration of Chinese New Year, this 
is also a solid relationship story worth sharing at any time of year. An author’s note 
about martial arts and Chinese New Year is included.  HM
cook, eileen Unraveling Isobel. Simon Pulse, 2012 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1327-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-1329-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
An old family mansion on a bucolic Washington island may be some people’s idea 
of heaven, but seventeen-year-old Isobel is resentful that her mother’s marriage 
to Richard Wickham has brought her to this isolated place. Soon she’s more than 
just resentful—strange apparitions appear to her in the house, possibly related to 
a number of tragic deaths and unexplained disappearances over the years, but her 
new stepfather claims that it’s all Isobel’s own work, the first signs of hereditary 
mental illness. Fortunately, Isobel has allies: Mandy, one of the town librarians, who 
January 2012 • 249
helps Isobel research the Wickham family history, and Nathaniel, Isobel’s irresistibly 
handsome stepbrother, who blames his father for his mother and sister’s death, and 
who is as attracted to Isobel as she to him. Cook starts with some classic territory 
(there’s even a boating accident à la Rebecca) while effectively updating things with 
Isobel’s brashly realistic contemporary voice; the chills of a damp drowned specter 
and mysterious supernatural messages are still plenty creepy even in a modern set-
ting. Though subplots get a little out of control at time (especially the messagey 
thread about Isobel’s father and his schizophrenia), the main storylines of the ghostly 
mystery and her blossoming romance with Nathaniel remain successful, and the 
latter is all the sweeter for her victory over a queen-bee classmate. This is ideal for 
readers who like their stories supernatural but their dream guys human.  DS
coomBs, kate, ad. Hans My Hedgehog: A Tale From the Brothers Grimm; ad. by 
Kate Coombs; illus. by John Nickle. Atheneum, 2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-1533-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
A farmer and his wife, long childless, welcome a child into the world who is half 
human and half hedgehog and name him Hans My Hedgehog. As a young man 
playing his beloved music in the woods, he has two encounters with kings who 
have lost their way; each time, he offers to help in exchange for the first thing that 
meets the king upon returning home, and each time, a princess meets the king. 
The first king chooses to ignore the promise; Hans subsequently sets his band of 
pigs loose to destroy his castle. The second king vows to keep the promise, and 
he and his daughter welcome Hans into their family. In the midst of the wedding 
celebration, the enchantment is broken and Hans is magically transformed into a 
complete man. This lesser-known tale from the Brothers Grimm, loosely adapted 
here, is an intriguing one, but some gaps in logic and explanation compromise the 
storyline; it’s especially baffling that there’s no justification for Hans’ transforma-
tion. Nickle’s art is similarly mixed; his acrylic illustrations, densely saturated in 
hue but delicately modeled in hedgehog spines and other details, gives the animals 
an interesting combination of vivid realism and fantastical action, but the humans 
are stiff and ungainly. This adaptation offers a unique opportunity to share an 
unfamiliar traditional tale, however, so true folktale fans may want to have a listen. 
A note explains the changes Coombs made to the story.  HM
cooney, caRoline B. The Lost Songs. Delacorte, 2011 250p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90800-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73966-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89805-1 $10.99   
R Gr. 7-10
A multifaceted narrative focalizes through four different teens at the same South 
Carolina high school. There’s Lutie, a gifted vocalist and star student haunted by 
her drug-addict mother; Doria, a transplanted New Englander more comfortable 
with her music than her new classmates; Kelvin, Lutie’s childhood friend, Doria’s 
crush, and the guy liked by everybody; and Train, once tight with Lutie and Kelvin, 
now a swaggering thug in the sway of his jailbird older brother. Plot strands, too, 
are multiple: a music teacher and visiting professor are trying to convince Lutie 
to share the songs created by her great-grandmother, an impoverished laundress; 
Doria’s friend-seeking involvement in the church youth group brings her into closer 
250 • The BulleTin
contact with Lutie; Train’s desire to make his criminal name leads him to focus on 
the vulnerable Doria. This is rich with plot, character, and emotion, and it’s all 
carefully combined into a highly readable tale that touches on family secrets and 
loyalty, the wonder of music, the strength of community, and the benediction of a 
fresh start. The book credibly captures the complexities of a small town with shift-
ing social categories based on history, economics, class, neighborhood, and race: 
in a subtle touch, Doria automatically notes when other people are black, while 
the African-American protagonists don’t; Lutie still retains connections to the old 
and disadvantaged African-American neighborhood where she grew up despite 
now living in a better off part of town. Cooney offers an eloquent tribute to the 
possibilities of music and religion, focusing on their power to bring people together 
and strengthen the community as well as the individual. That’s a lofty message, but 
the book’s firm focus on personal and everyday teen reality ensures that readers will 
stay with the story every step of the way, and they may well reconsider their own 
familial legacies and community possibilities.  DS
coRey, shana Here Come the Girl Scouts!; illus. by Hadley Hooper. Scholastic, 
2012 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-34278-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
With the hundredth anniversary of Girl Scouting in the U.S. just around the corner, 
expect an uptick in demand for material on its foundress, Juliette Gordon Low. 
Ginger Wadsworth’s First Girl Scout: The Life of Juliette Gordon Low, reviewed below, 
is so far this anniversary year’s biography of choice for Juniors and Cadettes, but 
Corey offers a complementary picture-book account well suited for sharing with 
Daisies and Brownies. Relatively little is made of Low’s childhood years, apart from 
repeatedly acknowledging her adventurousness and love of the outdoors. The main 
focus is on her encounter with Boy Scouts and Girl Guides in England and the way 
she enthusiastically imported the idea to America and enlisted friends and relatives 
to help her launch a home-grown program. Particularly delightful are references to 
skills that were suggested for early Girl Scouts, from “How to cure hams” to “How 
to secure a burglar with eight inches of cord,” and to badges such as “Pioneer” and 
“Dairy Maid.” Hooper’s mixed-media, digitally assembled pictures feature thick, 
relaxed lines and textured swaths of outdoorsy greens and blues. Quotations from 
Low snake through the spreads or pop up in design elements. Four dense columns 
of historical notes are appended, as well as a list of sources and citations for all 
quotations.  EB
davies, stePhen Outlaw. Clarion, 2011 289p
ISBN 978-0-547-39017-8 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
Fifteen-year-old Jake Knight isn’t all that upset when he’s suspended from his 
boarding school for prowling the town at night on a geocaching game; he’s quite 
happy, in fact, to be shipped off to Burkina Faso, where his father is the British 
ambassador, and where Jake has always felt life holds more adventure. On this visit 
he gets more adventure than he bargained for, as he and his activist younger sister, 
Kas, are kidnapped by the notorious Yakuuba Sor, regarded by Western countries 
as an outlaw in cahoots with “a well-known international terrorist network.” After 
being rescued from the back of a delivery van by a group of slingshot-wielding teens 
January 2012 • 251
on horseback, Jake and Kas are taken to a secret encampment where they meet 
the real Yakuuba and learn that he’s actually a Robin Hood sort of good guy who’s 
being framed by villains high up in the Burkina Faso political hierarchy. Yakuuba 
helps them back to the embassy, but nobody there is buying that he’s innocent of 
their abduction or return, and when Mr. Knight thinks he’s packed his kids off 
to safety in Great Britain, Jake has actually slipped away at the airport, purloined 
his father’s motorcycle, and blazed off to Yakuuba’s encampment to warn him of 
imminent Western military retribution. Nonstop action will please thriller fans, 
and a bit of discussion of foreign interests in Burkina Faso gold mines adds some 
substance to the plot. The cardboard villains, tidily choreographed escapes, and 
Jake’s relentless derring-do attitude carry the unmistakable scent of cheesiness, 
though, and undercut any well-meaning effort at examining post-colonial relations. 
A closing note sorts fact from fiction in the novel, and if readers are unfamiliar 
with the thermobaric missile system featured here, they’ll now have something to 
keep them awake at night.  EB
davis, heatheR Wherever You Go. Harcourt, 2011 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-547-50151-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In the six months since her boyfriend’s death, seventeen-year-old Holly has not 
only had to grieve for Rob, but she has also had to care for her little sister and ail-
ing grandfather while her mother works. Meanwhile, Jason, Rob’s best friend, has 
mourned his buddy quietly, while the rest of the wealthy suburban community have 
either ignored Rob’s death completely or blamed the car accident that killed him 
on Holly—to whom Jason finds himself increasingly attracted. As Holly and Jason 
become close, neither of them realizes they are being observed by Rob himself, whose 
spirit is caught in a limbo that leaves him frustrated, angry, and lonely. The shifting 
perspectives—Holly tells her own story, Jason’s experiences are narrated in the third 
person, and Rob’s sections employ an arresting second-person address—humanize 
each of the main players here while effectively drawing a complete picture of the 
devastation left behind in the wake of the accident. Although the romance between 
Holly and Jason is a tad predictable, especially as Jason continues to play the ever 
generous knight in shining armor, it is nonetheless sweet, tender, and appealingly 
hard won as the two battle their own guilt, other people’s expectations, and class 
stereotypes in order to be together. Even more compelling than the love story, 
however, is the relationship that develops between Rob and Holly’s grandfather: the 
old man is the only living person who can see Rob, and their ensuing conversations 
about love, life, and death create a poignant connection between a life not quite 
lived and one in its final moments.  KQG
deedy, caRmen agRa The Cheshire Cheese Cat: A Dickens of a Tale; written 
by Carmen Agra Deedy and Randall Wright; illus. by Barry Moser. Peachtree, 
2011 234p
ISBN 978-1-56145-595-9 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 3-5 
A friendship between an alley cat and a mouse seems unlikely, and yet that is precisely 
what happens thanks to Skilley’s aversion to eating rodents and his preference for 
cheese. When Skilley the cat finds a home in the venerable pub Ye Olde Cheshire 
Cheese, in Victorian London, he strikes a deal with Pip, a resident mouse: Skilley 
252 • The BulleTin
vows to only make a show of catching and eating the pub’s many mice, while Pip and 
the other mice promise to keep Skilley well stocked with plenty of the pub’s amaz-
ing cheese. Complicating this plan are the arrival of Skilley’s violent feline nemesis, 
Pinch, and Skilley’s discovery of Maldwyn, one of the Tower of London’s revered 
ravens, now a hidden resident of the pub after being rescued by the pub owner’s 
daughter. A humorous side story involves Charles Dickens searching desperately 
for an opening sentence for A Tale of Two Cities, which Pip eventually provides. 
Indeed, there are numerous nods to Dickens here, and the intended audience will 
unfortunately miss most of those references. The book also becomes preachy at 
times, and the human characters are considerably less interesting than the animal 
ones. Solid messages about friendship, loyalty, and being true to oneself are never-
theless effectively conveyed, and readers will likely enjoy the primary animal story, 
while historical fiction fans will appreciate the Victorian atmosphere. Moser’s softly 
shaded graphite illustrations, appearing in vignette spot art throughout, offer per-
sonable portraits, especially strong in their depictions of the animal characters.  JH
dionne, eRin Notes from an Accidental Band Geek. Dial, 2011 282p
ISBN 978-0-8037-3564-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-10
Like her father, a Boston Symphony Orchestra principal horn player, ninth-grader 
Elsie has devoted her life to the French horn, with friendships and fun perpetually 
taking a back seat to her intense practice schedule. After missing the auditions for 
the Boston Youth Orchestra, Elsie must join another performance group to up her 
chances of getting into Shining Birches, a prestigious summer music camp she is 
determined to attend in order to prove her talent to her skeptical father. Reluctantly, 
she joins her high school marching band, where she is assigned to the mellophone 
and is initially bewildered by both the students’ hijinks and their surprising dedica-
tion. Tentatively, Elsie befriends some of her fellow musicians and begins to like 
marching band, but her single-minded devotion to her musical goals and stunted 
social skills cause her to continually bungle her peer relationships. Although some 
of the characters are underdeveloped, this is an intriguing, affectionate, and de-
tailed look into the camaraderie and dedication of “band geeks” and into the lives 
of orchestral musicians. Elsie’s immature behavior is authentically portrayed, and 
her social anxiety and stormy relationship with her demanding father will hit home 
with many teens.  JH
diPucchio, kelly Crafty Chloe; illus. by Heather Ross. Atheneum, 
2012 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2123-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4390-7 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Young Chloe may not be good at sports or ballet, but she can totally rock a pair of 
scissors and a glue stick and knows that “anything becomes less boring with googly 
eyes on it.” When snooty London buys the exact doll that Chloe was about to 
purchase as the perfect gift for Chloe’s best friend, Emma, Chloe decides on the 
spot to “make her something special that you can’t even buy in a store,” an idea 
that London derides. Though Chloe initially draws a blank, inspiration eventually 
hits; in fact, when London’s gift doll ends up dress-less in a mud puddle after a 
January 2012 • 253
tussle with a dog on the way to the party, Chloe comes to the rescue with one of 
her gifts, an awesome homemade doll dress. The doll and dress are both a hit with 
Emma, as is the cute canopy doll bed Chloe has made. DiPucchio’s writing has an 
amusingly wry conversational tone (“Chloe’s father raised his eyebrows. Chloe’s 
mother checked her for a fever. Chloe’s baby brother spit out his green beans”), 
and the story moves along swiftly and smoothly. While there are plenty of artsy 
kids who will eat this up (and find creative inspiration in both text and illustra-
tions), the idea of making your own presents and playthings may be pleasantly 
novel to others. Ross’s snappy illustrations, with high-spirited pencil lines touched 
with digital color, depict wide-eyed, redheaded Chloe at home in a detailed crafty 
girl’s paradise where tubes of glitter, sewing patterns, and scraps of paper litter the 
floors, and Chloe’s dog, Bert, is an expressive and supportive assistant. Pair this with 
Ehlert’s Hands (BCCB 1/98) or use it as a prompt for some creative crafting.  JH
emond, stePhen WinterTown; written and illus. by Stephen Emond. Little, 
2011 [310p]
ISBN 978-0-316-13332-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Lucy and Evan were children together, pushing each other’s limits and imagining 
themselves into a fantasy world when their own lives seemed too ordinary. Then 
Lucy’s mom and dad split, and Lucy moved away. While Evan became a stellar 
college-bound student Lucy walked on the wild side, drinking, smoking, and ex-
perimenting with sex and drugs until her mother finally kicked her out. Over the 
years, the two weeks she spends with her dad every winter have kept friendship 
alive between Lucy and Evan, but this year’s visit reveals a radical change in her; 
she’s now completely goth, with a sullen attitude to complete the look. Evan tries to 
find the old Lucy, but his conversation is met with her sulks, and it isn’t until they 
finally kiss, something Lucy has apparently wanted to do for a long time, that she 
thaws enough to scold him for not getting how painful her life is. The third-person 
narration switches from Evan’s to Lucy’s viewpoint midway through, accompanied 
throughout by Evan’s ongoing comic strip that he develops in an attempt to work 
through the awkwardness between him and Lucy. Emond also writes like a graphic 
artist; a walk down a snow-covered street is narrated one closely observed step at a 
time, while the connections between the real emotional lives of Evan and Lucy and 
their comic characters on a fantasy quest are left unremarked for readers to sort out. 
The dense partial realism gives immediacy to the story, but neither character arc is 
fully realized, and the miracle of literary coincidence that brings them back together 
in the end strains credulity. Meanwhile, Lucy and Evan become poster children for 
the increasingly prevalent theme in YA literature of forestalling adulthood for the 
sake of living a more adventurous and less responsible life; their suburban malaise 
will be recognizable, even if narratively unsatisfying, to readers.  KC
evans, shane W. We March; written and illus. by Shane W. Evans. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-539-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Evans returns to the spare, immediate text style and dramatic, evocative art em-
ployed in Underground (BCCB 2/11) to evoke the experience of traveling to the 
254 • The BulleTin
nation’s capital and participating in the 1963 March on Washington, culminating 
in Martin Luther King, Jr.’s famous “I Have a Dream” speech. The homely, per-
sonable specifics make epic history into a humanly accessible event: the hushed 
anticipation is palpable as the kids are roused by their parents in the pre-dawn 
dark (“The morning is quiet.// The sun rises// and we prepare// to march”) and 
tidied into their clothing, and King’s determinedly raised arm mirrors that of the 
young boy as he sits on his dad’s shoulders. Yet there’s an iconic flavor to the scenes, 
their streamlined compositions and simplified human figures standing in for the 
experience of many, their numbers brought home in closeups and broad views of 
the crowd swelling around the Reflecting Pool and the Lincoln Memorial. You’ll 
need to partner this with a more fact-based account of the march to give kids the 
meat of what’s going on here, but this will convey to them with impact what it 
was like to wake up in a quiet morning and march into history. A brief note offers 
more detail on the event.  DS
fagan, deva Circus Galacticus. Harcourt, 2011 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-547-58136-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Like many parents, Trix’s mom and dad often told Trix she was special; they also 
entrusted her with a mysterious piece of meteorite to keep safe “no matter what” 
shortly before they were killed in a space-shuttle accident. After years of going either 
unnoticed or bullied at boarding school since then, Trix thinks her parents were 
mistaken about her uniqueness, but when she catches the attention of the enigmatic 
and charming ringmaster of the Circus Galacticus during a class field trip, her life 
goes from everyday boring to downright intergalactic in a moment. The Circus is 
of the space-traveling variety, and the Ringmaster invites Trix to climb on board the 
Big Top spaceship where she is introduced to a world of gravity-bending acrobats, 
mind-boggling techies, one multi-legged trash compacter, and an eons-old battle 
between the conformity-obsessed Mandate and the more inclusive Tinkers. As it 
turns out, both Trix and that old moon rock are something special after all. Fagan 
may go sci-fi here, but she brings the same charming characterizations and vivid, 
fluid prose that she used while tackling the more earthbound fantasy of her recent 
The Magical Misadventures of Prunella Bogthistle (BCCB 7/10) and Fortune’s Folly 
(BCCB 9/09). Circus life takes center ring in much of the scene making, decorat-
ing what is essentially a traditional story of finding one’s worth with plenty of flash 
and pizzazz so that even the familiar tale feels fresh and new. Like many of Fagan’s 
female protagonists, Trix is lovably flawed, and her often-misguided stubbornness 
is forgivable in light of her fierce loyalty and determination. Bring the popcorn, 
and be sure to stick around for the stellar finale.  KQG
fletcheR, RalPh Also Known as Rowan Pohi. Clarion, 2011 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-547-57208-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-9
What better place to launch a truly boneheaded scheme than a booth at the IHOP? 
Bobby Steele and his public-school buddies get their hands on an application 
to toney Whitestone Academy on the affluent side of town and, inspired by the 
reflection of the restaurant’s name in the window, conjure up a virtual applicant, 
January 2012 • 255
Rowan Pohi, complete with vita and references. Pohi gets accepted, and the guys 
collectively freak at their unanticipated success and bury the acceptance packet 
in an empty lot. Bobby, though, meets a luscious female Stoney who shows some 
interest in him, and he exhumes the papers, attends orientation, wins a scholar-
ship, and begins to settle in to his new, clandestine identity. The tenth-grade bully 
recognizes him for who he is—just another neighborhood kid—and threatens to 
shoot down Bobby’s promising academic prospects. There are no surprises here, 
from the course of Bobby’s romance, to his blue-collar father’s eventual support, 
to his triumph over the bully. Given that readers already know the story, even its 
relatively slim page count sometimes seems a bit bloated. This very predictability, 
however, coupled with plenty of dialogue, makes the title an easy-to-booktalk quick 
pick for reluctant middle-schoolers coerced into book reports, or anyone with a 
couple of extra hours and a taste for schoolhouse comedy.  EB
fReymann-WeyR, gaRRet French Ducks in Venice; illus. by Erin McGuire. Can-
dlewick, 2011 46p
ISBN 987-0-7636-4173-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Georges and Cécile, the titular ducks, do not, in fact, hail from France, but they 
still like to think of themselves as French: “No one knows why (not even the ducks 
themselves), but that’s how it is.” The feathered siblings live in a canal in Venice, 
California, near their friend Polina Panova, who is neither a duck nor French, but 
rather a Russian human who the ducks happens to believe is a princess. “Princess” 
Polina lives a good life as a renowned seamstress and girlfriend to a filmmaker, until 
said filmmaker takes off and leaves Polina sad and lonely. Both the ducks want 
to cheer their friend, but while Cécile is quite certain only time will heal Polina’s 
broken heart, Georges is intent on hastening the process by getting the princess a 
perfect gift. Freymann-Weyr (author of After the Moment, BCCB 6/09, etc.) brings 
her characteristic eloquence with matters of the heart to the younger set here, and 
her silky, concise prose keeps the fanciful concept from becoming cutesy. Format-
wise, this is a classic illustrated storybook with the trim size and artistic emphasis 
of a small picture book. Although the human figures are sometimes a bit stiff and 
Polina herself bears a striking resemblance to a Disney princess, the muted palette 
and gentle compositions of the digital illustrations offer a nice complement to the 
dreamy, romantic text. Youngsters may not fully understand the nature of Polina’s 
heartbreak, but they will certainly be able to relate to one of the three key players 
here, be it duck or human; Georges, in particular, is endearing both in the illustra-
tions and the story, as his quizzical expression in the face of Polina’s grief conveys 
his utter bewilderment at his inability to fix her. This is a warm, touching tale that 
will have young princesses (and perhaps a few princes) looking for some feathered 
friends to call their own.  KQG
gRavel, elise A Day in the Office of Doctor Bugspit; written and illus. by Elise 
Gravel. Blue Apple, 2011 34p (Balloon Toons)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60905-092-4 $10.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60905-182-2 $4.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Despite his assurance that “I have cures for every ailment in the galaxy, even ones 
that don’t exist yet,” the alien Dr. Bugspit (“the galaxy’s Number 1 doctor”) has 
more in common with a patent-medicine con man than a bona fide physician. 
256 • The BulleTin
After diagnosing a cowboy hat-wearing patient as having “split-brain-o-sis” (his 
hat has split his brain in two, causing him to repeat everything twice), Dr. Bugspit 
blithely sends him away with some “Fix-It-Up” syrup (ingredients include dead 
flies and earwax) and a jester hat, exclaiming, “I don’t know if he’ll get better, but 
this was fun. This was fun.” Along with the slightly severe Nurse Giggles and his 
vaguely piggish assistant, Googoo, Dr. Bugspit continues his day: seeing (but not 
necessarily helping) patients, napping, doing some nose and eyebrow exercises, and 
eating lunch (a slug slime and glow-in-the-dark jelly sandwich). About as nutritious 
(and delicious) as a jumbo bag of Skittles, this unabashedly goofy combination of 
picture book and junior graphic novel will draw in many a reluctant reader with 
its wacky sensibility and mild grossness. Although the book is quite accessible and 
enjoyable as a readalone title, the hilarious absurdity (“I keep these toy monkeys 
in my desk. I play with them while waiting for patients. Hello, my two little 
chubba-woo-hahs!”) makes this also well-suited for reading aloud or perhaps even 
performing. The black-outlined, cartoonish art is amusing as well, with the long-
nosed, salmon pink, and frequently pop-eyed Dr. Bugspit grinning and cavorting 
his way across mostly white pages splashed with electric red, chartreuse, and sky 
blue. Adults would be well advised to get this doctor in the house.  JH
gReenWald, lisa Reel Life Starring Us. Amulet/Abrams, 2011 294p
ISBN 9781-4197-0026-2 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 6-9
It’s not easy starting a new school a month late, but Dina is optimistic; after all, 
she was always popular in her old school in Massachusetts, so she’s looking forward 
to finding her place with the eighth-grade cool kids here in Long Island. By the 
end of her first day, though, she’s not so sure; although she has been paired with 
Chelsea, who’s obviously the queen bee of the school, to work on a video project 
for the school’s fiftieth anniversary gala, she’s also been “chipped” (a local form of 
hazing where people pour potato chips in your backpack) multiple times, and the 
cool girls are looking askance at her artsy style. Chelsea has her own problems, 
though, as her high-powered father has lost his job and she is trying to keep that a 
secret while she keeps up appearances. Chelsea and Dina take turns narrating, giv-
ing readers a clear sense of their voices and perspectives. While Dina is realistically 
drawn, Chelsea and her situation are decidedly less so; it particularly doesn’t seem 
credible that her friends don’t know about her father’s job loss, since she’s been 
immersed in a social scene shared by mothers and daughters and fueled by lattes 
and gossip, and Dina readily finds out about it via a quick Google session. Chelsea 
is, however, believably mercurial for an eighth-grade girl, with whiplash-inducing 
changes of heart and attitude, particularly where Dina is concerned. Though fully 
predictable, the aw-shucks ending affirms the values of looking beyond things like 
wealth and social status toward celebrating everyone’s uniqueness and learning 
what it really means to be a friend, making this accessible and nonthreatening for 
nascent chick-lit readers.  KC 
handleR, daniel Why We Broke Up; illus. by Maira Kalman. Little, 
2011 345p
ISBN 978-0-316-12725-7 $19.99   
R* Gr. 9-12
Min is a smart girl who likes to host quirky parties and watch old movies. Ed is 
the handsome co-captain of the basketball team who likes to hook up with girls. 
January 2012 • 257
Despite their differences, they end up very seriously involved, struggling to defend 
their relationship against family and friends who try to tell them they are simply 
too different to stay together. Sure enough, they do break up, and the story is told 
through Min’s reminiscences as she goes through a box of mementos that chart the 
trajectory of their time together. Each object, lent gravity by a full-color illustra-
tion in Kalman’s familiar style of tactile painterly strokes and vivid colors, opens 
up a memory that has both a particular and a universal quality as Min and Ed 
share their very different worlds with one another. Even as Min’s descriptions are 
tainted by her knowledge of what comes later, they detail a relationship that seems 
mutually affecting, of two people discovering the wonder of seeing themselves loved 
by someone other than family for the first time. Handler (yes, Lemony Snicket’s 
alter ego—who knew?) is at his best when he’s creating verbal collages of ordinary, 
recognizable high-school moments; in what read like prose poems, he makes the 
familiar new, detailing through Min’s sensitive impressions the engulfing sensory 
minutiae of events such as a high-school basketball game, a post-game bonfire, 
a first date, a post-breakup breakdown. Indeed, the avalanche of self-doubt that 
crashes down on Min in the immediate aftermath of the breakup is delivered in 
a headlong rush of brutal self-recrimination that exposes her vulnerability; it’s a 
spot-on, devastatingly rendered series of emotional lacerations that everyone who 
has ever been dumped will immediately recognize as the cry of his or her own per-
sonal heartbreak. Like the perfect breakup song, this turns the searing experience 
of losing your heart into a cathartic work of art.  KC
haRPeR, chaRise meRicle Henry’s Heart; written and illus. by Charise Mericle 
Harper. Ottaviano/Holt, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-8989-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Harper introduces readers to little Henry in a most unconventional way—from the 
inside out. Of particular interest is Henry’s heart, a perfectly healthy muscle pump-
ing blood and oxygen efficiently around his body. But that heart, of course, needs 
exercise for tiptop function, and although Henry’s not exactly a slacker, it certainly 
takes some prodding from his parents to get him outside and moving around. On 
a walk into town with his dad, Henry’s heart gets a decent workout on the uphill 
path, but it really starts thumping when Henry falls madly in love. The object of his 
desire is a puppy in a pet-store window, and when Dad predictably refuses to buy 
the dog, Henry slides into a heartbeat-abating funk. Happily for both Henry and 
his heart, the doctor prescribes a pet dog, and now Henry gets plenty of exercise 
chasing his pooch out in the fresh air. The whimsically crafted tale features not 
only a pleasingly goofy cartoon cast but also some very clever misdirection in the 
“love story” episode, which is certain to elicit groans and giggles. The physiology 
lesson, so carefully presented in the opening spreads, becomes muddled once the 
heart begins a dialogue with Henry’s eyes to determine whether to speed up or slow 
down, and some supplemental explanation will be required to make this work in a 
primary-grade health unit. Nonetheless, parents and educators looking to bypass 
the usual healthy-living diatribes will find this just what the cardiopulmonary 
specialist ordered.  EB
258 • The BulleTin
hilmo, tess With a Name Like Love. Ferguson/Farrar, 2011 249p
ISBN 978-0-374-38465-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-8
July, 1957, finds Ollie Love in Binder, Arkansas, one of the many three-day stops 
her family will make as they travel from Kentucky to Louisiana, sharing the gospel 
and bringing the joy of Christ to all who will come to their revival tent to hear 
Reverend Everlasting Love sing and preach. In Binder, though, Ollie finds a problem 
that might take more than three days to solve: a woman sits in jail awaiting trial for 
the murder of her husband, while her son, Jimmy, has intrigued Ollie’s compas-
sionate nature and set her romantic thirteen-year-old heart a-fluttering. Although 
domestic abuse and murder form the backdrop and occasion for this story, the tale 
itself has a thoroughly sweet disposition, befitting the hazily naïve and romantic 
ideal of its time period; aside from two genuinely reprehensible bad actors and one 
horrific scene of animal abuse, more good things than bad happen, and the adults 
in the story are wise and caring, willing to listen to their children and then to act 
in responsible and effective ways so that a compassionate justice prevails. Adult 
and child readers weary of the cynicism and edgy gloom that pervades so much of 
children’s literature can breathe easy here, as Reverend Everlasting Love (and indeed 
the entire Love family) live up to their name.  KC 
hoBBs, valeRie Maggie & Oliver, or, A Bone of One’s Own; illus. by Jennifer 
Thermes. Holt, 2011 181p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9294-3 $15.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Oliver the dog doesn’t understand that his elderly owner, Bertie, has died; he just 
knows that she’s left him, so he takes to the wintry streets of Victorian-era Boston 
in search of her. Meanwhile, ten-year-old housemaid Maggie has been turned out 
into the street for having the impertinence to speak to her mistress’s distinguished 
guest, the Duchess of Landsaway. As Maggie and Oliver each search for food, shelter, 
and companionship, their paths cross several times; Oliver finally gives up his search 
for Bertie, and Maggie claims him as her own, renaming him “Lucky.” Desperate 
Maggie reluctantly joins forces with young ne’er-do-well, Daniel, who attempts 
to coerce her into stealing from the duchess; all is well, however, as Maggie turns 
out to be the duchess’ long-lost granddaughter, and Maggie and Oliver both find 
a home with the benevolent lady. Although this is not as detailed and nuanced as 
similarly themed classics such as A Little Princess, young fans of old-fashioned hard 
luck tales that end happily will snap this up. Quick pacing and straightforward 
storytelling make this an accessible read and, while the plot isn’t exactly realistic, 
the ambivalent actions of various characters (e.g., Daniel) add a bit of welcome 
substance and solidity to the story. Although the figures in Thermes’ soft gray-
toned illustrations are occasionally stiff or slightly awkward, the gently shaded and 
crosshatched pictures are a good fit with the cozy, old-fashioned feel of the tale.  JH
hood, ann The Treasure Chest: Angel of the Battlefield. Grosset, 2011 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-448-45471-9 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-448-45467-2 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Stuck living in the former servants’ quarters of their ailing aunt’s mansion-turned-
museum, twins Felix and Maisie would give anything for a time machine that would 
January 2012 • 259
take them back to the days before their folks got divorced, before their dad took 
off abroad and their mom moved them from New York to boring Newport, Rhode 
Island. As it is, the two siblings try to make the best of their situation by exploring 
the off-limits sections of the mansion, including a room called the Treasure Chest 
that houses various historical artifacts from all sorts of different eras. There Maisie 
and Felix do indeed find the magic of time travel, but instead of going back just a 
few years, the siblings find themselves in 1836 and face to face with a young Clara 
Barton. This first installment of a proposed eight-book series (each one highlight-
ing different historical figure) suffers from impaired focus; the historical details 
are often clumsily integrated into the storyline, and because the link between the 
twins’ visit to Clara’s eventual accomplishments is never quite made clear, the entire 
endeavor seems programmatic and otherwise purposeless. The odd-couple pair-
ing of straight-laced Felix and adventurous Maisie makes the siblings’ relationship 
charmingly warm, however, and their culture shock while in Clara’s world is totally 
believable. There are echoes of Konigsburg’s From the Mixed-Up Files of Mrs. Basil 
E. Frankweiler (BCCB 3/68) in the twins’ museum wanderings, and readers who 
thrill to find magic amidst the everyday will be pleased when their explorations 
turn into something more.  KQG
joyce, William Nicholas St. North and the Battle of the Nightmare King; writ-
ten by William Joyce and Laura Geringer; illus. by William Joyce. Atheneum, 
2011 228p (The Guardians)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3048-8 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3575-9 $9.99   
R Gr. 3-6
When Pitch, an evil being who feeds on children’s dreams and gives them night-
mares, escapes from his imprisonment, he and his shadowy followers invade the 
unusual village of Santoff Claussen (home to imaginative dreamers and inventors) 
and kill the town’s beloved leader, the great magician, Ombric. Ombric’s foster child, 
Katherine, manages to revive him, and the village also gains Nicholas St. North, a 
young warrior and thief, who unexpectedly came to the rescue during the attack. 
Nicholas creates a mechanical man, or Djinni, as a helper, but disaster ensues when 
Pitch inhabits the Djinni and turns it against its masters. Readers willing to wade 
through the rather confusing beginning and a convoluted backstory about the 
Man in the Moon will find this an adventure worth taking. Katherine, Nicholas, 
and Ombric are compelling heroes, and Pitch’s ability to insinuate himself into 
“hosts” (the village’s bear, the Djinni) is genuinely creepy. The kind of kids who 
are intrigued by Rube Goldberg machines and Leonardo da Vinci’s creations will 
find the descriptions of Santoff Claussen and the Djinni interesting as well. The 
clockwork element has an echo of The Inventions of Hugo Cabret (BCCB 4/07), 
and the book similarly plays with black and white throughout, the moon’s story 
appearing in white against black backgrounds; Joyce’s smoky monochromatic il-
lustration, both dramatic full pages and smaller vignettes, have a stylized surrealism 
that appropriately evokes a feeling of otherworldliness.  JH
260 • The BulleTin
jukes, mavis The New Kid. Knopf, 2011 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95879-3 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85879-6 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89631-6 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
A move from southern to northern California means that eight-year-old Carson 
is now the New Kid in his class at Valley Oak School. That’s a daunting position, 
especially when obstreperous classmate Weston Walker seems bent on making 
Carson into his sidekick, if not actual partner, in crime, complicating Carson’s 
quest to find a friend with whom to celebrate his upcoming birthday. As the days 
go by, however, Carson begins to settle in, making friends with his classmates 
and the class rat and discovering that Weston’s not the troublemaker he appears. 
Veteran author Jukes has a fluid and readable style, and Carson, with his love of 
animals and his attachment to his beloved stuffed animal, Moose, is an endearing 
protagonist. The story is somewhat unshaped, though, so it’s left to the reader to 
identify the main points among the other quotidian events; aside from Weston, 
there’s little characterization of the secondary players, who tend to blend together 
save for the odd gimmick, and Weston’s misjudged nature requires a number of 
contrived misunderstandings. The easygoing prose and the humor-touched world 
of the middle-grades classroom will likely still satisfy fans of Claudia Mills and 
Johanna Hurwitz.  DS
juRmain, suzanne tRiPP Worst of Friends: Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, and 
the True Story of an American Feud; illus. by Larry Day. Dutton, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-525-47903-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 239, for review.
kalman, maiRa Looking at Lincoln; written and illus. by Maira Kalman. Paulsen/
Penguin, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24039-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
A little girl wandering through the park sights a very tall man in a very tall hat and 
struggles to place him (“He reminded me of someone . . . ”). The portrait on a five-
dollar bill sparks her memory, and she’s off to the library to investigate Abraham 
Lincoln. The fruits of her research are delivered as a sort of informal oral report to 
the book’s readers and listeners, meandering quirkily but effectively through the 
main facts about the sixteenth president’s life and some of the narrator’s ruminations 
about Lincoln’s personal life and inner thoughts (“I wonder if Mary and Abraham 
had nicknames for each other”; “He wrote many notes and stuffed them inside his 
hat. What was he thinking about?”). Although children familiar with Kalman’s work 
will recognize her bright palette and bold brushwork, here she largely eschews her 
signature gravity-defying composition in favor of strong, solo images like a vanilla 
cake (Mary’s specialty), the upholstered rocking chair from Ford’s Theater, and 
stylized scenes of Lincoln at his home in Salem, Illinois and the horse in Lincoln’s 
funeral procession with boot backward in its stirrup. A list of sources is included, 
and notes that coincide with spreads throughout the book offer more detail than the 
child narrator presents. The intimate, kid-to-kid voice and group-friendly artwork 
January 2012 • 261
will make this an excellent Presidents Day selection for primary classes or for any 
child making his or her acquaintance with Honest Abe. EB
kePlingeR, kody Shut Out. Poppy/Little, 2011 273p
ISBN 978-0-316-17556-2 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Control-freak Lissa is tired of having her make-out sessions interrupted, pre-empted, 
or cut short whenever her boyfriend the football player has his car egged or when 
he runs off to prank the soccer team as part of the two teams’ long-standing rivalry. 
Deciding it’s time to put an end to the war, she brings the girlfriends of the guys 
together and calls for a moratorium on sex until the pranking stops once and for 
all, convincing the girls that this will force the boys to decide what’s more impor-
tant to them—their girlfriends or their silly competition. Lissa herself ends up 
suffering public humiliation, as her boyfriend both cheats on her and reveals that 
she is in fact a virgin; meanwhile, she is trying to sort out her feelings as Cash, a 
very cute soccer player, seems to be toying with her, generating more heat than her 
boyfriend ever did. As the Lysistrata-style sex stoppage continues, the girls begin 
to share openly and frankly with each other how they each feel about sex in the 
first place, with opinions ranging from reverence to fear to distaste to lusty and 
unapologetic enjoyment. At times it reads a bit like a purposive seminar, but the 
opinions and experiences that surface do present a thought-provoking array of at-
titudes that will help readers feel liberated and validated as they sort out their own 
perspectives, no matter what they are. Lissa’s romantic arc is as frustrating as it is 
predictable, with her misunderstandings of her own and Cash’s responses likely to 
evoke eyerolls from readers who will see Cash for the great guy he is; romance fans 
will sigh over both his gentle acceptance of her need for control and his uncanny 
ability to strip it from her.  KC
keRley, BaRBaRa Those Rebels, John & Tom; illus. by Edwin Fotheringham.
Scholastic, 2012 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-545-22268-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 7-10 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 239, for review.
laWRence, iain The Winter Pony. Delacorte, 2011 246p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90394-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73377-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98361-0 $10.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Captain Scott’s famous and doomed expedition to the South Pole in 1910-1913 
has received all kinds of literary treatments from all kinds of perspectives; here, 
however, is a new one, the story of his journey from the viewpoint of James Pigg, 
one of the Russian ponies used by the expedition to carry loads along the route. 
Third-person accounts of the competing and victorious Norwegian Amundsen 
expedition and additional elements of Scott’s experience fill in the picture as the 
ponies meet Scott’s men, travel down to Antarctica, and experience the strange and 
difficult life there. The skilled hand of the veteran author turns this into a deeply 
poignant tale of ponies and men who met their ends in the frozen and unforgiv-
ing South. James Pigg has a childlike and humble view, responding with devotion 
262 • The BulleTin
to the kindness of the explorers, hoping to please his handler, and facing his fate 
mostly with sad acceptance. Without taking a stand for or against Scott’s use of 
ponies, Lawrence makes it intensely clear, in a way even classic accounts don’t 
manage to convey so vividly, just how dangerous, risky, and effortful every step of 
the journey was; the fondness of the pony-handling explorers for their charges is 
an understandable feeling of comradeship painfully complicated by foreknowledge 
of the ponies’ fate. The book changes a few factual details, but the point here isn’t 
exact historical fidelity but an heroic tragedy seen by one of its most unassuming 
participants. While the title and pony-faced cover may lead unwary horse lovers 
into heartbreak, it’s adventure-story buffs who will really appreciate this moving tale. 
A concluding note gives a little more background on the genesis of the story.  DS
levine, ellen In Trouble. Carolrhoda Lab, 2011 198p
ISBN 978-0-7613-6558-7 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Jamie Morse’s close friend, Elaine, has just found out she’s pregnant, and while 
pregnancy in junior year of high school is an unenviable condition even today, social 
strictures and a dearth of legal options in the mid 1950s make Elaine’s plight that 
much harder. Compelled to help, Jamie recalls whispered conversations among her 
female relatives and neighbors that lead her to believe they have connections to 
doctors who perform abortions, but opening the subject with them (particularly 
when they are skeptical about the “I have a friend . . .” line) is no easy matter. Ja-
mie does manage to secure the information, but Elaine is no longer interested; she 
will deliver the baby at a Catholic “home” for unwed mothers. By then, however, 
Jamie finds she needs the information for herself, because she is also pregnant as 
a result of date rape by a friend of her cousin. Levine bases her characters’ experi-
ences on interviews she conducted with women who faced unwanted pregnancies 
in the 1950s and 1960s, and she frankly states in her concluding note that “today 
women’s options are becoming more limited,” and “If we don’t know what has 
happened, we can’t appreciate our choices today and what we might lose if laws 
are changed.” Her agenda is considerably hobbled, though, by the potboiler plot-
ting that piles on so many problems that the young women often seem more like 
archetypes of misery than real girls in crisis. Nonetheless, many teens will want to 
take a measure of how far (or not) we’ve come over the past half century on the 
issue of reproductive rights.  EB
lindsey, maRy Shattered Souls. Philomel, 2011 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25622-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Lenzi is pretty sure the disembodied voices she’s been hearing 
lately mean that she has inherited her father’s schizophrenia, so when a beautiful 
guy shows up telling her that is not, in fact, the case, she’s open to his ideas. Alden 
informs her that as a reincarnated Speaker, Lenzi is entrusted with resolving the 
lingering concerns of Hindered spirits and that he, as her Protector, is there to make 
sure the more malevolent spirits don’t take permanent hold of her body. They’ve 
been doing this for lifetimes now, but for some reason, the current incarnation of 
Lenzi has no memory of her past and her powers to resolve the ghosts are slow to 
emerge, a situation that becomes problematic when the pair is forced to confront 
a wicked shade with a grudge against Lenzi for wrongs committed in another life. 
January 2012 • 263
The author creates a rich mythology involving not only of Speakers and Protectors 
but an all powerful Intercessor Council and an elaborate systems of rules and points 
that has each pairing of Speaker and Protector vying for more power; the ghosts 
Lenzi finds herself up against are just as compelling, particularly the ultimate baddie 
whose attempts to force his way into the material world are terrifically frightening. 
Unfortunately, the other humans in the story are not nearly as well drawn, and the 
push-and-pull romance between Lenzi and Alden never rises avove the predictably 
typical for the genre. Nonetheless, for teens who simply don’t want to stop seeing 
dead people anytime soon, this may be a satisfactory choice.  KQG
look, lenoRe Alvin Ho: Allergic to Dead Bodies, Funerals, and Other Fatal Cir-
cumstances; illus. by LeUyen Pham. Schwartz & Wade, 2011 197p
Library ed. ISBN 98-0-375-96831-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86831-3 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89882-2 $10.99   
R* Gr. 2-4
Alvin Ho (from Alvin Ho: Allergic to Camping, Hiking, and Other Natural Disasters, 
BCCB 9/09, etc.) remains enveloped in his warm fuzzy blanket of fears and frustra-
tions, but this time things are getting really scary. His grandfather’s best friend has 
died, and Alvin is certain he’s seeing bad omens portending his grandfather’s im-
minent death everywhere; worse still, he has agreed to accompany his grandfather to 
the funeral. Now he can’t get out of the terrifying event, and while his daring garners 
him some respect among his friends, his inability to speak at school manages to set 
in motion a huge mistake: his friends and his teacher think it’s Alvin’s grandfather 
who has passed away, and since GungGung is a beloved library volunteer, they put 
together a school-wide memorial service. Look fully capitalizes on the dark humor 
that arises from the gaffe, even while she keeps the focus firmly on Alvin’s legitimately 
troubled soul as he looks death squarely in the face for the first time in his short 
life. In emotional tenor, this most resembles Look’s third Ruby Lu book (Ruby Lu, 
Star of the Show, BCCB 3/11) where she strikes a similar balance between a serious 
problem and a comically offbeat, kid-friendly perspective. Pham’s inspired spot art 
punctuates every twist and turn of Alvin’s emotional rollercoaster with figures that 
are practically audible in their expressiveness. Alvin proves the ideal companion 
to walk a child through the valley of the shadow, since readers will likely be less 
timorous than he (one could hardly imagine a fellow more timorous) and thus will 
find both their compassion and their own bravery affirmed, at least in hyperbolic 
contrast; Alvin just keeps getting better and better.  KC
lunge-laRsen, lise Gifts from the Gods: Ancient Words & Wisdom from Greek & 
Roman Mythology; illus. by Gareth Hinds. Houghton, 2011 [96p]
ISBN 978-0-547-15229-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-8
Seventeen words and phrases derived from classical mythology are arranged here 
in alphabetical order from Achilles’ Heel to Victory, and accompanying each is an 
example of the word in context, an illustrated retelling of the myth, and a concluding 
inset on either variations of the word itself or another common term pertinent to 
the myth. Some entries, such as “arachnid,” “echo,” and “fury,” will be familiar to 
children who are already fairly well versed in mythology (e.g., Percy Jackson fans). 
264 • The BulleTin
Others, such as “janitor” (from the god Janus, whose two faces guarded the temple 
with his eyes on each door) and “panic” (from Pan’s pranks on unsuspecting travel-
ers) may not be as well known. Hinds’ line-and-watercolor artwork and graytone 
sketches enhance the tales and often provide supplementary visual information on 
arcana such as temple architecture, and vertical looms. In an especially nice touch, 
Lunge-Larsen opens each section with a quotation from a work of children’s or young 
adult literature—from Norma Howe to Lemony Snicket—to show contemporary 
usage of the word under examination. A list of Latin/Greek correspondences (with 
pronunciations), a selected bibliography, a brief offering of web sources, and an 
index are also included.  EB
lyga, BaRRy Mangaman; illus. by Colleen Doran. Houghton, 2011 126p
ISBN 978-0-547-42315-9 $19.99   
R Gr. 9-12
When the fabric between two worlds is ripped opened in this graphic novel, Ryoko 
Kiyami, a classic doe-eyed and beautiful manga boy, finds himself in a new reality, 
a strange place where the inhabitants all have proportional facial features, fail to 
leave lines behind them after a quick movement, and are actually quite vulnerable 
to injury in martial-arts showdowns. Ryoko’s disorientation only increases when the 
army major charged with his care instructs Ryoko to start classes at the local high 
school until the major can put the finishing touches on the machine designed to 
send Ryoko home. His exaggerated and literal expressions, which include a lovelorn 
look complete with floating hearts and a rain cloud that forces him to carry a mop 
around, make him an easy target for ridicule, and his affection for Marissa, the 
school’s queen bee, doesn’t help. Although the graphic novel starts out as a lovingly 
playful send-up of the tropes often found in manga and in more western-style comic 
books, it soon takes on a metafictive quality as Ryoko and Marissa recognize their 
roles as characters in a story and start to challenge the boundaries of their worlds. 
This heady premise, fortunately, does not negate any of the book’s wonderfully 
quirky and subversive humor; that humor, along with a nicely developed romance, 
gives Ryoko’s story an appeal that reach audiences beyond the mangamaniacs—
though comic-book fans will nonetheless appreciate several of Lyga’s inside jokes. 
Ryoko is a fluid, stylized figure amidst the strong-jawed, heavily lined residents 
of Marissa’s world, completing the effect of an east-meets-west sensibility in the 
illustrations.  KQG
lyon, geoRge ella Which Side Are You On?: The Story of a Song; illus. by Chris-
topher Cardinale. Cinco Puntos, 2011 40p
ISBN 978-1-933693-96-5 $17.95   
R 7-10 yrs
It’s all in the hook: a song written to rally 1930s mine workers to the union cause 
may not promise much kid appeal, but frame it as a song written by a miner’s wife 
while bullets riddle her walls and her kids hide under the bed—well, that could 
catch a kid’s attention. Lyons offers a glimmer of background on the Reece family 
of Harlan County, Kentucky and Sam Reece’s involvement in union organizing. 
The bulk of the text, though, spotlights the ordeal of Sam’s wife, Florence, and her 
children, who duck bullets while Sam goes into hiding from the mine operators’ 
hired thugs. Interspersed with the action are lines from the song Florence writes as 
her contribution to the organizing efforts. While it’s doubtful that picture-book 
patrons will put in a request for a book about Depression Era labor movements, 
January 2012 • 265
the content, length, and substantial musical and historical note in this title should 
attract the eye of social-studies teachers who want to liven up a unit on workers’ 
rights. Cardinale’s muscular, richly textured illustrations that suggest woodcuts in 
their bordering and detail are lively and sophisticated enough to retain the atten-
tion of a middle-grades audience, even in a classroom setting. Melody and lyrics 
are printed on the back cover and dust jacket for a rousing singalong.  EB 
mafi, taheReh Shatter Me. HarperTeen, 2011 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-06-208548-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
With the ability to torture and then kill anyone she touches, Juliette is either a 
danger to society or an invaluable weapon of the evil totalitarian Reestablishment 
government that has sprung up in the wake of supply shortages in this near-future 
world. Either way, she’s been locked up in solitary for close to a year when Adam 
is deposited in her cell, so she thinks she may be crazy to believe that he’s the same 
boy she loved as a child, the only one who treated her like a human being. The 
dystopian setting is familiar but dramatic fare—brutal oppression, dire divides 
between the haves and have-nots, disappeared critics—with an extra-evil, Juliette-
obsessed officer adding a personal touch to the protagonists’ persecution. Romance 
fans will appreciate the laser-tight focus Mafi keeps on her central characters: while 
the people trying to kill them keep Adam and Juliette far enough apart for maxi-
mum frustrated longing, there are nevertheless plenty of scenes with just the two 
of them, and they both have more than enough baggage to keep things interesting. 
The writing style gets a little out of hand with the imagery at times, but but the 
heightened emotionality, potent chemistry, and near-constant twists ensure that 
most readers won’t care a bit. Fans of Cashore’s Fire (BCCB 3/10), Oliver’s Delirium 
(BCCB 2/11), and, yes, Twilight will find this addictive—lucky for them, a sequel 
seems inevitable.  CG
manushkin, fRan The Belly Book; illus. by Dan Yaccarino. Feiwel, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-312-64958-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 3-6 yrs
Following The Tushy Book (BCCB 5/09), Manushkin here pays tribute to the core 
of every body’s existence—the belly. Bellies of all shapes, sizes, textures, and tones 
are celebrated herein, both for what they can do (growl when hungry, belly-flop 
into the pool) and how they look (hairy, smooth, round, flat). While the intent of 
the jaunty text is to draw attention to the many wonders of the belly, the narrative 
frequently strays off-topic just for rhyme’s sake (“Every little panda cub/ loves his 
mama’s belly rub./ Muddy puppies need them, too—/ and a rub-a-dub shampoo!”). 
There are also several statements that go beyond the fantastical to the confusing: 
sparrow bellies do not in fact “cheep and chirp,” for instance. The inconsistent 
scansion makes the text complicated to read aloud, so readers will want to practice 
a time or two before sharing this with a group. Yaccarino’s gouache paintings are 
retro stylized, reminiscent of vintage advertisements in their slightly shaded tones 
and strong figures. There is very little detailing, with most illustrations composed 
primarily of large planes of solid color and simple lines and dots. The playful topic 
and vivid illustrations may make this a good selection for a group readaloud; it 
would also work well in a baby or toddler storytime where little ones can rub their 
tummies along with the reader.  HM
266 • The BulleTin
mason, simon Moon Pie. Fickling/Random House, 2011 372p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75237-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75235-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89909-6 $10.99   
R Gr. 5-7
“Sometimes,” reflects eleven-year-old Martha, “it was a relief not to have to think 
about things.” Martha’s mainly trying not to think about two things, the death 
of her mother a few years ago and her father’s strange and erratic behavior of late, 
as she desperately attempts to keep the household together and care for her five-
year-old brother, Tug. Laura, a blunt new friend of Martha’s, points out that her 
father’s not just impetuous but drunk, and as he slides further downhill not even 
Martha’s frantic and determined attempts to keep him together can prevent family 
heartbreak. Mason, British author of the cozily quirky The Quigleys (BCCB 9/02), 
shows a similar narrative style here (Tug, for instance, is “famous for eating and a 
trick he did with spit”), which is an unusual voice for a story that’s often raw and 
painful. It’s oddly effective, though, in conveying the youth of the kids stuck in this 
breaking family, and the contrast between the gentle comedy of character (Martha’s 
making of “speed films” with her theatrical friend, Marcus) and Martha’s cleaning 
up the vomit of her passed-out father is stark indeed. In fact, there’s more situational 
realism here than in some treatments of the subject for older readers, with Martha’s 
father bouncing off of rock bottom more than once and losing his kids before he 
begins to find his way toward reliable sobriety. The portrait of hypercompetent 
Martha is heartbreaking in its plausibility, as she’s tremendously capable but not 
quite advanced enough to see the futility of her labors. Her blossoming artistry 
(she begins to follow in her mother’s acting footsteps) is inextricably tied up with 
her travails, and readers will be both sympathetic and intrigued as she begins to 
find herself even amid disaster.  DS
mass, Wendy 13 Gifts. Scholastic, 2011 341p
ISBN 978-0-545-31003-1 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Tara’s social awkwardness is a bane for her mother, who would feel more comfort-
able if Tara had a cadre of friends, but it’s Mom who keeps the family moving every 
couple of years, effectively preventing Tara from forming long-term friendships. 
When Tara tries to impress the popular crowd at her school and ends up suspended 
for the final two weeks of the school year, her mother sends Tara to stay with family 
in Willow Falls, a small town with open-hearted kids her age and more than a few 
secrets. Another moral misstep finds her indebted to a mysterious old lady who 
blackmails her into finding thirteen seemingly unrelated items from around town, 
a task she accomplishes while making solid friendships for the first time and even 
finding a boyfriend. By the time she’s finished collecting the items, however, the 
old lady changes the rules, and she has one more task to complete in order to find 
out what the real purpose of her quest has been. A solid, well-paced mystery with 
an engaging set of characters, this blends humor, magic, angst, and introspection 
in just the right amounts for a satisfying middle-school novel. Although it builds 
on characters and a setting introduced in 11 Birthdays (BCCB 2/09) and Finally, 
knowledge of those books isn’t required, as Tara is as uninitiated into the town’s 
weirdness as the reader. A tantalizing thread left unfinished will send readers back 
January 2012 • 267
to 11 Birthdays and perhaps forward to another installment, but for the most part, 
this book stands alone as a mystery that will be enjoyed by fans of Peter Abrahams’ 
Echo Falls series (Down the Rabbit Hole, BCCB 4/05, etc.).  KC
mccall, guadaluPe gaRcia Under the Mesquite. Lee & Low, 2011 224p
ISBN 978-1-60060-429-4 $17.95   
R Gr. 7-10
The oldest of eight children in a close-knit Mexican-American family, Lupita, pro-
tagonist of this verse novel, is starting freshman year and processing her mother’s 
big secret: uterine cancer. The story follows Lupita through her four years of high 
school, focusing on her newfound love for the performing arts (a passion that she 
later describes as her “life raft”), her success in straddling both her Mexican and 
her American identities, and, through it all, her family’s trials in supporting Mami, 
who initially beats the cancer but then suffers a recurrence in Lupita’s junior year. 
While not blatantly autobiographical, much of the novel is rooted in McCall’s own 
experiences, and at times Lupita’s emotions are filtered through an adult’s perspec-
tive. Still, her voice is powerful and tremendously honest, particularly in detailing 
the eventual loss of her mother. The titular mesquite tree serves as both a literal 
reference to the tree that grows among her mother’s rose bushes and a metaphor 
for the tree’s renowned adaptability and ability to reach out to find sustenance. 
This is ultimately a coming-of-age story of a girl who manages to build on her 
strengths as she copes with emotional hardship, and McCall’s is a fresh new voice 
in Latino/a writing. An extensive glossary of names, words, and cultural references 
is included.  HM
mccullough, kathy Don’t Expect Magic. Delacorte, 2011 247p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90824-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74012-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89891-4 $10.99   
R Gr. 6-10
Forced to move across country after her mother’s death to live with her estranged 
father, New Jersey native Delaney Collins and her prickly attitude and goth-emo 
getup make for a peculiar sight amidst the tanned blonde residents of her new, 
relentlessly sunny home in California. However, Delaney soon realizes she’s not the 
only one who doesn’t quite fit in: her dad, a.k.a Dr. Hank, life-coach extraordinaire, 
is actually a fairy godmother—er, godfather—and the talent is hereditary. Although 
Delaney easily masters arts such as Object Transference and Atom Manipulation, 
her snarkiness sometimes gets in the way of her perceptions, and when she misreads 
the romantic intentions of her first big client, she ends up causing more embar-
rassment than wish fulfillment and risks both her client’s and her own romantic 
happiness. A supernaturally touched rom-com, this is a bright, whimsical romp 
featuring a suitably sassy heroine with a killer pair of black leather boots. The author 
offers some amount of depth to her characters, particularly with Delaney’s initial 
chilly relationship with her father and its eventual transformation into a genuinely 
tender father-daughter bond, but for the most part the supporting cast operates 
on a pleasantly light level. With happy endings for all, there may be no surprises 
here, but it still makes for some excellent comfort reading.  KQG
268 • The BulleTin
mcnamaRa, maRgaRet George Washington’s Birthday: A Mostly True Tale; illus. 
by Barry Blitt. Schwartz & Wade, 2012 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94458-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84499-7 $17.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
Here’s a promising idea: introduce Presidents Day with a book about Washington’s 
birthday—at least, a sassy, fictionalized vision of what the future Founder’s seventh 
birthday might have been like. The event starts out as a pretty disappointing af-
fair: despite George’s hints, nobody in the family seems to give any thought to the 
day’s significance, and the birthday boy is expected to go through his customary 
rounds of lessons with his older stepbrother and chores with his father, which leads 
directly to the storied debacle of the cherry tree and the little axe. McNamara coyly 
slips snippets of legend and apocrypha into the day’s events, which will tickle kids 
who get the joke but leaves the uninitiated to the mercy of the endnotes to sort 
the whole business out. (And best wishes to the adult reader who gets to explain 
the gag article heading “Don’t Axe Don’t Tell Repealed” in the elder Washington’s 
newspaper.) Line-and-watercolor pictures in washed-out shades of blue, beige, and 
rose go for broad humor and portray the bewigged George as a mercurial little 
spitfire, no doubt intended as comical contrast to the more sedate images assigned 
to him later in life. Kids who want to explore how a presidential legend can take 
on a life of its own will be better served by Deborah Hopkinson’s delightful Abe 
Lincoln Crosses a Creek (BCCB 10/08), but this could offer a light diversion among 
more substantial Presidents Day readings.  EB
michaels, Rune Fix Me. Atheneum, 2011 [160p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-5772-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Orphaned after the death of her parents in a car crash, our nameless narrator lives 
with her overwhelmed aunt and abusive older brother and finds control only through 
an elaborate cutting ritual. A chance encounter with a creepy stranger—or is he 
not a stranger?—pushes her beyond tolerance and she flees, hiding in the local 
zoo. Though she’s eventually detected by the owner’s teenaged son, he agrees to 
keep her secret and give her cover as his girlfriend. She finds connecting with the 
animals, especially the elephants, healing, and she also becomes deeply involved 
in the fate of an abused young chimpanzee, who, like the narrator, may never 
be able to overcome her past and live among her kind. The story is fraught with 
agony and emotion, with the protagonist suffering not only from the brutality of 
the present and the loss of her parents but from sustained previous abuse at their 
hands (it’s never explicitly outlined, but she and her brother seem to have been used 
for online child pornography). Her turning toward the animals is a plausible plot 
move, and her identification with Tina, the young chimpanzee, speaks volumes 
about her own need for recovery. The book is more effective in its fervent embrace 
of its protagonist’s damage, however, than it is in resolving it, since her apparent 
move toward health comes out of nowhere, and the story offers little genuine hope 
for the future; the zoo setting and her sojourn there strain credulity but lack the 
depths that would allow them to be read more metaphorically. This doesn’t rise 
to the impact of Anderson’s Wintergirls (BCCB 3/09) or Speak (BCCB 10/99) or 
even Atkins’ The File on Angelyn Stark, reviewed above, but the animal component 
may intrigue readers who find their solace away from people.  DS
January 2012 • 269
moskoWitz, hannah Zombie Tag. Roaring Brook, 2011 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-720-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
For the past six months, twelve-year-old Wil has been grieving the loss of his older 
brother Graham, but his parents keep telling him that you can’t raise the dead so 
you might as well try to move on. Except Wil knows that you can, in fact, raise the 
dead, and that it was done about thirty years during an event that the grownups of 
Wil’s world still refuse to talk about. When he realizes that the key to bringing the 
deceased back to life (a secret government weapon) lies in his best friend’s basement, 
he manages to steal the item; sure enough, after Wil rings the magic bell, his once-
dead brother shows up on his family’s doorstep. Unfortunately, while Graham isn’t 
a brain-eating zombie, he’s still not quite Graham; he can’t seem to feel anything 
other than anger and fear, and what was supposed to be a joyful family reunion is 
turning out to be a tragic reminder that even with Graham back, things will never 
be the same. Admittedly, there is contrivance in the plot mechanisms that bring 
us to Graham’s re-awakening (what government official hides classified weapons in 
their basement?) but the story here isn’t really about the zombie apocalypse or lack 
thereof; instead, it is about the grief of a boy over the loss of his brother, and it’s 
a touching yet gently humorous exploration of that sadness. Wil is a typical boy’s 
boy, so his pondering about his brother’s death and his own life in its aftermath 
are sometimes sandwiched between his worries about his parents finding his dirty 
magazines and his annoyance with his best friend, making his concise contempla-
tions painful in their clarity. Funny and thoughtful, this will appeal to fans of 
Matthew Cody’s Powerless (BCCB 2/10).  KQG
ogBuRn, jacqueline k. Little Treasures: Endearments from Around the World; 
illus. by Chris Raschka. Houghton, 2012 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-547-42862-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Following a brief definition of “endearments,” this playful text introduces an 
abundance of terms used in fourteen different languages/countries/cultures around 
the world. Each page gives several examples from a particular country, provid-
ing definition and pronunciation for each term. The endearments vary from the 
fanciful (Amharic-speaking families in Ethiopia may call their little ones “yeinay 
filiklik,” which means “my bubble of joy”) to the funny (Brazilian Portuguese uses 
“docinho de coco,” which means “little coconut candy”) to the deep (one Arabic 
term translates to “part of my existence” and another to “light of my heart”). The 
text exudes affection, with the worldwide tendency of families to love their children 
both discussed and demonstrated throughout. Raschka’s striking ink, watercolor, 
and gouache illustrations use only a few colors for each spread, with the hues in 
the exuberant figures while the background remains a creamy sand. Though the 
figures are gestural, with Raschka’s familiar broadly painted informal line, they’re 
often faithful to the terms (“little fatty” is in fact a bit chubby, while “dumpling” 
is round and somewhat smushy in appearance). This will have obvious appeal for 
populations with large ESL groups, but it would also make an excellent gift book 
for your own honey/pumpkin/sunshine/babycakes. An author’s note provides some 
information on the selection and vetting process incorporated.  HM
270 • The BulleTin
oRloff, eRica Illuminated. Speak/Penguin, 2011 [256p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-14-241376-0 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 7-10
The legendary centuries-old love affair between the noted philosopher Abelard 
and his student, Heloise, forms the backdrop to this modern-day romance featur-
ing seventeen-year-old Callie and her search for the origins of a medieval Book of 
Hours. Spending the summer as an assistant to her historian uncle turns into quite 
an adventure when Callie is instructed to research the background of a recently 
discovered manuscript that may have once belonged to the only child of Heloise 
and Abelard. Joining her is the handsome college-aged son of one of her uncle’s 
colleagues, and as the two track down the story of the manuscript—a journey that 
not only has them conveniently stranded by a storm in a candlelit house but also 
has them traipsing off to Paris—they fall in love themselves. It’s not the pure wish 
fulfillment elements that don’t work here—what girl wouldn’t be swept off her feet 
by a guy with a thing for books and two tickets to the City of Lights?—but unfor-
tunately, the immediate, heated, life-changing link between Callie and August isn’t 
believable and it simply peters out mid-story. Their constant declarations of love 
become tedious and melodramatic, especially when their emotional and physical 
connections are minimal at best. The hunt for the manuscript’s origins is initially 
compelling, but that too reaches a rather anticlimactic conclusion that leaves several 
plot threads hanging and sheds little light on the original love story. Both romance 
fans and history buffs will leave feeling shortchanged but may be intrigued enough 
to track down the story’s factual inspiration.  KQG
oud, Pauline Ian’s New Potty; written and illus. by Pauline Oud; translated from 
the Dutch. Clavis, 2011 28p
ISBN 978-1-60537-103-0 $15.95   
R 2-3 yrs
Ian’s mother has just brought home a red potty and some big-boy underpants, and 
it is time for potty training to begin. The very encouraging text includes both the 
downs (“All of a sudden, Ian’s underpants are wet. So is the floor”) and ups (“I did 
more than pee!” Ian announces, looking into the potty) of the process, all the while 
making great connections between learning to use the potty and growing up in 
general. The book gains additional traction from Ian’s contrasting himself with his 
baby sister, who can’t do the things he does. The text, translated from Dutch, is a 
little clunky in the tightly focused dialogue, but its very straightforwardness is what 
makes it useful. The bold acrylic paintings feature mostly large planes of solid color 
in a controlled palette. Touches of patternwork (the wallpaper, Mommy’s blouse, 
Ian’s bunny) add copious visual interest, and the large square format of the pages 
makes this a great size and shape for sharing in an adult lap. This is a welcome new 
addition to the old standbys on the topic, and it will yield plenty of parent-child 
discussion when families need it most.  HM
PaRk, linda sue The Third Gift; illus. by Bagram Ibatoulline. Clarion, 
2011 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-20195-5 $16.99   
R* 6-10 yrs
In Park’s spare but evocative narrative, a nameless Middle Eastern boy learns from 
his father to harvest “tears,” hardened beads of sap from a desert tree, which are 
sold for high prices at the local market. After the boy’s successful harvest of a  
January 2012 • 271
particularly large tear, it’s sold to three foreigners, who are seeking the precious 
substance, myrrh, as a gift for a baby, to add to their presents of gold and frankin-
cense. While the gifts-of-the-Magi legend hovers over the text to provide it with its 
meaning, the manifest story itself is delicate and effective. The boy’s commitment 
to learning the family craft and his reflections on the work provide listeners with 
an illuminating window into his experience and subsequently into the era, and his 
relationship with his father is tender and loving. The relationship to the biblical 
story is effective and quiet, linking the everyday experience of a child living two 
thousand years ago to the more profound events about to occur. Ibatoulline’s strik-
ing compositions, rendered in acrylic and gouache, offer photorealistic portraits of 
the story’s characters set against backdrops of sand and rock. A desert-toned palette 
is used throughout, with beige, tan, and brown dominating most scenes; the only 
touches of rich color are those used to adorn the Magi. An author’s note provides 
further details about the biblical basis for the story, the author’s own interest in the 
tale, and additional information about myrrh. This is a beautiful book for giving 
and an excellent selection for sharing, both around the holidays and at any time 
of year.  HM
Paulsen, gaRy Paintings from the Cave: Three Novellas. Lamb, 2011 161p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90921-1 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74684-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89743-6 $10.99   
R Gr. 5-8
This trio of novellas (inspired, Paulsen says, by readers who share with him the 
experience of a “troubled childhood”) explores the way art and dogs can help chil-
dren “believe that there could be more to . . . life.” In “Man of the Iron Heads,” 
Jake, adrift in his public housing building, peers into the windows of the upscale 
apartments next door (a product of urban renewal) and catches the attention of a 
young sculptor. Bill, who has never seriously considered the plight of his immedi-
ate neighbors, not only offers Jake food and some cash for modeling, but gives the 
boy aspiration for a better life. “Jo-Jo and the Dog-Faced Girl” concerns an abused 
girl who, through the three pet dogs she secretly keeps from her parents, meets 
her first real friend, a child with leukemia who finds as much comfort in the dogs 
as Jo-Jo does. Finally, “Erik’s Rules” melds the themes of art and dogs in the story 
of two homeless brothers trying to make a life for themselves under the radar of 
social services. Narrator Jamie, the younger boy, is befriended by an animal-shelter 
volunteer who enlists Jamie’s skills as an artist to advertise pets for adoption, and 
ultimately puts both brothers on the path to a stable home life. Readers are free to 
supply their own optimistic conclusions to the first two open-ended tales, but it is 
equally probable that those characters may enjoy only respite rather than permanent 
relief from their predicaments. The final story, though, closes the volume on a more 
decisively positive note, and although serendipity plays a vital role in rebuilding 
shattered lives, readers will welcome the hopeful outcome.  EB
PRiestley, chRis The Dead of Winter. Bloomsbury, 2011 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-745-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
Michael Vyner, orphaned by his mother’s recent death, is left to the legal guardian-
ship of Sir Stephen Clarendon, a man whose life Michael’s father once saved. Before 
272 • The BulleTin
he even arrives at gloomy Hawton Mere, Michael catches his first sight of a flimsily 
clad, desperate woman begging for help. No one sees her but Michael, but the 
lawyer Mr. Jerwood and the servant Hodges listen attentively to Michael’s insistent 
description of the woman, and the boy suspects that there’s a deeper mystery here 
than adults are willing to discuss. Knocking in the walls, eerie stretches of hallway, 
and malicious pranks by a ghostly presence regularly plague Michael, and even Sir 
Stephen is occasionally reduced to cringing terror by sounds and apparitions. It all 
seems connected to the death of Sir Stephen’s beloved wife, and readers who feast 
heavily on gothic fare will probably be able to peg the source of evil well before the 
story’s end. The predictability of the plot, however, does not necessarily undermine 
the shivery pleasure of perils corporeal and supernatural. Priestley works the gothic 
horror tropes like a master, upholding the standards of the genre with a richness of 
language that fans will appreciate. The open ending, calculated to wring out one 
final shiver, feels a bit forced, but the fiendishly haunted mansion and its tortured 
occupants set the perfect tone for a bitter winter night’s reading.  EB
PRoimos, james 12 Things to Do before You Crash and Burn. Roaring Brook, 
2011 [128p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-595-7 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
“My father was a complete and total ass,” announces “Hercules” Martino to the 
mourners at his father’s funeral. His incensed mother sends him off to Baltimore to 
stay with his uncle Anthony, who gives the restless sixteen-year-old a list of twelve 
tasks to complete, including such concrete contributions as “Clean out the garage” 
and some more philosophical goals such as “Spend the day thinking big thoughts.” 
As Hercules pursues the list, more through inertia than through diligence, his real 
focus is on reconnecting with the beautiful girl he met on the train on the way to 
Baltimore. The pace here is blink-and-you’ll-miss-it zippy, with chapters only a 
page or two, dialogue and short paragraphs crackling along, and the whole shebang 
winding up in a little over 100 pages. There’s high-paced humor and more than 
a touch of enjoyable weirdness to the events, and Hercules’ episodic experiences 
(which occasionally echo the labors of the classical Hercules) sometimes become 
satisfying vignettes. The overall trajectory is less effective, however, since the emo-
tional dynamics are underdeveloped and the information sometimes simply lacking 
(why, for instance, is Hercules himself, only the son of a minor celebrity, so widely 
recognizable?); readers may rejoice that Hercules manages to take his dream girl to 
bed (okay, to a straw-bedded horse stall), but they won’t be entirely clear on where 
else his Baltimore experience has taken him. The snappy wit and general brevity, 
however, will make this appealing to reluctant readers and to those just looking 
for a quick sardonic pick.  DS
Raschka, chRis Seriously, Norman!; written and illus. by Chris Raschka. di 
Capua/Scholastic, 2011 342p
ISBN 978-0-545-29877-3 $17.95   
R Gr. 5-8
When twelve-year-old Norman Normann fails the entrance exam to a private 
school, his parents decide he needs a tutor. They hire the eccentric Balthazar Bird-
song, whose teaching methods include reading the dictionary and staring into the 
sky. Fortunately, Norman enjoys these activities, particularly because the words 
January 2012 • 273
he learns in the dictionary seem to be helping him sort out a problem at home. It 
seems that Norman’s father (Orman Normann), who sells used bombers for a liv-
ing, is getting involved with some very shady characters from the Pacific Rim, and 
it is up to Norman and his best friends to use what Balthazar has taught them to 
save Norman’s father from his own greed, bad karma, and some pretty dangerous 
characters. Raschka’s preoccupation with language, evident from his picture books 
(the iconic Yo! Yes?, BCCB 4/93), plays out in interesting ways here, as Norman and 
his best friend, Leonard, favor vowel-rich exclamations of “Eeeyaaa!”, even while 
they are learning an impressive amount of sophisticated vocabulary. This feature 
of the book makes it nerd lit for sure; readers will have to pay close attention to 
the dictionary lessons in order to follow the zany connections that the boys make 
as they pursue Norman’s father around the world. A man only a son could love, 
Norman’s father is a caricature of greed and insensitivity, prone to making jokes 
about Native Americans while he exploits equally caricatured people from South-
east Asia; indeed, there is nothing PC about this book except for Norman’s gentle 
scolds and the overarching message that what his father is doing is very wrong. 
Both broad humor and a more subtle sense of overall absurdity will prevent readers 
from taking any of the politics or portrayals seriously; instead they will focus on the 
infinite coolness of having a bizarre tutor and an adventure that features the boys 
climbing a mountain in Austria, walking all over New York City, and kite-surfing 
in Singapore before they ultimately save the day.  KC
RoBeRts, jeyn Dark Inside. Simon, 2011 329p
ISBN 978-1-4424-2351-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 8-12
In this apocalyptic novel, the end of the world brings not only earthquakes and 
tsunamis but also a dark force that turns humans into psychotic creatures bent on 
murder. Clementine barely escapes being rounded up and killed with the rest of 
her midwestern town by two infected neighbors; Mason is the lone survivor of 
suicide bombing at his small Canadian high school; Michael flees his hometown 
after realizing the two brutal murders he witnessed were not isolated incidents. 
The three teens all head west toward rumors of a safe haven in Vancouver, where 
they meet Aries, who has been holed up in a bombed-out store, fighting off the 
bloodthirsty “Baggers.” Amidst the recent glut of doomsday scenarios, Roberts 
makes her story stand out by focusing both on the physical challenges of finding 
safety in a world gone mad as well as the psychological devastation experienced by 
each of the teens. The terror of seeing friends suddenly transformed into monsters 
is keenly felt, but it is the teens’ disillusionment with themselves, and particularly 
their ability or willingness (or lack thereof) to lead that is most affecting. Playing 
the hero is a bit harder than they’ve been led to believe, and each of them discovers 
that the guilt of being a survivor is nothing compared to the emotional toll of hav-
ing to make the hard decisions. The characters’ struggles with their circumstances 
and their limits are vividly portrayed, and the storylines seamlessly coalesce into 
a thrilling climax. Readers looking to prepare themselves for the end of the world 
might do well to start here.  KQG
274 • The BulleTin
saundeRs, kate Beswitched. Delacorte, 2011 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98967-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74075-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98927-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Sent off to a posh boarding school, twelve-year-old Flora Fox instead finds herself 
traveling back in time to 1935 and to St. Winifred’s, a historical girls’ school, instead. 
It turns out she has actually been summoned by three of the school’s students, who 
found a hidden book of spells, and that Flora has switched places with another girl 
named Flora Fox. At first homesick and horrified, Flora gradually develops friend-
ships with the girls who summoned her, now her roommates; she is especially drawn 
to “Pete,” who is great fun when happy but meanly self-centered when she’s not. 
Soon it’s clear that it’s Pete Flora has traveled to help; once her task is done and 
she’s returned to her own time, she realizes that “Pete” was (and is) in fact her dad’s 
mother, whom she had never liked much until now, and a happy, if odd, reunion 
of the friends ensues. Although Flora’s realization that she hasn’t always been the 
best family member or friend is rather heavy-handed at times, the Tom’s Midnight 
Garden-esque premise in this British import holds great appeal. The complexity 
of a friendship with someone who is both very magnetic and wildly frustrating is 
also particularly well drawn, as is the book’s warm but realistic evocation of pre-
WWII England. Hand this to fans of family-related timeslip fantasies, aficionados 
of historical fiction fans, and those who like a bit of boarding-school drama.  JH
scaletta, kuRtis The Tanglewood Terror. Knopf, 2011 264p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96758-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86758-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89845-7 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
After finding a patch of glowing mushrooms in the forest behind his house, thirteen-
year-old Eric can’t seem to shake the idea that the blue-lit mushrooms are here to 
cause trouble, even when his science teacher informs him that bioluminescence 
is a perfectly natural phenomenon. His feelings of dread are only exacerbated by 
the other, non-fungi-related dramas in his life that include his parents’ imminent 
divorce, a rift with his football buddies, and a clingy little brother who suddenly 
seems to be hiding a big secret. As the mushrooms continue to spread through 
Tanglewood, Eric becomes increasingly convinced of their sinister nature; his 
suspicions are soon confirmed by a runaway girl who is certain that the lost works 
of a dead sci-fi author and former Tanglewood resident predict the coming of the 
fungi and the town’s demise. As he did in Mamba Point (BCCB 7/10), Scaletta 
imbues something utterly ordinary—the mushrooms, in this case—with a sort of 
mysticism that makes it seem totally believable that said fungi might indeed have 
malicious intentions. Unfortunately, the intrigue doesn’t quite hold up, especially 
under the weight of a convoluted backstory involving the origin of the town and 
characters that seem to waft in whenever the plot necessitates it. Still, the author’s 
examinations of sibling dynamics are on point, and the love/hate/really love rela-
tionship between Eric and his little brother is thoughtfully developed. The title’s 
promise of “terror” rings a bit false, but readers may still find plenty to like in 
Tanglewood.  KQG
January 2012 • 275
scatteRgood, augusta Glory Be. Scholastic, 2011 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-545-33180-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Set in Hanging Moss, Mississippi, in 1964, Scattergood’s debut novel tells the story 
of eleven-year-old Glory Hemphill, whose summer is about to change in ways she 
never could have predicted. It starts with rumors that the community pool will 
be closing, closely followed by the arrival of a Yankee girl named Laura Lampert, 
followed immediately by the discovery that Glory’s fourteen-year-old sister Jesslyn 
has been secretly dating Robbie, the new boy in town. Much of the novel focuses 
on Glory’s growing understanding of the injustices of segregation, injustices that 
she, a white Southerner, didn’t see at the start of the novel but that, by the latter 
part of the story, have her writing a letter to the editor of the local paper blasting 
the city council members behind the racism-based closing of the pool. Glory shifts 
problematically between complete ignorance of current events and her profound 
observations about the occurrences happening in her own town, between blissful 
unawareness and precocious understanding. Scattergood is more successful at cre-
ating a believable setting that’s chock full of characters who, though occasionally 
caricatured, add to the sense of place and time. Glory’s narration is fresh, and her 
high-spirited take on the implications of the events going on around her makes for 
light reading, given the somewhat heavy overtones of the topic. Fans of gregarious, 
opinionated historical girls will be particularly drawn to Glory’s perspective, or you 
could pair this with Curtis’ The Watsons Go to Birmingham—1963 (BCCB 1/96) 
to contrast two very different kids very memorable summers during the civil rights 
era. A note about the book’s historical origins is included.  HM
schimel, laWRence Let’s Go See Papá!; tr. from the Spanish by Elisa Amado; illus. 
by Alba Marina Rivera. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2011 38p
ISBN 978-1-55498-106-9 $18.95   
Ad 5-8 yrs
A young girl desperately misses her father, who has been away working in the 
United States for “one year, eight months and twenty-two days.” She’s torn, though, 
when her father arranges for his family to join him, requiring her say goodbye to 
her best friend, her beloved dog, and her adored abuela, with whom she and her 
mother have been living the last few years. As the girl travels toward her father on 
the plane, however, she packs away the notebook in which she has been writing 
to her father and starts a new notebook, this time addressed to her grandmother. 
The story, translated from Spanish, faithfully follows the girl’s emotional progress 
as she moves through a range of feelings and perceptions about the enormous 
change for her family. The core plot, though, is unfortunately derailed by side 
stories, particularly the one in which the girl attempts to hide her dog in a suitcase 
and almost makes them late for their flight. The suggestion that the girl uses writ-
ing to cope with missing her father and then grandmother adds dimension to the 
story, and the book may even see some bibliotherapeutic use as a result. Rivera’s 
mixed-media illustrations, incorporating pencil, crayon, watercolor, acrylic, and 
collage, combine elements of different techniques in each composition, with the 
girl’s own childlike crayonings, some sophisticated monochromatic linework, and 
busily patterned collage elements sharing space; the results range from stylized and 
original to cluttered and disjointed. Most youngsters will understand the daunting 
prospect of a big move, however, and listeners may find the girl’s emotional growth 
both familiar and reassuring.  HM
276 • The BulleTin
schmid, Paul Hugs from Pearl; written and illus. by Paul Schmid. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-06-180434-2 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-6 yrs
Friendly little Pearl loves to hug her friends at school, but her porcupine quills 
unfortunately make it “a little ouchy” for her pals (“Pearl didn’t WANT anyone to 
say, ‘Ouch! Thanks, Pearl. Ouch!’ when they got hugs”). Clearly, something must 
be done, and Pearl tries various possible solutions (pincushions, an extra long bath, 
asking her mom for a “quillcut”) until she is inspired by bees on a thorny rosebush; 
using her mom’s special rose-printed pillowcase, she fashions a sort of quill-cover 
that allows her to hug her buddies without harm. Pearl’s cognitive jump from 
rosebush to pillowcase is not entirely clear (and Mom may have something to say 
about the cutting up of the pillowcase), but there’s an unforced charm to the story. 
Pearl herself is a sunny little thing, and Schmid’s stylized, minimalist artwork (bold 
scrawls in grainy black that suggest charcoal or crayon, accented with sweet clouds 
of digitally swabbed pastel) on pages of subtle blues and greens is well matched to 
his streamlined story. Despite their quill-less state, most children will easily relate 
to the concept of well-intentioned actions that lead to less-than-satisfying results 
in interactions with friends, and Pearl’s sweet nature and mien will be mighty ap-
pealing as well. Pair this with Isop’s How Do You Hug a Porcupine? (BCCB 9/11) 
for a particularly prickly storytime.  JH
schuBeRt, leda The Princess of Borscht; illus. by Bonnie Christensen. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-515-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 7-10 yrs
Ruthie’s grandmother is in the hospital with pneumonia and has made one simple 
request: could Ruthie please bring her some borscht by five o’clock? The problem is 
that Grandma falls asleep before she is able to tell Ruthie the recipe. Upon returning 
to the apartment to begin cooking, Ruthie is soon joined by three of Grandma’s 
neighbors (Mrs. Lerman, Mrs. Rosen, and Mrs. Goldberg), each of whom is the 
self-proclaimed expert on (or, as the case may be, “Empress,” “First Lady,” or 
“Tsarina” of) borscht. While the ladies do help Ruthie get started, it is Ruthie’s 
own intuition that leads her to add dill at the last moment, which, it turns out, is 
Grandma’s secret ingredient. Grandma is, of course, delighted with the soup, so 
much so that she requests a noodle pudding for the next day (then proceeds to fall 
asleep once again). Schubert’s warm family story is nicely patterned, with Ruthie 
watching the clock as each of the neighbor ladies shows up to help her. There is a 
touch of humor in the bickering that goes on amongst the ladies as they argue over 
the best way to make borscht, and audiences will appreciate the fact that Ruthie’s the 
one with the culinary key. The art, rough-textured with paint strokes and scratchy 
charcoal-toned lines and shading, adds additional homespun appeal, with a cozy 
style well-suited to the domestic story. Pair this with variations on stone soup for 
a soup-themed storytime, or check it out for the weekend yourself and try out 
Ruthie’s borscht recipe included on the back cover.  HM
January 2012 • 277
selzeR, adam Extraordinary: The True Story of My Fairy Godparent, who Almost 
Killed Me, and Certainly Never Made Me a Princess. Delacorte, 2011 324p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90612-8 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73649-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98358-0 $10.99   
R Gr. 7-10
In a world where vampires and zombies are accepted as fact (and even enrolled in 
high school), you might think that the appearance of a fairy godmother wouldn’t 
be that surprising, but when Gregory Grue shows up looking like an unkempt 
drunk and claiming to be Jennifer’s “fairy godmofo,” he’s not what she’s expect-
ing. Still, he manages to deliver all three of Jennifer’s wishes, including a request 
to reconnect with her childhood sweetheart, Mutual. What Gregory fails to men-
tion, however, is that as payment for her wishes, Jennifer must complete a task of 
Gregory’s choosing; his choice involves Jennifer kissing and/or being converted 
by a vampire who is decidedly not Mutual. The premise has all the trappings of a 
predictable supernatural rom-com, but Selzer zigs where other authors would zag, 
turning the genre on its head and offering up an entirely refreshing and wonder-
fully witty romp that involves romance, intrigue, negotiations with vampire clans, 
and an enormous amount of unicorn poop. Realistically flawed and well aware of 
it, Jennifer is an immensely relatable protagonist, and her choices ring true to her 
character instead of being merely convenient to the plot, making the structure 
of what turns out to be a rather complicated storyline feel even more, as the title 
suggests, extraordinary. Readers familiar with Selzer’s I Kissed a Zombie and I Liked 
It (BCCB 3/10) will no doubt recognize the “post-human” world and its details, 
but knowledge of the previous book is not at all needed to enjoy this deliciously 
irreverent tale of not-totally-happy endings.  KQG 
shange, ntozake Freedom’s A-Callin Me; illus. by Rod Brown. Collins/Harp-
erCollins, 2012 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-133741-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 5-9
This collection of fifteen poems and paintings evocatively recalls the experience of 
those traveling the Underground Railroad, from the initial decision to escape to the 
horrific dangers of the journey to the newfound security of safely arriving north. 
Shange and Brown, who previously collaborated on We Troubled the Waters, part-
ner again in this haunting, beautiful story. The poems, all narrated by an enslaved 
young black man, perfectly and provocatively convey his point of view, from his 
convincing his family that he has to go, to the pain of his losing a companion to 
slave trackers, to his precarious sense of freedom at journey’s end. They’re perhaps 
more conceptual than literally historical—Sojourner Truth, who wasn’t actually a 
participant in the Underground Railroad, acts as a conductor in one scene—but 
they’re evocative in conveying the bitterness of slavery and the desperation of flight. 
The poems are compact and powerful, with single words carrying as much weight 
as lengthy phrases; though they’re free verse, there is a musicality to the rhythm and 
its portrayal of a breathless, anguished voice that begs to be read aloud. Brown’s rich 
acrylic paintings, one illustrating each poem, offer abundant visual support; light 
and darkness evoke mood (the glaring white of “The Slave Tracker” set against rich 
red is as emphatic as the text of the poem itself), with the strongly colored back-
grounds behind the text adding visual intensity as well, and clever perspectives grant 
278 • The BulleTin
information as well as display artistry. This would serve as a wonderful companion 
piece to more prosaically factual works about the Underground Railroad as well as 
being a powerful standalone readaloud to share with a group.  HM.
siy, alexandRa Bug Shots: The Good, the Bad, and the Bugly; illus. with photo-
micrographs by Dennis Kunkel. Holiday House, 2011 40p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2286-9 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-6
“Accused criminals get a fair trial. They are assumed innocent until proven guilty. 
Bugs deserve justice, too.” Thus Siy encourages readers to look at the facts about a 
host of commonly mistrusted and detested insects before passing judgment on their 
threat to humans. After an informative opening chapter that clarifies definitions of 
insects and bugs, the book presents chapters on true bugs; beetles; butterflies and 
moths; bees, ants, and wasps; and true flies; wrapping up with some conclusions 
on the relative risks each group poses. The gimmick of “accused” insects (complete 
with Wanted poster) rapidly wears thin, but readers can easily brush that patter 
aside and concentrate on the engrossing descriptions of attributes and behaviors. For 
many readers, though, Dennis Kunkel’s photomicrographs are likely to upstage the 
text. Produced with a scanning electron microscope, the original black-and-white 
pictures have been highlighted with brilliant, saturated colors to accent structures 
of the insects’ bodies. Simply studying the pictures in conjunction with their cap-
tions (enlargement factors are consistently included) is a richly informative and 
visually rewarding experience. End matter includes a glossary, lists of sources in a 
variety of media, and websites of particular interests to students and teachers, as 
well as an index.  EB
soto, gaRy Hey, 13! Holiday House, 2011 197p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2395-8 $16.95   
R Gr. 6-9
Thirteen short stories about what it’s like to be thirteen highlight Soto’s unique 
ability to capture adolescents’ range of emotional experiences. Stories follow a 
variety of events: altar boys get in and out of trouble; a politically and socially con-
servative honor student has her horizons expanded on a campus visit; a guy makes 
the wrong decision about which girl he should like; and girls play at being their 
favorite celebrities. Overall, teens look at themselves and their friends through new 
eyes and begin to sort out what they value. In some stories, the protagonist ends 
up unsettled, facing a kind of sadness that he or she doesn’t quite understand, and 
this is perhaps where Soto comes closest to really expressing the disquiet of being 
on the cusp of adolescence. In other stories, mostly the ones that feature male pro-
tagonists, Soto’s humor sparkles in the relatively simple closure of comic situations. 
Finally, he works an almost damning irony of the pretentions and powerlessness 
of youth into a few of the pieces, displacing the sense of disquiet onto the reader 
rather than the characters. The stories are thus diverse in their focus, appeal, and 
maturity level. The loud, teenybopper magazine–like cover may make this a tough 
sell to actual thirteen-year-olds, which is a shame, because the most stunning pieces 
in the collection hit squarely at that age level, but there are enough stories here for 
teen-wannabe eleven-year-olds to sink their dreams into as well.  KC
January 2012 • 279
sPRingeR, kRistina Just Your Average Princess. Farrar, 2011 197p
ISBN 978-0-374-36150-1 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 6-8
Jamie is content working at her family’s pumpkin patch in Average, Illinois. In fact, 
she’s downright perky as she goes about the endless chores that keep the patch a 
popular spot for the locals—feeding the rabbits and goats at the petting zoo, pick-
ing squash, piling pumpkins into pyramids, taking her turn at the haunted house 
and the concession stand. Even her longstanding unrequited crush on Danny, one 
of the workers, doesn’t stress her out too much, especially since her equally long-
standing goal of becoming the Pumpkin Princess seems about to come true. Then 
her cousin Milan arrives from California. The daughter of two A-list stars, Milan 
immediately turns Jamie’s world upside down, as everyone in Average, including 
Jamie’s parents, seems starstruck by the tabloid darling, but Milan seems to hate 
Jamie for no apparent reason. A predictable storyline would have Jamie do some-
thing awful to try to turn the town’s affection from Milan, and then regret it and 
make amends as she realizes that she’s misjudged Milan, with the two becoming 
best friends despite their differences; unfortunately, that’s exactly the clichéd plot 
the book delivers. The characters are straight from central casting with absolutely 
no quirks or surprises: Jamie is as sweet as a candy apple, and Milan as screechy as 
a hyperbolic Disney diva, and lo, hunky, flannel-shirted Danny can see through 
it all and decide on the right girl in the end. Still, it must be admitted that the 
formula is a cliché because it has an audience, and younger teen readers who like 
their pumpkin pie extra sweet and with more topping than substance may enjoy 
this romance.  KC
symes, sally Yawn; illus. by Nick Sharratt. Candlewick, 2011 24p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5725-3 $7.99   
R 1-3 yrs
Yawning is certainly contagious, and it’s a baby who starts it off in this board book: 
“Sean gave a yawn/ while sitting on his mat./ Guess who he gave it to./ A scruffy, 
fluffy . . .” A page turn reveals the answer—“cat”—which then gives a yawn of 
its own and keeps the chain going. The yawn gets passed among various animals, 
each of which (save the last, in an inexplicable break of the pattern) is introduced 
by a hinting page turn, making the text into a diverting guessing game for tod-
dlers and preschoolers. Aside from the one deviation, the concept works well, and 
die-cut holes for the yawning mouths on each page add visual and tactile interest. 
Sharratt’s digitally created illustrations are crisply composed with the featured animal 
(or baby) tidily outlined in thick black lines and posed in mid-yawn against bril-
liantly colored, simple backgrounds, thus keeping the focus on the animal and the 
gaping black hole that creates the “yawn.” The last spread reveals that the animals 
may in fact be stuffed animals and everyone is cozily lined up in bed with baby 
Sean. Although this would obviously make a great bedtime or naptime book, the 
boldness and simplicity of the illustrations make this a possibility for sharing with 
small groups as well; just be prepared for lots of sympathetic yawning on the part 
of both audience and reader.  JH
280 • The BulleTin
vaughan, maRcia Irena’s Jar of Secrets; illus. by Ron Mazellan. Lee & Low, 
2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-60060-439-3 $18.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
During the Nazi occupation of Poland, Catholic social worker Irena Sendler worked 
tirelessly with Zegota, an underground organization helping Jews, to smuggle chil-
dren out of the Warsaw ghetto and to help find foster homes for them. She kept 
scrupulous records of the children’s actual and false identities, which she stored 
in a sealed jar buried under a friend’s tree. Sendler was eventually captured by the 
Gestapo but, despite months of torture, refused to reveal any identities or offer any 
information about her work. On the eve of her scheduled execution, she escaped 
and, while on the run, continued her work for Zegota. After the Nazi defeat, 
Sendler dug up her jar, which contained the names of over 2500 children, and set 
about working with social service agencies to reunite the surviving children with 
their family members. While not the first picture-book biography about Sendler’s 
life (see Rubin’s Irena Sendler and the Children of the Warsaw Ghetto, BCCB 6/11), 
this is a solid offering; historic events are described in accessible but meaningful 
ways, episodes are recalled with just enough details to add emotional weight, and 
an informative afterword and list of sources ground the story in historical fact. The 
story is effectively framed by Irena’s commission from her father to help those in 
need, a lesson that may resonate with contemporary readers of the story. Though 
the compositions are sometimes stilted, Mazellan is adept at using touches of 
brighter color to shine light on specific regions of the scenes, and his oil paintings 
offer dramatic interpretations of the dark times detailed in the text. This would 
make an excellent addition to a study on unsung heroes as well as a good selection 
for independent readers drawn to such stories.  HM
WadsWoRth, gingeR First Girl Scout: Juliette Gordon Low. Clarion, 
2011 [224p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-547-24394-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
2012 will mark the 100th anniversary of the Girl Scouts of the USA, and a fresh, 
comprehensive biography of founder Juliette Gordon Low is most welcome. Since 
Mrs. Low did not embark on her best-known enterprise until relatively late in life, 
Wadsworth faces the challenge of keeping readers engrossed in decades of prefatory 
material before finally reaching what will be, for most, the main event. Fortunately, 
Low’s life reads like a series of novels: an early childhood in a family divided into 
opposing sides of the Civil War, a privileged adolescence in boarding schools and 
frolicking with an extended family of aunts and cousins, a young adulthood of 
courtships and European tours, a romantic marriage that devolved into adultery and 
divorce. Finally, well into her fifties, the restless Mrs. Low settled on an enthusiasm 
worthy of her energy and talent—working for the betterment of American girls. The 
tone here is admiring and enthusiastic but never hagiographic; it’s always clear that 
“Daisy” could be a bit flighty and more than a bit pushy. Plenty of black-and-white 
photographs are included, and Girl Scouts who are familiar with the solidly built 
Low in her tailored uniform will be delighted to see her more youthful images of 
a quite beautiful woman of fashion. Endnotes are included, as well as a timeline, 
a bibliography of print and online sources; the bound book will include an index. 
Pass the Thin Mints, please.  EB
January 2012 • 281
Walsh, joanna The Biggest Kiss; illus. by Judi Abbot. Wiseman/Simon, 
2011 28p
ISBN 978-1-4424-2769-3 $12.99   
Ad 3-6 yrs
A playful cast of cuddly animals stars in this boisterous rhyming ode to smooching, 
first published in Great Britain. Topics covered include who likes to kiss (frogs, 
dogs, and elephants, apparently), how certain species (worms and fish) kiss, and 
what types of kisses there are (“Bye-bye kisses,/ fly-high kisses,/ eye-dry kisses,/ all 
my kisses”). While conceptually sweet, the narrative is awkward and clunky, with 
scansion shifting constantly and rhyme sometimes strained. Abbot’s illustrations 
are cute, if sometimes saccharine, featuring solid figures rendered in pencil and 
acrylic. A rotund little penguin who appears throughout, celebrating each page’s 
smooches, is functionally the protagonist, and viewers will enjoy hunting for him 
in each spread. The clean design and rich palette make the animals really pop out 
from the background, and the sprinkling of pink valentines throughout ensures 
that little viewers do not forget the story’s theme for even a minute. While the 
textual problems limit the book’s effectiveness, it could partner with recent titles 
about hugs (Macdonald’s How to Hug, BCCB 3/11) for an exploration of al kinds 
of cuddles.  HM
yolen, jane Snow in Summer. Philomel, 2011 243p
ISBN 978-0-399-25663-9 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Snow in Summer, nicknamed “Summer,” lives in a mid-twentieth century rural 
West Virginia mining town with her grief-stricken father, who still mourns the 
loss of Summer’s mother. When Summer is eleven, Papa suddenly meets and mar-
ries a mysterious woman. Though Stepmama seems all right at first, it gradually 
becomes clear to Summer that her father is growing unnaturally old and befuddled 
and that Stepmama and her “po-tency drink” may have something to do with it. 
Then Stepmama takes Summer to a terrifying hillside church (in which members 
are encouraged to flirt with death in the form of rattlesnakes and strychnine-laced 
water) and later dumps her off with one of the church’s menacing members. Sum-
mer escapes, however, and finds refuge in the home of six kind and diminutive 
German jewel miners (the seventh is away at college) who come to her rescue when 
Stepmama tracks her down, and Summer finally gets her “happily ever after” ending. 
Although Summer narrates most chapters in this updated take on “Snow White,” 
some are told from the perspectives of a family friend and Stepmama, which is 
helpful (we learn Stepmama’s true motivations, for example) rather than intrusive. 
The historical backwoods setting adds substance, and it is surprisingly effective in 
making the tale’s magic seem almost possible (although the dwarf German min-
ers are a stretch). Yolen’s pace is measured yet relentless and her writing taut with 
a sense of foreboding; the church and its members are chilling, as is Stepmama 
herself. Readers who love fairy-tale fiction will find this perfectly satisfying.  JH
zaRR, saRa How to Save a Life. Little, 2011 341p
ISBN 978-0-316-03606-1 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Jill has dealt with her father’s death by becoming caustic and negative, pushing away 
friends and boyfriend. Her grieving mother, however, has shocked Jill by taking 
a very different approach: she’s decided to adopt the baby of an eighteen-year-old 
282 • The BulleTin
girl she connected with online, and the very pregnant Mandy is now coming to 
stay with the family until her baby is born. Narration alternates between angry, 
pained Jill and desperate, searching Mandy, who’s never been treated as valuable 
before, and who’s learned from her mother that the way to survive is to find a man 
to take care of you (even though he never does). Zarr steers clear of the sentimen-
tality that could have cheapened such a premise, giving full attention to the flaws 
all around, and the lacerating transition of bereavement underpins the family’s 
emotions throughout. Characterization is superlative, with Jill credibly the kind 
of person who’s mostly unaware of her persistent rejection of everything, a trait 
that means her legitimate warnings can go unheard; Mandy is deeply original, a 
mild-mannered girl of distinct limitations and unhappy past, who’s beginning to 
see the inadequacy of her motley collection of coping strategies. Jill’s changing 
relationships receive sympathetic treatment, especially the romance brewing with 
an former classmate just as her relationship with her old boyfriend is clearly com-
ing to an end. Mostly, though, this is the story of people figuring out how to be a 
family after their old family has been shattered, making this a compelling human 
drama to which many readers will relate.  DS
January 2012 • 283
BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons 2011
Like last year, we had a strong showing for younger children’s books this year, rather 
than the YA-dominant lists we’ve often encountered of yore, so we’re happy that 
readers will find much to delight them even before middle school. In excellent news 
for the just-post-toddler crowd, the picture-book list is also rich for the young end 
of their audience. Our fiction list is an intriguing mix, with history, fantasy, and 
realism all represented, each in several very different ways (albeit with an oddly 
generous helping of the death-related). The nonfiction category has a certain old-
school flair, breathing new life into iterations of actual classics and classic topics 
for results that will immeasurably enhance several curricular units as well as bring 
joy to recreational readers. We were particularly inclined to consent this year, but 
we may yet want to make some final pleadings, so any dissents by our reviewers 
will as usual be available for viewing at our website, http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu. 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
FICTION:
Atinuke. The No. 1 Car Spotter; illus. by Warwick Johnson Cadwell. Kane Miller. 
Gr. 2-4 (November)
Blundell, Judy. Strings Attached. Scholastic. Gr. 8-12 (March)
Brosgol, Vera. Anya’s Ghost; written and illus. by Vera Brosgol. First Second/Roaring 
Brook. Gr. 8-10 (June)
Cockrell, Amanda. What We Keep Is Not Always What Will Stay. Flux. Gr. 7-10 
(September)
Couloumbis, Audrey. Lexie; illus. by Julia Denos. Random House. Gr. 3-6 (June)
Kraus, Daniel. Rotters. Delacorte. Gr. 9-12 (May)
Meehl, Brian. You Don’t Know About Me. Delacorte. Gr. 7-10 (June)
Ostlere, Cathy. Karma. Razorbill. Gr. 8-12 (March)
Taylor, Laini. Daughter of Smoke and Bone. Little. Gr. 9-12 (September)
Ursu, Anne. Breadcrumbs; illus. by Erin McGuire. Walden Pond/HarperCollins. 
Gr. 4-7 (October)
Vernick, Audrey. Water Balloon. Clarion. Gr. 5-8 (October)
Violi, Jen. Putting Makeup on Dead People. Hyperion. Gr. 8-12 (July/August)
PICTURE BOOKS:
Crum, Shutta. Mine!; illus. by Patrice Barton. Knopf. 2-4 yrs (July/August)
Daly, Cathleen. Prudence Wants a Pet; illus. by Stephen Michael King. Porter/Roar-
ing Brook. 6-9 yrs (September)
Deacon, Alexis. A Place to Call Home; illus. by Viviane Schwarz. Candlewick. Gr. 
2-4 (July/August)
284 • The BulleTin
Durand, Hallie. Mitchell’s License; illus. by Tony Fucile. Candlewick. 3-6 yrs (May)
Henkes, Kevin. Little White Rabbit; written and illus. by Kevin Henkes. Greenwil-
low. 2-5 yrs (February)
McKissack, Patricia. Never Forgotten; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. Schwartz & 
Wade. Gr. 5-9 (November)
Moore, Inga. A House in the Woods; written and illus. by Inga Moore. Candlewick. 
5-7 yrs (December)
Murray, Alison. Apple Pie ABC; written and illus. by Alison Murray. Disney Hy-
perion. 3-7 yrs (June)
Ray, Mary Lyn. Stars; illus. by Marla Frazee. Beach Lane. 4-7 yrs (December)
Runton, Andy. Owly & Wormy, Friends All Aflutter!; written and illus. by Andy 
Runton. Atheneum. 4-7 yrs (March)
Savage, Stephen. Where’s Walrus?; written and illus. by Stephen Savage. Scholastic. 
3-6 yrs (February)
NONFICTION:
George, Kristine O’Connell. Emma Dilemma: Big Sister Poems; illus. by Nancy 
Carpenter. Clarion. Gr. 2-4 (January)
Hinds, Gareth, ad. The Odyssey; ad. and illus. by Gareth Hinds. Candlewick, 2010. 
Gr. 9-12 (January)
McClafferty, Carla Killough. The Many Faces of George Washington: Remaking a 
Presidential Icon. Carolrhoda. Gr. 5-9 (June)
Phelan, Matt. Around the World: Three Remarkable Journeys; written and illus. by 
Matt Phelan. Candlewick. Gr. 5-9 (October)
Ross, Stewart. Into the Unknown: How Great Explorers Found Their Way by Land, 
Sea, and Air; illus. by Stephen Biesty. Candlewick. Gr. 4-8 (May)
Rubin, Susan Goldman. Music Was IT: Young Leonard Bernstein. Charlesbridge. 
Gr. 5-9 (April)
Thomson, Ruth. Terezín: Voices from the Holocaust. Candlewick. Gr. 5-8 (February)
Turnbull, Ann, ad. Greek Myths; illus. by Sarah Young. Candlewick, 2010. Gr. 
5-10 (March)
January 2012 • 285
Abuse–fiction: Atkins; Michaels
Adventure: Bunce; Card; da-
vies; Fagan; Joyce; raschka
Africa–fiction: davies
Africa–stories: Beard
African Americans–fiction: Cooney
African Americans–poetry: Shange
African Americans–stories: evans
Alcoholism–fiction: Mason
Aliens–fiction: Gravel
Animals–fiction: Breitrose; deedy; 
Freymann-Weyr; Michaels
Animals–stories: Beard; Coombs; 
Schmid
Antarctica–fiction: Lawrence
AnthoLoGieS: Soto
Art and artists–fiction: Paulsen
Asian Americans–fiction: Look
Asian Americans–stories: Compes-
tine
Aunts–fiction: Mass
BedtiMe StorieS: Symes
BioGrAPhieS: Corey; Jurmain; 
Kalman;vaughan; Wadsworth
Birds–fiction: Freymann-Weyr
Birthdays–stories: diPucchio; Mc-
namara
Boarding school–fiction: Cochran; 
Saunders
Brothers–fiction: Moskowitz; 
Scaletta
Brothers and sisters–fiction: hood; 
Mason
Christmas–stories: Park
Circuses–fiction: Fagan
Civil rights movement–stories: evans
Clothing–stories: Barnett
Computers–fiction: Breitrose
Corporations–fiction: Austen
Cousins–fiction: Springer
Crafts–stories: diPucchio
Crime and criminals–fiction: Bunce; 
davies; raschka
Crushes–fiction: Adams
death–fiction: davis; Look; Mos-
kowitz
doctors–fiction: Gravel
dogs–fiction: hobbs; Paulsen
dogs–stories: harper
dreams–fiction: Joyce
dystopias–fiction: Austen; Mafi; 
roberts
Environmental studies: Beard
Ethics and values: Austen; emond; 
Greenwald; hilmo; Keplinger; 
roberts; Scattergood
explorers–fiction: Lawrence
Faith–fiction: Cooney
Families: ogburn
Families–fiction: Cook; Cooney; 
Mason; Zarr
FAntASy: Abbott; Barnes; Bunce; 
Childs; Freymann-Weyr; Joyce; 
McCullough; yolen
Fathers–fiction: dionne; hilmo; Mc-
Cullough; raschka
Fathers–stories: Park; Schimel
FoLK-LiKe tALeS: Beard
FoLKtALeS And FAiry tALeS: 
Coombs; yolen
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
286 • The BulleTin
Food and eating–stories: Schubert
Friends–fiction: Adams; Freymann-
Weyr; Greenwald; Jukes; Levine
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Adams
Ghosts–fiction: Cook; davis; Lind-
sey; Priestley
Gifts–stories: diPucchio
GothiC FiCtion: Priestley
Grandparents–stories: Compestine; 
Schubert
Grandparents–fiction: Look; Saun-
ders
GrAPhiC noveLS: Card; Gravel; 
Lyga
Grief–fiction: davis; handler; Ma-
son; Zarr
Health: harper
hiStoriCAL FiCtion: deedy; 
hilmo; hobbs; Lawrence; Levine; 
Mcnamara; Park; Scattergood
History, European: orloff
History, U.S.: evans; Jurmain; 
Wadsworth
holocaust: vaughan
homelessness--fic: hobbs
horror: Berne; Carman; Priestley
hugs–stories: Schmid
huMor: Barnett; Gravel; harper; 
Look; Lyga; Manushkin; Mc-
Cullough; Mcnamara; Selzer
identity–fiction: Atkins; Barnes; 
emond; Fletcher
illness–fiction: McCall
immigrants–fiction: Abbott
insects: Siy
Kisses–stories: Walsh
Knitting–stories: Barnett
Labor movement: Lyon
Language arts: Lunge-Larsen; 
ogburn
Latinos–fiction: McCall; Soto
Latinos–stories: Schimel
Literature, world: Lyga
Magic–fiction: Mass; McCullough
Martial arts–stories: Compestine
Mice–fiction: Breitrose
Monsters–fiction: Barnes
Mothers–fiction: Cochran; McCall
Mothers–stories: oud
Museums–fiction: hood
Music and musicians–fiction: 
Cooney; dionne
MySterieS: Mass; orloff
Mythology, classical: Childs; 
Lunge-Larsen; Proimos
Nature study: Beard; Siy
orphans–fiction: Fagan; hobbs; 
Priestley
Photography: Siy
Poetry: Shange
Ponies–fiction: Lawrence
Pregnancy–fiction: Zarr
Presidents: Jurmain; Kalman
Presidents–stories: Mcnamara
racism–fiction: Scattergood
Reading aloud: Gravel; Jukes; 
Shange
Reading, reluctant: Fletcher; 
Gravel; Proimos
relationships–fiction: Berne; 
emond; handler; Keplinger; 
Springer
relationships: Jurmain
rhyMinG StorieS: Manushkin; 
Symes; Walsh
romance–fiction: Cochran; Cook; 
davis; Keplinger; Lindsey; Mafi; 
orloff; Selzer; Springer
runaways–fiction: Michaels
School–fiction: dionne; Fletcher; 
Greenwald; Jukes; Lyga; McCall; 
raschka
School–stories: Schmid
SCienCe FiCtion: Card; Fagan; 
Scaletta
Secrets–fiction: Cooney
Sex–fiction: Keplinger
Short StorieS: Paulsen; Soto
Sisters–fiction: Childs
Slavery–poetry: Shange
SonGS: Lyon
Space travel–fiction: Card
Stepfamilies–fiction: Cook; yolen
Storytime: Manushkin
SuPernAturAL StorieS: 
Barnes; Berne; Carman; Cochran; 
Lindsey; Mafi; McCullough; 
Selzer
January 2012 • 287
SurvivAL StorieS: roberts
SuSPenSe: Berne; davies
teachers–fiction: Atkins; raschka
teen pregnancy–fiction: Levine
therapy–fiction: Carman
time travel–fiction: hood; Saunders
toddLer BooKS: Symes
toilet training–stories: oud
uncles–fiction: Proimois
underground railroad–poetry: Shange
vampires–fiction: Selzer
voyages and travel–fiction: Abbott; 
Fagan
voyages and travel–stories: Schimel
Witches–fiction: Cochran
Women’s studies: Corey; Wadsworth
World War ii: vaughan
Writers and writing–fiction: deedy; 
orloff; Scaletta
Zombies–fiction: Moskowitz
Zoos–fiction: Michaels
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please direct inquiries and orders to the ChLA: 
www.childlitassn.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
