ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
;
:: 
I;:; ;
~~·(;·~
~-
'" 
Six Starred Reviews for
4 
ALA Booklist 
The Bulletin
-
The Horn Book 
j 
Kirkus Reviews
4 
Publishers Weekly 
Vr School Library Journal
"An artistic mini-epic with two mini-heroes overcoming all odds of the
inevitably bewildering, irrepressibly hopeful journey called childhood."
-Starred, 
featured review/The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
"Poems and [black pencil and full-color] illustrations provide a
portrait of close sisterly relationship that intimately and lovingly
draws the reader into the joys and sadness of their lives. A
wonderful story, brilliantly told." 
-Starred 
review/Kirkus Reviews
Ages 7 up. $15.95 Tr (0-06-029460-4); $15.89 Lb (0-06-029461-2)
SGreenwillow Books 
An imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
Amber Was
Brave,
Essie Was
Smart
The story of
Amber and Essie
told here in POEMS
and PICTURES by
\
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 2001
Vol. 55 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
127 THE BIG PICTURE
The Great Canoe: A Karinia Legend ad. by Maria Elena Maggi; tr. by Elisa
Amado; illus. by Gloria Calder6n
128 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
128 * The Ugly Duckling by Hans Christian Andersen; ad. by Kevin Crossley-
Holland; illus. by Meilo So
130 * Olympia: Warrior Athletes ofAncient Greece by Dyan Blacklock; illus. by
David Kennett
149 * A Place to Sleep written and illus. by Holly Meade
153 *John &dAbigailAdams: An American Love Story byJudith St. George
155 * Yoko's Paper Cranes written and illus. by Rosemary Wells
157 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
158 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Sabrina Austin
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road,
Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O.
Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center fr Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Center fr Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2001 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Gloria Calder6n from The Great Canoe: A Karitia Legend ©2001. Used by
permission of Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre.
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
127
THE BIG PICTURE
The Great Canoe: A Karina Legend
ad. by Marfa Elena Maggi; tr. by Elisa Amado; illus. by Gloria Calder6n
World mythology is replete with stories of a great flood that destroyed all but a
little of life on the planet, and of the people, chosen and beloved of the gods, who
survived to rebuild the earth. Children's literature is replete with flood stories,
too, the majority of them picture-book versions from the Judeo-Christian tradition
(such as Janisch's adaptation Noah's Ark, BCCB 12/97). One of the reasons flood
stories resonate with adults and children is because they are powerful tales of
destruction and resurrection distilled into simple, manageable terms, as is Maggi's
retelling of the great flood story from the Karifia people of Venezuela.
Kaputano the Sky Dweller, father of the Karifia, appears on Earth to
warn them of the coming flood, but most reject his warning. Only four couples
heed the divine one's words, and those four couples build a gigantic canoe large
enough to hold themselves, two of every animal, and seeds from every kind of
plant. When, inevitably, the rains come, "the rivers overflowed. There was so
much water that animals were swept away and you could no longer see the tops of
even the tallest trees. The Karifia who stayed behind could not be rescued because
the waves were too high. Their world was drowned in water." When the waters
recede, the surviving couples are left in a land devastated by the water's fury.
Kaputano asks them, "How do you want the world to be, as you see it now?" With
this question he gives the surviving Karifia a chance to recall the earth to its former
fertile glory: "It was then that Kaputano created a new world for his children, the
Karifia, a world rich with marshes, rivers, mountains, and many trees."
Translated from the Spanish by Elisa Amado, the narrative is deliberately
spare. It also has a logical continuity that contributes to the momentum and
tension of the tale, even though the prototype flood story is not necessarily one
that lends itself to suspense. Readers aloud and storytellers will appreciate the
stringent yet lyrical text, with its easy rhythms and descriptive, evocative language.
Whether in scenes of calm domestic life or scenes of desperate industry,
Calder6n's hand-colored scratchboards have an organic energy unusual in this some-
times stiff medium. The illustrations depict the pre-flood preparations in compo-
sitions crowded with incident, from burning out the center of the huge canoe to
gathering the seed and animals into a canoe too big to fit on the page. And then,
the perspective shifts: the huge canoe appears tiny against the rising storm clouds
and lightning flashes, small amidst the mountainous waves and fury of the great
storm. The post-flood world is desolate, but it's been washed clean, a treeless,
barren expanse raw under the rays of the sun. Black lines play delicately against
white and hand-colored space; the lines for the leaves, the blades of waving grass,
and the thatch on the roofs flow naturally over organic curves and textile weaves.
Faces delicately emerge from the scratchboard, eyes glowing, smiles curving, ex-
128 
* THE BULLETIN
pressions individual and distinct. The harmoniously balanced illustrations set the
Karifia amidst the natural world of placid rivers, cultivated fields, and groves of
palm trees that provide them with an idyllic new beginning.
Maggi includes extensive descriptions of her original inspiration for the
retelling, her overall collaborative process with Calder6n, and their subsequent
visits to the Karifia, who today live in Anzoategui region of Venezuela. The after-
word includes both context and specific citations, and it offers a rich example of
how to write a clear and satisfying source note. Collections seeking titles for story-
telling, reading aloud, and studying comparative cultures and religions should waste
no time adding this to their shelves. (Imprint information appears on p. 147.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
The Ugly Duckling; ad. by Kevin Crossley-Holland;
illus. by Meilo So. 
Knopf, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91319-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81319-5 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Crossley-Holland adapts the Andersen classic for younger listeners in this capable
retelling. The momentum gets a little bumpy toward the middle with the attempt
to condense the lengthy fall-and-winter incidents into a few spreads, but Andersen's
story maintains its compelling resonance for children and adults. So (illustrator of
Prelutsky's The Beauty of the Beast, BCCB 1/98) uses sheer color against crisp
white space to create a light-filled, almost dazzling environment. Her watercolors
bring the story home with images that emphasize the fragility of the newly hatched
bird as well as the gracefulness of the mature swan. Textures of downy feathers,
cattails, marsh grasses, and flower petals are effectively conveyed; bustling scenes
of the farmyard are offset by elegant endpapers featuring white swans against a
cloudy blue sky. Those libraries that purchased Pinkney's sterling adaptation of
this same tale (BCCB 3/99) with its realistic images will want to place this more
ethereal one right beside it. JMD
AYLESWORTH, JIM 
The Burger and the Hot Dog; illus. by Stephen
Gammell. 
Atheneum, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83897-2 $16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
The titular burger and hot dog are squabbling, the orange is putting the moves on
the lemon ("You're at risk of getting squeezed!"), an ugly gang of sugar cookies
hassles a passing bagel ("Some cookies aren't so sweet"), maraschino cherries la-
ment their prominent placement on sundaes ("That top spot's eaten first"), and a
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
129
host of other foods show their poetic personalities in this edible collection of verse.
Though the unvarying tetrameter begins to wear and some of the poems have
more punch than others, there are some entertaining conceits and wordplay in this
literary food fight. Gammell's mixed-media illustrations (rendered, appropriately,
in "colored pencil, watercolor, pastel, crayon, and coffee") are startling: garish
touches of color, gleaming faces, and lubricious drips of juice and icing make these
surreal foodstuffs into dainties you'd think twice about letting near your mouth.
These disconcertingly animate creations will lure browsing readers, who'll enjoy
this poetic permission to play with their food. DS
BABBITT, NATALIE 
Elsie Times Eight; written and illus. by Natalie Babbitt. 
di
Capua/Hyperion, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-0901-9 
$16.45
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0900-0 
$15.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
A series of aural misunderstandings causes Elsie's fairy godmother to replicate Elsie
until there are eight Elsies. The resulting cacophonous confusion is more than
anyone can stand: "Day after day the Elsies were noisy. It made the goats nervous,
and it annoyed the neighbors. All the birds went somewhere else, and the cat was
not pleased with it, either." Elsie's fairy godmother finally puts everything to
rights, but before she leaves she turns the one cat into twenty. This lighthearted
bit of froth shows that raconteur Babbitt (author of The Devil's Storybook, BCCB
12/74, etc.) hasn't lost her touch: the premise is an amusing one and the language
has an irresistible flow. The humor is inherent instead of imposed, with a cumu-
lative sense of glee, and there's charm in the matter-of-fact acceptance of magic
gone good-naturedly awry. Unfortunately, the illustrations are not nearly as mas-
terful as the storytelling. Figures and facial expressions are stiff, the backgrounds
are generically bucolic, and the palette is washed out, leaving the story struggling
to carry the pictures. Read this one aloud, and let the listeners create their own
images. JMD
BAKER, ROSALIE F. 
Ancient Egyptians: Buildingfor Eternal Glory; by Rosalie F.
and Charles F. Baker III. 
Oxford, 2001 
[192p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-19-512221-6 
$40.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-12
This compilation of biographical profiles, organized by Old, Middle, and New
Kingdoms, is a remarkably comprehensive one-stop source for information on the
movers and shakers of the Two Lands. The Bakers highlight not only the predictable
list of pharaohs and well-known consorts but also architects, governors, physicians,
co-regents, and military leaders who were influential among their contemporaries
or who left documentary evidence that has helped scholars reconstruct and interpret
two and a half millennia of Egyptian life. Each substantial profile contains enough
background information to stand alone as a ready-reference article, and readers
who choose to page from cover to cover will find a fair amount of overlap and
repetition. Text is presented in a dense, triple-columned layout with a handy
sidebar of summarized data and one or two black-and-white images per spread.
The prose is frequently dry as natron, but it's certainly clear and serviceable enough
to meet the needs of middle- and high-school researchers. With end materials that
include a timeline, guide to the five pharaonic names, glossary, list of important
130 
* THE BULLETIN
foreign rulers, resource guide divided by subject, and index, this title will satisfy
students ready to move from "mummy books" toward a broader examination of
Egyptian political life. EB
BANG, MOLLY 
Tiger's Fall; written and illus. by Molly Bang. 
Holt, 2001 
110p
ISBN 0-8050-6689-6 $15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Eleven-year-old Lupe falls from a tree in her Mexican village and breaks her back.
Despite an operation that takes everything the family has, she remains paralyzed
from the waist down, and her parents reluctantly leave the depressed girl at a center
for the disabled where she can be taught to take care of herself. Through a series of
encounters with center residents and staff, Lupe learns not only that she can take
care of herself but also that she can take care of others, and she regains her will to
live. As the plot summary suggests, this is a didactic and predictable story, some-
what redeemed by the author's ability to communicate the initial grief, subsequent
despair, and ultimate hope of Lupe and her family. Another saving grace of this
book are Bang's homely line drawings, which have some of the scratchy
comfortableness of Michelle Edwards' creations. A concluding note describes the
real rehabilitation center in western Mexico that inspired Bang's story. JMD
BILLINGHURST, JANE 
Growing Up Royal: Life in the Shadow of the British
Throne. Annick, 2001 
154p 
illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55037-623-3 
$22.95
Papered. ISBN 1-55037-622-5 
$12.95 
R Gr. 4-9
This Canadian exploration of young crown aspirants gives all the details that royal-
watchers should want and a regal ladleful of genuine information besides.
Billinghurst touches on other royal dynasties, European and otherwise, through-
out, but she focuses mainly on the life of Britain's first families past and present,
examining royal education, media interaction, personnel, pastimes, perks, and re-
sponsibilities. The book's tone is breezy and likable ("There's nothing like a tiara
or two to brighten up a social event"), and the text is chock-full of anecdotes that
make it easily browsable. The princely particulars get so thick that a read is a bit
like overdosing on People magazine or a pan of fudge, but it's a consequence of
intensity rather than fluff (the approach is smartly gossipy, well-researched and
uninflammatory). There are also some serious analyses of the position of these kids
and enough intriguing facts about the institution to balance out the personal
glimpses, so that even readers who don't swoon at the thought of young Wills and
Harry might find this an enlightening and munchable read; fans of The Princess
Diaries (BCCB 12/00) will find it essential. Enticing charts and sidebars on vari-
ous subjects appear throughout the text, and inserts of color photographs are at-
tractive yet dignified; a bibliography and index are included. DS
BLACKLOCK, DYAN 
Olympia: Warrior Athletes ofAncient Greece; illus. by David
Kennett. 
Walker, 2001 
48p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8790-8 
$17.95
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8791-6 
$18.85 
R Gr. 3-6
It's long been a sticky social problem-just what to do when soldiers without proper
enemies to kill begin to slaughter each other. Here Blacklock introduces middle-
grade readers to the genesis of the earliest Olympic games, organized by King Iphitus
in the eighth century BCE as a constructive response, one might say, to internal
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
131
warfare among Greek city states. While the text handily sets out the events, the
eligible and proscribed competitors and spectators, the rituals, and the religious
significance that declined over the years, it's Kennett's line-and-acrylic pictures
that, well, grab the reader by the eyeballs. Most spreads are crammed a la graphic
novels with multiple frames, variously rendered in black and white or searing color
(blue hair and sea-green oxen are not uncommon), and most frames are packed
tight as tessellations with roiling figures in active combat or just milling around the
festival grounds. The nude athletes, seemingly mindful of viewers' delicate sensi-
bilities, cover themselves discreetly with limbs and shadows, but some bare bot-
toms are inevitable, reminding readers that this was a sweaty, dusty, earthy affair at
which spandex and Nikes would be a sartorial faux pas. This title is neither pretty
nor graceful, but it unquestionably sports a burly vitality that will bring children
closer to an understanding of ancient Greece than any postcard shot of an austere
white Parthenon. EB
BONNERS, SUSAN 
Above and Beyond. Farrar, 2001 
[160p]
ISBN 0-374-30018-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
When Jerry is assigned to research a local historical event, he chooses his uncle's
daring rescue of a young girl from a rock ledge on a cliff. Rather than interviewing
his uncle, Jerry starts first with other sources, including the local newspaper and
the young girl who was rescued, now a grown woman living in a nearby town.
Meanwhile, Jerry meets Danny, also possessed of a local uncle, but while Jerry's
uncle is a respected local citizen, Danny's uncle is in prison. Danny lacks social
skills and becomes defensive easily, but Jerry tolerates Danny's differences (some
of which stem from learning disabilities) and the two slowly develop a friendship.
Jerry's research soon reveals that his uncle did not rescue the girl alone-Danny's
uncle, hiding from the police at the time and begging Jerry's uncle to keep his
presence a secret, assisted. Unfortunately, the resolution is overly convenient, there's
an oversupply of coincidences, and the writing never goes beyond the serviceable.
The premise is a compelling one, however, and some readers will be drawn to this
story of uncovering the truth and seeing justice done at long last. KM
BOURGEOIS, PAULETTE 
Oma's Quilt; illus. by Stephane Jorisch. 
Kids Can,
2001 
32p
ISBN 1-55074-777-0 
$15.95 
R 
6-9yrs
It's a rocky transition for everyone when Emily's grandmother moves into a retire-
ment home, as Oma unhappily grumbles about everything, from her fellow resi-
dents (whom she dubs "nincompoops") to the food. Emily's solution is to make a
quilt (with the help of her mother) out of all of the treasured clothing and blankets
that Oma has had to leave behind, and the finished quilt is presented to a de-
lighted Oma, who lovingly recites the family stories behind each piece of its fabric.
While the quilt doesn't ease all the difficulties (Oma continues to complain about
the "nincompoops"), it does help, and the conclusion makes it clear that Oma will
indeed adjust to her new home. In this quiet story, Bourgeois balances reality with
reassurance in a text that is touching but not sentimental. Emily's natural narra-
tive voice sensitively presents a child's perspective on an event faced by many fami-
lies. Jorisch uses free-flowing, loosely elegant lines (in a style somewhat reminiscent
of Christine Davenier) and a watercolor palette of soft blues, greens, grays, and
132 
* 
THE BULLETIN
browns surrounded by plenty of white space, creating figures that are stylish both
in their rendering and in their attire (Emily's mother wears her hair in an attractive
auburn pageboy and dresses elegantly; retirement-home residents sport ball caps,
berets, and wedge-heeled mules). Emily's face and body posture are particularly
expressive as she radiates worry over her grandmother's unhappiness and satisfac-
tion over the secret of the quilt. Pair it with Patricia Polacco's The Keeping Quilt
for a poignant presentation about elders, children, and the power of memories.
JMH
BOURSIN, DIDIER 
Origami PaperAirplanes. Firefly, 2001 
64p 
illus. and with
photographs
Library ed. ISBN 1-55209-616-2 $19.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55209-616-5 
$9.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Soaring across playgrounds or nosediving into the teacher's trash basket, paper
airplanes never seem to wane in popularity, and Boursin offers over a score of
pilot-pleasing models that variously glide, spin, float, twirl, or twist. Absolute
novices may take exception to his blithe labeling of several planes as "beginner"
constructions (some of the "intermediate" folds are actually much easier), but readers
with basic mastery of the classic "Dart" and patience to scan the direction key
should find a wide selection that fall within their abilities. Boursin's title shares
the annoying design problem of so many origami instruction manuals-consign-
ing basic folds to an introductory section that is awkward to access-but the direc-
tions are generally clear and succinct, and stylish color photographs of the completed
aircraft can often help folders think their way through tricky bits. Occasional
references to angle bisectors and A4 paper size may strike some kids as a bit eso-
teric, but trial-and-error and experimentation bring the jargon back down to earth.
Keep a stack of paper handy, and be prepared to duck. EB
BRASHARES, ANN 
The Sisterhood ofthe Traveling Pants. Delacorte, 2001 
294p
ISBN 0-385-72933-2 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
Four inseparable friends-Carmen, Lena, Tibby, and Bridget-are facing separa-
tion, if only for a summer; they're reconciled somewhat to this fate by their plan to
share the magic jeans that Carmen has discovered, jeans that look fabulous on each
of the girls and seem to bring confidence and maturity to their wearer. All four
turn out to need all the help the Pants can provide: Carmen discovers that her
long-awaited summer alone with her father is really her first meeting with Dad's
fiancee and her teenage kids; Lena's visit with her Greek grandparents goes awry
when they misunderstand her disconcerting chance encounter with a neighbor
boy as something more serious; Tibby finds herself oddly attached to a sharp-
tongued younger girl who proves to have cancer; Bridget throws her considerable
talents into securing the affections of an assistant coach at soccer camp and finds
she may have gotten more than she bargained for. Brashares handles the disparate
threads well, with a companionable, sisterly tone that carries the reader through
the quick and constant changes from viewpoint to viewpoint (usually bridged by a
letter from one of the girls to another) even before the girls' identities are clearly
established. That establishment doesn't take long, however, and the personalities
are strong and original and true to their fifteen-year-old selves, capable of maturity
but also prone to lacking it when it's needed. It's no surprise that all four move
farther along the road to adulthood by the end of the summer, but the book's
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
133
loving depiction of enduring and solid friendship will ring true to readers, who
will appreciate this recognition of one of life's most important relationships. DS
BREWSTER, HUGH 
To Be a Princess; by Hugh Brewster and Laurie Coulter; illus.
by Laurie McGaw and with photographs. 
Madison/HarperCollins, 2001 
[64p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000159-3 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029480-9 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
No, it's not a companion to the Billinghurst title (reviewed above) or another title
in Cabot's The Princess Diaries series; this is a brief collective biography of a variety
of princesses through history. Brewster (author ofAnastasia's Album, BCCB 1/97)
and Coulter offer seven entries on twelve young women (three entries feature sis-
ters), ranging from less obvious subjects such as Gayatri Devi of India and Ka'iulani
of Hawai'i to princess staples such as Elizabeth and Mary Tudor, Victoria, and
Elizabeth and Margaret Windsor. The potted biographies can't decide whether to
be breathless (and sometimes disjointed) faux-fiction or informative overviews,
and McGaw's dewy, romanticized paintings (problematically undifferentiated from
genuine period portraiture) tip the balance towards the former. There's some
good material underneath the glitz, however, and the entries, under ten pages apiece,
are crammed with event. Double-columned pages are laced with relevant bits of
art as well as bounded by elegant gold scrollwork, so they're never oppressively
dense; each entry also has a timeline that puts the life of the subject(s) into histori-
cal context. Many of these princesses are better treated in other works, but impa-
tient or reluctant readers may appreciate the quick explorations and the breadth
here. A brief glossary, bibliography, and index are included. DS
BUNTING, EVE 
Gleam and Glow; illus. by Peter Sylvada. 
Harcourt, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-15-202596-0 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Viktor's father has left to join the underground, and Viktor is afraid that the fam-
ily will have to leave their home soon ("It was getting too dangerous to stay much
longer. Our enemies were coming, sweeping through villages like great brooms,
forcing people out and burning their homes") and that his father won't know
where to find them. A fleeing stranger gives Viktor's little sister a pair of goldfish,
which she names Gleam and Glow, but they must be left behind in the pond
behind the house when the family departs. After hard traveling, the family finds
respite-and Papa-in a refugee camp; months later, they return to find their
house a charred skeleton-but the pond alive with multitudes of golden fish. An
author's note describes this story's basis in an event in Bosnia-Herzegovina, wherein
the thriving fish provided not only symbolism but economic rebirth to a devas-
tated family. Unfortunately, the absence of that concrete framework (the story
offers no indication of setting or time) and reward (there's no mention of eco-
nomic utility here) from Bunting's story makes it rather ethereal and wishful; the
narrative has the neatness of a parable, but also the emotional detachment. Sylvada's
paintings, with their long, elegant brushstrokes, light-touched fields and figures,
and clean and well-dressed refugees, make fleeing for one's life dreamily beautiful,
and even the bare bones of the family's house look less like devastation than con-
struction in progress. Nonetheless, the tale's final image of a pondful of teeming
gold is a memorable one; generous adult assistance may help young listeners better
understand its context as well as its limitations. DS
134 
* THE BULLETIN
BURNS, KHEPHRA 
Mansa Musa: The Lion of Mali; illus. by Leo and Diane
Dillon. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 2001 
54p
ISBN 0-15-200375-4 
$18.00 
R Gr. 4-6
In the style of well-honed oral history, Burns tells the fictionalized life story of
Mansa Musa, "the Lion of Mali," who ruled the African kingdom in the four-
teenth century. Beginning with the kidnapping of Kankan (soon to be Mansa)
Musa from his village by Tuareg slave raiders and his subsequent rescue by myste-
rious stranger Tariq, Kankan's physical and metaphysical journey to his true self is
the stuff of which legends are made. His pilgrimage through the desert, his discov-
ery of his origins, and his embracing of his destiny make compelling reading. The
story is very text-heavy for a picture book (two columns of text per page), but the
declamatory and dramatic writing style keeps the narrative from dryness. The
Dillons' majestic full-page and smaller paintings feature sweeping panoramas of
desert, sky, and people that help balance out the occasional busyness of the over-
decorated text pages, and the sharp architectural lines are softened by crowds of
people swathed in draping attire. Framed in bronze and set against subdued an-
tique yellow pages, the art leans heavily on shades of desert gold and brown, with
touches of blue, white, and turquoise for emphasis. A concluding historical note
separates fact from legend, and a brief bibliography is included. JMD
CLINTON, CATHRYN 
The Calling. Candlewick, 2001 
16 6 p
ISBN 0-7636-1387-8 $15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Esther Leah Ridley (aka Esta Lea) gets the calling as a healer at a
family reunion in Beulah Land, South Carolina, in "the year of our Lord, nineteen
hundred and sixty-two." She, her sister Sarah Louise, and her uncle Peter Earl,
saved on the same day Esta Lea received the call, go out on a healing crusade, with
Sarah Louise singing and Peter Earl preaching to round out the trio. The crusade
takes on dark notes, however, when Esta Lea's concerns about her uncle prove to
be well founded: he talks his way into churchgoers' pockets as easily as into their
souls, and he takes larcenous advantage of Esta Lea's God-given gifts. In her first-
person narration, Esta Lea recounts various stops on the healing crusade, com-
menting on the local folks, their faith, and their foibles. Her voice is joyful, often
humorous, always thoughtful; she's faithful but doubt-filled and far from perfect,
with a canny ability to see the hypocrisy among the miracles, and there are miracles
aplenty. Unfortunately, the chain of miracles isn't enough to make a strong plot,
and the character development is too shallow to make the repetitive incidents worth-
while; there's also an adult sensibility here that suggests a book condensed for
young readers rather than conceived for them. Nonetheless, Esta Lea is a stub-
born, devout, and recognizable character that youngsters may be glad to encoun-
ter. JMD
CORMIER, ROBERT 
The Rag and Bone Shop. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[16 0p]
ISBN 0-385-72962-6 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Twelve-year-old Jason is accused of murdering his seven-year-old neighbor, Alicia.
Anxious to put the case to rest, the police call in an investigator, Trent, who is
developing an almost miraculous reputation for extracting confessions from the
suspects he questions. Although Jason is evidently innocent, Trent presses on,
confusing Jason with veiled accusations and careful manipulation ofJason's vision
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
135
of himself. Finally Jason does confess, but at the same time Alicia's brother is
implicated by two of his friends and placed under arrest. Trent emerges from the
interrogation room to discover that he has extracted a useless confession and ru-
ined his reputation as an investigator. Cormier uses deft dialogue and alternating
perspectives to create tense and twisted scenes between the two characters, as Jason
fights a losing battle to maintain his identity and innocence. The pacing is rivet-
ing, and the chapters that cover the interrogation raise intense ethical questions
about power, fairness, and truth. Unfortunately, the ending, in which Jason de-
cides he must really be a killer after all and sets out to attack a bully with a butcher
knife, is disconcertingly abrupt, and it fails to connect with the tautly wound psy-
chological drama of the rest of the book. Nevertheless, readers who have long
enjoyed Cormier's trademark twists will want to check out this last volume of the
late author's work. KM
COULTER, LAURIE 
Secrets in Stone: All about Maya Hieroglyphs; illus. by Sarah
Jane English and with photographs. 
Madison/Little, 2001 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-316-15883-6 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
While Egyptian hieroglyphs stubbornly resisted translation until Champollion's
nineteenth-century breakthrough, Mayan glyphs have proved an equally tough
nut to crack. Coulter leads readers through historical background on Mexican site
discoveries, extant codices, early efforts to make sense of the intricate pictograms,
and ongoing problems in translation. Intrinsically interesting as these concerns
may be, Coulter realizes that kids will be more anxious to practice their own inter-
pretive skills, and like an enthusiastic museum docent, she's armed with a bag of
tricks to aid their observation and application. There are clear photographic re-
productions of carvings to be searched for specific glyphs, number charts to be
filled in with Mayan numeric notation, personalized tributes based on royal steles
to be formulated for family and friends. Some Maya miscellanea are at times
logically and visually intrusive; illustrations vary in quality from an abundance of
truly helpful diagrams to some flat-out ugly spreads and spot art in a garish, pseudo-
Mayan style. A "Glyphmaster," suitable for rubbings, is an alluring bit of market-
ing fluff, but readers who have taken this business seriously will ignore it in favor
of the more accurate syllabary chart within the text. EB
DAVIES, NICOLA 
Bat Loves the Night; illus. by Sarah Fox-Davies. 
Candlewick,
2001 
30p
ISBN 0-7636-1202-2 
$15.99 
R 
5-7 yrs
Having covered various marine critters (One Tiny Turtle, BCCB 11/01, Big Blue
Whale, 10/97), zoologist Davies now turns to the air, following the night flight of
a tiny pipistrelle bat in search of insects to eat. The main body of the text chronicles
the bat's hunt, describing the night vision, high-pitched voice, and other charac-
teristics that aid her; an explanatory subtext or echo appears in a smaller typeface,
expanding on the information present in the main text. Fox-Davies' watercolor-
and-pencil illustrations give a clean vision of the tiny bat's nighttime adventures in
the natural world; the detailed draftsmanship is zoologically precise, rendering bat
and surroundings authentically and elegantly against a sweeping blue backdrop.
Informative, digestible text complemented by engaging illustrations makes this a
strong readaloud for preschool and primary grades. Endpapers provide some ad-
ditional bat facts and an index. JMD
136 
* THE BULLETIN
DEMI 
Gandhi; written and illus. by Demi. 
McElderry, 2001 
34p
ISBN 0-689-84149-3 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Slim and visually inviting, Demi's biography of the Indian leader seems poised to
claim its place among picture-book biographies for older readers. Unfortunately,
a text that tips from dignified to dull and wobbles uncertainly between history,
Eastern philosophy, and mere adulation will be somewhat difficult for casual read-
ers to navigate. Illustrations of spidery delicacy, rendered in the prettiest Easter
egg colors, seem somewhat out of place among threadbare description of epic acts
of civil disobedience (e.g., the Salt March and other resistance movements), and
several scenes may be positively enigmatic to viewers. Are the boxed figures beside
the Indian independence spread supposed to be Nehru and Jinnah? Which is
which? Is the prone figure on the wooden cot a fasting Gandhi or his deceased
wife? Given the level of challenge here, middle-grade readers would be better off
with a straightforward biography (such as John Severance's Gandhi, Great Soul,
BCCB 6/97), while younger children will need considerable adult intervention to
understand the breadth of contributions of this remarkable man. EB
EWALD, WENDY, ed. 
The Best Part of Me: Children Talk about Their Bodies in
Pictures and Words; ed. and illus. with photographs by Wendy Ewald. 
Tingley/
Little, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-70306-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-4
For this unusual picture book, fifteen elementary-school children worked with
Ewald to choose their "best" body part and to compose a photograph focusing on
the part in question; they then worked with a teacher to compose a piece of writing
expressing their feelings about their body. The result is a fascinating body of
artistic statements by a diverse group of children: Nada Hussain celebrates the
"toasty brown" of her hands; Tramika Davis considers hers "big and ugly" but
"strong"; Alejandro Espinosa compares his "sharp teeth" to those of "a shark and
my cousin laura"; Chris Ice Mitchell explains that he needs his arms "to pick up
my little brothers and throw them on the bed but when they get up and they try to
kick me in my head when I'm sleeping in the bed." Double-page spreads repro-
duce each child's prose or poem-in his or her own handwriting-opposite a strik-
ing black-and-white photograph on pale buff paper; open space generously frames
these pictorial and verbal revelations. Clarity of expression is understandably vari-
able, but the unedited quality of the text lends authority and an appealing imme-
diacy. A real conversation starter, this experiment in self-expression could be made
to serve a number of purposes in the right hands. FK
FEIFFER, JULES 
I'm Not Bobby!; written and illus. by Jules Feiffer. 
di Capua/
Hyperion, 2001 
34p
ISBN 0-7868-0906-X 
$15.95 
R 3-5 yrs
Bobby's being called, but he's not interested in coming ("She's always calling 'Bobby,
Bobby, Bobby!' all the time. I get tired of it"). He's interested in being something
nonresponsive, like a lion, or an airplane, or a monster, or maybe he's taken off in
a spaceship to Mars ("Mars has TV. Every channel. I can watch my shows and she
won't even know it"). Finally, however, he's hungry-not so hungry that he'll
capitulate completely but hungry enough that he'll "put on a Bobby face," so they
don't know he's a lion, and allow himself to be fed. This is an apt and evocative,
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
137
if lengthy, fantasy with more than a touch of Wild Things to it (though the mater-
nal voice here is considerably more offputting), and Bobby's responses are natural
as well as imaginative. Feiffer's familiar bold scrawl suits Bobby's audacious muta-
tions, and the cloudy watercolors reflect his turbulent intransigence. If you dare,
read this back-to-back with Runaway Bunny for two very different views of par-
ent-child attachment. DS
FINCH, MARY, comp. 
Playtime Rhymes for Little People; illus. by Clare
Beaton. 
Barefoot, 2001 
6 4p
ISBN 1-84148-425-3 
$18.99 
R 
6 mos.-3 yrs
Finch has selected a plethora of lap games, fingerplays, and action rhymes for
adults to share with young children. Many will be familiar to American readers
("Incy Wincy Spider," "One Potato, Two Potato," etc.); some, with a more En-
glish bent ("Five Currant Buns in Baker's Shop," "Cobbler, Cobbler Mend My
Shoe"), may be less so. The bouncy selections include counting-out rhymes, march-
ing songs, and circle games; brief instructions are included for each rhyme. The
verses are accompanied by collage illustrations made of "antique fabrics and felt,
braid, buttons, beads, and assorted bric-a-brac" in which the shapes of animals,
people, trees, and buildings are cut from materials of various textures and appliqued
to cloth backgrounds along with additional decorative stitching. The scenes are
rather static and the subdued colors don't match the collection's perkiness, but the
cuddliness will appeal to parents as the detailing intrigues young viewers. Make
room on the parenting shelf for this one. JMD
FLEMING, CANDACE 
Who Invited You?; illus. by George Booth. 
Schwartz/Ath-
eneum, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83153-6 
$16.00 
M 
4-7 yrs
The freckled, Pippi Longstocking-ish narrator is "a-polin' through the swamp" all
alone when Possum, "a-swingin', a-swayin', a dangly-wangly playin'," decides to
join her. Much to the narrator's chagrin, Possum ("if you got room for one ...
you got room for two") is joined by Skunk ("if you got room for two ... you got
room for three"), Frog, Muskrat, Heron, etc. all the way to Gator, who, at number
ten, is one too many. Gator, however, has culinary plans for all his little swamp-
land friends, and the final spread shows the narrator cheerfully a-polin' along:
"Now I'm only one,/ a-feelin' just fine ... /... and I pole/ only ME/ through the
bright swamp sunshine." Fleming (author of Gabriella's Song, BCCB 2/98, and
When Agnes Caws, 2/99) has left behind the sophisticated language and unique
premises of her earlier work for an ill-conceived effort full of choppy rhythms,
forced rhymes, and fake atmosphere. The slight story is built around counting
from one to ten, but the number of each animal is so buried beneath the clunky
text that the cumulation is difficult to follow, and the somewhat unclear end (did
Gator eat the other critters or not? Why was the narrator spared?) means that even
as a cumulative tale this story has problems. 
Line-and-watercolor illustrations
feature a lively bunch of swamp dwellers with personality to spare-big-eyed Heron,
scrawly-lined Coon, and ratty-looking Possum all have a slightly hysterical but
snort-inducing air. Booth's watercolors try their level best to support the text with
as much visual humor as possible, but it just isn't enough to carry a readaloud that
is nearly impossible to read aloud. Turn instead to Van Laan's inimitable Possum
Come A-Knockin'. JMD
138 
* THE BULLETIN
FLETCHER, SUSAN 
Walk across the Sea. 
Atheneum, 2001 
2 1 4 p
ISBN 0-689-84133-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
As the daughter of a California lighthouse keeper, Eliza Jane McCully has learned
to adjust her life to the pattern of the sea--at high tide she and her family are cut
off from the mainland, but at ebb tide they can scamper across a soggy land bridge
into town for school, shopping, and the fellowship of neighbors. Eliza is, in fact,
more closely connected with the town than she might care to be, particularly when
she's forced into meeting a Chinese boy, Wah Chung, who saves her goat from a
rogue wave. The rampant prejudice of the late nineteenth century has influenced
her regard for the exotic foreigner, but when the town erupts into a full-blown
Chinese exclusion movement, Eliza risks (and ultimately ruins) her father's career
by illegally sheltering Wah Chung on lighthouse grounds during a storm. The
friendship Fletcher fashions between Eliza Jane and Wah Chung is all the more
credible for its tenuousness; although their bumbling overtures are warm and sin-
cere, it is clear that language, custom, and social mores create barriers that the pair
will never cross. There's no tidy ending here-the McCullys pay a heavy price for
their compassionate act, and the Chinese are driven out despite the support of a
few sympathetic townsfolk-but while Eliza recalls the experience with some sad-
ness, she tells it with pride. EB
FRANK, LUCY JustAsk Iris. Jackson/Atheneum, 2001 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-689-84406-9 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Iris, her older brother, Freddy, and their mother have just moved out of Abuela's
apartment in the Bronx and into their own place downtown. While Mami struggles
to make ends meet without the assistance of her unreliable estranged husband, Iris
struggles to fill the long summer days with something other than the typing lessons
her mother insists she practice. Their six-floor building has been without an eleva-
tor for awhile and the stairs are dark and reeking, thus making the fire escape the
preferred highway. Desperate for the money to buy herself a much-needed bras-
siere (especially after Freddy's friends' raunchy reaction to her burgeoning charms),
Iris offers her services to run errands for her neighbors. In the course of earning the
money she needs, she makes friends and influences people, saves the resident cat
lady and her cats from being thrown out onto the street, and gets the absentee
landlord to fix the elevator. Frank (author of Oy, Joy!, BCCB 10/99) has urban
tenement-dwelling down cold. The drama of a looming divorce, the tragic acci-
dent that crippled the boy in 2B, the potential homelessness of Ms. Witherspoon
(aka Cat Lady) are underplayed enough to keep them from being maudlin, and the
high-spirited adventures balance out the book's more serious moments. Iris is aan
likable, believable narrator, and readers will relish the colorful discoveries occa-
sioned by her forays into the wilds of the fire escape. JMD
FREEDMAN, RUSSELL 
In the Days of the Vaqueros: America's First True
Cowboys. 
Clarion, 2001 
[70p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-96788-0 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Like Sandler's Vaqueros: America's First Cowmen (BCCB 5/01), this is an explora-
tion of the little-feted precursor to the cowboy. Sandler offers more discussion of
the vaquero-cowboy connection, but the ever-reliable Freedman manages to make
DECEMBER2001 
* 
139
this overview both more concise and more contextually informative; he provides
background for the development of the New World cattle ranches the vaqueros
worked, explains the economic and class systems that left the vaqueros in poverty
and obscurity, and describes the end of the tradition in the face of the changes of
the twentieth century. Some aspects are a bit sketchily treated (Freedman isn't
clear if there are still men who consider themselves vaqueros, for instance), but the
book covers the high points with admirable succinctness and makes clear the rel-
evance of its topic to North American history in general. More than merely deco-
rative, period art (much of it in color) and photographs offer windows on a distant
and different world; their generous usage gives a lushness to the simple layouts and
lends the book the unthreatening appearance of a photoessay. A detailed bibliog-
raphy is included, along with a glossary and an index. DS
FRESCHET, GINA 
Beto and the Bone Dance; written and illus. by Gina
Freschet. 
Farrar, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-374-31720-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Beto is trying to figure out what to leave on his abuela's altar for el Dia de los
Muertos, the Day of the Dead, but every time he thinks of something (candles,
soda pop, bread, chocolate, etc.), someone else has already thought of it. After
going to the cemetery with his family for the festivities, he falls asleep; his grand-
mother then comes to him, reminding him what it is that she loved best of all.
When Beto awakens, he puts a small photo of himself on his abuela's altar. "That's
right," his father says. "Abuela loved you best of all." While the book is apparently
meant to act as an introduction to a cultural event, it unfortunately confuses the
cultural context, mistakenly stating that the Day of the Dead is the same holiday as
Halloween and failing to identify where the holiday is celebrated. Still, this is a
touching story, and its affirmation that love is greater than death is strong and
reassuring. The art is vibrant and evocative, with the Day of the Dead festivities
rendered in hot hibiscus colors and the traditional dancing skeletons just creepy
enough. With some additional explanation, this title could be a personable intro-
duction to the Mexican holiday. A brief glossary of Spanish words and phrases is
included. JMD
GERAS, ADELE 
The Cats of Cuckoo Square; illus. by Tony Ross. 
Delacorte,
2001 
[192 p]
ISBN 0-385-72926-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Focusing on a group of cat friends who meet in a local square, Geras gives readers
two entertaining cat stories. In the first, "Blossom's Revenge," Blossom is cursed
with a family visitor, young Prissy, who makes Blossom's life a torment while
evading blame; with the aid of her person, Miles, and the local cats, Blossom man-
ages to drive seemingly angelic Prissy into retreat from the family home. In the
second story, "Picasso Perkins," Perkins is forced by his human, Lexie, and her
friend to pose for them as they draw his picture in hopes of winning a local pet art
contest. Perkins' efforts to escape this indignity result in his adding a feline touch
to the artwork, which then catches the eye of an art dealer who's struck with the
brilliance of these new paintings. Perkins' story is rather strained throughout,
especially at its conclusion, but Blossom's is a smoothly written and amusing de-
scription of a horrible visitor. Both stories convey a comforting domestic solidity,
140 
* THE BULLETIN
and they're told in the same frothy and humorous tone as Patricia Lauber's simi-
larly conceived Purrfectly Purrfect (BCCB 12/00). Ross' black-and-white draw-
ings borrow the zany lines of Quentin Blake's work while incorporating texture
and shading that anchor the characters in their settings. These stories offer fluffily
fun reading romps for cat lovers, especially those who are beginning to enjoy longer
chapter books. KM
GIBBONS, 
GAIL 
Behold... the Unicorns!; written and illus. by Gail
Gibbons. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17958-4 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17955-X $15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
It hardly matters that children past the age of Santa belief accept that unicorns
"aren't for real"; their fascination and demand for reading materials on the subject
doggedly persists. Gibbons offers a cursory but generally satisfying overview showing
how natural history, classical mythology from far-flung cultures, Christian reli-
gious traditions, and a few visual and textual misinterpretations have shaped our
Western image of the fabled beast. She is particularly crafty at dropping data at
one point and picking it up again at another to tacitly demonstrate how beliefs
about the unicorn mutate over time: "[Ctesias] described the unicorn's colorful
horn, which was said to possess magical powers capable of ridding the body of
poisons and of curing dreaded diseases"; "In an old Russian legend a dreaded dis-
ease called typhoid struck down a village.... The unicorn purified the water in the
village and held its horn over those who were ill until they were cured." Line-and-
watercolor scenes are often awkwardly drawn, and the visuals are disjointed, with
sophisticated borders formed by narrow strips of handmade papers stylistically ill
at ease with the more juvenile images; nonetheless, the fabled creatures are chipper
and appealingly contemporized in their cartoonish simplicity. No source notes are
included, but a page of unicorn miscellanea (which, to be honest, kids will like
even better) tops off the presentation. EB
GOODMAN, JOAN ELIZABETH 
A Long and Uncertain Journey: The 27,000-Mile
Voyage ofVasco da Gama; illus. by Tom McNeely. 
Mikaya, 2001 
48p 
(Great
Explorers)
ISBN 0-9650493-7-X $19.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Columbus may have become the eponym for European exploration, but it was his
less-celebrated Portuguese counterpart, da Gama, who succeeded where Colum-
bus failed and successfully navigated to the coveted treasure houses of the East and
safely, more or less, back again. Goodman cogently explains how da Gama's voy-
age followed the ground- (well, wave-)breaking accomplishments of fellow mari-
ners, and then she embarks on the journey itself-an adventure distinguished by
cultural arrogance, diplomatic blundering, and breathtakingly courageous seaman-
ship. His encounters with African peoples who welcomed him, shunned him, or
manipulated him for their own political purposes are, at Goodman's hands, little
gems ofserio-comedic drama. McNeely's dramatic spreads, while neatly executed,
display museum-diorama stiffness not quite in keeping with Goodman's more
fluid text. There are, however, several nice bookmaking touches here: page num-
bers elegantly but discreetly perched atop tiny anchors; spacious cream-colored,
black-bordered berths for the text; passages from da Gama's journal boxed in deli-
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
141
cate, unobtrusive insets; a map of the journey that can remain folded out for con-
sultation at any point in the adventure. While openly admiring da Gama's navi-
gational achievement, Goodman never loses sight of his mission or the coming
cultural maelstrom the journey unleashed: "His voyage gave the Portuguese an
understanding of how the Moslems managed trade in Africa and Asia.... Portugal
could neither negotiate nor buy her way in. ... Portugal could blast her way in."
EB
GRAFF, NANCY PRICE 
A Long Way Home. 
Clarion, 2001 
200p
ISBN 0-618-12042-4 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The crumbling old Vermont house that once belonged to his grandfather is defi-
nitely not Riley's idea of a proper home, and his mother's rekindling romance with
high-school-flame Sam-now the town oddball-sends things from bad to worse.
Mom tries to boost his spirits by presenting him with a family heirloom, a pair of
binoculars that belonged to a Civil War veteran ancestor. The strategy works a
little too well; Riley is certain the long-gone Silas Griffin was a Vermont hero at
the battle of Gettysburg and an altogether more honorable human being than
Sam, who was dishonorably discharged when he refused to carry arms in Vietnam.
Readers will see Riley's rude awakening coming from a mile away: Silas was in-
deed at Gettysburg-as a Virginia Rebel, and Sam is the kind of modest, everyday
hero whose past choices have sadly never been forgiven or forgotten in his home-
town. Still, Riley's quiet but effective resistances to Vermont, Sam, and life after
Dad's death ring absolutely true, and readers willing to follow Riley at a slow,
steady pace will be satisfied with his ultimate rapprochement. EB
HANSEN, JOYCE 
One True Friend. Clarion, 2001 
154p
ISBN 0-395-84983-7 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Fourteen-year-old Amir (from The Gift-Giver, BCCB 1/81, and Yellow Bird and
Me, 4/86) desperately wants to be reunited with his brothers and sisters, from
whom he's been separated since shortly after the death of their parents and with
whom he's lost touch. He's currently staying with a foster family, the Smiths,
who've been caring for his younger brother Ronald for some time. The warm and
loving Smiths assist Amir in his search for his siblings, but they're really hoping
that he'll choose to stay in his current placement. Amir documents his search and
expresses his anxieties in his letters to his best friend, Doris, who writes in return of
her own problems and of her friendship and support for Amir. The letters aren't
convincing as the work of young teenagers, and the personal revelations therein are
often predictable and didactically couched. There's a soft-spoken sympathy to the
story, however, that's very reassuring; shy, thoughtful Amir is an unusual charac-
ter, and his growing relationship with his little brother and with the Smiths is
touchingly portrayed. This is a warm and gentle treatment of a kid's struggle to
find a family. DS
HASKINS, JIM 
Conjure Times: Black Magicians in America; by Jim Haskins and
Kathleen Benson. 
Walker, 2001 
174p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8763-0 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8762-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Haskins, author of Black Music in America (BCCB 3/87), here turns to the history
of a quirkier art, that of stage magician. Starting with the nineteenth century,
142 
* THE BULLETIN
when African-American Richard Potter became the first recorded professional
magician in the United States, the book goes on to chronicle the appearance of
black magicians in minstrel shows, in vaudeville, in military shows, on television,
and at corporate entertainments, touching on changing theatrical and social trends
in connection with the history of this particular profession. The writing is some-
what flat, failing to convey the theatrical excitement of the performances; Haskins
also doesn't quite manage to surmount the spottiness of the history, so that this is
more a collection of vignettes than a cohesive account. Still, there are some memo-
rable figures included here, and the piquant and telling details (such as black ma-
gicians' common practice of classifying themselves as foreign to get around
segregation) help flesh out the narrative. In addition to drawing the interest of
young magic fans, this might also serve as a source of some vivid readaloud tidbits.
Black-and-white photographs appear throughout; detailed endnotes, a similarly
thoughtful bibliography, and an index are included. DS
HOWE, JAMES 
The Color ofAbsence: 12 Stories about Loss and Hope. 
Simon,
2001 
238p
ISBN 0-689-82862-4 
$16.00 
Ad Gr. 7-12
Despite the theme, this collection of original stories is surprisingly not angst-driven;
nor does it serve chicken-soupy uplift to victims of movie-of-the-week trauma. In
interesting ways, the various losses explored are de-centered, allowing these writers
to offer fresh perspectives on how to live, whether you are the odd duck in your
family (like Norma Mazer's Mim, in "The Tin Butterfly") or you are not "the
cheeriest '0' in the box" (like C. B. Christiansen's depression-prone family in
"Red Seven") or you are face to face with a grandfather who has lost the rainbow
trout he had "instead of pets-instead of lots of things" (as in Michael J. Rosen's
"The Fire Pond"). A few stories are comparatively flat (Howe's and Avi's sparsely
detailed stories about dead or absent fathers) or fragmented (Angela Johnson's
runaway-brother story), though, and not all seem to have a YA audience in mind.
Nonetheless, the best of these stories efficiently evoke the distinct world in which
these diverse characters' losses make sense, while the authors' notes offer more
directly stated insights and an insider view of the ways personal and found materi-
als are transformed into literary art. Despite its unevenness, this collection offers
readers a useful assortment of moments of confusion and clarity. FK
HOYT-GOLDSMITH, DIANE 
Celebrating Ramadan; illus. with photographs by
Lawrence Migdale. 
Holiday House, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1581-3 $16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
The latest collaborative effort by Hoyt-Goldsmith and Migdale follows fourth grader
Ibraheem and his family and classmates as they observe the Islamic holy month of
self-discipline and spiritual renewal, ending with the joyous celebration of Eid-al-
Fitr. Requisite background on the Five Pillars of Islam, community worship, and
Islamic schooling is neatly integrated, and a glossary provides a welcome assist for
readers who may have trouble catching or retaining Arabic terms introduced in the
text. Hoyt-Goldsmith judiciously notes that Ramadan customs vary among Is-
lamic communities and that Ibraheem's heritage (Bosnian and Egyptian) influ-
ences his family rituals. She also keeps steady emphasis on the religious doctrines
that underlie each practice ("Zakat [almsgiving] is not a government tax, nor is it
charity. Rather for Muslims it is a form of worship because it was commanded by
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
143
God"). Migdale's photo illustrations sport the candid informality of a family scrap-
book, and readers for whom Islam has heretofore been an exotic mystery may find
themselves surprisingly comfortable in Ibraheem's milieu. EB
HURST, CAROL OTIS 
Rocks in His Head; illus. by James Stevenson. 
Greenwillow,
2001 
[32 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029404-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029403-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Hurst writes gently and affectionately of her father's unusual career. Owner of a
pre-Depression gas station, he really preferred to collect rocks and talk to his cus-
tomers about them. When the Depression took its toll and he lost his station, he
turned an avocation of museum-going (to see the mineralogy exhibits) into a janitor's
job at the museum; his mineralogical expertise finally triumphed over the museum
board's requirements, and he was appointed curator of mineralogy. There's a
retrospective and adult slant here that will distance this from some young readers,
but this is a quiet and personal evocation of one man's self-acquired education and
enduring passion ("Take a look at this one," he's always saying as he pulls another
specimen out of his pocket). Stevenson's scratchy, flyaway lines have a front-
porch informality suited to their unpretentious subject; the colors are sometimes a
bit overly subdued, but they've got a low-key and pleasing period flavor. "Do
what you love" is a rather abstract message, but this concrete demonstration of the
philosophy and its rewards may open some youthful eyes. DS
JENKINS, STEVE 
Animals in Flight; written and illus. by Steve Jenkins and Robin
Page. 
Houghton, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-12351-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
A simple text gives an overview of the evolution, mechanisms, and variations of
animal flight, covering subjects ranging from dinosaurs to hummingbirds to hon-
eybees; alongside the overview, illustration captions and small sidebars give more
detail on individual examples. The result is more a gallery of interesting tidbits
than a cohesive exploration of flight, but the morsels are quite tasty ("A man of
average weight. . . would need wings about 140 feet across to fly successfully").
Jenkins' detailed cut-paper illustrations are paired with less revealing drawn dia-
grams that don't always earn their page space (what are the differences between the
pictured reptile wing, insect wing, bird wing, and bat wing?), and the highly atypi-
cal robin may raise some eyebrows, but the shaded colors and intricate complexity
of the paperwork helps focus the occasionally scattered pages. This isn't up to Nic
Bishop's The Secrets ofAnimalFlight (BCCB 6/97), but it may satisfy young read-
ers looking for a quick flutter. DS
JOHNSTON, JULIE In Spite ofKiller Bees. 
Tundra, 2001 
[232p]
ISBN 0-88776-537-8 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
Fourteen-year-old Agatha and her two older sisters, Jeannie and Helen, have been
eking out their existence since the death of their father and the departure of their
mother, but all that's going to change now that their wealthy grandfather has died,
leaving them his heirs. Or so they think, but it turns out that the old man's
144 
* THE BULLETIN
bequest is just the family home, and that they only get it if they can entice their
stubborn great-aunt Lily to share the home with them by the time the lake freezes
up-in four or five months. Panicked that she'll be abandoned by her sisters if
their new home doesn't work out, Agatha determines to settle in Grandfather
Quade's house, trying to make a place for the sisters in the suspicious little lakeside
town that well remembers their thieving father, the black sheep of the family; she
also desperately hopes that the sisters' mother will return to give them the mother-
ing for which Agatha desperately longs. The setup is inspired, and Johnston takes
the ensuing story in a rather surprising direction, providing a mood more reminis-
cent of classic tales of cheerful struggle such as The Five Little Peppers or, more
relevantly, Little Women (which Agatha reads in the course of the novel) than the
frenetic comedy one might expect. This isn't an old-fashioned idyll, however: the
return of the girls' mother isn't the sweet dream Agatha anticipates, and Agatha's
anxiety about her sisters' plans is clearly justified. This is a leisurely, intriguing,
and offbeat saga about a "born-again family-girl" who finds a place in the world.
DS
KIMMEL, ERICA., ad. 
Anansi and the Magic Stick; illus. by Janet Stevens. 
Holiday
House, 2001 
35p
ISBN 0-8234-1443-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
After being laughed at by his neighbors for his messy yard, sloppy house, and
untended garden, Anansi steals a magic stick from Hyena and straightens up his
act. Unfortunately, he falls asleep while the obedient stick is watering the garden
and the ensuing flood sweeps away the various animals, including Hyena, who
rescues his stick and stops the runaway magic. The animals learn to enjoy the
resultant lake, but they actually miss the absent Anansi. No need-as the closing
spread shows, Anansi is floating on the lake in his new houseboat, "planning new
tricks." Kimmel has traveled this road before (Anansi and the TalkingMelon, BCCB
6/94, etc.), and with the same traveling companion (Stevens), and the adventures
are starting to get somewhat repetitive and the storytelling a bit flat. The text is
still funny, however, and listeners will appreciate Anansi's attempts to avoid labor
as well as the plot parallels to "The Sorcerer's Apprentice." Stevens' watercolor
caricatures are more familiar than fresh (even relying on characters from her previ-
ous works unconnected with Anansi or Kimmel), but they are as solidly serviceable
as the text. No specific source notes are provided. JMD
KRAMER, STEPHEN 
Hidden Worlds: Looking through a Scientist's Microscope; illus.
with photographs by Dennis Kunkel. 
Houghton, 2001 
57p
ISBN 0-618-05546-0 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Dennis Kunkel is a microscopist, bringing his explorer's zeal to the usually invis-
ible world. The book traces his career from his early interest in science through his
work on the Mount St. Helens site (studying the return of microscopic life to the
ash-choked waterways) to projects on subjects as disparate as jellyfish tentacles and
plant structure, discussing en route the different kinds of microscopes and the
processes Kunkel uses (including the computer coloration of the black-and-white
images from the electron microscopes). The text sometimes jumps around con-
fusingly and the writing is a little choppy; nor is this as evocative of an actual
scientific path as, say, Montgomery's The Snake Scientist (BCCB 4/99). Kunkel's
photographs are a considerable draw, however: the emphasis here is in the beauty
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
145
rather than the ickiness of the microscopic world, which makes this a useful coun-
terbalance to Vicki Cobb's up-close work. The detailed and elaborate structure of
plants, animals, and basic cells achieves a genuine elegance through Kunkel's pic-
tures, with their artificially contrasting hues subdued by the underlying grayscale
coloration, leaving texture and structure at their most distinct. Despite its short-
comings, this may draw youngsters interested in science as well as those who just
want to check out the pictures. DS
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Born in the Breezes: The Seafaring Life of oshua Slocum; illus.
by Walter Lyon Krudop. 
Orchard, 2001 
[4 6p]
ISBN 0-439-2905-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
A cobbler's son who ran away to sea, Slocum spent nearly five decades traversing
the oceans as crew and, later, captain of a series of commercial sailing vessels; when
wind gave way to steam and it seemed likely that Slocum's seafaring days were
over, he rebuilt a decrepit sloop and became the first man to complete a solo cir-
cumnavigation of the world. Lasky traces his career from Slocum's first voyage as
a fourteen-year-old cook, through his prime as captain who, with his beloved and
exceptionally seaworthy wife, Virginia, raised a family on the briny, and on to his
final adventures aboard the Spray. She alludes to a host of Slocum's spine-tingling
experiences, from pirates to gales to shipboard ghosts, but never quite develops
them with the detail they deserve. The result is a catalogue of events--enticing,
yes, and ably illustrated with sweeping seascapes and figures sturdy enough to
withstand the ocean's severest punishments-but a catalogue nonetheless. A brief
epilogue simply and poignantly marks Slocum's end: "Somewhere between
Martha's Vineyard and his next port of call, he and the Spray vanished. Joshua
Slocum, like so many old Yankee seafarers, had never learned how to swim. It was
his opinion that if the sea wanted him, it would come and get him." Middle-
graders looking for an offbeat biography in an undaunting picture-book format
may want to set sail with this factual sea story. BB
LEINER, KATHERINE 
Mama Does the Mambo; illus. by Edel Rodriguez. 
Hyperion,
2001 
[34 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2533-2 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0646-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
The young narrator remembers when her mother danced all the time, even while
she cooked, swept, and shopped, and how Papa joined her after work, the two of
them dancing together to the music on the record player. After Papa dies, Mama
stops dancing ("Just like that, he died, and just like that, the dancing in our house
stopped"). A year passes, and everyone is determined that Mama should have a
dancing partner for carnival; Mama, however, has become increasingly fond of
kind, generous, and loving Eduardo, whose feet "seem put on backward" and who
can't dance to save his life. When carnival arrives, Mama attends with Eduardo
and finds a clever solution when the dancing begins: "Mama holds the beat and I
am the rhythm. And there, in front of all Havana, I am dancing with Mama, and
Mama is dancing the mambo again." Leiner does an admirable job of holding the
sentimentality in check while giving rein to honest emotion in this story of grief
and healing, and her depiction of Cuban daily life is flavorful but not touristy.
146 
* THE BULLETIN
Unfortunately, the lengthy text drags at times; the overexplanatory opening slows
the momentum, and the occasional clumsy turn of phrase interrupts the story's
flow. Though the faces are a bit generic, Rodriguez' mixed-media illustrations
(pastel, gouache, spray paint, and ink) in sunbaked colors strongly evoke the story's
Cuban setting, from the architecture to the furniture, from street to interior scenes.
This is a touching testimony to the healing power of time and to the powerful
links among a daughter, her father, and her mother. JMD
LEWIN, WALDTRAUT 
Freedom beyond the Sea; tr. from the German by Elizabeth
D. Crawford. 
Delacorte, 2001 
26 6p
ISBN 0-385-32705-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
Sixteen-year-old Esther Marchadi has witnessed the burning of her rabbi father in
an Inquisition auto-da-fe and barely escaped the decimation of her community;
now through a combination of luck and bribery she has signed aboard the Santa
Maria as Pedro Fernandez, page to Admiral Christopher Columbus. This expedi-
tion is no simple voyage of exploration, but a convoy of intrigue involving Jewish
conversos, spies, stolen Portuguese maps, secret log books, and a Genoese admiral
who, as Pedro/Esther observes, seems to have a bill of goods to sell to every player
from Queen Isabella to the lowliest crew member: "Hope for gold and hope for
mastery, hope for survival, hope for dignity and freedom, and for the salvation of
the faith. And I also am all too ready to believe him." Not only does Esther rely on
Columbus's good graces to shield or protect her from suspicion, she is startled to
discover a strong sexual attraction to him as well. Lewin's plotting is based, as her
endnote explains, on Simon Wiesenthal's suggestion that Columbus was partially
financed by Jewish interests and pursued a covert mission to discover "prophesied
'Jewish kingdoms' beyond the seas." The Pedro/Esther theme, however, is pure
potboiler-with handy contrivances, fleets of nautical jargon interpolated for color,
and sails fairly a-billow with heavy breathing. Nonetheless, this is an edge-of-the-
seat adventure story stylishly presented, and anyone who's vicariously visited Co-
lumbus' cabin with Pedro/Esther will never look at the caped, bereted mariner the
same way again. EB
LITTLEFIELD, BILL 
The Circus in the Woods. 
Houghton, 2001 
[208p]
ISBN 0-618-06642-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Molly's family has spent most of its summer vacations at a Vermont lake, where
they stay in a cabin attached to a resort lodge. As Molly gets older, she becomes
increasingly restless within the family and with the confinement of summers at the
lodge, but she's intrigued by her encounters, on her occasional wanderings, of an
odd circus in the woods, from which she has increasing difficulty finding her way
back to the secure and familiar. With the aid of Snow, the resort's beloved child-
minder, and the circus' fortuneteller, Nell, Molly begins to get some inkling of the
meaning of this otherworldly circus, but it's not until her family faces tragedy that
the meaning and possibilities of the circus are brought home. There's a retrospec-
tive adult flavor to the narrative that will distance it from kids, and the metaphoric
implications of the circus will be frustratingly obscure to many readers, who may
prefer Bradbury's Something Wicked This Way Comes. Littlefield (a familiar com-
mentator on National Public Radio) writes with a dreamy tenderness and with
sympathy for the strains of growing up, however, and his evocation of the details
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
147
of summer life will resonate with any youngster who's been lakeside and induce
yearning from many who'd like to be. Kids with a taste for straying from the
beaten path, both literally and literarily, may find this unusual look at growing up
worth an exploration. DS
MACE, NANCY In the Company ofMen: A Young Woman at The Citadel; by Nancy
Mace and Mary Jane Ross. 
Simon, 2001 
238p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-84002-0 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Mace, the first woman to complete her academic program at The Citadel, re-
counts her always challenging and often harrowing experiences at the South Caro-
lina military college, from which she graduated in 1999. Her love/hate relationship
with the institution and its enrollees is always at the forefront, and raw nerves,
wounded pride, and a huge measure of residual adolescent angst often get the
better of coherence. Readers learn much about her (possibly unrequited) devotion
to her brigadier-general father, her roommate problems, her battles with depres-
sion and ADD; they learn almost nothing about the nature and settlement of a
sexual-harassment lawsuit by two of her female classmates, Mace's romance with
the classmate she married right after graduation, or specifics of her involvement in
the many committees that addressed issues of female adjustment to The Citadel
and Citadel adjustment to females. While Mace rails on about the honor inherent
in Citadel tradition, she seems oblivious (as readers are unlikely to be) to the irony
of her very dishonorable treatment at events such as Ring Ceremony, at which she
was publicly hissed. In the end, Mace succeeds in telling us more about Mace than
about The Citadel, but for readers who crave an emotional thrill ride, her tale
delivers. An appendix of Citadel and Mace miscellanea is appended, and black-
and-white photos of seemingly happy, well-adjusted corps member Mace are in-
cluded. EB
MAGGI, MARIA ELENA, ad. 
The Great Canoe: A Karifa Legend; tr. from the Span-
ish by Elisa Amado; illus. by Gloria Calder6n. 
Groundwood/Douglas &
McIntyre 
[34p]
ISBN 0-88899-444-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 127, for review.
MAK, KAM 
My Chinatown: One Year in Poems; written and illus. by Kam
Mak. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029191-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029910-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
In fifteen free-verse entries, a young immigrant boy reflects on his homesickness
and disorientation as he refashions his life in an American Chinatown. The New
Year finds him kicking through celebration debris in search of the one whole fire-
cracker that will be his harbinger of good fortune for the coming year. "But I can't
find one,/ even though the air dances/ with scraps of red,/ a snowfall the color of
luck./ It must be someone else's luck this year./ Not mine." With economical
brushstrokes of text, Mak implies the circumstances that brought the child's fam-
ily out of Hong Kong, a hurried egress that left them no time to pack the house-
hold goods or to make complete peace with relatives left behind. Longingly recalling
148 
* THE BULLETIN
his grandmother's pickled kumquats, the boy observes, "But [Mama] doesn't know
how to pickle them./ Grandmother wouldn't tell her./ 'If I told you, you'd never
come to see me again!'" Adjustment comes slowly as the boy resists change ("But
I don't want to go to school,/ where the English words/ taste like metal in my
mouth"), finds comfort in the familiar (the animal chess game in which he beats
his sister, "Just like home"), and begins to embrace new customs ("Maybe we'll
find enough kids/ to play kick-the-can,/ my favorite American game"). Photoreal-
istic scenes, many of spare composition reminiscent of Allen Say's work, occasion-
ally jar against the text (laundry that supposedly "sags on the clotheslines," for
example, flutters in a breeze). If the visual details sometimes falter, the shifting
moods ofwistfulness and wonder are ably captured, and the child audience should
be entranced by this cathartic tour of Chinatown. EB
MCCLAFFERTY, CARLA KILLOUGH 
The Head Bone's Connected to the Neck Bone:
The Weird, Wacky, and WonderfulX-Ray. 
Farrar, 2001 
136p 
illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 0-374-32908-7 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
The "weird, wacky, and wonderful" thesis may be pushing things a bit, but this is
at least an intriguing and readable account of a world-changing technology.
McClafferty (herself a radiologic technologist) begins with an account of Roentgen's
surprising discovery, then expands into a discussion of its early effects on the medi-
cal and legal worlds, its prominence in the public imagination, the unanticipated
deleterious effects of the procedure ("The first person known to have died because
of his work with X-rays was Clarence Dally"), and contemporary uses for X-rays
that go beyond routine hunts for cavities at the dentist's office. The book's tone
wavers disconcertingly between the jocular and the serious, but it is rather a sub-
ject of extremes; coverage is impressive without being dry, and there are plenty of
accounts of and quotes from early pioneers and patients. This isn't quite up to the
Penny Colman standard for exploring broad implications from a specific subject,
but it's got a combination of tech history, gory details, and piquant implications
that should lure browsers. Black-and-white pictures appear throughout (though
some of the X-ray images would benefit from additional notation for less skilled
eyes). End matter includes a glossary, a bibliography, a list of books for further
reading and website resources, and an index. DS
MCDONALD, JOYCE 
Shades ofSimon Gray. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[25 6p]
ISBN 0-385-32659-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 7-10
The picturesque small town of Bellehaven is already being visited with strange
phenomena-a freak heat wave, an invasion of tiny peeper frogs carpeting the
town-when responsible high-schooler Simon Gray slams his Honda into the town's
Liberty Tree (aka The Hanging Tree, from a spot of Revolutionary Era vigilante
justice) and winds up comatose in the hospital. Simon has been hiding secrets,
however-for the love of his beauteous schoolmate Devin, he's been providing her
and her friends with advance copies of tests he's retrieved from the school
computers-and it looks like those secrets are about to come into the open, and
the unconscious Simon will make a superlative fall guy. There's something in the
strange manifestations in Bellehaven that connects Simon's impending doom to
the death of the man at the Hanging Tree centuries before, and both Simon, in
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
149
out-of-body ramblings that enable him to encounter the previous era's scapegoat,
and his friend Liz, who's researching the history of the event, think they may be on
the verge of uncovering the past secrets and, perhaps, thereby set Simon free.
McDonald's atmospheric and effectively paced opening will suck readers right
into this mysterious half-fantasy world of the return of the repressed, old wrongs
righted, and computer crime, and she manages to make Simon an intriguing
character despite his being at least technically unconscious for the majority of the
novel. Unfortunately, the computer-crime thread is never quite up to the standard
of the rest of the plot: neither Simon's malfeasance nor the greater malfeasance it
reveals (students using a teacher's password to access net porn) seem worth the
law-enforcement mobilization or the plot-resolving breast-beating, so the ending
is somewhat flat. There's enough momentum from the setup, however, that readers
may not care; they'll just enjoy the spooky implications of a world that won't let
the same wrong happen twice. DS
McMILLAN, BRUCE 
Days ofthe Ducklings; written and illus. with photographs by
Bruce McMillan. 
Lorraine/Houghton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-618-04878-2 
$16.00 
R 
4-10 yrs
With a title obviously meant to evoke his stellar Nights of the Pufflings (BCCB 3/
95), McMillan returns to avian life around Iceland. Here he's focusing on the
island of Hvallatur and its eider duck population, which is currently subject to a
renewal effort; a girl named Drffa, daughter of one of the island's new owners,
takes on the task of fostering the ducklings and ensuring their safety until their
return to the wild. This lacks the compelling plotline of Pufflings, since it's a
particular project rather than a ritual, and it's not quite clear what the overall
situation and impact are (though an author's note gives a bit more information on
the eider in Iceland). Wild-animal mom is always an appealing role, however, and
the details of the ducklings' care (Drffa even builds a walkway to guide them to the
sea) are absorbing. The main impact here is visual, with crisp and clear photo-
graphs of ducklings possessed of fuzzy cuteness that may stave off the inevitable
culinary humor; Drifa is clearly a composed and capable young lass, and her air of
competence suggests that the project couldn't be in better hands. Budding young
naturalists will want more information, but they'll still probably take to this like-
you guessed it-a duck to water. DS
MEADE, HOLLY A Place to Sleep; written and illus. by Holly Meade. 
Cavendish,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5096-3 
$15.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
In this question-and-answer bedtime story, each full-page color image accompa-
nies a question ("When this bear needs to snooze, where does he choose to lay
down his furry self?"); a turn of the page reveals the answer ("In the arms of a tree
is a good place for a slumbering bear to slump"), enhanced by a small black and
white insert on a creamy background. Seal and cat, mouse and hippo, etc. all seek
their favorite places to slumber, until the concluding pages when a little girl and
little boy go to beds "clean and soft, under covers and with kisses .. . they sink,
sink down in warmth while their dreams rise and rise. In their very own beds,
where they choose to snooze. Good night." The text is a bit stilted at first, but
there is a gentle rhythm to the alliterative language that works effectively with the
cuddly, oversized images. Meade (illustrator of Ho's Hush!: A Thai Lullaby, BCCB
150 
* THE BULLETIN
4/96) exercises glorious control over her collage portraits washed with watercolor,
and the sweep of images will carry viewers over any rough spots encountered on
the way to dreamland. JMD
MORA, PAT, ad. 
The Race of Toad and Deer; illus. by Domi. 
Groundwood/
Douglas & McIntyre, 2001 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-88899-434-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Lowly Sapo (Toad), annoyed by the arrogance of Venado (Deer), challenges him
to a race to determine who is fastest. With the help of his fellow toads, who are
stationed along the race route to confuse Venado into thinking Sapo has outpaced
him, Sapo solidly trounces the boastful mammal. This simple adaptation is a bit
flat, and the end may not fully explain the trick to young listeners (or to Venado,
for that matter). Kids will be entertained by a tale that doesn't run in the direction
they expect, however, and the storytelling is enlivened by the insertion of some
easily repeated Spanish throughout. Domi's watercolors provide additional en-
ergy, their naive power reinforced by the fiery but translucent palette-no muddy
colors here, only the brilliant hues of tropical birds, butterflies, and frogs set against
a rainbow colored jungle. Despite the flaws, the story is easily adapted for telling
aloud, and this is a ready-made opportunity for cultural comparison. JMD
PAYNE, NINA 
Four in All; illus. by Adam Payne. 
Front Street, 2001 
32p
ISBN 1-886910-16-2 
$15.95 
M 
3-6 yrs
The text here presents a rhyming list of four-item sets ("eyes ears nose mouth// east
west north south// oats wheat corn rye// sun moon stars sky// floor table chair
bed// yellow green blue red") as the illustrations provide a focal character in the
form of a little girl, who romps through scenes featuring the items in question.
Some of the conceptual sets are closed ("east west north south"), but some are
arbitrary selections from larger groups ("yellow green blue red"), making the logic
of the very limited text difficult to follow; nor is there any plot to retain audience
attention. The collage compositions are sometimes overcrowded, but in other
spreads the sharply delineated visual elements cut from richly textured paper make
up spare but balanced compositions that are more lyrical than literal. Ultimately
this volume is pretty but pointless, and it lacks the language, action, or images
necessary to attract single or group listeners. JMD
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
Table Manners; written and illus. by Chris Raschka and Vladimir
Radunsky. 
Candlewick, 2001 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-1453-X 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
The tongue-in-cheek subtitle here is "the edifying story of two friends whose dis-
covery of good manners promises them a glorious future," but in fact it's largely
the story of one friend's tutelage of another as Chester attempts to coach Dudunya
into basic civilization. Advice is generally massive silliness rooted in basic rules
("Napkins are for wiping your mouth. ... Only the Queen may wear her napkin
as a crown!"; "Why a fork and a knife? Because it makes you look grown-up, and
because a knife makes big things small enough to fit into your mouth"), spiced up
with demonstrative charts ("Chester's Chart of Full-Mouthed Speaking Accidents")
and various multiple-choice knowledge checks as well as a before-and-after gallery
on the endpapers. There are genuinely funny moments in the text, but it's largely
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
151
a slight and random assortment, lacking any overall pattern or central driving im-
pulse. The visuals are more arresting, as design-intensive pages sport mixed-media
art that usually depicts Chester and Dudunya as talking heads, the former a study
in blue and green and the latter a gormless dab with huge ears. There's a winning
gaiety and insouciance to the vibrant, contrasting colors and the high-energy and
fantastical figures. That's not really enough to knit the book together, but giggly
youngsters may still enjoy snacking on this absurd buffet. DS
RUBIN, SUSAN GOLDMAN 
Steven Spielberg: Crazy for Movies. 
Abrams,
2001 
94 p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-4492-8 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
It's hard to imagine a middle-grader who hasn't fallen under the spell of at least
one Spielberg production, so a visually appealing biography, loaded with family
snapshots and movie scenes and organized around some of the director/producer's
most popular films, should be a smash hit. Rubin's interviews with Spielberg's
parents, siblings, and coworkers lend gossipy insight into the early years of a mas-
ter in the making and supply many connections between his life and his art. Un-
fortunately, it is glaringly obvious (even to readers who never bother to consult
Rubin's "References and Resources" addenda) that Spielberg himself hasn't di-
rectly contributed a word to this effort and his quotes have been cobbled together
from other sources. Moreover, information on such a prolific industry dynamo
quickly becomes dated, and with A.I. already released and Jurassic Park 3 and cable
production Band ofBrothers never mentioned, the "Coming Attractions" chapter
has passed its shelf life. Still, there's comforting familiarity here to appeal to biog-
raphy report writers, and a great deal more concerning Spielberg's establishment
of the Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation that all his movie buffs
should appreciate. A glossary of filmmaking terms and an index are included. EB
RUMFORD, JAMES 
Traveling Man: The Journey oflbn Battuta, 1325-1354; writ-
ten and illus. by James Rumford. 
Houghton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-618-08366-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
"In the days when the earth was flat and Jerusalem was the center of the world,"
twenty-one year old Ibn Battuta began a pilgrimage from his home at the "very
edge of the earth" (Tangier) to Mecca. Driven by insatiable wanderlust, Ibn Battuta
made his way through Egypt and the Middle East, on to India and China, and
even into the Pacific toward "the earth's last horizon," where high winds merci-
fully blew his boat shoreward before he could plunge off the edge of the world and
into the sky. He returned to Tangier after nearly three decades only to learn his
family was deceased ("Traveling-it gives you a home in a thousand strange places,
then leaves you a stranger in your own land"). Rumford's presentation is lavish
and undeniably impressive. Ibn Battuta's route snakes across the spreads to create
an extended map, with text boxes serving as stopping points along the way. Lush
watercolor scenes, awash in gold highlights, are frequently bordered by equally
lush calligraphy quotes, rendered in Arabic, Persian, or Chinese as the destination
requires. Translations of quotes, a glossary, maps, and source notes support each
proffered biographical detail. Despite this elegant bookmaking and Ibn Battuta's
poetic narration, the traveler's tale itself is curiously flat, and even life-and-death
adventures are recounted as a somewhat weary memory in which the details no
longer loom as important as the journey. These kinds of details, however, are
152 
* THE BULLETIN
generally important to young readers, and although teachers may be inspired with
numerous curricular tie-ins from cartography to multicultural studies, kids may
wonder how thirty years of travel could be quite so bland. EB
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Poppleton in Winter; illus. by Mark Teague. 
Blue Sky/Scho-
lastic, 2001 
[48p]
ISBN 0-590-84837-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
Pleasant if pompous Poppleton the pig is back for his eighth foray into easy
readerdom, and this time he is enjoying the pleasures of winter: glittery icicles, a
slower pace, and a moonlight sleigh ride, to name just a few. Rylant is no stranger
to the intricacies of the easy reader; her success with Henry and Mudge (BCCB 4/
87) and the Poppleton series make it clear that she has mastered delivering a story
with a minimum of syllables and a maximum of action. Teague's illustrations fill
all available white space with gravely expressive characters that take themselves just
a tad too seriously, which adds just the right touch of formal humor to the com-
fortable text. JMD
SIERRA, JUDY 
Monster Goose; illus. by Jack E. Davis. 
Gulliver/Harcourt,
2001 
52p
ISBN 0-15-202034-9 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-5
Sierra, who has already earned her stripes as a reteller of well-received traditional
folktales (Nursery Tales around the World, BCCB 2/96), here takes a potshot at
Mother Goose, with predictably funny results. The irreverent takeoffs run from a
maniacally grinning Mother Goose who types rhymes into her laptop under the
light of the full moon (accompanied by flying bats), to Little Miss Mummy, who
"lay on her tummy/ Smoking a big cigar./ A very large spider/ Resided inside her./
(She kept all her guts in a jar)," to Weird Mother Hubbard (who has a bizarre
encounter with the toe of Skeleton Joe). While not all the rhymes achieve the
pithiness necessary to make them successful, all contain at least one giggle-induc-
ing moment. Davis (illustrator of Cuneo's Mary Louise Loses Her Manners, BCCB
5/99) creates pointy-toothed portraits of the denizens of this twisted Mother Goose
that only add to the hyper-maniacal milieu. Acrylic and colored-pencil illustra-
tions employ a palette reveling in unhealthy green and putrid pinks, and the layout
features pictures large enough to be seen by sure-to-be-sucked-in groups of listen-
ers and jolting enough to satisfy readers-alone. JMD
SONES, SONYA 
What My Mother Doesn't Know. 
Simon, 2001 
259p
ISBN 0-689-84114-0 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
In this series of poems (primarily free verse), teenager Sophie expresses her worry
and wonderment over everything from her parents' floundering marriage to her
changing body to the differences between lust and love. Though other narrative
threads appear as well (her Jewishness, her friendship with best buddies Grace and
Rachel), the emphasis here is on romance. When Sophie's infatuation with her
boyfriend, Dylan, fizzles as she realizes how little they have in common, she falls
for cyberpal Chaz, only to find (luckily before meeting him in person) that he's a
creepy pervert. To her surprise, Sophie discovers that the homely school scape-
goat, Murphy, is prime boyfriend material (he's sensitive and funny and he shares
her love of art), but she fears that her friends won't understand what she sees in
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
153
him. While many of the poems suffer from mundane language and cliches ("I'm
only aware of/ the sparks in his eyes,/ the sun in his hair/ and the spot where his
knee's/ touching mine"-from "In the Cafeteria"), a few are more lyrical ("our
cheeks/ burning with the cold// the tips of our noses/ numb// our icicled lips/
bump clumsily"-from "Winter Kiss"). Sophie's romance with Murphy will un-
doubtedly appeal to girls who secretly fantasize about the quiet boy in the back of
the class, and teens looking for a quick and pleasant read may appreciate both the
brevity of these poems and the familiarity of their content. JMH
ST. GEORGE, JUDITH John &rAbigailAdams: An American Love Story. 
Holiday
House, 2001 
147p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1571-6 
$22.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Yes, there have been biographies aplenty for each of the famous Adamses, but St.
George pursues a different and peculiarly effective tack-viewing their individual
peccadilloes and accomplishments through the lens of their marriage. This is no
organizational gimmick for, as St. George ably demonstrates, their five-decade
partnership actually powered (and in some instances hindered) their achievements.
Quotes from their correspondence disclose the ups and downs of a marriage filled
with passion and bickering, intense closeness and long periods of separation. Here
readers already familiar with the couple can revisit Abigail's famous "Remember
the ladies" line in light of her husband's offhand response, and John's abrasive
public temperament in light of his wife's zealous defense. Colonial, federal, and
international events are explained in just enough detail to bring kids up to speed,
and middle-schoolers who enjoy peeking at the domestic travails of public figures
will relish this humanizing history. Index, chronology, bibliography (with web-
sites), and black-and-white reproductions of period art are included. EB
TESTA, MARIA 
Some Kind ofPride. Delacorte, 2001 
119p
ISBN 0-385-32782-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Little League shortstop Ruth DeMarco is a local phenom, and her eleven-year-old
sights are squarely set on a major-league career. A well-placed word from her
sportswriter father brings Sports Illustrated reporter Ross Berwick to their Maine
town for an in-depth article on Ruth, but he arrives at a low point in the rising
star's life. She overhears her father make an offhand too-bad-she's-a-girl remark,
and she begins to doubt whether her deceased mother, who lost her life as a
firefighter, was really the hero she has been led to believe. Berwick has the making
of an intriguing character, but his role in Ruth's drama never quite makes it be-
yond sounding board; likewise, the "mother as hero in a man's world" theme doesn't
play as smoothly as readers might wish, instead collapsing into repetition and cli-
che. Testa does, however, take a gutsy swing at the glass ceiling that separates girls'
talents and aspirations from the reality of professional play and openly challenges
whether women's pro sports-certainly separate-are truly equal. EB
TOLAN, STEPHANIE S. 
Flight ofthe Raven. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
29 4 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029620-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17419-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
In this sequel to Welcome to the Ark (BCCB 11/96), Tolan follows nine-year-old
Elijah, former child of the techno-utopian Ark, after he's found in the wilderness
by a group of powerful and determined eco-terrorists. To most of the group, he's
154 
* THE BULLETIN
the mute autistic kid the news reports described, but some people see beyond the
label: the leader's part-Indian wife, Cassie, sees his connection to animals (he's
followed everywhere by an unearthly raven) as a sign of his spiritual power, and
young Amber, the leader's daughter, finds a connection with him as he begins to
trust and speak to her. Elijah's increasing bond with Amber throws him into
moral quandaries: does he use his special powers to save her and her family, de-
spite her father's murderous actions in the name of his cause? Is Elijah's commit-
ment to pacifism, a legacy of the Ark's anti-violence mission, practicable in the
face of the threats he now faces? Tolan's green warriors and their mission are
chillingly and effectively conceived, and there's a frightening relevance not just to
the terrorism but to the ethical questioning of responses thereto; the author refuses
to cheat her characters of full faith in their own beliefs, allowing her sympathetic
imagination to bring to credible life the conflicting viewpoints of Elijah, Amber,
and Amber's gung-ho brother, Kenny. The fantasy element is unfortunately less
well articulated, and the narrative's slow pace (which covers the passage of two
years) undercuts the dramatic tautness of the plot. The premise is undeniably
compelling, however, and readers may find this an eye-opening examination of
some resonant issues. DS
WAIT, LEA 
Stopping to Home. 
McElderry, 2001 
150p
ISBN 0-689-83832-8 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
When Abigail's mother dies of smallpox, eleven-year-old Abigail is determined to
keep her little brother, Seth, with her. She's therefore willing to help newlywed
Mrs. Chase, in exchange for her and Seth's board, with nursing her sick husband
and in helping keep the house together when Captain Chase too succumbs to
disease. When it becomes clear that the Widow Chase is expecting a baby, Abigail
looks forward to the event but also constantly fears that she and Seth will be turned
out, leaving them homeless again. While the story's conclusion is predictable (and
the climactic adopted-family ceremony is straight out of a contemporary social
worker's manual), there's a grave precision to Abigail's narration that gives the
story more weight than your run-of-the-mill period orphan story. Wait's picture
of an early nineteenth-century Maine port town is atmospheric without being
intrusive, and the occasional allusion to historical personages adds texture without
becoming didactic. This will be just the thing to feed hungry orphan-story junk-
ies. DS
WALDMAN, NEIL 
They Came from the Bronx: How the Buffalo Were Saved from
Extinction; written and illus. by Neil Waldman. 
Boyds Mills, 2001 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-891-1 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-3
In two parallel narratives, Waldman relates the return of the buffalo from near
extinction. In one story, a Comanche boy and his grandmother share stories about
the grandmother's young life in the days when buffalo still roamed wild on the
plains. The other narrative chronicles the trip of captive buffalo from the Bronx
Zoo back to their native plains. The story of the buffaloes' travel is more of a nuts-
and-bolts catalog of transportation events than a dramatic narrative, with place
names more prominent than details of the journey and a consequently sluggish
pace. The boy's excitement about the return of the buffalo lends the story some
energy, but his presence as a character is minimal, and the personal impact remains
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
155
distant. Waldman's illustrations provide some of the emotional appeal absent
from the story; he captures sweeping vistas and soft textures in a palette of dusty
browns and misty mountain grays, juxtaposed with scenes of the buffalos' journey
done in the sepia of old photographs. Young fans of animal-rescue efforts as well
as those who are fascinated with the West may be intrigued by this picture-book
history of one species' return. KM
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Yoko's Paper Cranes; written and illus. by Rosemary
Wells. 
Hyperion, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2602-9 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0737-7 
$15.99 
R 
3-6 yrs
When her grandmother's birthday comes, Yoko knows that "thousands of miles
away in Japan, Obaasan's garden was cold and snowy. Obaasan was waiting for
the cranes to come back to her garden pond." Yoko makes three cranes out of
beautiful paper, folding them just as Ojiisan, her grandfather, taught her (a trail of
small images shows the folding process step by step for craft-minded youngsters
and their grownups). She mails the origami cranes to Obaasan ("All night that
airplane flew, from warm California to wintry Japan"), who hangs Yoko's cranes
in her kitchen window. Fuzzy gray Yoko is about as lovable as a kitten can be, and
her grandparent cats are just as warm and appealing. Framed images are touched
with gold leaf, and motif-related spot art adds variety to the concise and elegant
compositions. Patterns echoing design elements from Japanese textiles give depth
to the small but richly detailed pictures; the drafting (especially that of natural
objects like waves, clouds, and cranes) is particularly graceful and delicate. Wells
simply and effectively illustrates the human ability to overcome time and distance
with love and shared memories. JMD
WISNIEWSKI, DAVID 
The Secret Knowledge of Grown-Ups: The Second File; writ-
ten and illus. by David Wisniewski. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17855-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17854-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Following the same format he did in The Secret Knowledge ofGrown-Ups (BCCB
7/98), Wisniewski returns to the case in an attempt to reveal the real reasons be-
hind typical adult demands. Accounts of each undercover discovery are provided,
along with crumpled fragments of the classified documents and the "true" expla-
nations behind such admonitions as "brush your teeth" (your teeth will riot rather
than rot if left undisturbed) and "don't eat junk food" (not because it's unhealthy
but because it will lead to "brainjacking," in which Cruddy Food Group molecules
make off with one's brain cells). Some of the exposed "truths" (e.g., slipping down
the bathtub drain, tiny actors inside the TV) are not as clever or original as those in
the first volume, but middle-graders will surely savor the corny humor and oddball
goofiness of this text ("Into their tissue of lies will blow the Nose of Truth!"; "Reck-
less incisors cavort with wanton tooth wrecker Ginger Vitus as heartbroken gum
looks on"). The compositions of Wisniewski's detailed cut-paper illustrations are
sometimes cluttered and less unified than those of the previous book, but the loud
colors and caricatured figures are appealing in their unabashed absurdity. Subtle
it's not, but kids who enjoyed the first one will likely discover enough silliness to
please them in this top-secret sequel. JMH
156 
* THE BULLETIN
WITHROW, SARAH 
Box Girl. Groundwood/Douglas & McIntyre, 2001 
1 8 1p
ISBN 0-88899-407-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Starting grade eight without the protection of her popular friend, Anisha, who
moved away, Gwen is initially repelled by the dogged friendliness of new girl Clara
("I'm trying to be a loner and she is ruining it"). As their friendship develops,
Gwen's worries increase: she's desperately trying to behave in ways that will bring
back her mother, who abandoned her daughter five years previously, and she fears
that making friends breaks her imagined rules. She's also afraid that Clara will
resemble Anisha in her response to Gwen's remaining family-her dad and his
boyfriend, Leon. There's some contrivance in the plotting, but Gwen's narrative
voice is so strong that authenticity wins over (in response to parental dogma, Gwen
seethes, "Why do my problems have to be opportunities? Why can't I just hate
something?"). Withrow is particularly gifted at keeping her protagonist's view-
point within the moment, so that the reader's understanding evolves along with
Gwen's; characterization and interpersonal dynamics are also strong, with Clara
credibly gawky and loyal, for instance, and Leon a sharp, affectionate, and obvi-
ously not straight partner to Gwen's genial but sometimes clueless dad. There are
a lot of raw adolescent nerves exposed here, and Withrow treats them with a re-
spect and understanding that will bolster readers feeling similarly vulnerable. DS
ZUCKER, N. F. 
Benno's Bear. Dutton, 2001 
24 4 p
ISBN 0-525-46521-9 
$16.99 
R Gr. 5-7
Benno's father plays the concertina, the bear dances to his tune, and eleven-year-
old Benno picks the pockets of bystanders; a tidy arrangement, except that Benno's
father has ended up in jail and the bear is being held at the zoo. Adopted by a
sympathetic policeman and his wife, Benno misses his bear but finds a security he's
never known before-until events force him to flee to the woods with his beloved
bear. In his narration, Benno filters events through the suspicious worldview en-
couraged by his proud, alienated father, whose "blood" has disowned him based
on a kinsman's lies; however, the reader also sees Benno's capacity for love in his
relationship with his bear. Set on the generic border between realism and fairy tale
(the story takes place at an undefined time in a vaguely central European setting),
Benno's tale has a small cast of well-defined characters and a focused, emotionally
appealing plot. At the same time, it includes a satisfying amount of realistic detail
(we learn about gold hallmarks and bread making) and explores some compelling
conflicts. The short chapters, clean lines, and emotional resonance of this decep-
tively simple tale make it a natural readaloud as well as a tempting readalone. FK
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
157
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Hogan, Walter. The Agony and the Eggplant: Daniel Pinkwater's Heroic Struggles
in the Name of YA Literature. Scarecrow, 2001. illus. with photographs (Scare-
crow Studies in Young Adult Literature) ISBN 0-8108-3994-6; $26.95. 159p.
Hogan approaches the life and works of Pinkwater chronologically, opening with
a chapter entitled "The Life of the Master," which covers the events of Pinkwater's
life and his decision to become a writer. Three subsequent chapters ("Three De-
cades of Fabulous Picture Books," "Seven Stories," and "Four Expeditions") dis-
cuss Pinkwater's career as a writer-illustrator, the connections between his shorter
and longer works, and the segue from middle grade to young adult fiction. Six of
Pinkwater's more substantial works are addressed individually in chapters discuss-
ing Alan Mendelsohn, the Boy from Mars; The Snarkout Boys and the Avocado of
Death and its sequel, The Snarkout Boys and the Baconburg Horror; Young Adult
Novel and its sequel Young Adults; and The Education ofRobert Nifkin. The con-
cluding chapter ("Menippus, Keats, Pinkwater, and the 'Big A"') gives Hogan a
final opportunity to compare Pinkwater's works to Menippean satire and laud
once again Pinkwater's "intellectual playfulness." Each chapter has extensive notes,
which often include humorous quotes from Pinkwater interviews. A chronology
and an index are included, as is an extensive bibliography of Pinkwater's works
and a detailed list of sources. JMD
Berman, Ruth, ed. The Kerlan Awards in Children's Literature, 1975-2001. Pogo,
2001. illus. with photographs. Paper ed. ISBN 1-880654-25-3; $17.95. 326p.
The University of Minnesota's Children's Literature Research Collections include
the Kerlan Collection of children's literature, books, manuscripts, artwork, and
letters; since 1975 the Kerlan Friends and the CLRC have given an annual award
to recognize "singular attainment in the creation of children's literature and in
appreciation for generous donations of unique resources to the Kerlan Collection
for the study of children's literature." This anthology opens with a brief history of
the collection and the awards followed by a chronological arrangement of accep-
tance speeches or articles by the award recipients or their designees. The speeches
and articles are given added value by the inclusion of biographical information,
manuscript facsimiles, artwork, and other related material from the Kerlan collec-
tion. There are some glorious insights into the personalities of writers and illustra-
tors: Elizabeth Coatsworth wonders "What Is One to Say about Oneself?"; Margot
Zemach writes "About My Work"; Katherine Paterson tells how she was asked to
wrap up her "trash" and send it to the collection in "My Ebenezer"; Madeleine
L'Engle describes her vision of the universe in "Out of All Whooping"; Marion
Dane Bauer discusses "Passing on the Torch"; and so on. That this compilation is
a labor of love is obvious; that lovers of children's literature will appreciate that
labor is obvious as well. Notes, a bibliography, and an index are included. JMD
158 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-fiction: Wait
ADVENTURE: Lasky; Lewin
Africa-folklore: Burns
African Americans: Haskins
African Americans-fiction: Hansen
Animals: Davies; Jenkins
Animals-stories: Meade; Mora
Aviation: Boursin; Jenkins
Baseball-fiction: Testa
Bats: Davies
Bears-fiction: Zucker
BEDTIME BOOKS: Meade
BIOGRAPHIES: Baker;
Billinghurst; Brewster; Demi;
Goodman; Hurst; Lasky; Mace;
Rubin; Rumford; St. George
Birds: Jenkins
Cats-fiction: Geras
Cats-stories: Wells
Chinese Americans-poetry: Mak
Circuses-fiction: Littlefield
Civil rights: Demi
Clothing-fiction: Brashares
Codes and ciphers: Coulter
Computers-fiction: McDonald
CONCEPT BOOKS: Payne
COUNTING BOOKS: Fleming
Cowboys: Freedman
CRAFT BOOKS: Boursin
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Bonners; Cormier; McDonald;
Zucker
Cuba-stories: Leiner
Death and dying-stories: Freschet
Detectives-fiction: Wisniewski
Disabilities-fiction: Bang
Ducks: McMillan
Ducks-stories: Andersen
Ecology: Waldman
Egypt, ancient: Baker
Endangered species: Waldman
Ethics and values: Cormier; Graff;
Mace; Tolan; Zucker
Explorers and exploring: Goodman
Explorers and exploring-fiction:
Lewin
Families-fiction: Hansen; Johnston;
Zucker
FANTASY: McDonald; Tolan
Fathers-fiction: Withrow; Zucker
Films and filmmaking: Rubin
Floods-stories: Maggi
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Andersen; Kimmel; Maggi; Mora
Food and eating-poetry: Aylesworth
Foster care-fiction: Hansen
Friendship-fiction: Bonners;
Brashares; Fletcher; Hansen;
Withrow
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Withrow
Grandmothers-stories: Bourgeois;
Freschet
Grandparents-stories: Wells
Greece, ancient: Blacklock
Grief-stories: Leiner
Growing up-fiction: Brashares;
Littlefield
HISTORICAL FICTION: Clinton;
Fletcher; Lewin; Wait
History: Brewster; Burns; Demi;
Freedman
History, ancient: Baker; Coulter
History, classical: Blacklock
DECEMBER 2001 
* 
159
History, U.S.: Freedman; Haskins;
St. George; Waldman
History, world: Coulter; Goodman;
Rumford
Hobbies: Hurst
Holidays: Freschet; Hoyt-
Goldsmith
Human body: Ewald
HUMOR: Babbitt; Kimmel;
Raschka; Sierra; Wisniewski
Iceland: McMillan
Imagination-stories: Feiffer
Immigrants-poetry: Mak
Islam: Hoyt-Goldsmith
Japan-stories: Wells
Japanese Americans-stories: Wells
Language arts: Ewald
Latinos-fiction: Frank
LEGENDS: Burns; Gibbons
Liberia-folklore: Kimmel
Lighthouses-fiction: Fletcher
Magic and magicians: Haskins
Magic-stories: Babbitt; Kimmel
Manners-fiction: Raschka
Maps and mapmaking: Rumford
Maya: Coulter
Mexico-fiction: Bang
Military life: Mace
Mothers-fiction: Johnston;
Withrow
Mothers-stories: Feiffer; Leiner
MYSTERIES: McDonald
MYTHS: Maggi
Nature study: Davies; Jenkins;
McMillan
Neighbors-fiction: Frank
NURSERY RHYMES: Finch;
Sierra
Olympics: Blacklock
Orphans-fiction: Wait
Pets-fiction: Geras
Photography: Kramer
Pigs-fiction: Rylant
POETRY: Aylesworth; Mak; Sierra;
Sones
Prejudice-fiction: Fletcher
Presidents: St. George
Princesses: Brewster
Quilts-stories: Bourgeois
Ranching: Freedman
Reading aloud: Sierra; Zucker
Reading, easy: Geras; Rylant
Reading, reluctant: Aylesworth;
Billinghurst; Blacklock; Brewster
Refugees-stories: Bunting
Relationships-poetry: Sones
Religion-fiction: Clinton
Religious instruction: Hoyt-
Goldsmith; Maggi
RHYMING STORIES: Fleming
Rocks: Hurst
ROMANCE: Sones
Royalty: Billinghurst; Brewster;
Burns
Science: Jenkins; Kramer;
McClafferty
Sex roles-fiction: Testa
Ships and sailing: Lasky
Ships and sailing-fiction: Lewin
SHORT STORIES: Howe
Sisters-fiction: Johnston
Sleep-stories: Meade
Sports: Blacklock
SPORTS STORIES: Testa
Storytelling: Maggi; Mora
Storytime: Davies; Finch
Summer-fiction: Brashares;
Littlefield
Swans-stories: Andersen
Technology: McClafferty
Terrorism-fiction: Tolan
Uncles-fiction: Bonners; Clinton
Unicorns: Gibbons
Urban life-fiction: Frank
Vacations-fiction: Littlefield
Venezuela-folklore: Maggi
Voyages and travel: Goodman;
Lasky; Rumford
Voyages and travel-fiction: Lewin
West, the: Waldman
Women's studies: Mace
160 
* THE BULLETIN
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION OF THE
BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN 0008-9036), as
required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is published eleven
times a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is $66.00 (institutional,
domestic), $73.00 (institutional, foreign), $50.00 (individual, domestic), $57.00 (individual,
foreign).
The owner and publisher is the Graduate School of Library and Information Science at
the University of Illinois, a nonprofit organization. Office of publication is located at 501
E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6211. The managing editor is Deborah Stevenson,
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820.
There are no stockholders, bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status
for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preceding twelve
months: 4103; number for single issue nearest filing date: 4063. Average number of copies
of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during preceding twelve months: 3293;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 3507. Average number of copies distributed
for free per issue during preceding 12 months: 36; number for single issue nearest to filing
date: 37. Average number of total copies distributed during preceding 12 months: 3329;
number for single issue nearest to filing date: 3544. Average number of copies of each issue
not distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after printing) during preceding 12 months:
774; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 519.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Marlo Welshons
Director of Publications
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
October 24, 2001
*2~A 
"The author of Dorp Dead'~
has composed a beautiful suite of poems~
!lliing he Christmas story. From the stable rat's
epiphany to the animals' hymn to joy, Cunningham
nings changes like handbells over the familiar
story, making it glisteningly new.
[Caldecott Honor artist]
Anita Lobel's paintings
are full of color
and rhythm....
A glorious
addition to
the Christmas
canon of
books for the
young.
-Starred review / 
1Ri'
ALA Book list
Ages 4 up.
$ 15%9 Tr
(0 688 17799-9)
$ 15.89 Lb
(0-688-17800-6) 
h
You Read
to Me, I'll Read
Very S'ort Stories to
| ea Togeher 
to 
YOU
by MARY ANN HOBERMAN
Illustrated by MICHAEL EMBERLEY
i 
"A delightful choreography of rhythm, rhyme, and repetition
that begs to be read aloud. . . . Humorous "stories" feature
enduring childhood subjects [and] Emberley's witty, exuberant
cartoon illustrations.... [A] valuable addition to picture
book collections." -school Library Journal (starred review)
"Rambunctious poems to tickle funny bones ... Designed for two
readers, the poems are laid out with verses in place-specific
SIuIuI~drK
to indicate th
-Kirkus Revie
Age 4 anc
$15.95/11
0-316-3635
Uttle, Brown and Co.
^
tw-__ 
-
Emiam
r~Y?·
4;~ "The principal of a fine, fine school just loves to see his
students learning. So happy is Mr. Keene, he gives an order, 'Let's
have school on Saturdays, too!' Young Tillie is less than pleased.
On weekends she likes to climb her favorite tree; show her dog
tricks; and teach her brother how to skip. But soon, she's going to
school on Sundays, holidays, and during the summer. Finally,
Tillie's had enough .... This book has it all: a fine, fresh idea; a
witty text that's fun to read aloud; and intelligent, amusing art that
provides an extra load of laughs. The closer one looks, the more
laughs there are, and everyone-kids, parents, teachers, even
principals-will want to look more than once."
-Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
"This timely story about extended schooling touches a nerve
with a kindly delivery ... [as] Creech and Bliss persuasively argue
one side of a volatile issue." -Starred 
review / Publishers Weekly
Ages 4-8. $15.95 Tr (0-06-027736-X); $15.89 Lb (0-06-027737-8)
- Joanna Cotler Books An imprint of HarpersCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americans, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
IL
Aedalist
reech
)ye Bliss
THAT'S WHAT MAMAS DO
DONALD DAVIS
SAudiobook $12.00 0-87483-613-1
Compact Disc $16.95 0-87483-612-3
Ages: Adult/8+
Four stories confirming once and for all that mother
knows best - "That's What Mamas Do," "Jack
Moore Builds a House," "Trying to Get Rid of Miss
Annie," and "The Power of Stories."
FATHER WAS A WISE OLD MAN
DONALD 
DAVIS
Audiobook $12.00 0-87483-611-5
Compact Disc 
$16.95 0-87483-610-7
Ages: 
Adult/8+
Five stories recall the wisdom of fathers with humor
and rich 
detail -"Dad's Stories: Selling Potatoes," "The
Christmas It Snowed," "The Truth Chicken," "My Father
Was a Wise Old 
Man," and "The Year Santa Claus
LeamedHis Lesson."
TUCK-ME-IN TALES: BEDTIME STORIES
FROM AROUND THE WORLD
MARGARET 
READ 
MacDONALD
Audiocassette $12.00 0-87483-511-9
Ages: 3-7
Bedtime stories that also provide a first sampling of
cultural diversity. Includes "The Old 
Woman Who lived
in a Vinegar Bottle," "Snow Bunting's Lullaby," "The
Playground of the Sun and Moon," "Counting Sheep,"
and Book Talk."
ITSY BITSY SPIDER'S HEROIC CLIMB
& OTHER STORIES
DAVID 
NOVAK
Audiocossette $12.00 087483-346-9
Ages: 4-10
Besides the title story, includes "A 
Glass of Water,"
"Mor-DawMinh,""Jack, "The Snake's Disguise," and
"Betsy & Jason."
SELECTED 
AS OUTSWNDING 
BY PARENT 
COUNCIL
WAKE, SNAKE!
J.J. 
RENEAUX
Audiocassette $12.00 0-87483-536-4
Ages: Adult/7+
Twelve traditional children's stories and songs drawn
from the diverse Southern heritage. Includes "Lapin's
Sweet Tooth," "3-6-9/Summer Chills," "Why Alligator
Hates Dog," and "Miss Mary Mac."
PARENTS' 
CHOICE 
GOLD 
AWARD
NAPPA GOLD 
AWARD
PARENT's 
GUIDE 
TO CHILDREN'S 
MEDIA 
AWARD
MY GRANDMOTHER'S TREASURE
JACKIE 
TORRENCE
Audiobook $12.00 0-87483-328-0
Ages: Adult/8+
Jackie Torrence remembers her childhood in tender
stories. Includes "The Big Cotton Patch," "Miss
Moetoy's Flower Bed," "The Strwberry Pie," "My
Granddaddy's Haint," and "The Funeral."
AUGUST
HoUUSE
www.augusthouse.com
P.O. 
Box 3223 / Little Rock, AR 
72203
201 East Markham 72201
501-372-5450 / FAX 501-372-5579
The Inoisible Child
ON READING AND WRITING BOOKS FOR CHILDREN
r 
1 
-
C
0-525-46482-4 * $24.99 * Ages 10 up
"...a smart, enthusiastic response to the best children's
books, old and new and a stimulating discussion of what
stories mean to kids...Teachers, librarians, parents,
and older students will want this."
-Booklist (Boxed review)
Universi
1325 So
Champs
U.S.A.
RETURN
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2000 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age, or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccb/
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at our homepage: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
Universic
1325 Sot
Champai
U.S.A.
RETURN :
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
· : 
.
,IL
.i:a
0008-9036(200112)55:4; 1 -M
