ILLINO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
;;
'"Despite 
its gritty milieu and violent central motif, this is a
love story, and a fine one. Sixteen-year-old Jamaica-born
Thulani's only friends are the pigeons he tends on the roof
of [his] Brooklyn brownstone.VFrom the roof, he witnesses
a rape. After he intercedes on the victim's behalf, he becomes
obsessed with her... .
Well-observed and subtle, Williams-
Garcia's novel artfully interplays harsh urban realities
with adolescent innocence." -
Starred review / The Horn Book
-
"- "Outstanding... a powerful, yet gentle coming-of-age story
Romance for realists."- Starred review / Kirkus Reviews
-
'-^ "An insightful, sensitive, and engaging tale."
- Starred review / School Library Journal
'-- 
"Will hold the rapt attention of sophisticated readers."
-
Starred review / Publishers Weekly
Ages 14 up. Tr $15.95 (0-688-16245-2); Lb $15.89 (0-06-0292024)
il HarperCollinsChildren'Books
Sf/TSt4 
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
www.harperchildrens.com
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
June 2001
Vol. 54 No. 10
A LOOK INSIDE
365 
THE BIG PICTURE
A Poke in the I: A Collection of Concrete Poems comp. by Paul B.
Janeczko; illus. by Chris Raschka
366 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
372 
* Vincent Van Gogh: Portrait ofan Artist by Jan Greenberg and Sandra
Jordan
374 
* The Demon in the Teahouse by Dorothy and Thomas Hoobler
377 * On the Wing: American Birds in Migration written and illus. by Carol
Lerner
391 
* Felix Feels Better written and illus. by Rosemary Wells
394 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
395 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Sho
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Jeannette Hulick
Melanie Kimball
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin
ofthe Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6211. E-mail:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2001 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Chris Raschka from A Poke in the I: A Collection of Concrete Poems ©2001.
Used by permission of Candlewick Press.
JUNE 2001 
* 365
THE BIG PICTURE
A Poke in the I: A Collection of Concrete Poems
comp. by Paul B. Janeczko; illustrated by Chris Raschka
Paul Janeczko is one of the most reliable and useful anthologists in children's lit-
erature. Never content simply to rearrange poems displayed in previous antholo-
gies, he's sought far afield and brought new voices to young audiences. He's worked
in different formats, focused on different themes, and appealed to different reader-
ships. Here he assembles a collection eminently suitable for introduction of that
most book-friendly genre, concrete poetry.
With its tendency towards inventive playfulness, concrete poetry can be ex-
tremely accessible to young readers (the book's concise introduction is all kids will
need) as well as sophisticated enough for older. The lot presented here is a diverse
one: some of the thirty poems will click immediately with readers, whereas others
may tease and puzzle. Youngsters may have already been introduced to the con-
cept of pattern poems, represented here by John Hollander's elegant "Swan and
Shadow" and Mary Ellen Holt's astonishingly evocative "Forsythia," among oth-
ers. Other kinds of typographical gamesmanship may be new to them: Monica
Kulling's "Tennis Anyone?" makes its reader bounce from one side to another
along with the ball in order to read the poem; Helen Chasin's "Joy Sonnet in a
Random Universe" offers, in a tidy square of the proper fourteen lines, a goofy and
spirited evocation of joy (" . . . Hey nonny nonny. La la la la la la la la la ... ");
Robert Carola's "Stowaway" neatly secretes the first a between the two w's of the
poem's text that is also its title. Contributors include writers for adults as well as
writers for children, and among their number are familiar names such as Douglas
Florian, John Agard, and Roger McGough. Most of the entries are enticing, some
are quite funny, and several are genuinely brain-tickling, and even the table of
contents gets into the mood, appearing, logically enough, as a table.
The layout leaves plenty of space for the verse to move, with white space domi-
nant in every spread. Raschka's artwork is inventive and lively, and he seems to
have created a whole new anthropoid species just for this book. These rectangular-
headed beings come in an array of colors, including primary, and they gambol
about the snowy pages in torn-paper clothing. The use of white line instead of
black line to indicate features gives these curious folk an otherworldly look, but
their expressiveness is undeniable, whether it be the green, cucumbery audience
intently watching tennis, the scarlet dancer with billowing crimson hair, or, for a
change of pace, the round-headed yellow guy who peers up into one poem or
recoils from another. The artwork's tension between parts (some of which are also
text) and whole mirrors that of the verse, so there's a congenial conceptual com-
panionship between the two.
While there are obvious pleasure-reading possibilities here for kids of various
tastes, this title also begs for all kinds of classroom appearances. It can be used to
366 
* THE BULLETIN
inspire philosophical exploration (are all these entries poetry? If not, why not?) or,
of course, to prompt similar projects for readers. Since some of the poems have
appeared and been illustrated elsewhere (Douglas Florian's entries being the most
obvious examples), there are good opportunities for provocative comparison and
contrast and interrogation of the differences in presentation. Challenge kids to
read the poems aloud or even to try some physical approximation of the concrete
poem, if you've got room. Let versaphobes use this for a different path into the
poetry they find stifling.
Good books open readers to new horizons. This book offers new possibilities
even with that old acquaintance, poetry, and it makes those possibilities fresh,
enticing, and vivid; this poke in the I just leads readers to see anew. (Imprint
information appears on p. 366.)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALEXANDER, LLOYD 
The Gawgon and the Boy. 
Dutton, 2001 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-525-46677-0 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
David is deliriously ill with pneumonia in Depression-era Philadelphia; chapters
about his illness and his relatives' decisions about his care are interspersed with
chapters of fantastic imagined adventures featuring David as protagonist. During
his long convalescence, David is turned over to Aunt Annie, a retired schoolteacher,
who is to oversee his education. He soon discovers that his elderly aunt, or the
"Gawgon" (from Gorgon), as he comes to call her affectionately, is much more fun
than she at first appears to be, and his studies become a delightful excuse for the
convalescent David and his invalid aunt to enjoy each other's company. Unfortu-
nately, the characters and settings of the fantasy chapters vary widely for approxi-
mately the first half of the book, keeping the story of David's recovery from gaining
momentum, and once the fantasy chapters evolve into a recognizable framework
they come to an abrupt end. The last segment of David's story is packed to over-
flowing with poignant departures and sentimental events. Nevertheless, Aunt
Annie's unconventional teaching methods and unpredictable assignments may
encourage readers to look beyond the unbalanced plot strands and to examine
their own elderly relatives for the spark of humor that makes the Gawgon such an
appealing companion. KM
ASHMAN, LINDA 
Maxwell's Magic Mix-up; illus. by Regan Dunnick. 
Simon,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83178-1 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
It's Louise's seventh birthday, but the entertainer for her party cancels and Max-
well the Magician is called in at the last minute. Unfortunately, all of Maxwell's
JUNE 2001 
* 367
magic seems to go awry, turning Louise into a rock, changing her guests into
various animals, and transforming her father into a broom. Just as things seem to
be hitting rock bottom ("Mom is sobbing. Max is pacing/ Pete is eating chips and
cheese./ In the midst of all this chaos/ Sits the birthday rock, Louise"), Maxwell's
nephew Al arrives and puts everything back in order. Ashman's rhyming stanzas
occasionally descend into jingle but generally carry the humorous story forward
with rollicking and rhythmic energy. The gleefully frenetic illustrations suit the
text well; Dunnick's use of line recalls Quentin Blake's drawings, but she fills her
characters in with watercolor and adds zippy crayon lines to depict the active move-
ment of this chaotic party. Use this for a birthday-party readaloud or for a silly
celebration any day. KM
BEDARD, MICHAEL 
The Wolf of Gubbio; illus. by Murray Kimber. 
Stoddart,
2001 
24p
ISBN 0-7737-3250-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
St. Francis of Assisi, the Poverello, arrives in the walled town of Gubbio with a
small band of followers. The townsfolk whisper that "he understands the language
of bird and beast" and that "some say he works wonders." One young boy of
Gubbio does not think that the "little poor one"-barefoot, his coarse robe belted
with rope-looks like a wonder worker; nevertheless, he follows along when the
man sets off to confront the wolf that has been ravaging the town. The boy then
witnesses the meeting between St. Francis and the wolf, a legendary encounter that
has long captured the popular imagination. Bedard's somewhat staid but still
engaging retelling has the immediacy of an eyewitness account, enhanced by the
voice of the young boy who is the first-person narrator. The formality of the text
is echoed in Kimber's paintings, which are a stylistic cross between controlled
cubism and pre-Renaissance perspective. Full- and double-page illustrations are
rendered in earthy greens and oranges, with a glaze of parchment yellow that makes
them appear antique. Red-roofed houses and cypress trees decorate the landscapes
and townscapes while monumental figures of Gubbio's citizens and the visiting
friars walk through the scenery. The figures have a sculptural look to them, their
faces notable for their chiseled features and flat planes; the narrator is more softly
drawn, less statuesque and thus more accessible. The wolf is a disproportionately
huge beast, a worthy object of terror. Cleanly drafted black-and-white drawings
add variety to the book's elegant design. An afterword gives background on the
saint and the legend. JMD
BROOKS, BRUCE 
All That Remains. Atheneum, 2001 
168p
ISBN 0-689-83351-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
The three novellas in this volume ("All That Remains," "Playing the Creeps," and
"Teeing Up") deal, somewhat eccentrically, with the impact of death on assorted
adolescents. "All That Remains" is a morbidly funny, offbeat piece on the death of
a woman with AIDS, and the way her niece, nephew, and partner circumvent the
rules and regulations about the burial of her remains. "Playing the Creeps" fea-
tures two cousins of disparate personalities drawing closer together after the death
of one's father, and "Teeing Up" is an uneven but humorous story about an ado-
lescent foursome (three boys and one at-first-unwelcome girl) playing a porten-
tous round of golf. The stories are sometimes choppy in exposition, but Brooks
has a knack for characterization that makes even the sketchiest individuals memo-
368 
* THE BULLETIN
rable. The first-person narrators of the first two novellas have engaging, believable
voices, and the supporting characters are well-drawn. The characters in Teeing Off
are not nearly as well-developed; the boys mouth far too many platitudes for their
age and adjust much too rapidly and sensitively to the presence of a girl in their
male midst. Still, there are some heartfelt moments that nearly make up for the
shallow typecasting. All the adolescents depicted are sporadically too arch and self-
aware, but the humor and humanity that Brooks allows them will draw readers
into the emotional heart of the tales. JMD
BUCHANAN, JANE 
Hank's Story. 
Farrar, 2001 
136p
ISBN 0-374-32836-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Hank has quite a dramatic story; sent west on an orphan train in 1923 after the
death of his parents, he and his older brother, Pete, are placed on a hardscrabble
Nebraska farm with the demanding Olsens. Mr. Olsen's drunken abuse soon
drives Pete to run away, leaving twelve-year-old Hank as scapegoat and farm labor
as well as butt of a schoolfellow's bullying. The increasingly lonely boy finds a
small solace in animals, which brings him together with local eccentric and animal-
lover Molly McIntire. When life at the Olsens becomes unbearable, Hank ven-
tures through a blizzard for the safety of Molly's barn, but that might not be enough
to extricate him from his troubled life. Hank is so beset that readers can't help but
feel for him; his isolation and sadness are poignantly described. The mistreated-
orphan story is largely predictable right up to its happy ending, however, and plot
points such as Pete's departure and Hank's relationship with the girls in his class
(one of whom featured in Buchanan's previous book, Gratefully Yours, BCCB 4/
97) are awkwardly interwoven and never satisfactorily explored. Still, there's pe-
rennial appeal to a story of a kid down on his luck, and aficionados who relished
Jake's Orphan may want to continue their orphan-train explorations here. DS
BUNTING, EVE 
Riding the Tiger; illus. by David Frampton. 
Clarion, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-395-79731-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Ten-year-old Danny, new in town and lonely, is intrigued by a passing tiger's offer
of a ride, and he mounts up. The tiger takes him through the neighborhood,
making his presence known and scorning people while sweet-talking his rider about
the power and respect that the tiger's company will bring to him; when Danny
thinks maybe he'd like to get off, the tiger makes it clear that dismounting is diffi-
cult and dangerous. Finally, though, Danny faces an ethical choice when the tiger
threatens a harmless, helpless man, and he manages a quick descent-which van-
quishes the tiger. It's hard to make a good picture book out of an extended meta-
phor, and the strain shows-there's definitely some heavy-handedness, and the
solution will be obviously simplistic even to young readers. Bunting does, how-
ever, manage a taut menace in the text, and the tension sharpens the atmosphere so
that it's clear this is no ordinary ramble. Though the human figures are sometimes
inappropriately cute, Frampton's woodcuts, grounded by extensive black and tinged
with dark mustards and reds, are strong and moody in the cityscapes and tiger
depictions, where the sharp-edged lines add to the impact; the smoky evening
lighting adds to the suspense. This isn't subtle and its sentiments aren't original,
but the offbeat exploration of a kid on the verge of trouble may provoke discussion
and contemplation in readers. DS
JUNE 2001 
* 
369
BURLEIGH, ROBERT 
I Love Going through This Book; illus. by Dan
Yaccarino. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
38p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-0288056-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028805-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
The narrator of this story about reading a story could be termed never to have
metabook he didn't like. He enjoys everything about this book, the highs and
lows, the easy meadows and the daunting dark woods, the landscape features and
the various people he meets in it; finally he reaches the end, but "the fun's not over
yet"-he'll just "walk around to the front of the book// and go back through
again!" The literary enthusiasm will be gratifying to adults and perhaps inspiring
to kids, and the metaphoric adventure made literal is an intriguing concept. Burleigh
(author of Black Whiteness, BCCB 2/98, etc.) isn't up to his usual standard, though:
the verse seesaws awkwardly and relentlessly along, and the narrative skips so lightly
over the adventures that it seems less a story in its own right than a summary
introduction to a real telling. Yaccarino's thickly modeled shapes bring some needed
solidity to the proceedings, and his topknotted protagonist provides a useful focal
point. There's an appealing compendium of chipper critters throughout the vari-
ous double-page landscapes, and the art includes a few diverting reminders, such
as painted holes in the paper "revealing" other pages and a readerly thumb ready to
turn over a new leaf, that this is a book-housed landscape. There are better book-
referential books around, but this has a cheery simplicity that may suit audiences
too young for those more sophisticated works. DS
CASELEY, JUDITH 
Bully; written and illus. by Judith Caseley. 
Greenwillow,
2001 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17868-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17867-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
Mickey's old friend Jack isn't so friendly these days ("'You used to be a mouse,
said Mickey. 'And now you've turned into a great big rat!'"), insisting on cookie
payoffs, breaking Mickey's pencil, and tripping Mickey in the cafeteria. Mickey's
parents give him advice, but nothing seems to help the situation until Mickey
comes up with his own solution. The bullying story is a familiar one, and the
happy solution (Mickey and Jack laugh together) seems more requisite than well-
grounded; the text is also quite lengthy for the picture-book format. Caseley capa-
bly captures Mickey's desperation, however, making clear just how haunted his
school days are with just a few incidents. The watercolor illustrations have a sturdy
simplicity that gives a note of reassurance to the story; it's not always clear, espe-
cially at the beginning, who is which character, but Mickey's worried mien is readily
identifiable. This isn't going to solve bullying problems, but kids may at least
appreciate the reminder that it's happened to others and that they survived. DS
CURLEE, LYNN 
Brooklyn Bridge; written and illus. by Lynn Curlee. 
Atheneum,
2001 
36p
ISBN 0-689-83183-8 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Curlee's titles are among the best starting places for awed middle-graders with
"How did they do that?" on their minds, and now the Brooklyn Bridge gets the
grandiose treatment recently accorded its more decorative cousins in Rushmore
370 
* THE BULLETIN
(BCCB 3/99) and Liberty (BCCB 5/00). Biography, social history, and introduc-
tory engineering are, as usual, precisely balanced, with human-interest angles (there's
tragedy aplenty associated with this marvel) spicing cogent explanations of cais-
sons and anchorages and diagonal stays. Curlee curiously relegates several dia-
grams and cross-sections to end materials, when they might have been more usefully
placed beside explanatory text. Readers might also wish, since figure drawing is
not Curlee's strong suit, that some page space lavished on Chief Engineer Roebling
and wife had been expended on more breathtaking views of the span and its sup-
ports instead. Nonetheless, this is a grand yet practical tribute to a grand yet
practical edifice, and children who dream beyond their Legos will be delighted.
EB
DEAN, Sis 
Racing the Past. Holt, 2001 
151p
ISBN 0-8050-6635-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Eleven-year-old Ricky Gordon is no stranger to trouble: he's lived his life under
the thumb of an abusive father, whose recent death has left the family stunned and
healing, and he's the target of bully Bugsie McCarthy, with whom he's had one
fight too many. Since the principal insists Ricky avoid further Bugsie battles,
Ricky eschews the school bus that's Bugsie's favorite taunting ground and instead
travels to and from school on foot; soon he's turning it into a regular athletic run,
improving time and technique and becoming somewhat of a local celebrity in his
attempts to beat the bus. Ricky's pleasure in his growing capability is gratifying,
especially since this is a kid who really needs to succeed at something, and his
bitterness about his father's mistreatment credibly seethes even as he's showing his
father's imprint in his own behavior. This is also a considerably different picture
of bucolic Maine than we usually see: the Gordons are dirt-poor and Ricky's
father kept their house in near-squalor, and both Ricky and his second-grade brother
swear like troopers a la the old man. The organization is problematic, however,
with misleading emphases, especially at the beginning, and strands and meanings
get somewhat confused. Nonetheless, readers will appreciate Ricky's hard-won
maturation. DS
DURANT, ALAN 
Big Bad Bunny; illus. by Guy Parker-Rees. 
Dutton, 2001 
26p
ISBN 0-525-46667-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
There's a lapine on the loose ("Here comes Big Bad Bunny./ He's coming to get
your money!"), and he's relieving the locals of their assets, taking corn from the
cashless little chick, a nut from the unmoneyed little squirrel, milk from the im-
poverished little goat. Finally, BBB wises up and hits the bank; Wise Old Bunny
at the bank responds by burying the would-be robber in sacks of money and only
lets him out on the promise of reform, whereupon Big Bad repents, makes restitu-
tion, and becomes Very Good Bunny. The rhyme doesn't really hop along and
the bunny's sudden rehabilitation isn't all that satisfying (though his acquaintan-
ces do miss the excitement of his robbing days). The notion of a big bad bunny is
this picture book's main allure, but it is pretty darn alluring. The illustrations
make the most of the concept, picturing the huge bun in sombrero and gunbelt
and spreading an even huger purple shadow across the desert on oversized pages;
the art's tendency towards sweeps of acid chartreuse is somewhat offputting, but
the bunny details (his gunbelt carries carrots, and that's what he uses to hold up
the bank) will tickle viewers. Despite its flaws, this may be just right to entertain
some young bunnies. DS
JUNE 2001 
* 371
ECCLES, MARY 
By Lizzie. 
Dial, 2001 
[128p]
ISBN 0-8037-2608-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-5
Feeling slightly shortchanged by her post-Christmas birthday, nine-year-old Lizzie
coopts Mom's old typewriter, determined to write fascinating stories of her own.
Each month of the year brings a different story: Lizzie tells of her dreaded swim-
ming lessons ("Even the dog swims better than I do"), the contest between Lizzie
and her best friend to see whose brother is the biggest pest, and class Secret Santas
(Lizzie gets the teacher). The tales are completely self-contained (and consequently
suitable for reading aloud), and they've got a Clearyesque sense of the dramas of
daily life. Eccles has an uncanny recall for sibling dynamics: there's no smarmy
adult appeasement here, just accurate relation of Lizzie's struggle for her share of
the pie between a superior older brother and a wannabe-Lizzie toddler sister (to
whom a fed-up Lizzie finally fiercely hisses, "My name is Liz-zie. With two z's and
no d's. You could try to get it right"). There's abundant truth here in an appealing
and readable package, and readers will find this reassuring as well as enjoyable. DS
EDWARDS, PAMELA DUNCAN 
Boston Tea Party; illus. by Henry Cole. 
Putnam,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23357-1 
$15.99 
M 
5-8 yrs
For the youngest listeners, Edwards recounts events prefatory to the American
Revolution in "House That Jack Built" styled verses intended to entertain as they
inform: "This is the king on his English throne/ who declared, 'Tax the tea!'/ that
was made from the leaves/ that grew on a bush in a far-off land/ and became part
of the Boston Tea Party." Clearly neither rhyme nor scansion figures into the
presentation, and although the cumulative construct reinforces facts through rep-
etition, the nursery-rhyme allusion unintentionally casts the coming armed insur-
rection as a rather droll affair. Cole's acrylic and colored pencil spreads generalize
the bad guys (i.e., British) as somewhat buffoonish snobs and the good guys (i.e.,
Patriots) as righteously outraged heroes. A quartet of mice serve as a sort of kibitz-
ing Greek chorus ("Dressing up as Mohawks will fool the British!"; "Make sure
you don't dump any cheese by mistake!"), offering background and keeping young-
sters focused on the action, but upstaging historical figures along the way. A clos-
ing scene shows a contemporary multicultural crowd at a fireworks display to
celebrate the Fourth ofJuly, and it is this connection which, in the end, may make
this title useful; an appended timeline may be of interest to listeners who suspect
there's more to this tale than soggy tea leaves and talking mice. EB
GALLO, DONALD R., ed. 
On the Fringe. Dial, 2001 
22 4 p
ISBN 0-8037-2656-2 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
The eleven short stories in this dark collection depict the suffering of adolescents
living outside the accepted norm. The table of contents is a who's who of young-
adult literature: Jack Gantos, Joan Bauer, Chris Crutcher, Nancy Werlin, Ron
Koertge, M. E. Kerr, Angela Johnson, and others have written entries specifically
for this compilation. Gallo's intentions are clear from his introduction, in which
he expresses the hope that the stories will "provide glimpses into the minds of
teenagers who are different from their more popular peers" and "offer thought-
provoking experiences that may result in greater understanding and tolerance of
others." Overall, the stories center on feelings of powerlessness and alienation,
372 
* 
THE BULLETIN
with little evidence of hope or humor. Thankfully, Koertge's "Geeks Bearing Gifts"
and Werlin's "Shortcut" don't depict geekness as a condition to be avoided at all
costs; their geeky characters, though put upon, are brave and sarcastic instead of
terrified and conciliatory. Crutcher's "Geeks with Guns" offers an unsettling,
mournful look at the survivors of a tragic school shooting and provides a strong
conclusion to an uneven collection. While the compilation as a whole has an
unfortunate tonal sameness, individual stories are thought-provoking and compel-
ling. Brief but earnest biographies about each author are included after each story.
JMD
GREENBERG, JAN 
Vincent Van Gogh: Portrait ofan Artist; by Jan Greenberg and
Sandra Jordan. 
Delacorte, 2001 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90005-8 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32806-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
Stellar art writers Greenberg and Jordan (authors of Chuck Close: Up Close, BCCB
5/98 and other excellent art titles) turn to their first portrait for older readers, with
excellent results. As they acknowledge in the introduction, it's hard to get past the
"more-or-less true" things people know about Van Gogh: "He was a great artist
who painted sunflowers. He went mad. He cut off his ear." The authorial pair
remedy that problem handily, vividly depicting the artist's troubled life from his
childhood in his father's parsonage through his doomed efforts to find himself a
professional niche to his obsessive, if not satisfying, creation of art. As depicted
here, he'll be magnetic to adolescent readers, with his furious rejection of conven-
tions, his impossible standards, and his absorption in his art to the point of ignor-
ing worldly matters (such as income, with which his brother fortunately provided
him); they may also absorb just what a difficult family member Van Gogh was and
how much he owed to the assistance of his puzzled family, particularly his loving
brother. The book also does a good job of putting Van Gogh into a cultural and
artistic context, discussing his relationship with artists of the time (several of whom
wanted to keep a safe distance from the unpredictable Dutchman) and artistic
movements (he rejected the prettiness of the Impressionists). Judicious use of
primary sources and well-chosen detail brings the account to brilliant life: the
prostitute to whom he gave his severed earlobe accepted his apology cheerfully,
noting that half the people in town were mad and he wasn't to worry; the Parisian
paint-store owner who took Van Gogh's paintings in trade sold one after the artist's
death only for exactly the amount Van Gogh owed him. Readers will see not just
the man but also the paintings anew after reading this biography. A helpful map
lays out Van Gogh's wanderings, and an insert with family photographs and color
reproductions of Van Gogh's work will be included. End matter will be exten-
sive, including endnotes, a glossary of artists and terms, a timeline, a bibliography,
and an index. DS
HATTMAN, PETE 
Hole in the Sky. 
Simon, 2001 
179p
ISBN 0-689-83118-8 
$16.00 
Ad Gr. 7-10
As the prologue explains, the year 2028 brought a lethal, quickly spreading flu to
the human race; now, in 2038, the diminished population is divided into Survi-
vors (all of whom have lost their hair, making them readily identifiable, and who
have suffered some permanent impairment), and those yet to catch the disease.
JUNE 2001 
* 373
Ceej-Charles Jacob-is sixteen, living a self-sufficient life with his uncle and
with his Survivor sister, Harryette, in rural Arizona; he's left on his own with his
friend, Tim, when it looks like there's trouble with the river that provides the
water supply and Tim's father, Ceej's uncle, and Harryette journey to open the
dam. When they fail to return as expected, Ceej and Tim take off after them, on
their way encountering Bella, a part-Hopi girl in search of the legendary Sipapuni,
place of emergence, through which they can reach another world. The three dis-
:cover that the lost relatives have been taken by the Kinka, a survivor cult, and they
determine to save them-but for some it may be too late. The deadly-flu plot is a
sci-fi standard, and though Hautman fudges on his science a bit the details of the
disease are narratively effectively conceived; the Kinka and their religious view of
their place are particularly ingenious and credible. The story moves considerably
more slowly than one would expect for such an exciting subject, however, and the
four different narrators (Ceej, Bella, Tim, and Harryette each get a turn) confuse
rather than enrich. The book is imbued with a certain millenarian vision, with
hints of the future for the children of the Kinka, for Tom and Harryette, and for
Ceej and Bella, who disappear into the place of emergence, but readers are more
likely to want a solid ending and the answers to some questions (does Bella die of
the flu she's contracted? What happens to Tim and Harryette?) than ineffable
mysteries. There's still some atmospheric action and philosophical explorations
here, and some young adults may find it provocative. DS
HEARNE, BETSY 
Wishes, Kisses, andPigs. McElderry, 2001 
133p
ISBN 0-689-84122-1 
$16.00 
Gr. 4-7
[Note: Books by Bulletin staff are given a descriptive annotation rather than a
review and code rating.]
Louise's reckless wish on an evening star sets off a chain of events involving a
forlorn pig, a persistent suitor, and a broken enchantment in this Babbitt-like
fantasy. JMD
HOGEWEG, MARGRIET 
The God of Grandma Forever; tr. by Nancy Forest-
Flier. 
Front Street, 2001 
[112p]
ISBN 1-886910-69-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Grandma Forever (she's going to live forever because she's ninety-three years old,
hence the name) comes to Maria's house to live in the attic that used to be Maria's
special place. The resentful child and her demanding paternal grandmother de-
velop a relationship based on family and Bible stories and on the fact that Grandma
Forever will answer any question (no matter how personal) with the candor of old
age. The text implies that Maria's parents are not religious; Maria herself, how-
ever, has her own sort of faith, including belief in the afterlife (she visits her mater-
nal grandmother's grave often, for solace and conversation). Grandma Forever is
less of a comfort, however: she and Maria clash and collude (including one esca-
pade where granddaughter takes grandmother to school as the subject of an oral
report), and the tensions of having a persnickety elderly relation living at home are
credibly evoked. Maria's observations about her world and the people in it are
based on a combination of empirical evidence and imaginative faith. The tone of
this novel (translated from the Dutch) is somewhat subdued despite the often-
374 
* THE BULLETIN
humorous content, and much of the action is understated. The stylistically un-
adorned text is reminiscent of Swedish author Maria Gripe (Julia's House, BCCB
3/75) in its blunt honesty. While peripheral characters are a bit sketchy, Grandma
and Maria are drawn in bold lines, and readers will find them memorable. JMD
HOOBLER, DOROTHY 
The Demon in the Teahouse; by Dorothy and Thomas
Hoobler. 
Philomel, 2001 
[208p]
ISBN 0-399-23499-3 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
This stand-alone sequel is a worthy successor to the Hooblers' The Ghost of the
Tokaido Inn (BCCB 9/99) as legendary Judge Ooka and his fictional adopted son
Seikei once again bring justice to eighteenth-century Japan. A string of arsons and
the murders of three young women seem to be related, and Ooka sends Seikei to
the Teahouse of the Falling Cherry Blossoms to observe and report on the move-
ments of staff and clientele. Seikei obtains employment as a menial worker and,
crouching in the background, begins to link fires and deaths to the eminent geisha
Umae, who entertains a host of her admirers each evening. As in any good murder
mystery, no solution is simple, and a tangle of twists and turns finds Seikei fighting
for his life in a climactic rooftop battle with the real villain. Ooka remains a
powerful and dignified behind-the-scenes presence, quietly wielding the political
clout necessary to keep an investigation moving while acting as intellectual mentor
to his would-be samurai son. Seikei is indeed a headstrong adolescent who makes
his share of heedless mistakes, but he's also a keen observer and able logician who
strives in all his actions to become worthy of rising to samurai status. The Hooblers
fashion not only a topnotch mystery but an engrossing tour of the "floating world"
Yoshiwara, where delicately adorned geishas hold powerful politicos in thrall and
where even the blameless pursue their midnight pleasures in disguise. EB
HOPKINSON, DEBORAH 
Fannie in the Kitchen; illus. by Nancy Carpen-
ter. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2001 
34 p
ISBN 0-689-81965-X 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
The Fannie of the title is Fannie Farmer, innovator of cooking science who estab-
lished the convention of specific measurement, but this story takes place before she
earned that fame. Here she's staying with the Shaw family as a mother's helper
because Mrs. Shaw is expecting a new baby, leaving young Marcia Shaw's nose out
of joint. Marcia is seduced, however, by the pleasures of working in the kitchen
with Fannie, learning how to bake biscuits, flip pancakes, and check for rotten
eggs, and Fannie finally puts her good information down in specific and informa-
tive notes that Marcia may follow on her own. Fannie's fame spreads, and she
finally leaves the Shaws to take a job at the Boston Cookery School while Marcia
makes sure her cooking lives on at the Shaw house. Hopkinson's sprightly narra-
tive is well-measured itself, divided into courses rather than chapters; Marcia is an
effective center for the narrative, making it light and tasty rather than merely nu-
tritious, and there's the occasional dash of zesty humor in her point of view (Marcia
finds Mother's obsession with the new baby "disgusting"). The illustrations are an
ingenious blend of line-and-watercolor and period engravings, bits of which are
inserted into the artwork and colored along with it. Carpenter makes Fannie a
composed, agreeably sharp-featured miss, while Marcia is a rich little dish in her
corkscrew-curled hair and perky ribbon; subdued colors suit the hand-tinted look,
JUNE 2001 
* 375
and imaginative details are occasionally startling (one pan of cake balances on
Marcia's head, Marcia's proper mother is caught licking her plate at the breakfast
table) but nonetheless amusing and telling. Ironically, the pancake recipe at the
end is a little short on information (how do you test the grill heat? How many
people does this recipe feed?), but it really doesn't matter. Fannie's good literary
company, and her impact is assuredly underestimated; why not link this to some
dramatic in-class demonstrations of the utility of specific measurements? A brief
note (though no bibliography or information for further reading) is included. DS
HOWARD, GINGER 
William's House; illus. by Larry Day. 
Millbrook, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7613-1674-4$22.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The scene is colonial New England in the spring, circa 1637, and colonist William
is determined to build a house "like the house he grew up in, his father's house, in
England." He builds a one-room house with few amenities for his wife and their
two sons. In August he digs a cellar; in October he replaces the thatch on the flat
roof with cedar shingles; in November he changes the flat roof to a pitched roof, to
offset the weight of the snow; in January he builds a new fireplace; come spring the
family welcomes cousins newly arrived from England. The building process is
oversimplified, leaving questions that neither text nor pictures address (replacing a
roof while it snows and building a new fireplace in the dead of winter are question-
able choices at best). Full-page paintings faithfully reflect the main action, while
half-page pen-and-ink drawings feature William's two sons engaged in seasonal
activities. Foreshortened and disproportionate figures mar the color compositions,
in contrast to the more precise drafting of the black-and-white art. The book's
overall impression is that the challenges of colonial life consisted of easily over-
come difficulties. The ending is abrupt, and only the liner notes indicate that the
point of the story is that life in the New World means letting go of the old ways.
Nevertheless, an adult with background knowledge of colonial lifeways will find
this a useful title for introducing kindergartners and primary graders to historical
New England. JMD
JANECZKO, PAUL B., comp. 
Dirty Laundry Pile: Poems in Different Voices; illus.
by Melissa Sweet. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16252-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16251-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
The "different voices" of the subtitle may sound like a standard characteristic of an
anthology, but in fact it's referring to the voices of the poetic subjects themselves-
this is a collection of poems where the usually voiceless get their time in the narra-
tive spotlight. Speakers include a scarecrow ("Scarecrow's Dream" by Nina Nyhart),
a household appliance ("The Vacuum Cleaner's Revenge" by Patricia Hubbell),
and plant roots ("Roots," by Madeleine Comora), as well as a covey of critters
ranging from a mosquito (in Peggy B. Leavitt's "The Mosquito's Song") to a cat
(in Carmen Bernos de Gasztold's "The Prayer of the Cat"). While entries from
poets such as Lilian Moore and Douglas Florian may be familiar, they take on a
different tone in this company, and many poems here will be new to readers. The
tone is light throughout but never cheap-the verses are sharp and deft, some
lyrical (" ... Or better yet, I hope/ for my swirling journey to end instantly/ on the
hot tongue/ of some shivering child ... "-Cynthia Pederson's "Prayer of a Snow-
376 
* THE BULLETIN
flake") or comic ("I am a young bacterium/ And I enjoy my work ... "-John
Collis' "Job Satisfaction"). Sweet's watercolors are somewhat more quirky than
usual, with some of the playful eccentricity of Brian Karas' work, and the animals
in particular have a slightly skewed charm. There are plenty of possibilities here for
performance as well as reading aloud (by kids as well as to them), not to mention
the simple pleasures of browsing; whatever the nature of the encounter, this is sure
to elicit some surprising sympathy for the previously unconsidered. DS
JANECZKO, PAUL B., comp. 
A Poke in the I: A Collection of Concrete Poems; illus.
by Chris Raschka. 
Candlewick, 2001 
35p
ISBN 0-7636-0661-8 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 4-7
See this month's Big Picture, p. 365, for review.
KELLY, MIJ 
William andthe Night Train; illus. byAlison Jay. Farrar, 2001 
26p
ISBN 0-374-38437-1 
$16.00 
R 
2-5 yrs
William is one of the few passengers on the night train who will not go to sleep
("he's switched on like a light./ He wants to get to Tomorrow in the middle of the
night"). After he's romped all over the train, William's mother shares a trick with
him to help the time pass, telling him to close his eyes and be quiet, and he dozes
off. Kelly's story is simple, and her soothing verse will lull listeners to sleep. Jay's
softly surrealistic illustrations complement the tone of the text perfectly, showing a
wide-eyed William in a hurry to get to tomorrow while the grownups around him
settle into the seats to rest. Endpapers and border spaces are populated by pillow-
like sheep which eventually make their way into the main space of the picture,
placidly grazing in a field as the night train speeds by, and William rides in the
night sky on a puffy sheep-cloud of steam from the train's engine. Design is out-
standing, as when the train moves right-to-left on the last page, creating an elegant
ending to all the left-to-right movement. Despite the lack of plot, the detailed
illustrations (in which readers can literally count sheep) and the gentle poetry make
this a solid bedtime story. Climb aboard. KM
KINSEY-WARNOCK, 
NATALIE 
A Farm of Her Own; illus. by Kathleen
Kolb. 
Dutton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46507-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
Town girl Emma not only adjusts to summers on Great Uncle Will's Vermont
farm, she fully embraces farm life-its predictable round of chores, the comforting
sounds, the closeness of animals, the satisfaction of homegrown fruits and veg-
etables. While her cousins plan to become doctors or scientists or teachers, Emma
shyly confides to Aunt Ada, "I want to be a farmer-like you." Her dream is a long
time in coming. When Will and Ada pass away, the farm is sold out of the family.
An opportunity finally presents itself to adult Emma, however, and she and her
husband purchase the rundown property and reestablish the family homestead. In
an age of disappearing small farms, this optimistic tale seems imbued with wishful
thinking; although Kinsey-Warnock dedicates this to her own farmer relatives Will
and Ada (and, according to flap data, the author and her husband still live on the
family's land), there's no evidence that contemporary city dwellers take up pastoral
life quite so easily. Kolb's watercolor scenes confer a romantic glow on sun-washed
fields, star-dotted nights, charmingly posed fauna (although old Jack, the horse,
JUNE 2001 
* 377
changes dimension most alarmingly), and a relentlessly smiling cast, yet they're
oddly drained of emotion. Viewers whose dreams are made of green fields and a
bright red barn may nonetheless appreciate the unabashed affection Emma holds
for the land. EB
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Interrupted Journey: Saving Endangered Sea Turtles; illus. with
photographs by Christopher G. Knight. 
Candlewick, 2001 
42p
ISBN 0-7636-0635-9 $16.99 
R Gr. 4-6
Beginning with the rescue of a Kemp's ridley turtle on the coast of Cape Cod one
cold November day, Lasky tells the story of the tenuous nature of the lives of sea
turtles and of human efforts to save them from extinction. Thematically titled
sections divide the text ("Stranded," "Emergency," "Risky Life," "Release," and
"Miracles") as the turtle dubbed Yellow-Blue (from the color of his new tracking
tag) is first transported to the New England Aquarium and then, after a ride on a
cargo jet, released into the Gulf Waters with the assistance of Richie Moretti's
Turtle Hospital. The book includes a panoply of turtle facts (a turtle nest may
include 100 eggs, the population of Kemp's ridleys had decreased from 40,000 to
2,500 in less than fifty years), an interesting contrast between joint individual and
institutional efforts to assist the turtles, and a map of turtle migration (though the
intent is slightly unclear: why would Yellow-Blue be placed back into the Gulf
Stream, only to be swept to Cape Cod again?). Knight's impressive photography
captures the gritty details of turtle rescue as well as the nobility of the species.
Lasky's respect and enthusiasm for her subject is clear, and the text will leave read-
ers more aware of human roles in species' extinction and preservation. Pair this
with George Ancona's Turtle Watch (BCCB 10/87) for some testudine fun. EAB
LERNER, CAROL 
On the Wing: American Birds in Migration; written and illus. by
Carol Lerner. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[48p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16650-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16649-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The picture-book format and trim size may not instantly attract middle-schoolers,
but the information in Lerner's study is thorough and challenging enough to ex-
pand a science unit or engross a novice bird watcher. Alternating spreads intro-
duce an aspect of migration (e.g. "Finding the Way," "Timing the Journey") and
focus on one or two species of birds that demonstrate a particular pattern or behav-
ior (mountain chickadees and blue grouse that migrate altitudinally; crossbills and
snowy owls that only migrate when food supply and demand on their home turf is
thrown off balance). Lerner is particularly effective in explaining relationships
between a bird's physiology and its need and capacity for migration and in describ-
ing the methods scientists use to collect migration data and observe bird behavior.
Spacious design allows plenty of room for detailed illustrations and helpful inset
maps displaying migration zones (although vermillion flycatcher and snowy owl
maps don't match the text as exactly as one might like); substantial chunks of
informatipn seem far less daunting when packaged in spreads with white space to
spare. It'would be a shame to relegate this volume to junior-high report writers;
perhaps there are some beginner adult birdwatchers who'd appreciate a crash course
in ornithology. EB
378 
* 
THE BULLETIN
LET'S COUNT THE RAINDROPS; illus. by Fumi Kosaka. 
Viking, 2001 
2 4p
ISBN 0-670-89689-6 
$15.99 
R 2-5 yrs
Ten short, cheerful verses about weather from John Ciardi ("Wouldn't You?"),
Aileen Fisher ("June!"), Christina Rossetti ("Clouds"), Margaret Wise Brown ("The
Leaves Fall Down"), and others make up this poetry collection for the youngest
listener. Acrylic paintings on gessoed canvas achieve a nubbly finish that adds
texture to the very simple geometric shapes that make up the uncluttered compo-
sitions. The little girl who romps through the pages with her dog no matter what
the weather is composed of triangles and half circles; her simple dot-eyes and an-
gular nose are surprisingly expressive. The stylized but child-friendly images in-
clude happy smiling faces on the sun and sunflowers, sheep-shaped clouds, and
laughing frogs. Listeners (and beginning readers, too) will appreciate the verve of
this easy verse. JMD
LEWIS, J. PATRICK 
Good Mousekeeping and Other Animal Home Poems; illus. by
Lisa Desimini. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83161-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Seventeen brief rhymes aim for the whimsical in their descriptions of animals'
imaginary abodes: "Oh, where would a Flamingo go?/ She'd go to a Flamingolow,/
A flaming hot pink bungalow/ Beside the steamy jungle-o." The rhymes run from
two to four to eight lines long, and, although their quality is uneven, some are
pithy and funny ("The house a Skunk would call a home a-/ Rises through a thick
aroma") and have vague echoes of Douglas Florian's work. Unfortunately, the
lengthy opening and closing verses that bracket the assortment of rhymes are forced
and awkward, and give the collection a contrived air. Desimini's mixed-media
illustrations, however, have a warped charm and twisted whimsicality that makes
them both surprising and appealing. The compositions feature far from realistic
animals in far from realistic settings; young readers may be inspired to invent a few
imaginary domiciles of their own. JMD
LILLEGARD, DEE 
Hello School!: A Classroom Full of Poems; illus. by Don
Carter. 
Knopf, 2001 
[26p]
ISBN 0-375-81020-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
There are fictional titles aplenty to drive away the creeps from tots heading off for
that mysterious institution, School. Lillegard (author of Wake Up, House!, BCCB
2/00) takes a lighter-handed, but equally therapeutic, approach, offering tiny poems
that highlight the realia of the preschool domain and make the coming experience
concrete and manageable. Not all her verses scale the heights of poetic brilliance
("Scissors": "Open shut/ Open shut/ A snippy pair,/ they're quick to cut"), but
many are quite pithy indeed ("Crayon": "Starts out tall/ with a fine pointed head./
Never grows up .. 
/ grows down instead"). Carter's classroom accoutrements,
rendered in foam board and plaster, conjure the homely familiarity of modeling
clay, and the textures and colors of the mixed-media illustrations compensate for
the occasionally cluttered compositions. Even before the first line of text is delivered,
children will recognize that they're on comfortable turf, with an overflowing
wastebasket that could be in the bedroom corner and a slide and swing set that
could be at the neighborhood park. From the banana-mouth, earmuff-eyed face
that grins welcome from the wooden cubby to the rhythm band instruments that
JUNE 2001 
* 
379
promise lots of noisy mayhem, school looks like a place that no kid in his/her right
mind would want to miss. EB
LIVINGSTONE, STAR 
Harley; illus. by Molly Bang. 
SeaStar, 2001 
[64p]
Library ed. ISBN 1-58717-049-3 
$14.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-58717-048-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-3
Harley is a llama with issues: he screams, he spits, he kicks, and he doesn't get
along with the other llamas. These character flaws do not keep a shepherd from
buying Harley to guard her sheep from coyotes, however, and Harley adapts to his
new home on a modern sheep ranch with surprising alacrity ("In the morning the
shepherd returns. Everything is settled. Harley is guarding the sheep. They are
his sheep now. The field is his field. What happened? Only Harley and the sheep
know"). Details of ranch life contained in the simple nonfiction text and mixed-
media art will capture children and provoke conversation. The text is sometimes
choppy, but the accumulation of events involving Harley, the coyotes, and the
sheep will keep the pages turning. Richly hued and textured illustrations add
depth to the easy-reader-type format. Pictures of Harley spitting grain at a trouble-
some ram, peering in the sheep-shed window to greet the new lambs, and sprawl-
ing on the ground, prostrate (and grinning) in the heat nimbly evoke his personality.
(The human figures are less cleanly rendered, but this isn't really their story.) Cur-
ricular connections will be easily made, and Harley himself is an endearing (if
ornery) character. JMD
MACY, SUE, ed. 
Girls Got Game: Sports Stories &6Poems. Holt, 2001 
152p
ISBN 0-8050-6568-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
There are probably more girls who embrace pain, sweat, and in-your-face compe-
tition than there are girls' sport stories to satisfy them; here Macy has assembled a
couple of fistfuls of tales and poems to redress the disparity. Besides the predict-
able girls on the diamond and girls on the basketball court, readers also meet girls
into tetherball, horsemanship, synchronized swimming, and even tackle football.
However, apart from this impressive range of sport, the collection is somewhat
programmatic, with a girl-has-problem, sport-saves-girl theme dominating through-
out. Jacqueline Woodson's darker, edgier entry "Beanie," in which the queen of
her street stickball team is elbowed out of the game when an all-male league is
formed, shines as an exception. Poems are earnest but pedestrian, from the clum-
sily mixed metaphor of Nancy Boutilier's "The Rhythm of the Strong" ("I am just
one link/ in this eight woman spine" to Grace Butcher's breathless tribute "Soc-
cer" ("We love our bodies,/ how strong they are, our legs, the way/ our thighs and
calves ripple in the sun"). While these tales can't match the muscle of a great girls
sports novel such as Virginia Euwer Wolffs Bat 6 (BCCB 6/98), athletes whose
tight practice schedules leave little time for leisure reading will appreciate these
quick takes on their fictional team sisters. EB
MCKELVEY, DOUGLAS KAINE 
Locust Pocus!: A Book to Bug You; illus. by Richard
Egielski. 
Philomel, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23452-7 
$15.99 
R 
5-9 yrs
What with Douglas Florian's Insectlopedia (BCCB 7/98) and Paul Fleischman's
Joyful Noise (2/88), this sequence of insect verse is in good company; the approach
380 
* 
THE BULLETIN
here, however, is even chirpier and more bite-sized, with each insect receiving a
quick couplet before the poetry darts off to the next subject. The reach is broad,
buzzing from bees to June bugs and scuttling from cockroaches to the lowly louse.
Even the weakest of the poems are entertaining, and at their best they deftly deliver
nifty sound effects ("Crafty crickets/ perch on pickets,/ chirp on porches, hide in
thickets") or pleasing puns ("The praying mantis/ prays for prey"). Egielski's wa-
tercolors, in full-page and spot art, have a Bug's Life flavor to their anthropomor-
phism, and with their jaunty demeanors and limpid bug eyes the insects quite
outshine the occasional human. Creepy and crawly and eminently browsable, this
conglomeration offers lively opportunities for readalouds, readalones, and occa-
sional solicitations of squeamish squeals. DS
MEAD, ALICE 
Girl ofKosovo. 
Farrar, 2001 
113p
ISBN 0-374-32620-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Informative but bearable, this "based on a true story" account of one contempo-
rary ethnic Albanian family is narrated by eleven-year-old Zana, who has grown
up in Yugoslavia under the "emergency law" imposed by Milosevic in 1989. She
and her family are rural villagers, traditional but also in touch with global moder-
nity (they watch Venezuelan soap operas and Italian racing on television). During
the war between the military and the Kosova Liberation Army rebels in 1998, they
experience catastrophic losses: a mortar shell kills Zana's father and her two younger
brothers, and Zana herself is gravely wounded in the leg. From that point on, the
novel gives a lot of attention to how Zana's recovery is affected by Serb-dominated
hospitals and sporadic international relief efforts; the story ends soon after the
NATO-imposed peace, when Zana returns from the hospital to her village, where
her family is living in a tent. Her remaining brother (who barely escaped death at
the hand of Serb soldiers) leads an attack on some privileged Serb neighbors, but
he is stopped by Zana, who still sees the daughter of the house as a friend. In a
little over 100 pages, Mead, the author of another novel about Kosovo (Adem's
Cross, BCCB 1/97), bears witness to the pain and isolation of children, as when
Zana views a Serb friend and wishes "something bad would happen to her so she
would know how I felt." The novel itself, however, does not make its point by
traumatizing readers: the terror and the tense tedium of this modern war is con-
veyed flatly: "My father and the tractor were destroyed.... Burim, too, had been
destroyed by the blast. I can't describe his body." Its effectiveness for American
readers lies in the clarity of presentation (a foreword gives additional context),
bolstered by experiential details (and brand-name products) that connect children
across the world. FK
MEYERS, SUSAN 
Everywhere Babies; illus. by Marla Frazee. 
Harcourt,
2001 [3 2p]
ISBN 0-15-202226-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
1-4 yrs
Meyers offers this rhyming paean to babies: "Every day, everywhere, babies are
born-fat babies, thin babies, small babies, tall babies, winter and spring babies,
summer and fall babies./ Every day, everywhere, babies are kissed--on their cheeks,
on their ears, their fingers, their nose, on the top of their head, on their tummy,
their toes." Granted, the repetitive form and the content here aren't unique, but
the text has a jolly bounceability in its solid evocation of the events in a bunch o'
JUNE 2001 
* 381
babies' day. Frazee's pencil and watercolor depictions of that bunch is what make
this title worthwhile; babies of all sizes, colors, and demeanors, engaged in all man-
ner of activities, romp, roam, and wriggle through the pages. Precise drafting and
plenty of action typify each spread. Toddlers are very fond of looking at pictures
of other younglings; this is one of those books that, though short on text, will be a
look-and-point lapsit hit. JMD
OLALEYE, ISAAC 
Bikes for Rent!; illus. by Chris Demarest. 
Orchard, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-531-30290-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Lateef lives in a "finger-shaped village called Erin in the rain forest of western
Nigeria." The boy is anxious to earn the money to rent a bicycle from Babatunde,
the bicycle man, and to that end he gathers mushrooms and firewood and sells
them in the market. When he has the money he rents-and learns to ride-an old
bicycle; soon he rides well enough for Babatunde to rent him a "new, big red bike
with a high and straight seat." When Lateef has an accident and damages the bike,
he works for the good-natured bicycle man to pay for repairs. Babatunde teaches
Lateef to rebuild and repair bicycles, and Lateef stays on to earn the money for a
new bike. Lateef's desire for a bicycle will be easily understood by young listeners,
and his delight in being able to join his friends as they do tricks on their bicycles
while whooshing down a steep hill adds immediacy to the action. Olaleye writes
with irresistible enthusiasm, and he captures the energy of the boys, the generosity
of Babatunde, and the determination of Lateef in a few well-chosen incidents that
show more than tell. The comfortably rounded shapes of the characters dominate
the open watercolor compositions. Subtle earth-toned backgrounds set off the white
shirts of Lateef and Babatunde, making them the center of attention on each page.
Friendly, effective storytelling and easy-to-see images will make this a readaloud
favorite. JMD
ORGILL, ROXANE 
Shout, Sister, Shout!: Ten Girl Singers Who Shaped a
Century. McElderry, 2001 
[16 8p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-81991-9 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
The chapters in this collective biography are organized chronologically by twenti-
eth-century decade, and featured singers include Sophie Tucker, Ma Rainey, Bessie
Smith, Ethel Merman, Judy Garland, Anita O'Day, Joan Baez, Bette Midler,
Madonna, and Lucinda Williams (who, along with Wynonna Judd and LeAnn
Rimes, represents the 1990s). The writing is chatty with an air of assumed inti-
macy (Orgill casually refers to the "girl singers" by their first names throughout);
biographical and career information about each woman includes unsourced quotes
from the women themselves and from their contemporaries. Quotations includ-
ing racial epithets and misogynistic language, while true to the eras being dis-
cussed, require more context than Orgill is able to provide in these brief biographies
in order to make them as understandable as they are shocking. Sidebars provide
historical background on and definitions of topics such as Vaudeville, silent mov-
ies, the blues, improvisation, folk songs, etc. A "What's New" section about the
impact of technological advancements (FM radio, television, CDs, etc.) is included
in nearly every chapter, as is a sidebar that describes the changing fashions each
woman wore during her career. A CD discography, bibliography, and index are
included. JMD
382 
* THE BULLETIN
PIERCE, TAMORA 
The Circle Opens: Street Magic. Scholastic, 2001 
300p
ISBN 0-590-39628-5 $16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Briar Moss, current green mage and former street urchin, is visiting the city of
Chammuri with his mentor, Rosethorn, when he discovers a young girl working
stone magic in the marketplace. The girl, Evvy, flees Briar and his curious ques-
tions, but his subsequent investigation reveals she is a runaway slave living on the
streets, making a meager living by magically polishing semiprecious stones. Com-
plications arise when Briar becomes embroiled in a war among rival street gangs, a
war instigated by bored noblewoman Lady Zenadia, mastermind of the Vipers
gang, who not only wants to control the streets but wants to control Evvy and her
magic as well. This second entry in the Circle Opens series has the cohesion
lacking in the first volume (The Circle Opens: Magic Steps, BCCB 3/00). The
action is fast and furious, and characterizations are precise (the reformed Briar is
an engaging rogue, and Evvy is a streetwise, sympathetic, and resourceful indi-
vidual). The final confrontation between Briar and Lady Zenadia after she kid-
naps Evvy has the pounding pace of a Die Hard finale; the fact that Evvy engineers
her own escape from Zenadia's clutches will leave readers more than satisfied. JMD
PIERCE, TAMORA 
Protector ofthe Small: Squire. Random House, 2001 
[4 16p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98916-1 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88916-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
In the third novel about Keladry of Mindelan (see BCCB 9/00 and 7/99), Pierce's
heroine becomes squire to Raoul of Goldenlake, Knight Commander of the King's
Own Guard. The author treads familiar ground here ("girl overcomes gender
barriers by being better than the boys" has pretty much been the theme of the last
two books) but rather than repeat the predictable, successful patterns of the previ-
ous titles in the series, Pierce (who, in her acknowledgments, thanks J. K. Rowling
for proving to publishers that kids will read longer books) has one hundred extra
pages in which to develop both characters and story. She extends the scene dra-
matically: an apparently unstoppable enemy gathers at the border, the struggle for
the monarchy gains intensity, and Keladry's vision in the Chamber of Ordeal (her
last test of knighthood) reveals the horrendous evil she is to fight. Keladry ages
from fourteen to seventeen in the course of the novel, and her rites of passage are
duly noted: first love, sexual awakening (she doesn't actually have sex but she does
prepare for it), and war bring new wisdom to the determined young woman. Despite
a prominent romantic interest, this novel is by and large an adventure story. Strong
imagery anchors the action; the pace is quick, and the conclusion is promising.
Unfortunate cover art makes the maturing Keladry appear much too young to
attract the intended audience, but a quick booktalk should fix that. Idealistic
Keladry has guts, and strong foreshadowing indicates that, in the next book, she'll
need them. JMD
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
Fat Camp Commandos; illus. by Andy Rash. 
Scholastic,
2001 
89p
ISBN 0-439-15527-4 
$14.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Brother and sister Ralph and Sylvia have been sent to Camp Noo Yoo, a kiddie fat-
farm, for the summer by their plump parents. Once there they meet Mavis Goldfarb,
a sharp and savvy kid who is furious at her archaeologist parents for sending her to
JUNE 2001 
* 383
the camp against her will. The three campers plot escape and revenge: they elude
supervision, hop a bus home, and set up camp at Mavis' secluded mansion (conve-
niently empty of her parents, who are off searching for fossils). The jolly ex-
campers become Fat Commandos, and their acts of sabotage include verbal assaults
on the skinny, artistic alteration of anorexic models on billboards and exposure of
a self-proclaimed "formerly fat" diet doctor who was never even pleasingly plump.
Short chapters and easy, funny language are a Pinkwater trademark, and fans of his
previous works will feel right at home here. Amidst the mayhem the author in-
cludes some discreet and heartening advice for the unhappily dieting: at the site of
a potential commando raid, Dr. Deepdip Cha-cha remarks "Getting some extra
exercise is probably the best thing you can do .... And most important, don't get
tricked into hating the way you look. The people who tell you that you have to be
thin to be a happy person are either idiots, or they're trying to sell you something
that isn't going to work anyway." While the plot is contrived and the staccato
chapters lack cohesion, Pinkwater has the diet-industry lingo down cold. Diet
books, weight-loss gurus, and appearance-obsessed media all get their turn on
Pinkwater's punny pillory. Rash's full- and half-page black-and-white cartoons
feature pudgy protagonists gleefully taking on the thin and judgmental. JMD
POWELL, RANDY 
Run If You Dare. Farrar, 2001 
[192p]
ISBN 0-374-39981-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Often oblivious to the world around him, fourteen-year-old Gardner is seemingly
unaware of his father's inability to get a job and his resulting depression. Money is
short, Mom's salary is barely enough, the family dynamic is tense, and Gardner
begins to get a small inkling of his father's rising desperation. His older sister
Lacey reveals her bitter thoughts about their potential ("People like you and me
... we're not meant to be hotshots. We're not meant for greatness. You're going
to hit smack up against that wall soon enough. The wall of breeding and heredity.
The wall of limitation. The world is going to put you in your true place"), causing
Gardner to take a closer look at his father's lost dreams and his own personal
ambitions. There's a lot of free-floating angst in this novel, along with extensive
dialogue that explicates characters' feelings, but there is little action. The resolu-
tion to Gardner's emotional quandary (he is burdened with Dad's revelation that
he intends to abandon the family and start anew) is anticlimactic and his decision
to "take his life and run with it," while heartening, is somewhat contrived. The
humor that made Powell's previous titles (Tribute to Another Dead Rock Star, BCCB
4/99, The Whistling Toilets, 11/96) fizz is often flat here, and the momentum is
slowed by the protagonist's low-energy interior monologues. Gardner is a dispas-
sionate narrator but that actually works for him; his sometimes ambivalent self-
reflection just may strike a chord with readers in a similar state of adolescent stasis.
JMD
RATCLIFFE, JANE 
The Free Fall. Holt, 2001 
[352p]
ISBN 0-8050-6667-5 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Shortly after her sixteenth birthday, Violet, known as Let, meets sexy nineteen-
year-old Henry. She's ensnared by his slow, cool sensuality, and she manages to
evoke some interest--or perhaps just sexual opportunism-in him. Meanwhile,
384 
* THE BULLETIN
there's Ryder, the sweet cowboy kid stuck at a local boarding school, who shares
Let's philosophical questionings and appeals to her emotionally and intellectually
("I liked Ryder. I really did, but it was like something inside of me wouldn't let me
like him all the way"). While ricocheting between the two, Let dulls her uncer-
tainty with drugs (Henry is amply supplied with coke) and booze (Ryder carries a
flask), crawling home at all hours to her ineffectual and embattled parents. Just
when she finally realizes that Henry is a dead-end for her and casts her lot in with
Ryder, she's hit with a family-rocking tragedy. Ratcliffe is a talented stylist, and
she's given Let a credible voice, especially as she grapples with the mystery of hu-
man dynamics and destiny ("That was one thing that always confused me in life-
how to separate individuals from their beliefs"); there's a hard and serious edge to
the picture of adolescent entropy and the moment-to-moment, incredibly foolish
decisions (though Let is wise enough at least to stick to safe sex). The book's
general architecture, however, doesn't support its substantial length. Though the
unhurried and meandering pace effectively convey Let's imprisonment in her
troubled life, there's an awful lot of book at a slow speed; Let seems as troubled at
the beginning and middle as at the end, so the foreshadowings and flashbacks
don't really have much contrast or impact. Though the book is (inexplicably) set
in 1994, it paints a picture that will be familiar to many young people today lead-
ing lives of which their parents have little knowledge. DS
RAU, MARGARET 
The Wells Fargo Book of the Gold Rush. 
Atheneum,
2001 
143p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-83019-X 
$18.00 
R Gr. 5-9
Certainly other authors have taken on the California Gold Rush, but Rau scores
extra points for her smooth narrative and breadth of coverage. The romantic lure
of gold and the frenzy it inspired are seamlessly integrated with such issues as
transportation, mining methods, camp booms and busts, collateral business ven-
tures, life in the mining towns, and final playing out of the lodes and the national
recession of 1854. Primary source materials from the Wells Fargo archives-from
business records to period illustrations-lend firsthand authenticity and a novel
slant on events. A typographical error dates the establishment of Sacramento as
state capital in 1954 (1854); nearly exclusive focus on the experiences of white
Forty Niners (minorities only receive cursory treatment) tends to gloss over the
challenges and contributions of others who pursued the same dream. Jerry Stanley
provides a partial remedy in Hurry Freedom: African-Americans in Gold Rush Cali-
fornia (BCCB 1/01), though, and together these titles offer a solid middle-school
introduction. A bibliography and index are included. EB
RINALDI, ANN 
Girl in Blue. 
Scholastic, 2001 
310 p
ISBN 0-439-07336-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
War looks a lot better to Sarah Wheelock than marriage to boorish widower Ezekiel
Kunkel, and since she's already quite handy with a Winchester, she chops off her
curls and passes herself off to the not-too-particular Union recruiter as Neddy
Compton. "Neddy's" first assignment keeps her in the safety of a Washington
hospital, assisting Dr. Hammond, but eventually the 2nd Michigan is off to
Manassas, and in the bloodbath at Bull Run. Sarah is separated from her regiment
and she makes her way back to Washington. A brief mission behind the enemy
lines proves her mettle to ranking officers, but it also inadvertently blows her cover;
she's drummed out of the service but referred to Allan Pinkerton, who runs an
JUNE 2001 
* 385
espionage ring. Sarah is assigned to infiltrate the home of society matron Rose
Greenhow, and although immediate physical dangers are somewhat diminished
on this front, Sarah's heart is in considerable peril from the attention of handsome
guard Sheldon, who may or may not share her loyalty to the Union. Sarah's
masquerade in the Army of the Potomac, which is fraught with more excitement
than her subsequent turn as a spy, comes off with surprising ease, and her stay at
"Fort Greenhow" (as operatives dub the site) isn't quite the nail-biter readers might
wish. However, Rinaldi has an undeniable knack for weaving romance into his-
tory, and Sarah's simultaneous attraction to and mistrust of Sheldon is convinc-
ingly portrayed. Rinaldi's many fans probably agree that her novels, even when
not quite at peak, are nonetheless reliably entertaining, and they'll welcome this
new title accordingly. EB
RODDA, EMILY 
Rowan ofRin. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
151p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029708-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029707-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Timid Rowan is the keeper of the bukshah (large, ox-like creatures) for his village,
Rin. His quiet days among the unthreatening domestic beasts suit him, and he
longs for nothing more than an uneventful life. When the river that waters Rin
ceases to flow, the villagers decide to send a band of their best and bravest up the
dragon-guarded mountain to discover the cause. Old Sheba, the only one among
them who knows the way, names young Rowan one of the troupe of seven who
must make the difficult and dangerous journey. In order to guarantee his partici-
pation in the quest, she gives the troupe a map that can only be read when Rowan
holds it in his hands. On the journey five of the questors are met and defeated by
their worst fears, and, one by one, they each turn back. Only Rowan and Strong
Jonn remain to complete the quest and save their people. The pacing is unfortu-
nately uneven-the opening pages spend too much time on the still-vague set-
up-and the conclusion is much too quickly resolved. However, once the journey
begins, the action is quick and the dangers just enough to be creepily terrifying.
Overall, the characters are sketchy, but the conflicted Rowan is a heart-grabber,
and his final act of courage in confronting the dragon is completely believable.
The perspective is a bit too adult (aside from Rowan, the troupe members are
grownups with adult fears and concerns), and much is implied but little is clarified
about the society itself. Still, this first volume in Rodda's series about Rowan of
Rin may appeal to younger readers looking to ease into more complex fare, and
they will appreciate Rowan's dogged determination to act in spite of his fears.
JMD
ROSALES, MELODYE BENSON 
The Adventures of Minnie: Minnie Saves the Day;
written and illus. by Melodye Benson Rosales. 
Little, 2001 
[96p]
ISBN 0-316-75605-9 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Minnie is a brown-skinned rag doll given to Hester May by her Grandmama Alfie,
who uses bits and pieces of cloth from family clothes (and family history) to make
her. When the energetic Hester finally goes to sleep, Minnie and the other toys
have a nighttime confabulation: good-hearted Minnie meets the snooty Prima
Donna, the Grumpy Old Bear, and the helpful Waddle Waddle, the wooden pull-
toy duck. Minnie and Scruffy (a stuffed rabbit with a broken music box that
makes him a "used-to-be" favorite toy) join forces to "save the day" when Hester's
386 
* THE BULLETIN
mother burns a butter pound cake meant for dessert. This nostalgic story is set in
the 1933 African-American Bronzeville neighborhood of Chicago, and historical
references abound: Hester's father is a Pullman porter, her older sister is a member
of the Bud Billiken Club (a club for African-American children still in existence in
Chicago today), and her babysitter, Mrs. Morgan, listens to soap operas on the
radio. Awkward phrasing and rhyming dialogue mar the text, but the combina-
tion of the activities of the human characters and the secret life of the talking toys
is still appealing. The watercolors feature bright-eyed, expressive people in an
idealized setting lit by a golden glow; the toys are sometimes rendered in a slick
soft-focus that adds to the sentiment of an already overly sentimental tale. A con-
cluding section entitled "Chocolate-Covered Memories" gives pertinent historical
information about the Bronzeville community and the rest of American society a
la the Dear America series, and it includes captioned sepia photographs, brief bio-
graphical sketches of famous African Americans, and quotes from individuals who
lived in Bronzeville during the 1930s. JMD
ROTNER, SHELLEY 
Parts; written and illus. with photographs by Shelley
Rotner. 
Walker, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8754-1 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8753-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
In a reversal of her concept in Nature Spy, Rotner shares picture clues and rhymed
riddles ("What's bright yellow, with seats in rows/ Up and down the streets it
goes"), urging the reader to guess the object described ("Red lights flash when it
stops for us/ climb on board the big SCHOOL BUS"). Subjects range from flow-
ers ("Petals on top,/ leaves down below"), to a dog ("A tongue to lick, a tail to
wag"), and finally, a home ("Climb up the steps, one, two, three, four ... I always
return after I roam/ To the place where I live-my house, my HOME"), and a
child's body ("A head on top and legs below/ All my parts will grow and grow").
Rotner's vivid photographs occasionally lack clarity of focus, but they evince a
range of invitingly bright colors in both the collages of parts and the coherent
portraits of the featured objects. This perceptual puzzle doesn't possess the se-
quential and detailed focus of Roger Bester's Guess What? (BCCB 5/80), but Rotner's
less exacting approach will be a cheery and useful addition to storytime guessing
games. EAB
SHAN, DARREN 
Cirque du Freak: The Saga ofDarren Shan. 
Little, 2001 
266p
ISBN 0-316-60340-6 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Darren Shan is (supposedly) just an ordinary kid who (supposedly) wrote this
book about his journey to the dark side. An oddly obtained ticket to an illegal
freak show places Darren and his best friend, Steve, in the darkness of an aban-
doned theater, where, to their terror and delight, they are treated to acts involving
Snake Boy, Wolf Man, and Mr. Crepsley and his performing pet, Madame Octa,
a very poisonous spider. Darren witnesses Steve's after-performance encounter
with Crepsley, whom Steve recognizes as a vampire. Knowledge of Crepsley's
vampirism doesn't stop Darren-enraptured by the spider Madame Octa, he sneaks
into the theater and steals her; a contrived chain of events then puts Darren into
Crepsley's power and forces the boy to become the vampire's servant. Narrator
Darren has an affected, too-adult voice, and the book's pace (it takes nearly a
hundred pages before Darren even gets to the freak show) is slowed by too much
explanation and not enough action (the descriptions of the players' interactions
JUNE 2001 
* 387
with the poisonous spider aren't nearly exciting enough to merit their length). In
fantasy-horror, the characters must be strong enough to anchor an unbelievable
premise in order to allow the suspension of disbelief to take place. Here, unfortu-
nately, the characters are emotionally shallow, and they lack both imagination and
believable motivation. The character of Mr. Crepsley is the most fully developed;
the author appears to find Crepsley more interesting than Darren, and as a result
he shortchanges his own protagonist. Horror and the supernatural have a built in
audience, however, and the action here may hold uncritical readers. JMD
SIEBERT, DIANE 
Mississippi; illus. by Greg Harlin. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16446-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16445-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
In a poetic paean to the "Father of Waters," Siebert traces the history of the river
and of the people who settle its valley and exploit its economic bounty over the
centuries. Although she creditably conveys her sense of awe at the vastness of the
river system and the diversity of enterprises along its banks, verses are often more
heartfelt than polished ("Then dreaming dreams of long ago,/ On down to Hannibal
I flow,/ Where happy memories remain/ Of steamboats, and a man called Twain")
and are occasionally even trite ("And where these many paths converged,/ Their
channeled waters rose and surged/ Down through the land, creating me-/ A river,
young and wild and free"). Harlin's watercolor scenes, despite their gauzy focus,
boast a brawny vitality that suits Big River to a tee and provide much needed
respite in an overlong text. There's simply too much iambic tetrameter for all but
the most ardent river rats to wade through, and armchair tourists will probably be
happier with Peter Lourie's straightforward Mississippi River (BCCB 10/00). EB
SPENCER, ANN, comp. and ad. 
Song of the Sea: Myths, Tales, and Folklore; illus.
by Mark Lang. 
Tundra, 2001 
198p
ISBN 0-88776-487-8 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 3-7
From Sedna to Scylla, from mermaids to sea-monsters, from pirates to ghosts,
Spencer cuts a broad swathe through sea lore and legend in this handsomely de-
signed volume. Interspersed among folktales from China, legends from classical
Greece, and other tales are bits of sailor superstitions and ocean lore. Full and half-
page black-and-white line drawings feature romantic yet robust images of gods
and (mer)men, and small ornamental details decorate the pages. Despite the some-
times fulsome writing and occasional careless phrase, Spencer's compact retellings
have a potent energy that will appeal to young readers and storytellers. While
detailed notes specific to each tale are not provided, a list of source books is in-
cluded. JMD
SPIRES, ELIZABETH, ad. IAm Arachne: Fifteen Greek and Roman Myths; illus. by
Mordicai Gerstein. 
Foster/Farrar, 2001 
98p
ISBN 0-374-33525-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Spires retells fifteen classical myths-Arachne, Pandora, King Midas, Callisto, etc.-
in the first person, each tale narrated by the story's protagonist. This is an interest-
ing if not untried approach to myths and legends (Orgel's We Goddesses, BCCB
11/99; McClaren's Waiting for Odysseus, 2/00), and making the pantheon per-
sonal sometimes results in more accessible tales. These retellings, unfortunately,
388 
* 
THE BULLETIN
are oversimplified and repetitive; the choppy monologues lack momentum, and
the tone is anachronistic. Full-page black-and-white line drawings open each tale,
and while the featured characters are expressively rendered, the scribbly lines are
sometimes overly busy. On the plus side, the sentences are short and the language
is direct, making the stories much easier for younger readers to access. Spires
doesn't include any source notes, but there is a glossary of names and places. JMD
THESMAN, JEAN In the House of the Queen's Beasts. Viking, 2001 
167p
ISBN 0-670-89285-8 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-7
Emily is thrilled to move to a new home, leaving old enemies behind, and she's
intrigued by Rowan, the shy girl from the house behind Emily's. The two become
friends despite the strictures of Rowan's stern and controlling father; they meet
only in Emily's treehouse, which Emily is decorating with Rowan's help and where
Rowan keeps her wood carvings of animals, the Queen's Beasts. Emily soon be-
gins to realize that Rowan's father is more than just strict, and she becomes in-
creasingly worried about her friend and unsure of what, if anything, she should do
to assist. Thesman (author of Calling the Swan, BCCB 11/00) has a smooth and
fluent style, and Emily's narration is an authentic blend of thoughtful and pushy.
The book underscores its theme by paralleling her uncertainty about her responsi-
bility in Rowan's case with her similar uncertainty about her older brother's clan-
destine escapades with a heedless friend, but that exploration is capably balanced
by a solid and humorous domestic strand. The "should I tell?" issue often gets a
preachy and oversimplified treatment; this is a serious exploration with no easy
answers in a solid story. DS
THOMAS, SHELLEY MOORE 
A Baby's Coming to Your House!; illus. with photo-
graphs by Eric Futran. 
Whitman, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-0502-1 
$15.95 
R 2-5yrs
Make room on your parenting shelf for this addition to the "new baby comes
home" genre. Thomas' language is simple but not simplistic, and she keeps her
audience firmly in mind when explaining the chronology of events that accom-
pany the imminent arrival of a new sibling, from the overt physical changes caused
by pregnancy ("The first thing you notice is your mommy's tummy. It gets big-
ger, and her lap gets smaller") to the multitudinous items such as cribs, strollers,
car seats, toys, etc. that crowd the home ("Who would think that a person so small
would need so much stuff?"). Easily digested bits of information regarding silly
grownup and responsible older-sibling behavior are scattered throughout the
friendly, reassuring text, along with a couple of warnings as well: "Don't bounce it
[the baby] or pinch it or you won't get to hold it very much"; "Sometimes it is a
good idea to go outside when the baby starts to smell, just to be safe." Cheerful
color photographs (many of the poses appearing to be candid) arranged in a casual
scrapbook style feature a multicultural cast of families and friends. This is a com-
forting introduction to a sometimes anxiety-inducing event. JMD
TORREY, MICHELE 
The Case of the Gasping Garbage; illus. by Barbara Johansen
Newman. 
Dutton, 2001 
[112p]
ISBN 0-525-46657-6 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Doyle and Fossey (fifth-graders Drake Doyle and Nell Fossey) are business part-
JUNE 2001 
* 389
ners-they're science detectives (with their own new easy-reader series). In com-
petition with their arch rival James Frisco, Mad Scientist, they employ science to
solve the mysteries of their schoolmates. In eight short chapters they save a girl
from a garbage monster (live bread dough making respiratory noises), create a
traffic bypass for frogs, extricate a truck stuck under a bridge, and ascertain the
author of a series of love letters. There are some entertaining science slants (and
kids who haven't previously heard the "let the air out of the tires" story will adore
the solution's elegant simplicity), but the narrative never lifts above the pedestrian
and the balance of concepts and character is flawed. Some of Doyle and Fossey's
experiments are fairly repeatable, though, and a fifteen-page section on activities
may galvanize some readers into beginning science or at least into clicking on
relevant websites. Black-and-white spot art and full-page illustrations have a loopy
intensity that adds a bit of spice to the story. DS
VAN STEENWYK, ELIZABETH 
Let's Go to the Beach: A History ofSun and Fun by the
Sea. 
Holt, 2001 
[144p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-6235-1 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Van Steenwyk presents not so much a history of beachgoing as some thematic
ruminations on seashores, lakeshores (and the odd river bank) and the pleasures
and diversions they offer. Some history necessarily figures in, particularly in her
discussions of the expansion of seaside amusement parks and the diminution of
swimwear over time. Many chapters, though, amount to little more than catalogs
of activities and appurtenances: "Things to Do at the Beach," "Sports for Surf and
Sand," "Beach Equipment," "Actors and Artists at the Beach." Enthusiasm too
often gives way to questionable overstatement ("[The sixties] was a decade dedi-
cated to the youth of the nation whose life's work seemed to be found only at the
beach"; "The Beach Boys were a major socioeconomic phenomenon of the six-
ties"), and the effort of reviewing American history in relation to beaches some-
times goes over the edge: "It was apparent that Lewis and Clark had discovered a
major waterway of transportation across the nation, eventually discovering a beach,
too." Still, there's an extensive gallery of inviting photos of sand castles, roller
coasters, surfboards, and vintage swimsuits, and come winter this could be just
what the doctor ordered for sun-deprived readers aching for balmier days and sand
between their toes. A timeline, bibliography, and index will be included. EB
VIORST, JUDITH 
Super-Completely and Totally the Messiest; illus. by Robin Preiss
Glasser. 
Atheneum, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-82941-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
The individual deserving of the titular title is Sophie, the little sister of the narra-
tor, Olivia. While Olivia is a tidy and orderly person and brother Jake is mildly
disheveled, Sophie is in a class of her own. Her room is a disaster area (she once
disappeared in the fallout when she opened her closet door), and she can wreck her
desk area at school or herself when she's going to a party in nothing flat. Olivia
and her parents entreat her to be more careful and neat, like Olivia, but it looks
like that day will be awhile in coming. This is basically a very long list of messinesses,
so there really isn't a story. Olivia's CAPITALS-laden narration smacks realisti-
cally of vexation, however, and kids both clean and hygiene-challenged will find
plenty in Sophie's habits to snicker at ("But once when our dad was combing her
390 
* 
THE BULLETIN
hair he combed out a whistle, a ring, and a piece of a sandwich"). The illustrations
depend on elaborate nets of fine squiggly lines, with watercolors redeeming Sophie
and occasional individuals and items within her orbit from the obscurity of black-
and-white; some of the scenes are too crowded even for close-up viewing, but
Sophie's electric presence will draw the eye throughout. The chaos is funny, and
Olivias may find the distance therapeutic-Sophies, of course, will just enjoy the
attention. DS
WARNER, SALLY 
Finding Hattie. HarperCollins, 2001 
227p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028455-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028464-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
The Hubbards do their best not to treat fourteen-year-old Hattie Knowlton as a
poor relative, but the newly orphaned girl thrust into their care has not been raised
according to their social standards and it quickly becomes clear to Hattie that the
advantages so graciously lavished upon her are supposed to be accepted with hu-
mility and repaid with unquestioning obedience. Hattie accompanies her older
cousin Sophie to her upscale boarding school and is promptly (and genuinely)
accepted into Sophie's clique, but a bullying schoolmate who knows Hattie's lowly
background and a boisterous nouveau riche girl rock Hattie's social boat and force
her to decide just how much subservience is too much. Warner draws inspiration
for Hattie's story from the schoolgirl journal of her own great-grandmother, em-
bellishing it with luscious swipes of sharp-clawed cattiness and opulently detailed
descriptions of finery that fans of nineteenth-century boarding-school stories crave.
While this won't draw tears like A Little Princess, it will satisfy any reader with that
secret dream of being a feisty orphan herself. EB
WEEKS, SARAH 
My Guy. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2001 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028370-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028369-6 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Guy Strang (from Regular Guy, BCCB 7/99 and Guy Time, 5/00) is appalled when
his mother announces her engagement to professional clown (and all-around weird
guy) Jerry Zuckerman. Guy's objection isn't just because Jerry is a little strange,
but because Jerry is the father ofLana Zuckerman, whom Guy describes as "mean
as a snake and about equally appealing." Lana, it turns out, is not thrilled by the
prospect of having Guy for a stepbrother, so, at the instigation of school chum
Buzz, Guy and Lana join forces to break up the engagement. The two unwilling
future stepsiblings make lists of what drives each parent crazy and, using the lists,
host a disastrous (and hilarious) dinner party. This title doesn't have quite the lure
of the previous entries, the plot concentrates more on the grownups than the kids,
but it's still a humorous romp. Weeks is a whiz at evocative imagery, and the
pictures conjured by her descriptions of Guy's mother's creative clothing are just
this side of antic (picture the bride in a dress made of styrofoam cups, reciting this
poem to the groom: "Most things on earth come and go,/ ebb and flow like the
sea,/ But our love is like Styrofoam,/ here for all eternity"). While the resolution is
overly optimistic, in the final analysis Guy is a funny guy, and readers will appre-
ciate his dilemma. JMD
JUNE 2001 
* 
391
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
Felix Feels Better; written and illus. by Rosemary
Wells. 
Candlewick, 2001 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-7636-0639-1 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
3-5 yrs
Poor little Felix overdoses on chocolate blimpies, and the next morning he's the
worse for wear: "'You look peaky, Felix,' said Felix's mama." Solicitous maternal
ministrations such as the provision of sugared prunes don't jolt Felix from his
malaise, "so Felix's mama called the doctor." Felix is at first uncomfortable with
Dr. Duck, but the examination proves painless and a dose of Happy Tummy sets
Felix back on the road to health. Wells vitalizes the introductory visit-to-the-
doctor reassurance with her characteristic spirited charm. The concise text is im-
bued with personality and telling accuracy, and the specifics ("Doctor Duck let
Felix's mama stay with him the whole time") provide a cozy demystification of the
medical encounter. Thick colored frames add to the sense of control and enclo-
sure, but fuzzy little Felix has presence that exceeds all boundaries; in his healthy
state he's gleefully bouncing off the bed, but when under the weather, his eyes
worried, his little guinea-pig mouth pouting, he's practically a rodent Camille.
This has plot enough to be a successful story in its own right, but it's also much
more credible than self-interested parents when it comes to encouragement about
trips to the doctor; prescribe a copy for the waiting room of your favorite pediatri-
cian. DS
WILCOX, BRIAN 
FullMoon; by Brian Wilcox and Lawrence David; illus. by Brian
Wilcox. 
Doubleday, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-385-32792-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A boy's birthday gift from his grandmother, a crystal globe of her home city, in-
spires a nighttime journey. He hitches himself to the moon and orders it to take
him to his grandmother, and he's taken through a fantastical night sky filled with
amusement park rides, flying cowboys, and circus acts (he also swings low enough
to encounter magic on the ground), until finally he ends up at a big party on the
Statue of Liberty, where his grandmother (astride an elephant) receives him with
delight. This is essentially a dream narrative (complete with the "And then I woke
up" ending), including the alluring details and the general absence of logic; as a
consequence it doesn't really hold together as a story, and the elements aren't
particularly inventively employed. Wilcox's soft monochromatic illustrations dis-
play dream and non-dream world in shades of gray; while this palette adds a hazy
and effective atmosphere it also makes the vision sometimes uninterestingly ho-
mogeneous, undercutting the fascination of the dream elements. Those elements
are still worth pursuing, however, and kids will enjoy scoping out the illustrations
in search of entertaining items and facets of Manhattan. Despite the lack of edge
and focus, this is a pretty sequence of nocturnal imaginings. DS
WILSON, NANCY HOPE 
Mountain Pose. 
Farrar, 2001 
233p
ISBN 0-374-35078-7 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
At the death of her estranged grandmother, Aurelia, Ellie Dunklee is bequeathed
Hart Farm and a suitcase of old family diaries. Ellie and her best friend, Leese,
start reading through the diaries, and they begin to find eerie coincidences, begin-
392 
* THE BULLETIN
ning with a Sara Evans, with whom Ellie shares a birthday. As Ellie reads farther
into the diaries, she begins to unravel the story of her mother's family, while re-
maining perplexed by sections hidden in code. She seeks assistance from Mary, an
old friend of her mother's who was recently Aurelia's neighbor and chosen lawyer,
and finds that the code illuminates dark family secrets from generations ago, ac-
counting for Aurelia's odd behavior. The story seems disparate, with references to
Aurelia's estrangement, her daughter's psychological therapy, yoga poses (yoga is
used as a framing device for the book-beginning and ending with the Mountain
Pose of the title), Ellie's dad's upcoming tenure review, and his distant girlfriend,
until the pieces begin to fit together and the plot gains its own life, just as the
pieces of Aurelia's story come together to reveal the complex bonds of family and
friendship. Wilson chooses to resolve the story without wrapping it up neatly,
which makes for a powerful conclusion despite the overcomplicated narrative. An
author's note on the historical codes in the book is appended. EAB
WULFFSON, DON L. 
The Kid Who Invented the Trampoline: More Surprising Sto-
ries about Inventions. Dutton, 2001 
[128p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-46654-1 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Rather than examine a handful of inventions in depth, Wulffson simply holds
forth on lots of stuff-from false teeth to rubber boots, from leotards to toilet
paper. Several dozen items step alphabetically into the spotlight, and it's pretty
obvious that the page or two allotted to each cannot begin to accommodate a
serious history (e.g., the camera is dispatched in five paragraphs, one of which is a
mere sentence long). No source notes are provided, and without such citation
readers may rightly begin to question how much is promotional lore and how
much is the honest-to-gosh truth. Furthermore, Wulffson occasionally overplays
his hand at wooing an audience with chummy, breathless informality: "It sounds
too silly to be true. But the first-known baby bottle was a dried cow's udder!"
(ust how silly is this? What else is a cow's udder for?) Still, this is a browser's
Valhalla, with oodles of pictures and nifty sidebar clips ("In eighteenth century
Europe, people took to shaving off their eyebrows and attaching fake ones of mouse
skin"). Hand this to a "reluctant reader" and watch the pages fly. EB
YACCARINO, 
DAN 
Oswald the Octopus; written and illus. by Dan
Yaccarino. 
Atheneum, 2001 
[34 p]
ISBN 0-689-84252-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4 -7 yrs
Oswald is an engaging octopus who's embarking on life in Big City along with his
dog, Weenie. The move hits a hitch when his attempts to get his piano up the
stairs backfire, and it starts rolling down the street past various denizens of the
neighborhood. Henry the Penguin, his friend Daisy, and other locals lend a hand
and, powered by a few treats, they manage to install the piano in Oswald's new
place and celebrate with music and dancing. When not starring in picture books,
Oswald features in a Nickelodeon network cartoon, and this title does suggest the
introductory first episode; there's less plot here than situation and character ap-
pearance, and though the characters are appealing, audiences will be waiting for
something active to happen. There's a cozy and cheerful feel here, however, and
the cast is worth watching. Oswald is a round ball of royal-blue octopus sporting
JUNE 2001 
* 
393
a fetching derby perched on his head, and Weenie is, of course, a wiener dog; along
with the offbeat but charming cast of Henry the Penguin, Daisy the daisy, Egbert
and Leo the egg twins, Madame Butterfly and her daughter Catriona the caterpil-
lar, they float in an airy background of the palest cream, which presumably is
oceanic enough to support Oswald. This may become more significant in context
with the cartoon or with future volumes, and the friendly and unusual cast may be
enough to appeal to young viewers even without additional context. DS
ZINNEN, LINDA 
The Truth about Rats, Rules, and Seventh Grade. HarperCollins,
2001 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028800-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028799-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Larch Waysorta hasn't made it to seventh grade without understanding the unspo-
ken rules of her family, especially the rule that forbids her from asking her mother
about the death of her father: "Do not ask Elaine Mae Waysorta (mother) a direct
question about her husband, Christopher Allen Waysorta (deceased)." A bright
and funny girl, she finds this restriction annoying but acceptable, and she concen-
trates instead on the humorous travails of junior high. It's therefore quite a shock
to her when, on a class assignment to interview the school janitor, she finds out
that her mother was driving the car in the accident in which her father died. Larch
reacts with fury, considering her mother her father's murderer, but the rules have
been so inculcated that she's having a hard time even mentioning the subject.
Despite the serious theme, this is quite a breezy and funny book, which melds its
somber subject with lighter subplots such as a stray dog's initially helpful ratcatching
and Larch's friend's burgeoning affection for the handsome class nuisance. Larch
has a witty voice ("When I look around our class and think, 'Well, here's what
we'll be dragging to the high school prom,' honestly, I get sick to my stomach"),
and the book provides some effective slapstick scenes (the notion of a rat up the
trouser leg will stay in many readers' minds). Larch's anger is also understandable,
however; though touches of the resolution are contrived, her obsession and its
leaking out into the rest of her life rings true. This will be just right for kids
looking for daily-life comedy with a serious edge. DS
394 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Lehr, Susan, ed. Beauty, Brains, andBrawn: The Construction ofGender in Children's
Literature. Heinemann, 2001. Paper ed. ISBN 0-325-00284-3; $21.00. 211 p.
Susan Lehr, professor of Children's Literature and Reading at Skidmore College in
New York, has compiled a collection of fourteen essays on gender in contempo-
rary children's literature. In the opening essay Lehr poses the question, "When we
talk about female and male, what is actually biologically based?"and then proceeds
to differentiate between the terms "sex" and "gender." Deborah Thompson takes
on the publishing phenomenon of the Harry Potter series and finds disappoint-
ingly limiting roles for females in the popular titles; Barbara Chatton discusses
illustrative images of boys and girls in children's picture books and the manner in
which preschoolers "typically assign gender to characters using gender stereotypes."
In the only essay that directly addresses images of boys and men in children's
literature, Daniel P. Woolsey discusses coming of age as a universal process. Belinda
A. Louie cites "deep-seated socialized thinking" as a barrier to eliminating gender
bias in children's literature, and in a call-to-arms essay, Kathy G. Short argues for
a conscious and deliberate choice of politically aware pedagogy. While the re-
search quality of the essays is uneven, the questions raised by this title are vital, and
they will provoke much needed discussion. Ten author profiles are also included.
JMD
Van Orden, Phyllis. Selecting Books for the Elementary School Library Media Center:
A Complete Guide. Neal-Schuman, 2000. Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-368-32;
$49.95. 212p.
This useful introduction focuses on book-selection issues in school libraries, but
public libraries will find this title equally helpful. Van Orden opens with chapters
about establishing and applying general criteria for book selection, reflecting di-
versity in the collection, and using selection tools. Subsequent sections address
basic criteria for evaluating particular genres (picture books, fiction, folktales, po-
etry, nonfiction, reference books, etc.), and the author emphasizes the importance
of practitioners' having a wide range of knowledge regarding the available litera-
ture. Each chapter includes references, recommended resources, representative
authors (and illustrators, where applicable), and bibliographic information for books
mentioned in the text. Well-organized and cleanly designed, this title would be a
boon for new librarians or paraprofessionals trying to get a handle on what can be
a daunting task. Use this with Jane Gardner Connor's Children's Library Services
Handbook for a crash course in practical library management. A glossary and an
index are also included. JMD
JUNE 2001 
* 395
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Pierce
Protector
African Americans-fiction: Rosales
Art and artists: Greenberg
Aunts-fiction: Alexander
Babies: Thomas
Babies-stories: Meyers
Beaches: Van Steenwyk
BEDTIME STORIES: Kelly;
Wilcox
Bicycles-stories: Olaleye
BIOGRAPHIES: Greenberg;
Hopkinson; Orgill
Birds: Lerner
Birthdays-stories: Ashman
Books and reading-stories: Burleigh
Bridges: Curlee
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Eccles;
Hautman; Hearne; Powell;
Thesman
Brothers-fiction: Buchanan
Bullies-fiction: Deans
Bullies-stories: Caseley
Child abuse-fiction: Deans
Civil War-fiction: Rinaldi
Colonial life: Howard
Cooking: Hopkinson
Cousins-fiction: Warner
Crime and criminals-stories:
Durant
Death and dying-fiction: Brooks;
Hogeweg; Mead; Zinnen
Detectives-fiction: Torrey
Diets-fiction: Pinkwater
Doctors-stories: Wells
Dreams-stories: Wilcox
Drug abuse-fiction: Ratcliffe
Ecology: Lasky
Ethics and values: Brooks; Bunting;
Gallo; Olaleye; Powell; Thesman
Families-fiction: Ratcliffe
FANTASY: Alexander; Hearne;
Pierce Circle; Pierce Protector;
Rodda; Shan
Farms-stories: Kinsey-Warnock
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Weeks; Wilson
Fathers and sons-fiction: Deans;
Powell
Fears-fiction: Rodda
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Spencer
Food and eating: Hopkinson
Friendship-fiction: Pinkwater;
Shan; Thesman; Torrey
FUNNY STORIES: Ashman;
Pinkwater; Weeks
Gangs-fiction: Pierce Circle
Gold Rush: Rau
Grandmothers-fiction: Hogeweg
Grandmothers-stories: Kinsey-
Warnock; Wilcox
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Buchanan; Hoobler; Rinaldi;
Rosales; Warner
History, U.S.: Curlee; Edwards;
Hopkinson; Howard; Orgill;
Rau; Van Steenwyk
History, world: Greenberg
HORROR: Shan
Houses-poetry: Lewis
Illness-fiction: Alexander
Illness-stories: Wells
Insects-poetry: McKelvey
396 
* THE BULLETIN
Inventions: Wulffson
Japan-fiction: Hoobler
Language arts: McKelvey; Janeczko
Poke; Let's; Lewis
Llamas: Livingstone
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Hearne; Pierce Circle
Magic and magicians-stories:
Ashman
Miners and mining: Rau
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Hearne; Zinnen
Mothers and sons-fiction: Weeks
Mothers and sons-stories: Kelly;
Wells
Moving-stories: Yaccarino
MYSTERIES: Hoobler
MYTHOLOGY, CLASSICAL:
Spires
Nature study: Lasky; Lerner
Neatness-stories: Viorst
Nigeria-stories: Olaleye
Ocean-stories: Spencer
Orphans-fiction: Buchanan;
Warner
Pigs-fiction: Hearne
POETRY: Janeczko Dirty; Janeczko
Poke; Let's; Lewis; Lillegard;
McKelvey
Rabbits-stories: Durant
Ranching: Livingstone
Reading aloud: Eccles; Hogeweg;
Janeczko Dirty; Janeczko Poke;
Lewis; Spencer; Spires
Reading, beginning: Let's
Reading, easy: Howard; Torrey
Religion-fiction: Hogeweg
Religious instruction: Bedard
Revolution, American: Edwards
RHYMING STORIES: Ashman;
Durant; Meyers
RIDDLES: Rotner
Rivers-poetry: Siebert
Saints-stories: Bedard
School-poetry: Lillegard
School-stories: Caseley
Science: Lerner
Science-fiction: Torrey
SCIENCE FICTION: Hautman
Secrets-fiction: Wilson
Self-esteem-fiction: Pinkwater
Sheep: Livingstone
SHORT STORIES: Gallo; Macy
Singers: Orgill
Sisters-stories: Viorst
Sports: Macy
Sports-poetry: Macy
Storytelling: Bedard; Spencer; Spires
Storytime: Let's; Rotner
SURVIVAL STORIES: Hautman
Tigers-fiction: Bunting
Toys-fiction: Rosales
Trains-stories: Kelly
Turtles: Lasky
Vampires-fiction: Shan
Voyages and travel-stories: Kelly
War-fiction: Mead
Weather-poetry: Let's
Wishes-fiction: Hearne
Wolves-stories: Bedard
Women's studies: Orgill
Writers and writing-fiction: Eccles
S"Eighteen slaphappy poems play nimbly with words, names,
and crazy situations. Grossman goes for the yucks with these
loopy rhymes, but there's a hint of sophistication... and there
are a number that have the mischief of a Shel Silverstein
poem. Hawkes is the perfect zany artist to interpret these silly
poems with images that would draw laughs even without the
words. His deep-dish colors mind the music of the footwork
of Grossman's highly visual wordplay."
-Starred 
review / Kirkus Reviews
"r "[This] outlandish collection of original verses ... [manages] to
tap into a verbal and visual slapstick that gives kids a literary
version of The Three Stooges... crass, cruel, and, for many,
a laugh-out-loud knee-slapper."
-- Starred review / The Horn Book
Ages 3-7. $14.95 Tr (0-06-028010-7); $14.89 Lb (0-06-028758-6)
IkLaura Geringer Books An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
JUST
AROUND
THE
CORNM
1Pe-1s sy
" 
"A delightful collection of 26 short poems on topics
including umbrellas, the classroom, cookies, and the
windowsill. The attractive layouts, varied type sizes
and colors, and accomplished [full-color] illustrations
add to the appeal. A charming partnership of inspired
language and design."
-
Starred review / School Library Journal
4E "More sweet kernels of verbal and visual poetry. This
silky gathering is an irresistible invitation to harvest
library shelves for Stevenson's four previous
collections. Time spent stalking this poet is never
frittered away." -
Stared review / Kirkus Reviews
Ages 8 up. $1495 Tr (0-688-17303-9); $14.89 Lb (00-06-29189-3)
-
Also by James Stevenson
Sweet Corn 
Cornflakes
$5.95 Pb (0-688-17304-7) 
$14.95 Tr (0-688-16718-7)
Popcorn 
Candy Corn
$14.95 Tr (0-688-15261-9) 
$15.95 Tr (0-688-15837-4)
SGreenwillow Books An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
I
rKlODCKUMD I
WRK 
EDI
"The true tale of [Manjiro, also known as John Mung]
who, after being shipwrecked in 1841, was rescued by an
American whaling ship, [was] educated in New England,
and returned home to become an honored samurai. With
its large, well-chosen illustrations [this] fluid story about a
fascinating person packs a lot of excitement and drama."
-Starred 
review /School Library Journal
S"Blumberg hooks readers with anecdotes that astonish ...
[an] outstanding biography." -Starred 
review/ALA Booklist
"An absorbing tale ... [that] combines high adventure with
vivid historical detail to open a window onto the past."
-Starred 
review /Kirkus Reviews
Ages 8 up. $16,95 Tr (0-688-17484-1); $16.89 Lb (0-06-029365-9)
-
Rhoda Blumberg's Newbery Honor Book
Commodore erry in the Land of the Shogun
Ages 8 up. $18.95 Tr (0-688-03723-2)
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
&;• • 
•6--)
LaF^-^
A "Hines [pairs] twenty seasonal poems with spectacular quilted
and appliqued piecework scenes . .. demonstrating dazzling
mastery of color and pattern. The poetry is brilliant, too.
Even readers with no interest in [quilting] will admire this
tour de force." 
-Starred 
review / Kirkus Reviws
"Hines takes her quilter's stash of fabric swatches and her
wordsmith's metaphors for memories of the seasons, and
pieces together a unified artistic whole. An outstanding book."
-Starred 
review I Publishers Weekly
"This lovely book combines the intricacies of quilting with
the wonders of the changing seasons. A thoughtful offering."
-Starred 
review / ALA Booklist
Ages 5 up. $15.95 Tr (0-688 16%3-5); $15.89 Lb (0-6t8-194-3)
SGreenwillow Books An itprlt of HarperColmiisPubsihrs
1350 Avenue ot theAmericas, N'w ork NY 
't 
N 
19 www. harperchild rens, c
HEAR THE VOICES OF Ar
homas Jefferson: Letters
'om a Philadelphia
ookworm
y Jennifer Armstrong
-890817-30-9,
residents Day,
ebruary 19, 2001
Theodore Roosevelt: Letter.
from a Young CoalMines
By Jennifer Armstrong
1-890817-27-9
President's Day
February 19, 2001
raham Lincoln: Letters
m a Slave Girl
Andrea Davis Pinkney
90817-60-0
ay 2001
WINSLOW PRESS
CONNECTING THE MAGIC OF THE
BOOK WITH THE WONDER OF THE WEB
DISCOVER DEAR MR. PRESIDENT'S
INTERACTIVE WEB SITE WITH WORLDWIDE
LINKS, GAMES, ACTIVITIES, AND MORE AT
WINSLOWPRESS.COM
MERICA'S HISTORY
The Dear Mr. President- series
brings American history alive through
fictitious correspondence between a
president and a young person. The
captivating letters, by notable children's
book authors, allow the reader to learn
just what it was like to live during the
historical period of that president, and
provide insight into the president, his
family life, his personality, and his views
on political issues of the time.
A special and unique feature of the
Dear Mr. PresidentM series is the
use of the interactive Web footnotes
throughout each book that refer readers
to its own Web page at winslowpress.com
for further information on a particular
topic. There they will find primary
source materials, links, historical sites,
interactive games, and activities.
ALL BOOKS:
$8.95, Hardcover, 6 x 81/2
Ages: 9-12, 128 pages
Special features: each book has two
colors and includes photographs, line
drawings, an index, a biography of the
president, a time line, and a glossary
when appropriate.
COMING SOON:
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, George
Washington, John Quincy Adams,
James Madison, Woodrow Wilson,
Harry S. Truman, John E Kennedy,
Dwight Eisenhower
Kppn unn 
Teach j'g k
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
4 
1
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A.
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
0008-9036(2 
II0010 
I 6)54:10 
1
0008-9036(200106)54:10;1 -G
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2000 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age, or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccbl
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at our homepage: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
i':31. -·;-~1~-i""~~ ~i
