ILLINGI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
SHARON CREECH
LOVE
THAT
DOG
a 
n ove l
-2- 
"Creech continues to explore
new writing paths with her latest [novel],
written as free verse from the viewpoint of
a middle-school boy named Jack. Jack's
class assignments incorporate responses
to eight well-known poems (included in
an appendix) and gradually reveal the
circumstances, and Jack's hidden feelings,
about the loss of his beloved dog. ...
This really special triumph is bound to be
widely esteemed by Creech's devoted
readers." -Starred 
review / Kirkus Reviews
-
"By exposing Jack and readers to
the range of poems that moves Jack,
Creech conveys a life truth: pain and joy
exist side by side. For Jack and for
readers, the memory of that dog lives on
in his poetry. Readers will love that dog,
and this book."
--Starred review / Publishers Weekly
S"Creech has created a poignant,
funny picture of a child's encounter with
the power of poetry. This book is a tiny
treasure."
-Starred review / School Library Journal
Ages 8-12. $14.95 Tr (0-06-029287-3)
$14.89 Lb (0-06-029289-X)
Among Sharon Creech's Novels
Walk Two Moons
1995 Newbery Award
Ages 8-12. $15.95 Tr (0-06-023334-6); $15.89 Lb (0-06-023337-0);
$5.95 Pb (0-06-440517-6)
The Wanderer
A 2001 Newbery Honor Book
Ages 8-12. $15.95 Tr (0-06-027730-0); $15.89 Lb (0-06-027731-9)
-- Joanna Cotler Books An imprint of HarpersCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
~----y 
-
-- I 
--- 
-1
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 2001
Vol. 55 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
91 
THE BIG PICTURE
Rainbow Boys by Alex Sanchez
92 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
98 
* The Stable Rat and Other Christmas Poems by Julia Cunningham; illus.
by Anita Lobel
106 * Slap Your Sides by M. E. Kerr
108 * Fat Cat: A Danish Folktale ad. by Margaret Read MacDonald; illus. by
Julie Paschkis
118 * The Big Dig: Reshaping an American City by Peter Vanderwarker
119 * The Animals' Christmas Carol ad. and illus. by Helen Ward
121 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
122 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Sabrina Austin
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road,
Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O.
Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2001 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Jack Louth from Rainbow Boys ©2001. Used by permission of Simon &
Schuster Books for Young Readers.
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 91
THE BIG PICTURE
Rainbow Boys
by Alex Sanchez
Young adult literature is often populatedby token lone gay figures or, occasion-
ally, a duo of queer teens lucky enough to find one another and instantly fall in
love. Growing up gay is rarely so simple, as Sanchez shows in this coming-of-age
novel told from the perspectives of three gay seniors-Jason Carillo, Nelson
Glassman, and Kyle Meeks-who go to the same high school.
Jason is a popular kid and star athlete who's just beginning to come to
terms with the possibility that his sexual orientation may be more complex than he
has previously acknowledged, as he notices his desire for his girlfriend waning and
his sexual dreams about men increasing. Hoping to slip in unnoticed to a Rain-
bow Youth meeting, he is stunned to encounter Nelson, an openly gay classmate,
along with Nelson's friend Kyle; Jason has seen Kyle, a shy swimmer, "with Nelson
at school, but he looked so... normal." Kyle in turn is thrilled: he has had a crush
on Jason for ages, and he's ecstatic at the possibility of his dreams coming true.
Nelson notices Kyle's excitement and responds with a jealousy that surprises him,
leading him to realize that he may be in love with his best friend, who doesn't seem
to love him back.
Despite their common orientation, the three boys lead very different lives.
Flamboyant Nelson brandishes camp like a weapon, supported by his divorced
mother's acceptance and activism. Quiet Kyle is a question mark at school and
closeted at home despite his long-term self-awareness. Complicating Jason's inter-
rogation of his sexuality is his abusive alcoholic father, who hurls homophobic
epithets as a matter of habit, and his adoring and beloved girlfriend. During the
course of the novel, all three characters come more fully to terms with their sexual
identities: Jason and Kyle come out to their parents, Kyle and Nelson start a Gay-
Straight Alliance group at school in order to resist the sometimes violent homopho-
bia of some of their classmates (Jason readies himself to attend the first meeting as
the novel closes), and all three boys cross new sexual thresholds.
Sex is an important part of this book, which is refreshingly honest about
the significance of the physical as well as the emotional. When sexual encounters
are described, the writing is clear without being explicit or graphic, using a direct
but tasteful manner comparable to some ofJudy Blume's groundbreaking descrip-
tions of heterosexual encounters; readers will understand exactly what the charac-
ters are experiencing without knowing exactly whose what is where. There's no
stinting on the emotional, however, and the story pulsates with romantic longing
("They kissed with an urgency from which there was no turning back"). Kyle and
Jason's courtship balances psychosocial issues with quite a dewy-eyed love story,
complete with thrilling chance encounters and tender mementoes, that might have
been at home in Seventeenth Summer. This relationship has its ups and downs,
92 
* THE BULLETIN
particularly as Jason resists his attraction to Kyle, but their growing intimacy is
described with all the sweetness of falling in love for the first time. The love
triangle of Jason, Kyle, and Nelson also demonstrates that homosexual romance
can be just as personally complicated as heterosexual romance. Yet Sanchez never
oversimplifies the parallel, maintaining a strong sense of the cultural and social
difficulties faced by gay youth, many of which their heterosexual counterparts may
never have imagined.
Additionally, Sanchez writes in breezy prose that brings a bracing light-
ness and accessibility to potentially heavy topics. His sentences are short and de-
scriptions pithy, and the style easily incorporates both the locker-room rawness
and casual informality appropriate to the teen protagonists ("Who would have
thought that one day he'd have a gay guy over and together they'd listen to a tape
of a group called The Butthole Surfers?"). Though the stories of these three boys
refer to a range of issues, from the risks of anonymous sex to the difficulty of
coming out (a list of resources is included at the end), the book never allows issues
to overshadow the emotional power or slow the pace of the narrative. Instead, the
author creates believably nuanced portrayals, offering a rare look at not just one or
two, but three gay characters interacting with each other and acting within a larger
community of gay and straight characters. When a work of fiction embodies such
accuracy and emotional complexity, there is but one word to describe it: true.
(Imprint information appears on p. 115.)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE/
ALARCON, FRANCISCO X. 
Iguanas in the Snow and Other Winter Poems/Iguanas en
la nieve y otros poemas de invierno; illus. by Maya Christina Gonzalez. 
Children's
Book Press, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-89239-168-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Eighteen verses in Spanish and English offer homage not just to winter but to the
year-round delights of San Francisco and the rest of northern California. Short
poems offer concrete imagery ("Clouds/ floating/ mountains/ dreaming/ in the
sky"-"Clouds") and descriptions, which often employ the title of the poem as the
first line of the verse ("In My Barrio/ you can hear/ the music/ of life// coming out/
of murals/ in full color"-"In My Barrio"), and longer poems provide more reflec-
tive examinations of experiences or landmarks (footnoted explanations help clue
in non-Californians). The English versions are spare, sometimes stretching or
sacrificing the rhythms that make the Spanish poems musical, but the simple lan-
guage will be a boon to beginning independent readers. Gonzalez' illustrations are
mural-like in composition and perspective, emphasizing the human figures. There
is little subtlety either in palette or drafting, and big round faces with big smiles are
the rule. Still, the paintings have an innocent verve that combines well with Alarc6n's
poetic observations in a piquant regional overview; fans of their earlier collabora-
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
93
tions (Laughing Tomatoes, BCCB 6/97 etc.) and professionals seeking to expand
their ESL collections will appreciate this new addition. JMD
BARTOLETTI, SUSAN 
The Christmas Promise; illus. by David Christiana. 
Blue
Sky/Scholastic, 2001 
[34p]
ISBN 0-590-98451-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
A child narrator and her father take to the rails during the Great Depression in
search of "someplace good," but it looks as if there may be nothing better than
hobo camps and soup kitchens in their future. A brief stay in jail for railroad
trespassing proves their salvation, though, as an understanding sheriff steers them
to a woman who takes the girl in while her father continues to look for work, with
the promise that he'll come back for her; indeed, "before the first Christmas star
came out, he did." Younger listeners are bound to pose questions: Where's the
mother? Where do they get the potatoes to roast and the tape for their ragged
shoes? How long were they in jail? Why do so many people live in comfort when
the introduction suggests widespread poverty? However, these concerns may well
be overshadowed by Christiana's striking evocations of the narrator's Depression-
era milieu. This is a world where steely gray, gritty rust, and dreary brown build-
ings teeter around her at harsh, tipsy angles, and exaggerated, threatening railroad
bulls and thieving hoboes loom out at her from walls, floors, and patches of foggy
space. Her brief glimpses of privilege and comfort are rendered in startling con-
trast-the bright reds and greens of a coveted tea set, the buttery glow of illumi-
nated windows against milky white clapboards, the strong, fleshy curves of the
kind woman who soothes her in her father's absence. Although the abrupt and
rosy ending (the father returns from who-knows-where with a pile of gifts in hand)
would earn a "humbug" in any other season, it can be generously welcomed in the
spirit of Christmas. EB
BATEMAN, TERESA 
A Plump and Perky Turkey; illus. by Jeff Shelly. 
Winslow,
2001 
34p
ISBN 1-890817-91-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Seriously put out by the absence of turkeys in their bucolic burg ("The birds have
gotten smarter/ and they all seem quite aware/ that it's best to disappear/ when
autumn leaves are in the air"), the residents of Squawk Valley fear it will be a
turkey-less Thanksgiving unless they can figure out a way to trick a turkey into the
pot. A leading citizen suggests an arts-and-crafts fair featuring turkey art, since
even turkeys understand you can't make turkey art without a model. Pete the
turkey sees the signs ("Model wanted"), and he answers the call. Pete models for
turkeys made out of potatoes, clay, and oatmeal; then he avoids being dinner by
hiding among the sculpture, which acts as camouflage. The citizens of Squawk
Valley mournfully make do with shredded wheat for Thanksgiving dinner: "That
day folks learned a lesson/ that stuck firm with them forever./ A plump and perky
turkey/ can be pretty doggone clever." Bateman (whose previous work includes
The Ring of Truth, BCCB 5/97) handily delivers this rhyming tale with a tongue-
in-cheek panache that does her tricky turkey proud. The verse is quick, rhythmic,
and funny, and it lends itself to all sorts of vocal interpretations. Shelly's water-
color and gouache illustrations clearly owe a debt to animation, and they're even
94 
* THE BULLETIN
busier; the exaggeration in both color (loud autumnal oranges, shiny pink faces)
and line (pop eyes and slavering jaws) emphasizes the visual silliness. Youngsters
will applaud Pete's successful trickery even as they tuck into their holiday drum-
sticks. JMD
BIERHORST, JOHN, ad. 
Is My Friend at Home?: Pueblo Fireside Tales; illus. by
Wendy Watson. 
Farrar, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-374-33550-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-6
Brief trickster tales from the Hopi tradition feature the irrepressible Coyote and his
friends. Each tale opens with an exchange between storyteller and listeners ("Shall
I begin?" "Yes"), indicating the oral origin of these stories, a tradition reflected in
the easy flow of the tales themselves. The brief retellings are imbued with a dry
sense of situational humor-Badger tricks the once long-eared Coyote into short-
ening his own ears; a cold, presumed-dead Beetle is thawed by friends Badger and
Mole-that makes them mini-masterpieces of understated delivery. Watson uses
her talent for anthropomorphized animal caricature to good advantage; there's a
mobile expressiveness to the protagonists' mouths and eyes, and the dusty purples
and creamy ochres of the palette soften but never condescend to the characters.
The layout is uncluttered, with various-sized illustrations and generous borders.
Aside from the obvious uses of storytelling and reading aloud, this has wide appli-
cability across curricular lines as well as appeal for wary or reluctant readers. JMD
BODKIN, ODDS 
The Christmas Cobwebs; illus. by Terry Widener. 
Gulliver/Har-
court, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201459-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
When fire destroys their home, a shoemaker and his family in "old Chicago" man-
age to save only a box of beloved blown-glass Christmas ornaments, brought when
the family emigrated from Germany. As the family struggles to make a home in an
old abandoned shack, the shoemaker reluctantly sells the ornaments in order to
buy new tools and leather, and on Christmas Eve the holiday tree is bare. While
the family sleeps, grateful spiders, spared from the broom by the shoemaker's wife
("against her better judgment"), drop down to decorate the tree with delicate web
traceries. This tale is clearly based on the traditional German folktale wherein
spiders decorate the Christmas tree (though no notes or attribution are provided):
the alterations aren't all effective (there's more closure but less logic in having the
spiders weave replicas of the original ornaments rather than the more traditional
tinselly cobwebs), but the location gives it an energetic, American immediacy, and
Bodkin's concise retelling keeps it from falling into the overly sentimental. Widener's
acrylics are surprisingly understated; this departure from his monumental style
unfortunately results in a reduction of his usual vigor. Those seeking a tale with a
little more substance and logic might want to look at Shirley Climo's Cobweb
Christmas (BCCB 10/82), but this may charm youngsters more inclined to ooh
than to question. JMD
BROWN, DON 
A Voice from the Wilderness: The Story of Anna Howard Shaw;
written and illus. by Don Brown. 
Houghton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-618-08362-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Four-year-old Anna nearly didn't make it to America; the ship carrying her mother
and siblings to meet their father was crippled in a storm and sent back to England.
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 95
This was only the first of several turbulent journeys unusual for a nineteenth-
century woman-from immigrant and frontier settler, to college graduate, minis-
ter, non-practicing physician, and suffragist. Although Brown explains in an
endnote that Shaw was most notable for women's-rights advocacy (she became
president of the National American Woman Suffrage Movement upon Susan B.
Anthony's death), his text is heavily skewed toward her pioneering years in Michi-
gan. Through this portion of Shaw's story, Brown's signature watercolor scenes
deftly realize the eerie shades of densely forested terrain and cast human figures as
doughty, vulnerable newcomers trying to bring the wilderness to heel. Shaw's
subsequent years, however, race by from her stint as log-cabin school teacher to
her days as a college student (how advanced education was funded on her $2.00-a-
week salary is never addressed), through a couple of "careers that women were
discouraged from entering at that time," and on to worldwide (exactly where is
never mentioned) speaking engagements in a dozen sentences. Brown's respect for
Shaw's career is clearly heartfelt and even breathlessly expressed ("Anna vowed to
open the minds of people who would hobble women's dreams"), but details that
could make her accomplishments concrete for young listeners are sparse. For an-
other picture-book take on women's suffrage, see Connie Nordhielm Wooldridge's
When Esther Morris Headed West (BCCB 10/01). EB
BUNTING, EVE 
We Were There: A Nativity Story; illus. by Wendell
Minor. 
Clarion, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-82265-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
The apocryphal guest list to the Nativity is long indeed this season (see Calhoun
and Foreman, below); here Bunting introduces the lowliest visitors-"fat, warty,
rough" toad, "shiny shelled" cockroach, and other less than lovable creatures who
make their way to the stable. Each poetically proclaims he was there to witness the
birth, but their collective pride is tempered not with humility but with a touch of
very un-Christmasy bitterness toward their more celebrated fellow fauna: "In times
to come/ they'll talk/ about this silent night,/ the donkey/ and the cows,/ so gener-
ous to share their place/. .. No one will look/ beyond the light/ to darkness/ and
the corner where we watch,/ unwatched./ They will not know or care." Minor's
arresting animal portraits, elegantly bordered in a simple gold band and ample
white space, compensate for the text's lack of impact as he zooms in on back-
ground scenes to hasten the approach to Bethlehem and the warmth of the stable
on a frosty winter night. Bunting's free verse is graceful and accessible, but at the
end of the day it may take some effort to tease out a point to the tale. EB
BURNINGHAM, JOHN 
Hushabye; written and illus. by John Burningham. 
Knopf,
2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-375-81414-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
Everybody's tired, including the cat with the stroller, the baby sailing the boat, the
three bears climbing stairs, and the man in the moon; fortunately, they've all found
peaceful places to spend the night, as has the audience: "You are tucked up in bed.
Your toes are all warm. You're out of the wind and the rain." The gently rhyth-
mic, occasionally rhyming text offers a lulling sequence (punctuated by soft repeti-
tions of "Hushabye") that balances rather than accumulates, setting up its sleepy
96 
* THE BULLETIN
subjects one by one and then going back down the line to put them all to bed.
Mixed-media art draws on techniques ranging from soft-edged collage to delicate
crosshatching in luminous yet somewhat soporific colors (small black-and-white
vignettes, sometimes softened with smudgy textures or fluid washes, appear oppo-
site the full-page illustrations); the figures, both human and animal, are personable
and endearingly bleary-eyed. Cozy but not cloying, this is an alluring invitation
into Morpheus' embrace. DS
CABRERA, JANE, ad. 
OldMother Hubbard; ad. and illus. by Jane Cabrera. 
Holiday
House, 2001 
30p
ISBN 0-8234-1659-3 
$15.95 
R 2-4 yrs
The familiar nursery rhyme is extended here beyond the most famous ending,
which leaves Old Mother Hubbard's poor dog without his bone. Instead, Mother
Hubbard embarks upon a series of shopping trips, bringing home assorted items
of apparel for her canine companion. Each time she returns, however, the preco-
cious pup is engaged in a different ridiculous action. For example, Mother Hubbard
sets off to buy him some shoes, "but when she came back, he was reading the
news." After eight spreads of this kind of exchange, the book ends with a slightly
altered version of a less-common ending as the dog, to his great joy, receives an
enormous bone. Though the nursery-rhyme text is simply a catalogue of events,
Cabrera's candy-colored paintings are divertingly droll. Vivid brushstrokes and
high-contrast backgrounds ensure maximum back-of-the-room visibility, though
a few clever details (such as the news headline stating "Little dog laughs to see such
fun!") will be best appreciated close-up. The cartoonish Old Mother Hubbard
doesn't look terribly old (more like a kid playing dress-up with a blue-tinted wig),
and her dog, a brown-and-white spotted, pointy-eared little guy, is a pert and
perky delight. His antics are complemented by the presence of a curious but wary
ginger cat, who observes his actions throughout the book (and becomes an unwill-
ing participant in one bathtime scene). Pull this one out when your nursery-
rhyme cupboard is bare. JMH
CALHOUN, MARY 
A Shepherd's Gift; illus. by Raul Col6n. 
HarperCollins,
2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15177-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15176-0 
$15.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Orphaned shepherd Matthew has tended a particular lamb since its mother strayed
from the flock, but one evening the lamb simply runs off, with Matthew in pur-
suit, toward a stable carved into a hillside. There the lamb finds its mother min-
gling with other animals near a newborn baby and its parents. Matthew senses a
deep peace and longs to be part of this family, and when the baby open its eyes and
gazes at him "with eyes as bright as stars," Matthew is aware he's in the presence of
"a wonderful child who knew him, an ordinary shepherd." Calhoun's simple tell-
ing should connect with even the youngest children who have already absorbed
the Nativity tale, although her heavy-handed Scriptural allusion-Joseph observes,
"Yes, the lost sheep came to us"-will probably float over their heads. Col6n's
glowing figures, illuminated by an unspecified light source that is apparently nei-
ther astral nor divine, are stiffly and theatrically posed. Although Calhoun assures
us that "the baby fit snugly into the man's big hands," Joseph handles the rigid
child awkwardly, and Mary (ruby-lipped and neatly manicured) regards her baby
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 97
with more calm reverence than maternal affection. Although a heavenly spotlight
beams down on Matthew as he hikes back to the shepherds' camp, having made a
gift of sheep and lamb to the child Jesus, no clue is offered as to how Matthew's life
is changed, and listeners are left with little more than a warm, fuzzy feeling about
the night's events. EB
CALMENSON, STEPHANIE 
Goodfor You!: Toddler Rhymesfor Toddler Times; illus.
by Melissa Sweet. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[64p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029811-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17737-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
1-4 yrs
This good-sized but not overwhelming compendium covers a multitude of tod-
dler-appealing concepts and experiences in cheery verse. You want colors? "I see
green./ Green rug, green tree,/ Green frog on TV." You want animal noises? "I
went to a farm when I was two,/ And on that farm, I heard a 'Moo!'" You want
outings? "I'm riding in my stroller./ What do I see?" You want toilet-training
(and you almost certainly do)? "I have my own potty./ I use it very well." This has
some of the same comprehensive appeal as Denise Fleming's Everything Book (BCCB
10/00) but with an even larger scope and more involved text. While Calmenson's
lyrics are a walk on the mild side, emphasizing sweetness over precision in rhythm,
they've got bounce, relevant detail, and an upbeat repetition of the title exhorta-
tion that will make this a happy resource for parental and toddler-storytime shar-
ing. Sweet employs her usual ebullient, naive draftsmanship, her multicultural
cast composed in easygoing painterly strokes; the gardeny palette will go nicely
with playroom decor and playsuit foodstains. The pick-and-choose luxury will
increase this title's popularity with toddlers, and they and their adults are bound to
find something here for everyone. DS
COONEY, CAROLINE 
For All Time. 
Delacorte, 2001 
261p
ISBN 0-385-32773-0 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Cooney's given her time-crossed lovers, Annie and Strat (from-Prisoner of Time,
BCCB 2/98, Both Sides of Time, 10/95, and Out of Time, 5/96), one more novel-
istic chance to surmount the century that separates them. Knowing that Strat had
gone to Egypt after she had left his time of 1899, Annie seeks him in a contempo-
rary Metropolitan Museum exhibit focusing on the expedition he joined. The
effects are not what she had expected: she's drawn back not to 1899 and Strat's dig
but to the living Egypt in the time of the building of the pyramids. Meanwhile, in
1899, Strat has become entangled in his father's plot to ruin him; fortunately
Time intervenes by sending him back to save Annie from entombment alive, but
unfortunately Time still won't let him keep her (though Annie has found a mod-
ern-day Strat, indirect descendant and possible reincarnation of the original, at the
exhibition). As usual, Cooney makes the most of her anachronisms, with Annie's
crisp contemporary take on mores old and new adding spice to the romantic plot.
The introduction of yet another era to negotiate, however, seems more like a teas-
ing delay to the resolution of Annie and Strat's dilemma than a plot-worthy ele-
ment of its own and that resolution still leaves plenty of questions unanswered.
Still, Annie and Strat are a magnetic pairing, and their frustrating predicament will
continue to be irresistible to fans of the series. DS
98 
* THE BULLETIN
CUNNINGHAM, JULIA 
The Stable Rat and Other Christmas Poems; illus. by Anita
Lobel. 
Greenwillow, 2001 
[24p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17800-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17799-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
Most of these nine poems celebrate the birth of Christ from the points of view of
the animals that were present, from mouse to rat to sheep to crow; the remainder
are joyful odes to the unheralded birth that would change the world. Cunningham's
verse is replete with the surprise of well-chosen language, her turns of phrase both
evocative and apt. The poems concentrate on the impact this birth will have on
subsequent centuries; the added weight of hindsight anchors the poems' captured
moments and balances the lighter but still worshipful reactions of the witnessing
fauna ("What a gathering it was,/ A chorus of caws,/ voices all giving out/ with
hoarse Hosannas"-"Crows on a Certain Evening"; "Give greatly of your grunts,
O pig!/ Scratch deeply of your joy, O hen!/ Sing out in choired squeaks, O
mouse!/ To herald in the boy. Amen"-"Hymn to Joy"). Lobel's line-and-water-
color illustrations maintain the same graceful balance between joy and reverence:
smiling lions lie down with lambs, and cities tremble under the "weeping face of
night." Lush floral touches, swirling stars, and comfortingly solid angels rendered
in a substantial, rich palette will make this title a vivid presence on the holiday and
poetry shelves. JMD
CUYLER, MARGERY 
Stop, Drop, and Roll; illus. by Arthur Howard. 
Simon,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84355-0 
$16.00 
R 
4-7yrs
Ever- and over-sensitive to the many perils that threaten a primary schooler, Jes-
sica achieves a new level of panic when her teacher announces Fire Prevention
Week and daily introduces a safety strategy that Jessica translates into imminent
household doom. She harangues her family into implementing sensible innova-
tions at home (smoke detectors, a fire-escape plan, electrical-cord inspection, etc.),
but she cannot manage to commit to memory that axiom familiar to most listen-
ers, "Stop, drop, and roll." Blazing candles on her brother's birthday cake ulti-
mately trigger Jessica's alarm, and as Tom starts to blow out the flames, Jessica
screams out the directive (fortunately unnecessary) and sends him plunging to the
floor. Jessica's queasiness in 100th Day Worries (BCCB 2/00) takes a pedantic
turn here that undercuts the storytelling, but children whose stomachs knot at the
thought of disaster will recognize their fears in Jessica's fishbowl-eyed attacks of
nerves (Howard's line-and-watercolor pictures make her very pigtails buzz with
tension) and will probably regard the relaxed approach of more laid-back teacher
and classmates with equal misgiving. A list of "Sparky's [TM] Top 10 Fire Safety
Tips for Kids" is included on the jacket back. EB
DAVID, LAWRENCE 
Peter Claus and the Naughty List; illus. by Delphine
Durand. 
Doubleday, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 0-385-32654-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Peter Claus, son of Santa and Mrs. Claus, is disturbed by the plight of all the
naughty children ineligible for Christmas presents. He has reason to be concerned:
last year he went presentless himself, and with his name on the naughty list again,
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
99
he's not likely to be luckier this Christmas. Slipping off in Dad's sleigh without
permission, Peter collects all the naughty children and brings them to the North
Pole to plead their cases to St. Nick. Santa agrees to give them a hearing and offers
a concession to each naughty child: one good deed will suffice to compensate for
naughtiness and effect a change of lists. Names drop off the naughty list right and
left until the only name left is that of Peter Claus himself; Peter is surprised when
Santa crosses his name off, but Santa explains that Peter has performed his good
deed by helping all the other children. Although the shifting standard of present-
worthiness isn't clearly explained, there's a wry and comic tone to the narrative,
especially the naughty kids' dialogue. Durand's illustrations emphasize the hu-
mor: cheerfully boxy, tube-nosed figures are too absurd to evoke genuine Christ-
mas anxiety, and the landscapes sometimes explode into festive business that includes
diverting details (such as Santa's grinning cat) waiting to be found by attentive
viewers. The perky Peter will reassure more than a few listeners who suspect that
their own years may be peppered with deeds more naughty than nice. KM
DAVIES, NICOLA 
One Tiny Turtle; illus. by Jane Chapman. Candlewick,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-1549-8 
$15.99 
R 4-8 yrs
Davies makes a dramatic shift in scale from her excellent Big Blue Whale (BCCB
10/97) to a tiny loggerhead "not much bigger than a bottle top." She's in fine
form with an informative narrative that is immediate and loving: "For three or
four years, maybe more, the turtle rides out in the storms and floats through the
hot calms. Steadily she outgrows her nursery. Nobody sees her leave, but when
you look for her, she has vanished all the same." Text in oversized type traces the
loggerhead's life cycle, from her earliest independent days in her weedy ocean nursery
to the point at which her single surviving offspring takes to the safety of the sea;
additional information in smaller type curls discreetly off to the side, to be con-
sulted as a listener's interest and maturity demands. Chapman's acrylic paintings
clearly convey the anatomical detail of the loggerhead and the varied environments
she encounters in her odyssey-deep green of "cool seaweed jungles," tropical
blue of coral reefs, mysterious indigo and purple of the moon-bathed beach in
which she'll lay her eggs. Until young listeners can paddle through the text on
their own, expect calls for encore readings. EB
DIOUF, SYLVIANE A. 
Bintou's Braids; illus. by Shane W. Evans. 
Chronicle,
2001 
34p
ISBN 0-8118-2514-0 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Bintou wants braids like her big sister and her older cousins, all of whom have
glamorous hairstyles with gold coins, seashells, and beads braided into them, while
all Bintou has are four little tufts she deems "plain and silly." Despite Grandma
Soukeye's gentle remonstrance that little girls don't need to draw attention to them-
selves with beaded and braided hair, Bintou yearns: "I dream I am sixteen and I
have braids with gold coins and seashells. And when I turn my head the sun
follows me. I shine like a queen." When Bintou's heroic action saves the lives of
two boys (she alerts the village that their canoe has overturned and that they're in
danger of drowning), her mother considers that she's finally earned the longed-for
brains-but unfortunately her hair is too short. Wise Grandmother has the deco-
rative solution, and now when Bintou looks in the mirror she sees yellow and blue
100 
* THE BULLETIN
birds in her hair: "I am Bintou. My hair is black and shiny. My hair is soft and
pretty. I am the girl with birds in her hair. The sun follows me and I'm happy."
There's unfortunately no note explaining this tradition or locating the story (be-
yond a general reference to West Africa), but Bintou is a fine narrator with a natu-
ral and truthful voice. Evans' oil paintings benefit from a palette of glowing golden
hues lightened with blues and reds and enlivened with adinkra patterns on the
characters' clothes. The human figures are gracefully drafted, their faces vibrant
and expressive. This is an enjoyable addition to the recent spate of hair-themed
books such as Williams-Garcia's Catching the Wild Waiyuuzee (BCCB 12/00) and
hooks' Happy to Be Nappy (BCCB 1/00). JMD
DONAHUE, JOHN 
Till Tomorrow. Farrar, 2001 
[176p]
ISBN 0-374-37580-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Terry "O.B." O'Brien and his army family have moved yet again, this time to a
base outside Verdun, France. Loquacious "Cannonball" promptly takes O.B. un-
der his wing, introducing him to all the right guys (the "aces"), cautioning him
against getting too chummy with the wrong social set (the "deuces"), and hauling
him off to baseball tryouts, where he bombs miserably. While consigned to
scorekeeping duties, O.B. makes the acquaintance of a local boy, dubbed Claude
the Clod by the base kids, and reluctantly finds that Claude has a lot to offer as a
friend. Predictably, O.B. is tempted into betraying his new buddy; predictably,
Claude slugs O.B. right in the conscience ("I hear what people call me ... but I
thought you were different. I thought you were better"); predictably, Claude saves
the aces from being blown to bits by unexploded shells around Verdun and proves
that they can all be friends. The standard Cool vs. Doofus plotline gains some
interest from the hidden perils of the locale and from the 1961 setting that finds
the base on alert during the Berlin partition, and the inviting trio of war, baseball,
and hangin'-with-the-guys themes promises an engaging, undemanding read. EB
FALCONER, 
IAN 
Olivia Saves the Circus; written and illus. by Ian
Falconer. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2001 
34p
ISBN 0-689-82954-X 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Brash young piglet Olivia (from Olivia, BCCB 11/00) has returned: she's got a
slightly updated family (now she's got a "new little brother, William" in addition
to her "old little brother, Ian") but a largely unreconstructed attitude as she revels
in telling the class about her vacation. Unsurprisingly, she lavishes her account
with embroidery ("Olivia always blossoms in front of an audience"), turning a day
out at the circus into a day out in the circus as she fills in for all the indisposed
circus folk. Her teacher is skeptical about Olivia's reported expertise as clown, lion
tamer, trapeze artist, and so forth, but Olivia insists it's all true "to the best of my
recollection." The text's plotlessness is more apparent here than in the first title,
and the catalogue of experiences drags on a bit, but the sly evocation of Olivia's
forceful personality remains entertaining. Visually, Falconer starts with the same
dichromatic palette as before, shifting from black and red to black and coral when
depicting Olivia's imaginary adventures. The art skillfully employs shadows to
convey the spotlit chiaroscuro of the circus, and the layout enhances the pacing (a
foldout spread of porky little Olivia as trampoline artist has a slo-mo effect for her
dramatic bounce) and emphasizes the breathless quality of Olivia's self-adoring
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
101
narrative. This doesn't quite have the freshness and precision of the previous vol-
ume, but Olivia's charming relentlessness will continue to amuse youngsters. DS
FARLEY, CAROL 
The King's Secret: The Legend of King Sejong; illus. by Robert
Jew. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12777-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12776-2 
$15.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
When King Sejong of Korea leaves his royal robes behind to wander undetected
among his people, he encounters a young boy in his garden, and in the course of
conversation he discovers that the boy longs to learn to read and write. The yearn-
ing of the young boy inspires Sejong to seek an easier alphabet than the complex
Chinese characters then used by Korean scholars and clergy. The result is a pho-
netic alphabet both simple and useful, but it's unacceptable to the populace until
the king and his young friend execute a gentle trick that convinces the wise and
influential men of the kingdom to accept the new alphabet. Though stately in
pace, this historically based narrative is undogmatic and educational. The illustra-
tions are occasionally awkward, especially in the drafting of figures, but their muted
tones and formality suit the story's quiet, distanced feel. Historical notes are ex-
tensive and informative; a chart of modern hangeul symbols is included. JMD
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
Seek. 
Marcato/Cricket, 2001 
16 7p
ISBN 0-8126-4900-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-10
Adolescent Rob longs for his father, a radio disc jockey who deserted Rob's mother
when she was pregnant with Rob. Hoping for some understanding of the man he
never knew, the boy listens incessantly to tapes of his father's old radio show and
seeks his father via shortwave on radio stations all over the world. This is written
essentially in playscript form, with narrative unfolding speaker by speaker in what
jacket copy calls "a collage of voices." Rob as a high-school senior sets the frame-
work as he reads from an obligatory teacher-assigned autobiography while the voices
of his past, including his own younger voice, interrupt and contribute to the ac-
tion; despite the plurality of perspectives, Rob's story is coherently and touchingly
delivered. The thematic aptness of the narrative structure will be apparent to
readers, and some will hear echoes of Thornton Wilder's Our Town in this
multivocal and retrospective chronicle. Fleischman provides guidance for turning
this into a readers' theater production, though with the addition of stage direc-
tions it could easily be transformed into a full stage play. The revelation of Rob's
character and the emotional nuances provided by the supporting players will carry
readers (and potential listeners) to the simple truth: only after Rob lets go of his
search for his father is he able to find himself. JMD
FOREMAN, MICHAEL 
Cat in the Manger; written and illus. by Michael
Foreman. 
Holt, 2001 
26 p
ISBN 0-8050-6677-2 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Cats never seem to figure among the wooden figurines in a standard creche set, but
Foreman's feline narrator nonetheless claims bragging rights for his attendance at
the Nativity. The evening begins, in his view, with unsettling inconveniences:
"Just as the barn was getting nice and warm, the door flew open"; "Then I heard a
baby cry. The cows and the goats were all wide awake now, shuffling about and
treading on each other's toes. Unceremoniously, I was tipped out of the manger!"
102 
* THE BULLETIN
A veritable army of humans and animals arrive to view the baby-quite a little
prodigy, sitting up politely in his mother's arms, regarding his visitors with startled
alertness. The cat knows something extraordinary has happened, but it's not until
well after the encounter that he makes a tenuous connection with his altered lifestyle:
"The funny thing is, I haven't caught a mouse since. I chase them occasionally,
just for practice, but I haven't the heart to catch one." Foreman's tale has its share
of sentimentality, but it also possesses the warmth, gentle humor, and concrete
moral-to-the-story that Calhoun's more solemn offering (reviewed above) lacks.
Compressing the Epiphany and Nativity into a single deep blue, star- and snow-
flake-studded night, Foreman overstuffs the stable with a cast of awestruck observ-
ers ("worshippers" would inaccurately describe a group obviously too baffled to
comprehend what they see) from regal and humble-and faunal-walks of life.
Their collective deer-in-the-headlights gaze, while undeniably droll, also seems quite
natural under the circumstances, and listeners won't need pedantic explanation to
catch the message of this baby peace-bringer. EB
GARLAND, MICHAEL 
Christmas Magic; written and illus. by Michael
Garland. 
Dutton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-525-46797-1 
$16.99 
Ad 
4 -7yrs
On the day before Christmas, Emily builds a snow woman in her front yard; later
that evening, she sees the new neighbor boy next door, who seems "too shy to even
say hello," building a corresponding snowman in front of his house. That night,
Emily can't sleep, and when she climbs out of bed she finds masses of Christmas
magic: Ginger and Max, her cat and dog, are dancing and singing "Jingle Bells";
the angel decorations have come to life and are flying around the staircase; mice are
making Christmas pies in the kitchen; and the snow man and snow woman have
turned into a glamorous human couple engaged in a festive Christmas dance. This
is an idea more than a story, and a rather well-worn idea at that, and there's little
style to the flat exposition. The interest here is likelier to come from Garland's
digitally generated faux-collages and their teeming spreads of nocturnal celebra-
tions. The varied textures of the collage elements are somewhat disconcerting (the
combination of soft focus and crisp edges is disparate rather than effectively con-
trasty), and the glitz is somewhat hard to take for a book's full length. The garish
rainbow glow and rhinestone-sparkly snowflakes of the romantic scenes of dancing
ex-snow people, however, have the same pink and purple allure as Lisa Frank's
popular designs. Some young sugarplums may therefore be entranced by the end-
less visual sparkles and rainbows, delighted to think of what Christmas magic may
happen while they sleep. KM
GARLAND, SHERRY, ad. 
Children ofthe Dragon: Selected Tales from Vietnam; illus.
by Trina Schart Hyman. 
Harcourt, 2001 
58p
ISBN 0-15-224200-7 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
In this collection of six folktales from Vietnam, a tiger earns his stripes the hard
way after an encounter with a clever farmer, a banyan tree takes a woodcutter to
the moon, two elemental suitors battle over a princess, a poor fisherman shows a
mandarin's proud daughter the meaning of love, a kind younger brother achieves
wealth through generosity instead of greed, and two sisters earn what their indi-
vidual actions prove they most assuredly deserve. The text is unfortunately choppy
and bland; the lackluster language is pedestrian, and the word choices uninspired.
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
103
Garland's selection of tales has tonal variety, however, with touches of humor as
well as poignancy. The volume itself is a handsome one, with gold-flecked endpa-
pers, cream-colored pages, red titles and detailing, and oval ornamental seals at the
beginning of each story. Hyman's full- and half-page paintings, rendered in India
ink and acrylic paint, add luster with a brilliant palette and romantic tone under-
scored by the artist's controlled draftsmanship. An introduction to the volume as
a whole and concluding notes for each individual tale provide a frame of cultural
reference for readers, but no specific sources are included. JMD
GERSON, MARY-JOAN 
Fiesta Femenina: Celebrating Women in Mexican Folktale;
illus. by Maya Christina Gonzalez. 
Barefoot, 2001 
64 p
ISBN 1-84148-365-6 
$19.99 
R Gr. 4-8
Gerson, a seasoned reteller of traditional tales (How Night Came from the Sea,
BCCB 10/94), lends her expert touch to these eight stories about the heroines of
Mexico. From the Mayan "Rosha and the Sun" to the Aztec "The Hungry God-
dess," from the Spanish-influenced "Blancaflor" to the Catholic "Virgin of
Guadalupe," she presents tales of powerful female figures in compelling language
that lends itself to reading aloud or telling. The art is sometimes more energetic
than focused, but overall Gonzalez takes her cue from Gerson's powerful text. The
images of the women are forceful, their faces made powerful by expressive eyes,
dark brows, and strong features supported by intense washes of color. Source
notes give specific citations and provide some cultural and historical context; end-
papers sport a rough map of the country. Readers aloud, storytellers, and fans of
heroine anthologies such as Tchana's The Serpent Slayer (BCCB 11/00) will em-
brace this well-executed volume. JMD
HESSE, KAREN 
Witness. 
Scholastic, 2001 
[176p]
ISBN 0-439-27199-1 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Small-town Vermont in 1924 isn't isolated from the social turmoil of the country
at large: there's concern about the ongoing Leopold and Loeb trial, there's a res-
taurant owner supplementing her earnings with running Prohibition-forbidden
booze, and there's growing interest in the Ku Klux Klan, supported by a local
preacher. Hesse joins Mel Glenn, Ron Koertge, and other authors in employing a
series of free-verse poems from the point of view of several characters to tell her
story (speakers here include a twelve-year-old African-American girl, a local farmer,
a teenager drawn to the Klan, a six-year-old Jewish girl, husband and wife shop
owners, the local newspaper editor, and others), in which the Klan's influence
results in the shooting of a Jewish man and a plot to poison a black family's well.
The account is sometimes contrived (the all-lower-case type isn't particularly use-
ful, and some of the characters, such as the rather predictable cowardly preacher,
are functionary) and sometimes romantic (the youngest girl, the titular witness to
the shooting, writes in an unconvincing Opal Whiteley-esque style, and the news-
paper editor is little more than a tower of moral strength), but this is also a thoughtful
and thought-provoking examination of a national phenomenon on a local level.
The book is rife with curricular applications (readers' theater being an obvious
use) and connections with other works contemporary and historical-try it, for
instance, in tandem with the documentary Not in Our Town. A photo-gallery of
the speakers is included; no historical notes are provided. DS
104 
* THE BULLETIN
HILL, DAVID 
Time Out. Cricket, 2001 
117p
ISBN 0-8126-2899-3 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Kit's miserable at home, because his argumentative parents are separated and his
mother drinks; he's miserable at school, where he's an unpopular and
unaccomplished loner. A victory in cross country gives him a chance for a differ-
ent approach, a chance he initially rejects-but then something changes his world
completely, landing him in a universe like his world at home but not quite, where
he's a valued member of the cross-country team that's gearing up for a vital, save-
the-school meet. Readers will probably guess before Kit does that he's actually
injured and comatose in his home universe and the struggle to win at the meet is
actually his struggle for survival, and the parallel-worlds notion is more contrived
than intriguing. The names in Kit's coma-world are awkward concoctions, the
narrow focus makes the exploration superficial, and the relationship between events
in the two worlds is sometimes confusing (what crucial juncture in his coma pro-
vided the parallel to the cross-country meet?); his parents' convenient reformation
goes beyond unlikely to TV-movie corny. This does have the advantage of being
a quick and undemanding read, but most kids would find Hill's other books, such
as See Ya, Simon (BCCB 9/94) or Take It Easy (6/97), more satisfying experiences.
DS
HITE, SID 
A Hole in the World. Scholastic, 2001 
[208p]
ISBN 0-439-09830-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
A little white lie grown dingy gray lands fifteen-year-old Paul Shackleford in hot
water with his father and on the farm of a distant relative for a summer of manual
labor and some much needed self-reflection. Paul is, at heart, a good guy, with
manners and poise to acquit himself decently among strangers and with enough
common sense to refrain from imposing his resentment on his hosts. In return,
the Vallenports and their close-knit team of farmhands delicately overlook the
circumstances that brought Paul among them, and soon he's wrapped up in their
overriding concern-missing and mourning their beloved coworker Hennley, who
committed suicide a year previously and left the titular hole in their collective life.
Everyone acknowledges that Paul mightily resembles Hennley, and even Hennley's
bereaved dog, Einstein, seems to take some comfort from Paul's presence. As Paul
slowly comprehends the intense impact this man of fierce integrity had on his
friends, he begins to emulate the dead man's virtues and set his own life back on
track. If all this sounds a bit didactic in intent, it's leavened with a healthy dose of
humor, a dash of tender and respectful romance, and tantalizing bits of supernatu-
ral intrigue. Paul's a smart kid who recognizes and welcomes his own maturity,
and adolescents struggling against their own mischievous demons will appreciate
the transformative power of his season with the Vallenports. EB
HOBBIE, HOLLY 
Toot & Puddle: I'll Be Home for Christmas; written and illus. by
Holly Hobbie. 
Little, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-316-36623-4 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
As Christmas approaches, inclement weather delays Toot abroad, but he keeps
Puddle abreast of developments via postcards and emails replete with promises to
be home for the holiday. While Puddle strings lights, bakes fruitcake, and con-
structs paper chains for the tree, Toot's airplane lands in a Boston brought to a
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
105
transportational standstill by snow. Determined to get home, Toot hikes into the
countryside: "The night was cold and the snow was deep. He trudged on until, at
last, he could go no further." But all is not lost: "Toot was startled by a tinkling,
jingling sound. As he peered into the dark, he saw a faint light coming toward
him. It twinkled and flickered in the snowy night." The driver of the sleigh,
bundled in red suit and red and white muffler, drives the nearly frozen traveler
safely home, where Toot and Puddle celebrate Toot's homecoming, finish deco-
rating the Christmas tree, and sink into a satisfied Christmas Eve slumber: "When
they wake up, it will be Christmas." The lovable piglets (of Toot & Puddle, BCCB
2/98, and Toot 6&Puddle: You Are My Sunshine, 9/99, etc.) are at their best-friend
best in this holiday tale. The simple dilemma adds just enough tension to keep
listeners guessing, and the apt solution is even more satisfying for not being spelled
out in detail. The watercolors are mostly action-oriented vignettes, with the occa-
sional drama of a full-page or full-spread illustration. Strong Christmas books are
notoriously difficult to come by-sentimentality and cutesiness tend to overwhelm
(or accompany) even the best intentions-but Hobbie manages to keep the focus
on the loving relationships that make holidays worth celebrating in the first place.
JMD
HOOPER, MAUREEN BRETT 
Silent Night: A Christmas Carol Is Born; illus. by Kasi
Kubiak. 
Boyds Mills, 2001 
[32p]
ISBN 1-56397-782-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Lerner and Loewe, Rodgers and Hammerstein, Gilbert and Sullivan... Gruber
and Mohr? The last pairing may not be household names, but their eleventh-hour
collaboration resulted in the song that is, arguably, the best loved of all Christmas
carols. Hooper recounts how leaky bellows on the church organ threatened to
turn Christmas Eve into a truly silent night, until organist Gruber set to music a
poem by parish priest Mohr, and together they delighted the congregation with a
simple, stirring vocal and guitar duet at the evening Mass. Kubiak's paintings
depict a mannered and schmaltzy nineteenth-century Austria straight off a bar-
gain-boxed Christmas card, with requisite tidily placed snowdrifts and lumpy fig-
ures exuding tension or gemiitlichkeit, as the text demands. Margaret Hodges'
Silent Night (BCCB 12/97) can reach a similar audience with fuller detail, but if
brevity is a concern, this is a serviceable abridgment. EB
JACOBSON, JENNIFER RICHARD 
Winnie Dancing on Her Own; illus. by Alissa Imre
Geis. 
Houghton, 2001 
[96p]
ISBN 0-618-13287-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Winnie, Zoe, and Vanessa are a happy and nearly inseparable triad; then Zoe and
Vanessa fall in love with ballet, and Winnie stands on the edge of going it alone
("How come her friends didn't remember how badly she danced?"). For a time,
Winnie grimly struggles through ballet lessons, every bit the ordeal she'd feared, in
the name of her hard-pressed friendship. A boost from her father finally allows her
to bring her own personal flair to class, but it also gives her enough confidence to
stop dancing and maintain her relationship with Zoe and Vanessa despite their
newly different interests. Jacobson softens the edges of the issue enough to reduce
discomfort-the friends bend over backwards to stay together, and Winnie does
106 
* THE BULLETIN
get her moment in the ballet spotlight-but she's also truthful about Winnie's
lesser ability and the authentic and worrisome threat of friendship drift. Big print
and fast-moving chapters make this inviting to readers uncertain about longer
texts, and Geis' sharp-edged black-and-white scrawls add a pleasing pungency.
DS
KERR, M. E. 
Slap Your Sides. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
[208p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029482-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029481-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
While other people are seeing their sons and brothers off to World War II, Jubal
Shoemaker and his family must see his brother Bud off to what may prove a harder
fate: government service as a conscientious objector. Even in their Quaker circle,
Bud's stern anti-war stance (supported by his devout girlfriend) is unusual; in the
Shoemakers' Pennsylvania town (and in their larger extended family, especially
Bud's aunt and her Jewish husband), Bud's actions are seen as cowardice and trea-
son. Jubal is uncertain: he sees his father's business suffer for his son's decision
and he sees the shock waves tearing at his parents' marriage, and he's increasingly
conflicted about the ethics of killing vs. the ethics of failing to stop destruction.
He has also become unrequitedly but seriously attached to Daria Daniel, whose
anger leads her to vandalize Jubal's father's store, who bitterly misses her brothers
in the military, and who finds a secret friendship with Jubal that breaches her
family's ethics ("Our hanging out together wasn't very different from certain French
people 'fraternizing' with the Germans"). Kerr paints a vivid picture of a young
teenager grappling with some of life's toughest issues and who as a consequence
takes an action that changes his life; she doesn't sugarcoat the complexity of these
issues and the gamut of human effects, whether it be casual cruelty or genuine
agony. She provides readers with the unexpected in the form of Jubal's pivotal
action (in a defense of Daria that proves, too late, to be misguided, he kills some-
one) and in typical Kerr fashion leaves most of the explanation and analysis to her
audience. The result is a somewhat abrupt conclusion but a sharply questioning
one, and between the drama and the moral challenge readers will have plenty to
digest. DS
KRENSKY, STEPHEN 
How Santa Lost His Job; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Simon,
2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83173-0 $15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Having gotten his job (in How Santa Got His Job, BCCB 9/98), Santa now sees it
challenged. One of the elves, Muckle, considers Santa to be squandering time and
energy unnecessarily and designs a machine to take over the task of toy delivery.
The Deliverator bests Santa in laboratory test conditions, but come the real deliv-
ery crisis, the machine chokes, leaving the man in red to perform his usual miracles.
This doesn't have the dotty pourquoi-tale charm of the original: the plot doesn't
actually make much sense, since the machine's failure doesn't seem to be con-
nected to Santa's wise forebodings or much of anything except the story's require-
ments. The old-fashioned man-beats-machine tale is Christmas-suitable, however,
and the biographical touch-Santa does lighten his load by taking on mail-carrier
Clara as Mrs. Claus and, presumably, delivery partner-is appealing. Schindler's
line-and-watercolor illustrations, often inset against engineering-sketch backgrounds
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
107
hinting at the development of the Deliverator, offer holiday charm in a tidy and
often amusing package; his amiable, slightly bemused reindeer are clearly worthy
matches for the Rube Goldberg contraption that is their competitor, and there's a
festive explosion of red as the scarlet-coated elves gather on the white snow with
Santa garbed to go. While not up to the previous installment, this is a diverting
continuation of the Santastical history. DS
KUKLIN, SUSAN 
Hoops with Swoopes; written and illus. with photographs by Su-
san Kuklin. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0551-X 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 1-4
In Dance (BCCB 1/99), Susan Kuklin used her considerable photographic skills to
capture the strong, graceful movements of dancer Bill T. Jones. Here Kuklin
celebrates basketball, turning her camera lens toward the moves ofWNBA MVP
Sheryl Swoopes as she "shoots hoops." A running narrative describes Swoopes'
play ("She plays from RIGHT to LEFT-from the tips of her fingers-to the tips
of her toes") while single words ("BOUNCE," "FAKE," "DEFEND!") describe
her various actions. The basic text is as simple and straightforward as a free throw;
creative typographical placement, vividly colored captions, and a repeated tongue-
twister phrase ("Sheryl Swoopes shoots hoops") transform it into a linguistic slam
dunk. The book's layout and design are very much in keeping with the sport that
is its subject; the streaming narrative, one-word labels, and stunning photographs
of a solo Swoopes in action work together to replicate the stop-and-go rhythm of
players on the court. Kuklin's photos catch and freeze Swoopes in mid-stride or
mid-jump, muscles flexed, ponytails swinging, arms reaching out to catch or shoot,
presenting her as a blend of athleticism, glamor, and attitude. High contrast and
nearly neon colors pump up the visual energy, with Swoopes' brown skin and
ebony hair, her bright blue sports bra and satiny scarlet shorts, and the orange ball
glowing against an endless expanse of dazzling white. For roundball-loving read-
ers who aren't quite ready for the longer texts of Charles R. Smith, Jr. (such as
Short Takes: Fast-Break Basketball Poetry, BCCB 2/01) or readers-aloud who need
a book with multiple appeals, this title is a winning three-pointer at the buzzer.
JMH
LUNDGREN, MARY BETH 
<<Love, Sara>>. Holt, 2001 
199p
ISBN 0-8050-6797-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Sara's an angry teenager trying to recover from a childhood of abandonment and
abuse. While she doesn't realize it, her life is settling down: her foster home of
four years is solid and secure, and she has developed a serious and supportive friend-
ship with her classmate Dulcie. Dulcie's budding romance with popular jock Jon
arouses complicated emotions in Sara, however-she's protective of Dulcie, she's
suspicious of Jon, and she's afraid she'll be left out in the cold again. Things get
much, much worse when Dulcie gets pregnant, and Sara wants desperately to be
able to help her friend even as she deals with her own troubles. Lundgren gives
Sara voice through her email, diary, and school assignments; that voice is authentic
in its awkwardness and self-righteousness, and the real-time flavor of the multiple
components gives the saga a Go Ask Alice appeal. Much of the book seems forced,
however, ranging from the address of Sara's diary to Toulouse-Lautrec to Sara's
tendency to recount phone conversations blow-by-blow to her sudden decision to
join Dulcie's and Jon's suicide pact; nor is it clear what we're to make of Dulcie
108 
* THE BULLETIN
and Jon's maybe-not-suicide death while Sara survives. Readers may nonetheless
find Sara's anguish affecting, and if her survival doesn't have the dramatic flair of
Alice's fate, it may at least offer some reassurance. DS
LUPTON, HUGH, ad. 
The Story Tree: Tales to Read Aloud; illus. by Sophie
Fatus. 
Barefoot, 2001 
64p
ISBN 1-84148-312-5 
$18.99 
R 
3-6yrs
English storyteller Lupton's selection of tales is nearly foolproof, providing seven
stellar entries from seven different cultures. While not all the titles will ring bells
with all readers-aloud, the stories themselves may faintly chime: several are retell-
ings of familiar tales, such as "The Gunniwulf' in the guise of the African Ameri-
can "The Sweetest Song," and "Caps for Sale" in the cloak of the Indian
"Monkey-See, Monkey-Do." Fatus' illustrations have the geometric simplicity of
children's drawings, and the resulting compositions are examples of innocent fun
that complement the simple but fluid text. Similar collections by Hutchinson and
Rockwell are sure to be falling apart; supplement the bedtime-story collection with
this effective volume and give adults something they'll be happy to read aloud. A
note on story sources is included. JMD
LYNCH, L. M. 
How I Wonder What You Are. 
Knopf, 2001 
199p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90663-0 $17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80663-6 $15.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Sixth-grader Laurel is dismayed when the new neighbors, the Holyfields, cut down
the climbing tree that stands just outside the nature preserve. Speculation runs
rampant through the neighborhood about the whys and wherefores, and the adults
take action by creating a committee while the children take action by harassing the
Holyfield siblings, David and Roberta, at school. Circumstances throw Laurel
and Roberta together, and the two become cautious friends; meanwhile Laurel
becomes interested in computer-geek David, going so far as to believe he may be a
computerized creation of his software-designer father. This densely written novel
is crowded with subplots: Laurel's complex relationship with her gifted sister, her
conflict between being popular and doing the right thing, her crush on possible
cyber-boy David Holyfield, and her investigation of the tree-cutting incident.
Ultimately, the plot contrivances (including the one wherein sixth-grader David
has a crush on second-grader Jeanie) are overwhelming and patently unbelievable.
The novel vacillates between science fiction and realistic school story, and the
result is overly dramatic rising action and an anticlimactic conclusion. JMD
MAcDONALD, MARGARET READ, ad. 
Fat Cat: A Danish Folktale; illus. by Julie
Paschkis. 
August House, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-87483-616-6 
$15.95 
R 
3- 6 yrs
A fat cat eats way more than his share in this lively retelling of a familiar Danish
folktale. MacDonald's text has the verve of language honed by frequent telling,
and her words fall trippingly off the tongue: "A cat and a mouse kept house. You
can see this was not a good plan. Cat was always hungry. Mouse was always
cooking." Cat starts off with thirty-five pies, but they just whet his appetite, and
he goes on to eat a washerwoman and her clothes, a company of soldiers, a king on
an elephant, and even his friend Mouse, who saves the day with her scissors, needle,
and thread. Frequent opportunities for participation include the Cat's refrain
NOVEMBER2001 
* 
109
("I'm meow, meow FAT! 'Cause I'm a HUNGRY, HUNGRY CAT!"), gastro-
nomical expressions ("SLIP! SLOP! SLUUURP!"and "BURP') and the exclama-
tions of unknowing future snacks ("MY, Cat! You sure are FAT!"), all of which
will easily pull young listeners along. The illustrations are equally alluring: the
titular ginger cat goes from generous to gargantuan proportions, taking over not
only all the available food but all the available space on the pages as well. Clean
white pages lend a crisp austerity to the layout, displaying playful compositions
with whimsical perspectives against an uncluttered backdrop. Those who miss
Jack Kent's The Fat Cat (BCCB 9/71) will welcome this vivid retelling; those
unfamiliar with the tale will appreciate MacDonald's bringing it to their attention.
Detailed source notes are included. JMD
MAYER, MARIANNA 
The Real Santa Claus. 
Fogelman, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2624-4 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Mayer returns to her signature format-combining reproductions culled from cen-
turies of religious art with a reverent text-to present the life of Saint Nicholas,
fourth-century bishop of Myra. She includes not only his best-known legends
(providing a status-saving dowry for three sisters destined for slavery; bringing
three murdered brothers back from the dead) but also miraculous interventions
that do not generally make their way into children's saint tales (saving an entire
province from famine; expostulating the emperor Constantine in his sleep). Illus-
trations (some of which appear blurry here) have been deftly selected to both un-
derscore the action of the text and survey the range of Nicholas
portraiture-clean-shaven youth, stern bishop, compassionate philanthropist, near-
playful apparition. Artwork is fully credited in an appended "List of Illustrations,"
but interested viewers will have a challenge matching page references in the list to
the unpaged leaves in the body of the work. Despite a title that seemingly relegates
Saint Nicholas to the Christmas season, Mayer's opus is a strong choice for any
library filling requests for saint books. EB
MCKENNA, COLLEEN O'SHAUGHNESSY 
Third Grade Stinks!; illus. by Stephanie
Roth. 
Holiday House, 2001 
99p
ISBN 0-8234-1595-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Gordie's best-laid plans for third grade (which include sharing a locker with best
bud, Lamont, and having the best year of his life) go awry when his new teacher
assigns as his lockermate the bossy Lucy Diaz, who will undoubtedly fill the locker
with stuffed animals and a "zillion pictures of flowers and kittens." In a desperate
effort to ensure that his plans come to pass, Gordie plots with Lamont to stink
Lucy out of the shared locker. After two failed attempts at acquiring appropriately
smelly items, Gordie finally resorts to a chunk of fragrant cheese but, to his sur-
prise, learns that Lucy actually loves Limburger. After she demonstrates an inter-
est in baseball cards (which he and Lamont collect) and saves him from being
stuffed into their locker by the school bully, Gordie decides that maybe neither
Lucy nor third grade will be so bad after all. Though the plot is a bit simplistic and
the characterization minimal, McKenna's writing is clear and accessible, with some
just-right observations about life in a third-grade classroom (Gordie's exasperated
teacher snaps at her complaining students: "'If you don't want to act like good
third graders, then you can march down the hall [to] room three.' Room 9 got
quiet. Nobody said a word. Room 3 was second grade." Roth's full- and half-
page illustrations use a monochromatic palette of washes and pencil lines to depict
110 
* THE BULLETIN
this multicultural cast with warmth and gentle humor. Readers who are just start-
ing to tackle chapter books such as Stephanie Greene's Owen Foote series (Owen
Foote, Second-Grade Strongman, BCCB 3/96, etc.) will appreciate both the "boy
vs. girl" aspect and the quest for odoriferous objects. JMH
MELMED, LAURA KRAUSS 
This First Thanksgiving Day: A Counting Story; illus. by
Mark Buehner. 
HarperCollins, 2001 
24p
ISBN 0-688-14554-X 
$15.95 
M 
3-6yrs
This rhyming counting book relates the legendary story of the first Thanksgiving.
Melmed's quatrains work with Buehner's illustrations to present a bucolic and
altogether fictional New World peopled by rosy-cheeked colonists and sprightly
native peoples. The opening spread sets the tone: choppy verse ("1 dressed in
linen,/ sitting in a tree/ dreaming of the tall, strong ship/ on which he crossed the
sea.// 2 dressed in deerskin,/ gathering nuts below,/ giggling as they tiptoe by,/ too
shy to say hello") accompanies the illustration of a young boy in period costume
dozing in the branches of a tree while two laughing Indian girls in buckskin fringe
slip past. Everyone in this book is smiling, from the grinning colonists gathering
turnips and parsnips from the regimented rows of a very neat garden to the native
boys catching fish by hand in the bay. Cute little woodland creatures peer from
behind bushes and trees, and the colony itself is an ideal vision of tidy houses,
fences, and roads. There is no conscious irony either in pictures or text, although
the image of Indian boys happily gathering clams on the beach while a ship in full
sail hovers on the horizon pushes the envelope quite a bit. This is less for children
than for grownups drawn by the well-meaning (and unfortunately simplistic) view
of history. JMD
MELTZER, MILTON 
Piracy &6 
Plunder: A Murderous Business; illus. by Bruce
Waldman. 
Dutton, 2001 
86p
ISBN 0-525-45857-3 
$24.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
The media has provided us with images of a kinder, gentler sort of pirate, and
Meltzer is on a mission to set the record straight: "rape, pillage, and plunder" are
no mere buzz words, but the substance of the pirate trade. Here readers satisfied
with a quick sprint though pirate lore can get a bit of the real skinny-replete with
lurid detail and full-color illustration (of pirates drinking, pirates dueling, pirates
marooned, and so on)-on Blackbeard, Henry Avery (referred to as "Every" in
this text), Anne Bonny and Mary Read, and their brother and sister sea rovers.
Serious seadogs, though, will be disappointed with the erratic organization that
tacks wildly between centuries and continents, personalities and pirate miscella-
nea. Adding a layer of confusion are annoying contradictions: Meltzer observes
that Rome had cut back its naval forces yet later recounts how Pompey defeated
piracy through strategic placement of fleets "at every sector of the Mediterranean
coastline"; the article on Francis Drake states, "Even though of humble birth, a
seaman could rise if he was able, conscientious-and lucky," while the section
"Who Pirates Were" claims, "[Ordinary seamen] had no hope of ever rising above
that lowest of positions." Uncredited quotes pepper the volume, and the overview
grinds to an abrupt halt after some remarks on modern maritime pirates, copy-
right infringement (no segue from sea- to e-piracy is provided), and pirate images
in literature and film. This may still make an enticing browse for readers not yet
ready to sail with Marrin's Terror of the Spanish Main (BCCB 2/99). BB
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
111
MIKLOWITZ, GLORIA D. 
Secrets in the House ofDelgado. Eerdmans, 2001 
182p
ISBN 0-8028-5206-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
At the height of the Jewish expulsion from Spain in 1492, fourteen-year-old orphan
Maria Sanchez is sent by Dominican zealot Fra Adolfo to work as companion to
the spirited and spoiled young daughter of conversos, a family of Jewish descent
who had converted to Catholicism a century before. The Delgados believe
themselves to be safe from the Inquisition and they welcome Maria more warmly
than she, as a servant, has the right to expect. Maria has secretly been commissioned
by Fra Adolfo to watch the Delgados for any sign of religious backsliding, however,
and in a moment of jealousy over the handsome Delgado son's engagement
announcement, she lets slip some innocuous observations. Almost immediately
Don Delgado is arrested, and a horrified Maria turns all her attention to helping
find a way to spirit the family out of the country. There's plenty of scope for
drama here, but all the characters go through their predictable motions with near-
mechanical precision. The Delgados are just a bit too saintly, Fra Adolfo a bit too
slimy, and Maria a bit too gullible to be fully believed. Still, readers who can will
themselves to believe that such vulnerable characters could live in such perilous
times in such a state of oblivion will find some mild thrills here. EB
MOORE, CLEMENT CLARKE 
The Night before Christmas; illus. with photographs
by Raquel Jaramillo. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2001 
35p
ISBN 0-689-84053-5 
$18.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Jaramillo turns the well-known poem into a period photoessay documenting St.
Nick's famous visit. An introductory spread introduces the Nick-hosting family
and provides a pretty fiction about the discovery of the photographs ("I had these
photographs authenticated by several experts"), and then it's away to the verse
itself. Browned and cracking sepia-toned images offer proof of the truth of the
tale, depicting the whole family as roused by Santa's noise and witnessing his liv-
ing-room antics. This isn't up to the historical recreation standards of Casey at the
Bat (BCCB 1/01), often looking gimmicky rather than antique: the aging effects
make some of the images rather indistinct, the kids have an indisputably contem-
porary look to them, and the child-sized Santa lacks charisma. There's an old-
fashioned glamor, rather like a Christmas card ofyesteryear, to the scenes, however,
and the hazy vision of the diminutive Santa and his collection of reindeer may well
suit the dreamy imaginings of youth. The days-of-yore setting might help you
weasel out of discrepancies with contemporary views of Santa, but don't be sur-
prised if it inspires some Christmas attempts with the digital camera. A note on
the poem and its authorship is included. DS
MUTIN, BURLEIGH, ad. 
The Lady of Ten Thousand Names: Goddess Stories from
Many Cultures; illus. by Helen Cann. 
Barefoot, 2001 
80p
ISBN 1-84148-048-7 
$19.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Muten retells eight tales featuring goddess figures from as many cultures, includ-
ing the stories ofIsis (Egypt), White Buffalo Woman (Lakota Sioux), Freya (Scan-
dinavian), Oshun (Yoruba), and others. The retellings are often austere and
weightily respectful rather than earthy or humorous, and the downplaying of god-
dess sexuality undercuts these figures' power. Nonetheless, the gathering is un-
usual and refreshingly broadly representative. While the illustrations occasionally
suffer from cumbersome and inexpressive draftsmanship, the large oversized paint-
112 
* THE BULLETIN
ings, intricate running borders, and ornamental details add to the volume's visual
appeal. A brief introduction to each tale provides some historical and cultural
context, and a bibliography is included. JMD
NAPOLI, DONNA Jo 
Three Days. 
Dutton, 2001 
151 p
ISBN 0-525-46790-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Eleven-year-old Jackie is reveling in three whole weeks alone in Italy with her
divorced father, until something terrible happens: one night her father suffers a
heart attack on the highway, perhaps a fatal one, and Jackie, who speaks no Italian,
frantically tries to seek help. Things go from bad to worse when the two men that
pick her up prove to have a mission other than taking her to the nearest police
station, instead spiriting her off to a quiet country villa, where a woman manages
to convey her name-Claudia-and her kindness. As Jackie slowly pieces to-
gether the reasons behind this strange event (Claudia's daughter, Antonia, died at
Jackie's age not too long ago, and Claudia's loving family hopes that Jackie will fill
her place), she and Claudia become more attached, but she remains determined to
return to her mother and unsure of whom she can trust as she plans. While the
plot engine requires acceptance of not just one but two unlikely events, the in-
triguing "what wouldyou do" scenario is the real point here, and the book's stretch-
ing of reality has less impact than Jackie's dilemma: how do you get out of a
situation when the only people you can contact put you where you are? How do
you know where to find other people, and how do you communicate with them
when you don't know the language or the telephone system? While fans of more
orthodox mysteries might find the conclusion disappointing (Jackie gets away with
Claudia's help, but we don't see her reunion with her mother, and we don't know
if anything happens to Jackie's kidnappers), the open-endedness is in keeping with
a narrative that's more enigma than traditional adventure. Napoli's style retains
the accessibility familiar from On Guard (BCCB 2/97) and her other realistic-
fiction titles, and readers looking for something off the beaten track but not neces-
sarily harder slogging may find this account ofJackie's strange interlude just the
thing. DS
PETERSON, MELISSA 
Hanna's Christmas; illus. by Melissa Iwai. 
HarperFestival,
2001 
[2 8p]
ISBN 0-694-01371-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
When Hanna and her family move from Sweden to America, Hanna is desolate,
missing her grandmother and her grandmother's farm. She's startled to find, in-
side a shipment from her grandmother, a grumpy tomten, who also dislikes America
and who proceeds to cause all sorts of mischief for which Hanna is blamed. When
the magical little man realizes that Hanna is as homesick for Sweden as he is, he
helps her make a crown and prepare some toast (crowned with her grandmother's
jam) to serve the family on Santa Lucia day. The toast convinces Momma that
"the rest of the unpacking will just have to wait" and that it's time instead to
decorate the house, bake cookies, and celebrate Christmas. While it's nice to have
a modern Christmas story that contains elements of Swedish tradition, the text is
pat and predictable and the plot overly convenient. Iwai's watercolors are sweet
but too bland to offer much of interest (the round-faced, round-eyed characters
are coloring-book stock). This is ultimately likely to appeal most to adults already
enamored of Hanna Andersson clothing, of which this is a line extension. JMD
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
113
PINKNEY, ANDREA DAVIS 
Mim's Christmas Jam; illus. by Brian Pinkney. 
Gulliver/
Harcourt, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201918-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
It's 1915 and Pap has been working as a "sand hog," digging the tunnels for the
New York subway system, one of many African-American men who (according to
the foreword) worked side by side with Italian and Irish immigrants in extremely
dangerous working conditions. Pap's difficulties include his foremen-Mead and
Evans, nicknamed "Mean" and "Evil"-who react to the men's holiday caroling
by ordering them to work on Christmas Day, crushing Pap's dreams of being
home with his family for the holiday. However, when the foremen taste Mim's
famous jam ("This is from Mim and our young'uns-best jam you'll ever eat.
Belly-hum jam, Mim calls it"), they reverse themselves, ordering the men to "quit
drillin', quit poundin', quit pickin' and haulin'. . .. Quit blastin', quit loadin',
quit sweatin', quit crawlin'." There's more wishfulness than logic in the story, and
some of its ingredients are stock and conventional, but the rhythmic language and
quirky poetic descriptions add character to a conventional home-for-Christmas
plot. The delicate swirling lines of Brian Pinkney's characteristic scratchboard
illustrations mitigate the static, posed quality of this period piece. The happy
ending-which begins with his children hearing Pap's "deep hooty whistle"-will
satisfy readers hungry for holiday bliss, and the recipe for the apple-jelly-like "jam"
may lead others to add to their repertoire of family comfort foods. FK
PINKWATER, DANIEL 
Irving and Muktuk: Two Bad Bears; illus. by Jill
Pinkwater. 
Houghton, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-618-09334-6 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
In Larry (from Ice Cream Larry, BCCB 6/99, etc.), Pinkwater created one memo-
rable polar bear with a sweet tooth; now he's got two more in Irving and Muktuk,
determined stalkers of blueberry muffins. Every year they cunningly attempt to
secure muffins at the annual Blueberry Muffin Festival in Yellowtooth, whether it
be by lurking near the warehouse, disguising themselves as orphan penguins ("Of-
ficer Bunny consults his book of wildlife. Yes! Penguins are native to the South
Pole, not the frozen north! And no penguin grows to be nine feet tall"), passing
themselves off as Girl Scouts, or pretending to be muffin-contest judges. Finally,
the doughty yet kindhearted Officer Bunny sends the recidivists off to the zoo in
Bayonne, New Jersey, which should suit the duo perfectly, as it's the muffin capi-
tal of the world. The plot's end is a little bit underbaked, but the droll language
and the exceedingly offbeat cops-'n'-robbers saga has that traditional Pinkwateresque
allure. Jill Pinkwater's art misses the mark on Officer Bunny, whose face is awk-
ward and stodgy, but the jazzy-lined villains have an insouciant and roguish charm
and the playful hues ofYellowtooth make it an enticing festival venue. This would
also serve as an enjoyably quirky readaloud for those youngsters with a taste for the
slightly strange, and Larry fans will want to eat it right up. DS
RAEL, 
ELSA 
OKON 
Rivka's First Thanksgiving; illus. by Maryann
Kovalski. 
McElderry, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83901-4 
$16.00 
R 4-8 yrs
Rivka, born in the U.S., lives with her immigrant parents in a Lower East Side
tenement in 1910 New York, evoked in attractive milky sepia-tone acrylic and
colored pencil illustrations. Against the considered opinion of her rabbi, Rivka
114 
* THE BULLETIN
champions the cause of Thanksgiving, which her elders assume is "a party for
Gentiles." She even goes so far as to contradict Rabbi Preminger, arguing that
Jews who fled turn-of-the-century pogroms have much in common with earlier,
Protestant pilgrims and asserting, "The Pilgrims were thankful and I think that we
should be too." The rabbi's susceptibility to juvenile argument may be a tad con-
venient, but Rivka makes a compelling and sympathetic advocate. Rael also does
a subtle and effective job presenting parallel Yiddish and English terms ("'That's a
funny looking kotcha,' Mama said.... 'It's not a duck, Mama,' Rivka replied) and
offers a kid-strength description of pogroms. The button-nosed, bright-eyed
cuddliness of Kovalski's figures plays excessively on the sweetness of the tale, but
the bustling backdrops and subdued interior tones add depth. Kids will be heart-
ened by the reconciliation of the different traditions; teachers may also like the
possibilities offered by the concluding culturally diverse Thanksgiving feast. FK
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
Little Tree; written and illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Hyperion,
2001 
[28p]
ISBN 0-7868-0795-4 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
e. e. cummings' poem "Little Tree" inspires and introduces this story about a tree
finding his Christmas destiny. After being taken from its forest home, the little
tree waits on a city sidewalk for selection; eventually, a family looking "for their
own special, just right, one and only, perfect little tree" takes him home to their
apartment, decorates him, and provides him with "a special little place that was
waiting for him all his life." This is more than a little syrupy, and kids drawn by
the personification of the little tree are bound to inquire about its post-Christmas
fate, but with its neat little repetitions the text has a sturdy simplicity. Raschka's
illustrations, emphasizing muted reds and greens, draw on the triangular shape of
the little tree in forming intricate and geometric landscape and cityscape mosaics
that offer both sequential and simultaneous scenes within panels; these relatively
dense images are counterbalanced by airy text pages with floating bits of spot art.
There's fascination in the intricacy, and it's entertaining to hunt down the Santa
figure from spread to spread; youngsters may, however, find it rather difficult to
puzzle out the events depicted, and there's little in the way of extra conceptual
reward for such diligent pursuit. This can't touch A Charlie Brown Christmas for
a good tree-rescue story, but it might make a cozy and affectionate bedtime book
for those long pre-Christmas evenings. DS
ROSEN, MICHAELJ. 
Chanukah Lights Everywhere; illus. by Melissa Iwai. 
Gulliver/
Harcourt, 2001 
26p
ISBN 0-15-202447-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
On each of the eight nights of Chanukah, a nameless child narrator first counts the
number of candles burning in the menorah and then finds that same number of
lights somewhere in the world around him ("On the second night of Chanukah,
two headlights aim right through the window into the living room, where my
sister and I spin the dreidel on the floor"). Some of the "lights" being counted are
rather a stretch (five silver dollars) or a convenient selection (the seven stars of the
Big Dipper plus the North Star singled out amid a star-studded sky), but this is a
pleasant expansion of the Festival of Lights. Iwai's illustrations capture a cozy
domestic setting within a snowy city neighborhood, brightened by an abundance
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
115
of warm illumination shining from windows, streetlights, menorahs, and Christ-
mas candles ("Dad says that Chanukah is also about the joy of different religions
sharing a street"). Unfortunately, human figures are stiff, with expressionless google
eyes in blankly happy faces, and there are some discrepancies between art and text
that may confuse young viewers. Despite these flaws, young children will enjoy
the reassuring pattern of this homey holiday book, and they may even be encour-
aged to count the lights in their own neighborhoods. KM
SANCHEZ, ALEX 
Rainbow Boys. 
Simon, 2001 
24 5p
ISBN 0-689-84100-0 
$17.00 
R* 
Gr. 9-12
See this month's Big Picture, p. 91, for review.
SEEGER, PETE 
Abiyoyo Returns; by Pete Seeger and Paul DuBois Jacobs; illus. by
Michael Hays. 
Simon, 2001 
40p
ISBN 0-689-83271-0 
$17.00 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Thirty years after a little boy and his magician father save their town by making a
gluttonous giant disappear, the townspeople need the strength ofAbiyoyo to build
a dam. The now-grown boy, his daughter, his wife, and his elderly magician father
bring the giant back, after first making him "lots of good food so he won't eat us
up." Mollified by his meal, the giant digs up the huge boulder obstructing the
construction of the dam and throws it into the distance; before he can eat anyone,
the girl and her parents play music and the giant falls asleep. When it turns out
that the magic wand that would return Abiyoyo has been broken in the effort, the
townsfolk and Abiyoyo learn to live with each other. This is a more prescriptive
plot than the first Abiyoyo, and it's not clear what prompts the giant's transforma-
tion from giant glutton into docile helper. Hays' acrylic renderings of the interna-
tional cast (all sporting their regional costume) are blurry and imprecise; the drafting
is awkward, and the figures are disproportionate and wooden. This lacks the irrev-
erent fun of the first book, but there are enough entertaining sound effects and
thematic hooks to make this a title with curricular possibilities. JMD
SHREVE, SUSAN 
Blister. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2001 
[160p]
ISBN 0-439-19313-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Alyssa Reed's world falls apart when her baby sister is stillborn, sending her mother
into deep depression, the family into a smaller apartment in town, and her father
back into his old habits of seeing other women. When her father moves out,
leaving the fifth-grader to cope with her mother on her own, Alyssa remakes her-
self as the tough and resilient Blister (who appeared in a slightly different incarna-
tion in Shreve'sJonah the Whale, BCCB 4/98). Blister is determined to pull things
together by making cheerleader in her new school and by punishing her father for
leaving (it's a boost of luck for both goals when she finds a bag of his girlfriend's
clothing and jewelry hidden under his bed and pilfers it for her own use), but it
begins to look as if it'll take more than that to resolve her family's problems. Shreve
writes with a measured clarity that emphasizes Blister's determination; she concen-
trates on observation more than empathy, but the result is a sharply evoked char-
acter, authentic in her implacable certainty about the rightness and efficacy of her
actions in the face of the abdication of both her parents. There's sometimes a
touch of adult distance in the style, but the matter-of-factness with which the book
116 
* 
THE BULLETIN
treats Blister's actions is a refreshing contrast to more angst-filled narratives, allow-
ing Blister's life to speak for itself. This is a nuanced and effective examination of
a girl who finds both the extent and the limits of her strengths. DS
SIEGEN-SMITH, NIKKI 
First Morning: Poems about Time; illus. by Giovanni
Manna. 
Barefoot, 2001 
4 0p
ISBN 1-84148-337-0 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
This collection (first published in the UK in 1995) contains a variety of relatively
brief poetic musings on themes such as evolution, seasons, lost dogs, and timed
math tests. Some selections are straightforwardly didactic, like Pat Moon's "Earth's
Clock," an almost prosaic attempt to give readers a sense of geologic time ("Imag-
ine that the earth was shaped/ Twenty four hours ago,/ Then at 6 a.m. rains fell
from the skies/ To form the seas below"). The "tintinnabulation that so musically
wells" in the excerpt from Poe's "The Bells," on the other hand, appeals more to
the ear. Larkin's "Days" is philosophical ("What are days for?/ Days are where we
live"), and Prelutsky's "Today I'm Going Yesterday" is downright mind-bending
("I'm moving very fast/ as I'm putting off the future for the very recent past").
Though some entries are piquant, the selections are uneven, and the compilation
is ultimately fairly predictable. Line-and-watercolor illustrations in clear soft tones
tend to homogenize the experience, but they people the poems with appealing
sharp-eyed children in appropriately diverse domestic and fantastic settings. Teach-
ers will likely find something to suit students of diverse interests and abilities, and
browsing readers may wonder where the time went. FK
SOMERS, 
KEVIN 
Meaner than Meanest; illus. 
by 
Diana 
Cain
Bluthenthal. 
Hyperion, 2001 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2498-0 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0577-3 
$15.99 
R 4-8 yrs
An evil old hag, "the second meanest creature alive," shares a hovel with the mean-
est creature alive, a scrawny black cat named Hisss. One close-to-Halloween day
the hag decides to make a monster ("It'll be even meaner than Hisss and uglier
than me," she says) and, after digging through her "ratty old books," she comes up
with the perfect recipe-but she leaves out one important ingredient. The result:
a cute little girl named Daisy with pink hair decorated with daisies and butterflies.
The horrified hag locks Daisy in a room with Hisss ("Spend some time with the
cat. Maybe some of his meanness will rub off on you!"); but a purring Hisss is
renamed "Mr. Fluff' by the unconquerable Daisy. The little girl's irrepressible
cheerfulness in the face of basements, rats, and wormy apples depresses the poor
old hag, until Daisy prepares a Halloween surprise. Somers' tale of ornery plans
gone awry will elicit giggles from youngsters unready for real book-induced terror.
Bluthenthal's illustrations take every scary-story cliche and play it for laughs, from
the green-faced, hook-nosed crone to the cotton-candy-haired Daisy to the per-
petually hissing black cat. This is one comedically twisted delight with a wide
range of appeal. JMD
SPOONER, MICHAEL 
Daniel's Walk. 
Holt, 2001 
21 4 p
ISBN 0-8050-6750-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Daniel isn't certain whether it's a dream, a vision, or a flesh-and-blood man who
has warned him that his father's in danger; Daniel only knows he must find his
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
117
father somewhere in the Rocky Mountains and help if he can. Setting off on foot,
Daniel hasn't cleared Missouri before he's forced to take a defensive shot at horse
thief Thompson Haggard, and even the relative protection of Mr. Clymer's wagon
train, which he promptly joins, can't keep the vengeful thieves at bay throughout
the arduous trek west. Daniel treads a literarily well-worn route, peopled with
such familiar trailmates as an avuncular wagonmaster, a wise and resourceful free
black mentor, snarly outlaws, and a feisty love interest, but Spooner manages to
keep the tension taut and the action lively throughout most of the journey. Plot-
ting begins to unravel, though, as Daniel improbably discovers his father running
guns to the Indians and withdrawing into visions in a sweat lodge, and villain
Haggard turns out to be Daniel's crazy uncle-a contrived twist that readers will
be onto long before our otherwise astute hero figures out the clues plainly before
his eyes. American Indian ritual figures prominently in this tale, and although
Spooner's endnote expounds on Manifest Destiny and Western movement, some
sources and specifics on Ute belief and practice would have been most welcome; a
map appears on the endpapers. EB
STINE, 
R. 
L. 
The 
Haunting Hour. Parachute/HarperCollins,
2001 
153p 
illus.
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623605-3 
$14.89
Trade ISBN 0-06-623604-5 
$11.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Ten tales of the supernatural appear in this new collection by the popular Stine.
Plots have time-honored turns: a boy turns the clock back way too far during
"The Halloween Dance," a brother and sister foil "The Bad Babysitter," a ghost
deprived of an ocean voyage demands "Take Me With You" of a young girl, and a
young artist confounds a mentor from beyond the grave in "Can You Draw Me?",
and so on. This is slick campfire-and-pajama-party stuff, told with an eye toward
the easy thrill and the surprise ending, and the predictability of the stories and the
unsophisticated storytelling won't keep Stine fans old and new from swallowing
this down in one big gulp. Stine introduces each story with a brief paragraph
describing the incident or memory that inspired it, and his collegial, friendly tone
may inspire readers to some storytelling of their own. The title spreads for these
tales (by such notable artists as Art Spiegelman, Greg Call, and John Jude Palencar)
are black-and-white illustrations with creepy "Tales of the Crypt" images-mum-
mies, bats, cobwebs, spiders, etc.-rendered in various stages of decay. The cover-
an hourglass with a staring skull set on luminous paper-will draw kids like a
magnet. JMD
THESMAN, JEAN 
A Sea So Far. Viking, 2001 
[224p]
ISBN 0-670-89278-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Thesman turns her talents to historical fiction once again, but readers awaiting
resolution to Clare and Mr. Younger's budding romance in The Tree ofBells (BCCB
7/99) will have to wait longer. This latest title follows two girls from divergent
backgrounds who survive the 1906 San Francisco earthquake and find their for-
tunes thrown together the following year. Kate Keely and her aunt have already
fallen socially in the world, and now with their home in ruins they invest modestly
in a neighbor's boarding house; privileged Jolie Logan, in poor health following a
bout of scarlet fever, loses her mother in the quake. Ensuing sections bring Jolie
118 
* THE BULLETIN
and Kate together as socialite and hired companion-a position Kate accepts only
because it dangles before her a vague promise of a trip to her mother's homeland,
Ireland-and Dr. Logan does indeed send the girls abroad in hopes of restoring his
daughter's failing health and easing her obsession with her deceased mother. Al-
though Kate fully intends to abandon her charge once she sets foot on Irish soil,
she finds that her bond of friendship to Jolie is surprisingly strong and that Ireland
is not quite the welcoming land she had fantasized it to be. It is Kate who finally
returns to America after she and Jolie arrive at a tacit understanding that Jolie is
doomed and will never reach home again. One might expect the earthquake and
dying-girl plots to be the animating forces here, but as in Thesman's Tree books,
character outstrips events in creating and sustaining interest. Jolie and Kate are
well-matched protagonists, and their separate yet intertwined struggles with disap-
pointed life expectations are thoroughly involving. Now, if we only knew what
happened to Clare and Mr. Younger .... EB
TURNER, SANDY 
Silent Night; written and illus. by Sandy Turner. 
Atheneum,
2001 
[36p]
ISBN 0-689-84156-6 
$16.00 
R Gr. 1-4
On Christmas Eve, a family prepares for bed, but something is disturbing peace on
earth-the relentless yappings of their little white dog. He goes from beyond
vocal to frenzied when Santa arrives, growling at St. Nick's heels as the old gentle-
man goes about his duties. The pup attempts to alert the paterfamilias to the
intruder, but apparently grownups can't see Santa; finally Santa departs, the yippy
little terrier is silenced by the cat next door, and the kids find a telltale piece from
Santa's suit, which is included on the closing endpapers of the book. The plot
could use some streamlining (shouldn't the piece of fabric at least be a clear conse-
quence of the doggy's enthusiastic nips?) and the pacing lags as a consequence.
This is a diverting notion, however, and its execution, in largely wordless (if not
silent, due to the relentless woofing) panels, helps keep the whimsy interestingly
quirky rather than schlocky. Turner's scratchy, delicate lines look like the work of
the New Yorker cartoonist that she is; drawn on buff backgrounds, her figures
come to life in color when the plot requires them to do so (Santa's tomato-soup
costume and snowy beard glow against the subdued background tone), and they
offer some amusing characterizations (Santa's ride is a single long-faced reindeer
chauffeuring him in a motorized flying sleigh). Kids more drawn by actions than
words will find this a diverting Christmas story with a difference. DS
VANDERWARKER, PETER 
The Big Dig: Reshaping an American City. 
Little,
2001 
55p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-316-60598-0 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Boston has the harder job: to modernize an arcane traffic system with two new
bridges, two underwater tunnels, and an underground tunnel while keeping the
city open for business. Vanderwarker's job is slightly less daunting: to sort out the
details and present them in a format children (and more than a few interested
adults, probably) can understand. One can only hope Boston succeeds as well as
Vanderwarker, who admirably incorporates history, urban planning, and engi-
neering into a cogent whole. Each major component of the project is treated
separately, but the lucid, lively text and several well-placed maps knit the details
together. Ample illustration is not here for window dressing; each diagram and
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
119
photograph is precisely coordinated with the text to explicate a tricky bit of rout-
ing or an abstruse engineering technique, so that readers both "hear" and "see"
everything from weight distribution along the Charles River Bridge to the laying
of a tunnel tube sections in Boston Harbor. IfVanderwarker is to be faulted at all,
it is perhaps for glossing over justifiable criticism of the project as businesses and
private lives are inevitably, albeit minimally, disrupted; mitigation efforts are briefly
addressed, but adulation of engineering achievement casts a rosy glow over the
human cost. This, however, won't trouble readers who come for the earthmoving
and the building; their only dilemma will be to decide whether it would be more
fun to build a bridge or a tunnel. EB
WARD, HELEN, ad. 
The Animals' Christmas Carol; ad. and illus. by Helen Ward.
Millbrook, 2001 
36p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2408-9 
$23.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1496-2 
$17.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
Using the familiar carol of "The Friendly Beasts" as her jumping-off point, Ward
(illustrator of The Hare and the Tortoise, 6/99) adds a few more voices to the tradi-
tional medley of donkey, cow, sheep and dove, allowing dog and lion, peacock and
bear, mongoose and woodworm, and others to chime in with their various gifts to
the newborn savior. While rhyme is sometimes prioritized over scansion, Ward's
additional text has a gentle rhythm. The naturalistic portraits of birds and beasts,
gleaming with gold highlights, compensate for any poetic awkwardness: camels
with gentle, liquid eyes, turtledoves comfortably crouched in their feathers, a ram
with curving horns and soft muzzle gaze at viewers from what is clearly a world
made peaceful with the arrival of this child. An afterword places the song in its
historical and musical context; lyrics and music are included. JMD
WARREN, ANDREA 
We Rode the Orphan Trains. Houghton, 2001 
132p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-618-11712-1 
$18.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Whereas Warren's earlier offering Orphan Train Rider (BCCB 9/96) focused on
one boy's experience, here she introduces nine individuals, interviewed as adults,
who rode the trains throughout the first decades of the 1900s. Although most
orphan-train accounts focus on Charles Loring Brace and his Children's Aid Soci-
ety, Warren broadens her scope to include children placed from the Catholic New
York Foundling Hospital and a Kentucky orphanage with no apparent East Coast
affiliation. All Warren's subjects clearly landed on their feet, and adulthood may
have tempered some of their harsher memories, but each seems to weigh honestly
the fear and confusion of orphanage, uprooting, and often insensitive examination
by strangers against their eventual acceptance into good homes. And these homes
could hardly be more varied-comfortable town homes, modest farm homes, abu-
sive homes from which children were removed, affectionate homes in which par-
ent-child bonding was almost immediate. Warren also includes a profile of Clara
Comstock, an agent from the Children's Aid Society who accompanied the or-
phans on the trains and made supervisory visits to the children's new families.
Childhood and adult photographs of each subject draw what may seem to child
readers a quaint, arcane experience directly into their own era; an index and list for
further reading are included. EB
120 
* THE BULLETIN
WOOD, AUDREY 
A Cowboy Christmas: The Miracle at Lone Pine Ridge; illus. by
Robert Florczak. 
Simon, 2001 
4 6p
ISBN 0-689-82190-5 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Cully's a useful hand around the ranch, and Evan and his mother have come both
to rely on and to cherish him. Evan is sure something's awry when Cully doesn't
turn up as expected for Christmas, and miraculous signs point him to the half-
frozen Cully; after recuperating, Cully becomes the stepfather for which Evan yearns.
Though described as a "tribute to the courage and faith of the men, women, and
children ... of the frontier West," this follows a conventionally romantic western
plot: fatherless boy meets cowboy, boy (almost) loses cowboy, boy (and his wid-
owed ma) get cowboy back. In a note, Wood discusses her reading of pioneer
women's journals, but there's little evidence of this research in a hackneyed story
that would have served comfortably as an episode of Bonanza. Florczak's rough-
textured photorealistic oils on canvas will appeal to Zane Grey fans in the making;
these dramatic landscapes are slick and predictable, but there's a folkloric monu-
mentality to the figures that's archetypally appropriate. Readers looking to have
their generic expectations fulfilled if not expanded may appreciate this lope down
the familiar trail. FK
WYNNE-JONES, TIM 
The Boy in the Burning House. Kroupa/Farrar, 2001 
214 p
ISBN 0-374-30930-2 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-10
Jim Hawkins is gradually recovering from the disappearance and presumed suicide
of his father when his careful existence is disrupted by Ruth Rose Fisher. Ruth
Rose is the local pastor's wild stepdaughter, and to hear her tell it she's got plenty
of reason to be wild: she says her stepfather's being blackmailed for something,
and she thinks that's why he killed Jim's father. A stunned Jim doesn't know
whether to believe the girl Father Fisher smoothly dismisses as disturbed, but he
can't resist following up on some of her hints; investigation tends to support her
suspicions and leaves Jim with questions not just about his father's death but about
Hub Hawkins' culpability in a fire in his youth that killed a boy, back when he was
friends with the boy who grew up to be Ruth's stepfather. Wynne-Jones (author
of The Maestro, BCCB 10/96, etc.) draws liberally on the Treasure Island refer-
ences throughout, but as the tension rises and the kids elude the frightening and
dangerous preacher, the echoes of Night ofthe Hunter are even stronger (unctuous
and threatening Father Fisher manages much of the same satisfying villainy as the
cinematic clergyman). The book plays effectively on the "who-do-you-believe?"
guessing game, realistically letting Jim swing from one extreme to the other under
the influence not just of adult opinion but also his own fears about his father's
secrets. The adventure builds effectively and gives Jim his due chance for genuine
heroism, and the psychological dramas are also effectively played out, making this
a satisfying read for teens interested in human dynamics as well as for adventure
fans. DS
moo^
NOVEMBER2001 
* 
121
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Jweid, Rosann. Building Character through Literature: A Guide for Middle School
Readers; by Rosann Jweid and Margaret Rizzo. Scarecrow, 2001. ISBN 0-81-8-
3951-2; $32.50. 24 0p.
Sidestepping any controversy about the value of character education, the authors
state that this book is "intended to assist the educators, parents, and other adults
working with children who have embraced the concept." Fifty novels appropriate
for grades 4-8, chosen for their literary excellence and strong characterizations, are
arranged alphabetically by title. Each entry includes publication data, a list of
awards (including children's choice and local, regional, and national awards), a
cast of characters, choice of setting, and a plot summary. The summary is fol-
lowed by a list of discussion questions, suggested projects, vocabulary exercises, a
short biography of the author, and a brief statement by the author (when available)
about the writing of the particular book. An appendix of titles arranged by genre
and theme, a list of character traits (citizenship, fairness, self-respect, etc.) and the
novels that exemplify them, a list of websites, a bibliography, and an index are
included. The range of novels selected is far-flung, from Verne's Around the World
in Eighty Days to Levine's Ella Enchanted, and they're qualitatively something of a
mixed bag. No audience recommendations beyond "appropriate for grades 4-8"
are given, and the appropriateness of all titles for the given grade range is question-
able. Nonetheless, this is an organized and replicable approach that has a multi-
tude of curriculum and other uses. JMD
Scales, Pat R. Teaching Banned Books: 12 Guides for Young Readers. American
Library Association, 2001. Paper ed. ISBN 0-8389-0807-1; $28.00. 136p.
School librarian Pat Scales offers twelve strategies for teaching books that have
been challenged or censored in the United States. Designed to accompany teach-
ing about the First Amendment, "each strategy includes a summary of the novel, a
pre-reading activity, discussion questions to encourage critical thinking, and ac-
tivities to broaden students' knowledge of topics in the novel." The book is di-
vided into five parts: The First Amendment, Censorship, and Intellectual Freedom;
The Bully and the Outcasts; Racism, Bigotry, and Civil Rights; Reality, Secrets,
and the Imagination; and Other Worlds, Other Cultures, Other Times. Each part
contains two or three strategies; Strategy 1 is related to "Studying the First Amend-
ment," but remaining strategies are related to a specific book or series of books.
Every title chose for inclusion is worthy of close examination, from Cole's The
Goats to Taylor's Rollof Thunder, Hear My Cry, from Lowry's The Giver to Newton's
I Will Call it Georgie's Blues. Summaries of the books are critical and thought-
provoking; discussion questions are complex; activities are designed for both groups
and individuals; and connections are made to other books through annotated
booklists at the end of each strategy. A bibliography and index are included. JMD
122 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
African Americans-stories: Pinkney
American Indians-fiction: Spooner
American Indians-folklore:
Bierhorst
Animals: Davies
Animals-poetry: Bunting;
Cunningham; Ward
Basketball: Kuklin
Bears-fiction: Pinkwater
BEDTIME STORIES: Burningham
BILINGUAL BOOKS: Alarc6n
BIOGRAPHIES: Brown
Cats-stories: Foreman; MacDonald
Chanukah-stories: Rosen
Christmas: Hooper; Mayer
Christmas-fiction: Turner; Wood
Christmas-poetry: Bunting;
Cunningham; Moore; Ward
Christmas-stories: Bartoletti;
Bodkin; Calhoun; David;
Foreman; Garland, M.; Hobbie;
Krensky; Peterson; Pinkney;
Raschka
Circuses-stories: Falconer
Cities: Vanderwarker
CONCEPT BOOKS: Calmenson
Construction: Vanderwarker
COUNTING BOOKS: Melmed;
Rosen
Cowboys-fiction: Wood
Dancers and dancing-fiction:
Jacobson
Death and dying-fiction: Hite;
Lundgren; Shreve; Thesman
Denmark-folktales: MacDonald
Depression, the-stories: Bartoletti
Dogs-fiction: Turner
Dogs-poetry: Cabrera
Egypt, ancient-fiction: Cooney
Engineering: Vanderwarker
Ethics and values: Hesse; Lynch
Families-fiction: Shreve
FANTASY: Hill
Farms-fiction: Hite
Fathers-fiction: Fleischman; Shreve;
Wynne-Jones
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Bierhorst; Bodkin; Garland, S.;
Gerson; Lupton; MacDonald;
Muten; Seeger
Foster care-fiction: Lundgren
Friendship-fiction: Donahue;
Jacobson; Lundgren; Lynch;
Thesman;
Friendship-stories: Hobbie
FUNNY STORIES: Pinkwater;
Somers
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Sanchez
Giants-stories: Seeger
Gifts-stories: David
Grandmothers-stories: Diouf
Hair-stories: Diouf
Halloween-stories: Somers
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Donahue; Farley; Hesse; Kerr;
Pinkney; Spooner; Thesman
History, U.S.: Warren
History, world: Meltzer
Holidays: Bartoletti; Bateman;
Bodkin; Bunting; Calhoun;
David; Foreman; Garland, M.;
Hobbie; Mayer; Rael
Hopi-folklore: Bierhorst
HORROR STORIES: Stine
NOVEMBER 2001 
* 
123
Illness-fiction: Thesman
Imagination-stories: Falconer
Immigrants-stories: Bodkin;
Peterson; Rael
Jews-stories: Rael
Kidnapping-fiction: Napoli
Kings-stories: Farley
Korea-stories: Farley
Magic-stories: Garland, M.
Mexico-folklore: Gerson
Mothers-fiction: Shreve
Music and musicians: Hooper
Music and musicians-poetry: Ward
MYSTERIES: Napoli; Wynne-
Jones
MYTHOLOGY: Muten
Nature study: Davies
NURSERY RHYMES: Cabrera
Orphans: Warren
Pigs-stories: Falconer; Hobbie
Pioneers: Brown
Pirates: Meltzer
POETRY: Alarc6n; Bunting;
Calmenson; Cunningham; Hesse;
Moore; Siegen-Smith
Pregnancy-fiction: Lundgren
Prejudice-fiction: Hesse; Sanchez
Racism-fiction: Hesse
Readers' theater: Fleischman; Hesse
Reading aloud: Bierhorst; Gerson;
Kuklin; Pinkwater
Reading, easy: Jacobson; Kuklin;
McKenna
Reading, reluctant: Bierhorst;
Kuklin; Stine
Relationships-fiction: Sanchez
Religious instruction: Mayer
Religion-fiction: Miklowitz
RHYMING STORIES: Bateman;
Melmed
Safety education: Cuyler
Saints: Mayer
School-fiction: McKenna
Sleep-stories: Burningham
Snowmen-stories: Garland, M.
Spain-fiction: Miklowitz
Spiders-stories: Bodkin
Sports: Kuklin
Sports-fiction: Hill
Storytelling: Bierhorst; Garland, S.;
Lupton; MacDonald; Mutin
Storytime: Calmenson;
MacDonald; Somers
Suicide-fiction: Lundgren
SUPERNATURAL TALES: Stine
Thanksgiving-poetry: Melmed
Thanksgiving-stories: Bateman; Rael
Time travel-fiction: Cooney
Time-poetry: Siegen-Smith
Trees-stories: Raschka
Turkeys-stories: Bateman
Turtles: Davies
Vietnam-folklore: Garland, S.
Voyages and travel-fiction: Thesman
Voyages and travel-stories: Hobbie
West, the-fiction: Spooner; Wood
Winter-poetry: Alarc6n
Witches-stories: Somers
Women's studies: Brown; Gerson;
Mutdn
WORDLESS BOOKS: Turner
World War II-fiction: Kerr
Writers and writing-stories: Farley
,,MYloom~y
Kon leachtin 
Kr
£JL 
IV, 
4J
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
-otsd 
Us ad 
I 
~t
Cove 
pri
-
.
. .
__-~S--
Don't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
I '"~-I~;-~-~-------- 
--~_._
-
i 
~"'"' '"'"
"[In] Huck's retelling of this Scottish folktale . . . Peggy Ann wishes for
a husband good and kind, and ends up with the Black Bull (actually the
enchanted Duke) of Norroway. Lobel's illustrations have a sturdy, literal
straightforwardness that matches the no-nonsense text. A solid addition
to comparative folktale and storytelling collections." -The Bulletin
"Huck's talents are impressively demonstrated in a blithesome retelling of
a tale reminiscent of 'East of the Sun and West of the Moon.' The text,
fluid and precise, [is matched by] the full-color illustrations. The total
effect is lushly romantic and definitely appealing." -The 
Horn Book
"Huck's effort to find 'traditional tales that show plucky girls' pays off
here . . . [her] text is powerful and sweet, well-matched by Lobel's
theatrically imagined pictures." -Kirkus 
Reviews
"A superb addition to all folktale collections." -
School Library Journal
Ages 6 up. $15.95 Tr (0-688-16900-7); $15.89 Lb (0-688-16901-5)
R Greenwillow Books An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
WILL
In the wake of Dawson City's Great Fire of 1899, 16-year-old Jason
and his girlfriend Jamie canoe the Yukon River across Alaska in an
epic race from Canada's Klondike to Nome's new gold fields.
2000 ALA Best Books for YAs * 2000 ALA Quick Picks for Reluctant YA Readers
$15.95 Tr (0-688-15093-4) * $4.95 Pb (0-380-72914-8)
* HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Amencas, New York, NY 10019 * www.harperchildrens.com
i
i:
-----
Picture Perfect -
August House LittleFolk!
BANK 
STR
THE 
BEST 
CHILDREN'S 
BOOKS
AR'S ALL-NIGHT PARTY
LL 
HARLEY 
will anyoni
istrated by Melissa Ferreira 
fond of sa
Irdback $15.95 0-87483-572-0 
what migh
ges: 4-7
STONE SOUP
HEATHER FOREST
A .Illt 
ncrntnt ~I 
+ 
cnn 
Jnhr
nuILL 
V 
uJriu V 
y 
us U 
.e
EET 
COLLEGE: 
Hardback $15.95 0-87483-498-8
OF 
THE 
YEAR 
Paperback $6.95 0-87483-602-6
Aaes: 4-7 U
*
fTLE JOHNNY BUTTERMILK
FTER AN OLD ENGLISH FOLKTALE
NN 
WAHL 
SELECTED 
AS
lustrated by Jennifer Mazzucco 
Ba 
PARENT 
CO
Hardback $15.95 0-87483-559-3
A,^. 
A 0
Sto throw a party, but
e come? As Bear is
ying, "You never know
t happen."
I
OUTSTANDING
OUNCIL
HyA. A U 
r 
__
·
****************/ 
ISereams,
AM: A FEAST OF FOOD RHYMES 
Yo-u Scream
I 
/*"t-witi^.
SELECTED 
AS ONE 
OF THE 
NEW 
YORK 
LILLIAN MORRISON
PUBLIC 
LIBRARY'S 
100 BEST 
CHILDREN'S Illustrated by Nancy Dunaway
BOOKS 
FOR 
READING 
AND 
SHARING 
Hardback $12.95 0-87483-495-3
Ages: 4+ -
IE DANCING TURTLE: A FOLKTALE FROM BRAZIL
ETOLD BY PLEASANT DESPAIN
ustrated by David Boston
lardback $15.95 0-87483-502-X
Ages: 4-7 
A TTY TT II
SELECTED 
AS OUTSTANDING 
BY PARENT 
COUNCIL
BANK 
STREET 
COLLEGE: 
THE BEST 
CHILDREN'S 
BOOKS 
OF THE YEAR
SELECTED 
FOR ELEMENTARY 
SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 
COLLECTION
HAUSET
www. augusthouse. cor
P.O. 
Box 3223 / Little Rock, AR 
72203 / 201 East Markham 72201 / 501-372-5450 / FAX 
501-372-5579
-n
I
The-
FIVE OWLS
7 publication for readers personally and professionally
involved in children's literature.
THE FIVE OWLS is a bimonthly
publication devoted to children's
literature, bringing together many
of today's finest books with writers
whose contributions are shaping the
future of children's books. A yearly
bscription is available for $35.00.
THE FIVE OWLS for Parents
Schools, libraries and other institutions that have a subscription
to the magazine can receive free quantities of THE FIVE OWLS for
Parents-it's short on advertising and long on book picks,
parenting information, and child development content that
is of real value to families.
For more information,
call 612-377-2004
or visit www.fiveowls.com
#
Il,,
I 
km J-...1, 
Hil,- 
.
V-i" 4- 
Eldw (S..l 
m~d Sch- 
1955)
nl--b UiL~r Yni~. ~nM FI-u I(mmmA(rb··.r~ 
IU'i(l 
/
A 2001 Boston Globe-Horn Book
Award Honor Book for Nonfiction
Pr 
WIMJMi 
LT-B' 
4
/c0~
MS'WATPH 
VLlW 
Init.H"WL
Pictures 
by 
James 
Stevenson
"
With 
reat 
affection 
and 
an 
a 
ealin 
nostal 
ia 
Hurst 
recou 
s
the story of her father, an avid rock collector from the time he
was a boy.... . The story's conclusion will prove as satisfying
to readers as it was to Hurst's father [when he becomes
curator of mineralogy at the local museum]. Stevenson's artwork
convincingly evokes both the personality of this endearing
protagonist and the period in which he lived."
-
Starred review / Publishers Weekly
"A big-hearted true story ... nourished by the deep humanity in
Stevenson's watercolors." 
-Kirkus 
Reviews
"Readers will warm to Hurst's rock-solid tale of unwavering
dedication and determination." 
-
The Horn Book
Ages 5 up. $15.95 Tr (0-06-029403-5); $15.89 Lb (0-06-029404-3)
i Greenwillow Books An imprint o HarperCollnsChildren'sBooks
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019 www.harperchildrens.com
B
LI
·~···~
c
i
"~ ~~
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street 
P 
O 
A
Champaign, IL 61820 
POSTAGE
U.S.A.
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
0008-9036(200111)55:3;1 -Q
";
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2000 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age, or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccb/
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only
individual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at our homepage: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
