T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
June 2007
Vol. 60   No. 10
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
June 2007
Vol. 60 No. 10
399  the BIg PICture
 
 Violet Bing and the Grand House written and illus. by Jennifer Paros
400  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
405  • Take-Off: American All-Girl Bands during World War II by Tonya   
 
 Bolden
406  • Sara’s Face by Melvin Burgess
408  • One Whole and Perfect Day by Judith Clarke
422  • Daffodil, Crocodile by Emily Jenkins; illus. by Tomek Bogacki
423  • Evil Genius by Catherine Jinks
442  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
444  suBjeCt And use Index
398 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Cindy Welch, Reviewer (CW)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann
Melissa Zilic
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $80.00; combined print & electronic $112.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $50.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $13.20 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.35. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2007 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Jennifer Paros from Violet Bing and the Grand House ©2007. Used by permission of 
Viking Children’s Books.
June 2007 • 399
the BIg PICture
Violet Bing and the Grand House
written and illustrated by Jennifer Paros
Literary heroines, especially those of middle-grade novels, tend to run to one of two 
types: they’re either plucky and intrepid or shy and timorous. In Violet Bing and 
the Grand House, however, audiences meet a protagonist who crosses the categories, 
a timid seven-year-old girl who combines unease about anything outside of her 
minuscule comfort zone with a ferocious determination to stay squarely within it, a 
girl who specializes in saying “No” to anything, like bumpy pancakes, piano lessons, 
or sleepovers, that tosses her into the daunting realms of novelty and uncertainty. 
“When the going gets tough,” says Violet Bing, “I always just want to go home.” 
When Violet says “No” to accompanying her family on vacation, she’s 
stuck with the disconcerting alternative of staying with her great-aunt Astrid at 
the Grand House. There she’s initially intimidated by elements ranging from the 
colors on the bedroom walls to the prospect of seaside outings. Soon, though, 
she’s intrigued by a local girl chasing a stray dog, spurred on by an old diary that 
proves to have been written by her great-aunt as a young girl, and tempted by the 
internal appeals of the mysterious house. It’s the last that really lifts her into a new 
viewpoint—literally, as she finds the secret passage in the house and climbs up to 
the old sunroom, an achievement that proves to her she’s more of a match for the 
unknown than she had realized.
The book doesn’t hammer its point home; like Aunt Astrid, it sits back 
and allows Violet space to grapple with the drawbacks of her self-imposed strictures. 
From the start, Violet is uncomfortable rather than contrary, a kid who also might 
like a little something different if it weren’t so complicated to explain just how nov-
elty would need to blend in with her reassuring routine. She essentially undergoes 
a quiet program of desensitization, moving gradually from looking at new experi-
ences (either through the upstairs window or on the map Aunt Astrid made of the 
house) to dabbling her toe in them to modestly enjoying them while still retaining 
some control over her participation; since nobody ever pushes Violet toward these 
explorations, she’s free to sort out her own balance and she’s in charge of her own 
progress. The plot trajectory is subtle and the plot itself mild rather than dramatic, 
but this is a book about character and voice. Violet is utterly credible as a kid who’s 
so in the habit of defending herself from being overwhelmed by change that even 
she’s starting to sense the possibility that she’s missing out as a consequence.  Paros 
offers a third-person present-tense narration that’s economical in expression and 
sympathetic in tone, but it’s also quirky and individual, wryly comedic yet percep-
tive about Violet’s thoroughgoing unease (“And although lunch is still some time 
away,” thinks an uncomfortable Violet faced with the alarming prospect of a new 
friend, “she should probably start getting ready for it, or something”). 
400 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
The touches of linguistic complexity may make this more suitable for 
a gently humorous readaloud at the younger end of the range; more experienced 
readers will nonetheless be reassured by the concise text and the spare, tidy line 
drawings that thickly populate the pages. Either way, many kids may recognize 
elements of themselves in Violet, and they’ll warm to this tenderly jocular but 
understanding literary exploration of a kid who considers stasis her best friend. 
(See p. 435 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
AlexAnder, AlmA Gift of the Unmage. Eos/HarperCollins, 2007 389p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-083956-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-083955-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-9
Fourteen-year-old Thea has grown up under the weight of impossible expectations, 
since, as the seventh child of a seventh daughter and seventh son, she should have 
extraordinary magical abilities. Instead, her parents have grown increasingly disap-
pointed as their various strategies to spark her mystical powers all fail. In desperation, 
Thea is sent into the past to seek help from Cheveyo, an Anasazi warrior. While 
there, Thea discovers that she has repressed her own boundless gifts, intuitively 
knowing since a young age that showing her strengths would have meant ruin for 
herself and indeed the world, as the ruthless alien race of the Alphiri would have 
stopped at nothing to harness her power to their benefit. Shortly after her return to 
her own life and time, a long-awaited battle between the Alphiri and Thea (backed 
by current allies and past mentors) culminates in a breathless struggle that goes 
to the forces of good, though it also becomes clear that this encounter is only the 
first of many. While Thea’s time with Cheveyo is contemplatively paced, the rest 
of the book cracks along, with Thea garnering allies, determining her destiny, and, 
of course, saving the world at a lightning clip. Readers will find the inscrutable and 
haunted Thea remarkable at any pace; Alexander skillfully offers details of Thea’s 
past to inform and engage readers, while shrouding her future in such mystery that 
fans will eagerly anticipate the remaining two novels of the planned Worldweavers 
trilogy.  AS
Andersen, HAns CHristiAn The Tinderbox; ad. by Stephen Mitchell; illus. by 
Bagram Ibatoulline. Candlewick, 2007 40p
ISBN 0-7636-2078-5 $17.99   
R 7-10 yrs
This familiar Andersen tale is retold here by the same team that collaborated on 
The Nightingale (BCCB 11/02). Mitchell follows Andersen’s plot, telling of a 
soldier who tricks a witch out of her tinderbox, then uses its wish-granting power 
to call up magical dogs, view a princess, and, finally, save his own life. Mitchell’s 
stately retelling retains the traditional tone and pacing of Andersen’s tale and moves 
June 2007 • 401
steadily through the episodes, treating the violence with calm straightforwardness. 
Ibatoulline’s line-and-watercolor illustrations have the flavor of nineteenth-century 
engravings; the oversized compositions are densely detailed with elaborate, formal 
linework that adds depth and dimension both to the landscapes and the portraiture. 
The balance of restrained elegance and larger-than-life outlandishness works to great 
effect and matches the cool, even tone of the narrative. Though the extensive text 
will take a while to read aloud, young listeners will likely buy right into the drama 
of the soldier’s tale. There is plenty to discuss in the story’s ending, and listeners 
will likely have strong opinions about the justice of the events.  HM
Arnold, Tedd Rat Life. Sleuth/Dial, 2007 199p
ISBN 0-8037-3020-9 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-9 
There’s not much shakin’ in fourteen-year-old Todd’s New York burg in May of 
1972, but even so, a kid needs more spending money than Todd can squeeze out 
of the vending machine he runs at his parents’ motel. He therefore jumps at the 
chance of part-time work at the local drive-in theater, offered to him by an edgy 
young man, Rat, who pops up in one of the stranger moments of Todd’s life—as 
he’s forced to euthanize a stray pup he tried to rescue. Todd is fascinated by Rat, a 
Vietnam vet not much older than himself, and by Rat’s seedy life with a drugged-out 
mother. Rat, though often morose, proves a good friend to Todd, at least until Todd 
begins to sniff out connections between Rat, a violent patron at the motel, and a 
body of a murder victim recently fished out of the river. Rat is a truly engrossing 
character, at once sympathetic and menacing, and although Todd is intrinsically 
less interesting, he functions well as the innocent instrument with which readers 
probe the shadowy corners of Rat’s sad life. A gunpoint abduction (or is it?) and a 
torrential flood should keep readers engaged even after they think they’ve figured 
out “who done it.” Tweens and teens who associate Arnold with goofy picture books 
from their bygone youth are in for an eye-opener.  EB
Aronson, MArc Up Close: Robert F. Kennedy. Viking, 2007 [208p] illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 0-670-06066-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
“So who was Bobby? Pale shadow of his brother? Ambitious conniver? Crusader 
for the poor and unfortunate? Martyr?” In attempting to capture the personality 
that garnered such diverse public opinions, Aronson knows he must also grapple 
with the Kennedy family, and to probe the Kennedy family is to enter a labyrinth 
of patriarchal domination, vicious sibling rivalry, shady financial deals, probable 
underworld connections, dirty personal secrets, and almost paradoxically, a fierce 
dedication to public service. With his customary attention to historiography, 
Aronson critiques the sources from which he draws his account, and it’s therefore 
little surprise that the “insightful psychological portrait” of Kennedy by author 
Evan Thomas seems to have influenced his own largely psychological approach to 
this biography. While he occasionally fills in the historical background with a very 
broad brush (“As [Senator Joseph] McCarthy understood, people voted with their 
emotions, rather than their minds”), he paints a compellingly detailed portrait of 
an overlooked son who settled into (or perhaps just settled for) the role of politi-
cal manager and enabler for elder brother Jack, and who only stepped into a race 
for Democratic presidential nomination with reluctance and insecurity. Writing 
402 • The BulleTin
is lively and intimate, all quotations are cited, and a bibliography with annotated 
websites is included; an index and black-and-white pictures will be included in 
the final copy.  EB
Aston, diAnnA Hutts A Seed Is Sleepy; illus. by Sylvia Long. Chronicle, 
2007 34p
ISBN 0-8118-5520-1 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
Following the format of their previous title An Egg Is Quiet, Aston and Long turn 
their attention to the structure, function, and diversity of seeds. Readers can cer-
tainly cull a fair amount of information from the text on such pertinent matters as 
varying lengths of seed incubation and dormancy, wildly disparate sizes of seeds, 
and seeds’ need for soil, warmth, and water. Haphazard organization makes the 
story difficult to follow, though, and Aston occasionally loses precision in distin-
guishing between the seed itself and the plant into which it develops. A number 
of niggling annoyances mar the effectiveness: the insufficient definition of “fruit”; 
the confusing explanation of the germination of the world’s oldest known seed (can 
the date palm that grew from the seed now be called “extinct”?); the vividly hued 
double-page spread of seeds that shows the sixty-pound coco de mer palm seed only 
marginally larger than an adjacent grain of rice; the observation that a seed might 
“tumble through a bear’s belly” accompanied by a depiction of bear and berries, 
sans poop. The spacious layout, lovely cursive and pseudo hand-lettered fonts, and 
elegantly drafted botanical watercolors will nonetheless make this an attractive 
addition to the 580s.  EB 
BArkley, BrAd Dream Factory; by Brad Barkley and Heather Hepler. Dutton, 
2007 [224p]
ISBN 0-525-47802-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
When Disneyworld’s cartoon characters—or at least the people inside of them—go 
on strike, the park quickly hires young fill-ins to literally step into their shoes (some 
of them hired, in fact, specifically for their ability to fit into the extant costumes). 
Two such hires are our alternating narrators: Luke, who occupies the role of Dale 
(the lesser-known chipmunk in Chip and Dale) and Ella, who, appropriately 
enough, inhabits the Cinderella costume. Luke immediately hooks up with Cassie, 
the all-around American girl who conveniently plays his partner, Chip; Ella falls 
in with Mark, her Prince Charming. The two narrators nonetheless grow closer, 
sharing their taste for looking below the surface and questioning the past (Ella still 
grieves the loss of her beloved older brother) and future (Luke resists following 
his older brother and father into the family business). This is ultimately a classic 
romance about soulmates finding each other against the odds, but Barkley and 
Hepler reenergize the old theme with their creative approach and setting. The book 
makes genuinely clever use of the Disneyworld milieu, exploring the merchandis-
ing of magic and the playing of roles in ways that tie into Luke and Ella’s personal 
dilemmas. Yet it’s affectionate rather than cynical, with Disney true-believer Mark 
a pretty good guy and respect given to the craft of a long-term character actor who 
takes his job very seriously indeed. This is a witty and sweet romance about the 
magic of finding both oneself and true love.  DS
June 2007 • 403
BAuer, CAt Harley’s Ninth. Knopf, 2007 202p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93736-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83736-1 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Having discovered the true identity of her real father in Harley Like a Person (BCCB 
5/00), Harley is now living with her dad in New York, pursuing her dream of being 
an artist and preparing to open her first exhibit in a posh gallery. The entire novel 
takes place on the day of the exhibit, and it is simply crammed with more of the 
melodramatic coincidences that characterized the earlier novel. As the day progresses, 
she and Sean, her father, who hasn’t been back to her hometown of Lenape Lakes 
for fourteen years, go there together, and drama piles on top of drama. They run 
into Carla, Harley’s ex-best friend, whose biological father is also Sean, and there 
is a tense confrontation. Another confrontation ensues when Harley stops by her 
home to get a dress for the exhibit, and her abusive stepfather decides to drag up 
Sean’s history with Harley’s mother; then Harley finds out that the old woman she 
always considered her fairy godmother is really her grandmother. All the while, 
Harley is worried that her family history of early pregnancy may be repeating itself: 
she’s five days late for her period. Readers of the first book will be interested and 
satisfied to see loose ends tied up here, but the decision to set the entire book in a 
single day makes the unfolding of coincidences and confrontations feel contrived. 
Nevertheless, Harley’s blend of intense artistic longing and pouty teenage angst 
rings as true as it did in the first book; readers who want nothing but the best for 
Harley will be tickled pink as wave after wave of good fortune and positive closure 
wash over her.  KC 
Bell, HilAri Shield of Stars: The Shield, Sword, and Crown, Book One. Simon, 
2007 267p
ISBN 1-4169-0594-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-8
Weasel, a former pickpocket, has spent the last few years trying to forget his past 
and live up to the high expectations of his new boss, the Justice Holis. When they 
are both arrested for treason, Weasel makes his own escape, but he cannot ignore the 
debt he owes to his mentor and determines to return and save Holis from certain 
death. The bad news is that he only has fourteen days to breach an impenetrable 
prison; the good news is that he’s made friends with the formidable Arisa, a mysteri-
ous girl whose murderous tactics belie her quiet demeanor. A larger political upheaval 
is underway, as various forces converge to drive out the current power-hungry 
regent, and Weasel realizes that Justice Holis may be more closely involved with 
the rebellion than he expected. The unstoppable Arisa may be enough to tip things 
in Weasel’s favor, but he has also stumbled onto an ancient talisman, the shield of 
stars, desperately sought by many who want the respect given to the shield-bearer. 
Although this is the first installment of a trilogy, the book works equally well as a 
fast-paced and clever stand-alone novel; Bell masterfully ties up several plot threads 
while leaving plenty of room for the characters’ new adventures. In fact, there is a 
dramatic turn of events where the Justice becomes the new regent, which means 
that Weasel’s days of being poor are numbered. Although Weasel’s ability to adapt 
to gold-plated luxury and the nuances of political life may be in question at the end 
of the book, readers will undoubtedly be reassured by the fact that his past work 
dealing with thieves and liars can only serve him well in his new role.  AS
404 • The BulleTin
BermAn, steve Vintage: A Ghost Story. Harrington Park/Haworth, 
2007 [164p]
Paper ed. ISBN 1-56023-631-0 $12.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
A seventeen-year-old goth teen kicked out of his home for being gay certainly knows 
loneliness. Even he is surprised, however, by the depths of isolation and despair 
that he sees in a hunky ghost, Josh, whom he finds wandering the highway. The 
unnamed protagonist feels an immediate physical attraction to the ghost, and he 
is at first willing to ignore several disturbing signs about his relationship with Josh, 
not least of which is the fact that the ghost tries to steal his life force while they are 
making out. Once the narrator sees Josh, he becomes aware that he’s surrounded by 
ghosts, many of whom need him to help them find peace. Luckily for his spectral 
and earthly friends, the loyal protagonist is willing to take risks to save those he 
loves. The book’s humor and irony balances the mostly grisly discoveries made about 
the unresolved deaths of the ghosts. Unfortunately, even the witty narration and 
steamy spectral sensuality cannot quite compensate for an overambitious plot: in 
addition to dealing with his family’s problems with his coming out, the protagonist 
also has innumerable ghost dramas, a crush on his best friend’s little brother, and 
an almost fifty-year-old murder mystery that, if not solved quickly, could result in 
his own death. Several intriguing subplots languish unresolved, and the idyllic end-
ing feels a bit forced, though readers will certainly be relieved that the protagonist 
finally finds a home and true love. Readers may well forgive the contrivances and 
lack of spookiness, since Berman has succeeded admirably in writing a powerful 
and poignant coming-out story.  AS
BlACkford, HArriet Tiger’s Story; illus. by Manya Stojic. Boxer, 2007 28p
ISBN 1-905417-39-X $12.95   
R 3-6 yrs
Tiger is, appropriately enough, a tiger, a “small, strong, stripy cub” growing up in 
the Indian forest. He spends his days playing with his sisters and learning to catch 
prey, becoming increasingly independent as he matures. Eventually he strikes out 
on his own, at first accidentally trespassing into another tiger’s territory but even-
tually finding a place just waiting for its own tiger (“This new part of the forest is 
a good place for Tiger”). The gentle present-tense text is a picturesque yet factual 
introduction to tiger life, with harsher aspects of animal development softened (it’s 
never stated exactly what—or whom—Tiger is eating) but still acknowledged; the 
importance of natural habitat is obliquely stressed with the constant evocation of the 
surrounding flora and fauna. Stojic’s painterly landscapes make Tiger’s world soft, 
fuzzy, and inviting, with tigerish rust and complementary grass green predominat-
ing; though there’s a touch of anthropomorphism in the animals’ slightly smiling or 
frowning faces, it’s hard to beat the cuddliness of even an unanthropomorphized tiger 
cub, and the visuals are capable of suggesting tension and danger as well as cheer. 
This will be an inviting lesson in natural history for kids too young for Hewett’s 
Tiger, Tiger, Growing Up (BCCB 5/93), or a story for any youngster who just enjoys 
the cuddly allure of the feline protagonist. An introductory author’s note gives an 
audience-friendly overview of tiger life and behavior.  DS
June 2007 • 405
Bolden, tonyA Take-Off: American All-Girl Bands during World War II. Knopf, 
2007 [96p] illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92797-2 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82797-8 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
When the men shipped off to Europe and Asia in the second World War, women 
riveted ships, drove cabs, ran family businesses, and even stepped up to home 
plate. Bolden turns the spotlight on another golden opportunity that opened up 
for women: leading their own orchestras and—gasp!—thumping, banging, and 
wailing jazz that critics and audiences alike believed only men could play. In three 
well-focused chapters covering Ada Leonard’s All-American Girl Orchestra (white), 
The Prairie View State College Co-Eds (black), and The International Sweethearts 
of Rhythm (racially mixed), readers follow the “orks” as they play in dance halls 
around the country, entertain the troops at home and overseas, and convince skeptics 
that jazz is a matter of talent, not gender. Bolden has a sharp eye for the details that 
bring the stories to life: the stale Fred Harvey sandwiches and flat tires and Jim 
Crow accommodations that made road trips a trial; the frilly dresses worn to appease 
the audience’s sense of feminine aesthetics (and how those sax straps, worn with a 
strapless gown, did cut into the skin!); the hooting and pawing of love-starved GIs 
that became an occupational hazard. Bolden delivers her account with snap and 
sass (“Ina [Ray Hutton] sang okay. Other than her voice, the only instrument she 
played was her body”), and she slings slang that catches the mood of sidebar review 
clips from Metronome and The Beat. Plenty of photos, ads, and press clippings 
embellish the text, and the picture captions are comprehensive enough to serve 
as informative sidebars—Vilaida Snow’s internment in a Nazi prison camp, white 
International Sweethearts passing as black. Information is documented in endnotes, 
lists of sources and recommended reading and listening for kids is included, and 
a glossary, index, and CD are forthcoming in the final volume. Once the fem cats 
start passin’ this around the band room, look out, brother.  EB 
BuCkingHAm, royCe Demonkeeper. Putnam, 2007  [224p]
ISBN 0-399-24649-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Nat’s job as a newly minted demonkeeper is to provide a sort of “wildlife preserve 
for monsters that cause chaos,” which he does in a spooky old house in Seattle in-
fested with uneasy and ungrateful demons. When a pair of skateboarders break into 
the house, one of them is digested by the truly monstrous six-legged furry demon 
imprisoned in the basement, but the other skater escapes only to find the beast hot 
on his trail. Nat, meanwhile, has been on an ill-fated date; he returns home to see 
the blood-spattered basement door still open and to realize, through evidence left 
at the scene, that the monster is tracking the surviving skater. It appears, in fact, 
that the second skater has nabbed Nat’s monster manual, and when Nat goes after 
it, he encounters a former demonkeeper apprentice, now turned evil and intending 
to use Nat’s demons to rule the world. This is horror on the mild side, a slapstick 
monster mash of dripping fangs and wall splatters that comes off as gross rather 
than menacing; the easygoing, breezy humor adds appeal to an already engaging 
premise about monster livestock. Buckingham throws in a superfluous romantic 
subplot, but young readers will probably ignore it in favor of the demonic chases 
and close calls that keep the story moving at a clip. Kids who aren’t ready for the 
406 • The BulleTin
richly demonic world of Stroud’s Bartimaeus Trilogy (The Amulet of Samarkand, 
BCCB 3/04, et al.) but who seek a quick monstrous caper will find this an enjoy-
ably gory outing.  CW
Burgess, melvin Sara’s Face. Simon, 2007 [272p]
ISBN 1-4169-3617-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
After taking us on a rollicking romp in the world of teen sex (Doing It, BCCB 7/04), 
and a dark dive into drugs (Smack, BCCB 4/98), British author Burgess makes the 
next logical move by delving into the seductions of rock ’n’ roll. He doesn’t focus on 
the music, however; instead, he shines his highbeams on the weirdnesses enabled 
by hyperfame. Jonathon Heat is a pop star so famous as to be a household name, 
and he has had so many plastic surgeries that his face has begun to deteriorate. 
Sara Carter is a troubled young woman whose personality is so plastic as to seem 
schizophrenic but who is committed to being famous at any cost. When she scars 
her face through a quasi-accidental encounter with an iron, she lands in a burn 
ward where Jonathon is visiting, and she is sucked into his orbit as either his next 
charity case or his next victim. His attentions appear benevolent except for Sara’s 
recurrent visions of a girl wearing her clothes but lacking a face, and she becomes 
convinced that Jonathon intends to steal her face rather than arrange to repair the 
damage as he has promised. Burgess adopts a format similar to cable TV documen-
taries: he asserts in an introduction that he is trying to get behind the scenes of a 
widely publicized and bizarre crime, and then unfolds his tale by mixing excerpts 
from Sara’s video diary with journalistic accounts of interviews and narrations of 
events from multiple people’s points of view. While the graphic descriptions of 
Jonathon’s ghoulish features amp up the horror, Sara emerges as a postmodern 
gothic heroine, at once innocent of and complicit in her own doom, as she is both 
horrified and transfixed by Jonathon’s awful intentions. Sara’s meditations on fame, 
identity, masks, and the true nature of beauty will take this a step further than its 
sensationalistic plotline might seem to allow; in Sara, Burgess has created a character 
that is strangely unique and yet troublingly familiar.  KC 
BurningHAm, JoHn Edwardo: The Horriblest Boy in the Whole Wide World; written 
and illus. by John Burningham. Knopf, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-94053-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-84053-2 $16.99   
M 4-6 yrs
Edwardo doesn’t start out as the horriblest boy, but when his youthful excesses (“Like 
most children, Edwardo made a lot of noise”) are greeted with firm pronounce-
ments about his nature (“You are the noisiest boy in the whole wide world”), they 
fix his character until he’s a true horror. When by happenstance his actions begin 
to be seen as praiseworthy (he rudely shoves a kid, accidentally pushing him out 
of the way of a plummeting lamp, and gets applauded for his quick thinking), that 
response shapes his behavior positively (“From then on, Edwardo looked after the 
little children”), eventually turning him into “the nicest boy in the whole world.” 
This is more a fable than a story, and youngsters may be intrigued by the notion of 
some fairly easy shifts from bad kid to good kid. Ultimately, though, this is a lesson 
for adults rather than kids, since it’s both pointedly didactic and simplistic in its 
halo-effect-takes-all approach to behavior, and there’s really not enough informa-
tion about Edwardo himself and his feelings to elicit empathy. Burningham’s art 
June 2007 • 407
displays his familiar energetically scribbled lines touched with daubs of lively color 
and floating in white space; the illustrations emphasize the message by repeated 
horizontals of adults pointing accusingly at Edwardo in the first half and extending 
their hands in praise and friendship to him in the second. The art’s the strongest 
element here, though; this bogs down in its moralizing, and kids would be better 
off with Burningham classics such as Mr. Gumpy’s Outing (BCCB 1/72).  DS 
CAlmenson, stepHAnie May I Pet Your Dog?: The How-to Guide for Kids Meeting 
Dogs (and Dogs Meeting Kids); illus. by Jan Ormerod. Clarion, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-618-51034-6 $9.95   
R 4-8 yrs
Harry the dachshund narrates this explanation of safe kid-dog interaction, covering 
important aspects such as permission (“Ask my owner, ‘May I pet your dog?’”), safe 
approaches (“Don’t reach over my head. That scares me”), and general philosophy 
(“Always be gentle with dogs”). There’s a clear message that dogs and situations vary: 
the book carefully explains that some dogs aren’t friendly, that dogs in vehicles are 
often pretty territorial and shouldn’t be approached, and that dogs who are working 
as service animals shouldn’t be interrupted. This is a subject usually relegated to a 
page or two, at best, of dog books, and it’s useful to see it thoroughly explored as 
its own topic, since dog encounters are a big part of kids’ sidewalk travel. While 
the portrayal of the owners’ universal patience and effective animal control is a tad 
optimistic (and kids may occasionally be a bit thrown by the fact that it’s the dog, 
not the subject kid, who’s narrating), the book is clear and helpful in its acknowl-
edgment that dogs respond variably and it’s up to the person in charge of the dog 
to give an eager kid the go-ahead. Ormerod’s streamlined line-and-watercolor il-
lustrations prioritize clarity, keeping the action consistent for best demonstration 
practices and differentiating dogs by behavior as well as by looks. This will not 
only be a helpful lesson for heedlessly enthusiastic youngsters, it will provide more 
timid kids with some useful tools that might make them feel more in control of 
inter-species encounters. A concluding spread distills key points about dog-meeting 
into six main messages.  DS
CArroll, miCHAel Quantum Prophecy: The Awakening. Philomel, 
2007 264p
ISBN 0-399-24725-4 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old friends Danny and Colin uncover a secret on the tenth anniver-
sary of Mystery Day, the day everyone believes that the world’s superheroes and 
supervillains completely disappeared from the planet. It turns out that their very 
much alive parents are former heroes and that an evil plot gone wrong stripped the 
powers from all superbeings on that day ten years ago. Both boys have just begun 
manifesting superpowers themselves (Danny is faster than a speeding bullet, and 
Colin has augmented strength and hearing) when Danny is suddenly snatched 
from his home by the man he thought was his father but who turns out to be a 
shape-shifting bad guy, “frozen” in his father’s image when the great change came. 
Colin and his parents are also snatched, and they, along with Danny, are taken 
to a deserted gold mine where mysterious equipment is being assembled for an 
enigmatic but undoubtedly sinister purpose. Fast-paced action and an extended 
succession of good guy-bad guy confrontations make up the bulk of this novel, the 
first of an anticipated series. There is some tension created toward the end, when 
Danny and Colin race to destroy a null-field generator, mop up the bad guys, and 
408 • The BulleTin
learn that the worst guy of all has escaped, but until then the plot is more a series 
of episodes than a trajectory with momentum. Readers focused on action and who 
are fans of comics and superhero-based novels may nonetheless enjoy this cartoon-
adventure outing.  CW
ClAre, CAssAndrA City of Bones. McElderry, 2007 485p
ISBN 1-4169-1428-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
A typical evening at a New York club takes an irrevocable turn for the weird and 
dangerous when fifteen-year-old Clary witnesses a murder committed by three teens 
who are invisible to everyone else. Less than a day later, Clary’s mother disappears, 
and Clary is herself brutally attacked in their apartment. On top of that, there is 
the handsome but obnoxious Jace to deal with, one of the Shadowhunter (demon-
killing) teens that Clary saw in the club. Clary slowly learns that her ordinary life 
was a cover and that her mother has been having Clary’s memories expunged so 
that she doesn’t remember her power-hungry father, who became evil, or even 
the small signs of magic that she sees everyday. A budding romance between Jace 
and Clary doesn’t get far, thankfully, before the two discover that they are actually 
brother and sister (Clary’s mother was certain Jace was dead when she made her 
escape from all things magical years ago). As this is the first installment in the Mortal 
Instruments series, there are many unresolved threads, but the author is careful to 
provide enough closure to make this a satisfying, albeit open-ended, standalone 
novel. Readers looking to the future will note that Clary successfully harnesses her 
rediscovered supernatural powers and forms several new, intense friendships that 
she will desperately need as she tries to save her still-comatose mother, discover her 
own complex and often dark familial roots, and determine her destiny, both in the 
magical world and in her own everyday life. Indeed, with the strong plot, brilliant 
heroine, and surrounding cast of intriguing and well-developed side characters 
(including the sexy and tortured Jace), fantasy buffs will be eagerly anticipating 
the next volume.  AS
ClArke, JuditH One Whole and Perfect Day. Front Street, 2007 250p
ISBN 1-932425-95-0 $16.95   
R* Gr. 8-12
Seventeen-year-old Lily has grown exhausted with the “sheer peculiarity” of her 
family members: her hopeless older brother, Lonnie, who can’t seem to settle on 
any program of study; her hot-tempered grandfather, Pop, who regularly threat-
ens to burn her house down; her gentle grandmother, Nan, who engages in long 
conversations with an imaginary friend; her overworked mother, Marigold, who 
consistently brings home elderly patients from the adult day care center where 
she works as a psychologist. Nan decides that what the family needs to really pull 
together is a celebration, and she begins planning an eightieth birthday party for 
Pop in hopes that it will prove the needed impetus for Pop and Lonnie to work out 
their differences. Lily is soon caught up in making the party happen, determined 
that even her wacky family deserves one whole and perfect day. While Lily’s voice 
dominates, this quiet, moving novel rapidly shifts points of view, giving each fam-
ily member as well as several secondary characters a voice. As in Kalpana’s Dream 
(BCCB 4/05), with which this book shares characters, the eloquence lies in the 
perfect, fluid movement from character to character and the success with which 
the book ties all of those characters together in a conclusion riddled with elements 
of coincidence and destiny. Reminiscent of Perkins’ Criss Cross (BCCB 9/05), this 
June 2007 • 409
Australian import will appeal especially to fans of strong character development 
and alternating points of view; the birthday-party plotline lies secondary to the 
portrayal of the characters’ internal lives, and readers willing to follow that devel-
opment will wholly embrace the gentle pacing and pointed exploration of the way 
lives interconnect.  HM
Cooper, miCHAel l. Jamestown, 1607. Holiday House, 2007 [112p] illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1948-7 $18.95
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 5-9
Relying largely on the primary source accounts of colonists John Smith, George 
Percy, and Gabriel Archer, Cooper retells the story of the founding of the English 
settlement at Jamestown, the troubled relationship between the Englishmen and 
the Powhatan people who inhabited the region, and the devastation wrought by 
hostilities and famine among the first arrivals and those who followed close on 
their heels. Laudable though the use of primary materials may be, Cooper offers 
readers little guidance concerning their interpretation, complacently allowing them 
to take Smith’s view of events for granted with no consideration of his probable 
biases. Although a concluding essay on the sources observes, “The biggest gap 
is the lack of information from the Native Americans. Everything known about 
Powhatan’s people comes from Europeans who knew little about their language 
or culture,” Cooper does not consult recent scholarship from excavations at and 
around the fort for newer ideas, however tentative, on Anglo/Indian relations. Even 
the extensive gallery of historical engravings (no photographs of the current site, 
or even imaginative reconstructions, are included) reinforces an underexamined 
Anglo-American take on colonization. Source notes, lists for further reading, and 
an index will serve middle-school researchers, but it would be wise to encourage 
them to take a look at Lange’s 1607: A New Look at Jamestown (BCCB 3/07) to 
update and balance their reports.  EB 
CorrigAn, eireAnn Ordinary Ghosts. Scholastic, 2007 328p
ISBN 0-439-83243-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
The death of his mother has given Emil Simon a fair amount of latitude at his 
private day school, latitude he’s not afraid to exploit. Underneath the opportunism, 
however, lies roiling grief, not only at his mother’s passing but at the unexplained 
departure of his glamorous older brother, Ethan, which has left Emil largely alone, 
except for the few times his stern father tears himself away from his work. Emil 
mainly relies on drugs and his loyal friend, Soma, to get through the days, but he 
recently has acquired a secret opportunity: a key that will let him into the majority 
of buildings on campus. Illicitly roaming the campus at night, he finds a girl, Jade, 
with whom he gradually builds a relationship; he also begins to find hints that he 
doesn’t understand the real story behind his family’s traumatic losses. Corrigan is a 
superb storyteller, and her Salingeresque tale keenly depicts not only her troubled 
narrator’s emotional struggles but also the emotional components to the physical 
landscapes he vividly inhabits: his home, foundered on the wreck of family tragedy, 
and his school, thick during the day with manipulatable adults and heedless kids 
(Holden’s “phonies” are Emil’s “douchebags”) but transformed at night into a place 
of possibility that both entices and disappoints. Emil’s voice is rueful and poignant 
while still remaining credibly that of a guy knee-deep in teenaged guyhood, spending 
410 • The BulleTin
much of his time in chemically altered states and desperately relying on the support 
of his best friend while trying to avoid anything resembling serious conversation 
with him. Aficionados of Portman’s King Dork (BCCB 5/06) will be moved by this 
darker look at family secrets and maturation.  DS
Cowell, CressidA That Rabbit Belongs to Emily Brown; illus. by Neal 
Layton. Hyperion, 2007 32p
ISBN 1-4231-0645-8 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
“That rabbit” is actually a toy named Stanley, and he’s the loyal companion to 
young Emily on all her imaginative escapades. Stanley’s stellar attributes haven’t 
gone unnoticed, though: the covetous Queen repeatedly sends emissaries requesting 
that Emily relinquish “that Bunnywunny” and accept in exchange a “brand-new 
golden teddy bear” and an escalating sequence of gifts. After Emily’s constant refus-
als, the Queen finally resorts to burglary, but it’ll take more than that to separate 
Stanley and Emily Brown. Though the storytelling is a touch on the arch side, the 
solid structure (including chantable repetitions) and the imaginative touches make 
this substantive as well as whimsical. Young audiences may consider the Queen 
undeserving of the clemency she receives (after retrieving Stanley, Emily tells the 
Queen the secret of transforming a soulless toy into a true friend), but this is a topic 
close enough to their own hearts that it’s a good place to take first baby steps into 
empathy. Layton’s illustrations deliver the story from the specter of saccharinity 
and fortify it with a vivid and eccentric edge. Emily is all wiry thick scrawl, while 
Stanley is a dawdlingly outlined mass of threadbare cloth that effectively conveys 
the shapelessness of a thoroughly loved toy; in its mix of collage elements from 
old illustrations, photographs, and patterns alongside the informal contemporary 
scribbles, Emily’s world has enough formality to make the fantasy authoritative 
and believable. Youngsters who roll their eyes at the length and sentiment of The 
Velveteen Rabbit will find this a congenial alternative toy story.  DS 
Cronin, doreen Bounce; illus. by Scott Menchin. Atheneum, 2007 34p
ISBN 1-4169-1627-X $14.00   
Ad 2-4 yrs
The exuberant canine from Wiggle (BCCB 7/05) has returned with a new way 
to shake it up. Rhyming text begins with the bouncing of others but soon settles 
down to the joys (“Bouncing with your best friend is called a bouncing double”) 
and risks (“Bouncing on the couch is called big bouncing trouble”) of bouncing 
oneself. This doesn’t achieve the easy, unfettered glee of its predecessor: the start 
is slow, and the scansion and wording are sometimes forced. Once it gets going, 
however, it’s hard to resist bouncing along, and young obstreporati will benefit from 
the reminder that the occasional bump is part of the bouncing game. Menchin’s 
digitally colored linework is touched occasionally with collaged photographic 
elements, but otherwise it’s filled with tangy 1960s retro flavor with only the ma-
chined regularity of the color planes to give away its contemporary origins. While 
little ones don’t usually need much encouragement to bounce, this could be an 
invigorating post-naptime shakeup or rainy-day exertion or just a literary excuse 
to cut bouncingly loose.  DS
June 2007 • 411
de lA Cruz, melissA Masquerade: A Blue Bloods Novel. Hyperion, 
2007 [320p]
ISBN 0-7868-3893-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
In their quest to find out who’s killing the young vampires of New York (see Blue 
Bloods, BCCB 9/06), Schuyler and her human conduit, Oliver, follow her dying 
grandmother’s instruction to seek out Schuyler’s grandfather Lawrence in Venice. 
He initially proves a disappointment, evading and then sending them away, but 
shortly thereafter he turns up in New York to train Schuyler in her powers and 
address the threat that the Committee seems determined to hide: a Silver Blood, 
one of Lucifer’s remaining faithful, is menacing young Blue Bloods and is probably 
being harbored by one of their own. As the plot intensifies, so do the relationships 
between characters, but in disappointingly foreseeable ways. Schuyler still finds 
herself drawn to Jack and vice versa, even though Jack is eternally bound to Mimi, 
who happens to be his twin sister in this cycle of incarnation (adding an ick factor 
that’s hard to overcome), and a beautiful new bad boy turns out to be as untrust-
worthy in character as he is perfect in appearance. Meanwhile, Schuyler’s health is 
failing because she hasn’t yet performed the Sacred Kiss on a human familiar; not 
wanting to lose this virginity of sorts to a stranger, she uses Oliver, only to find that 
he’s deeply in love with her—no surprises there either. Thankfully, added historical 
mysteries and power intrigues move the story forward in ways much more interest-
ing than the romance plots, and a cliffhanger ending turns on an unexpected and 
intriguing twist. Though not as delectable as the first book, this is still undeniably 
tasty fare; the vampire-romance fan base will savor this strategically plotted midsec-
tion of the chronicles of the posh and pointy-toothed.  KC
dingle, AdriAn The Periodic Table: Elements with Style!; illus. by Simon 
Basher. Kingfisher, 2007 128p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7534-6085-8 $8.95   
R Gr. 4-8
What librarian hasn’t watched in agony as a student cuts and pastes together a report 
comprising material far beyond their academic reach? If a science assignment has 
them scurrying for data about the elements, here’s a handy little number to bring 
the subject down to (or up from) earth. After a brief introduction to Mendeleev’s 
famous table and a spread on the chart-topping loner, hydrogen, Dingle presents 
the elements by group, beginning with comments on their similarities (“[The noble 
gases] were once called the inert gases, meaning completely unreactive, but this isn’t 
entirely true—some of them have been caught in clandestine clinches with other 
elements”), offering a thumbnail “portrait” of each element in the group, and then 
highlighting in a double-page spread the most famous, report-worthy, or just plain 
quirkiest of the lot. Data on featured elements includes symbol, atomic number 
and weight, color, standard state, classification, density, boiling and melting points 
(opting, where there’s scientific disagreement, for the British figure), a diagram of 
the position on the periodic table, a full-page original anime-styled icon (helium 
is a pink, cloudlike balloon), and descriptive paragraphs that rise from informative 
all the way to entertaining: “Quick and deadly, that’s me,” boasts Mercury. “I put 
the ‘mad’ in Mad Hatter, and my ability to poison the brain is legendary. A sinister, 
silver-coated killer, I am a strange and stealthy liquid metal that easily vaporizes 
into toxic fumes.” An index and glossary are included, and Basher also provides 
412 • The BulleTin
a detachable poster of the table. When you spot a researcher on the Internet with 
telltale glazed eyes, rush to the rescue with this inviting ready reference.  EB
dogAr, sHAron Waves. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2007 327p
ISBN 0-439-87180-8 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The Ditton family’s life was torn apart the previous summer when their eldest 
daughter, Charley, suffered a swimming accident that’s left her comatose ever since. 
Now they’re uneasily returning to the summer house on the Cornish coast that was 
the scene of the tragedy, and fifteen-year-old Hal, trying to come to grips with the 
questions about his sister’s accident and the prospect of taking her off of life support, 
begins hearing her voice. As he becomes involved with another summer visitor, 
Jackie, he finds out more about Charley’s relationship with Jackie’s older brother 
(and his possessive ex-girlfriend) and begins to unravel the mystery of Charley’s 
fate. Though there’s a touch of The Lovely Bones to the plot, the West Country set-
ting, gothic mystery, and magnetic ex also recall du Maurier’s Rebecca, and readers 
will appreciate the considerable atmosphere of the seaside setting with its motif of 
crashing waves. The book touches effectively on a credible family agony, in which 
members’ responses vary from bewilderment to grief to anger, and the notion that 
Charley is sending her thoughts to Hal adds a spooky pleasure. Less successful, 
though, is the pacing, which plods to a degree that even richly created atmosphere 
cannot relieve, and the narration, which alternates between Hal and Charley, each 
in their last summer’s incarnation as well as their current one; despite the headings 
at the beginning of each narrative section, the voices blend together confusingly 
and the shiftings slow the story further. This therefore lacks the tautness of works 
by Kevin Brooks (Martyn Pig, BCCB 9/02, etc.), but patient readers in search of 
an emotional, supernaturally touched mystery may want to take a dip here.  DS
dowd, sioBHAn A Swift Pure Cry. Fickling/Random House, 2007 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75109-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75108-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
It’s 1984, and Shell Talent’s father has come unhinged after his wife’s death, turning 
to alcohol, maudlin religiosity, and tyrannical parenting as outlets for his grief. With 
responsibility at home for her younger siblings and no real help or guidance from 
anyone in her Irish town, save a young priest, Shell revels in what she believes to be 
the affection of the local cad, Declan. Just before sixteen-year-old Shell learns she’s 
pregnant, Declan takes off for America; although the whole community realizes her 
condition, her father remains in denial, Father Rose is hobbled by propriety from 
assisting her, and the neighbors gossip and speculate over support. Shell’s situation 
veers toward tragedy when she and her siblings quietly bury her stillborn baby, a 
murdered infant is found nearby, and the local police inspector launches a probe 
designed to pin the wrong infant’s death on her and her neglectful father. There’s 
enough operatic drama here to sell a lot of soap, and Shell’s visions of her deceased 
mother add a supernatural element that sits uneasily with the earthly, and earthy, 
tale. Dowd does deliver genuine poignancy, however, in her treatment of Father 
Rose’s dilemma over whether to become involved in the welfare of a girl not much 
younger than himself, Declan’s blissful oblivion over the situation he’s left behind, 
and Mr. Talent’s ineffectual efforts at sobriety and reform.  EB
June 2007 • 413
fields, terri Holdup. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 2007 163p
ISBN 1-59643-219-5 $16.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Nine different people describe their lives as their existences move inexorably to-
ward convergence at the holdup of a fast-food restaurant. The narrators include 
the five teenaged employees working that night, a retired teacher who frequents 
the restaurant to encourage one of the workers toward college, a mentally disabled 
teen who happens on the scene, the naïve young guy duped into helping with the 
robbery, and the calculating eighteen-year-old who’s been masterminding a string 
of crimes. The book never really overcomes the contrivance of the situation: most 
of the characters are clichés or collections of mannerisms rather than believable 
people, and their voices sound eerily similar in the epilogue, wherein many of them 
describe the effects of this event on their lives. The notion of one small decision’s 
leading to a life-changing experience is an intriguing one, however, and there’s still 
a pulpy kick in experiencing the immediacy of a crime from one’s safe armchair. 
While it’s not up to the standard of classic Lois Duncan, fans of her Ransom may 
still relish the you-are-there-but-not-really frisson of the fictional adventure.  DS
flores-gAlBis, enrique Raining Sardines. Brodie/Roaring Brook, 
2007 160p
ISBN 1-59643-166-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-10
Set in pre-Communist Cuba, this first novel from Cuban-born Flores-Galbis tells 
the story of Ernestina and Enriquito, best friends living in a village near Havana. 
When Ernestina and Enriquito discover that the wealthy and powerful Don Rigol 
is going to clear-cut the mountain valley that is home to the last herd of wild 
ponies, Ernestina blackmails Alysia Rigol-Betancourt, her uppity classmate and 
the Don’s daughter, and seals the deal with Alysia’s precious golden locket. When 
Enriquito is later accused of stealing the locket, he ends up in jail, though he has 
a strong feeling, based on a dream, that the locket actually belongs to his family. 
Add to this an age-old quest for Indian treasure and you’ve got a many-layered 
story of fact, fiction, and folklore that moves easily between magical and traditional 
realism. Enriquito and Ernestina are a formidable twosome, always in the thick of 
things and truly dedicated to their homeland, and their remarkable friendship is 
solidly portrayed. The multifaceted nature of the novel can be confusing at times, 
but those willing to ride the wave between perception and reality will appreciate 
the novel’s quiet rhythm and mystical atmosphere.  HM
floriAn, douglAs Comets, Stars, the Moon, and Mars: Space Poems and Paintings; 
written and illus. by Douglas Florian. Harcourt, 2007 48p
ISBN 0-15-205372-7 $16.00   
R Gr. 3-7
Accomplished poet Florian turns his attention to the heavens in twenty new po-
ems. Subjects include the planets and ex-planet (“Pluto was a planet/ Till one day 
it got fired”) as well as a host of other heavenly bodies and phenomena. Though 
they’re leavened with humor, the compact verses are genuinely informative rather 
than jocular, providing an enticing introduction to astronomy for kids fonder of 
language arts than science and offering the science-inclined some gems for recita-
tion. Florian’s in absolute top form in his celestial illustrations: his watercolors are 
simply luminous, each spread shimmering with a predominant color (gleaming 
deep blue a recurring favorite); interpolated collage elements from antique images 
414 • The BulleTin
and floating letters add a sense of dreamy timelessness and a long heritage of hu-
man stargazing. The book adds dimensionality to its images with die-cut circular 
apertures that shift playfully from random creation of constellations to highlighting 
bits of borrowed landscape; additionally, some spreads teasingly imitate the die-cut 
effect with trompe-l’oeil circles of collage or design. This offers a galaxy of possibili-
ties for use for reading aloud and alone and for just poring over the enticing view. 
A glossary explains more about the poems’ subjects, and a list of further reading 
(fairly ambitious reading, with titles including Stephen Hawking’s A Brief History 
of Time) is included.  DS
formAn, rutH Young Cornrows Callin Out the Moon; illus. by Cbabi 
Bayoc. Children’s Book Press, 2007 [24p]
ISBN 0-89239-218-5 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
This nostalgic yet energetic look at summertime’s joys focuses on African-American 
city girls in South Philadelphia, where “we don have no backyard/ no sof grass 
rainbow kites mushrooms butterflies”; instead, “we got black magic n brownstone 
steps/ when the sun go down.” The kids don’t miss grass and butterflies when they’ve 
got street games, the ice-cream man, the corner store, and the rituals of cornrow 
and cornbread creation at home with their mother and grandmother. Forman’s ef-
fervescent free-verse celebration (originally published in a collection of her poems) 
will convey the pleasures of this playful estivation to audiences unfamiliar with 
this block-as-kingdom world as well as to those conversant with the upside of city 
summers. Bayoc’s paintings in opaque pigments and saturated colors focus on ac-
tion; though this sometimes deprives the compositions of balance (and the kids’ 
eyes sometimes bug disconcertingly), the style is pop exuberance and the feeling 
affectionate and festive. Though the squeaky cleanliness of both the streets and the 
kids’ white high-tops emphasizes the idealization of this picture (Joosse’s Hot City, 
BCCB 6/04, or Hesse’s Come On, Rain!, 4/99, would make an effective realistic 
counterpoint), kids can understand taking a rosy view of summer freedom, and 
they’ll itch to join these “fine sistas” on their brownstone steps.  DS
foyt, viCtoriA The Virtual Life of Lexie Diamond. HarperTempest, 
2007 310p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-082564-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06082563-4 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-9
Much to her parents’ chagrin, Lexie is closer to her computer than she is to almost 
anyone else. She loves the equal parts anonymity and connection that accompany 
online relationships, and she views “real” life with suspicion. After her mother dies 
in a horrific accident, Lexie is tempted to fully withdraw into her virtual world, 
but her father’s new girlfriend keeps Lexie tied to her everyday life, at least until 
she can alert her oblivious father to Jane’s ominous other side, hidden beneath her 
perky exterior. After an online connection with her dead mother’s spirit confirms 
Lexie’s suspicions that Jane is a murdering psycho, Lexie realizes that, for the first 
time ever, she may need some actual (as opposed to virtual) allies to save herself and 
her father. Foyt establishes the web world as a fully developed second setting, with 
rich, warm descriptions of the incorporeal life the protagonist adores contrasting 
nicely with the distanced, almost anthropological tone taken as Lexie warily tries 
to make sense of the humans around her. Although the ghostly Internet mom and 
June 2007 • 415
freaky shapeshifting Jane nudge this novel into fantasy, most of Lexie’s separa-
tion from the real world is a protective, preemptive strategy to avoid the hazards 
of being different in the usually cruel world that is high school. Realistic fiction 
fans will therefore easily relate to Lexie as a memorable protagonist who is slowly 
awakening to the idea that there may just be life worth exploring outside of her 
Internet world.  AS
frenCH, JACkie Rover. HarperCollins, 2007 283p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-085079-5 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-085078-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-8
Though Hekja knows her family is poor, she is quite happy at home with her mother 
and their new puppy, a rejected runt whose name, Mighty Rover, belies his cur-
rent size and status. Ships on the horizon bring horror and irrevocable change for 
Hekja and her village, however, when invading Vikings rob and murder everyone 
she loves. Hekja is taken on as a slave for Freydis, Erik the Red’s daughter, and she 
quickly adapts to her new life and her new surroundings, though she never stops 
imagining ways to escape. She is fortunate indeed to still have Rover as her constant 
companion, after inspiring enough sympathy and admiration (Hekja is as daring, 
outspoken, and brilliant as her new mistress) to have been granted ownership of 
him. Ultimately, Hekja and Freydis form a close bond that helps both as they 
explore new lands, battle for recognition and survival, and, ultimately, each find a 
peace of sorts for their lives. Even with a large cast, French has created compelling, 
fully realized characters that surround the richly developed Hekja, whose defiance 
plays out in realistic ways given the Viking setting (the author admirably avoids 
creating Hekja as a twenty-first-century girl squashed into a historical fiction). In 
addition, the haunting setting, recalling Nancy Farmer’s Sea of Trolls (BCCB 11/04), 
is mainly drawn out of real geographical and historical details of eleventh-century 
Scotland, Greenland, and Iceland; a map, author’s note, and occasional footnotes 
will help readers sort out fact from fiction and may inspire further interest. A girl 
and her dog against an entire world is compelling enough, and the fact that readers 
get a brief update on her adult life makes this an irresistibly well-crafted historical 
fiction that is also a powerful coming-of-age novel as Hekja grows into a woman 
who, even in situations that are often troubling, complex, or grim, seeks love and 
beauty.  AS
fritz, JeAn Who’s Saying What in Jamestown, Thomas Savage?; illus. by Sally Wern 
Comport. Putnam, 2007 64p
ISBN 0-399-24644-4 $18.99   
M Gr. 4-6
Following her well-established format (And Then What Happened, Paul Revere? 
BCCB 3/74, et al.), Fritz retells the colonial Jamestown saga through the perspec-
tive of Thomas Savage, a colonist who arrived with the “First Supply,” the wave of 
settlers who followed those of 1607. Fritz readily admits in her foreword that very 
little is known about Savage, even his age and occupation, and her work thus falls 
into the category of historical fiction. Her tone, however, slips frequently between 
fiction writer and historian, noting from time to time the “maybes” and “probablys” 
that pepper the account, yet imputing to Savage attitudes one cannot be certain 
he held. Like Michael Cooper’s Jamestown, 1607 (reviewed above), this is strictly 
an Anglo-American take on events (and an overtly condescending take, at that), 
and there’s little evidence in the text or the source notes that recent interpretations 
416 • The BulleTin
of the archaeological site and material culture have been incorporated to update 
the story. Quotations are unsourced, which is particularly problematic in light of 
the fact that some dialogue is clearly fictionalized (only one direct quote can be 
attributed to Savage) and some has the ring of an actual citation: “If your king has 
sent me presents,” says Powhatan, “I also am a king and this is my land. Your father 
(Newport) is to come to me, not I to him, nor will I bite at such a bait.” Even 
Comport’s pictures disappoint, showing only prepubescent Pocahontas unclothed 
while other children are overly covered, generally neglecting the Powhatan partially 
shaved heads noted in both early accounts and illustrations, and sometimes simply 
mismatching the facing text. While some younger readers may find the unintimidat-
ing format a manageable entree into the 400th anniversary observances, all would 
be well advised to supplement their reading with a visit to the up-to-date websites 
on Jamestown.  EB 
george, JessiCA dAy Dragon Slippers. Bloomsbury, 2007 324p
ISBN 1-59990-057-2 $16.95   
R Gr. 6-10
The day Creel is sent to the dragon’s lair turns out much better than she thought 
it would: she strikes a deal with the great creature so that it doesn’t have to harm 
her or fight the slightly vacant knight sent to save her, and in return for the favor 
she walks away with a pair of shoes from the dragon’s hoard, a striking pair of blue 
slippers lined with white silk. Arriving in Feravel’s capital city to look for work, 
Creel meets the crown prince’s lovely younger brother and manages to anger the 
snotty princess from the rival kingdom of Roulain, who has come to marry the 
crown prince. When bad-tempered Princess Amalia demands that Creel hand over 
her shoes, Creel refuses even though she doesn’t know the shoes grant the wearer 
the ability to control dragons; Princess Amalia then arranges for the slippers to be 
snitched, enslaves the dragons, and turns them on Feravel. Creel must find a way 
to regain the shoes and free her new draconic friends before Amalia, the dragons, 
and the Roulainian army, which has gathered just over the border, destroy every-
thing she holds dear. First-time author George has created an endearing fantasy 
with quirky twists on traditional elements; dragon hoards may be anything from 
shoes to stained glass, and suitable rewards may include a dress shop rather than 
marriage to the crown prince. The tale is told deftly and with warm humor, and 
readers will bond quickly with sensible country girl Creel. Romance, friendship, 
and betrayal all spice the mix, and readers looking for something to follow Hale’s 
Princess Academy (BCCB 9/05) will find pleasure here.  CW
gorBACHev, vAleri Red Red Red; written and illus. by Valeri Gorbachev. Philomel, 
2007 40p
ISBN 0-399-24628-2 $16.99   
R 3-6 yrs
Turtle hurries through town on his way “to see something red, red, red,” and his 
speed and resolve have attracted the attention of many neighbors, who try with-
out success to guess at Turtle’s object. Following Turtle to see what he’s after, the 
neighbors are bewildered when they come to a grassy hillside with nothing red in 
sight . . . that is, until the sunset fills the sky with a deep sanguine glow, and “all of 
them turn to enjoy it.” Though the story is pretty mild, this color-filled adventure 
is appealing on lots of levels: Turtle’s cryptic quest provides mystery, the neighborly 
offering of red-colored objects provides opportunities for audience participation, 
and the cumulative nature of the story provides patterning for young listeners. 
June 2007 • 417
The illustrative presentation of the animal-filled neighborhood is reminiscent of 
Richard Scarry, with each creature attending to his or her own home or business 
amid the flurry of community activity. Gorbachev’s signature line-and-watercolor 
art is lively and energetic, with casually hatched detail adding texture and a bright 
palette of paints (including lots of red) contributing to the story’s dynamism. This 
would serve as a launching pad for a creative writing project wherein different colors 
were substituted for the red; it is also a sweet readaloud in its own right, and young 
listeners will enjoy predicting Turtle’s goal.  HM
grAvett, emily Orange Pear Apple Bear; written and illus. by Emily Gravett. Si-
mon, 2007 28p
ISBN 1-4169-3999-7 $12.99   
R* 3-6 yrs
This creative picture book cleverly combines concept book, rhyming story, and 
gentle brain teaser in a text limited initially to only four words. After an introduc-
tion of our four key titular nouns, the book then presents them in several different 
playful configurations: for instance, “Apple, pear/ Orange bear” shows the pear 
balanced on the apple on the verso, and the bear turned a delicious orange on the 
recto, while “Orange pear/ Apple bear” features the pear now turned a glowing 
orange and the bear now apple-y in both his rose-touched green and his plumply 
round rear end. After each of the three fruits meets its inevitable fate at the jaws of 
the hungry mammal, the cores and peels are tossed aside and the bear departs with 
a satisfying and rhyming “There!” This never makes its ingenious craftsmanship 
obtrusive, evincing instead a cozy jollity that invites audiences into its game. Figures 
are splotches of watercolor bordered in rustic, furry line; the fruits are very specific 
and homely foodstuffs, while the bear has all the spontaneous bodily expressiveness 
of a dancer or a toddler as he peers amiably out at the audience, tosses fruit up into 
the air, or lumbers away. The simplicity of the pared-down—peared-down?—text 
makes this suitable for novice readers as well as lapsitting audiences, and between 
the sweet orality of the elements and the cuddly approachability of the featured 
bear, this is one youngsters will eat right up.  DS
HArrington, JAne Extreme Pets! Tangerine/Scholastic, 2007 163p illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 0-439-82948-8 $12.99   
R Gr. 4-10
This high-energy guide describes a panoply of nontraditional pets, dividing them 
into four categories: cold-blooded (for snakes and lizards), pocket pets (small 
mammals such as sugar gliders, ferrets, and hedgehogs), insects (ranging from 
creepy-crawlies such as the Madagascan hissing cockroach and the tarantula to the 
monarch butterfly), and slimy pets (toads, frogs, and slugs). Each of the twenty-one 
featured animals receives a few breezy pages of information, including a “Report 
Card” feature that grades the prospective pet candidly on coolness, aroma, neatness, 
ease of care, and cost factor. There are more than a few formatting and conceptual 
glitches (and the creative manipulation of photographic images is at times simply 
misleading), but the combination of information, enthusiasm, and irreverence 
packed into a browsable and visually appealing format is easy to love (which is more 
than can be said for some of the featured pets). The tone creates an enjoyable sense 
of clubbiness, with those interested in weird pets clearly Us to the disapproving 
adult Them, and even reluctant readers will be all over this like musk on a ferret. 
A concluding section gives kids hints on winning parents over to the extreme-pet 
concept, and an index is appended.  DS
418 • The BulleTin
HArrington, JAniCe n. The Chicken-Chasing Queen of Lamar County; illus. by 
Shelley Jackson. Kroupa/Farrar, 2007 34p
ISBN 0-374-31251-6 $16.00   
R* 4-8 yrs
The mischief sings in every syllable of this energetic tale of a girl who just can’t stop 
chasing the chickens on her grandmother’s farm. Her routine is as regimented as 
a soldier’s: first she gets up and performs morning ablutions, then she eats break-
fast, tells her grandmother a few stories, and commences her chicken chasing. Of 
course she has her nemesis, the one chicken in the yard that is as smart, wily, and 
quick as the chicken-chaser herself. When she stealthily tracks Miss Hen to her 
hiding place, though, she discovers a true treasure—Miss Hen is a mama, and this 
changes everything. From then on, the chicken chaser becomes the chicken tender, 
feeding and minding the birds with no less energy but with far more loving care. 
Harrington’s storytelling style makes the prose jump from page to ear, with lots of 
onomatopoeic wordsmithery tucked in to showcase the girl’s affinity for her feathery 
playmates; the prucks, pee-os, and sqwaukKKs will exercise the reader’s vocal skills 
and delight young listeners. Jackson’s kinetic collage and paint art is more than a 
match for Harrington’s lively language; the chickens are improbably composed of 
feathers made from notebook and graph paper, stamps, homespun fabrics, chair 
caning, lace, title lists, and painted paper with finely inked designs. These collage 
bits stand out against the textured painting of the backgrounds and the face of our 
heroine, whose expressions mirror those of her two chief adversaries—her grand-
mother and Miss Hen—in two particularly humorous spreads, rendering palpable 
the contest of wills. Other spreads highlight the peculiar grace of the prepubescent 
girl enjoying her dubious avocation. Readers will join with her in enjoying fully 
the pleasures of the thrill of the chase and the surprising satisfaction of getting 
something wholly different from what you expected.  KC
HArrison, mette ivie The Princess and the Hound. Eos/HarperCollins, 
2007 [416p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-113188-1 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-113187-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Like his mother, the queen, George possesses the gift of animal-speak, but most 
folks in Kendel and neighboring kingdoms consider it a sign of sorcery, and its 
possessors keep their abilities secret for fear of being burned at the stake. George 
loses his mother at a young age, his father’s grief distances father and son, and the 
burdensome secret of his outlawed magic further separates George from the lives of 
those around him. In time, George is betrothed to a suitable princess from another 
land, and he thinks she is perfect—not least of all because she too is an animal 
lover, sharing a deep bond with her dog. However, George discovers that the bond 
is more than he thought and that his bride is in fact ensorcelled, with her soul and 
that of her pet exchanged. In order to reverse the enchantment and win the prin-
cess’ love, he must reveal his magic and risk the loss of kingdom and family. This 
is polished storytelling, satisfyingly old-fashioned in tone, with a dreamy, naïve 
quality that will draw young romantics. The appealing narrative gains resonance 
from its employment and reinterpretation of “Beauty and the Beast,” which will 
please fairy-tale lovers. Fans of Napoli’s Zel (BCCB 7/96) and Pattou’s East (BCCB 
10/03) will be quite happy in the Kendel woods.  CW
June 2007 • 419
HempHill, Helen Runaround. Front Street, 2007 117p
ISBN 1-932425-83-7 $16.95   
M Gr. 5-8
Eleven-year-old Sassy wants to know how love works, but no one will tell her 
anything except that she’s too young to think about it. Think about it she does, 
though, swallowing whole the stories she reads in Love Confessions magazine. Decid-
ing that her older neighbor Boon Chisholm is going to be her boyfriend, she flirts 
shamelessly with him, taking his embarrassed but roguish responses as proof that he 
loves her. Her older sister Lula finds out about Sassy’s flirtation and tries to explain 
things to her, but Sassy thinks Lula is just jealous, until she follows her one day, 
taking her daddy with her, and finds Lula making out with Boon. Lula decides to 
run away from her daddy’s anger to find their mama, who isn’t dead, as Sassy has 
been told, but who ran out on them when Sassy was a baby, prompting Daddy to 
worry that his girls might have some “runaround” in them as well. The plot arc 
follows a banal, disappointing formula—trashy mom deserts family, daughters turn 
wild, taciturn daddy holds it all together with help of spinster housekeeper—to a 
pat conclusion: both girls reluctantly go home with a new understanding of each 
other, and Sassy learns what real love is through a daddy who silently forgives the 
women who are bound to disappoint him. Both story and characters are too slight 
to bear all that weight, however, and Sassy herself never emerges as believable or 
sympathetic; if anything, her willful misreadings of Boon’s attentions evoke cringing 
pity and head-shaking disbelief—nobody, even in the 1960s, is that obnoxious or 
naïve. Sidebars purportedly taken from the romance magazines front each chapter 
and supposedly provide context for Sassy’s interpretations of events, but they don’t 
always fit the scenarios. Readers who enjoyed Hemphill’s debut Long Gone Daddy 
(BCCB 6/06) will be sorely disappointed by this slim second helping.  KC
HiCkey, CAroline Cassie Was Here. Roaring Brook, 2007 [192p]
ISBN 1-59643-205-5 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
It’s been a difficult move for eleven-year-old Bree; she has therefore, much to 
the dismay of her family, taken up again with her imaginary friend, Joey, and 
her consequent silliness results in the breaking of her older brother’s arm and his 
ensuing inability to attend basketball camp. Into this dreary and lonely summer 
comes glamorous thirteen-year-old Cassie, who offers to be Bree’s “neighborhood 
guide” but leads her not just around the neighborhood but into daring older-girl 
ways. The aspirational element of a preteen girl’s attachment to a teenager is ef-
fectively explored here, and Cassie, with her mild raciness (she encourages Bree to 
try smoking, she sneaks into the empty school building, and she makes out with 
Bree’s older brother), is perfect as a harbinger of adolescence and an ironic reminder 
that Bree’s imaginary friend may be less trouble. Cassie is somewhat ambiguous 
and inconsistent as a character, however, in that the book seems to want to suggest 
she’s more troubled than her behavior really indicates, and her final kind gesture 
to Bree of providing a connection to a new friend comes largely out of nowhere; 
the Joey issue also never quite partners with the Cassie story. This will still speak 
to youngsters, especially girls, verging on that lurch into adolescence and viewing 
with a mixture of awe and alarm the teens who’ve made that transition.  DS
420 • The BulleTin
HiCks, BArBArA JeAn The Secret Life of Walter Kitty; illus. by Dan Santat. Knopf, 
2007 34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93196-1 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83196-7 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Walter is, in reality, a complacent and misguided tabby cat, but in his dreams he 
is Fang, swashbuckling hero and explorer. Unfortunately, every time he’s about 
to bring a fantasy to an exciting conclusion, he’s called back by his Person, Mrs. 
Biddle, with an affectionate “Wally” or “Kitten” or, heaven help the poor animal, 
“Snookums.” Despite the title, there really isn’t that much derived from Thurber 
here; this is mostly a humorous day-in-the-life look at a happy if loudly complain-
ing cat. Audiences will snicker at the way Walter “helps” around the house and his 
consequent rebuffs as much as they do at his superhero fancies, and those with cats 
will find comparisons between Walter and their own kitties irresistible. Santat’s art 
firmly embraces the ridiculous in Walter, aka Fang, while enhancing his silliness by 
contrasting it with the solid domesticity of his real existence. Thick inks in subdued 
tones of olives and harvest golds bring the orange marmalade of Snookums—er, 
Walter—to the fore, where he appropriately draws the eye in every scene; in his 
fantastical exploits, he’s particularly appealing in his similarity to a primary-grader 
in costume. This is clever and comedic silliness, sure to appeal to youngsters who 
enjoy a feline with cattitude.  DS
HoffmAn, mAry The Falconer’s Knot: A Story of Friars, Flirtation, and Foul 
Play. Bloomsbury, 2007 297p
ISBN 1-59990-056-4 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-10
In fourteenth-century Italy, sixteen-year-old Silvano has professed his love for the 
comely but married Angelica only a day before her husband is publicly stabbed 
to death not far from their home—apparently by Silvano himself. Protesting his 
innocence, he avoids arrest by taking to a nearby abbey, where he meets Brother 
Anselmo, who entered the church many years ago because the woman he loved 
was promised to another man. When Anselmo’s rival is murdered within the abbey 
walls, both men fall under suspicion, but an additional murder clears Silvano while 
pushing Anselmo further into the spotlight. Aided by timely twists of fate, by the 
widows of two of the victims, and by a reluctant novice from the nunnery next 
door, Silvano and Anselmo clear themselves but must discover the real murderer 
before another death occurs. Although the circumstances that eventually reveal 
the killer skate close to the contrived, Hoffman, author of the Stravaganza series 
(Stravaganza: City of Masks, BCCB 2/03, etc.), has produced a lively and clever 
puzzle that young readers will enjoy unraveling; it’s flavored by its Italian Renaissance 
setting, laced with mild romance, and colored by information about producing 
dyes for church frescoes. Chapters are segmented into discrete scenes that often 
jump between storylines, but each bit contributes information about three major 
characters and several lesser characters and moves the narrative briskly on its way. 
This is an intermediate step for teens who aren’t quite ready for sophisticated adult 
mysteries but who like multifaceted storytelling, settings that don’t overwhelm the 
plot, and happy endings.  CW 
June 2007 • 421
HugHes, mArk peter Lemonade Mouth. Delacorte, 2007 338p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90404-5 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73392-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Five social misfits end up in detention one fateful day. As their frightening teacher 
is seized with a coughing fit and leaves the room for a frozen lemonade from the 
vending machine, the kids spontaneously perform a riff on an advertising jingle 
using improvised instruments from around the room. The teacher, formerly a 
professional musician, returns and recognizes their synchronicity for the miracle 
it is, and the band Lemonade Mouth is born. The band’s alternative sound and cri 
de coeur lyrics take the school by storm, awakening subversive attitudes, especially 
when they protest the removal of their precious frozen lemonade machine due to 
a noncompetition clause specified by the corporation that is paying for the new 
scoreboard. This title offers a fresh if not wholly original take on the age-old jocks-
versus-geeks, mighty-corporation-versus-little-guy dynamic; it stops just short of 
being an emo manifesto by giving the kids credibly difficult but not insurmountable 
backstories and keeping them from the darker behaviors associated with the emo 
subculture. These kids are all squeaky clean, and they’re just trying to survive on 
the social margins of their school, with the ersatz family they form helping each to 
cope with relatively mild pressures at home. Each band member’s story follows the 
arc of the band itself, moving from shy and misunderstood underdog to reasonably 
confident and successful young adults, with a few setbacks along the way. Narra-
tion alternates between the voices of the five as well as the voices of their fans; the 
result is a sense of thoroughness in the storytelling and a full understanding of the 
way a band formed in a school basement can become a phenomenon and how a 
few friends can make all the difference.  KC 
Jenkins, A. m. Repossessed. HarperTempest, 2007 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-083569-9 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-083568-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Kiriel, a demon who has spent eons at the boring work of tormenting the damned 
(“it practically does itself—no lie”), decides to take a vacation on Earth, so he steps 
into the body of a middle-class American teen named Shaun just as Shaun nearly 
steps in front of an oncoming truck (Kiriel figures Shaun’s fair game since he would 
have died without Kiriel anyway). Kiriel then starts living Shaun’s life while trying 
to minimize the suspicions of Shaun’s family and friends about the teen’s changed 
behavior. The demon knows he’ll eventually be caught by the higher-ups and sent 
back to the fiery depths, but in the meantime he wants to have an impact, to at-
tract God’s notice just once, to maybe change some lives for the better—oh, and 
to experience a few deadly sins while he’s at it. From his love affair with ketchup 
to his insightful handling of Shaun’s withdrawn younger brother and his plans to 
deflower the girl crushing on Shaun, Kiriel acts honorably while evincing delicious 
intent, experiencing real emotions and wallowing in the wonder of corporeality. 
Jenkins works magic on readers, who will come to care about Kiriel and his need 
for validation. The relationships he builds, along with his reactions to the world 
above ground, are genuine and sweet, and Jenkins handles her demon with care, 
avoiding both gore and sensationalism. This is a provocative outsider’s look at the 
beauties and strains of ordinary life, sort of a contemporary demonic twist on Our 
422 • The BulleTin
Town, and teens seeking food for thought will appreciate its warm, heartening 
message of hope coupled with a little rebellion.  CW
Jenkins, emily Daffodil, Crocodile; illus. by Tomek Bogacki. Foster/Farrar, 
2007 26p
ISBN 0-374-39944-1 $16.00   
R 3-6 yrs
Identical triplet Daffodil (from Daffodil, BCCB 7/04) is increasingly tired of being 
a “pretty little, clean little flower of a girl” who’s considered to be interchangeable 
with her sisters, Rose and Violet. Rescue comes in the form of Daffodil’s mother’s 
art project, a papier-mâché crocodile head; when Daffodil puts it on, she becomes 
a crocodile of high-spirited adventure and gleeful misbehavior (“Violet and Rose 
had a tea party, and the crocodile ate the guests”), making a statement about in-
dividuality that lasts even after the crocodile head becomes soggy and undergoes 
retirement. While this echoes the first book’s theme of individuality, the story lets 
it rip in a whole new direction that will delight audiences who knew there was 
something brewing behind Daffodil’s demure desire, in the previous book, for her 
own choice of clothing. The text makes particularly effective use of dialogue, with 
compact, crisply humorous sentences setting up structure as well as situation (it’s 
clear that Daffodil really is putting up with considerable indignity on the mistaken-
identity front). Daffodil’s crocodile experience is deliciously empowering, including 
the opportunity for repeated roars and snapping (“Raa Raa Raa/ Chomp Chomp 
Chomp”) in which audiences will delight in participating; they’ll also be pleased to 
note that Daffodil successfully makes her point, even after removing the crocodile 
head, that she’s more crocodile than flower. Bogacki’s illustrations complicate the 
situation somewhat by making most of the human faces nearly as identical as the 
triplets’, but his frosty-edged layers of color shift interestingly from brushtroke 
textures to concrete daubs on the crocodile head, which is a geometric wonder that 
dominates the scenes in which it appears. Plenty of kids will relish the notion of 
releasing their inner scary monster, and they’ll find it enjoyable to let loose with a 
few comradely “Raa raa raas” of their own.  DS
Jenkins, steve Dogs and Cats; written and illus. by Steve Jenkins. Houghton, 
2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-618-50767-1 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
Known as a talented and innovative documenter of the natural world, Jenkins here 
turns his attention to its domestic side in this reversible volume that prioritizes cats 
in one direction and dogs in the other. For each species, the book covers evolution, 
breeds, development, and behavior, throwing in amiable bits of trivia en route; 
most spreads also include a thumbnail tidbit, identified by an illustrative silhouette, 
about the partner species, so the discussion of kittenhood, for instance, includes a 
note that “puppies are also helpless at birth.” The information is sometimes a little 
unclear, but this is a lively and irresistibly browsable joint overview that makes ef-
fective use of its compare-and-contrast approach. It’s the visual aspect that’ll really 
sell this book, though: oversized spreads float carefully arrayed illustrations and 
meaty niblets of text against white space, with recognizable yet smooth changes 
of font differentiating illustrative captions from headings and main text. Jenkins’ 
established expertise in paper collage is on full display here, with subjects sometimes 
mounds of curvilinear cuddliness, sometimes pettable fuzzballs, and sometimes 
June 2007 • 423
sinewy athletes. This lends itself to a multiplicity of uses: pre-readers will enjoy 
browsing it or sharing it with a reading adult or older kid, reluctant readers will find 
the visual-heavy layout reassuring, and animal fans will lap it all right up.  DS
Jinks, CAtHerine Evil Genius. Harcourt, 2007 [496p]
ISBN 0-15-205988-1 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
It looks as if Cadel Pigott will be in therapy for years to come; as an asocial seven-
year-old Australian prodigy adept at visualizing systems and hacking into networks, 
he isn’t exactly on the road to good citizenship. His shrink, Dr. Roth, actually 
encourages his patient’s misdeeds, though—and with good reason: he’s in the em-
ploy of Dr. Darkkon, an incarcerated master criminal who claims to be Cadel’s real 
father and is grooming him to take over the old man’s nefarious business. To that 
end, Darkkon and Roth have established the Axis Institute for World Domination, 
where Cadel eventually enrolls at age fourteen to study the finer points of disguise, 
embezzlement, forgery, legal loopholes, etc. Relatively unburdened by conscience, 
Cadel is willing to give this a go until one of his personal money-making schemes, 
a bogus online-dating service, puts him in contact with his first real friend, a 
nurse/mathematical savant who gives him his first notion that even geniuses can 
lead kindly lives. When shenanigans at Axis start to turn deadly, Cadel tries to make 
a break with the school and his hovering adult monitors, but he only manages to 
set off a chain of murder and mayhem among the staff that discloses an intricate 
web of hidden identities and puts his life in jeopardy. One can only marvel at the 
mind of Catherine Jinks, who handles crusaders (Pagan’s Crusade, BCCB 2/04, et 
al.) and computer geeks with equal dash, and whose sharp, satirical humor and 
deep humanity are again on full display. The dénouement (a letter from Cadel to 
his internet pen pal, now unmasked) seems a little abrupt and tame, following as it 
does a rousing climax involving fire, multiple escapes, and an odorous attack that 
would leave Pepe LePew green with envy; nonetheless, teens starting to lay out their 
own college plans will enjoy fantasizing about a seriously alternative educational 
program with novel job prospects.  EB 
Jones, diAnA wynne The Game. Firebird/Penguin, 2007 [192p]
ISBN 0-14-240718-9 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7 
Shy, quiet Hayley always knew there was incredible magic in the world, but she 
was forbidden to engage with it by her strict grandmother and the patriarch of 
the family, her uncle Jolyon. After magic finds Hayley and she is kicked out of her 
grandparents’ house, she discovers that two important secrets have been kept from 
her. First, she learns about the world of the mythosphere, a mystical layer of stories, 
myths, and legends that converge into path-like strands on which one can travel; 
she also learns that her parents, presumed dead, are actually alive and trapped in 
the mythosphere, and that she is actually the child destined to overpower Jolyon. 
Between the family drama, the rich Irish and magical settings, and the revelation 
that all of the characters are based on Greek and Roman myths, there is a lot of 
plot here for a self-proclaimed novella, but Jones manages admirably by frequently 
returning the focus to Hayley’s coming-of-age struggles. Trapped into her role of 
obedient, dutiful granddaughter for an unknown number of years (extremely long 
lives run in the family), Hayley is learning to be independent and strong at the same 
424 • The BulleTin
time that she is trying to save her parents, explore this heretofore unknown magical 
world, and harness her own mystical powers. Although the author’s note may have 
been more useful at the beginning of the novel to help provide the mythical context 
for the characters, even readers who have no knowledge that, for example, the aunts 
represent the Pleiades will find this a compelling, taut fantasy. Those in the know 
will revel in seeing how each of the mythical beings is modernized and made human 
and in spotting where Jones diverges from the original characters.  AS
kArr, kAtHleen Born for Adventure. Cavendish, 2007 [208p]
ISBN 0-7614-5348-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Packing bottles and vials for a medical supplier won’t further Tom Ormsby’s career 
ambitions or satisfy his lust for adventure. They do, however, put the sixteen-year-
old into contact with explorer Henry Morton Stanley, who is outfitting his third 
expedition to Africa, where he hopes to “rescue” colonial governor Emin Pasha from 
unverified dangers and score a victory for colonialism. When delivering a case of 
medicine, Tom glibly talks his way into a lowly position on Stanley’s staff, and he’s 
off to see the elephant. Literally. He sees a great deal more, as well—ruthless slave 
traders in collusion with white colonialists out to make a buck on ivory and rubber 
exports (well, exploitation); native guides and carriers who drop like flies under 
overwork, malnourishment, and despair; Pygmies astonishing in their cleverness 
and brotherliness; and an expedition leader whose single-minded determination is 
a study in both callousness and success. Plenty of authors have infiltrated historical 
treks and voyages with their fictional creations, but not always with Karr’s skill-
fulness. Tom is a winning narrator, convincingly tinged with nineteenth-century 
British paternalism but taking on each challenge with an open mind and learning 
to treat the Africans under his command with respect born of good sense and good 
humor rather than saintliness. Karr appends comments on the real-life members 
of the 1886-9 “Relief of Emin Pasha Expedition,” a map, and a timeline of events 
in the region then known as the Congo. Pack the quinine and mosquito netting 
for a memorable trip.  EB 
kAywell, JoAn f., ed. Dear Author: Letters of Hope. Philomel, 2007 222p
ISBN 0-399-23705-4 $14.99   
M Gr. 7-10
Twenty-seven authors, including luminaries such as Christopher Paul Curtis, Nancy 
Garden, and Chris Lynch, take their turns writing inspirational responses to letters 
that detail how the characters of the authors’ books mirror the array of pain, loss, 
and abuse suffered by their readers. Most of the authors tell how they got the ideas 
for characters and situations, affirm the young letter writer’s bravery, intelligence, 
and sensitivity, and encourage him or her to read more, write more, and seek out 
the counsel of caring adults. Though the responses are predictable and repetitious, 
the real problem here is the genesis of the young peoples’ letters themselves: Kaywell 
solicited a collection of letters received by each author and then created a “composite 
letter that protected the identities of each and every writer while attempting to 
capture the voice of a single child.” Even if one could set aside the dubious ethics 
of such a decentering approach to individual pain, one has to admit the serious 
problems it poses for the rhetorical situation. After all, the goal of writing to an 
author is to make a genuine, intimate contact between two real persons; that these 
composite kids are as fictional as the characters they are relating to and that the 
June 2007 • 425
authors can compose seemingly heartfelt letters to fictional composites voids any 
sense of intimacy and strains belief in their authenticity. Nearly all of the letters 
sketch kids who are exactly like the kids from the books, thus making it seem as 
though mirrored experiences are the only reason why a book might speak to a teen. 
There is even a whiff of a suggestion, from Kaywell’s letters as well as from her 
afterword and Catherine Ryan Hyde’s preface rather than the authors’ responses, 
that reading books about one’s serious problems is as effective as getting actual 
counseling. Clearly, all participants are well intentioned, but the disingenuous 
strategy and cheerleading sensibility undermine their ends.  KC
kent, rose Kimchi & Calamari. HarperCollins, 2007 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-083770-5 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-083769-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
A school assignment about his ancestry leaves fourteen-year-old Joseph with ques-
tions: why doesn’t his Italian-American family talk to him about his adoption from 
Korea, where did he come from there, and what does his Korean origin mean? 
Uncomfortable with taking the matter directly to his parents, he seeks his birth 
mother on the Internet and garners information from a new Korean classmate, but 
he makes the situation worse for himself by inventing a heritage for his ancestry 
project. The fallout brings the subject out into the open at home, though, and 
Joseph begins to explore his multilayered legacy. This is a situation that many kids 
will recognize, and the book is particularly perceptive about the tendency of an 
adopted kid to get put in the position of caretaker to his parents, protecting them 
from his own history even as he’s hoping for more access to it. The contrast between 
Joseph and his Korean buddy Yongsu helps make the point about the different 
ways one can be influenced by one’s country of origin and country of residence. 
The book never really faces the either/or myth head-on, though, and it tends to be 
more programmatic than effective; the writing’s pedestrian tendencies underscore 
the sometimes hackneyed characterization. This therefore lacks the nuance of Marie 
G. Lee’s similarly themed If It Hadn’t Been for Yoon Jun (BCCB 3/93), but this is an 
undertreated topic, and readers thinking about issues of heritage and legacy may 
find this an unintimidating way to ease into the subject.  DS 
kerley, BArBArA Greetings from Planet Earth. Scholastic, 2007 [256p]
ISBN 0-439-80203-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Theo Perry is wild about all things astronautical, and the combina-
tion of the upcoming Voyager 2 mission and a class assignment challenging students 
to consider what message they would like to send beyond the galaxy should launch 
him into a state of bliss. The mysteries of space can’t quite rival the mysteries unfold-
ing in his own household, however, as he begins to suspect that his father, whom 
he’s been led to believe is MIA in Vietnam, had in fact several years ago returned 
to the United States but not to his family. Moreover, his grandmother JeeBee, the 
only family member who will speak with any candor about Dad, balks at giving 
him the whole story and seems to be leading an enigmatic second life of her own. 
Kerley hooks readers into the drama by alternating chapters of third-person narration 
with passages in which Theo dictates an introspective tape-recorded message to an 
unidentified recipient (his father, we learn in the final pages). Unfortunately, the 
426 • The BulleTin
family tension, rife with maternal lies and sibling rancor, is dissipated by the book’s 
heavy-handed emphasis on the Big Life Lesson Theo learns from his space message 
assignment, which seems to intrude every time the action picks up momentum. 
Iain Lawrence’s Gemini Summer (BCCB 12/06) therefore offers a more riveting 
portrayal of a kid with family issues and a serious space jones, but this may still 
appeal to readers with a taste for drama at the galactic and domestic levels.  EB
kinney, Jeff Diary of a Wimpy Kid: Greg Heffley’s Journal; written and illus. by 
Jeff Kinney. Amulet/Abrams, 2007 217p
Paper over board ed. ISBN 0-8109-9313-9 $12.95   
R Gr. 6-8
Seventh grade is lousy enough, but when you are at the bottom of the popularity 
pecking order, your best (and only) friend embarrasses you, and no one else seems 
to recognize you as the brilliant leader you are, then middle school is downright 
unbearable. Luckily, Greg has a journal into which he can pour his frustrations, 
disappointments, and secret desires. In short entries, many of which read as in-
dependent vignettes, Greg describes the sometimes humorous, sometimes awful 
events of his life with an unflinching eye: his mostly failed endeavors are highlighted 
along with his rare accomplishments. The small black-and-white line drawings that 
accompany many of the entries are simple, as if indeed drawn by a budding artist, 
but not at all simplistic, as they interact with the text by sometimes contradicting 
Greg’s account and often highlighting particularly cringe-worthy elements that 
would be less remarkable without the comic-style visuals. Inconsiderate, sullen, 
and greedy Greg is unfortunately not a very likable kid, but he’s still funny and 
creative, and the frequent moments of sardonic wit add a richness and depth to his 
accounts. Kinney’s well-designed and popular web comic (created in 2004) easily 
translates into illustrated novel format: devoted fans will be thrilled to have a print 
collection, while new readers can simply enjoy this as a stand-alone novel or they 
can head online to find out what happens next to Greg and the peculiar mix of 
characters who surround him.  AS
lAndy, derek Skulduggery Pleasant.  HarperCollins, 2007 [400p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-123116-9 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-123115-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Inheriting a large estate is hardly compensation for losing a favorite uncle, and the 
fact that someone tries to murder Stephanie on her first night in her uncle’s house 
is hardly an auspicious sign. Stephanie does not have to fend off fiendish bad guys 
alone, however; she also seems to have inherited allies. Her most important new 
ally is Skulduggery Pleasant, a brilliant detective who is also a living skeleton. To-
gether, they embark on a quest to save the world by finding an evil artifact before 
the extremely creepy and powerful Serpine gets his hands on it, using it to pave the 
way toward his domination over both the magical and mundane worlds. Along the 
way, Stephanie discovers that her genetic history ties her to powerful magic; if she 
can live long enough to develop her skills and learn from the incredible sorcerers 
around her, her talents may be limitless. Landy offers a sizable cast of characters, 
all of whom have impressive depth: Skulduggery, heroic and undeniably admirable, 
is tortured by a less than honorable past, and even the insidious Serpine shows 
vulnerability. The result is a rich fantasy that is as engaging in its creative protago-
nists and villains as it is in the lightning-paced plot and sharp humor. Kids may 
not have Stephanie’s opportunity to pursue detective work with skeletons or epic 
June 2007 • 427
battles with monsters, but they’ll read in vicarious enjoyment of this adventure; a 
significant thread about the power of chosen names versus given names (Stephanie 
eventually chooses Valkyrie Cain as her new name and therefore becomes immune 
to hypnotic suggestions by other sorcerers) may lead some readers to seek a bit of 
magic through claiming their own otherworldly monikers.  AS
lArBAlestier, Justine Magic’s Child.  Razorbill, 2007 291p
ISBN 1-59514-064-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-12
When readers last saw Reason (in Magic Lessons, BCCB 6/06), she was a few days 
pregnant and newly infected with the full force of her family’s magic, bequeathed to 
her by her centuries-old ancestor, who dissolved after transferring his magic to her. 
It’s the next day, and already Reason is starting to become like the old man—she 
is living between two worlds, one a wondrous place of color and light, the other 
the ordinary world with its drag of gravity and interpersonal commitments. As she 
spends time in the world of pure magic, and as this world disappoints her more and 
more (Danny, the father of her baby, rejects her, Jay-Tee, her best friend, is dying, 
her mother is insane, and she can’t trust her grandmother or her grandfather), she 
realizes that she can choose to become nothing but the magic and leave her world 
behind. As she works through her decision, she comes to realize that magic is not 
just a physical disease but a moral one as well, as she witnesses the greed with which 
her grandfather tries to dispossess her of the family magic at any cost. In this final 
book of the series, Larbalestier places her version of magic in a religious as well as 
physical context, as Tom, Jay-Tee, and Reason all try to sort out where magic fits 
into the interface between God and people, people and people, and love and evil. 
The budding romance between Tom and Jay-Tee provides a nice counterbalance 
of the ordinary with the increasingly mystical plotline of Reason’s transformation. 
Readers who follow Reason away from the pain, uncertainty, and sheer messiness 
of her life into the nirvana-like oblivion of pure magic will find her temptation to 
stay there poignantly and believably rendered, even as they applaud her decision 
to resist. Many will also sympathize with Tom, though, who can’t see losing his 
magic as anything like salvation, and they will thus welcome the little bundle of 
surprise at the end.  KC 
leedy, loreen It’s Probably Penny; written and illus. by Loreen Leedy. Holt, 
2007 [32p]
ISBN 0-8050-7389-2 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Penny, the expressive Boston terrier, is again called into service to explicate a math 
concept. This time, narrator Lisa, Penny’s owner, is learning probability in math 
class via the example of jelly beans, showing how events can fall into categories of 
certainty, likelihood, and impossibility. Now the kids have a weekend homework 
assignment requiring them to observe and chart these kinds of events as they emerge 
around them: “Penny WILL want to go on a walk. She MIGHT bark at a squirrel. 
We CAN’T see a shark.” Explanations are simple and cogent, with the emphasis 
strongly on situations rather than numerical statements, and Lisa’s assignment is just 
the kind of exercise listeners might themselves be asked to complete. Although the 
flat figures and bland colors are definitely notable for utility rather than aesthetics, 
diagrams and Lisa’s charts and notes assist children in visualizing the problems and 
tracking the results. Since this title can be expected to see considerable curricular 
use, the large, group-friendly trim size is an added bonus.  EB 
428 • The BulleTin
lourie, peter Arctic Thaw: The People of the Whale in a Changing Climate. Boyds 
Mills, 2007 48p illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-59078-436-7 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 5-8
On his latest geographic junket, Lourie flies in to the Barrow, Alaska region to visit 
scientists from the lower Forty-Eight who study possible effects of global warming 
and to talk with Iñupiat whalers whose livelihood and folkways depend on climatic 
stability above the Arctic Circle. The juxtaposition of testimony from those who 
put their faith in scientific data and those who embody generations of experience 
is valuable, as are Lourie’s occasional observations on groups who would actually 
benefit economically from a diminished ice cap. Unfortunately, organization is 
haphazard (information on Richard Glenn, who helped establish a forum through 
which Iñupiat and scientists can pool their findings, appears some twenty-five pages 
after his introduction). Moreover, after giving a fair hearing to those who believe 
that global warming may be, overall, beneficial, as well as those who view the rise 
in hunting accidents due to premature ice thaw an effect of weather rather than 
climate, Lourie’s personal conclusion that it’s time to “change my own ways” seems 
a bit abrupt. Still, Lourie rightly suggests that negative effects of global warming 
will surely rebound on the Iñupiat, while any positive effects (and those are specu-
lative, at best) would benefit only narrow sections of the industrialized world. A 
regional map, plenty of snapshot style color photographs, an index, glossary, and 
list of print and Internet resources are included.  EB
luddy, kAron Spelldown: The Big-Time Dreams of a Small-Town Word Whiz. Si-
mon, 2007 211p
ISBN 1-4169-1610-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Plucky thirteen-year-old Karlene is a spelling prodigy, and she’s determined to 
become the National Spelling Champion of 1969. What might hold her back, 
though, is her father’s spiraling descent into alcoholism, which results in her mother 
having to put in extra hours at the mill and leaving Karlene to look after her twin 
brothers. Fortunately, a new teacher arrives who takes Karlene’s breath away with her 
elegance, her wit, and her commitment to Karlene’s success. At first, Karlene’s South 
Carolina dialect seems overly cutesy, as peppered with mild profanity as it is with 
advanced vocabulary words and snippets of lyrics from Motown, the Beatles, and 
the Rolling Stones, but once Luddy settles into her storytelling, Karlene’s colorful 
narration offsets a genuinely tragic picture of her father’s breakdown and leavens 
the triumph of her progress through local, state, and finally national spelling bees. 
Karlene’s support system represents the changing social picture of the late ’60s—her 
father’s staunchest AA ally is a black cab driver named Kelly, and her teacher, the 
wife of the mill manager, is a liberated woman with a master’s degree and two 
children as well as a boundary-breaking commitment to Karlene (she calls her at 
home, has her spend the night when she babysits, travels with her to Washington, 
etc., all to ensure that her home life doesn’t interfere with her dreams). Readers who 
like family drama, success stories, and colorful protagonists will all find something 
to latch on to here.  KC
lutes, JAson Houdini: The Handcuff King; illus. by Nick Bertozzi. Hyperion, 
2007 90p
ISBN 0-7868-3902-3 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-8
In the final line of this graphic novel, escape-artist Harry Houdini muses, “Will 
June 2007 • 429
anyone even remember me a hundred years from now?” Bet on it, Harry, and the 
fresh format offered here should snag another crowd of devotees. Lutes and Bertozzi 
follow Houdini through one very long day—May 1, 1908—as he times himself at 
picking a handcuff lock, goes for a morning run to check the day’s venue at Harvard 
Bridge in Cambridge, Massachusetts, meets with the press, hires a roustabout/body 
guard, makes his regal progress under escort to the bridge, pulls off a literally 
breathtaking underwater escape in a minute and nineteen seconds, and then heads 
off to the theater for the evening’s paid performance. The day-in-the-life approach 
fits admirably into the graphic format, and without breaking the continuity with 
chapter headings, Bertozzi nonetheless sections off the quieter, midday events by 
cleverly bookending them in long vertical panels of a deep-water dive and hotel 
elevator rides. Palette is limited to black, white, and shades of blue and blue-gray, 
which evokes the monochrome media of the day without resorting to obvious sepia 
possibilities, and the caricature of Houdini himself—handsome, cocky, and prone to 
run the mercurial gamut from rage (at the press) to besotted bliss (over his beloved 
wife, Bess)—is right on the money. With their careful attention to contemporary 
detail and list of sources, Lutes and Bertozzi seem to aim for an information-book 
audience, but the notes are often more supplemental sidebars than authentication 
(there’s also a bit of waffling about the trick behind Houdini’s river escape). Still, 
it’s a great tale, rousingly told and, given the elusive nature of the Master himself, 
probably as close to the truth as his spellbound followers are likely to get.  EB
MacLennan, cathy Chicky Chicky Chook Chook; written and illus. by Cathy 
MacLennan. Boxer, 2007 28p
ISBN 1-905417-40-3 $12.95   
Ad 2-4 yrs
MacLennan’s debut picture book features extensive onomatopoeia in a lighthearted 
tale of changing weather. The featured cast (chicks, bees, and kitties) starts the day 
warm in the yellow sunshine but soon raindrops begin to fall, quickly intensifying 
into an eye-boggling thunderstorm. A gentle breeze and more sunshine follow, 
and the rain-drenched creatures dry out. The plotline is slim and the character 
development even slimmer, and the tongue-twisting phrases (“Fizzy, fizzy, buzz 
buzz,/ fizz, fizz buzz./ Fizzy, fizzy, buzz buzz,/ busy . . . busy . . . buzzzzzz”) get a 
little wearing on reader-aloud if not listener after awhile. Nonetheless, the energetic, 
sound-based language makes for a playful, quick readaloud. Employing a palette of 
mostly yellow, blue, green, and white and painted on brown corrugated cardboard, 
the animated paintings feature chicks, bees, and kitties in motion, busily pecking, 
buzzing, and scattering through the sunny parts of the day and growing visibly 
perturbed as the thunder begins to crash. Thickly applied brushstrokes suggest 
feathers and fur, punctuated with the crisp geometry of beaks, legs, and other 
details. The large-scale images will register well across a crowded storytime carpet, 
and young listeners just may have a go at imitating the range of sounds and noises 
resonating through the story’s pages.  HM
Marsden, caroLyn When Heaven Fell. Candlewick, 2007 183p
ISBN 0-7636-3175-2 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Set in a contemporary Vietnamese village, Marsden’s latest novel explores the cul-
tural conflict experienced by the family of nine-year-old Binh when an American 
relative comes to visit. Binh has only just learned that her grandmother Ba Ngoai 
had another daughter before her own mother was born; this first daughter, Thao, 
430 • The BulleTin
was fathered by an American GI and, for her safety, given up for adoption to an 
American family in the mid-seventies. When Thao contacts her birth mother about 
plans to visit Vietnam, Binh’s family is sent into a whirlwind of hopes for the riches 
and wealth that Thao will bring to them (Binh herself hopes Thao will bring her 
back to live in a glamorous American city like she has seen in the movies). Binh 
and the rest of her extended family are disappointed when Thao arrives, but with 
the gentle guidance of her American auntie, Binh works through her confusion 
about what it means to be American; meanwhile Thao, with Binh’s assistance, 
comes to realize what she can do to best help her Vietnamese family. While the 
narrative is occasionally punctuated by Thao’s deeply felt memories of the war and 
Ba Ngoai’s lingering guilt over having sent her daughter away, the story is mostly 
unemotionally straightforward, lacking the lyrical descriptions of other Marsden 
novels. The true success of this short novel lies in its portrayal of the Vietnamese 
villagers’ misconstrued perceptions of what it means to be American and in the 
resolution of those misperceptions through Thao’s visit. This would work well in 
conjunction with a unit on the Vietnam War, especially if paired with a nonfiction 
story of war orphans such as Warren’s Escape from Saigon (BCCB 10/04). A glossary 
and pronunciation guide are included.  HM 
Marsden, John While I Live: The Ellie Chronicles. Scholastic, 2007 [304p]
ISBN 0-439-78318-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
Ellie Linton and those of her resistance fighter friends who survived the war de-
scribed in Tomorrow,When the War Began (BCCB 4/95) and its sequels are now 
trying to pull their lives back together in a partitioned Australia. Four months 
into the “peace,” Ellie’s ranch is attacked by border raiders who brutally murder 
her parents and a neighbor, leaving Ellie orphaned but still in charge of Gavin, the 
deaf street urchin who attached himself to her during the war. Compounding her 
troubles are a fight for custody of the estate, which is in shaky financial condition, 
and her growing involvement in a group called Liberation, which orchestrates rescues 
of Australians taken prisoner across the border, territory into which government 
troops cannot legally trespass without reigniting full-scale war. Although The Ellie 
Chronicles is promoted as a fresh series, prior reader familiarity with Marsden’s 
alternative contemporary reality, its war, and Ellie’s tight-knit group of scrappy 
comrades is, if not absolutely essential, at least strongly advisable. Fans of the previ-
ous series certainly knew that Ellie wouldn’t settle down to a normal high-school 
routine or that peace would follow the treaty, and they’ll be pleased to learn their 
heroine hasn’t lost her touch with a pistol, a fuel tank, and a getaway cycle.  EB
MccuLLy, eMiLy arnoLd The Escape of Oney Judge: Martha Washington’s Slave Finds 
Freedom; written and illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. Farrar, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-374-32225-2 $16.00   
Ad Gr. 3-5
As the light-skinned “servant” of Martha Custis Washington, Ona (Oney) Judge 
certainly led a less harsh life than the hands who worked the Washingtons’ fields; 
this relative privilege had its limits, though, as McCully makes clear in this retelling 
of Judge’s life—education was denied, and continued residence with her immedi-
ate family was always precarious. When rumor reached Judge that other slaves in 
the Custis estate were being sold, she turned to a free black family to help plan 
her escape, but even in the relative safety of New Hampshire, the Washingtons’ 
June 2007 • 431
acquaintances and relatives attempted promises and trickery to lure her back to 
Mount Vernon. Without resorting to overt iconoclasm, McCully nudges readers 
to consider the Founding Father’s insensitivity to denizens of the new nation who 
dwelled right under his nose. Picture-book format is not the most effective vehicle 
for Judge’s story, though—compression of childhood through adult years burdens 
the text, and the complexity of inheritance chains and slavery-related laws calls for 
a more sophisticated audience than is likely to be attracted to the relatively sunny, 
somewhat romanticized look of the watercolor illustrations. A lengthy author’s 
note complements the text and leads readers to, among other sources, an online 
article of an interview with elderly Judge. While this will not be as versatile a title as 
Weatherford’s Moses (BCCB 11/06) or Levine’s Henry’s Freedom Box (BCCB 4/07), 
it may strike the fancy of American Girls fans with an eye for historical drama or 
of younger listeners ready to eavesdrop on the seamier side of the Washington 
household.  EB 
McdonaLd, Megan Daisy Jane, Best-Ever Flower Girl!; illus. by Claudine 
Gevry. Random House, 2007 [48p] (Step into Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93110-4 $11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-375-83110-X $3.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 1-3
One of Daisy Jane’s favorite games to play with her beloved babysitter, Allie, is 
wedding. She is thrilled, then, to find that Allie is actually getting married, and 
Daisy Jane is to be the flower girl. After a picture-perfect garden wedding, things 
go haywire when a freakishly strong storm sends hats, plates, and tents flying, and 
people scurrying to the safety of the house. Then the lights go out, and Daisy Jane 
saves the day by finding candles for everyone, playing the piano, and passing out 
bubble wrap to duplicate the festive atmosphere of the fireworks that got rained out. 
The text never really offers more than bland sweetness, and the idea of Daisy Jane 
performing these feats of quotidian heroism in a house that presumably isn’t hers isn’t 
really credible. The point here is wish fulfillment though, and McDonald delivers 
this in spades. The illustrations are pedestrian at best, sporting chunky figures with 
pin-dot eyes who bear a strong resemblance to Fisher-Price Little People, but they 
offer effective and substantial story support. The story arc itself carefully teaches the 
literary and cultural competencies needed to understand the plot—first Daisy Jane 
plays at being a flower girl with all the conventional trappings, and then she actually 
becomes one. The unexpected introduction of a near-catastrophic storm and Daisy 
Jane’s rescue of the situation furthers readers’ preparation for more complex plots, 
which tend to feature similar elements in a similar order, making this a particularly 
effective rung of support as readers move up the literacy ladder.  KC
Mcewan, JaMie Rufus the Scrub Does Not Wear a Tutu; illus. by John 
Margeson. Darby Creek, 2007 [64p]
ISBN 1-58196-060-3 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Rufus may not wear a tutu, but he’s a novice ballet dancer nonetheless, hoping 
the classes will give him a bit more coordination and help him be more nimble on 
the football field. He’s not fazed by the idea, or by being the big guy in a class of 
eight-year-old girls (he becomes quite popular as a lifter of tiny ballerinas), but the 
razzing from the coach and his teammates may convince him to quit—unless he 
432 • The BulleTin
can demonstrate some real improvement in his game. The old story of grade-school 
gender conflict moves up to varsity level in this affable early reader touched with 
laconic wit, and even the inevitable lesson about the benefits Rufus has obtained 
from ballet follows an original game plan. Characterization varies from humorously 
broad (the football coach) to sly and economical (Rufus’ mother), while Rufus 
himself is an easygoing and sympathetic protagonist, absolutely the kind of big 
boy who’d become the pet of a fleet of little girls. Computer-drawn cartoon spot 
art enlivens chapter openings, and the big print will reassure timid readers. Fans 
of this series’ Willy the Scrub (BCCB 4/04) and other easygoing sports adventures 
will want to give this one a twirl.  DS
miller, lee Roanoke: The Mystery of the Lost Colony. Scholastic, 2007 112p il-
lus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-71266-1 $18.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Tucked away in the social studies book between the chapters on Christopher 
Columbus and Jamestown lurks the tantalizing problem of an entire missing 
colony. Established by Great Britain in the late sixteenth century as a New World 
military outpost in the face-off with Spain, Roanoke staked its main claim to fame 
by promptly vanishing. Readers with a taste for historical conundrums may have 
pondered the mystery in Fritz’s The Lost Colony of Roanoke (BCCB 6/04) or Yolen’s 
Roanoke: The Lost Colony (BCCB 9/03), but here Miller offers fresh evidence in 
a child-friendly repackaging of her adult opus, Roanoke: Solving the Mystery of the 
Lost Colony. This is no tepidly balanced overview of possibilities but a full-blown 
conspiracy theory, based on Miller’s rereading of primary source documents and 
indigenous lore. She points an accusatory finger at Queen Elizabeth’s advisor, Sir 
Francis Walsingham, whose rivalry with Sir Walter Raleigh, financial embarrass-
ment, and deft hand at patiently pulling off high-stakes political intrigues mark 
him as prime suspect in undermining the success—even the very existence—of 
Roanoke. No doubt a Walsingham defense team would note how much evidence 
is circumstantial; it would certainly be hard to prove that the ship’s pilot was in 
Walsingham’s pocket for past services rendered, or that the many tragedies that led to 
the colonists’ abandonment in Roanoke rather than safe deliverance to Chesapeake 
Bay were all due to dastardly planning. However, Miller presents an argument that 
goes well beyond mere plausibility and, even more important for middle-school 
readers, a story that is clearly told and rife with suffering underdogs and villains 
in high places. Besides an index and specific source notes, welcome bonus mate-
rial includes an annotated list of characters in order of introduction, a timeline of 
Roanoke events and rescue attempts, and a wealth of illustrations from expedition 
artists John White and photographs of the region as it appears today.  EB
moloney, JAmes The Book of Lies. HarperCollins, 2007 [368p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-057843-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-057842-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
In the dead of night, three teenagers have been brought separately to a foundling 
and orphan’s home in the isolated village of Fallside, where two of them, Fergus 
and Nicola, have had their memories systematically replaced with fiction dictated 
to them by the enigmatic Book of Lies. The third and youngest teen, Marcel, has 
evaded the full impact of the procedure; he has managed to retain his true name, 
June 2007 • 433
he knows that his memories have been erased, and he is determined to learn the 
secrets of the Book and its creator, the frightening Lord Alywn, so that he can take 
back what was stolen from him. There are other secrets afoot: two strangers convince 
Marcel that he, Fergus, and Nicola are the heirs to the kingdom of Elstenwyck and 
that they must escape Lord Alwyn’s grasp to join their parents and retake the throne 
by means of secrets hidden within the Book of Lies. But the Book has become 
corrupted over its long life of collecting lies told in its hearing, and the teens, along 
with Marcel’s best friend who has secrets of her own to unravel, are being misled 
by the very people they need to trust. Australian author Moloney’s elegant and 
descriptive prose begs to be read aloud, and the atmospherically charged opening 
chapters will make readers tremble with anticipation as they try to disentangle the 
truth from the lies told to the young folks. The Book of Lies itself is a creative 
ingredient in this mix of mistaken identities and royal ambition; it becomes a 
character, helping heighten tension as the plot progresses. Middle-school readers 
will enjoy this absorbing tale well told, and they will be intrigued by an ending 
that hints at a sequel to come.  CW
NaNce, aNdrew Daemon Hall; illus. by Coleman Polhemus. Holt, 
2007 [208p]
ISBN 0-8050-8171-2 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-9
Ian Tremblin, a controversial horror writer, takes five high-school students into 
dreadful Daemon Hall where the five, who are winners in Tremblin’s contest for 
young writers, will retell their tales and whoever lasts the night—er, tells the best 
story—will win the opportunity to be published in Tremblin’s Macabre Master 
series. Once inside the haunted hall, each young author must re-read their entry 
and then tell an original spine-tingler, and one candle is extinguished after each 
tale is told. Five young writers start the story tour; one goes to the bathroom, and 
then there are four. Nance offers a smoothly written, clever framework for relaying 
ten scary stories, and horror fans will appreciate classic elements like the spooky 
house that seems to be alive, the evocation of Agatha Christie’s And Then There 
Were None, and the one guest who must be left behind. The stories themselves 
are riffs on familiar themes—arachnophobia, babysitting, and crazy bus drivers, 
just to name a few—but they’re lively and a few even offer creatively formatted 
interpretations in poetry and email/chat-room exchanges. There are no subtleties 
here, but these tales are enjoyably creepy and straight-up fright-night fun for read-
ers ready to take the next thrilling step after San Souci’s Double-Dare to be Scared 
(BCCB 7/04).  CW
O’cONNOr, BarBara How to Steal a Dog. Foster/Farrar, 2007 170p
ISBN 0-374-33497-8 $16.00   
R Gr. 3-5
Three rolls of quarters and a jar of crumbled singles, all that Georgina’s father left 
behind when he took off, won’t pay the rent, so she and her mother and brother 
Toby are living in their rattletrap car until Mama can get the money together for 
permanent lodging. Fed up with her precipitous decline in diet, hygiene, and 
status among friends and classmates, Georgina devises a moneymaking scheme 
to supplement her mother’s scanty, unreliable income: steal a dog from affluent 
and kindly looking owners, wait for the reward notices to be posted around her 
South Carolina town, and then return the dog for $500. Purloining perfect pup 
434 • The BulleTin
Willy proves remarkably easy; it’s hiding and feeding the dog, getting to know the 
story behind his not-so-wealthy-after-all owner, and dealing with a mighty prickly 
conscience that turns out to be hard. O’Connor strings out the slender storyline a 
tad more than necessary, but the details of the homeless family’s plight—washing 
in gas-station rest rooms, doing homework by flashlight, sleeping sitting up for 
nights in a row—will give a more privileged audience much to ponder. Readers 
will be glad to see the happy resolution that finds mother and kids sharing a small 
house with a single mom in exchange for babysitting help, the satisfying result of 
Mama’s hard work and the compassionate support of others who know a thing or 
two about hard times.  EB
O’dell, KathleeN Bad Tickets. Knopf, 2007 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-93801-X $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-83801-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
It’s 1967, and with rebellion in the air Mary Margaret Hallinan is determined not 
to turn into her mother, a chain-smoking malcontent perpetually pregnant and 
resentful about it. Mary Margaret pitches over her old best friend, stick-in-the-mud 
Elizabeth, for new friend Jane, a wild child who is more than willing to egg Mary 
Margaret on in her quest to break loose from her good-girl image. Jane drags Mary 
Margaret off to parties in the communal residence of a group of college-aged boys, 
where Jane mistakes chemically influenced discussions of Siddhartha for depth of 
character and Mary Margaret discovers that she really likes liquor and pot. But 
Mary Margaret has been brought up a little too well after all and has a boyfriend 
who genuinely cares about her, and in the end it’s parentally neglected Jane who falls 
for a guy who expects his woman to serve his needs and wishes. Jane gets pregnant, 
he needs a draft exemption, and Mary Margaret can only watch in distress as her 
friend enters into the kind of shotgun marriage that presages the elder Hallinans’ 
unhappiness. Readers looking for a ’60s novel have come to the right place; there’s 
plenty of weed, hash brownies, teen sex (of both the liberated and the repressed 
varieties), and rock ’n’ roll. Unfortunately, there’s also an uneasy sense that these 
girls have been too carefully choreographed into their roles in order to deliver a 
timely message that, in the final analysis, strict parents are good parents, teen sex 
leads to trouble, and your dullest friends may be your truest friends. That may be 
a point well taken, but for YAs who came for the party, Mary Margaret and Jane 
are at their best when they’re at their worst.  EB
ParKiNsON, siOBháN Second Fiddle: Or How To Tell a Blackbird from a 
Sausage. Roaring Brook, 2007 [192p]
ISBN 1-59643-122-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Mags first encounters Gillian in, of all places, the forest, where the latter goes to 
practice her violin. Twelve-year-old Mags, one of life’s chargers-ahead, latches onto 
Gillian and soon discovers that the older girl is a truly gifted violinist, so gifted 
that she’s been invited to audition for entry to a prestigious English music school. 
When Mags hears that there’s an obstacle—Gillian’s mother doesn’t have tuition 
money—and that Gillian’s divorced and seldom-in-contact father is Gillian’s only 
hope for funding, she determines to track down Gillian’s dad and extract the prom-
ise of financial support from him. Parkinson, author of the touching Something 
June 2007 • 435
Invisible (BCCB 5/06), shows her usual high style in Mags’ narration; Mags is 
credible as a headstrong and impulsive character, and the correlation between her 
determination to find Gillian’s father and the hole in her family left by her own 
father’s death is wisely left largely implicit. The plot is, as a consequence, somewhat 
diffuse in its focus, and the narration tips into the arch at times (especially when 
Mags is explaining that she’s also writing the chapters in Gillian’s voice), but it’s 
still a highly original story with a vividly drawn protagonist. Fans of lively family 
drama will appreciate Mags’ energetic quest and her own unobtrusive steps toward 
maturation.  DS
pAros, Jennifer Violet Bing and the Grand House; written and illus. by Jennifer 
Paros. Viking, 2007 106p
ISBN 0-670-06151-4 $14.99   
R Gr. 2-4
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 399, for review.
pinkwAter, dAniel Bad Bears Go Visiting: An Irving & Muktuk Story; illus. by 
Jill Pinkwater. Houghton, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-618-43126-8 $16.00   
R Gr. 2-4
Everyone loves the Bad Bears—but imagine if they showed up at your front door. 
In this fourth adventure of the dauntless duo, Irving and Muktuk are taught the 
art of visiting by their friend Larry, who comes to visit one night and stays for cake 
with little fishes on it, a game of volleyball, and some pleasant chatting. Irving 
and Muktuk are thus convinced that “visits are nice,” so after yet another success-
ful nighttime escape from the zoo, they opt to mix things up a bit by taking up 
the pastime themselves and visiting the home of Steve, Loretta, and little Sylvia 
Beachball. The ensuing antics as Irving and Muktuk put their visiting skills to good 
use are all the more hilarious for the guests’ most noble intentions, and kids will 
especially love the idea that chatting pleasantly can be fun and not just an activity in 
which adults engage to make children suffer while they wait. Using her customary 
felt-tip markers and ink, Jill Pinkwater gives center stage to the two amorphous 
yet shapely furballs; the new socialites stand out brilliantly in their black-fringed 
whiteness. The fairly imperturbable sweatshirt- and slipper-clad Beachballs are a 
softly colorful bunch, in contrast with the sketchy ursine strangers who squeeze 
through their door. Wryly understated dialogue calls for a comic readaloud, but 
the humor found in the snappy text and the expressive eyes exchanging alternately 
cunning or contented glances could be divined by individual readers as well. Keep 
a copy of this one on your coffee table, and keep a cake with little fishes on top in 
your kitchen, just in case some visitors decide to drop by.  KB
pitCHford, deAn The Big One-Oh. Putnam, 2007 181p
ISBN 0-399-24547-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Charley comes home one day to a birthday card from his estranged dad that asks, 
“What are you going to do for your big day?” Even though his dad has gotten both 
the day and his age wrong, those ten words set off a chain of events that could spell 
Charley’s destiny or his doom. He decides that he has to do something to com-
memorate leaving the single digits, but he quickly realizes that he has no idea of how 
to throw a party and no friends to invite to one. Cinematic slapstick hilarity reigns 
when he throws a House of Horrors birthday party based on his favorite comic-book 
436 • The BulleTin
series, which threatens to go horribly wrong until his occasional friend, the weird 
guy who lives next door, saves the day with a few very convincing special effects. 
Charley is a winning nerd, and the friends that he gathers to him gain from being 
fifth-grade stereotypes—their characters are universal enough for kids everywhere 
to recognize them as people they know. The humor resides in the broad action of 
the events rather than snappy dialogue or narration, making this a straightforward 
read with lots of exercise for the reader’s inner eye as s/he brings the comical scenes 
to imagined life. Many a birthday party will no doubt be patterned after Charley’s 
wildly successful bash, but few (thank goodness for parents, neighbors, police, and 
other emergency workers) will pack the same punch.  KC 
ruBin, susAn goldmAn Haym Salomon: American Patriot; illus. by David 
Slonim. Abrams, 2007 40p
ISBN 0-8109-1087-X $16.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
In the elementary-school social studies saga of the American Revolution, little atten-
tion is paid to the indispensable money man behind the Patriot cause, and Rubin 
is out to redress the omission with a picture book aimed at an audience that has at 
least a passing familiarity with the other big-name players. Indeed, Salomon can 
boast some pretty notable and exciting life experiences—his minority status as a 
Jew in a largely Christian country, his work with the Sons of Liberty undermining 
the British, his stints in jail, and even his remarkable feat of cheating the hangman, 
and to her credit, Rubin spins the somewhat lengthy tale in brisk, accessible prose. 
Once onto financial matters, however, the text will probably be rough going for 
young readers, even with the provided glossary for consultation: “Haym became 
Morris’s broker. He received loans and bills of exchange from France, Spain, and 
Holland to gain money for General Washington’s troops. Usually he charged noth-
ing for his services.” Moreover, Slonim’s cartoonish paintings, which clearly try to 
strike a light, friendly note, are uncomfortably out of sync with the serious nature 
of the narrative. This Haym is a far cry from the sober, dignified figure shown in 
an appended period portrait; with his bulbous nose, carefree expressions, and ever-
present doggie mimicking his movements (the dog squats on his hind legs with 
forepaws raised when his master is arrested by a Redcoat), he plays the situation 
for laughs all the way to his deathbed, where he rolls his eyes and grins like he’s 
about to sleep off a bender. This will be useful in expanding children’s awareness 
of an overlooked Founder, but it’s unlikely to cultivate a circle of budding financial 
moguls. Endnotes and a bibliography are included.  EB
ryAn, sArA The Rules for Hearts: A Family Drama. Viking, 2007 222p
ISBN 0-670-05906-4 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
In Empress of the World (BCCB 9/01), Battle found her first love in Nic; now she’s 
moving up to Portland the summer before she starts at college in order to be with 
another Nick, her older brother, who left home five years previously and recently 
contacted Battle. In Portland, Battle moves into her brother’s household, owned 
by theater director Aurora and inhabited by a colorful collection of theater people, 
including Meryl, a twentysomething woman to whom Battle feels an immediate 
attraction. Nick is another matter, though, and Battle finds that the more she 
grasps about what he’s doing, the more concerned she is about her charismatic but 
troublesome brother. This doesn’t have the same richness and focus as its predeces-
sor; the two main stories, about Battle’s off-and-on relationship with Meryl and her 
June 2007 • 437
frustration with her evasive brother, detract from each other rather than working 
together effectively, with Meryl’s plot petering out and Nick’s speeding into an 
abrupt conclusion. Ryan continues to be a smooth and thoughtful writer, though, 
and Battle, with her combination of stability and eagerness for new experience, 
remains a sympathetic character indeed. Her journey of maturation has a blend 
of authenticity and appealing glamour that will continue to make readers believe 
they could be in her place and wish that they were.  DS
seeger, lAurA vACCAro Dog and Bear: Two Friends, Three Stories; written and 
illus. by Laura Vaccaro Seeger. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2007 [32p]
ISBN 1-59643-053-2 $12.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 3-5 yrs
This trio of stories follows the domestic adventures of Dog, a high-spirited dachs-
hund, and Bear, a timid toy bear. First, Dog encourages Bear to jump down from his 
high perch on a chair and join Dog on a trip outside; then eager Dog keeps begging 
Bear to put down his book and play; finally Bear offers advice when Dog wants to 
change his name. The plots are a little blurry, lacking crisp focus, and the text lacks 
the compact pithiness of classics such as the similarly themed Frog and Toad; there’s 
still pleasure to be found in these amiable adventures, especially for preschoolers, 
and the protagonists are engaging and well differentiated (the viewpoint slightly 
favors the more thoughtful Bear). The illustrations emphasize graphic strength and 
simplicity, with generous helpings of creamy white space adding emphasis to the 
appealingly toylike figures outlined in thick brushstrokes of black and filled with 
rich color (Dog is an autumnal russet, while Bear is a multicolored harlequin). It’s 
hard to resist an effervescent wiener dog and a cuddly colorful ursine, and youngsters 
will enjoy hanging out with these endearing friends.  DS
sHerry, kevin I’m the Biggest Thing in the Ocean; written and illus. by Kevin 
Sherry. Dial, 2007 32p
ISBN 0-8037-3192-2 $16.99   
R 2-5 yrs
The braggart making the titular claim is a giant squid, and his belief seems to be 
pretty justified: he’s certainly bigger than the shrimp, crabs, turtles, and series of 
fish that swim by. The flaw in his theory becomes apparent when a huge blue whale 
not only overshadows him but gulps him right down, but the philosophical squid 
readjusts himself to observe his small comrades in the whale’s stomach and to now 
boast that he’s “the biggest thing in this whale.” While this may stray from real-
world marine biology, the obsession with size and who’s biggest of all will strike 
a chord with growth-obsessed preschoolers, who will appreciate the streamlined 
(ocean-lined?) and humorous text—all dialogue—that keeps its sights on its im-
portant subject. Illustrations play up the deep blue of the sea with delicately washed 
backgrounds in shades of azure, turquoise, and cerulean, against which the figures, 
paper cutouts edged in bold black, stand out in relief. Creatures are expressive 
despite their simplicity, with the smaller sea creatures visually balanced against the 
dominant squid (it’s odd, though, that the foldout spread doesn’t take the oppor-
tunity to show the protagonist in full glory and instead just adds to the sequence 
of little fish). The art and concept will make this title’s appeal run to quite young 
audiences (some perhaps too young for safe play with the book’s included bathtub 
stickers), who will relish an ensuing discussion of all the surrounding objects next 
to which they can be giants.  DS
438 • The BulleTin
spinelli, Jerry Eggs. Little, 2007 220p
ISBN 0-316-16646-4 $15.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Nine-year-old David is grieving the sudden loss of his mother by being angry and 
sullen to his grandmother, avoiding sunrises, and following rules. After all, if the 
janitor who had washed the floor had followed the rule of putting up a sign warn-
ing people that it would be slippery, his mother wouldn’t have slipped, fallen down 
the stairs, and failed to show up the next morning, or ever, to see the sunrise with 
him as she promised. Thirteen-year-old Primrose is protesting the weirdness of her 
fortune-telling, not-altogether-there mother by moving into an abandoned van in 
the front yard of their decrepit house. The two first encounter each other in a spooky 
way—David stumbles upon Primrose pretending to be a dead body in the woods 
during an Easter egg hunt—and develop a tense but strangely loyal friendship when 
he sees her again, very much alive, at storytime in the library. Spinelli overlays the 
story of their friendship with a series of provocative images that are both real and 
symbolic: eggs, for instance, alternate between real eggs such as those local thugs 
throw at Primrose’s van and the hard-cooked ones at the Easter egg hunt, and 
their symbolic resonance is visually similar to sunrises and metaphorically related 
to embryonic and fragile friendships. Primrose and David are also fascinated by a 
man who stands on a city corner and waves at everyone; Spinelli obliquely connects 
his bizarre behavior to that of these kids who are trying desperately to get someone 
to recognize what’s behind their crusty and off-putting personalities and give them 
the recognition and response that, despite the well-meaning efforts of the adults 
in their lives, they are only getting from each other. This subtle symbolic layering, 
which may unfortunately be lost on more literal readers, turns an utterly ordinary 
plot of two grumpy, unlikely friends into a lyrical study of grief and hope.  KC 
turnBull, Ann Forged in the Fire. Candlewick, 2007 312p
ISBN 0-7636-3144-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-10
When Turnbull left her Quaker sweethearts Susanna Thorn and William Heywood 
at the conclusion of No Shame, No Fear (BCCB 11/04), their love and faith, already 
tested by government persecution, were about to be tried by a long separation, 
during which the betrothed teens prepared economically for marriage. But as this 
novel opens and William is ready to bring Susanna up to London to begin their 
life together, the plague of 1665 forces draconian travel restrictions. When Susanna 
finally reaches the city, a misunderstanding regarding William’s relationship with the 
daughter of a well-to-do Quaker benefactor undermines her trust and she releases 
him from their engagement. Readers know Turnbull hasn’t brought them through 
imprisonment, separation, and disease for nothing, though, and the marriage does 
indeed take place. Another author, or another historical setting, might safely leave 
the couple at “I do,” but exigencies of historical fact decree that they only get a few 
peaceful months of honeymooning before London bursts into flames in 1666, and 
now-pregnant Susanna and her husband must start over again, this time with the 
assistance of William’s father, from whom he has long been estranged. Although 
Turnbull draws her historical backdrop with compelling authority, this is at heart 
a tender and ever so satisfying love story in which amorous passion and religious 
conviction, too often at odds in works of fiction, unite the newlyweds to face 
whatever history throws their way.  EB
June 2007 • 439
umAnsky, kAye Solomon Snow and the Stolen Jewel. Candlewick, 
2007 245p
ISBN 0-7636-2793-3 $12.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Solly, now returned to his former humble status following a brief and eventful 
flirtation with drama among the upper crust (Solomon Snow and the Silver Spoon, 
BCCB 12/05), is on his way to deliver a load of freshly laundered underwear to a 
neighbor when he is again swept by Fate into adventure. He and his prickly friend 
Pru must free her father from prison before he’s deported for poaching, while 
meanwhile off at the circus, their old acquaintance Rosabella, the Infant Prodigy, 
becomes unwittingly involved in the theft of a cursed gem from the tomb of a 
touring pharaonic mummy—a gem purloined by a dwarf in the employ of a giant 
in the employ of a reclusive master criminal. Naturally (well, quite unnaturally, but 
isn’t that the point?), the trio is reunited to bring the villains to justice and restore 
the innocent—or at least the not-quite-so-guilty—to liberty. Umansky again has a 
grand old time weaving improbable elements into a coherent plot, and in this case 
a stuffed toy bunny and Rosabella’s indolent pet rabbit, Mr. Skippy, are the wild 
cards that win the hand. Reliable good guy Solly has by now established himself 
as straight man for the antics of his companions, and the simpering, lisping, hard-
as-nails Infant Prodigy continues to steal the show. Fans of Silver Spoon should be 
equally satisfied with the latest caper.  EB
wArd, Helen Little Moon Dog; illus. by Wayne Anderson. Dutton, 
2007 32p
ISBN 0-525-47727-6 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Every year the peace of the moon is disturbed by the arrival of tourists. These 
malevolent little fairies trail “seven shades of trouble” in their wake, but the Man 
in the Moon has always avoided their mischief by locking his door and nailing his 
mailbox shut until they go away. Not so this year. They lure his faithful compan-
ion, Little Moon Dog, into their wild romps and take him home with them, only 
to abandon him when their very short attention spans drift elsewhere. Beset by 
loneliness, the Man in the Moon decides to go in search of his friend, and the two 
reunite, never to part again, though they do decide to go off on vacations of their 
own when a fairy visit is due. The illustrations in this British import punctuate the 
ethereal setting with their delicate luminosity, as does the cover’s nubbly sheen. The 
sharpness of tiny detail in the faces and figures of the fey folk and lunar landscapes 
is softened by a fuzzed texture of graphite and colored pencil lightly applied, giv-
ing everything an appropriately transparent solidity. The palette is a little mistily 
indistinct, but pastel colors, especially in the yellow-green family, are deployed 
to good use to suggest the reflected light one would experience on the moon set 
against a deep navy sky. Though the dog is a bit too generic to be appealing on his 
looks alone, the fairies are delightfully grumpy and ill-mannered, and the old man 
is decidedly moonish, from his oversized head to his Ben Franklin glasses to his 
benevolent expression. The wistful illustrations thus effectively complement the 
poignancy in the story of a foolish pup tempted beyond what he can bear, only to 
find that home and the steadfast love of one significant other is always better than 
the glittery appeal of the fickle at heart.  KC 
440 • The BulleTin
wAtt, mélAnie Scaredy Squirrel Makes a Friend; written and illus. by Mélanie 
Watt. Kids Can, 2007 32p
ISBN 1-55453-181-0 $14.95   
R* Gr. 2-4
The aptly named Scaredy Squirrel would “rather be alone than risk encountering 
someone dangerous,” but he’s excited when he notices the backyard water feature is 
sporting a nice harmless goldfish, just right for friendship with a nervous squirrel. 
Scaredy carefully plans his friend-making mission to present himself appealingly and 
avoid all risks en route, but all his painstaking prep founders when he encounters 
an active dog who wants to eat him—or does he? Watt mines effective comedy 
from excess (Scaredy is hilariously organized in his compulsive planning and absurd 
lists) and from droll detail (he’s afraid of being bitten by walruses, bunnies, beavers, 
piranhas, and Godzilla), gently satirizing her protagonist’s obvious desperation (his 
“interesting” ways to pass the time all by himself include reading the phonebook 
and chatting to a sock puppet). It won’t surprise book-savvy audiences that the 
frightening dog just wants to play with Scaredy, since seeming foes often prove to 
be friends in literature, but they’ll be greatly relieved that poor old Scaredy doesn’t 
have to make do with a wet pet whose main virtue is safety and instead finds a 
satisfying “83% safe, but LOTS OF FUN!” canine pal. Figures in sprightly acryl-
ics are airily bounded by streams of white space as well as thick charcoal line, with 
a result suggesting a campy contemporary cartoon; clever formatting (overhead 
views, sequential panels, tests, and diagrams) add sly amusement. The humor is 
silly enough that kids with their own scaredy tendencies won’t feel preached at, and 
others will just appreciate the delicious ridiculousness that doesn’t keep Scaredy 
from getting the friend he needs.  DS
wemmlinger, rAymond Booth’s Daughter.  Calkins Creek/Boyds Mills, 
2007 210p
ISBN 1-932425-86-1 $17.95   
R Gr. 6-9
“My unfortunate uncle John Wilkes Booth died when I was three years old. I 
remember nothing of him.” That may be Edwina Booth’s stock answer to prying 
acquaintances, but she is well aware the entire family dynamic is affected by relation-
ship to Lincoln’s assassin. Narrator Edwina, now of marriageable age, is therefore 
grateful for a suitor who can accept her as a person apart from her notorious uncle, 
and she enters into an engagement with Downing Vaux, son of a prominent archi-
tect. But when Vaux suffers a breakdown and is later supplanted in her affections 
by Ignatius Grossmann, she slowly comes to realize that the truly controlling figure 
in the family is her father, actor Edwin Booth, who governs his daughter with an 
iron hand in a velvet glove, relying on her to support him on tour and through the 
dark moods that periodically threaten his career. Edwina’s voice is coolly formal 
and her attitude toward her suitors dispassionate, but the real star of this show is 
Edwin Booth; Wemmlinger, an expert in nineteenth-century theater, presents him 
through Edwina’s eyes as a loving but manipulative man for whom any publicity 
is good publicity: “Edwin’s a tragedian. Being connected to a national tragedy in 
life helped him more than any publicity ever could. A burden, perhaps, but much 
of it is his choice.” Though Edwina’s a little overshadowed in her own story, the 
book’s take on this larger-than-life family is a fascinating counterpoint to James 
Cross Giblin’s Good Brother, Bad Brother (BCCB 6/05).  EB
June 2007 • 441
wHite, rutH Way Down Deep. Farrar, 2007 197p
ISBN 0-374-38251-4 $16.00   
R Gr. 5-8
Ever since Ruby appeared from out of nowhere as a toddler in 1944 in the small 
town of Way Down Deep, West Virginia, she has been embraced by the town (a 
neighborly bunch of oddballs, not overly curious about Ruby’s origin) as one of its 
own. When Ruby is twelve or thirteen, the townsfolk take in another lost soul, this 
time a would-be bank robber with a passel of kids and a senile father. In a moment 
of lucidity, the elderly father remembers Ruby as a little girl who was rumored to 
have been carried off by a panther from a house in the woods sixty miles away. 
Feeling the need to investigate, Ruby finds a mean, bitter old woman who proves 
to be her grandmother and who is happy to have Ruby back to wait on her hand 
and foot. White works her usual magic of creating an entire town that looks after 
one another and accepts the quirks in their fellow humans that they can’t begin 
to understand. This time, however, she adds a bit of real magic, as the arrival of 
Ruby turns out to have been tinged with mystical physics, while her return to Way 
Down Deep is a result of the no less magical pull of a strong and abiding love. 
White’s humor is wise and gentle, limned always with the sense that every oddity 
of character is the result of an unanswered grief leaking out sideways. Some of those 
griefs get resolved, some don’t, but the characters will stay with readers long after 
the last page. Goats, children, readers, disappointed old men, and crotchety old 
women—all find a warm welcome in Way Down Deep.  KC
442 • The BulleTin
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
fiCHtelBerg, susAn Encountering Enchantment:  A Guide to Speculative Fiction 
for Teens. Libraries Unlimited, 2007 328p (Genreflecting Advisory Series)
ISBN 1-59158-316-0 $48.00
Speculative fiction, as defined here by Fichtelberg to include fantasy, science fiction, 
and horror, is often a jungle for professionals who lack a map to the real estate.  The 
1,400 titles assembled here, all published or reprinted during the last fifteen years, 
are an admittedly selective list, but they deliver what knowledgeable speculative-
fiction readers would expect to see and push boundaries by including a section on 
graphic novels as well as titles in large print, Braille, audiobook, and video formats. 
Entries include standard bibliographic information, along with relevant awards, 
and an annotation (except in the cases of individual entries in adult series, where 
the series has a general annotation).  The book is notable for its appendices that 
include programming ideas, fantasy lists for Harry Potter read-alikes and “Girl 
Power,” a separate list of speculative fiction in audio or video format, and a list of 
books recommended for use with book clubs.  Fichtelberg features short interviews 
with nine authors from Lloyd Alexander to Scott Westerfeld, and there is a resource 
list that includes books, websites for genres and authors, and an awards glossary. 
Navigation is enhanced by author and title indexes as well as a subject index, cross 
references within various sections, and tab-like markings on the page edges that 
help get quickly between sections.  This is a thoughtful and inventive breakdown 
of current speculative fiction: for example, Epic Fantasy breaks down even further 
into Mythic Epic and Pre- and Postindustrial Epic, just the sort of details that will 
help match title to reader.  The titles, series information, programming suggestions 
and navigational aids will make it very popular in public and school libraries for 
maintaining and building collections, as well as for linking readers to books they’ll 
come to love. CW
KeAne, NAnCy J. The Big Book of Children’s Reading Lists:  100 Great, Ready-to-Use 
Book Lists for Educators, Librarians, Parents, and Children. Libraries Unlimited, 
2006 270p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59158-334-9 $35.00
    The Big Book of Teen Reading Lists:  100 Great, Ready-to-Use Book Lists for 
Educators, Librarians, Parents, and Teens. Libraries Unlimited, 2006 297p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59158-333-0 $35.00
Creating fresh and interesting booklists and displays is a constant challenge for 
busy school and public library staff. Keane provides 100 new booklists, grouped in 
unusual ways, for children and a like number for teens. The lists are found under 
headings such as “School Subjects,” “Characters and Values,” and “Genres and 
Themes,” and they offer a mix of titles, published between 1995 and 2005, on 
everything from vowel sounds and the way books are made, to more traditional lists 
about cowboys, angels, and gymnastics. Teen headings are similarly broad, including 
titles sorted by genres, settings, characters, and a category called “Audience” that 
provides ready-made lists for particular reading groups and uses. Not all the lists 
are annotated, and Keane provides more than one formatting option: some lists fill 
June 2007 • 443
their pages while a few are formatted as camera-ready bookmarks. The indices in 
both books are straightforward and fairly comprehensive, providing author, title, 
and subject access to the various topics and lists. Keane has conscientiously vetted 
her lists with working librarians, and she has provided for lower- to mid-range aged 
readers as well as older readers within each book. Generally speaking, both these 
books are helpful, although reproducing some of the full-page lists may necessitate 
nearly dismantling the books themselves and some lists seem perfunctory (for ex-
ample, the Native American list consists only of series books, when there are many 
new and interesting titles available for inclusion). Nonetheless, as the professional 
equivalent of fast food, these lists will satisfy a variety of appetites.  CW
444  •  The BulleTin
Actors and acting–fiction: Ryan; 
Wemmlinger
Adoption–fiction: Kent; Marsden, C.
AdventuRe: Alexander; Bell; 
Buckingham; Carroll; French; 
Karr; Landy; Marsden, J.; Mo-
loney; umansky
African Americans: McCully
African Americans–stories: Forman; 
Harrington, Janice
Alcoholism–fiction: Luddy
Animals: Calmenson; Harrington, 
Jane
Animals–fiction: Watt
Animals–stories: Blackford; Gor-
bachev; MacLennan; Seeger; 
Sherry
Appearance–fiction: Burgess
Arctic, the: Lourie
Art and artists–fiction: Bauer
Astronomy: Florian
Bears–fiction: Pinkwater
Behavior–stories: Burningham
BioGRAPHieS: Aronson; Fritz; 
Lutes; McCully; Rubin
Birthdays–fiction: Clarke; Pitchford
Books and reading: Kaywell
Books and reading–fiction: Moloney
Brothers–fiction: Corrigan
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Clare; 
dogar; Ryan
Cats: Jenkins, S.
Cats–stories: Hicks
Chickens–stories: Harrington, Janice
City life–stories: Forman
Colonial life: Cooper
Colors: Gravett
Colors–stories: Gorbachev
Computers–fiction: Jinks
ConCePt BooKS: Gravett
Counseling: Kaywell
Crime and criminals–fiction: Bell; 
Clare; Fields; Foyt; Hoffman; 
Jinks; Landy; umansky
Crime and criminals–stories: Cowell
Cuba–fiction: Flores-Galbis
Current events: Lourie
death–fiction: Corrigan; dogar; 
Foyt; Parkinson; Spinelli
demons–fiction: Jenkins, A.
dogs: Calmenson; Jenkins, S.
dogs–fiction: French; o’Connor
dogs–stories: Ward
dragons–fiction: George
Ecology: Lourie
ecology–fiction: Flores-Galbis
Environmental studies: Lourie
Ethics and values: Burgess; Hughes; 
Jenkins, A.; Jinks; Larbalestier; 
o’dell 
explorers and exploring–fiction: 
Karr
Fairies–stories: Ward
Fame–fiction: Burgess
Families–fiction: Bauer; Clarke; 
Corrigan; dowd; Jones; Kent; 
Larbalestier; Marsden, C.; Parkin-
son; Spinelli
Families–stories: Jenkins, e.
FAntASy: Alexander; Bell; Buck-
ingham; Carroll; Clare; Flores-
Galbis; George; Harrison; Jones; 
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
June 2007  •  445
Landy; Larbalestier; Moloney; 
Ward
Fathers–fiction: Bauer; Foyt; Hemp-
hill; Kerley; Luddy; Parkinson; 
Wemmlinger
Fear–fiction: Watt
FoLKtALeS And FAiRy tALeS: 
Andersen
Food and eating: Aston
Friends–fiction: Arnold; Hickey; 
Hughes; o’dell; Spinelli; Watt
Friends–stories: Seeger
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Berman; 
Ryan
GHoSt StoRieS: Berman
Grandmothers–fiction: White
GRAPHiC noveLS: Kinney; Lutes
Grief–fiction: Spinelli
Growing up–fiction: Hickey
Growing up–stories: Blackford
Heroes–fiction: Carroll
HiStoRiCAL FiCtion: Ar-
nold; dowd; French; Hemphill; 
Hoffman; Karr; Kerley; Luddy; 
o’dell; turnbull; Wemmlinger
History, colonial: Fritz; Miller
History, U.S.: Aronson; Cooper; 
Fritz; Miller; Rubin
Homelessness–fiction: o’Connor
HoRRoR: de la Cruz; nance
Houses–fiction: Paros
HuMoR: Cronin; Harrington, 
Janice; Hicks; Jenkins, e.; Kin-
ney; Mcewan; Paros; Pinkwater; 
Pitchford; Sherry; umansky; Watt
identity–fiction: Burgess; Kent
identity–stories: Jenkins, e.
internet–fiction: Foyt; Jinks
ireland–fiction: dowd
Journals–fiction: Kinney
Korean Americans–fiction: Kent
Letters: Kaywell
Lies–fiction: Moloney
Literature, children’s: Kaywell
Love StoRieS: Barkley; turnbull
Magic–fiction: Alexander; Clare; 
Harrison; Landy; Larbalestier
Mathematics: Leedy
Monsters–fiction: Buckingham
Mothers–fiction: Hemphill
Music and musicians: Bolden
Music and musicians–fiction: Bur-
gess; Hughes; Parkinson
MySteRieS: Arnold; Berman; 
dogar; Hoffman; Landy
Mythology, classical: Jones
Nature study: Aston
orphans–fiction: Marsden, J.; White
Parties–fiction: Pitchford
Pets: Harrington, Jane; Jenkins, S.
PoetRy: Florian
Poverty–fiction: o’Connor
Pregnancy–fiction: dowd
Prisons–fiction: Bell
Rabbits–stories: Cowell
Reading aloud: Florian; Paros; 
Pinkwater
Reading, beginning: Gravett; Mc-
donald
Reading, easy: Mcewan; Paros; Watt
Reading, reluctant: Harrington, 
Jane; Jenkins, S.; Mcewan
Relationships–fiction: Barkley; Cor-
rigan; Hemphill; Ryan; Wem-
mlinger
RHyMinG StoRieS: Gravett
Romance–fiction: Barkley; de la 
Cruz; turnbull
Royalty–fiction: George; Harrison-
School–fiction: Kinney; Luddy
Science: dingle
Secrets–fiction: Bauer; Kerley; 
Moloney
SHoRt StoRieS: nance
Sisters–stories: Jenkins, e.
Size–stories: Sherry
Slavery: McCully
Space travel–fiction: Kerley
SPoRtS StoRieS: Mcewan
Storytime: Blackford; Cronin; Ma-
cLennan
Summer–stories: Forman
SuPeRnAtuRAL StoRieS: 
dogar; Foyt
SuSPenSe: Fields
time travel–fiction: Alexander
toys–stories: Cowell
vacations–fiction: Paros
vampires–fiction: de la Cruz
vietnam–fiction: Marsden, C.
446  •  The BulleTin
voyages and travel–fiction: French; 
Karr
voyages and travel–stories: Gor-
bachev
War–fiction: Marsden, J.
Weddings–fiction: Mcdonald
Women’s studies: Bolden
World cultures: Marsden, C. 
World War ii: Bolden
