T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
October 2014
Vol. 68   No. 2
Disseminate. Innovate. Collaborate.
A global community of authors, readers, and 
publishing partners align to discover and share 
new knowledge.
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
October 2014
Vol. 68 No. 2
83  the BIg PICture
 
 The Turtle of Oman  by Naomi Shihab Nye
84  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
94 • The Madman of Piney Woods  by Christopher Paul Curtis
97 • The Badger Knight  by Kathryn Erskine
99 • Unstoppable Octobia May  by Sharon Flake
118 • While You Were Napping  by Jenny Offill; illus. by Barry Blitt
131 • Unfriended  by Rachel Vail
135  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
136  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image: The Turtle of Oman copyright ©2014 by Betsy Peterschmidt and used by permission of 
Greenwillow Books, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.
OctOber 2014 • 83
the BIg PICture
The Turtle of Oman
by Naomi Shihab Nye
There’s nothing like a family move to make it clear to kids how little control they 
actually have over their lives. Best friends, favorite neighborhood spots, that corner 
shop where the owner knows exactly what you need when you need it, all of that, 
over and done with, because your folks decided it’s time to pack it up and move 
on. This is exactly the position young Aref finds himself in, and he’s not simply 
moving to the next town or state but halfway across the world, from Muscat, Oman 
to Ann Arbor, Michigan.
The book opens in an airport with the first of many goodbyes, although 
this one is Aref saying a temporary farewell to his father, who is off to get things 
ready in Ann Arbor; Aref’s mom and dad will be attending graduate school there 
for the next three years, after which the family plans to return to Oman. Aref and 
his mother are left with seven days to clean up the house and pack what’s left, but, 
despite his mother’s reassurances that this will be an “adventure,” Aref can’t bring 
himself to fill up his suitcase. The case is simply too small, and he can’t fit every-
thing he wants to bring with him—his rock collection, the nearby market, the sea 
turtle beach, his beloved grandfather, the view of the ocean from his house. Even 
making lists, a favorite pastime of Aref’s, of various factual tidbits about Oman 
and Ann Arbor do nothing to cheer him up. 
His mother calls for reinforcements in the form of Sidi, Aref’s grandfather, 
and the elderly man suggests a quick camping trip. The two spend the next few 
days traveling through Oman, stargazing in the desert, turtle-watching near the 
sea, and consuming as many fresh tangerines, curried vegetables, and giant melons 
as they can. Aref’s still not enthusiastic about the move upon their return, but the 
wise words of his grandpa and the chance to fully experience his country in his 
last few days there arms Aref with the strength to pack his bag and move forward.
Nye’s elegant but accessible tale—a love letter to Oman, a touching 
portrayal of a boy and his grandfather, and a poignant look at how we experience 
change—is deeply moving. The award-winning poet infuses her prose with imagery 
that is both breathtaking and unpretentious, opting for concrete metaphors and 
simple sentence structures to put this within the reach of younger readers: “You 
had better thoughts in the country. Your thoughts made falcon moves, dipping and 
rippling, swooping back to into your brain to land. . . . Your thoughts weren’t tied 
to one spot, and they weren’t nervous. They were just open and rolling.” 
There’s just a touch of Alvin Ho in Aref, with his penchant for list-
making and tendency towards worrying, but his concerns about moving (“Will 
I feel backwards in Michigan?” “Will our houses feel sad when we leave?”) will 
84 • the bulletin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
be keenly felt, especially by any reader who’s been forced to relocate. The third-
person narration is also rife with kid-centered insights (“Shopping was rarely fun. 
Aref suspected only grown-ups found it fun”), giving it a companionable, almost 
pleasantly conspiratorial tone. 
The beautifully described and fascinating sights and sounds of Aref’s final 
days traveling through Oman make his reluctance to leave such a magnificent place 
certainly understandable, and even his ultimate gutsy determination to see this as 
the adventure his mother claims it to be is tinged with bittersweetness. Readers 
never see Aref’s arrival or experience in Michigan, which focuses the story on the 
state that many preteen readers, moving or not, find themselves in: on the brink of 
definite change, with only the knowledge that it won’t be easy and the hope that it 
won’t be all that terrible. (See p. 117 for publication information.) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor 
Aguirre, Ann Mortal Danger. Feiwel, 2014 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-02464-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-06426-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Bullied and humiliated, Edie is set to exit this life when Kian, a preternaturally 
attractive stranger, appears with an offer that is more appealing than jumping 
off a bridge. He and his people can grant her three favors, which, to Edie, mean 
revenge against her tormentors and make the cost—three favors in return—well 
worth paying. Soon, however, Edie sees that there is more to her bargain than Kian 
originally let on, and that both she and he are now pawns in a deadly game played 
by immortals and created from humanity’s worst nightmares. On the one hand, 
things have become much more bearable for Edie, who becomes beautiful, acquires 
friends, and enjoys an intense, reciprocated crush on Kian. On the other, her life 
has become a horror movie complete with specters only she can see, classmates 
dying of a flesh-eating disease, and, most devastating of all, the grisly murder of 
her mother. These things were not part of her bargain, and she is determined to 
find a way to stop the body count and regain control. Aguirre’s prose is uneven, 
but her premise successfully blends ancient archetypes with today’s urban legends 
and internet memes to craft a thrilling puzzle that prods the dark recesses of the 
imagination into a waking nightmare. Edie’s transition from suicidal mess to gutsy 
heroine is more expedient than believable, but her inner dialogue keeps readers on 
track with her persisting insecurities, ensuring that readers will be fully on board 
as she prepares to do battle in the promised sequel.  KC 
OctOber 2014 • 85
Angelini, Josephine Trial by Fire. Feiwel, 2014 [384p] (The Worldwalker 
Trilogy)
ISBN 978-1-250-05088-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
The severe allergies that have kept Lily Proctor from a normal teenage experience 
lead to her having a seizure at an end-of-the-school-year senior party. Utterly morti-
fied, Lily wishes for a different existence, and that’s just what she gets: she wakes up 
to find herself in a completely different version of her town of Salem, one where 
witches not only exist but rule the world with an iron fist. In this version, Lillian, 
Lily’s alternate, is the most powerful witch, and she ruthlessly uses her powers to 
strike down those who oppose her. Lily finds herself drawn to Rowan, Lillian’s 
former lover and now nemesis, as he organizes the effort to end Lillian’s reign, 
but as Lily learns more about her own powers and Lillian’s history, she begins to 
wonder if Lillian isn’t after all protecting the world and the people she loves from 
a power even greater and more dangerous than magic—science. Angelini draws 
absorbing characters, from the physically frail but doggedly determined Lily, to 
the grief-stricken but compassionate Rowan, to the incredibly complex, perhaps-
not-so-evil villain, Lillian. The environmental message initially seems a bit heavy 
handed (Lillian’s world is unpolluted and pure due to use of magic as energy), but 
that element is given depth by Lily’s ethical dilemmas as she navigates the power 
structures in this new Salem and learns the temptations and the limits of her own 
abilities. A compelling, intricate world, a swoony romance, and a memorable cast 
make this one a blazing success.  KQG 
Aronson, MArc, ed. One Death, Nine Stories; ed. by Marc Aronson and Charles 
R. Smith, Jr. Candlewick, 2014 153p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5285-2 $16.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Nineteen-year-old Kevin Nicholas was reckless, charismatic, and troubled. His un-
expected suicide provides the occasion for this set of interconnected short stories by 
nine different authors that spin variations on the theme of initiation. A young boy 
with no ambition is coerced into working for his uncle at his funeral home; jolted 
into something like self-awareness by the unwavering gaze of Kev’s sister, his life 
begins with Kev’s death. Other boys, and one girl, remember the “firsts” in their lives 
that were orchestrated by Kev: first drink, first sex, first theft and now, first funeral. 
Most poignant, perhaps, is the experience of the boy who remembers his initiation 
into the gang Kev formed, recalling the complicated embrace of masculinity he 
felt when Kev chose him to inflict the pain he later called on them all to bear. Two 
stories explore the ripple effect of Kev’s death on people who didn’t know him at 
all. Each story shows how the death of a young person impels a pause and often 
results in an affirmation to move forward with a more well-defined purpose. The 
talents of the writers, including Rita Garcia-Williams, Ellen Hopkins, A. S. King, 
Will Weaver, and Nora Raleigh Baskin, keep the stories consistently moving and 
authentically voiced, with only the jaunty tone of Aronson’s enthusiastic afterword 
hitting a discordant note. Useful as a model for a group creative-writing exercise, 
this would also make for therapeutic reading and discussion in the aftermath of 
a tragedy.  KC
86 • the bulletin
BAker, keith Little Green Peas: A Big Book of Colors; written and illus. by Keith 
Baker. Beach Lane/Simon, 2014 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7660-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7661-5 $10.99  
R 3-5 yrs
The peas (from 1-2-3 Peas, BCCB 10/12) are back, and this this time they’re cel-
ebrating the world of color. Each color is introduced in huge block letters (“BLUE”) 
followed by a few specific examples, in rhymed verse, of things that are that color 
(“Blue boats, blue seas, blue flags, and . . . ”), followed by a spread of the green 
peas amid a landscape dominated by that color (little green peas cavort on a sand-
bar in a blue ocean next to a blue ocean liner). As in the previous titles, the story 
stands second to the delight of poring over the highly detailed digitally rendered 
illustrations of the personified peas, who are doing everything from sunbathing and 
unicycling to hula-hooping and downhill skiing. Cool white backdrops effectively 
set off the juicy palette, making this a true visual feast for the eyes. While there’s 
not much story here, viewers will nonetheless love the opportunity to borrow this 
one after storytime for a closer look.  HM
BAuer, JoAn Tell Me. Viking, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-451-47033-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Summer isn’t looking great for twelve-year-old Anna: her parents are separating, so 
she’s been sent to stay with her grandmother, leaving behind her friends and her 
beloved acting job (she gives an inspired performance as a cranberry in an in-store 
promotion). Resilient Anna manages to find some friends and local theatrical op-
portunities (she’s a petunia promoting the upcoming Flower Festival) in the small 
town, but she’s caught in something bigger when she witnesses a frightened girl 
being forcibly restrained by adults, who then drive away with her. Investigation 
suggests that the girl is a pawn in human labor trafficking, and with her new allies, 
Anna doggedly persists in her effort to find and free the girl. Bauer manages the 
difficult feat of folding the topic of human trafficking into a middle-grade novel 
about daily-life family and peer struggles; in fact, Anna’s conviction that the missing 
girl matters is part and parcel of her character throughout, as she similarly com-
mits whole-heartedly to her acting efforts and beloved friends. The author’s usual 
Capra-esque atmosphere is evident here in the small-town milieu and its collective 
cooperation for a big cause, but the book refreshingly twists the initially villainous 
framing of a pushy local businessman, letting him redeem himself with his sup-
port of Anna’s search for the missing girl. Though the current-events relevance will 
bring this title curricular use, readers will appreciate the story for Bauer’s classic and 
relatable heroine who pursues her goal through adversity.  DS 
Becker, suzy Kate the Great: Except When She’s Not; written and illus. by Suzy 
Becker. Crown, 2014 262p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38743-9 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38742-2 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38744-6 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 3-5
In this first title in a series, Kate details her struggles to befriend the unpleasant, 
self-isolating Nora (at her mother’s behest), navigate her relationship with her older 
OctOber 2014 • 87
sister, and earn a place as flute section leader in band, not to mention survive art 
with Mrs. Petty, who specializes in mind-numbing rhetorical questions. Kate’s 
world is comfortingly small and secure, with reassuringly predictable relationships; 
their dynamic ultimately proves soothing, and her supportive friendships offer an 
inviting alternative to petty fights and competition. Her harmonious family life is 
idealized, though, with the family discussing important ideas and famous quotes 
together every night at the dinner table (for instance, her parents repeatedly recall 
Einstein’s musings on needing to decide if one is in a hostile or friendly universe), 
and the voice is initially somewhat forced and clunky. It does manage to find its 
rhythm, though, and Becker subtly reveals details about Kate as she appears to 
others, developing her characterization and allowing readers to more fully engage 
with and relate to her. With a plot that’s heartfelt if not groundbreaking and an 
appealing layout that includes cartoony spot art and newspaper clippings, Kate’s 
story makes a fine outing for readers wanting minimal drama and a few laughs with 
their experience of a manageable and friendly universe.  AA
Bell, cece El Deafo; written and illus. by Cece Bell. Amulet/Abrams, 2014 
233p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-1020-9 $21.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-1217-3 $10.95  
R Gr. 3-6
In this graphic novel based on the author’s own life, the protagonist, Cece, learns 
at four years old that she’s lost her hearing and acquires a hearing aid. As she grows, 
her life becomes a sequence of regular upgrades in hearing devices, an ongoing battle 
with finding the right mix of lip-reading, sign language, bluffing, and aid, and a 
parade of mostly well-intentioned friends who are way off the mark about how to 
be effective pals with a girl who just wants to be considered normal. The format 
is put to good use as pages of wordless panels and frequent empty speech balloons 
highlight how much Cece is missing, and massive letters crowd the illustrations 
each time a mishap with her supersensitive hearing aid means that auditory signals 
are coming through too loud. Cece is represented as a brightly colored, wide-eyed 
bunny, and while it isn’t clear why this is a rabbit-based world, the accessibly friendly 
illustrations match the informative, chipper tone of most of the graphic novel. While 
there is an occasional dip into exposition as the reader is given quick lessons on 
deaf culture or assumptions about individuals with hearing loss, those are readily 
balanced with sections of zippy superhero imaginings (Cece often pictures herself as 
El Deafo, an act that helps her be more courageous as herself) and humorous scenes 
about some unexpected things Cece can hear (leaving readers to wonder whether 
it is horrifying or hilarious to hear your teacher urinate). A substantial, engaging 
author’s note details Bell’s own hearing loss as a child and talks about deafness.  AS
Berry, Julie The Scandalous Sisterhood of Prickwillow Place. Roaring Brook, 
2014 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-956-6 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
The seven students of Saint Etheldreda’s School for Young Ladies may not like 
their headmistress, the unpleasant Mrs. Plackett, but they don’t want her dead. 
Unfortunately, she and her even less likable brother ate some poisoned meat and 
suffered the fatal consequences; now faced with two dead bodies and the promise 
88 • the bulletin
of freedom, the girls, led by Smooth Kitty, attempt to cover up the situation. Soon 
all the girls play a role in the ruse, concealing the corpses in the garden and try-
ing to keep their story straight as Pocked Louise plays sleuth, Stout Alice imitates 
the deceased headmistress to unsuspecting neighbors, and Disgraceful Mary Jane 
distracts the handsome new constable. Their cover beings to crumble, though, 
upon the unexpected arrival of Mrs. Plackett’s sister-in-law and nephew, causing 
ever more scrambling—and laughter—in this part caper, part whodunit Victorian 
school story. The cast of heroines, while perhaps a bit unwieldy, proves humorous 
and inspiring, giving readers many personality types and temperaments to latch 
onto or laugh at. Barry keeps the pace quick and the attention to detail and to 
character thorough, merging elements of domestic fictions with comedies of error. 
With a collection of interesting independence-seeking girls, a bit of mystery, and a 
smattering of romance, this will suit Anglophiles and boarding-school enthusiasts 
as well as those seeking a bit of sisterly literary companionship.  AA
Bird, BenJAMin There’s a Mouse Hiding in This Book!; written and illus. by Ben-
jamin Bird. Capstone, 2014 [32p]
Paper over board ISBN 978-1-62370-125-3 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-7 yrs
Right from the title page, Tom Cat (yes, of Tom and Jerry fame) lets audiences know 
that a mouse is loose in his book. Viewers are encouraged to help him in his hunt 
for Jerry, through a mousehole, across a field of mousetraps, and under falling paint, 
while turning pages, shaking the book, and blowing to clean up the mess—right 
up to the end, where the book can be snapped shut, trapping the mouse until next 
time. This book’s frenzied chase captures the tone of the classic cartoon and the 
familiar faces might offer some appeal. However, its rather prosaic approach to 
the interactive genre (“I can hear him breathing. Can’t you? Shut your eyes and 
listen closely”) lacks the whimsy of classics like Schwarz’s There Are Cats in This 
Book, the inventiveness of Tullet’s Press Here, or even the grabby humor of recent 
additions like Lehrhaupt’s Warning: Do Not Open This Book! (BCCB 9/13). The 
evenly saturated digital illustrations have the polished sheen of animated classics, 
complete with comic-book style speech bubbles and colorful onomatopoeia, but 
the attempt to pack in the frenetic energy of a TV cartoon often clutters the page 
and makes the illustrations difficult to follow. Still, storytime leaders who’ve gone 
through aforementioned titles several times will likely be happy to have one more 
interactive tale to add to their bag of tricks.  TA
BlAck, holly The Iron Trial; written by Holly Black and Cassandra Clare. Scho-
lastic, 2014 [304p] (Magisterium)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-52225-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-52227-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
After his mage mother was killed in the Cold Massacre, Callum has been raised by 
his father to hate magic, so when Callum receives a mandatory summons to audi-
tion for a spot at the Magisterium, a school for mages, he tries his best to screw up. 
He is nonetheless selected, along with the far more talented Tamara and Aaron, to 
be apprenticed to Master Rufus. Despite his rearing, Callum finds himself drawn 
to the school and what it represents, and he makes friends for the first time in 
OctOber 2014 • 89
his life as he, Tamara, and Aaron slowly open up to one another. An unrepentant 
rule-breaker hampered by a physical disability, Callum nonetheless ends his first 
year as a hero, but he’s also learned some deeply unsettling truths about himself; 
those may make him a danger in the promised sequels of this planned five-part 
series. Fantasy readers will find riffs on virtually all of their favorites here, with 
character constellations and plot points especially mirroring the Potterverse and 
Camp Halfblood, but the capable finesse of Black and Clare ensures the derivation 
becomes something surprising and enjoyable. Both the cosmology and the psychol-
ogy hit the sweet spot for middle-schoolers who can tolerate some complexity but 
want magic to be understandable and character motivations traceable. In the end, 
the question remains: do readers really need another series featuring likable trio 
of magical apprentices facing down world-threatening evil? Well, why not?  KC
Block, FrAncescA liA The Island of Excess Love. Ottaviano/Holt, 2014 [244p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-96317-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
In this sequel to Love in the Time of Global Warming (BCCB 10/13), Pen, Hex, 
Ash, Ezra and Venice are eking out a living in Pen and Venice’s miraculously intact 
pink beach house in post-apocalyptic California. With the special powers each was 
granted after the Earth Shaker, they have what they need, but adventure isn’t fin-
ished with them yet. This time, the Aeneid is their guide, with their lives strangely 
aligning with that story in the way they did with the Odyssey before. After Giants 
destroy their home, they leave on a mysterious ship, and their voyage takes them 
through a ghost time to an island of dreams, where a fair king, determined that Pen 
will be his queen, seduces them with rich food and wine. By the time they realize 
it’s all been a glamor, Pen has betrayed Hex by sleeping with the king. Through 
all of their misadventures, Pen struggles to hold fast to her ideal of a secluded life 
with her loved ones, but her destiny lies outside that dream, and by the time they 
return home, she has developed the strength to face that destiny. This book requires 
knowledge of Love in the Time of Global Warming to be comprehensible, but it 
works better than the previous tale as an original story rather than a mere revision 
of a classic; the plot is more coherent, with cause and effect sequences easier to 
trace on their own without reference to the source text. The relationships between 
Pen and Hex and Pen and the king revisit themes of obsessive love and betrayal 
that Block has explored elsewhere, so that the intertext echoes Weetzie Bat’s story 
as much as the Aeneid. Pen’s exhausted but determined heroism delivered through 
Block’s dreamy sensual excesses will help readers see why these classics have such 
cultural staying power.  KC
Booth, coe Kinda Like Brothers. Scholastic, 2014 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-22496-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-66288-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Jarrett is used to the continual stream of infants and toddlers who 
move through his home. It’s all part of his mother’s job of providing foster care, and 
he’s even taught himself to enjoy the babies but not get too emotionally attached. 
The latest newcomer is Treasure, nonverbal at nearly two years old but, more 
problematically (at least for Jarrett), accompanied by her twelve-year-old brother 
90 • the bulletin
Kevon. The challenge of adjusting to Kevon’s presence is just one trial too many 
for Jarrett at the moment. He’s already worrying about failing summer school and 
repeating sixth grade; listening to Mom and her boyfriend quarrel over her never-
ending focus on foster kids; figuring out how to approach his crush, Caprice; and 
balancing competition for Mom’s attention with the knowledge that many of her 
charges have been abused and need her immediate help more than he does. Booth 
exercises laudable restraint in discussion of the foster care system, and although she 
spins Kevon and Treasure’s background into a mystery for Jarrett to puzzle out, it’s 
sympathy rather than sensationalism that sets the overall tone. Jarrett and Kevon are 
believable adolescents—defiantly bent on saving face among their peers, unprepared 
to consider the consequences of their hasty words, and prone to settle differences 
with fists rather than diplomacy. Their ultimate rapprochement, which caps Jarrett’s 
narrative, is all the more realistic for its tenuous nature. Kevon and Treasure may 
stay, or they may go, but while they’re in residence in Mrs. Ashby’s home, they’ll 
be treated as siblings—with all the affection and scrapping that involves.  EB
BryAn, Ashley Ashley Bryan’s Puppets; illus. with photographs by Rich En-
tel. Atheneum, 2014 80p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8728-4 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8729-1 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 3-6
An introductory author’s note describes Bryan’s penchant for taking found objects 
and transforming them into something else, in this case, puppets made from things 
that wash ashore the Cranberry Isles. Photographs of more than thirty of these pup-
pets, each of whom have an African name (translated into English in a subheading), 
appear within the book’s pages, most of them accompanied by Bryant’s poem about 
them. Unfortunately, the poems are uneven, fluctuating considerably in their ef-
fectiveness. The more concrete poems, such as “Kwesi” (“Stew bones fashioned for a 
trunk,/ Rib bones for a tusk;/ Shoulder bones, my perfect ears,/ Opal eyes a must,/ 
Old corduroys that washed ashore,/ With shells, seaweed, a plant./ I’ll journey now 
to Africa/ A proper elephant”) will be more successful with younger children; the 
more abstract concepts of poems like “Mayimuna” (“I am amazed/ That the act-
ing art/ could change me./ Teach me how to convince you/ That I am/ Who I am 
not”) will require an older audience for full appreciation. Some poems, however, are 
pleasingly mysterious, adding to the slightly surreal air of the puppets. Entel’s crisp 
photographs of the puppets are strikingly lit against a dark background; close-ups 
or alternate perspectives give viewers a good, close look at each puppet. The pup-
pets themselves are fairly abstract in their features, but kids will be intrigued and 
inspired to see what materials Bryan has used in their construction (unfortunately, 
no actual list of the materials is provided). Teachers and other adults might use the 
three poem-less puppets as springboards for some creative writing projects, and the 
book as a whole to inspire some puppetry construction.  JH
Burleigh, roBert Edward Hopper Paints His World; illus. by Wendell Minor. 
Ottaviano/Holt, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-0-8050-8752-9 $17.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Students fortunate enough to retain a robust art program in their curriculum 
are generally introduced early on to the moody, melancholy, slightly mysterious 
paintings of Edward Hopper, and many readers will promptly recognize a scene 
OctOber 2014 • 91
strongly reminiscent of Nighthawks on this book’s cover. One of the two fedora’d 
gentlemen, though, approaches the diner rather than sits at the counter—could 
it be Hopper himself? Burleigh’s introduction to Hopper sidesteps much of his 
biographical background and zeros in instead on Hopper’s artistry, describing his 
careful observation of scenes and his ability to make shifty amendments to the 
details, to invite viewers to speculate on what goes on behind glimpsed windows, 
and to sense loneliness, solitude, or simply guarded privacy in the interiors. Mi-
nor’s gouache illustrations depict both episodes from Hopper’s life and his various 
inspirations, and the transitions between full color scenes, sepia-toned sketches, 
large expansive landscapes, and tightly focused shots provide effective variety. The 
illustrations follow Burleigh’s lead in pondering Hopper’s own viewing experience 
and in so doing draw the audience into Hopper’s artistic process: “But Edward 
didn’t just copy what he saw. His paintings often combined things he sketched on 
his travels.” Hopper’s art appears in only four reproductions—barely more than 
thumbnails—that may leave readers wishing for more. Appended materials include 
notes by the author and illustrator, quotations from Hopper, a themed bibliography, 
a paragraph with important dates, and the aforementioned reproductions with 
brief interpretations.  EB
Busch, MiriAM Lion, Lion; illus. by Larry Day. Balzer + Bray, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-227104-4 $17.99  
R 5-7 yrs
“Lion!” calls the little boy into the distance (seconded by his little mouse friend), 
and though a lion does indeed turn up, he doesn’t seem to be what the boy is 
looking for. The lion, on the other hand, is aggressively looking for lunch; the boy 
sweetly offers him some possible tidbits, but the lion rejects all of them based on 
the annoying adjacent fauna (the porcupine-infested mushrooms are “too prickly,” 
the hummingbird-bedecked flowers are out because “feathers make me sneeze”). 
Armed with this cunningly acquired information, the boy (along with his mouse) 
dives down the lion’s gullet to retrieve his beloved cat, Lion, and with the help of 
his knowledge and his animal buddies he gets them all sneezed safely out of the 
lion’s maw. The plot’s a little strained in places, but the playful twists on expecta-
tion are amusing, and folktale-experienced readers will recognize the tropes of the 
innocent yet sly trickster and his support system. The mixed-media art evinces some 
interesting fresco-like textures in its granular pigments, making the lion’s tawny fur 
and cinnamon mane a pettable froth. Draftsmanship, however, is more irreverent, 
with the lion’s face goofily anthropomorphic in its beetle black eyebrows and rolling 
eyes, while there’s a Sendakian flair in the self-possessed African-American kid who’s 
quietly getting the lion’s number. This could be a jumping-off point for discussions 
about what kids would do for their own pets, and it would be an excellent way 
to introduce younger listeners to the deliberate subversion of expectations.  DS 
Buzzeo, toni My Bibi Always Remembers; illus. by Mike Wohnoutka. Disney 
Hyperion, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-4231-8385-3 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
In this companion to Stay Close to Mama (BCCB 4/12), a thirsty little elephant, 
Tembo, follows the family matriarch, Bibi, as the herd seeks water (“Step-step. 
Searching for wet”). Tembo, however, is often distracted along the way, several 
times losing contact with the herd until an elder—her mother, her auntie, her 
Bibi—gently retrieves her and brings her back to the group. Wise Bibi success-
92 • the bulletin
fully navigates the family to a long-remembered spot where water lies beneath a 
sandy riverbed, and the elephants dig until they hit water and can finally quench 
their thirst. Once again, Buzzeo and Wohnoutka manage a lively fictional tale that 
stealthily conveys a surprising amount of fact about animal behavior, while the 
careful structure, lilting patterning, and occasional elephantine sound effects make 
this an excellent readaloud candidate. The playful art gently anthropomorphizes 
the smiling elephants but also vividly sets the African scene, employing interesting 
perspectives to add drama (many scenes look up at the elephants from a child’s eye 
level). This works equally well as animal story or warm family tale, and it would 
be a particularly fine grandparent read for those human Bibis honored by the 
comparison. An author’s note about elephant families is appended.  DS
cAMden, steven Tape. HarperCollins, 2014 363p
ISBN 978-0-00-751120-4 $17.99  
R Gr. 4-7
In 1993, thirteen-year-old Ryan is a good kid trying to make the best of a not-
so-good situation: he’s still reeling after losing his mother to cancer when his dad 
remarries, bringing not only a new parental figure into the household but also a 
stepbrother. Ryan records his attempts to adjust to this new dynamic, along with 
stories about his goofy pal Liam and his crush on a girl named Eve, on tapes along 
with his favorite music, creating both a diary and a mix tape for his deceased mother. 
Twenty years later, thirteen-year-old Ameliah, grieving the loss of her parents, finds 
an old boom box in her grandmother’s house and hears Ryan’s voice through the 
ether, at some point even managing to have a conversation with him. Though the 
prose is occasionally overwrought, the setup and ultimate revelation behind Ryan 
and Ameliah’s connection has the quiet mystique of Stead’s When You Reach Me 
(BCCB 9/09), and there’s a tender authenticity to Ryan’s and Ameliah’s struggles. 
Ryan’s voice in particular shines through with self-deprecating but also self-aware 
charm, and his combative (but maybe just on the brink of caring) relationship with 
his stepbrother carries the genuine complexity of sibling interactions. Ameliah’s 
tale is more straightforward, focusing mostly on her grief over her parents, and the 
subtle changes in her daily life poignantly conveys the impact of her loss. At times 
heartbreaking, this is ultimately an affirmation that the universe does indeed have 
a plan, and readers who enjoy pondering their place in the world will find kindred 
souls in Ryan and Ameliah.  KQG
cheAney, J. B. Somebody on This Bus Is Going to Be Famous. Sourcebooks Jab-
berwocky, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4022-9297-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-7
As the title promises, someone on this bus of middle-schoolers will hit the big time 
one day. As readers learn more about the nine students central to the story—from 
the bully to the pushover to the brainiac—a mystery threads itself through the 
separate narratives devoted to them and their often complicated lives. Only by 
working together can they figure out why their driver, Mrs. B., makes a stop one 
morning where no one seems to be waiting; the origin of unsigned, personalized 
notes some of them receive; and the reason the community ran a certain young 
man out of town decades prior—and why he seems to have returned. The benign 
but sufficiently interesting mystery plays second fiddle to author Cheaney’s detailed 
OctOber 2014 • 93
portrayals of her diverse cast of characters; sympathetic to the complex home and 
inner lives of children, she renders them with realism, respect, and even judicious 
tenderness. Still, this story suffers under from a slow build-up and considerable 
length, which makes the pace often ponderous and undermines the reward of 
intimacy with the characters. While a nail-biting climax gets the pages turning, it 
will only pay off for those readers willing and able to stay with the book that long. 
The result feels somewhat more like a novel for adults than for kids, but readers 
may appreciate its thoughtfulness and keen observations.  AA
cohn, edith Spirit’s Key. Farrar, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30011-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Though Spirit has been living on Bald Island for years, she knows that she will 
never truly fit in with the superstitious locals. She didn’t care much before, because 
she had her dog, Sky, and her dad, who made his living telling the future. Now, 
though, Sky has mysteriously died and Spirit’s father is sick and losing his powers, 
so Spirit knows she has to make alliances with the islanders and figure out why 
everything is going so wrong. Spirit’s own nascent powers don’t seem much help at 
first (she can see ghost dogs and smell the future), but they are ultimately exactly 
what is needed to help her father and to stop the cruel poisonings of the local wild 
dogs. There is no denying the gravity of the situation in which the whole island 
finds itself, but there is a thread of hope and determination that will reassure readers 
even as they fret waiting for resolution. The indomitable Sky, a fiercely loyal doggie 
companion even as a ghost, is a surprisingly rich character, and his guidance and 
comforting presence saves Spirit, literally and figuratively, more than once. Fans of 
Ingrid Law’s quirky and elegant Savvy (BCCB 9/08) will find Spirit is an equally 
memorable protagonist seeking to turn her untamed powers into a true gift.  AS
cooner, donnA Can’t Look Away. Scholastic, 2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-42765-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63401-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Torrey’s perfect life as carefree teen and massively popular beauty vlogger Beauty-
starz15 came to an end when her little sister, Miranda, was killed by a drunk driver. 
Now she and her parents have moved to be near family in Texas, and Torrey has 
to find her way in a new school where her star status and clothes savvy aren’t an 
asset but a threat. At the same time, Torrey is coming to grips with her grief and 
her guilt (she was a mean and excluding older sister, and her last exchange with 
Miranda was a pitched battle), a process that’s helped by her growing friendship with 
Luis, a handsome classmate who works at the local funeral home. Cooner capably 
crafts the narration of a girl who’s tied her identity to appearances and has lost any 
conception of herself other than as a vlogger relating to her audience (“How exactly 
am I supposed to talk about ribbed thigh-high socks in an engaging bubbly voice 
now that everyone knows my sister is dead?”), and she writes knowledgeably about 
YouTube culture of haul videos and haters. There’s also real sympathy for Torrey 
in her naked need to strategize for social success and her genuine bereavement, 
complicated by her realization of how little she appreciated her sister. The story is 
certainly imbued with message, but it’s chatty and negotiable, so both YouTube 
lovers and scoffers will find understanding and satisfaction here.  DS
94 • the bulletin
curtis, christopher pAul The Madman of Piney Woods. Scholastic, 
2014 [384p]
Trade ed. iSBn 978-0-545-15664-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63376-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-8
Curtis returns to the Ontario community setting of his award-winning Elijah of 
Buxton (BCCB 10/07), following a pair of thirteen-year-olds, who are, in 1901, 
living stable, happy lives built on the tragedies and struggles of their forebears. 
Alvin “Red” Stockard, ginger-haired resident of neighboring Chatham, is dearly 
loved by his wise, good-natured father, who tries to help his son understand that 
Grandmother O’Toole has never recovered from the horrors of emigration during 
the Irish Potato Famine and her quarantine on a “coffin ship” in the St. Lawrence 
River. Benji Alston, an aspiring newspaperman locked in perpetual skirmish with 
his younger siblings, has grown up in the tight-knit town of Buxton, founded 
decades ago by escaped slaves. Both boys, along with their respective friends, have 
been kept in line by their elders’ cautionary tales of a boogeyman-like creature 
who roams the area in search of errant children. Benji and Red each have a private 
encounter with the man himself—the Madman of Piney Woods to Benji and the 
South Woods Lion Man to Red—and come away shaken, but cognizant that this 
is a human being with manners and a deep streak of kindness. When the two boys 
finally meet each other and form a friendship, they are drawn into an adventure to 
save the man who had once terrified them. Curtis masterfully interweaves goofy 
family vignettes, memorable characters, and thought-provoking themes into a 
page-turner with appeal to multiple audiences and tastes. While episodes of belling 
Grandmother’s cane and turning siblings’ lives literally upside-down will bring on 
the laughs, well-crafted reminders of the psyche-breaking hardships of family and 
community founders will resonate just as powerfully. This will be a strong recom-
mendation for families in search of materials to enjoy together.  EB
dAirMAn, tArA All Four Stars.  Putnam, 2014 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16252-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Gladys Gatsby is a foodie, but her peers and her parents (satis-
fied with microwave cooking and greasy takeout) are assuredly not. When Gladys 
accidentally sets the kitchen curtains on fire with her father’s blowtorch while 
attempting crème brûlée, her parents flat-out forbid her to cook and force her to 
forgo cooking shows, cookbooks, and “anything else adults do that kids normally 
don’t.” Luckily, she makes friends with Mr. Eng, the proprietor of a gourmet 
foods store, with Sandy, the boy next door, and with his mother, who owns a copy 
of Larousse Gastronomique and is always experimenting with new recipes. When 
Gladys writes an essay about her desired future career (food critic)—in the form 
of a professional-sounding cover letter—for a newspaper contest, a mix-up results 
in the paper’s food editor offering her a temporary assignment. Gladys is thrilled, 
but the assignment (reviewing a fancy new dessert bistro in New York City) proves 
difficult to keep secret from her parents, especially when the check comes in the 
mail. There’s a certain amount of contrivance to Gladys’ situation and to her tem-
porary employment as a food critic, but Dairman sets it all up meticulously and 
writes with sympathy and humor. Kids who appreciate an underdog—and those 
OctOber 2014 • 95
who watch the Food Network religiously—will appreciate Gladys’ journey. Expect 
a lot of cookbook requests from readers of this title.  JH
dAvies, BenJi The Storm Whale; written and illus. by Benji Davies. Holt, 
2014 28p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9967-6 $16.99  
R 4-7 yrs
“Every day, Noi’s dad left early for a long day’s work on his fishing boat,” leaving 
Noi all alone by himself in the solitary cottage at the sea’s edge. One day Noi finds 
a very small whale stranded on the beach, and to save the youngster, Noi tows him 
home and pops him in the filled bathtub, reveling in the company of his new pet. 
When Noi’s father returns home and discovers the unexpected guest, he realizes 
that his son has been lonely; together they return the young whale to the ocean, 
and then spend some serious father-son time together. With its central image pre-
cipitating an emotional shift, the text is reminiscent of a spare short story; there’s 
also a touch of the fabulous in the isolated little child and the visiting whale who’s 
shiftable by a kid a quarter of his size. Literal-minded listeners may struggle with 
the plot turns, but those more attuned to mood and subtext will be intrigued, and 
they may wish to grapple with the possibility that the whale was only ever there in 
Noi’s imagination. The digital art uses grainy, colored pencil-style hatching strokes 
to texture landscapes and figures, with scenes in a slightly muted, Nordic palette of 
slatey blues and slightly grayed earthtones. The double-page spread of the whale’s 
release is a dramatic and emotive overhead view of the yellow-slickered father and 
son together in a tiny boat on the midnight-blue waves, and subsequent spreads 
repeat the family togetherness and echo them in sightings of the whale alongside a 
bigger whale and amid his pod. A gentle, atmospheric father and son tale, this will 
draw kids who appreciate the touch of mysticism and the parent-kid adventure. DS
dAwson, delilAh s. Servants of the Storm. Simon, 2014 376p
ISBN 978-1-4424-8378-1 $16.99  
R Gr. 8-12
A year after Hurricane Josephine made landfall, seventeen-year-old Dovey sees her 
best friend Carly in their favorite café—an impossibility, since Carly was killed by 
Josephine’s floodwaters, which cut a swath of death and destruction through Savan-
nah, Georgia. Dovey stops taking the tiny white pills that were supposed to help 
her get over her grief but instead left her in a fog, and her eyes are opened to the 
sordid underworld behind her beloved city’s veneer, which is roiling with demons 
and monsters hungry for human flesh and mortal servants. In order to save Carly’s 
soul from an eternity of demonic servitude, Dovey enlists the help of two boys, 
but her quest ends up putting their afterlives and hers in danger. Dawson offers 
up an urban fantasy that could rival some of Holly Black’s most imaginative and 
creepy fare, and the increasingly complex demonology is fascinating, if at times a 
bit unwieldy, in its drawing on various religions. The boys helping Dovey are dis-
tinct characters, lending depth to the requisite love triangle, but Dovey’s strongest 
relationship is the one with the memory of her best friend, and it’s refreshing to 
see a female protagonist risk everything not for a crush but for a lifelong pal. The 
Savannah setting is gorgeously evoked here, with a touch of gothic flair, and ele-
ments of Southern culture add authenticity to biracial Dovey’s home life. The final 
page is a heartstopper, and readers might find themselves suspicious of shadows in 
their own hometown as they eagerly await a sequel.  KQG 
96 • the bulletin
dowell, FrAnces o’roArk Anybody Shining. Atheneum, 2014 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3292-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3294-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Arie Mae Sparks loves everything about her mountain home in 1930s North 
Carolina, except for the fact that she doesn’t have a really good friend. She has a 
cousin her age in Raleigh, but since that cousin’s mother won’t have anything to 
do with Arie Mae’s parents, it’s kind of a sore subject. Arie Mae decides to write to 
cousin Caroline anyway, hoping that if they become pen pals, they can convince 
their parents to heal the rift. Arie Mae is diligent, filling her letters with stories 
of the settlement school that two women have founded in their area, and of the 
children who come to visit one summer to learn folkways. One boy in particular, 
Tom, proves to be a kindred spirit; like Arie Mae, he wants to be a writer, so she 
is determined to give him something to write about. In this story that’s as much a 
hymn to Depression-era mountain life as it is a homespun tale of a sensitive girl in 
want of a friend, Arie Mae’s letters and first-person storytelling paint a compelling 
picture of a time of gentle change. While the songcatchers from the settlement 
school are keen to preserve what they think are genuine ways of life, Arie Mae and 
her family are eager to embrace new ways of doing things, including listening to 
the National Barn Dance on the radio and buying goods from mail-order catalogs. 
Between her letters to her city cousin and her attempts to show Tom a good time, 
Arie Mae is positioned as an ideal raconteur, giving readers a richly textured, joyful 
portrait of a bygone era.  KC
ellis, deBorAh The Cat at the Wall. Groundwood, 2014 [144p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-491-6 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-707-8 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-492-3 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Clare used to be a thirteen-year-old girl in North America, but following her death, 
she’s been reincarnated as a street cat in Israel’s West Bank. A jaded pessimist, she 
sees a free meal ticket when she gets trapped in a Palestinian house with two armed 
Israeli soldiers, who’ve taken over the house to spy on the neighbors, and a clearly 
terrified young Palestinian boy, who is unable to communicate and whose parents 
are nowhere to be found. As tensions increase in the house and in the surrounding 
rioting streets, Clare begins to reflect upon her former life and what sins she could 
have possibly committed—sure, she was a bully, a liar, and a thief, but she was 
just a girl—that landed her here. Clare’s past life offers an obvious point of acces-
sibility for readers who might be more familiar with the trials of difficult teachers 
and annoying siblings than the presence of armed checkpoints and daily rioting; 
the scenes that contrast the girl’s school detention and the cat’s escape from bul-
lets make for an affecting and jarring juxtaposition. Unfortunately, Ellis overrelies 
on flashbacks, losing some of the emotional traction (and social context) of the 
present military conflict and making the old Clare unlikable and off-putting. Still, 
the ultimate message that every one has a story and that everyone has a chance 
at redemption is a hopeful one; in light of the recent escalating Israeli/Palestinian 
conflict, this might make a useful fictional counterpart to Ellis’ nonfiction work 
as a unit on the region.  KQG 
OctOber 2014 • 97
ellis, kAt Blackfin Sky. RP Teens, 2014 [304p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-5401-3 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-5554-6 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
When sixteen-year-old Skylar Rousseau shows up late to school one day, she real-
izes she hasn’t just missed the first bell, she’s apparently missed the entire last three 
months of her life. Even for Blackfin, a town with its own resident weathervane 
ghost, the situation is weird: her classmates, neighbors, and family are certain they 
buried her after she drowned on her sixteenth birthday, while Sky herself has memo-
ries of the last few months that seem to match no one else’s. Plagued by visions of 
a burnt-down circus and suspicions that her parents know more than they’re tell-
ing, Sky embarks on an investigation that eventually leads to her discovering that 
she’s a Pathfinder—someone with the ability to move through alternate versions 
of her life—and that her powers have caught the attention of one very sadistic and 
power-hungry circus master. An intriguing premise is unfortunately undermined 
by plot contrivances and scarcity of atmosphere; characters keep repeating how 
strange Blackfin as a town is, but few examples are actually provided, and bits of 
history—a murder at Sky’s house, the backstory of an old Gypsy woman—are 
hastily and often awkwardly dropped in. Still, the central storyline—Sky’s attempts 
to learn about her powers and her efforts to defeat an undeniably frightening and 
disturbed villain—may draw readers along, and the dialogue-driven text might 
particularly appeal to readers of fast-paced, plot-driven thrillers.  KQG
erskine, kAthryn The Badger Knight.  Scholastic, 2014 325p
ISBN 978-0-545-46442-0 $17.99  
R* Gr. 5-7
Adrian knows that he is destined to be a great archer, even if his albinism, small 
stature, and young age (he’s only twelve) are all significant obstacles. His decision 
to follow his friend, Hugh, into battle to defend England from Scotland (darn 
those pagan Scots) quickly turns into a coming-of-age journey as he encounters 
knights, monks, new allies, thieves, and essentially everyone except his best friend 
for a good, long time. Searching for Hugh begins to change Adrian, now known 
as the Badger; he still employs his razor-sharp sardonic tongue, but he’s also much 
more willing to sympathize with those around him. War itself, though, is what 
truly changes the Badger, and readers will likely be right there with him, stunned 
by the difference between legends about military exploits and the reality (war is 
not honorable or fair, nor does it offer a chance to be heroic and show off fancy 
skills). The integration of historical facts into the text is seamless; readers will leave 
knowing a sturdy amount about England and Scotland in 1346 but won’t even 
notice how much they are learning, as it is all so cleanly embedded into Adrian’s 
gripping, often harrowing, adventures. Fans of Pagan from Catherine Jinks’ series 
(Pagan’s Crusade, BCCB 5/05, et al.) will find a kindred spirit in Badger, who also 
knows a good moment for snark when he sees it but can spot the times when he 
should simply observe and learn. A bonus glossary written using Adrian’s witty 
asides will help readers unfamiliar with medieval terminology.  AS
98 • the bulletin
ewing, AMy The Jewel. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223579-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223580-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
At the age of twelve, Violet was selected as a surrogate, taken from her poverty-
stricken family in the Marsh, and groomed in a holding facility to eventually take 
up the task of carrying some wealthy woman’s child. Four years later, she is sold to 
the Duchess for that purpose and brought to the Jewel, the glittering, wealthy city 
center of their small island that is also a web of political intrigue, budding unrest, 
and deception. Terrified and angry, Violet engages in small acts of rebellion when 
she can, and she’s intrigued by the possibility of escape offered by Lucien, a stylist 
to the rich. Her true act of defiance, however, comes when she meets Ash, a boy 
hired as a companion for the Duchess’ niece, and falls desperately in love with him. 
If Lucien is to get Violet out, however, she must leave Ash behind. There’s plenty 
that will be familiar to YA dystopia readers at this point—the segregated districts, 
the abuse of power by the wealthy, the developing rebellion aided by an insider—but 
it’s the well-drawn characters, particularly Violet and Ash, that appeal here. Like 
Peeta and Katniss, they’re both being used by the system, their bodies owned by 
those in power; in that respect they’re essentially equals, making their relationship 
feel more authentic than the typical hero/damsel romance. A cliffhanger ending 
that’s true to the genre will have fans of Oliver’s Delirium (BCCB 2/11), Cass’ 
The Selection, and DeStefano’s Wither (BCCB 3/11) breathless with anticipation 
for the sequel.  KQG 
Fiedler, lisA 
Mouseheart; illus. by Vivienne To. 
McElderry, 
2014 315p (Mouseheart)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8781-9 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8784-0 $10.99  
M Gr. 5-8
Young mouse Hopper, his sister, Pinkie, and their little brother, Pup, manage to 
escape from a pet store above a subway tunnel but are then separated. Searching 
for his siblings, Hopper stumbles across a colony of rats known as Atlantia, ruled 
by a rat emperor, Titus. Titus tells Hopper (false) stories about the terrible “Mu¯s” 
(a colony of mice) who want to overtake Atlantia; though initially hoodwinked, 
Titus finally learns the truth behind Titus’ reign (cat queen Felina acquired the 
right to frequent “hunts”—wholesale slaughters of mice refugees by the queen and 
her cat companions—in exchange for peace with the rats). Hopper therefore steps 
up to lead the Mu¯s and a rebel force of rats in a fight against Atlantia and the cats. 
Fiedler gets points for the complexity of the plot and for the genuine horror evoked 
by the cat hunts of the mouse colonists. The characterizations are implausible and 
often clichéd, though; pure contrivance is all that allows Hopper to believe in 
Titus’ goodness as long as he does, and the writing is frequently overwrought or 
trite. To’s occasional black and white digital illustrations are a little more cuddly 
than the text, but any kid who sees the glossy jacket illustration will know instantly 
who the bad guys are in the story despite the narrative’s laboriously slow reveal of 
that information. Fans of Hunter’s Warriors series or Jacques’ Redwall series may 
enjoy this, but kids who want a little more depth to their animal fantasy will want 
to look elsewhere.  JH
OctOber 2014 • 99
Fine, sArAh Of Metal and Wishes. McElderry, 2014 321p
ISBN 978-1-4424-8358-3 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Wen lives with her father in the medical clinic at the Gochan One factory, and 
while she knows her family is in debt, she also knows that the Noor, the poorly 
paid workers they treat, are worse off. This, plus guilt, is why she sells her own 
beloved dresses to help cover the Noor’s expenses after multiple accidents befall the 
workers at the hand of the factory “ghost” who will do anything to protect Wen. 
The ghost is, of course, not a supernatural entity but rather a young man named 
Bo, who went into hiding after his body was mangled in the killing room of the 
slaughterhouse. Even while Wen finds him intriguing, she recognizes she is falling 
for one of the Noor, and that she will risk almost everything to allow them to be 
together. The metaphorically and literally scarred Bo is the true and complex star 
of this homage to Phantom of the Opera, and his melding of beauty and horror will 
likely be the most memorable element of this novel. Unfortunately, too much of the 
plot hinges on Wen’s virtue, an abstract concept with which almost every character 
in the novel is obsessed. In addition, the world outside of the factory is so poorly 
explained that it actually becomes a distraction: it isn’t quite clear what pieces are 
historical or purely fiction, or whether this is a creative merging of both. Neverthe-
less, it’s always refreshing to see fantasy showcase for Asian characters (Fine’s world 
seems to be Asian-inspired as well), and the romance is so darn swoonworthy that 
some readers won’t mind the flaws.  AS
Fisher, cAtherine Circle of Stones. Dial, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3819-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
This British import features three overlapping stories that share a common ele-
ment: the Circus, a circular street of thirty houses in Bath, England. In the novel, 
an ancient druid king finds a magical location, an eighteenth-century architect 
decides to build a remarkable structure in the same spot, and a contemporary girl 
with a complex past comes to terms with her own secrets while living with her new 
foster parents in one of the architect’s homes. The short, haunting passages that 
describe the ancient king are sharp and vividly written; his determination to live 
even while his leprous body rots away is urgently conveyed. The chapters focusing 
on the architect and his assistant, Zac, a boy who is the only character to narrate his 
own section, are equally powerful. Zac is not the person that he wishes he was, and 
this disconnect between intent and reality is uncomfortable but intriguing. Sulis, 
the modern girl trying to avoid her past, brings slightly less to the mix; she seems 
more generally lost than the other two, who are wandering toward enlightenment. 
Even so, the swift pacing and frequent character shifts will sweep readers along to 
the final convergence of these stories, after which they will likely be curious enough 
about the region itself to warrant a bit of research and Google Earth exploration.  AS
FlAke, shAron g. Unstoppable Octobia May. Scholastic, 2014 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-60960-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-60961-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Ten-year-old Octobia May has a bad feeling about Mr. Davenport, her aunt’s 
boarder in 1953 Philadelphia. Convinced he’s a vampire, she enlists the help of her 
100 • the bulletin
friend Jonah in discovering the truth, much to his disapproving mother’s chagrin. 
A proud spinster and aspiring businesswoman, Auntie Shuma tries to guide her 
imaginative, incorrigible niece away from graveyard visits and amateur detective 
work while still encouraging her independence and bravery, characteristics that a 
young African-American girl will definitely need. When Octobia’s instincts about 
Mr. Davenport prove (somewhat) correct, her and her aunt’s future rests on her 
ability to gain the support of her community and uncover the truth. Sophisticated 
topics of race dynamics, war, and feminism underpin the vampire-chasing antics on 
this story’s surface, and author Flake handles them with grace and candor. Octobia’s 
distinct narrative voice and vision make this novel accessible and enjoyable, and 
the sinister if not supernatural mystery of Mr. Davenport and Octobia’s gift for 
getting into dangerous situations keep the pace lively. This socially conscious work 
of historical fiction asks a lot of its audience, providing that rewarding stretch for 
middle-grade readers who want a story as smart, spirited, and hopeful as Octobia 
May herself.  AA
FleischMAn, pAul Eyes Wide Open: Going Behind the Environmental Head-
lines. Candlewick, 2014 [208p] illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7102-0 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7545-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
M Gr. 6-10
“Environmental news may turn out to eclipse all the wars and doings in your history 
textbooks.” So says author Fleischman, who attempts here to offer teen readers a 
host of strategies for looking critically at environmental news and sorting reliable 
information from junk science in the media. This is certainly a laudable goal and 
it’s approached with a lively voice, but the shaky organization, with broad ideas 
loosely herded together under vaguely delineated headings (Noticing, Perception, 
Defense Mechanisms, Systems, Attitudes, and Eyes Abroad and Ahead) and involv-
ing a multitude of varied references and hat tips, results in a pastiche of concepts 
rather than a workable system for source evaluation. That Fleischman facilely garbs 
environmental players in black and white hats (scientists, good; Republicans, bad) 
is actually less problematic than the thin evidence he offers to illuminate his posi-
tion. Only three “backstory” sections examine an issue in any depth—the 1970s 
oil embargo, depletion of the ozone layer, and the Kyoto Protocol—and these rare 
flashes of specificity will leave readers wishing for more of the same. Perhaps most 
useful is the volume’s back matter, which, besides source notes and an index, offers 
an extensive bibliography of print and non print media, suggested resources ar-
ranged by topic, and an excellent glossary of terms that often carry domain-specific 
meaning (e.g., mitigation, Cornucopians). This may be worth a skim to generate 
ideas for a research project, but as a guide to critical media consumption, it leaves 
much to be desired.  EB
Fox, diAne The Cat, the Dog, Little Red, the Exploding Eggs, the Wolf, and Grandma; 
written and illus. by Diane and Christyan Fox. Scholastic, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-69481-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-9 yrs
“There was once a sweet little girl who lived with her father and mother in a pretty 
OctOber 2014 • 101
little cottage,” announces the stately type beginning this book, and the titular cat is 
very eager to finish the story of Little Red Riding Hood. The dog, however, assumes 
that Red’s cape means that she’s a superhero and her basket must be filled with 
exploding eggs, so the pooch peppers the cat with questions throughout much of 
the telling. The cat does manage to make it to the end of the story, getting carried 
away and scaring the dog just a little bit with axe-wielding enthusiasm. Dog just 
has one more question: “Is Grandma still in the closet?” Where most breaking-
up-the-classic-story texts opt for boisterous chaos, this one tends toward a quieter 
but still amusing subversion; there’s never enough digression from the main story 
to detract from it, and the dog’s questions aren’t too far off from the kind asked 
by children during a readaloud. Illustrations also are pretty simple, with scrawled 
pencilly outlines, often only splashed in with gently faded color in small details, 
leaving plenty of white space for imaginations to fill in. This fractured fairy tale 
would work especially well as a more subdued counterpart to the energy of Stein’s 
Interrupting Chicken or Scieszka’s The Stinky Cheese Man and Other Fairly Stupid 
Tales (BCCB 10/92).  TA 
Fox, MeM Baby Bedtime; illus. by Emma Quay. 
Beach Lane/Simon, 
2014 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2097-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2098-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R 1-3 yrs
An elephant parent rhapsodizes about its baby in a lyrical, rhyming story that also 
serves as bedtime prep: “I could stroke your silky hair. I could sit you on my knee./ I 
could sing you all the songs that my mother sang to me.” Although there’s not much 
of a plot, overall the rhythmic text is both lovely and lulling. Quay’s illustrations, 
in subdued pastels, are a combination of pencil, acrylic paint, and digital elements, 
including patterns and textures of lace, knitting, cloth, and basketry. The darker, 
smudgy outlines of the lavender-gray elephant parent and child give them a gentle 
solidity and the figures themselves are appealingly rounded and toylike; their sweet 
expressions and cozy physical interactions nicely complement the slightly patterned, 
strongly hued backdrops. This would make a mellow closing title for a nighttime 
story hour or a pleasantly soporific bedtime read for families.  JH 
FrAnk, lucy Two Girls Staring at the Ceiling. Schwartz & Wade, 2014 257p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97975-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97974-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97976-6 $9.99  
Ad Gr. 8-12
In this free-verse novel, Chess has tried faithfully to follow the family practice of 
pretending everything’s okay, but she’s finding that difficult now that she’s landed 
in the hospital with a severe flare-up of Crohn’s disease. A self-controlled, dieted-
into-thinness athlete, she’s horrified at the betrayal of her body and at having to face 
the fact that she has bowels, let alone dysfunctional ones. As she comes to grips with 
her shame (especially her embarrassment over the incontinent ending to a recent 
romantic encounter) and deals with the rigors of treatment, she gets to know her 
nervy and brazen roommate, Shannon, a fellow Crohn’s patient who vocalizes all 
the pain and anger that Chess can’t. But do Shannon’s repeated surgeries mean the 
same is in store for Chess? Veteran author Frank tackles an unusual subject here, 
102 • the bulletin
and Chess’ viewpoint emotively conveys a teenaged girl’s reeling when her already 
vulnerable body image takes a savage beating; readers will relate easily to her agony 
of embarrassment over the embrace that ends in perhaps the most humiliating way 
possible. Shannon and her experiences, however, are largely authorial device, with 
Shannon a thinly contrived character; the book’s side-by-side layout, constructed to 
convey Shannon’s voice coming to Chess through the curtain dividing the room, is 
initially confusing. Physical illness remains an undertreated subject in YA, though; 
Chess’ anger and embarrassment will reflect many readers’ feelings, and they’ll be 
emboldened by her eventual hope.  DS
gAle, eric kAhn The Zoo at the Edge of the World. Balzer + Bray, 2014 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212516-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212518-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
As the son of Roland Rackham, one of the nineteenth century’s most famous 
explorers, young Marlin feels the pressure to live up to the Rackham name, but 
his stutter prevents him from being the dynamic individual his father desperately 
wants him to be. Marlin would rather care for and talk (confidently and stutter 
free) to the animals at his father’s expansive South American resort, the Zoo at the 
Edge of the World, where Roland parades his various conquests and captures in 
circus-like shows for wealthy British travelers. One night, however, an encounter 
with a jaguar gives Marlin the ability to communicate directly with the animals, 
and he must face the fact that these creatures are captives, his beloved father is their 
jailer, and their treatment is getting worse as Roland demands increasingly danger-
ous shows to impress his elite guests. The animal story here has more of a Life of 
Pi sensibility than that of Dr. Doolittle, with Marlin’s gift allowing him to see the 
beauty and brutality in nature and their reflections in humanity. The devastation 
he feels when he discovers how cruel his father has become is palpable, but the 
author still allows sympathy for the older man, particularly in the final pages as 
Roland realizes what his actions have cost him. The mystique of the jaguar is ap-
pealingly enigmatic without being overwrought, and the animals themselves offer 
distinct secondary characters that run the gamut from amusing to villainous. An 
entertaining adventure with some provocative elements, this might draw in young 
fans of Kipling and those whose interest in zoos goes beyond the spectacle.  KQG
gephArt, donnA Death by Toilet Paper. Delacorte, 2014 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99143-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74399-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Cheap, scratchy toilet paper certainly isn’t the biggest of twelve-year-old Ben’s 
problems, but it’s not one to sneeze at, either. Since his dad’s recent death after 
a battle with lung cancer, his mother’s waitressing job isn’t making ends meet, 
and the small family is faced with an impending eviction unless they can come 
up with the back rent in just a few short weeks. Add the sudden reappearance of 
Ben’s grandfather in the early stages of memory loss, and you’ve got a family hang-
ing on by the skin of their teeth. Ben’s practice of entering contests—such as his 
invention of a jingle for the good kind of toilet paper the family used to be able to 
afford—might just be their only hope. Gephart, author of How to Survive Middle 
OctOber 2014 • 103
School (BCCB 6/10), again shows a deft hand at rendering difficult situations with 
empathy, adding just the right amount of realistic humor to relieve but not trivial-
ize. Ben’s relationship with his best friend, Toothpick, is painted with clear insight 
into the ups and downs faced by tween guys, and the grief that Ben feels about his 
father’s death—expressed in a variety of ways, including anger and confusion—is 
convincingly relayed without becoming melodramatic. Toilet and tissue facts add 
edification and levity to each chapter, and there’s a glossary of Yiddish words for 
the goyim. Despite its title and cover art, this is not a romp, but it would make a 
fine classroom readaloud.  TA 
giBBs, stuArt Space Case. Simon, 2014 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9486-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9488-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Apart from the celebrity that comes with being among the first people to occupy 
Moon Base Alpha, Dash Gibson is finding the novelty of space exploration to wear 
thin. There’s just not much to do in the less than luxurious accommodations, the 
food is wretched, and nobody can go outside unless it’s critically work related, so 
even family game time is starting to look good. Then, though, affable Dr. Holtz 
dies, stepping through the airlock in the middle of the night in an improperly 
donned space suit. Pressure is on the base commander to write the whole issue off 
as an accident, or even suicide—anything to keep the costly moon base project 
in Washington’s political good grace—but Dr. Holtz was a rational man, an avid 
proponent of the program, who was giddily excited to announce a scientific dis-
covery, an announcement that will now never be heard. Dash knows there’s more 
to this story than, well, lunacy, and he, gamer geek Roddy, and newcomer Kara 
launch their own covert investigation. The lunar setting puts a fresh spin on the 
locked-door mystery genre, and Gibbs plants plenty of credible suspects among 
the eccentric cast. The climactic chase scene, which plays out in one-sixth gravity 
with a gigantic robotic arm for a nemesis, is prepackaged for the big screen. Fans 
of the Spy School series (BCCB 4/12) will welcome this debut entry in Gibbs’s 
latest run.  EB
godkin, celiA Skydiver: Saving the Fastest Bird in the World; written and illus. 
by Celia Godkin. Pajama Press, 2014 32p
iSbn 978-1-927485-61-3 $19.95  
Ad 5-8 yrs
Godkin follows a mating pair of peregrine falcons as they court and tend their nest 
of eggs. The expected trajectory of this picture-book idyll is startlingly broken by 
a woman who rappels down the cliff wall, scoops the eggs away, and takes off. The 
birds make another attempt at brooding for the season, and although two eggs are 
shattered, one chick hatches. The present-tense story is unclear in both tone and 
premise until it shifts to background on the discovery of how DDT, concentrated 
in the food chain, was rendering falcon eggs too fragile to survive nesting. The 
cliffside thief is actually one of the good guys in this narrative, and the focus now 
becomes scientific strategies to encourage a second seasonal mating to maximize egg 
production, and to raise hatchlings in an environment free from human contact. 
The story itself will engross bird lovers and nascent environmentalists, but the 
quirky careening of tenses and settings, along with the lack of reference to time 
period, is likely to cause confusion. Colors in the art are unfortunately muddy and 
104 • the bulletin
figures stiff throughout, dimming the implied glamor and speed of this fleetest of 
birds. A brief note suggests four sources for further research and alerts readers to 
the need for continued vigilance on current pesticides.  EB.
griFFin, Adele The Unfinished Life of Addison Stone. Soho Teen, 2014 [256p] 
illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-360-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-361-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
The art world periodically eats its own young, and it looks like that’s what happened 
to Addison Stone, the prodigious young talent who died falling—jumping?—from 
a bridge she was putting an installation on. Griffin’s novel emulates long-form 
nonfiction journalism, consisting of interviews with those who knew Addison 
along with Addison’s own emails and notes, while photographs of Addison and 
her art provide additional illumination. The result is a fascinating peel-back of a 
character and post-mortem conventions of storytelling: initial reports about gifted 
and willful Addison are absolutely fawning, but gradually a more nuanced picture 
appears as Addison’s immense talent takes her to New York after junior year. There 
she becomes a hot property, rubbing shoulders with the moneyed and famous 
and falling first for a well-heeled young Eurobrat and then for an intense fellow 
artist; at the same time, though, she pushes away the medication she takes for her 
schizophrenic symptoms and lies to her therapist as her always precarious stability 
begins to slide away. The result is a compelling look at the dark underbelly of the 
Manic Pixie Dream Girl fantasy, an exploration of the way a magnetic personality 
can imbalance relationships, a portrait of an artist whose talent comes from the part 
of her that endangers her, and a whiff of supernatural possibility (the voice Addison 
hears may be that of a real, long-dead young woman). Griffin’s “interviews” often 
define the speakers in swift and telling strokes but also allow complexities to emerge 
as interviewees expand their statements and perspectives shift. There’s no shortage 
of romance in the portrayal of Addison, the brilliant beauty who captured all eyes 
and whose ghost still powers imaginations, but perceptive readers will see beyond 
the glamor to the simmering dysfunction and may be inspired to investigate the 
tragic real-life artists mentioned alongside her.  DS
hAgen, george Gabriel Finley and the Raven’s Riddle. Schwartz & Wade, 
2014 [384p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37104-9 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37103-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37105-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Gabriel’s father has long been missing, much to Gabriel’s sorrow. When his aunt 
gives him Dad’s old notebooks, Gabriel dives in to figure out the mysterious 
connection between ravens and his father and uncle (also missing) and to find 
out what has become of both men. He soon learns of a complex tale dating back 
hundreds of years involving valravens (avian zombies, who can be spotted by their 
absolute lack of a sense of humor), an evil magical necklace, and his own family’s 
rare ability to connect with ravens and form a magical bond. Luckily, Gabriel has 
a couple of good friends, two girls who are staunch allies, as he tries to determine 
OctOber 2014 • 105
his place in the raven-centered world, even while he is being threatened at every 
turn. The birds, some tormenters and others friends, are surprisingly engaging; 
like the humans that surround them, they easily emerge as memorable characters, 
particularly the flesh-eating but ultimately not really villainous valravens. Puzzle 
and riddle fans will delight in the genuine attention paid to these elements—there 
are plenty sprinkled throughout in ways that actually move the story toward the 
(for now) conclusion.  AS
hAle, Bruce Big Bad Baby; illus. by Steve Breen. Dial, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3585-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-8 yrs
“One warm spring day, Sweet Little Sammy turned into . . . Bad Baby!” Follow-
ing a few minor domestic misdemeanors (shaving the cat, squirting ketchup on 
the walls), Bad Baby decides he needs “bigger and better badness” and so invents 
a machine that turns him into a giant baby. Big Bad Baby and his evil hench-dog 
Boris bust through the roof ready to wreak havoc on the city. No one can get him 
under control, until Mom shows up with a gigantic blankie, captures Big Bad Baby, 
and transports him home. While the penultimate page would suggest that Sweet 
Little Sammy is back to his usual sweet little self, the final image finds him with 
an evil glint in his eye plotting world domination. There’s a lot of humor worked 
into Big Bad Baby’s escapades, most of which plays on the enormity of the baby 
himself, and the details (drinking the milk tanker truck as if it were a bottle) are 
often rather clever. In general, though, the bodily function jokes fall pretty flat, and 
the ending is confusing, leaving it unclear how enlargement and shrinkage worked 
for blankie and Baby. Breen’s ink, watercolor, and colored pencil illustrations play 
on hyperbolic visuals, and viewers will get a kick out of Sammy’s destructive tour 
through town. This doesn’t have nearly the punch of Hawkes’ The Wicked Big Tod-
dlah (BCCB 10/07), but it offers some big bad fun for listeners nonetheless.  HM
hAnnigAn, kAte Cupcake Cousins; illus. by Brook Boynton Hughes. Disney 
Hyperion, 2014 268p
ISBN 978-1-4231-7830-9 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Fourth-grade cousins Willow and Delia are utterly horrified by the pink flower girl 
dresses their aunt has selected for them to wear at her wedding. At the extended 
family’s rental house in Michigan, the girls plot to get out of being flower girls by 
instead bringing attention to their culinary skills, but the cousins have one mis-
hap after another involving the chef, a Southerner named Cat, until she has had 
about all she can take from them. Adding to the distress is a rift between Delia’s 
mother and father resulting from his layoff, and the discovery that Cat, who has 
inherited the house next door, may lose it to the bank. When a series of events 
results in Cat’s accidental destruction of part of the wedding cake, the girls finally 
are able to save the day by fixing the problem with style. Hannigan’s characters are 
reductively cookie cutter, and repeated encounters with a goose and gosling are an 
unnecessary addition to the plot, but the portrayal of the girls’ relationships with 
each other and with their family and friends is genuine and authentic. There’s also 
real pain in Delia’s observations about her parents’ problems, and while the book’s 
solution to their woes is rather pat (Cat will marry the rental-house landlord and 
Delia’s parents will buy Cat’s house and turn it into a gallery), the happy ending 
106 • the bulletin
is nonetheless satisfying. Hughes’ occasional monochromatic illustrations are 
somewhat bland, but they’re cheerful. Recipes for a number of dishes mentioned 
in the book are included.  JH
hArrington, kAren Courage for Beginners. Little, 2014 289p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-21048-5 $17.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-21047-8 $9.99  
R Gr. 4-6
According to a pamphlet twelve-year-old Mysti stumbles on, “a highly developed 
imagination is often found in the children of agoraphobic parents,” and it’s certainly 
true in her case. The lighthearted stories she loves to concoct for her family and her 
own internal narration take a weighty turn when her father has a serious accident 
and her mother retreats further into herself, leaving Mysti to keep the household 
running and figure out how to supplement the dwindling food supply. At school, 
she’s lost the support of her former best friend, but her new lunch table of loners 
and pariahs introduces Mysti to determined, loyal Rama Khan, whose candor and 
encouragement help Mysti to write her life story rather than simply narrate it. The 
book tackles a difficult topic with a deft touch, subtly but powerfully considering 
the effects of agoraphobia on family life, from not knowing what it’s like to eat in 
a restaurant to being unable to join extracurricular activities or see an orthodontist 
for want of a driver. Mysti’s understandable anger with her mother is reined in by 
her authentic maturity and admirable ability to laugh, and readers dealing with 
similar mental illness in their own homes will recognize her seeming detachment 
for the coping mechanism that it is. Harrington metes out humor, spunk, and 
sadness in restrained doses as Mysti moves between the worlds of home and school 
and finds the courage to meet the challenges within both, making for a believable 
and ultimately hopeful story from the perspective of a believable and ultimately 
hopeful protagonist.  AA
heApy, teresA, ad. Very Little Red Riding Hood; illus. by Sue Heap. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-544-28000-7 $16.99  
R 3-5 yrs
The big, bad wolf doesn’t know what he’s in for when he meets Very Little Red Rid-
ing hood in this enchanting, giggle-inducing take on the traditional fairy tale. The 
extra diminutive Red is off to visit Grandmama when she spies the wolf watching 
her from the trees; she gleefully cries, “a Foxie!”, promptly hugs him, and enlists 
his help gathering a bouquet (“Not lello flowers! RED!”) before instructing him 
to chase her to her grandmother’s, where all three exhaust themselves with play. 
Heap’s crimson-heavy watercolor and ink illustrations charm with sweetness and 
humor, capturing the good-natured Very Little Red as an apple-cheeked tyrant 
and the dapperly dressed wolf (with clever crosshatching making an overcoat of his 
fur, accented with a polka-dot scarf) as her unwittingly besotted yes-man. Clearly 
familiar with both the whims and uniquely persuasive vernacular of the preschool 
set, Heapy captures exactly the sort of afternoon very little storytime listeners long 
for and that caregivers will recognize, filled with hide-and-seek, dancing, and, of 
course, a much-needed nap—for everyone. Audiences will love seeing how a mere 
toddler can make even a mighty wolf feel sheepish.  AA
OctOber 2014 • 107
hernAndez, leezA Cat Napped!; written and illus. by Leeza Hernandez. Put-
nam, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16438-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-5 yrs
An inquisitive gray cat leaves her apartment and settles down on a comfy yellow 
chair in the back of a red pickup truck on the street. When the truck takes off, the 
frightened cat cowers and then catapults itself out of the truck, injuring its paw. A 
passer-by finds the kitty and takes her to the animal shelter, while the cat’s owner, 
a little girl, searches for her missing pet. A call to the shelter helps reunite the pair, 
and the gray cat happily returns home for a snack and a snooze with the relieved 
little girl. The compact rhyming verse (“Shake cat. Quake cat./ There must be 
some mistake cat”), the simplicity of the tale, and the sweet-faced cat will make 
this a winner for the preschool storytime crowd. Hernandez’s illustrations, drawn 
in pencil and then digitally collaged with textures that were originally hand-painted 
on paper, are sunny and orderly. The pale gray, wide-eyed, swooshy-tailed kitty is 
as cute as can be, and the caramel-skinned little girl with her fluffy pigtails of curly 
brown hair is an equally adorable protagonist. Add this to a cat-themed story hour 
or perhaps share before a cozy nap session, preferably with a furry feline friend.  JH
herthel, JessicA I Am Jazz; by Jessica Herthel and Jazz Jennings; illus. by Shelagh 
McNicholas. Dial, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4107-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-10 yrs
Jazz Jennings, trans girl advocate for the recognition of gender dysphoria among 
younger kids, shares her story of knowing that she has always been a girl, despite 
her family’s and teacher’s belief that she is a boy. Jazz explains all of the things that 
she likes to do—dancing, swim with a mermaid tail, play soccer—and how a visit 
to a doctor helped her parents understand what it means to be transgender. There’s 
a strong sweetness in the message of acceptance of being different and understand-
ing gender variance, and the upbeat tone never falters, even as Jazz explains that 
her parents once made her wear boy clothes in public and recounts the resistance 
she faced at school from teachers who didn’t understand. This perkiness means 
that the story is light on plot, though, and it’s also not heavy on the information 
end, beyond a simplified definition of trans identity (“I have a girl brain but a boy 
body”), meaning that its primary use will be therapeutic rather than explanatory. 
Watercolor illustrations have a retro realism that’s soft and approachable, although 
Jazz and her friends occasionally have a plasticky stiffness. This picture-book mem-
oir does have a lot of opportunity to provide a much-needed outlet for kids with 
gender nonconformity or trans identities, as well as to help other kids understand 
what may be going on in some of their friends’ lives, making it a selection that 
many libraries will want to put on their shelves.  TA 
hidier, tAnuJA desAi Bombay Blues. Push/Scholastic, 2014 550p
ISBN 978-0-545-38478-0 $18.99  
Ad Gr. 10 up
Two years in book time have passed since American-born South Asian seventeen-
year-old Dimple fell heart-over-head in love with Karsh, the suitable boy her 
parents had pinned their hopes on (in Born Confused, BCCB 2/03). Since then, 
108 • the bulletin
she and Karsh have been pursuing her photography and his DJing in the hottest 
Desi hip-hop clubs in New York and sharing beds in their NYU dorm rooms. Now 
Dimple’s cousin, Sangita, has invited them to her wedding in Bombay, and both 
have trepidation about the trip; Dimple is grieving the death of her Dadaji and 
Karsh the suicide of his father, and they are wondering what India will mean to 
them without these native anchors. The journey moves them closer to themselves 
but farther from each other, as Karsh seeks solace through spirituality and Dimple 
goes fully carnal through multi-page, perspective-shattering sex with a stranger. 
This is a very different book than its predecessor, with Dimple at a very different 
stage of life and the language less accessible and more artful. Dimple ultimately 
comes to terms with being neither fully inside nor fully outside either of her cultural 
identities, but her stream-of-consciousness scene-kid narration is so hipster and 
private that only readers plugged into all of her various currents will be able to take 
that journey with her. Her exploration of the teeming wonders of Bombay and 
her reflections on desires and behavior are conveyed through a dizzying blend of 
inventive intercultural hip-hop terminology that is intricately crafted, but it often 
proves more baffling than engrossing, more art than story. Nonetheless, readers 
willing to suspend the need to make complete sense of her lush language and submit 
instead to its mellifluous sounds will share Dimple’s experience of sensory overload 
and identity fusion and confusion, and that may be enough for those desperate to 
know what happened to Dimple after Born Confused.  KC
holuB, JoAn Be Patient, Pandora!; illus. by Leslie Patricelli. Abrams Appleseed, 
2014 24p (Mini Myths)
ISBN 978-1-4197-0951-7 $6.95  
Ad 2-4 yrs
   Play Nice, Hercules!; illus. by Leslie Patricelli. Abrams Appleseed, 
2014 24p (Mini Myths)
ISBN 978-1-4197-0954-8 $6.95  
Ad 2-4 yrs
Two well-know Greek myths are distilled for the board-book audience, with two 
domestic scenarios loosely paralleling rather than closely replicating the myths. 
Hercules features a ginger-haired hellion of a boy using the claim “I am not nice. 
I am strong” as a justification for banging up his toys and knocking around his 
sister’s blocks. She cries; he fixes things; she knocks the blocks down herself, and 
the new moral of the story seems to be that life is more fun when you trash things 
together. Pandora adheres more closely to the myth’s plot. Patricelli teams up well 
with Holub, inserting a wordless sequence in which modern-day Pandora sneaks 
up on the box her mother has told her to leave alone; text returns as Pandora lightly 
touches the edge of the box: “I am not opening the box. I am only touching it.” 
When she succumbs to temptation and upsets the box full of cupcakes, only one 
remains inside unharmed, and flush-cheeked Pandora asks her mother, “Do you still 
love me? I hope so.” Artwork is solidly in the board book tradition, with simplified 
backgrounds, limited details, and boldly outlined characters. At the book’s close, 
each title includes a brief retelling of the actual myth, radically streamlined, but still 
well above the comprehension level of the picture-book text itself. This ultimately 
may not be the optimal age for tackling classical mythology, but these might be of 
use as character education titles or loose introductions to these very old stories.  EB 
OctOber 2014 • 109
hood, susAn Tickly Toes; illus. by Barroux. Kids Can, 2014 18p
ISBN 978-1-894786-52-2 $9.95  
R 6-24 months
In this chunky board book, Hood expounds on one of life’s indisputable facts: for 
sheer entertainment value, it’s hard to top a pair of baby feet: “Those ten little pig-
gies!/ Watch how they wiggle./ We count them and kiss them/ and, oh, how you 
giggle!” They’re great for peek-a-booing in the bathtub, far more attractive than 
shoes; they curl, they stretch, they’re fine for teething. Bouncy verse is rife with 
suggestions for parent/child play, from bending pudgy knees to kicking up pillowy 
heels, and the coup de grâce is, of course, stuffing a whole foot into a gaping mouth. 
A break or two in the rhythm scheme may send adult readers stumbling, but after 
multiple readings they’re sure to regain their balance. Barroux’s round-headed, 
dot-eyed family could be cousins to G. Brian Karas kids, and the streamlined 
compositions and thickly brushed paint render objects eminently paintable and 
touchable, though it’s surprising how frequently toes are upstaged by rattles, bath 
toys, and stuffed animals. No parent needs an instruction manual for how to play 
with baby feet, but this title gives them an extra excuse to do so.  EB 
houts, Michelle Winterfrost. Candlewick, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6565-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
When her parents must hurriedly depart on Christmas Eve, leaving her to look after 
her baby sister, twelve-year-old Bettina forgets to leave the traditional pudding out 
for the nisse. Although she loved listening to her grandfather’s tales of Denmark’s 
magical people, she’s not sure how much she believes—that is until Klakke, the 
young nisse who lives in her family’s barn, causes mischief when he doesn’t get his 
pudding. Emboldened by the magic of the rare winterfrost, Klakke goes so far as 
to take Bettina’s baby sister while the two girls nap, ultimately leading Bettina deep 
into the forest on a quest to recover her sister. Simple and sweet, this contempo-
rary fairy tale uses straightforward prose and measured pacing to tell a story both 
slightly otherworldly and utterly accessible. Bettina is calm, rational, and brave, 
an admirable if not complex heroine, and Houts paints the nisse with humor and 
whimsy. Charming and guileless, this story of adventure and enchantment would 
work well for a young fairy-tale aficionado or as a classroom readaloud in those 
restless days just before winter break.  AA
huser, glen The Elevator Ghost; illus. by Stacy Innerst. Groundwood/House 
of Anansi, 2014 [168p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-425-1 $14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-426-8 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-427-5 $12.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
The Blatchford Arms is a quirky little place, an old apartment complex that’s filled 
with eccentric families and rumored to be haunted. It’s therefore fitting that it’s on 
Halloween night that Carolina Giddle, “experienced babysitter, mah-jong instruc-
tor, and vegetarian caterer” and excellent storyteller of ghostly tales, moves into 
Apartment 713. In the episodic chapters that follow her arrival, Carolina babysits 
for several of Blatchford’s families, taming mischievous twins Dwight and Dwayne 
110 • the bulletin
Fergus with a story about a skeleton and a prank gone awry, defusing little Angelo 
Bellini’s temper tantrums with a tale of ghostly at-sea antics, and helping timid 
Hubert Croop overcome his fear of the dark with an account of shadow-making 
and monster-taming. The short chapters, each with a self-contained scare, and the 
mix of humor and gentle spookiness make this a perfect classroom readaloud, and 
tellers might even be inspired by Carolina to set the mood with lighting, snacks, 
and a pet tarantula (or not). Innerst’s black and white art has a creepy flatness to 
the big-headed figures, which complements the more absurd elements of Carolina’s 
tales but still lacks depth. Have this on hand for Halloween week or whenever kids 
want a fun but not too frightening tall tale.  KQG 
isAdorA, rAchel Jake at Gymnastics; written and illus. by Rachel Isado-
ra. Paulsen/Penguin, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16048-6 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 3-6 yrs
In this companion to Bea at Ballet, Isadora once again takes a preschool activity and 
celebrates it through focus on a participating child. Jake, a young Asian-American 
boy with a shaggy row of bangs, arrives at gymnastics class ready to begin. The 
children go through a series of stretches and guided activities (“Let’s be frogs and 
hop today”) before starting on the equipment: a tunnel, balance beam, trampoline, 
ball pit, etc. The multicultural cast of preschoolers takes turns, observes, and cheers 
each other’s successes, and teacher Dave is always on hand to guide and assist. The 
simple narrative clearly conveys class activities, beginning with the start of the class 
and ending with the dismissal (“Right before we go home, Dave says, ‘Let’s be birds.’ 
We spread our wings and fly out the door”), and while there’s little additional story, 
the narrative effectively captures the children’s enjoyment of the class session. Oil 
paints add glowing panels of color in clothing and hair accessories to the simple ink 
and pencil-drawn figures floating on white backgrounds. The brushstrokes in the 
painted elements add texture and directionality to the illustrations, and the clean 
layout keeps the focus squarely on the kids. This would lend itself well to a kines-
thetic storytime wherein participants move along with Jake and his friends.  HM
JonsBerg, BArry The Categorical Universe of Candice Phee. Chronicle, 
2014 [248p]
ISBN 978-1-4521-3351-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
“I’m me.” So goes twelve-year-old Candice Phee’s default and heartfelt response 
when asked if she’s autistic, a question she hears frequently due to her seemingly 
detached emotions and frequent misunderstanding of social cues. When Douglas 
Benson From Another Dimension joins her class, Candice makes her first friend, 
not minding that Douglas feels compelled to jump from a tree at the same time 
every evening in hopes of traveling back to the alternate dimension where he believe 
he belongs. He’s a welcome distraction from the sadness of her home, where her 
mother still mourns the passing of Candice’s baby sister some years prior and her 
father loses himself on his computer. Her uncle Brian takes her on his yacht, wins 
her beloved fish at the local carnival, and admires her ability to “sing her own song,” 
but his unwavering love and support can’t bridge the estrangement between him and 
his brother, Candice’s father. These details emerge in the form of an autobiography 
OctOber 2014 • 111
assignment where, committed to fact and thoroughness, Candice feels compelled to 
exceed the required twenty-six paragraphs about herself (one for each letter of the 
alphabet), with full chapters that paint her as a balanced, nuanced, and sympathetic 
heroine worthy of admiration. Jonsberg cleverly uses Candice’s unique perspective 
to tell her bittersweet story and reveal her emotional depth and strength of character 
without self-pity or self-importance. Candice’s frequent misunderstandings of hu-
man behavior and related commentary (and occasional inadvertent positive results) 
lighten this poignant Australian import, creating a heartfelt and humorous novel 
sure to resonate with any kid that feels different—and as Candice’s story reveals, 
that’s almost everyone.  AA
kAng, AnnA You Are (Not) Small; illus. by Christopher Weyant. Two Lions, 
2014 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-4772-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-9772-0 $3.99  
R 2-5 yrs
This playful take on perspective details a confrontation between two bears, the larger 
one accusing the smaller of being “small” and the smaller one accusing the larger of 
being “big.” Each argues his position (“I am not small. You are big”), then brings 
in backups to further prove the point (the larger bear, surrounded by a group of 
other large bears, states, “They are just like me. You are small”). The argument is 
eventually silenced when a much larger bear (only his ankles and feet are visible) 
and a tiny little bear arrive, offering additional size contrast to the original pair. 
Husband and wife team Kang and Weyant nail the concept and provide humor 
along the way. The story’s structure makes it an entertaining readaloud, and the 
dialogue between the two bears authentically captures child logic. Weyant’s ink 
and watercolor illustrations are simply drafted, with thick, rough-edged lines and 
a fluid animation that suggests cartoons without the slickness; gentle brushstrokes 
add furry variation to the bears’ coats, enhancing their tactile quality. This would 
pair perfectly with Willems’ A Big Guy Took My Ball (BCCB 9/13) for a playful 
examination of the way size ultimately depends on who is standing beside you.  HM 
kiernAn, celine Into the Grey. Candlewick, 2014 290p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7061-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-7409-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 8-12
After a fire burns down their home, Irish fifteen-year-old twin brothers Pat and 
Dom and their family move into the coastal cottage where they’d previously spent 
summers. Narrator Pat, Dom, and their baby sister Dee all begin to have nightmares: 
Pat’s take him to the trenches in World War I, where he dreams his own death, but 
Dom’s nights are worse: he’s not dreaming but being haunted by a ghostly boy, who 
in a panic slips into Dom’s body. Now a horrified Pat must try to get his brother 
back and also deal with the distressed soul of young Francis, who is unable to make 
sense of the world he sees and is desperately searching for his own lost brother. Irish 
author Kiernan has a taut and atmospheric style, vividly capturing the Ireland of 
the early 1970s and its earlier twentieth-century shadows. Like Roddy Doyle’s A 
Greyhound of a Girl (BCCB 6/12), this offers a keen poignancy in its revisiting the 
years of the now old and the long-dead: an old World War I veteran whose suicide 
attempt Pat and Dom foil, Pat’s dementia-impaired grandmother, and not one but 
two ghosts converge in a shared past and an array of tragic losses. Also like that book, 
112 • the bulletin
however, it keeps the young people at the fore, since this is very much Pat’s story 
of brothers being cruelly, perhaps irrevocably torn apart. The two generations, the 
young and the old, share the knowledge of what’s happening, and the book mines 
considerable anxious tension from their attempts to negotiate seemingly everyday 
situations without betraying the truth to Pat and Dom’s unknowing parents. 
American readers may not be familiar with the Irish Republican tensions and the 
period’s cultural landmarks, but they’ll be right at home with eerie, heartbreaking 
ghosts and a boy’s implacable loyalty to his beloved brother.  DS
kishirA, MAyuko Who’s Next Door?; tr. the from Japanese by Shana Rieko Shimizu; 
illus. by Jun Takabatake. Owlkids, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-77147-071-1 $17.95  
Ad 4-7 yrs
In this Japanese import, Chicken lives in a little house with a red roof and longs 
for a neighbor to move into the blue-roofed house next door. When it looks like 
a new resident has arrived, he’s delighted, but he can’t seem to make contact; the 
frustrated chicken ultimately decides to leave a note and go to bed. It turns out the 
new bird Owl has, like Chicken, been trying hard to meet his new neighbor, but 
because he’s asleep in the day and awake at night, he and Chicken have completely 
missed each other. Finally they meet and happily install a chalkboard between their 
homes where they can leave each other notes and other useful items (such as the 
sunglasses that Chicken leaves for Owl on the last page to block out the daytime 
light). Kishira’s story offers a playful introduction to the concept of nocturnal and 
diurnal animals, and listeners will likely enjoy figuring out the problem over the 
course of the story. The story’s on the low-key side, though, and since the conclu-
sion is somewhat confusing (it’s hard to tell if the chalkboard or the sunglasses are 
being presented as the solution, and the sunglasses don’t really work as a concept) 
it’s not all that narratively satisfying on its own. Those willing to overlook the weak 
punchline may nonetheless appreciate the humorous presentation of the two avian 
friends, particularly Chicken’s many efforts at reaching out to his silent neighbor. 
Takabatake’s illustrations have a childlike quality, their trickly ink outlines contain-
ing digital planes of vivid color (canary yellow, dark green, and bright red) with 
occasional touches of hatch and pattern. While enjoyable as a standalone story, this 
could also serve as an introduction to animal sleep patterns in an early elementary 
science unit.  HM
kloepFer, John Galaxy’s Most Wanted; illus. by Nick Edwards. Harper/Harp-
erCollins, 2014 208p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223101-7 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223103-1 $9.49  
R Gr. 4-6
Kevin and his brainy friends want to beat out bully Alexander and his chums at the 
STEM camp’s big science fair expo. They think they’ve got it locked down once 
they create something that brings to Earth an actual alien, a creature that arrives 
with not only his adorable fluffy self but also all sorts of cool space tools and a sob 
story about being the victim of interplanetary brutes. Of course, Kevin and pals 
can relate, and they decide to protect Mim (an act that will conveniently also win 
them science camp glory). Unfortunately, adorable Mim is not who he claims to 
be, and those big bad guys chasing him are actually trying to protect Earth from 
being sucked down Mim’s ever-expanding gullet. Cheerful illustrations interspersed 
OctOber 2014 • 113
throughout the chapters mainly reflect the text, occasionally highlighting the grossest 
elements, which will surely appeal to the middle-grade boys who are the likeliest 
audience for this book. It does take a bit for the story to get rolling, but now that 
the characters and camp setting are well established, it is likely that future volumes 
will get to the fun much quicker. Summer camp’s getting a bad rap this year with 
rabid zombie squirrels in Lettrick’s Frenzy (BCCB 5/14) and marauding aliens 
here—kids might want to just stay home and read about it. Black and white line 
art in appropriate neo-cartoonish style appears throughout.  AS
knudsen, Michelle Evil Librarian. Candlewick, 2014 343p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6038-3 $16.99  
R* Gr. 7-12
High school junior Cynthia understands why her best friend Annie is crushing on 
the new librarian—he’s seriously smokin’—and she gets the pleasure and pain of 
unrequited love, since she’s been fantasizing about having Ryan Halsey’s babies for 
years now. Something seems off about Mr. Gabriel, though, and when Cyn finds 
him sporting giant bat wings and curling horns and covered in blood, her unease 
seems pretty justified. Yep, the new librarian is a demon, bent on obtaining An-
nie as his human bride and sucking out all the souls of the other students—after 
the school’s production of Sweeney Todd, because apparently every demon loves a 
bloody musical. Cyn’s ability to resist Mr. G’s hypnotizing gaze is pretty helpful as 
she works a plan to save her best friend, but most beneficial of all is Ryan’s sudden 
interest in her, which provides her with an ally among an increasing number of 
demon-stunned students (and an opportunity to spend more time with the love 
of her life). It’s all terrifically entertaining from start to finish, with Cyn’s wry voice 
narrating her transformation from musical theater–loving, crush-having teen to 
musical theater–loving, crush-having teen who can also kick some demon butt. 
The plot is particularly well done here, with several encounters with Mr. Gabriel 
and other demons providing moments of both horror and humor and eventually 
culminating in the final demon/human battle. Buffy fans are an obvious audience 
here, as are readers of Rosemary Clement-Moore (Prom Dates From Hell, BCCB 
7/07) and Lish McBride (Hold Me Closer, Necromancer, BCCB 12/10).  KQG
kulling, MonicA Spic-and-Span!: Lillian Gilbreth’s Wonder Kitchen; illus. by 
David Parkins. Tundra, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-77049-380-3 $17.99  
R Gr. 3-5
A more (ahem) seasoned generation for whom Cheaper by the Dozen was standard 
reading and viewing will recognize the Gilbreths and the eyebrow-raising applica-
tion of their professional efficiency expertise to organizing their abundant family. 
Here Kulling turns the spotlight on the materfamilias, Lillian. Working alongside 
husband Frank, she provided input as a psychologist to their work studying in-
dustrial workflow and collaborated in their pioneering use of the motion picture 
camera to provide detailed information on workers and their tasks. When Frank 
died of a heart attack, the widow was forced to re-create her life as sole support of 
her children in an age when her own accomplishments seemed to follow Frank to 
the grave. At Kulling’s skillful hands, Gilbreth’s eventual acclaim as a noted designer 
of efficient kitchens plays as a merited triumph rather than a domestic letdown, 
and readers will enjoy learning about kitchen innovations that are now standard 
equipment. Parkins’s ink and watercolor paintings have a Schindler-esque delight in 
114 • the bulletin
detail and flair for humor, milking the innate fun of big, rowdy family scenes, while 
handling Frank’s sudden death with imagination and delicacy, situating viewers 
within the phone booth where Frank passed. Closing notes remark on Gilbreth’s 
formal awards, and four of Kulling’s “sources of inspiration” are included.  EB 
leveen, toM Random. Simon Pulse, 2014 217p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9956-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9958-4 $10.99 
 Ad Gr. 7-9
The night before Tori goes to court to face charges that she and her friends cyber-
bullied Kevin, a former friend, to the point where he committed suicide, she receives 
a phone call. The caller claims that he dialed her number at random, as a sort of 
test to see if there was a God who cared about whether he lived or died: if he got an 
answer, he might not follow through on his plan to take his own life. Torri talks to 
him through the night, listening to his story while he pushes her to remember and 
share hers, even though she is suspicious of his authenticity and angry with him 
for blackmailing her with the continual threat that if she hangs up, he will die. As 
the night progresses, she comes to terms with the dubious choices she made to get 
in with the popular group, realizing that while she may not have handed Kevin the 
scarf he used to hang himself, she didn’t stop others from harassing him. The texts 
and Facebook posts that drove Kevin over the edge are included, giving readers the 
opportunity to pass their own judgment on Tori and her friends, as well as to see 
how quickly things can escalate when there is no accountability. While the topic 
is timely and the exploration of culpability is clear (and no doubt instructive for 
actual or would-be bullies), it’s overall contrived and messagey, especially when it 
turns out that her suspicions that the call was a set-up were well founded. The ruse 
came from an unexpected quarter, however, motivated by tough love rather than 
revenge; the book therefore deviates from the formula for books on this topic by 
allowing Tori’s friends’ trick to deliver the positive side of the intervention lesson 
as well as the negative one.  KC
lewis, J. pAtrick Harlem Hellfighters; illus. by Gary Kelley. Creative Editions, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-56846-246-2 $18.99  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Marking the centennial of the Great War, poet Lewis uses the spare strokes of his 
medium to evoke the trials and triumphs of the African-American 369th Army 
Infantry Regiment, the Hellfighters. Central to Lewis’s narrative is bandleader Lt. 
James Europe, who turned his talents to writing patriotic songs and leading a military 
band that brought jazz to an eagerly receptive French audience. Short poems and 
prose pieces, arranged according to wartime chronology, appear in boxes inserted 
into spreads broken into blocks of illustration, creating an impressionistic take on 
the war. Although Lewis’ imagery is frequently evocative (“The moon took cover/ 
in a bunker of clouds”; “Townsfolk knocked back glasses of liberation with free beer 
chasers”), the fusion of poetry and prose is awkward, and the segues between topics 
are abrupt and unfocused. Kelley’s grainy, earth-toned illustrations are outstand-
ing, often stepping into command when the text stumbles. The troop transport 
that passes a ghost slave ship in the foggy Atlantic is visually arresting (though it 
could benefit from textual support); faces of Frenchmen swaying to “Jim Europe’s 
pizzazz jazz ‘Marseillaise’” are eerie puppet-like figures dancing at fin du monde; a 
OctOber 2014 • 115
pair of lynched black bodies bookend a bullet-torn helmet atop a rifle, contrasting 
the predicaments of the Hellfighters and their brothers back home. A bibliography 
is included, and artist’s notes on several paintings that inspired his work provide a 
path to further research.  EB
london, c. AlexAnder Blood in the Water. Scholastic, 2014 [224p] (Tides 
of War)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-66298-7 $5.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-66300-7 $5.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 4-6
Cory McNab washed out of the Navy SEALS training program a year ago, and, 
after toying with the idea of quitting the Navy altogether, he’s been reassigned to the 
Marine Mammal Program, handling dolphins that guard naval vessels and search 
for underwater explosives. Embarrassed by his failure and doubly humiliated by his 
fear of sharks in the open seas, that last thing he wants to hear is that his dolphin, 
Kaj, is “our best chance of preventing World War Three,” according to Master 
Chief Landon Charles. Cory can hardly look a SEAL in the face, but now he’s off 
to North Korean waters to deploy Kaj to locate a U.S. stealth intelligence-gathering 
submersible that’s gone missing and retrieve or destroy it before the North Koreans 
learn of the spying and retaliate. The opening scene, in which Cory saves his younger 
brother from a shark attack and is in turn saved by a dolphin, is a rather heavy-
handed way to establish Cory’s frame of mind, but it’s an attention-grabber that 
effectively pulls tween readers right into the story. Through Cory’s experience and 
musings, readers are cautioned against imputing human emotion and motivations 
to the dolphins and to seriously consider the ethical implications of taming a wild 
animal for use in war. A final note comments on the Marine Mammal Program 
and directs readers to print and online sources for further research.  EB 
look, lenore Alvin Ho: Allergic to the Great Wall, the Forbidden Palace, and Other 
Tourist Attractions; illus. by LeUyen Pham. Schwartz & Wade, 2014 [176p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-36973-2 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-36972-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81986-9 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Poor Alvin Ho has considerably more trouble than most seven-year-olds just in 
navigating the familiar environs of his Concord, Massachusetts home, but never-
theless, his intrepid parents have decided it’s time for the family to visit relatives in 
Beijing. Worried about needing room in his suitcase for souvenirs, he wears all of 
his clothes at once; worried about getting through security, he takes all his clothes 
off; worried about everything else, he packs his PDK (personal disaster kit) with 
quite a few prohibited items. Alvin’s travel terrors don’t stop there: he refuses to 
ride the elevator to and from his relatives’ apartment on the thirty-second floor, 
cuts short their visit to the Great Wall because of a panic attack, loses his father’s 
passport, and freaks out over pit toilets in the Forbidden City. Meanwhile, though, 
Alvin’s narration of the guidebook provides young readers with a more reasonable 
visit to all of the sites in and around Beijing, and he and his long-suffering dad 
have a lovely day being creatively lost. The glossary that accompanies all of the 
Alvin Ho outings is also less fanciful and more informative than usual, offering 
116 • the bulletin
kid-friendly but mostly accurate factoids of the history, culture and must-see at-
tractions of China. The details of international travel, though wildly exaggerated 
for comic effect, would be effective in a discussion preparing young readers for real 
or imagined trips of their own; after all, if Alvin and his parents can do it and live 
to tell the tale, anyone can.  KC
McBride, lish Firebug. Holt, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9862-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Ava is a pro at starting fires just by imagining them, but she’s not so great at 
controlling this ability yet, especially in stressful situations. Unfortunately, being 
roped into a contract with a supernatural mafia who kills the disobedient is a pretty 
stressful situation. After she refuses to take out a family friend, Ava and a very small 
group of allies have to go on the run, trying to stay alive, right some wrongs the 
evil Coterie have done, and, for Ava at least, find a balance between the horrific 
things she is capable of and the ways in which her powers can be beneficial. Ava 
is intriguing, and though her fiery methodology is dramatic, most teens will be 
familiar with many of the inner demons she battles. She’s also surrounded by a 
complex cast of allies and enemies, all of whom McBride carefully develops; any 
one of these characters could have their own spinoff novels. Clever chapter titles, 
an overlapping setting, and a snappy, world-weary teen narrator hearken back to 
McBride’s equally sharp Hold Me Closer, Necromancer (BCCB 12/10) and the sequel 
Necromancing the Stone (BCCB 11/12).  AS
MurguiA, BethAnie deeney I Feel Five!; written and illus. by Bethanie Deeney 
Murguia. Candlewick, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6291-2 $14.99  
R 4-6 yrs
On the eve of his fifth birthday, Fritz contemplates being five, certain that milestone 
will feel very different, and he anticipates the many things his new age will bring: 
losing a tooth, tying his shoes, learning to snap his fingers. Fritz is disappointed to 
find that he feels pretty much the same the next day (“First thing, Fritz checks his 
teeth. Not even a wiggle”), but when a little girl on the playground asks for his help 
reaching apples in the nearby tree, Fritz soars into the air and successfully procures 
two perfect apples, “and when he takes a bite, Fritz is quite sure that one of his 
teeth wiggles, just a bit.” Murguia has perfectly captured the child perspective here, 
and Fritz’s trials and tribulations will be easily recognizable to young listeners. The 
idea that the feeling of five comes not with a quiet reflection but with an action 
is convincing and effective, and the independent apple-picking is a tidy callback 
to the opening spread, where Fritz’s father must lift him up to grab apples from a 
fruit-filled tree. The line and watercolor illustrations pair tidy linework with muted, 
somewhat autumnal palette, awash with dusty reds, pale yellows, and washed-out 
blues in airy compositions; gently varied compositions add rhythm, and spare drafts-
manship is still plenty accessible as Fritz works through his problem. Those who, 
like Fritz, feel five (or thereabouts) will greatly appreciate this birthday tale.  HM
OctOber 2014 • 117
neri, g. Hello, I’m Johnny Cash; illus. by A. G. Ford.  Candlewick, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6245-5 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
This biography of the quintessential “a boy, a dream, and a cheap guitar” success 
story—country musician Johnny Cash—focuses on the rise of the singer/songwriter 
from his impoverished family life in the Great Depression, through to his big break 
at Sun Records and opening for Elvis Presley. In the oversized picture-book format, 
each double-page spread functions as a chapter in Cash’s life. Multiple columns 
of ragged-right-edge prose, rich in lyricism and boasting a driving cadence, deftly 
develop an intricate and detailed look at different moments and themes: J.R.’s 
(Johnny’s) close relationship with his older brother, who died a tragic and grue-
some death; Johnny’s first sight of June Carter (smitten) and Elvis wowing the 
ladies (jealous); Johnny’s stint in the Korean War (radio plays another pivotal role 
in his life). Neri musters these elements together to track Cash’s musical develop-
ment and reveal the encouragement, mentoring, and lucky breaks that bolstered 
his own determination to make it in entertainment. While Ford’s oil paintings are 
not particularly stellar in portraiture, the scenes ably convey the variety of milieus 
in which Cash marked time or made his mark before hitting it big. End matter 
includes information about Cash’s later career and second marriage to June Carter; a 
brief, annotated discography of sources to begin careful listening; paragraphs about 
historical events, noting Cash’s songs on those themes; and a bibliography. Kids 
unenthusiastically facing a biography report may find this to be a perfect balance 
of engaging reading and teacher-satisfying substance.  EB
nye, nAoMi shihAB The Turtle of Oman. Greenwillow, 2014 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-201972-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-233761-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 83, for review.
o’Brien, cArAgh M. The Vault of Dreamers. Roaring Brook, 2014 [432p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-938-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-9
The Forge Show, a reality show set at the Forge School of the Arts, is one of the 
most popular things around, and if Rosie can make the first cut from 100 potential 
students to fifty, she’ll be guaranteed a spectacular education and a huge following 
as folks at home watch the students every day. Of course, the weird, drugged, man-
dated twelve hours of sleep every night is slightly offputting, even with reassurances 
that it boosts student creativity, and the constant jockeying for rank is exhausting, 
but a good education in this futuristic world seems rare enough to make most stu-
dents ignore any problems. Deeply inquisitive Rosie has a hard time following the 
rules, landing her in a series of harrowing situations that put herself and some of 
her friends in substantial danger. The reality show background unfortunately isn’t 
developed fully, with the book never mentioning the actual ways in which the show 
is edited or interpreted by the home audience. In addition, Rosie’s willingness to 
drag innocent bystanders into her heedless quest to expose all of the many secrets 
this school/show holds makes her an unsympathetic protagonist and undercuts the 
impact of what she discovers. Even so, this is a sharp novel about the ways in which 
118 • the bulletin
everyone can be manipulated, either through careful editing or one’s own desire to 
go the easiest path. A startling cliffhanger certainly demands a sequel, and readers 
will likely be torn about what it all means and how much is left to explain.  AS
oFFill, Jenny While You Were Napping; illus. by Barry Blitt. Schwartz & Wade, 
2014 [34p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96572-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86572-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98743-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 6-9 yrs
FOMO (fear of missing out) may be an adult-created term, but it’s a kid-central 
anxiety, and this comic piece of literary torture strikes right at its heart with an ac-
count by an older sister of all the wonderful things her little brother missed during 
enforced naptime. The disingenuously helpful sister relates to the newly awakened 
boy the series of miraculous and delightful events that all the other kids just enjoyed: 
driving bulldozers, digging up dinosaur bones, dining with robots on French-fry 
sandwiches (“and no one made us say the magic word or asked us to stop drinking 
the ketchup”). Then, of course, there were the fireworks (and the subsequent fire), 
the pirate invasion, and the moon journey with the astronauts—but “you slept 
right through it.” Offill spins the account perfectly, with the narrator exquisitely 
crafting the lie for maximum envy, dropping in new developments with devastating 
casualness (“Just then the astronauts arrived in their rocket ship to take everyone 
to the moon”), and repeatedly needling the napper about how much he’d have en-
joyed it (the robots brought his favorite kind of cotton candy). Blitt’s illustrations, 
slender, squirrely lines with daubs of pale watercolor, work best close up, where the 
caricaturesque drafting (there’s an amusing doll-like weirdness to the kids’ over-
sized heads) and vignettish subdramas are easily perusable. Percussive close-focus 
intervals add punctuation, while the broader landscapes are like a wonderful febrile 
delirium, with kids going every which way as they sow the seeds of destruction and 
adventure at odd, sometimes literally skewed angles. The brazen over-the-topness 
leavens the taunting with pure ridiculousness, but there’s still enough bite to make 
this absolutely hilarious, especially to older sibs.  DS
pAlAtini, MArgie No Nap! Yes Nap!; illus. by Dan Yaccarino. Little, 2014 28p
ISBN 978-0-316-24821-1 $17.00  
Ad 2-4 yrs
It’s the age-old battle of wills: Mom declares naptime, baby insists that it is anything 
but. Thus begins the tyke’s antics—running away from Mom, engaging in suddenly 
very important alternate playtime activities, needing a drink—that eventually and 
inevitably ending with the child’s sleepy collapse curled up on Mom’s chest. The 
story will be all too familiar to overtired parents (who will likely be amazed by 
this mother’s seemingly endless patience and willingness to give the child some 
leeway) who regularly engage in this dance, and young artists of distraction will 
recognize plenty of the tricks employed by the story’s mop-headed tot. Palatini’s 
usual linguistic facility is unfortunately lost here, though, in favor of choppy baby 
talk that renders the text more caveman-esque than endearing. There is a decid-
edly retro feel to the pastel digital and ink compositions, which are chock full of 
energy as mom and tot race through the house. The faces of mom and babe possess 
identical features—round black eyes, wide-open mouths, enormous piles of brown 
OctOber 2014 • 119
curls—lending humor to the pairings. While obviously intended for reading to the 
littlest listeners, this may also get some use by beginning readers, particularly those 
with younger siblings willing to listen.  HM 
pAttou, edith Ghosting. Skyscape, 2014 [392p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-4774-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-9774-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
It’s the last weekend before senior year, and Emma and Brendan are set to party 
with Chloe and Anil. They’ve invited Felix, too, even though he’s become a stoner, 
and Maxie, who used to be Emma’s and Felix’s best friend. When a prank goes 
horribly wrong and a lonely, mentally disturbed boy tries to protect his home 
with a gun, Emma’s little sister, Faith, is almost killed, Emma’s dream of a soccer 
scholarship is destroyed, Felix loses an eye, and Brendan is paralyzed. Guilt has its 
own paralyzing effect, however, and there is more than enough of that to go around 
until each of the survivors finds his or her own path on which to move forward. 
Pattou develops distinctive poetic styles for each character in this verse novel, but 
the poetry itself is unfortunately flat. Additionally, the cast is somewhat stock: the 
golden people, Chloe and Brendan, hide family secrets behind beautiful facades; 
Anil, the South Asian overachiever, might not want to be all that he can be; Felix 
has become a self-destructive stoner after watching his father abuse her mother, 
etc. Each of these usual YA suspects is well enough developed, though, and since 
each character manages a full recovery through difficult circumstances, the ending 
note is upbeat as kindness ultimately wins out.  KC
perry, Jolene Stronger Than You Know. Whitman, 2014 [244p]
ISBN 978-0-8075-3155-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Joy was reared by an abusive, drug-addicted mother who forbade her to step 
outside their trailer and brought home men who molested her daughter. Now she 
lives with her mother’s sister, Nicole, and her family, which includes her uncle 
Rob and twin cousins, Tara and Trent, a year older than her fifteen. While she 
marvels at their kindness, she has a hard time trusting it until Uncle Rob confides 
in her that he lost a sister to suicide and sees in Joy, at least in part, an opportunity 
to be wiser and more attentive to someone else’s pain. Nicole feels guilty for not 
intervening sooner as well, and between Nicole, Uncle Rob, a therapist, and some 
new friends, Joy slowly works through the panic attacks, nightmares, and fear of 
intimacy that are the aftermath of her traumatic past. While Perry is careful not to 
be overly graphic about the abuses Joy suffered, she is not subtle about the residual 
effects, and deftly shows how seemingly insignificant everyday circumstances—a 
whiff of cigarette smoke, the smell of beer, the rumble of a deep male voice, being 
bumped in the hallway at school—can trigger episodes of anxiety and panic. Joy’s 
new family members give her space and support in equal measures, negotiating 
their need to protect her and her instincts to isolate and defend. Perry manages to 
convey Joy’s gradual growth without resorting to pamphlet-speak, but moreover 
she offers a portrait, rare in YA, of the way compassionate, functional families work 
and the good effects they can produce.  KC 
120 • the bulletin
phAM, leuyen A Piece of Cake; written and illus. by LeUyen Pham. Balzer + 
Bray/HarperCollins, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-0-06-199264-3 $16.99  
R 5-8 yrs
It’s Little Bird’s birthday, and Mouse has baked her a cake. En route to deliver 
the tasty treat, he runs into an assortment of friends, each of whom offer items in 
trade for a slice, until Mouse arrives on Little Bird’s doorstep without any cake 
at all. Wise Little Bird, however, knows the traded items—a cork, a wire, a net, 
and a flyswatter—will be useful, and in fact the pair trades the items back to the 
same series of friends for the necessary ingredients to make a brand-new birthday 
cake. Pham’s tale engages in delightful absurdity, with creativity and subverted 
expectations in the animal’s barters (when the Bear complains, “These bees won’t 
leave me alone! If only I had something to swat them away,” Mouse and Little 
Bird bypass the flyswatter and instead suggest a cork “to close up the hole of the 
hive”). The narrative alternates between blocks of text and speech bubbles, and 
the many characters make the story well suited for a readers theater adaptation as 
well as a readaloud. Pham’s digitally colored pencil illustrations are retro flavored 
in style and layout; Mouse and Little Bird, in particular, with their pupils nearly as 
large as their eyeballs, are reminiscent of 1950s illustrative work, while the palette 
and gently curved spot art will be familiar to Golden Book fans. This will work 
remarkably well in a storytime setting, and there are plenty of opportunities for 
curricular tie-ins (particularly prediction and inference) for a school setting.  HM 
phelAn, MAtt Druthers; written and illus. by Matt Phelan. Candlewick, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5955-4 $15.99  
R 3-5 yrs 
It is “raining. And raining. And RAINING,” and bored Penelope slouches over 
to her dad, who asks her what she’d do if she had her druthers, explaining that 
“druthers are what you would rather do if you could do anything at all.” Testing 
the concept, Penelope suggests she’d like to go to the zoo, and to be a cowgirl, 
and to be a pirate captain, with Dad obligingly diving into each pretend scenario, 
until finally Daddy and daughter end up in space at “the biggest moon party ever!” 
Penelope realizes a rainy day of pretend with her daddy is having her druthers, 
and though that’s a fairly predictable conclusion, the story of a dad and daughter’s 
day of play is fond and indulgent, with illustrations adding touches of clear-eyed 
realism in the house’s growing chaos and Dad’s increasing tiredness. Phelan’s ink 
and watercolor art evinces its familiar brushy informal textures, with the mood 
transforming effectively from spare gray spreads of gloomy Penelope to scenes of 
sweep and motion and ever-denser toy population, while the window behind the 
action documents the slashing rain. The compact square trim size adds to the cozy 
feel, making this a cuddly choice for sharing with a shut-in youngster on a bleak 
day—as long as you’re geared up for the imaginative romp it will inspire.  DS
poBlocki, dAn The Book of Bad Things. Scholastic, 2014 247p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-64553-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-64555-3 $16.99 
 R Gr. 4-7
When Cassidy finds life too scary to handle, she consults (and often adds to) her 
Book of Bad Things, a detailed reference book she created that helps her compart-
OctOber 2014 • 121
mentalize her fears. There are plenty of entries that deal with the latest supernatural 
events in the small town where she spends her summers: zombies, death, curses, and 
hauntings, to name a few. It turns out that the crazy woman living alone in a creepy 
house has actually been trying to protect everyone from an intense vortex located 
under the house that holds an otherworldly beast that wants to suck everything, 
including people, into itself and then spits the formerly living back out in zombified 
form. Cassidy teams up with a trio of local kids who are determined to clear the 
curse, and they turn to the possibilities of a seal of protection—if they can make 
one in time. While the haunted-house plotline itself is fairly straightforward, the 
strong friendships that form between the four unlikely allies and their implacable 
determination to save their own little corner of the world are effectively conveyed. 
In addition, there are few true bad guys here: the zombies are viewed with unusual 
sympathy (one is, in fact, the beloved dog of one of the kids), and the supernatural 
force itself seems driven by a compulsion rather than evil intent. The body count 
runs pretty high, but the clear resolution and Cassidy’s slow growth toward inde-
pendence from her own terrors will likely speak to late elementary readers.  AS
reedy, trent If You’re Reading This. Levine/Scholastic, 2014 296p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-43342-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-70049-8 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Mike has spent the last few years being the dutiful son, focusing on school and his 
part-time job and keeping his mother calm as she continues to grieve for his father, 
a National Guardsman killed in Afghanistan. This year, however, the high school 
sophomore is ready to cut loose, and a series of letters from his father, planned 
by the man before his death to arrive in the run-up to Mike’s sixteenth birthday, 
finally impel Mike to act on his restlessness. In each letter his father assigns him a 
“mission,” and Mike takes those missions seriously. To get involved in school activi-
ties, Mike forges Mom’s signature on permission forms for him to play football; 
to find a girlfriend, Mike rethinks his relationship with Isma, a Muslim classmate 
who’s also in the midst of resetting her submissive relationship with her parents. 
The actual sender of the letters remains a mystery, though, and as Mike pursues 
his identity, he discovers the lingering guilt that fuels his mother’s sadness, and the 
long-concealed pain within a neighbor who has been a support to the family over 
the past years. The letters themselves, though, are often outright mawkish, and 
the change football wreaks in Mike’s life, with his almost immediate star status, is 
contrived. Fans of Reedy’s recent blood and thunder thriller Divided We Fall (BCCB 
1/14) may, however, be pleasantly surprised to see what he can do with a quieter, 
more thoughtful take on a boy stepping into a man’s shoes.  EB
reynolds, Alison A New Friend for Marmalade; illus. by Heath McKenzie. Lit-
tle Simon, 2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-4814-2046-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Friends and neighbors Ella and Maddy, and their shared cat, Marmalade, are en-
joying some outdoor summer playtime, until Toby, the boy across the road, joins 
in. Unfortunately for the girls, Toby’s energetic activity ruins their fort and then 
the sand castle they are building, but he and Marmalade seem to get along fine. 
When a sudden soaking from lawn sprinklers sends Marmalade up a tree, where 
122 • the bulletin
he dangles from a cracking branch, it’s Toby who convinces Marmalade to jump 
to safety, landing in Toby’s outstretched superhero cape. The next day the kids and 
cat have a new game, inspired by Toby’s heroics, and they all, “even Marmalade,” 
prance about in capes. The text and pictures make it clear that Toby isn’t destroying 
the girls’ play maliciously, but that he is just impulsive and active; while the girls’ 
quick acceptance of him post-fort-destruction doesn’t totally ring true, the story 
has an easy charm that will draw young listeners. McKenzie’s art is eye-catching, 
as tidy yet elaborately drafted black and white line drawings are accented with 
watercolor-like patches of color against stretches of clean white space. The big-
eyed kids and cuddly-looking Marmalade (who somewhat resembles a stuffed toy 
tiger) are pretty appealing, and kids who enjoyed meeting the girls and their cat 
in A Year with Marmalade will probably want to see what they are up to here.  JH 
rivers, kAren Finding Ruby Starling. Levine/Scholastic, 2014 294p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-53479-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-53482-6 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-7
Thanks to online image-searching, twelve-year-old adoptee Ruth Quayle has found 
stylish Ruby Starling, her identical twin sister living in England. As Ruth and 
Ruby correspond with each other and their respective parents and friends in this 
email-based epistolary novel, the circumstances of Ruth’s adoption emerge, as do 
the many emotions and occasional secrets that accompany the adoption process, 
from initial surrender to potential reunion. While the girls wrestle with why Ruth 
was given up for adoption in the United States while their biological mother 
returned to the UK with Ruby, they also seek to reassure their loved ones who, 
in turn, struggle to support them while coping with their own feelings of shock 
and concern. Though the initial premise conjures images of Hayley Mills (or, for 
the younger set, Lindsay Lohan), this very human novel wisely turns instead to a 
deeper exploration of familial bonds. The story is sympathetic to all members of 
the adoption triad—biological parent(s), adoptive parents, and adoptee—without 
losing the magic of discovering a twin, and it’s easy to forgive any implausibility. 
Budding romances and supportive friendships for both girls round out the details 
of their preteen existence, smartly combining relatability, levity, and emotional 
depth to leave readers wanting only the best for Ruth, Ruby, and the people in 
their lives.  AA
rockliFF, MArA Chik Chak Shabbat; illus. by Kyrsten Brooker. Candlewick, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5528-0 $15.99  
R 5-8 yrs
Every Saturday, several residents of an apartment building—the Santiagos in 4-D, 
Signora Bellagalli in 3-C, Mr. Moon in 2-B, and the Omars on the first floor—
gather in Goldie’s unit for a delicious Shabbat dinner of cholent. To Goldie, mak-
ing Shabbat cholent is a tribute to her grandmother’s practice of breaking with the 
hurry of the week to slow down, cook the meal leisurely, and enjoy spending time 
together. When Goldie falls ill one Saturday, however, her dinnermates whip up 
a last-minute Shabbat dinner for her from their own kitchens, and Goldie finds 
that even a hastily assembled dinner tastes like Shabbat when it brings people 
together. The story’s a little languid and the cast somewhat reductive, but it’s a 
warm and cheerful tale of multicultural togetherness centered on the ever-popular 
OctOber 2014 • 123
subject of food. Brooker’s combination of oil paint and collage evinces its usual 
tactile dimensionality, with touches of patterning balancing the robust cheer of her 
characters’ faces and the geometry of the apartment building’s architecture provid-
ing structure and a bit of theatricality. The theme of a group’s stepping in to save 
the food day is reminiscent of Schubert’s Princess of Borscht (BCCB 1/12), and the 
title additionally offers opportunities for curricular use and ecumenical celebration 
here, if you’ve been looking for an excuse to feed a crowd. A recipe for cholent (a 
vegetarian version) is appended.  DS 
rosenstock, BArB Ben Franklin’s Big Splash: The Mostly True Story of His First 
Invention; illus. by S. D. Schindler. Calkins Creek, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-62091-446-5 $16.95  
R 5-8 yrs
Children who have already met statesman Benjamin Franklin through one of 
many picture-book biographies may be familiar with his early efforts to enhance 
his efficiency at swimming. Here Rosenstock offers a rollicking recreation of the 
invention process, based on Franklin’s own brief description, courteously included 
within the author’s note. Ben, it seems, was well ahead of his time simply by virtue 
of swimming at all: “Even sailors never learned to swim. Most people thought 
swimming would make you sick.” But inspired by the physiology of such proficient 
swimmers as otters and fish, young Ben devised a set a paddles for his hands (they 
made his wrists ache) and his feet (the paddles promptly fell off); they weren’t a 
grand success, but Rosenstock’s moral, which Ben himself would probably have 
endorsed, is that the effort itself was its own reward. The line and watercolor art 
takes obvious pleasure in the visual possibilities of Ben’s antics, and kids will chuckle 
at the myriad ways the illustrator manages to preserve Ben’s modesty as he cavorts 
in the river. Rosenstock sorts her own extrapolations out from Franklin’s original 
account and ends with a light-hearted nod to Franklin’s induction into the Inter-
national Swimming Hall of Fame. A timeline and source notes are included.  EB
rundell, kAtherine Cartwheeling in Thunderstorms. Simon, 2014 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9061-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9063-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 5-8
Wilhelmina “Will” Silver, a girl “stubborn . . . and exasperating and wild and honest 
and true,” lives on a Zimbabwean tobacco farm with her beloved father (who serves 
as the foreman for Captain Browne, the owner) and spends her days barefoot and 
dust-covered, riding her horse with her best friend Simon. Her life takes a sudden 
turn when her father passes away and the elderly Captain, now her legal guardian, 
marries a villainous younger woman, Cynthia Vincy, who decides to send Will to 
boarding school back in England. Will is plucked from Zimbabwe and deposited 
at Leewood Academy, where she’s forced to wear a tight uniform and sleep inside 
walls, and where she is harassed, bullied, spit upon, and physically attacked. Will 
escapes for a madcap adventure in the streets of London, involving a night spent 
in the monkey enclosure at the London Zoo, several attempts at panhandling, and 
her eventual rescue by the kindly grandmother of a boy she met along the way. 
Author of Rooftoppers (BCCB 11/13), Rundell writes with a beautiful voice; Will’s 
love for her Zimbabwean home and way of describing the world around her is both 
gripping and profound. The plot and characters aren’t always plausible, being more 
124 • the bulletin
suited to a colonial-era adventure than the contemporary realism of the book, but 
most readers will be willing to forgive these shortcomings in the name of following 
the courageous Will living in a world that is difficult for her to navigate. This will 
appeal both to fans of survival stories and those drawn to atmospheric evocations 
of unusual places.  HM 
ryAn, pAM Muñoz Tony Baloney: Buddy Trouble; illus. by Edwin Fothering-
ham. Scholastic, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-0-545-48169-4 $6.99 
 R Gr. 1-2
When siblings Tony and Big Sister Baloney (of Tony Baloney: School Rules, BCCB 
9/13) argue and make a mess one day, their parents refuse to take them to their 
school’s much anticipated “Books and Buddies” night, in which students get to 
bring a stuffed buddy and teachers read stories by flashlight. Big Sister, blaming 
Tony, sneaks Dandelion (Tony’s beloved stuffed ostrich) into their baby siblings’ 
diaper bag and Dandelion gets an unfortunate “princess makeover” (the toy is 
covered in pink and glitter) at the babies’ playgroup. After witnessing Tony’s dis-
may at Dandelion’s disappearance and transformation, a repentant Big Sister helps 
Tony get him cleaned up. Pleased at their children’s reconciliation, Tony’s parents 
agree to take the kids to Books and Buddies after all, where a good time is had by 
all. The sibling interactions and Tony’s dialogues with his toys (printed in word 
bubbles in a different font than the text and with alternating colors for the dif-
ferent speakers) are both amusing and credible. The easy-reader format and short 
sentences make this accessible to primary-grade readers, but it would be equally 
successful as a readaloud to a group. Primary colors plus green feature heavily in 
Fotheringham’s digital art, and the macaroni penguin characters, with their orange 
fringe and yellow eyebrow tufts, are remarkably expressive figures. This is shaping 
up to be a solid little series with lots of kid appeal.  JH
sArn, AMélie I Love I Hate I Miss My Sister; tr. from the French by Y. Mau-
det. Delacorte, 2014 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99128-8 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74376-1 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37020-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Eighteen-year-old Sohane, after listening mutely to a discussion among her fellow 
French classmates about how degrading it is for Muslim women to have to wear the 
hijab and more, decides that it is just as much an infringement on her freedom to 
not be allowed to wear a head scarf. Her sister, Djelila, on the other hand, embraces 
life as a secular French teen, questioning her traditional uncle and standing up to a 
group of Muslim thugs in their apartment complex who accuse her of being a slut 
for wearing jeans. While Sohane is expelled from school for refusing to remove her 
scarf, Djelila pushes her limits even further, until one of the boys grabs her, throws 
gasoline on her, and immolates her in the basement of the apartment complex. 
Sohane is overtaken by grief and guilt, and tells her story in broken fashion, flashing 
between memories and present reflections as she processes the pain of losing her 
sister twice, first by trying to hold her back and scolding her for her decisions, and 
then by not protecting her when the danger was very real. Sohane’s most poignant 
cri de coeur arises when she rails against her and Djelila’s becoming symbols of 
OctOber 2014 • 125
someone else’s values; as a “victim of the rise of fundamentalism,” her decision to 
wear the hijab can never be viewed as anything other than a political statement or 
a forced choice, and she is even shut out from the protests that arise using Djelila 
as a poster child to oppose violence against women in the Muslim community. 
Based on actual events, including a law banning religious attire in French schools 
in 2004 and the murder of a Muslim girl in 2002, this French import insists on 
a fair and balanced look at not just two equal and opposite perspectives on these 
issues, but at the multiple, refracted, messy nuances in between.  KC
schMid, pAul Oliver and His Egg; written and illus. by Paul Schmid. Disney 
Hyperion, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-1-4231-7573-5 $15.99  
Ad 3-5 yrs
When Oliver (of Oliver and His Alligator, BCCB 9/13) finds an “egg” (an egg-shaped 
rock) at the park, he is convinced it will hatch into an orange-polka-dotted dinosaur 
pal. Oliver imagines playing with his new friend: eating donuts together, sailing 
to new places (a sail turns the dinosaur into a ship, and Oliver, as captain, sports a 
Viking helmet), and traveling in a rocket to space. A playmate’s question—“Why 
are you sitting on that rock?”—causes Oliver to ponder the object for a moment, 
but then he goes on to imagine dinosaur adventures with all his friends in a foldout 
spread; in real life, Oliver and his friends are all sitting on rocks. There’s not much 
story here, and unfortunately, what story there is is confusing: Oliver’s invitation to 
his friends to join his pretend play is never made clear, and the other kids’ under-
standing of Oliver’s game isn’t communicated. Still, Oliver and the dinosaur are a 
winsome pair, and Schmid’s illustrations in pastel pencil, colored digitally, continue 
to be appealingly cuddly. The figures and objects generally have soft, rounded edges 
(the dinosaur resembles an inflatable pool toy or a large stuffed animal), and a gentle 
palette of pastel tones keeps things calm and cheery. Oliver’s slightly disheveled 
hair and oversized blue sweater emphasize his youth, as do his undersized hands 
and feet. Despite the conceptual glitches, this might be be a useful addition to a 
storytime focused on rocks, dinosaurs, or imagination.  JH 
scieszkA, Jon, ed. Guys Read: True Stories; illus. by Brian Floca. Walden Pond/
HarperCollins, 2014 [272p] (Guys Read)
ISBN 978-0-06-196382-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Considering the sizable number of fiction-averse guy readers around, it’s high time 
this appealing series gathered up some good informational offerings. It was worth 
the wait. A host of well-known nonfiction authors pitch their wares, while a few 
curve balls keep the game interesting. Steve Sheinkin starts off with a harrowing 
adventure tale of shipwrecked Americans enslaved in the Sahara in 1815; Sy Mont-
gomery offers behind-the-behind-the-scenes episodes from her expedition to French 
Guiana for The Tarantula Scientist (BCCB 4/04). Candace Fleming regales readers 
with the life and death of Jumbo, P. T. Barnum’s prize attraction; Jim Murphy riffs 
on the gruesome history of dentistry; Elizabeth Partridge enters a bio of bluesman 
Muddy Waters; Thanhha Lai recalls her girlhood ambition to be just like her broth-
ers—with results not unlike editor Scieszka’s own memoir Knucklehead (BCCB 
11/08). Poet Douglas Florian shows what verse can contribute to physics; Nathan 
Hale relates in comic-book format the tale of an adventurer left for dead by a bear; 
126 • the bulletin
and comics guy James Sturm eschews his métier for a prose rendition of how he got 
into the field. Sports editor T. Edward Nickens wraps it up with a piece on the joys 
and dangers of canoeing. There’s not a bummer in the bunch, and each short work 
showcases the writer’s strong suit, with endnotes directing readers to suggestions 
for longer works by each author. This is great for browsing, readalouds, or reading 
straight through, and it would be a shame if girls didn’t grab this up as well.  EB
selzer, AdAM Play Me Backwards. Simon, 2014 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0102-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0104-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
How to Get Suspended and Influence People (BCCB 5/07) left Leon in a hopeful 
place: his movie was a big underground hit, and he got his girl, Anna. Since then, 
though, Anna moved to England, taking with her all of Leon’s motivation and 
more than half of his confidence, and he’s subsequently had just a few dead-end 
jobs and a couple of disappointing sexual encounters. He does, however, have a 
new best friend, a guy named Stan who claims to be Satan; Leon has his doubts, 
but he’s hedging his bets in case it’s true. When he gets word that Anna might be 
coming back, he worries that he has become too much of a slacker to live up to her 
activist standards, so Stan give him a series of assignments that, in the end, actually 
pan out the way Stan says they will. Many readers will find Leon’s self-deprecating 
commentary on his own sexual prowess, the snarky descriptions of the goings-on 
in the back room at his place of employment, and his sardonic assessment of all 
things suburbia quite funny, but unfortunately nothing much happens in this book. 
There is a sustained allusion to Moby-Dick, as Leon and his girlfriend quest after 
the white grape Slushee, and there is the signature Selzer protest move as Leon mo-
bilizes a campaign to protect a Satanic poem he slipped into the yearbook. Despite 
the heavy issues raised (teen performance anxiety—sexual, intellectual, economic, 
etc.—as well as a pregnancy scare), however, there is a lack of substance here, and 
no teens are shown at their best, while many are shown at their worst. There is 
nonetheless a cunningly worked plot arc, and the humorous narration itself may 
be enough to satisfy Selzer fans.  KC 
siddAls, MAry MckennA Shivery Shades of Halloween; illus. by Jimmy Picker-
ing. Random House, 2014 24p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97181-5 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-36999-2 $12.99  
R 3-6 yrs
This creative color concept book uses Halloween as a vehicle for exploring a wide 
spectrum of shades. Opening with the question “What color is Halloween?”, the 
author then goes through a gamut of colors, offering lush, descriptive language 
in playful rhyming verses (“Halloween is gray./ Tombstone, gargoyle,/ Dungeon 
wall,/ Rats and rubble,/ Haunted hall/ Dusty-fusty, dimly-grimly, shady-fraidy/ 
Shroud of gray”). Boldly hued digital compositions in full-bleed spreads are on the 
slick side, but they’re certainly eyecatching. The depictions of spooky Halloween 
characters are definitely more silly than scary, making this an excellent choice for 
little ones, and visual clues to help with the less familiar references in the text. There 
is plenty of readaloud potential here, and the book would also serve as an excellent 
springboard for October writing assignments.  HM
OctOber 2014 • 127
siMpson, dAnA Phoebe and Her Unicorn; written and illus. by Dana Simp-
son. Andrews McMeel, 2014 [224p] (Heavenly Nostrils Chronicle)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4494-4620-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R* Gr. 3-5
The oh-so-lovely unicorn Marigold Heavenly Nostrils is saved from a traditional 
peril—being stuck staring awestruck at her own reflection—when human girl 
Phoebe bonks her with a rock. The friendship that emerges between the two is 
impeccably developed as they circle around each other, deciding how much is 
bluster and how much is true connection. Marigold helps with Phoebe’s isolation at 
school, and although the unicorn would never admit it, Phoebe, a kid with bound-
less imagination and seemingly endless enthusiasm, is pretty great company. This 
collection of black and white traditional framed comic strips mostly reads like a 
graphic novel; there are occasional panels that initially seem out of context but they 
all loop back to a steady narrative arc about the evolution of friendship. Rich humor 
lies in the illustrations, since Marigold’s wry comments are often taken literally by 
Phoebe but their slant is present in the unicorn’s epic eyerolls and behind-the-back 
smirks. There are, of course, overlaps with the exceptional Calvin and his best pal 
Hobbes, but Marigold and Phoebe hold their own as quirky friends whose bond is 
obvious even when they are doing their best efforts at throwing shade. While some 
readers may not recognize Peter S. Beagle as the person introducing the collection, 
he’s a perfect choice for those in the know, and his unabashed enthusiasm for and 
knowledge about Phoebe and Marigold make him an ideal spokesperson.  AS
siMukkA, sAllA As Red as Blood; tr. from the Finnish by Owen F. Witesman. Sky-
scape, 2014 [236p] (Snow White Trilogy)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-4771-8 $7.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-9771-3 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 10-12
Lumikki lives on the social edge at her prestigious high school for the arts, striking 
a balance between privacy and amiability, conformity and individuality. Having 
left home, she holes up in a tiny studio apartment, quietly battling her demons 
and marking time until real life begins, but then a chance discovery in the school 
darkroom upends her steady life. Thirty thousand Euros, washed clean of blood 
and hung out to dry, scream of a mystery, and an overheard conversation among 
several classmates indicates just who is involved. Elisa, daughter of a police narcotics 
investigator, found the garbage bag full of dirty money in her backyard the night of 
a parents-free house party, and after the first rush of glee at the discovery she and 
her friends realize they have a tiger by the tail. Tuukka, the principal’s son, knows 
that Lumikki knows, and between his subtle blackmail and Elisa’s cajoling, Lu-
mikki is drawn into their investigation. The solution to the whodunit is established 
early on, but there’s plenty of plot left to thrill as Lumikki, who is named after the 
heroine in the Finnish version of Snow White, goes undercover at a party hosted 
by enigmatic criminal kingpin Polar Bear and nearly loses her life. The Arctic set-
ting of this import is used to full advantage, evoking a chilling mood and strewing 
genuine frigid weather obstacles in Lumikki’s way. The backstory of her personal 
tragedy unfolds organically as Lumikki finds herself considering the possibility of 
friendship with Elisa. The first entry in Simukka’s Snow White trilogy will tempt 
mystery readers back for more.  EB
128 • the bulletin
singer, MArilyn I’m Gonna Climb a Mountain in My Patent Leather Shoes; illus. 
by Lynne Avril. Abrams, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0336-2 $16.95  
Ad 4-6 yrs
Sadie’s family camping trip requires her (as far as she’s concerned) to pack a trous-
seau of ruffled underpants, a purple party bag, and the titular patent leather shoes, 
all in her sparkly suitcase. Her opulent clothing choices don’t prevent her from 
pitching the pup tent or chasing a chipmunk, however, and she delights in her 
bravery as she contemplates tracking and lassoing Bigfoot with her “seven strings 
of pearls.” Sadie cuts a charming figure in Avril’s pastel chalk drawings, her cheeks 
a happy pink and her curly copper hair constantly restrained by a rhinestone tiara 
(except when a trip to the river requires a saucy wide-brimmed hat). As bright and 
energetic as Sadie herself, the full-bleed double-page spreads convey her colorful 
personality as they juxtapose her style choices with the natural world. The text, 
however, is less successful; the rhyming verse is catchy, but it fails to tell a clear 
story, and the Bigfoot plot is awkwardly interwoven. Still, micro fashionistas will 
enjoy both Sadie’s style and her spirit as she matches and even leads her brother in 
outdoorsmanship; the Ginger Rogers of camping, she matches him step for step—if 
not backward and in high heels, at least in a skirt and patent leather shoes.  AA
sMelcer, John Edge of Nowhere. Leapfrog, 2014 150p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-935248-57-6 $9.99 
 R Gr. 6-9 
Sixteen-year-old Seth Evanoff washes over the side of his father’s commercial salmon 
fishing boat during a storm and isn’t missed until the Erin Elizabeth pulls into its 
Alaskan home port the next day. As his father and the community lose precious 
hours searching for him ashore and then mount a rescue operation, Seth and his 
dog Tucker wash up on one of the hundreds of coastal islands tantalizingly close 
to the mainland; realizing that his window for rescue is narrow, the teen begins to 
strategize his way back home. The best bet is to island hop on flotsam and makeshift 
rafts fashioned from the driftwood and weather-beaten nets and rope that litter the 
islands, scavenging for food along the way. As he inches his way home, he recalls 
scraps of vocabulary and lore from his grandmother, who had always hoped her 
grandson would cherish native customs that her own son had largely ignored. Seth’s 
tale is as much bildungsroman as survival story, and readers who simply want to 
follow the perils of a stranded kid with a knife and a couple of beef sticks will find 
themselves equally appreciating Seth’s expanding awareness of his place in nature 
as on the islands themselves. Grandmother’s wisdom, in particular, guides Seth to 
face his trial as yet another creature struggling with elements variously hostile and 
nurturing. Brief, thoughtful, and often lyrical, this is a quick pick for young teens 
who have the good sense not to confuse a short book with a shallow book.  EB
sMith, Andrew 100 Sideways Miles Simon, 2014 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4495-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4497-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
When Finn was seven years old, a dead horse fell out of a truck crossing a high bridge, 
landing on Finn and his mother, killing her and breaking his back, leaving him with 
a strange scar and a seizure disorder. Finn’s author father wove threads of the event 
OctOber 2014 • 129
into a cult classic about aliens who come to earth, and Finn, now a teenager, can’t 
help but wonder if that isn’t who he really is—a creation of his father, destined to 
be forever trapped in a book he didn’t write. His best friend, Cade Hernandez, is 
no help, since Cade has his own way of setting things in motion that makes Finn 
part of a larger plan once again. When Julia Bishop comes into Finn’s life, he falls 
for her, and his need to break free becomes even more acute just as a chance to do 
so via a road trip comes to him. Finn’s journey to self-discovery is full of surprises 
in the form of tiny bursts of insight, humor and pathos as he negotiates first love 
and attempts to stay afloat in Cade’s sea of maddening self-confidence. Like Finn’s 
father, Cade is a wildly successful plotter, whereas Finn is running as fast as he 
can just to keep up. A mosaic of recurring motifs, subtle symbolism, wonderfully 
funny bits, and the best birthday present ever make this a book that repays close 
attention; the current of genuine warmth that runs through it ensures multiple 
revisits and enthusiastic sharing.  KC
sMith, clete BArrett Magic Delivery; illus. by Michal Dziekan. Disney 
Hyperion, 2014 280p
ISBN 978-1-4231-6597-2 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Nick is known for being the cool kid who can make things, sometimes slightly 
shady things, happen, but even he has his weak spots, such as his big, slightly dolt-
ish friend Burger. Even Nick is thrown when he and Burger witness a runaway 
truck, seemingly driven by a bear, careen off a cliff; it turns out the truck carries 
costumes that can (temporarily) turn you into whatever the outfit represents. Even 
after Nick and friends learn the backstory behind the bear (he’s a man who got stuck 
in a costume while on his first delivery assignment for a secret organization with 
which his family has been involved for over 300 years), they’re tempted to use the 
costumes for amusement and possible havoc. What follows is a mostly ridiculous, 
enormously satisfying adventure as Nick and Burger try to put things right, since 
they feel partially responsible for the truck wreck in the first place. The deliciously 
creepy Mary, the brains behind the destructive secret operation that controls more 
than it seems to, is a great and atmospheric touch. Although the magical elements 
propel the story, there is a surprising amount of depth and vulnerability in Nick 
as a protagonist who secretly mostly acts out of consideration for others; Smith 
fans will recognize the emotional and philosophical layers that exist beneath the 
slightly scary, mostly madcap Halloween romp. Occasional full-page black and 
white illustrations offer a slick and enjoyably exaggerated loopiness in keeping 
with the story.  AS
sMith, greg leitich Little Green Men at the Mercury Inn; illus. by Andrew 
Arnold. Roaring Brook, 2014 214p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-835-4 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-095-4 $10.99  
R Gr. 4-6
The Mercury Inn’s prime location on the Space Coast makes the kitschy but well-
maintained motel a hot spot for Florida vacationers, especially during launches from 
nearby Cape Canaveral. Aidan has spent many of his twelve-going-on-thirteen years 
helping his parents run the place, occasionally aided by his best friend Louis, who, 
as a UFO enthusiast, loves the area. When a massive power outage delays a launch, 
the sighting of an unknown aircraft over the motel sets off a media frenzy focused 
130 • the bulletin
on the Mercury, but the boys’ investigation uncovers something even bigger: at 
least one of the residents at the Inn may be more than a little bit out of this world. 
Smith’s easygoing narration pulls the sci-fi adventure pace back from pulse-pounding 
to a pleasing almost-languidness, giving younger audiences a chance to dip into 
the genre while avoiding full-blown scares. That doesn’t mean that there’s a lack of 
interest, though: Louis’s insistence that a UFO was involved in the car crash two 
years ago that left him using a prosthetic leg but left Aidan unscathed is resolved 
with a truly mind-bending twist. Additionally, a recurring chapter cap of “trending 
topics” and news headlines lends a contemporary touch, while Arnold’s bug-eyed 
and angular line drawings add visual interest. Budding nerds will appreciate Smith’s 
casual sprinkling in of pseudoscientific details that will likely send them Googling 
to find out more about the Vile Vortices or the Montauk Monster. This will be a 
gentle liftoff on the alien invasion concept, prepping readers for weightier books 
like Rex’s The True Meaning of Smekday (BCCB 2/08) or perhaps catching readers 
not often interested in extraterrestrial exploits.  TA 
speArs, kAt Sway. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2014 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-05143-1 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-5219-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Jesse may have the flattened-out emotions of a budding sociopath, but he has the 
“sway” to get things done: he delivers drugs to parties, procures term papers, turns 
failing businesses into places to see and be seen, and finds out what guys need to 
know to get the girls they want, all for a price. When football hero Ken wants good 
girl Bridget, Jesse takes on the gig, only to find himself falling in love with Bridget 
and befriending her brother Pete, whose cerebral palsy has jaundiced his views. 
Bridget’s solid, unaffected goodness starts breaking down the walls that Jesse has 
built to protect himself from his mother’s mental illness and suicide and his father’s 
drinking, but he knows a relationship with her is impossible—first, because it’s bad 
business, but second, because she would never forgive him if she knew he sold her 
secrets to Ken. While the story has a Cyrano component to it, Jesse’s appeal as a 
character lies not so much in his silver tongue as in his brokenness and how he has 
responded to it. He oozes cool fearlessness and amoral aplomb, which is of course a 
cover for pain and a deep-seated moral vision that leaves him surprised by his own 
actions and unaware of why certain people can’t get enough of him. Perspective 
is handled beautifully: Bridget clearly only appears perfect because she’s focalized 
through Jesse, while readers get glimpses of the real Jesse through the responses of 
other characters, particularly Bridget, keeping him wholly sympathetic even at his 
most jerkish moments. Readers will thus be torn between wanting a guy like him 
around to make things happen and wanting to fix him so he isn’t that guy anymore, 
and they’ll be heartened when he ends up a little of both.  KC
stoeke, JAnet MorgAn Oh No! A Fox!; written and illus. by Janet Morgan 
Stoeke. Dial, 2014 [32p] (The Loopy Coop Hens)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8037-3952-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 1-2
Those endearing dumb clucks the Loopy Coop Hens are back in a new easy reader, 
and they’re joined by a new nemesis: a fox. Fortunately, when the hungry fox sets 
OctOber 2014 • 131
his sights on a sleeping hen, brave Rooster Sam scares him off (by running away 
smack into the trash can, but hey, it works). Now the coop is alert and the farmer 
sends a dog out to guard the chickens, but the sleepy old dog dozes right through 
the fox’s entry into the coop. Once again, though, brave Rooster Sam is ready—to 
shakily fall over and to flee into the dog, who then wakes up and scares the fox 
away. This outing offers some engaging slapstick humor and also some amusing 
play on the word “something”—the hens are sure Sam will “do something” if a fox 
comes, and while he technically does do something, it’s not in the way they meant 
it. This pivot on the word’s ambiguity adds layers to the book’s tightly deployed 
vocabulary, which is cleverly full of repetition without feeling stilted. The colored 
pencil and gouache illustrations have the spare simplicity of digital art in their few 
planes of solid color, but Stoeke makes her chickens hilarious and lovable with a 
few deft strokes of her pencil, whether it be in their gazes of adoration at extremely 
lucky Sam or Sam’s frenzied and fortunate cowardice. While this isn’t quite as direct 
a hit to the funnybone as previous titles in the series, kids will still flock to the 
Loopy Coopers’ adventures.  DS
stott, Ann What to Do When You’re Sent to Your Room; illus. by Stephen Gil-
pin. Candlewick, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6052-9 $15.99  
R 5-8 yrs
One glance at our freckled, keen-eyed narrator and you know you’re being schooled 
by a master; this is a young man who has perfected his skills at being grounded 
through years of practice. First, his room (shared with an older brother who ap-
pears to be equally averse to tidiness) is well stocked with everything one might 
need during solitary confinement, from snacks secreted inside a hollow bobblehead 
figure, to pets for entertainment and commiseration, to a wealth of hobbies. Right 
now he’s in a room-decorating phase, taping pictures from a sports magazine all 
over the walls; when he tires of the makeover, he can inventory his collections to 
see what needs to be entered on his birthday wish list. Viewers will discern from 
the varying position of accoutrements that the narrator is sharing his thoughts 
over a number of groundings, the lengths of which depend on which parent has 
snapped—or, just as urgently, whether the room is needed to ground his older 
brother. This leads to the punchline, a visual gag that demonstrates why the two 
boys must never be incarcerated at the same time. The shambles of the room, a 
treasure trove of playthings to be broken and repurposed, stands in risible contrast 
to the formality with which the narrator lectures his audience: “Room time is also 
a prime opportunity for improving my special-ops skills.” The jauntiness of the 
Everykids and their oh-so-ordinary home in the suburbs has a Hanna-Barbera-esque 
cartoon style that seems story-boarded for imminent animation. There’s much 
hilarity to be found here, and the narrator’s impeccable advice could argue for this 
title’s inclusion in the nonfiction section. Hmmm.  EB
vAil, rAchel Unfriended. Viking, 2014 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01307-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-8
After two years of rejection, Truly is finally summoned by her ex-best friend Natasha 
to the eighth-grade Popular Table in the lunchroom, little knowing the disaster 
dominoes that will consequently topple. In changing groups, Truly leaves behind 
132 • the bulletin
smart, arrogant, and determinedly offbeat Hazel, who’s none too thrilled at being 
jettisoned in favor of girls she considers beneath her; additionally, angry, insecure 
Natasha grows convinced that Truly is conspiring to nudge Natasha out of the 
group, and the actions of Hazel and Natasha result in a growing anti-Truly storm 
that rages over social media and text messages. Those are only a few of the strands 
of this fascinatingly intricate, poignantly authentic look at middle-school dynam-
ics and their amplification through technology. Narration alternates between six 
eighth-graders: Truly, Hazel, and Natasha, plus the popular group’s low-key leader, 
Brooke; Brooke’s long-term friend who’s starting to become a romantic possibility, 
Clay; and the boy who likes Truly, Jack. The result hearkens back to Vail’s wonderful 
The Friendship Ring series in its opportunity to see how various characters delight, 
suffer, and rationalize, complicating the portrayals: sweet Truly really does dump 
Hazel without a backward glance; Hazel repents her pot-stirring account hacking 
and finds herself liking Brooke; Natasha is so influenced by her bitter and puni-
tive mother that it’s a miracle she manages to be functional. The author rises to 
the difficult technical challenge of keeping all these chaotic plot elements in clear 
and compelling play, and she not only plausibly pulls her characters out of their 
combined downward spiral but manages to give everybody some grace and hope. 
This will be an irresistible starter to a discussion of ethics and values, and readers 
will appreciate both the cautionary tale and the message of survival’s possibility.  DS
vernick, Audrey Edgar’s Second Word; illus. by Priscilla Burris. Clarion, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-68462-8 $16.99  
R 5-8 yrs
Hazel can hardly wait for her baby brother to be born, but when Edgar finally 
arrives, she discovers that he isn’t all that interesting. She reads him lots of books, 
waiting for the day when he will begin talking, and finally, he says his first word 
(“He said it with force. With meaning. With conviction! ‘NO!’ Edgar roared”). 
Hazel is not pleased, particularly when his roars are accompanied by him shoving 
his head against her leg “like a ram from some kind of angry-animal farm.” She and 
her mother attempt to bring Edgar to the library for the change of scenery (“Edgar’s 
‘NO!’ was so loud that people stared. Some covered their ears. A librarian fainted”), 
and despite Hazel’s efforts to teach him new words, he remains a “no-saying grump 
of a brother.” It is on Hazel’s lap, cuddled up for a bedtime story, that Edgar finally 
utters his winning second and third words: “Again, ’azel?” This new-sibling story 
strikes the perfect chord of realism, sweetness, and wit. The understated humor 
woven throughout the narrative leavens Hazel’s rapidly diminishing patience, and 
the heartfelt payoff will delight listeners who share Hazel’s frustration along the 
way. The digitally rendered line and watercolor art incorporates a pastel palette 
and plenty of white space, making for an inviting layout. This is a fresh take on an 
age-old tale that will offer plenty of story- and family-time laughs.  HM
wilson, n. d. Ninja Boy Goes to School; illus. by J. J. Harrison. Random 
House, 2014 26p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96584-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86584-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98179-1 $10.99  
R 4-7 yrs
Addressing fellow ninja wannabes, the narrator cautions that the path of a ninja 
is not an easy one. It takes great self-discipline (“A ninja must be still and patient, 
OctOber 2014 • 133
like a deep- rooted tree”) while being prepared to take action ( “. . . and strike with 
the VIPER’S speed when the time is right for disappearing”). All this wisdom, 
however, is in the service of what viewers will quickly recognize as a questionable 
mission—to sneak out the classroom window and beat the playground tetherball 
within an inch of its life. Now more ninja skills come into play: “A ninja knows 
when to be silent,” especially as the principal phones the parents. “In the face of 
injustice and hardship, a ninja’s emotions are as smooth and still as a clear pond,” 
especially on the ride home with an angry Dad. Harrison’s pictures stand in zany 
contrast to the measured, tongue-in-cheek text, supplying a wealth of detail that 
presages the coming debacle, from Ninja Boy’s bleary parents’ unawareness that 
their son is packing up his ninja gear for the day, to the bus driver’s obliviousness 
to Ninja Boy attached with suction cups to the bus ceiling. Any kid who’s longed 
for a break in the school day to work out some energy and frustration will cheer 
Ninja Boy’s mission and trust that—after he’s not grounded anymore—he’ll return 
to fight another day.  EB
winter, JonAh Joltin’ Joe DiMaggio; illus. by James E. Ransome. Atheneum, 
2014 48p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-4080-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0279-8 $10.99  
R 5-8 yrs
Winter has made several notable contributions to the baseball nonfiction shelf 
(such as You Never Heard of Willie Mays?, BCCB 2/13), and now here’s another on 
the Yankee Clipper. With the tone of one enthusiast addressing another, Winter 
digs back into DiMaggio’s childhood to provide a remarkably balanced bio; as, of 
course, he must, since Joe was just a kid of seventeen when he went pro (with a 
paycheck that changed dad’s opinion about the merits of the game), and nineteen 
when he became a Yankee, heir apparent to Babe Ruth. There’s a strong emphasis 
on Joe’s reluctance to natter to the press or for that matter even to engage much 
with his own teammates, a practice that, as Winter notes in his closing remarks, 
“only added to his mystique.” Winter displays keen judgment in what to include 
in the text, and what to add in the final notes. Therefore, Joe’s unbroken record 
of a fifty-six-game hitting streak is featured, with other stats relegated to the end 
matter; likewise, his marriage to Marilyn Monroe gets the glamorous double-page 
spread that the headline-making union demands, but his ritual of laying roses on 
his ex-wife’s grave is simply but touchingly saved for the end. Ransome’s artwork is 
an excellent match, comprising both day-in-the-life scenes and cleverly composed 
contrasts between Depression Era baseball glamor and Dust Bowl squalor. Visual 
allusions to the media feeding frenzy around Joltin’ Joe are deftly incorporated, 
tacitly reminding readers that celebrity is not a recent invention. Pair this with Mays 
and perhaps a hot dog or two for a baseball biography bonanza.  EB
wood, douglAs When a Grandpa Says “I Love You”; illus. by Jennifer A. 
Bell. Simon, 2014 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-689-81512-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9847-1 $10.99  
R 4-7 yrs
Wood’s sweet text offers a litany of ways in which grandfathers actively show their 
love (“When a grandpa says ‘I love you,’ he doesn’t always say it in the regular 
way”). The examples of love range from playfulness (“Sometimes a grandpa says 
‘I love you’ by mussing up your hair. Just after you’ve combed it”) to helpfulness 
134 • the bulletin
(“Or by showing you how to tie your tennis shoes. Again”) to willingness to watch 
endless gymnastics routines, listen to piano performances, and learn new games 
on the computer. The language sometimes tips into the saccharine, but the overall 
message about showing rather than talking about love is thoughtfully conveyed, 
and kids will definitely relate to the examples. Digitally enhanced pencil art inter-
prets the text with endearing animal families, with grandfather/grandchild pears 
of anthropomorphized bears, penguins, koalas, owls, etc.; soft hatched textures, 
amusing details, and well-balanced compositions add coziness and interest. There 
is not a whole lot of story here, but the book has obvious potential for gift-giving 
and bedtime sharing, and those grandchildren lucky enough to have a grandpar-
ent to share the story with will likely have plenty of additional examples to add 
to the list.  HM 
yAccArino, dAn Doug Unplugs on the Farm; written and illus. by Dan Yacca-
rino. Knopf, 2014 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75329-6 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75328-9 $17.99  
R 4-7 yrs
Robot Doug and his family are heading off for a drive in the country to visit the 
grandbots, prompting the directive from his father to “plug in” and learn about 
farms en route. Doug downloads all matter of fascinating factoids, but when the 
car lands in a ditch while avoiding a flock of sheep and Doug hops out to help the 
farm girl leading the flock, he is invited to assist with the rest of her chores and 
learn even more. Much like its predecessor Doug Unplugged, this title celebrates 
hands-on learning and the importance of stepping away from media input every 
once in a while. While assisting the girl, Doug is able to synthesize the facts he 
picked up while plugged in with actual experiences (“Doug knew that milk came 
from cows, but he actually got to milk one!”). His new experiences are full of sen-
sory descriptors—prickly hay, delicious apples, smelly pigs—that add substance to 
his observations, and when Doug spots the horse and remembers what he learned 
about horses pulling plows, he comes up with the perfect solution for assisting his 
parents with the stuck vehicle. Soon Doug and his parents are back on the road; this 
time, however, Doug chooses not to plug in and instead reflects on all the things 
he learned. Yaccarino’s retro-styled compositions incorporate brush and ink on vel-
lum as well as digital enhancement. Large, single-toned planes of color and black 
detailing work to great effect here, and the stylish, borderless figures are simple yet 
assured. This new offering would obviously fit nicely into a farm-themed unit or 
storytime, but it offers just as much use as a conversation starter about different 
ways of learning.  HM
CORRECTION:
In our September issue, the entry for Rod Green’s Giant Vehicles omitted the pub-
lisher; the title is published by Templar/Candlewick. 
OctOber 2014 • 135
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
Booth, heAther, ed. The Whole Library Handbook: Teen Services; ed. By Heather 
Booth and Karen Jensen. ALA, 2014 204p illus. with photographs 
ISBN 978-0-8389-1224-9 $58.00
With over fifty essays from professionals in the field (including former BCCB 
reviewer Maggie Hommel Thomann), this handbook looks at both the practical 
day-to-day aspects of teen services and its philosophical underpinnings. The first 
of eight chapters aims to define teens, citing examples of brain research and devel-
opmental stages, but it also largely (and correctly) puts the onus of understanding 
local teens on the practitioner, encouraging readers to engage with the community 
through school and outreach events to get to know their patrons and their sensibili-
ties. The second chapter is a more anecdotal portrayal of who teen librarians are, 
but it offers a host of practical, insightful tips, introducing rookies to some of the 
challenges that sometimes come up while dealing with YAs and providing concrete, 
sometimes touching, sometimes humorous, approaches to these challenges. The 
remaining chapters focus on more technical aspects like programming, collection 
development, and marketing, while the final chapter, “Issues,” tackles a swath of 
larger concerns, from intellectual freedom to reluctant readers to diversity in col-
lection development to juvenile detention center libraries (a selection provided by 
GSLIS alum and CCB affiliate Jeanie Austin). Appendices include a sample program 
plan, sample services plan, and marketing resources; an index is also provided. 
Overall, this makes an excellent overview of teen services and a valuable resource, 
both for young professionals just entering the field as well as those practitioners 
looking to pump up the volume on their teen programs.  KQG
136  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Perry
Adoption–fiction: Rivers
AdventuRe: Black; erskine; 
Fiedler; McBride; Smith, C.; 
Smith, G.
Africa–fiction: Rundell
Africa–stories: Buzzeo
African Americans: Lewis 
African Americans–fiction: Booth; 
Flake
African Americans–stories: Busch
Alaska–fiction: Smelcer 
Aliens–fiction: Smith, G.
Animals–fiction: Fiedler; Gale
Animals–stories: Busch; Fox, d.; 
Pham
AnthoLoGieS: Scieszka
Art and artists: Bryan; Burleigh 
Art and artists–fiction: Griffin
Autism–fiction: Jonsberg
Babies–stories: hale; Palatini
Babysitters–fiction: huser
Baseball: Winter
Bears–stories: Kang
BedtiMe StoRieS: Fox, M.
Behavior–stories: Stott
BioGRAPhieS: Burleigh; her-
thel; Kulling; neri; Rosenstock; 
Winter
Biracial people–fiction: dawson
Birds: Godkin
Birds–fiction: hagen
Birds–stories: Kishira
Birthdays–stories: Murguia; Pham
BoARd BooKS: holub; hood
Boarding school–fiction: Berry; 
Rundell
Brothers–fiction: Kiernan
Brothers–stories: Stott
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Ryan
Brothers and sisters–stories: offill; 
vernick
Buildings–fiction: Fisher
Bullies–fiction: Leveen; vail
Camps and camping–fiction: Kloep-
fer
Camps and camping–stories: Singer
Cats–fiction: ellis, d.
Cats–stories: Bird; hernandez; 
Reynolds
Chickens–fiction: Stoeke
China–fiction: Look
Circuses–fiction: ellis, K.
Clothing–stories: Singer
Colors: Baker; Siddals
ConCePt BooKS: Baker; Kang; 
Siddals
Conservation: Godkin 
Cousins–fiction: dowell; hannigan
Crafts: Bryan
Crime and criminals–fiction: Berry; 
Sarn; Spears
Current events: ellis, d.
deafness–fiction: Bell
death–fiction: Griffin
demons–fiction: dawson; Knudsen
disabilities–fiction: Bell
divorce–fiction: Bauer
dogs–fiction: Cohn
dolphins–fiction: London
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
OcTOBer 2014  •  137
dystopias–fiction: ewing; o’Brien
eggs–stories: Schmid
elephants–stories: Buzzeo; Fox, M. 
england–fiction: Fisher
Environmental studies: Fleischman
ePiStoLARy noveLS: Rivers
Ethics and values: ewing; Gale; 
Leveen; Pattou; Smith, A.; Spears; 
vail 
Families–fiction: Bauer; Becker, S.; 
Booth; Camden; Curtis; Gephart; 
hannigan; Jonsberg; Perry
Families: Kulling
Families–stories: Buzzeo; Wood
FAntASy: Angelini; Black; Block; 
Cohn; dawson; ellis, d.; ellis, K.; 
Fine; hagen; houts
Farms–stories: yaccarino
Fathers–fiction: hagen; Reedy 
Fathers–stories: davies; Phelan
Fear–fiction: Look; Poblocki
Finland–fiction: Simukka
FoLK-LiKe tALeS: Busch; houts
FoLKtALeS And FAiRy tALeS: 
Fox, d.; heapy
Food and eating–fiction: dairman
Food and eating–stories: Rockliff
Foster care–fiction: Booth 
Friends–fiction: dairman; dawson; 
harrington; Knudsen; Pattou; 
Poblocki; Selzer; Simpson; Smith, 
A.; Smith, C.; vail
Friends–stories: Reynolds; Schmid
Ghosts–fiction: Cohn; huser; Kiernan
Grandparents–fiction: nye
Grandparents–stories: Wood
GRAPhiC noveLS: Bell; Simpson
Grief–fiction: Aronson; Camden; 
Cooner; Gephart; Reedy; Sarn
Growing up–stories: Murguia
Gymnastics–stories: isadora
Halloween: Siddals
hiStoRiCAL FiCtion: Berry; 
Curtis; dowell; erskine; Fisher; 
Flake; Gale
History, U.S.: neri; Rosenstock
hospitals–fiction: Frank
human trafficking–fiction: Bauer
huMoR: Berry; Bird; Fox, d.; 
hale; heapy; Kloepfer; Knudsen; 
McBride; offill; Palatini;; Pham; 
Selzer; Simpson; Stoeke; Stott; 
vernick; Wilson
identity: herthel
identity–fiction: hidier; Reedy; Sarn; 
Smelcer 
illness–fiction: Frank
imagination–fiction: harrington
imagination–stories: Phelan; Schmid
india–fiction: hidier
indian Americans–fiction: hidier
internet–fiction: Cooner; vail
ireland–fiction: Kiernan
israel–fiction: ellis, d.
Jews–stories: Rockliff
Journals–fiction: Jonsberg
Language arts: Scieszka
Lions–stories: Busch 
Literature, classical: Block
Loneliness–stories: davies
Magic–fiction: Angelini; Black; Fisher; 
Smith, C.
Media: Fleischman
Mental illness–fiction: Griffin; har-
rington
Mice–stories: Bird
Missing persons–fiction: Bauer
Mothers–fiction: harrington
Moving–fiction: nye
Music and musicians: neri
Muslims–fiction: Sarn
MySteRieS: Berry; Cheaney; Flake; 
Simukka 
Mythology–stories: holub
naps–stories: offill; Palatini
Nature study: Godkin; Kishira
navy, u.S.–fiction: London
neighbors–stories: Kishira; Rockliff 
ninjas–stories: Wilson
oman–fiction: nye
Penguins–fiction: Ryan
Pets–stories: hernandez 
Physical education: isadora
Play–stories: Phelan; Reynolds 
Puppets: Bryan 
Quests–fiction: Fiedler 
Race relations–fiction: Curtis
Readers theater: Pham
138  •  The BulleTin
Reading aloud: houts; huser; Ryan; 
Scieszka
Reading, beginning: Palatini
Reading, easy: Ryan; Stoeke
Reading, family: Curtis
Recovery–fiction: Perry
Relationships–fiction: Block; Frank; 
Gephart; hider; Selzer; Spears
Revenge–fiction: Aguirre
RhyMinG StoRieS: Fox, M.; her-
nandez; hood; Siddals; Singer
Riddles–fiction: hagen
Robots–stories: yaccarino
Romance–fiction: dawson; ewing; 
Fine
Runaways–fiction: Rundell
Rural life–fiction: dowell
SCARy StoRieS: huser
School–fiction: Becker, S.; Cheaney; 
Perry; Simukka; vail
School–stories: Wilson
Science: Fleischman
SCienCe FiCtion: Kloepfer; 
Smith, G.
Secrets–fiction: Curtis; dairman; 
Leveen; o’Brien 
ShoRt StoRieS: Aronson; Scieszka
Sisters–fiction: Cooner; houts; Rivers; 
Sarn
Size: Kang
Soldiers: Lewis 
Spies and spying–fiction: London 
Sports: Winter
Stepfamilies–fiction: Camden
Storytelling–fiction: huser
Storytime: Baker; Pham; vernick
Suicide–fiction: Aguirre; Aronson
SuPeRnAtuRAL StoRieS: Agu-
irre; Camden; dawson; ellis, K.; 
Gale; hagen; Knudsen; McBride; 
Poblocki
SuRvivAL StoRieS: Rundell; 
Smelcer
Swimming: Rosenstock
television–fiction: o’Brien
toddLeR BooKS: Fox, M.; 
holub; Palatini
trades–stories: Pham
tragedies–fiction: Pattou
transgender people: herthel
twins–fiction: Rivers
unicorns–fiction: Simpson
veRSe noveLS: Pattou
voyages and travel–fiction: Block; 
hidier; Look; Smith, A.
War–fiction: erskine
Weddings–fiction: hannigan 
Whales–stories: davies 
Witches–fiction: Angelini
Wolves–stories: heapy
Women’s studies: Kulling
World War i: Lewis
Writers and writing–fiction: Smith, A.
Zombies–fiction: Poblocki
Zoos–fiction: Gale
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 68 (2015).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $62.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$103.00 (print); $115.00 (online);  
$144.00 (print & online)
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Claudia Nelson, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
