I L 
N O I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
4 
.
$ 
4 
*.
*"From the intriguing title to the final page, layers of cynical wit and care-
ful choracter development occumulate achingfy in this beautfully rafted
emotionally charged story" --Starred review, ScholLbary ornl
*"Readers will take heart from the way Steve grows post his rebellion as
they laugh at the plethora of comic situations and saply set up, welC
executed punchllnes. "-Pointered review, Kirkus Reviews
*"lt's Thomas's first novel and he has such an accurate voice that it screams
read me now while I am hot and hot it is."-Starred review, VOYA
0689-80207.2 
* $17.00 US/$23.O0 CAN (S&S BFYR)
0-689.80777-5 * $3.99 US/$4.99 CAN (Aladdin Ppoprboekst
ALADDIN 
PAPERBACKS
SIMON &f SCHUSTER BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
Imtprints of Simron &'P Schuster Children's Publishing· Division
1230 Avenue of the Americas * New Yorkr, NV 10020
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
September 1996
Vol. 50 No. 1
A LOOK INSIDE
3 
THE BIG PICTURE
American Fairy Tales: From Rip Van Winkle to the Rootabaga Stories
comp. by Neil Philip; illustrated by Michael McCurdy
5 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
5 
* The Story ofLittle Babaji by Helen Bannerman; illus. by Fred Marcellino
11 
* The Abracadabra Kid by Sid Fleischman
16 
* How to Make Holiday Pop-Ups by Joan Irvine; illus. by Linda Hendry
25 
* A Pizza the Size of the Sun by Jack Prelutsky; illus. by James Stevenson
28 
* The Twelve Days of Christmas: A Pop-Up Celebration illus. by Robert
Sabuda
34 
* On Board the Titanic by Shelley Tanaka; illus. by Ken Marschall
40 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
41 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
Susan S. Verner, Reviewer (SSV)
Amy E. Brandt, Graduate Research Assistant (AEB)
Lisa Mahoney, Graduate Research Assistant (LM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
Gerty Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1996 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Michael McCurdy, from American Fairy Tales: From Rip Van Winkle to the
Rootabaga Stories ©1996 and used by permission of Hyperion Books for Children.
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
3
THE BIG PICTURE
American Fairy Tales: From Rip Van Winkle to the
Rootabaga Stories
comp. by Neil Philip; illustrated by Michael McCurdy
A new collection of fairy tales is not unique. We get new collections nearly every
month, every week. They are, with a few forgettable exceptions, relatively well-
written, and they are often beautifully illustrated examples of bookmaking. The
best of them have an inner logic that connects the tales to one another, making the
book more than just a collection of individual stories but a unified whole with a
unique perspective. Philip accomplishes this in a distinctly American anthology of
a dozen fairy tales (or, as he says in his afterword, wonder tales, for not all of them
contain fairies) and in the process has given an overview of the American impulse
for creatively adapting the traditions of the European fairy tale to a robustly Ameri-
can context.
These fairy tales march through one hundred years of American history.
In the opening story, Washington Irving's Rip Van Winkle wakes to find his old
country gone and a new country risen, while in the closing tale, Carl Sandburg's
"How They Broke Away To Go To The Rootabaga Country," Gimme An Ax and
his tough son and daughter, Please Gimme and Ax Me No Questions, sell all and
buy a ticket to "ride to where the railroad tracks run off into the blue sky and then
forty ways farther yet." In between these two tales, the first set in an America that
is sleepily (and somewhat crankily) awakening, the last in an America that's wide
awake and traveling, are stories about the transition between the two. The authors
of these tales consciously transplanted the traditions of the western European fairy
tale to American soil and nurtured a unique hybrid of fairy-tale motifs and Ameri-
can whimsy, optimism, and exaggeration. These tales differ from their European
ancestors not only in the less ornamental style of their language but in their inher-
ent values, having a cheerfully red-blooded belief in self-direction and a distinct
distrust of wealth as a measure of a man's value.
Philip scatters uncommon gems among some well-known American jew-
els. Tales such as Frank Stockton's "The Bee Man of Orn" and Howard Pyle's
"Apple of Contentment" nestle comfortably beside Helen Plumly Thompson's
"The Princess Who Could Not Dance" and Louisa May Alcott's "Rosy's Jour-
ney." From Thompson's take on the ritual fairy tale opening ("Oh once--oh,
once, dears and ducks, there was a beautiful princess who could not dance! Think
of it!") to Alcott's Rosy and her father happily ending her quest on the backs of
(American) eagles ("away they flew to a great city, where the little girl and her
father lived happily together all their lives"), the language of the tales is a treat,
both accessible and invigorating.
Each story opens with a short introduction that places it in its historical
and literary context. Philip's afterword, an overview of "the coming of age" of the
4 
* 
THE BULLETIN
American fairy tale, traces the genre's growth from derivation to original creation.
He also provides a solid list of sources and background material as well as some
inviting suggestions for further reading. Michael McCurdy's woodcuts are stylis-
tically suitable for these tales, their confident black-and-white drama providing a
sturdy visual connection to Philip's selections. Text and woodcuts are nicely jux-
taposed on pages with a generous amount of white space. Stars, stripes, and
McCurdy's handcolored engravings on the book's jacket employ a red, white, and
blue palette, and, along with the rich red binding, gold letters, and dark blue end-
papers, contribute a patriotic flavor most appropriate to the book's theme and
content.
Examining the table of contents, one might frown over names of authors
recalled from very long afternoons in American literature classes and wonder about
the book's appeal for younger readers, or even older ones, for that matter. There is
something delightful in discovering that one's first, off-the-cuff impression is not
to be trusted. There is something delightful about rediscovering that notable Ameri-
can authors are not irrelevant relics to be relegated to a dusty classroom shelf or
research library, but storytellers who revel in universal themes and emotional nu-
ance, tongue-in-cheek humor, and engaging plots and who still have appeal across
a wide range of age groups. It's been a long time since there's been a representative
collection like this one. Making it widely available may well be a patriotic duty.
(Imprint information appears on p. 25.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
A MMAJn TM(T1~alEM'T
AU 
lllIN 
UI CNLVILINI 1
It is an honor and a pleasure to assume the editorship of The Bulletin ofthe Center
for Children's Books in its fiftieth volume year. One of the major strengths of this
journal is its traditional reviewing process: reviewers meet several times monthly,
all books reviewed are seen by all the reviewers, and everyone has a chance to
comment--on books, on reviews, on clarity. ("Vociferous" is a word that comes
immediately to mind.) The results, of these discussions, we hope, are balanced,
considered, thoughtful reviews, reflecting not only the judgement of the individual
reviewer but the input of the entire reviewing and editorial staff. It is a challenging
and rewarding tradition, and one that will be enthusiastically continued. The
focus of the Bulletin is its use as a critical selection tool for school and public
libraries, and to that end the editorial staff will keep our receiving audience (and
their receiving audience) firmly in mind. Readers may notice a slight shift in the
recommended grade levels for picture books as we acknowledge their broader age
appeal and more varied potential audience. Our new publishing venture, "Bulle-
tin Blue Ribbon Storytelling," a recommend-only review source for storytelling
audio and video tapes produced between 1990-96, will be available in the spring
of 1997. It's already an exciting year. Happy Anniversary to us! JMD
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 5
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AWMILLER, CRAIG 
This House on Fire: The Story of the Blues. 
Watts,
1996 
[160p] 
illus. with photographs 
(The African-American Experience)
ISBN 0-531-11253-1 
$22.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Any brief survey of blues history runs the risk of superficiality; Awmiller's account
combines a lot of helpfully synthesized information with a lot ofovergeneralizations.
Following a sketchy background on African-American religious and work songs
come introductions to musical giants such as W. C. Handy, Charley Patton, Blind
Lemon Jefferson, Robert Johnson, Louis Armstrong, Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith,
Leadbelly, Billie Holiday, Muddy Waters, the Rolling Stones (!), Eric Clapton,
Lightnin' Hopkins, John Lee Hooker, B. B. King, Etta James, Buddy Guy, and
Robert Cray. At this point the reader may detect some sidesteps into jazz and
rock; they're justified in the grand scheme of creative cross-currents, but they crowd
an already overpopulated book and lead to a blur of superlatives instead of selec-
tive depth. Speculation abounds ("no one has contributed more to today's surging
popularity of the blues than Robert Cray"); strawmen rise to be knocked down
("those who care about the blues are sometimes in a state of near hysteria" that the
blues will be forgotten); and questionable assertions come out of left field ("It's
surprising, though, how few art forms take this realistic approach: for the most
part, art tries to present an idealized, unreal world"). The writing includes a plethora
of misplaced modifiers ("Although catchy, Clapton thought that the song was
childish pop") and awkward phrasing ("Meant only to simply provide variety to
the music"). Despite these flaws of scope and style, Awmiller is knowledgeably
enthusiastic when he settles into his subject, and the book may attract browsers on
their way to more substantial fare. With black-and-white photographs, conscien-
tious footnotes, bibliography, discography, and index. BH
BANNERMAN, 
HELEN 
The Story of Little Babaji; illus. by Fred Marcellino. 
di
Capua/HarperCollins, 1996 
[72p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205065-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205064-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 4-6 yrs
In yet another attempt to cleanse a durable story of racist associations, artist
Marcellino has set the story of Little Black Sambo in India, where the tale's origi-
nal author/illustrator, Helen Bannerman, lived for so many years and where her
story appeared to be set despite its inclusion of stereotyped African characters.
Except for a change of names (from Little Black Sambo, Black Mumbo, and Black
Jumbo to Babaji, Mamaji, and Papaji), Bannerman's text is essentially unaltered,
retaining the narrative rhythm that has always paced a tightly patterned plot.
Marcellino's watercolor paintings project a toy-like quality that emphasizes humor
over suspense. Working within a small-size format, he has kept the layout clean
with lots of white space, cohesive coloration, and simply focused compositions.
It's a jovial alternative to Julius Lester and Jerry Pinkney's Sam and the Tigers
6 
* 
THE BULLETIN
(BCCB 7/96), which is high-spirited in a sly way that would appeal to a more
sophisticated readaloud audience. Clearly there's no one correct choice to answer
the charges brought against this ninety-seven-year-old story, but we now have a lot
of creative alternatives, which-like many spontaneous publishing trends-seem
generated by some subconscious cultural combustion. A librarian would do well
to buy as many socio-aesthetically respectable versions as possible, mount a display
with historical annotations for the education of parents, and observe the survival of
the fittest. Even in times of critical adversity, this story has been a perennially
popular choice. It's doubtful that new versions will sit long on the shelf, especially
if they have as much child appeal as this one. BH
BLUMENTHAL, DEBORAH 
The Chocolate-Covered-Cookie Tantrum; illus. by Harvey
Stevenson. 
Clarion, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-68699-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
3-6 yrs
As Sophie and her mother make their way home from the park late in the after-
noon, they come across another toddler munching a chocolate cookie. "I want a
cookie. .... 
I want that cookie," Sophie insists. Whether her mother takes the
moral high ground on discipline or there is simply no cookie to be had hardly
matters. Sophie's pouty displeasure at her cookie-less state promptly roils into a
tantrum of stupendous magnitude. Forget the proffered banana-it's gonna be
that cookie or nothing, and so Sophie "kicked and kicked and kicked and kicked
and kicked" and "cried and cried and cried and cried and cried." Stevenson's
acrylics depict the emotional turbulence from Sophie's perspective-as the tot
pounds the pavement, the earth shatters (literally), birds flee their trees, and the
playground transforms into a vortex of sandbox toys and her own flailing feet set
against the blues, greens, and reds of misery, jealousy, and rage. Exhaustion finally
quells the storm; back at home, a nap and supper soothe the savage Sophie, and
three guesses what's for dessert. The toddler placidly announces, "I like cookies,"
and her mother patiently concurs, "Yes.... I know you do." Toddlers who need
some behavioral reflection (and parents who need a role model in fortitude) should
put this toward the top of their reading list. EB
BROWN, RUTH 
The Ghost of Greyfriar's Bobby; written and illus. by Ruth
Brown. 
Dutton, 1996 
[26p]
ISBN 0-525-45581-7 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Greyfriar's Bobby is a legendarily loyal dog of history, and here's a retelling of his
story. This version sets the account of Bobby's fourteen-year vigil by his master's
grave against a contemporary framework of tourist kids noticing Bobby's monu-
ment and hearing the story from the churchyard gardener. Unfortunately, this
setup waters down the simple tale considerably and pointlessly; there's never any
sense of location, and the characterlessness of the kids makes them an irritatingly
bland foil to the story ("I don't think that we'll ever forget Bobby," Tom sappily
sums up). Brown's watercolors, grained with brushstrokes and touched with Scot-
tish sun and soot, are more satisfyingly evocative, although drafting problems in
the muzzle area sometimes make Bobby look more Persian cat than Skye terrier.
Bobby's story is a dramatic one for young listeners; if they can make it through the
trappings here and focus on the art and the essentials, they'll enjoy it. DS
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 7
BUEHNER, CARALYN 
Fanny's Dream; illus. by Mark Buehner. 
Dial, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1497-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1496-3 
$14.99 
R 6-9 yrs
Fanny is a rawboned farm girl who knows, just knows, that the storybook destiny
of marriage with a prince lies in store for her. On the night of the mayor's ball,
Fanny waits eagerly in her garden for her fairy godmother's arrival, but instead
runs into Heber Jensen, a pleasant if unprincely young local. Fanny relinquishes
her dreams of princesshood and marries Heber, only to encounter her tardy fairy
godmother years later-now, however, Fanny turns the magical intervention down
in favor of the life she's made for herself. Sure, there's a message, but it's a gently
conveyed one; the book is succinct but convincing about both the hard work of
Fanny's life ("She planted potatoes in the garden and pansies in the front. She
thinned the beets, fed the chickens, threshed the beans. She held the sheep while
Heber sheared them, churned butter, and slopped the pigs") and Heber's charms
("As for Heber, he figured that it hadn't been easy for Fanny to give up her dreams,
so he made it a point to wait on her at least once a day, as if she were a princess, and
every so often he wiped the grime off the windows"). The oil and acrylic illustra-
tions show a big shiny world filled with big, shiny, earnest people; the homely
shadows give the farm's solidity a reassuring gloss that contrasts with the garish
flash of the fairy godmother. Less a revision than a reexamination of a fairy tale,
this would pair interestingly with more classic versions of Cinderella. DS
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
Zero at the Bone. 
Viking, 1996 
2 1 8p
ISBN 0-670-86725-X 
$14.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Cray's world is forever altered when his beautiful, strong-minded seventeen-year-
old sister, Anita, fails to come home one night, and he and his parents are plunged
into a world of waiting, searching, and wondering. Cadnum's painfully deliberate
intensity, which has sometimes impeded his storytelling, works effectively here, as
Cray and his family get more numb and bewildered by Anita's disappearance. The
inconclusive but incontrovertible evidence of Anita's keeping of important secrets
(she wasn't working the late hours she claimed, and her diary suggests she was
meeting a man no one knew about) adds a taunting layer of additional mystery
without straining the book's credibility. Some of the subplots (Cray's ambiva-
lence about playing football and his growing friendship with a teammate) don't
blend in as well as they should, but the story and the compulsion to read it remain
strong. This is the same topic as Susan Beth Pfeffer's The Year without Michael
(BCCB 9/87), but Cadnum is detached where Pfeffer was explosive; a bigger dif-
ference is that Michael's youth cleared him of all culpability, whereas Anita is old
enough and capable enough to have made an unspeakably cruel decision as an
adult but still vulnerable enough to be a victim as a child. The book's pathos lies
in the tension between these two possibilities. DS
CARLSON, LORI MARIE, ed. 
Barrio Streets Carnival Dreams: Three Generations of
Latino Artistry. 
Holt, 1996 
127p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-4120-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Thirty selections of prose, poetry, and art reflect Latino culture-both its contri-
butions to and conflicts with a dominant Anglo-American society. The age levels
of the material seem as varied as the genres: Belprd's Puerto Rican folktale rubs
elbows with a series of maxims by Cuban poet Josd Martf and with Susan Lowell's
8 
* 
THE BULLETIN
nostalgic recollection of her grandmother, who grew up in Mexico and Peru. Marco
Rizo's happy biographical sketch of Desi Arnaz contrasts sharply with Johanna
Vega's poignant description of a tormented boarding-school experience ("From
the South Bronx to Groton"). Poems in Spanish and English are tonally diverse as
well, from Magdalena Hijuelos' simple love song "Beautiful Spanish" to Jaime
Manrique's long narrative "Leaving Ybor City." There's even a section,
"Bolerobombabugalucongacharangacorrido," describing common terms in Latin
music. All this adds up to great browsing but fragmented reading, especially in the
beginning when a mini-history of nineteenth-century Anglo-Latin relations and a
drawing of traditional tinware is suddenly followed by a contemporary cartoon
and then a poem from the mid-1900s. Except for the section decorations, the
illustrations comprise samples of mural art, dress design, self-portrait, landscape,
ornithological painting; etc., some with explanatory descriptions and some with-
out. Like any sampler, this offers uneven but potentially rich fare. BH
CRAFT, M. CHARLOTTE, ad. 
Cupid and Psyche; illus. by K. Y. Craft. 
Morrow,
1996 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13164-6 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13163-8 
$16.00 
Ad Gr. 4-6
Craft retells the Roman myth of the beautiful mortal Psyche who runs afoul of
jealous Venus, wins and loses the love of Venus' son Cupid, and endures trials to
regain his love and earn immortality. Closer in tone to fairy tale than to myth, the
story is an excellent choice for readers who prefer their Olympians more romantic
than brutal or beastly, and while Craft doesn't turn the heat up too high, there is
enough intrinsic steam to this tale to lure even older readers in for a closer peek.
Narrative prose is smooth and direct, but conversations occasionally smack of
melodrama ("'Oh, Cupid,' she cried, 'having lost you once, I wish never to lose
you again. Can you forgive me?'... 'Only if you will forgive me, dearest Psyche'").
Intricately bordered oil over watercolor paintings are overbearingly opulent and
fantastical, with the Delphic oracle holding forth in a well-waxed hall, a diapha-
nous Cupid sporting wings that would make an archangel envious, and a leggy,
Barbie-like Psyche whose little bow mouth and wide eyes ooh and aah at every
twist of fate. No source notes accompany the text. EB
CROLL, CAROLYN 
Redoute: The Man Who Painted Flowers; written and illus. by
Carolyn Croll. 
Putnam, 1996 
40p
ISBN 0-399-22606-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Pierre-Joseph Redoute was one of the first great flower artists, and his art had a
diverse lot of admirers including Marie Antoinette, the Empress Josephine, and
John James Audubon. Croll gives a brief account of the artist's early life, his affec-
tion for flowers, and his eventual success at painting the subject he loved most.
Though the French names may challenge young readers (a pronunciation guide is
included), the text is smooth and the story simply told. Unfortunately, neither the
biography nor the art history are particularly substantive: one can only find
Redoutd's birth year in the CIP information, for instance, and there's no explana-
tion of why his florals were artistically significant or how they differed from the
rest of his era's art. The page describing "How Redoutd Made His Book" offers a
detailed account of the collecting, engraving, and printing processes for his impor-
tant botanical (the name of which is never given), and it's a shame that more of the
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
9
book doesn't provide that sort of concrete interest. The art is sweet but bland: the
figures are round with gently shaded lines, and the abundant flowers only occa-
sionally give a hint of the intricacy that drew Redoute. Still, the famous figures
add some color to the account, and it makes a change to have an artistic biography
about such a devoted specialist. A bibliography is included. DS
CUSHMAN, KAREN 
The Ballad ofLucy Whipple. 
Clarion, 1996 
[208p]
ISBN 0-395-72806-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
"Bodaciously sorrow-burdened and wretched," California Morning Whipple has
been transported by her free-spirited, widowed mother to Lucky Diggins, Califor-
nia, where they will run a boarding house out of an oversized tent; California
Morning (call her "Lucy," please) intends to return to the home of her civilized
New England relatives just as soon as she can sell enough pies to earn her coach
fare. As Lucy pours out her miseries in letters to grandparents and aunts and
cousins, the reader quickly recognizes the girl's kinship with the less-than-couth
49ers she initially despises and senses from her feisty narration ("I liked writing
letters. There wasn't much else to do for fun in Lucky Diggins if you didn't dig or
drink") that she will eventually put down roots here. Over the course of three
years, Lucy matures from adolescent to young woman, loses a brother and gains a
stepfather; Lucky Diggins itself booms and burns, and its itinerant population
commits to making the settlement into a town. While Cushman delicately limns
the ever-strengthening bond between Lucy and her new home, the episodic story
lacks momentum, and the host of intriguing characters (a runaway slave, an abused
neighbor girl, the amorous Gent who woos but fails to win Lucy's mother) who
influence her decision to stay are shallowly developed. Surely the death of brother
Butte and Mama's departure with her new husband could have been more touch-
ing had the reader been afforded the opportunity to know them better. Still, the
audience wholeheartedly shares Lucy's satisfaction when at last she smells "burned
beans and mules and privies ... as familiar as morning" and proudly reclaims her
birth name, California Morning Whipple. EB
DUFFY, CAROL ANN 
Stoppingfor Death: Poems ofDeath and Loss; illus. by Trisha
Rafferty. 
Holt, 1996 
134p
ISBN 0-8050-4717-4 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-12
Duffy has turned what might have become a single-track or even sentimental project
into a multifaceted anthology of poems ranging from lyrical to narrative, humor-
ous to mournful, youthful to seasoned, Western to Eastern, sixteenth to twentieth
century. Here the survivors of death's visits memorialize family, friends, lovers,
pets, villains, heroes. "Come from that window child/ a bomb blow up daddy car
tonight/ but daddy words still burning bright," chants John Agard in tribute to
Walter Rodney, a Guyanese revolutionary killed in 1980. "Here's how they rated
him when they looked back:/ sometimes he did this, sometimes he did that," says
Simon Armitage several pages later in his ironic description of an "ordinary" man.
Matthew Sweeney's whimsical "Fishbones Dreaming," Elizabeth Bartlett's eerie
"Charlotte, Her Book," Debjani Chatterjee's softly challenging "Yama," and
Sabahattin Kudret Aksal's three-line "Memento Mori" are samples of an anthol-
ogy so full and richly representative of both famous and lesser-known poets that
any library-junior high, high school, or public--would be the better for it and
10 
* 
THE BULLETIN
any librarian the wiser for booktalking it. British editor Duffy has included Ameri-
can poets such as Anne Sexton, Audre Lorde, Alice Walker, Gary Soto, Lucille
Clifton, and Cynthia Rylant as well as representatives of Britain and its other former
colonies. Scattered pen-and-ink sketches have a light touch that's surrealistic enough
to win over older readers who might disdain more earnest illustration. BH
DWYER, KATHLEEN M. 
What Do You Mean I Have Attention Deficit Disorder?;
illus. with photographs by Gregg A. Flory. 
Walker, 1996 
42p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8393-7 
$15.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8392-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Maintaining concentration and sitting still are hurdles that loom as high as Math
and Social Studies in the course of Patrick's school day; teachers have complained
and parents have nagged, but Patrick is simply unable to control his behavior.
Now Patrick and his family are encouraged by his sixth-grade teacher to consult a
physician, and after an evaluation, Patrick is diagnosed with ADD (Attention Deficit
Disorder). The doctor prescribes a course of treatment which includes drug therapy
and a host of organizational techniques and memory aids to help the boy manage
his condition. Although Dwyer (also author of What Do You Mean I Have a
Learning Disability?, BCCB 9/91) never explicitly states that her work is based on
an authentic case, the chain of school and medical interventions is plausible, and
Patrick's frustration with his own unsettled behavior is credibly presented. How-
ever, Dwyer does not explain the relationship between ADD and hyperactivity,
nor does she tackle some of the thornier problems of condition management, such
as medication side effects and the often complicated process of curriculum read-
justment. Her text, simple enough to be read aloud to a quite young audience, is
choppy as well as ill-matched to its subject-an adolescent boy. Exchanges such as
"Why do you act so silly in school?" "Mr. Norris, I really don't mean to be in
trouble so much" don't match accompanying black-and-white photos (often fuzzy
and grainy) of a boy whose legs no longer fit under his desk. However, the mes-
sage that ADD need not doom home and school life will be comforting to those
with the condition and instructive to classmates who may not understand that
these children are "as smart as anyone else." EB
EVANS, DOUGLAS 
The Classroom at the End of the Hall; illus. by Larry Di
Fiori. 
Front Street, 1996 
132p
ISBN 1-886910-07-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Strange things happen in the classroom at the end of the hall, which is presided
over by the tall teacher: Mary is followed by a lamb until she learns to pay atten-
tion, Roger calls up a genie who makes him realize how others see his behavior,
and the Messy-Desk Pest makes it clear to Emily just how desirable organization
can be. In all, there are nine stories of peculiar school happenings, and there's a
gentle humor and some clever ideas that will appeal to kids. Overall, however, this
pales compared to Louis Sachar's conceptually similar but far more ingenious
Wayside School stories (Wayside School Gets a Little Stranger, BCCB 3/95, etc.) or
even to Daniel Pinkwater's Mister Fred (BCCB 1/95): the prose here is glib, the
plotting seems labored rather than fizzily inventive, and the ultimate didacticism
of many of the stories gives them a disconcertingly medicinal flavor. Di Fiori's
breezily scrawled illustrations, however, have a Feifferesque feel that keeps things
lively. A surreal classroom is always an entertaining idea, and readers who've worn
out the classic stories in the genre may appreciate this newcomer. DS
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
11
EWING, LYNNE 
Drive-By. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
85p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027126-4 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027125-6 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The title tips us off to the gang shooting in the beginning, and the action surges on
relentlessly in this disturbing novel. Twelve-year-old Tito lives in Los Angeles
with his little sister, Mina, and teenage brother, Jimmy; their mother works as a
hotel housekeeper. Mom's wages and Jimmy's "work" provide barely enough in-
come for the family to rent a house in a gang-infested neighborhood-until Jimmy
is gunned down one night in front of Tito and Mina. The author's terse declara-
tive prose propels the story forward as Tito learns that his adored brother who
preached against gangs was, in fact, a gangbanger himself and was murdered for
skimming from dealers. Despite overwhelming peer pressure, Tito resists the urge
to avenge his brother's death; instead, he becomes a real hero by forgoing violence
and setting up Jimmy's killers for arrest. In Tito's world, the adults are incompe-
tent (shouldn't Mom have known that Jimmy didn't really work at a restaurant
downtown?) or ineffectual (policemen and teachers especially), and kids can't even
count on each other (Tito's best friend has thrown in his lot with Jimmy's killers).
This isn't up to the caliber of Myers' Scorpions (BCCB 7/88); the plotting is often
contrived, and the subject has a movie-of-the-week superficiality. It's a fast-paced
story, however, and the dark topic, flashy cover, and short paragraphs will lure
reluctant readers. SSV
FARLEY, STEVEN 
The Black Stallion's Shadow. 
Random House, 1996 
182p
ISBN 0-679-85004-X 
$16.00 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Picking up where his late father left off, Steven Farley tells the story of a new
chapter in the life of the famous stallion: after a tragic racetrack accident, the
Black seems to have developed a fear of shadows that will endanger him if he races
again. His devoted owner and rider, Alec Ramsay, takes him to a gifted trainer's
movie ranch, where, in addition to working on the Black's problem, Alec becomes
embroiled in the struggling business' fight to break even despite a run of bad luck
that may be the result of sabotage. The writing and characterization here are
shallow, as is the plotting: the Black's problem as it's presented doesn't have the
import to sustain a whole book, and the danger-at-the-ranch subplot has a Hardy-
Boys patness to it. The movie-making tidbits have some interest to them, and
there are a few (too few) scenes of Alec and the Black together that convey the
bond that has made this series so popular. While obligations to series readers may
require this title's purchase, you may want to wait for the paperback. DS
FLEISCHMAN, SID 
TheAbracadabra Kid. Greenwillow, 1996 
198p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-688-14859-X 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Sid Fleischman is a pro, and it shows in this autobiography as much as it does in
his fiction. A magician by training and trade, the author of The Ghost in the
Noonday Sun (BCCB 11/65), ten McBroom tall tales, The Whipping Boy (1986
Newbery Medal winner, BCCB 3/86), and many other comic adventures here
turns real life into a story complete with cliffhangers. And it's a classic boy's story,
from card tricks and traveling magic shows to World War II naval experiences and
screen-writing gigs for John Wayne movies. En route, we learn how Fleischman
learned the craft of writing: "When Wild Bill [Wellman] insisted that every scene
12 
* THE BULLETIN
end with a strong curtain line, I carried this over as an effective writing habit into
my novels. Unless my imagination dries up, my chapters inevitably end with the
dramatic flourish of a curtain line." Racing through snappy episodes-with dra-
matic flourishes at the end of almost every chapter-readers will intuit the connec-
tion between sleight of hand and the art of fictional illusion, though Fleischman's
twelve tips for young writers seem less mysterious than straightforward and practi-
cal. Chapter headings quoted from fan mail prove that Fleischman's sense of
humor is matched by his readers' ("I read The Ghost in the Noonday Sun. Keep
your day job"), while the spacious format features just enough black-and-white
photographs to be friendly without distracting attention from an inventive bal-
ance of personal and professional information. Fleischman fans will also appreci-
ate the appended bibliography of the author's work. A smooth act. BH
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI 
Behind the Couch; written and illus. by Mordicai
Gerstein. 
Hyperion, 1996 
58p 
(Hyperion Chapters)
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-0116-6 
$13.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-1139-0 
$3.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Zachary drops his stuffed toy pig, Wallace, behind the sofa, and when he scoots
under to retrieve it, Zachary emerges in an alternate world where lost stuff carries
on an animated existence. Zachary's Uncle Yankle from Baltimore is there, look-
ing for his glasses, and Zachary's classmate Ralphine is there too, searching for her
toy duck, Beverly. The toys, feeling somewhat slighted at having been lost in the
first place, now have fulfilling lives of their own and are reluctant to come home;
Wallace is, in fact, President of all the stuffed animals in the universe and, more-
over, is engaged to Beverly. Gerstein has created a sort of lost objects Wonderland,
with toys clamoring for their President and First Duck, and Uncle Yankle volun-
teering to stay behind the couch as their surrogate leader; but unlike Carroll, Gerstein
never develops within any character the "madman's logic" necessary to make their
surreal actions credible. This tale may pique the interest of confident readers with
a taste for the bizarre, but rookies who need some structure and plot to their chap-
ter books may feel a little lost themselves. Gerstein's tidily bordered black-and-
white illustrations, with their combination of soft shading and intricate
crosshatchings, compactly convey this strange toy world. EB
GIBBONS, FAYE 
Mountain Wedding; illus. by Ted Rand. 
Morrow, 1996 
32 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11349-4 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11348-6 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
North Georgia is blooming with spring when Mr. Long's seven children and Mama's
five (including narrator Mandy) line up for their respective parent's marriage-
but show themselves unready to forever hold their peace. Insulting faces are made,
fisticuffs flash, a swarm of bees stings the dog that chases the rooster that flies at the
cat that scares the mules that bolt with the loaded wagon that spills armfuls of
household goods. With both families running pell-mell to pick up their belong-
ings (and each other), the mules finally stop and everyone gathers together, some-
what tattered and torn but bonded by a breathless experience. It's a one-track
plot, but chase scenes hold time-tried appeal and the down-home style sets up an
easy camaraderie between book and listener. Rand's watercolors are accurate, ac-
tion-packed, and peppery in tone. From the first aerial view of a tranquil land-
scape, he speeds up and winds down the pace with experienced control. What this
lacks in innovation, it makes up for with flair. BH
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
13
GUIBERSON, BRENDA Z. 
Into the Sea; illus. byAlix Berenzy. 
Holt, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8050-2263-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-10 yrs
The life of a female sea turtle is depicted here from its first moment after hatching
until it returns to its birthplace some twenty years later to lay its own eggs. Unlike
their freshwater cousins, sea turtles cannot pull in their heads or flippers and are
totally defenseless the first several years of their lives. Yet some of them do survive
long enough to reproduce, which Guiberson handles with a G rating: "They mate
and he fertilizes the eggs." Guiberson's understated, just-the-facts-ma'am text is
rich with information and carefully paced. While the text is calmly pragmatic,
Berenzy's artwork is lush, with illustrations evoking the warmth and overabun-
dance of the tropics. Blending color pencil and gouache on black and on white
paper, the artwork has a true Caribbean sparkle. And the pictures do just what
they should--drive home the point that even a technicolor coral reef is just a
hideaway if you're a sea turtle on another creature's lunch menu. An endnote
gives a capsule summary of the state of the species today, while also providing
some background on the causes of their near extinction. Share this one with a
group and have fun identifying all the lurking sea critters. SSV
HARDING, DONAL 
The Leaving Summer. 
Morrow, 1996 
180p
ISBN 0-688-13893-4 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Although Austin is eleven when he and his Aunt Ada assist an escaped convict
named Bass, Austin narrates the story at a later-presumably adult-age; the grown-
up sensibility shows. He accurately records a child's sense of exclusion from meaty
family discussions and the insistent nature of childhood fears, but an adult per-
spective informs some of the novel's themes (the ambiguities of adult romantic
love, the difficulty in understanding and balancing compassion and justice) and
the narrator's language. Austin tells how his "eyes refused to close; they burned
from lack of reprieve" and ruminates on "the unnatural way the [hospital] build-
ing seemed to breathe, a white breath in calculated rhythm." The self-consciously
literary language undercuts the immediacy of Austin's experiences, possibly dis-
tancing a young reader from the character, and dilutes the impact of Austin's in-
tense emotions. Still, Harding never flinches from acknowledging ugliness
(including racism, particularly in one hard-edged scene) or confused emotions
(such as Austin's struggle to understand why his mother fled to Winston-Salem).
Finely tuned descriptions and observations lift a plot that sags under occasional
cliches. The book seems better suited to adults who want to look back on early
adolescence than to children poised at the precarious brink of adolescence them-
selves, but some young readers may appreciate a mature take on an exciting event.
LM
HARRISON, PETER 
Claude Monet; ISBN 0-8069-6158-9; Vincent Van Gogh; ISBN
0-8069-6156-2. 
Each book: 
Sterling, 
1996 
32p 
illus. 
with
photographs 
(Art for Young People) 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
In this new series of artist biographies, each title contains a brief overview of the
artist's personal and professional life and a multitude of illustrations, including
reproductions of paintings, photographs, and diagrams. The text is simple and
accessible, the open format is appealing, and a helpful chronology starts off each
volume. The analyses of paintings, however, are often frustratingly broad, vague,
14 
* THE BULLETIN
and presumptuous ("His pictures are not careful copies of a scene but make you
feel what it would be like to be there"; "Vincent makes you understand just how
important the Bible is to him"), and several egregious typos appear ("He went with
his new friends on painting drips in the open air"). While some of the supporting
illustrations are useful, some (the diagram showing points of a nineteenth-century
French steam locomotive) seem peripheral at best. Miihlberger's What Makes
a... art titles (BCCB 1/94) are more efficient on much of the same territory, but
this series' plethora of clear reproductions and big-print text will help young read-
ers get a foot in the gallery. A glossary and an index are included. DS
HERMAN, GAIL 
Flower Girl; illus by Paige Billin-Frye. 
Grosset, 1996 
48p 
(All
Aboard Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-448-41107-5 
$13.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-41108-3 
$3.95 
R Gr. 1-3
It is clear from the zesty narration of our unnamed heroine that being her sister
Donna's flower girl is the high point of her life to date. From the mushy wedding
announcement, to the serious "flower girl business" of dress selection, through the
prenuptial jitters, the flower girl is understandably the center of the attention- at
least her own. And when fate calls upon her to save the ceremony by producing
her gaudy pink plastic ring (a sartorial solecism relegated to the flower basket by an
edgy Donna), her triumph is complete. The four-chapter format keeps the read-
ing easy, and Herman achieves a quite naturalistic tone within the constraints of an
easy reader ("The wedding starts. There is lots of stuff about love. Blah, blah,
blah. ... 
Then I hear a gasp. It is Bill. 'Where is the ring?' he hisses. His brother
turns red. 'I left it home,' he says in a whisper"). Billin-Frye's watercolors supply
plenty of light touches: Donna's mooning at her bespectacled beau, a parade of
rejected flower-girl dresses, and of course the cheesy splendor of the narrator's
plastic gem. This wedding features enough bows and frills and emotional ups and
downs to satisfy flower girl veterans and wannabes alike. EB
HEST, AMY Jamaica Louise James; illus. by Sheila White Samton. 
Candlewick,
1996 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-348-6 
$15.99 
R 
4-7 yrs
Jamaica Louise James, age eight, budding artist and storyteller, narrates this tale of
special birthday presents and family devotion. "Everything I see is something I
want to draw," says Jamaica, and her ambition is fueled by her family with the gift
of "a real paint set-with eight little tubes of color and two paint brushes." Ja-
maica spends the next few weeks making energetic paintings, and on the morning
of Grammy's birthday, she and her mother go down into the subway station, where
Grammy works as a token collector, and hang them all over the walls. Not only
Grammy, but all the subway riders love Jamaica's paintings-the mayor even puts
up a plaque with her name on it. Samton's gouache/acrylic/watercolors have a
childlike innocence and energy combined with a sure hand for composition and
expression. Opening endpapers depict a blue skyline at sunset; closing endpapers
show the same skyline by moon and starlight. The family apartment, the city, and
the subway are shown in vibrant tones and positive light, and the coloring-book-
style illustrations utilize vivid geometrics outlined in black. Jamaica's first-person
narration suits this tale just fine-there is a sort of pell-mell rush to the text, with
Jamaica's words falling over one another in her eagerness to get the story out.
JMD
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
15
HILL, PAMELA SMITH 
Ghost Horses. 
Holiday House, 1996 
21 6p
ISBN 0-8234-1229-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Sixteen-year-old Tabitha Fortune's longstanding fascination with the nascent sci-
ence of paleontology has often put her at odds with her father, a preacher who
views evolutionism as one of the many moral evils threatening the righteous at the
turn of the century. Tabitha learns that rival research teams will be excavating sites
near her Badlands home and, in the guise of Tom Fortune (Tabitha's fictitious
twin), she secures a job as scout with Dr. Parker's party. However, when impor-
tant finds are unearthed by each team, a disillusioned Tabitha discovers she has
wrongly idealized scientists and has allied herself with a researcher who values
academic accolades more than scholarship and professional integrity. Hill pro-
vides some refreshing twists to the stock girl-in-disguise plot-Tabitha's year-long
preparations for her ruse fool no one except the woman-hating Dr. Parker. Schol-
arly rivalry between Parker and his learned opponent Dr. Harding (egads, a woman!)
is also presented with lively immediacy. However, Tabitha is surrounded by card-
board characters, from her ignorant, Bible-thumping father ("New sermons needed
research-or at least, Papa's version of research. He pored over outdated newspa-
pers and magazines"), to dimpled paleontologist Harding ("so feminine, so utterly
fashionable"), to Tabitha's tobacco-spitting confidante, Abby, who teaches her to
shoot, smoke, and swagger. Still, Tabitha herself is a credible heroine whose deter-
mination to strike out on her own will win her some fans. EB
Ho, MINFONG, comp. 
Maples in the Mist: Children's Poems from the Tang Dy-
nasty; tr. and comp. by Minfong Ho; illus. by Jean and Mou-sien Tseng. 
Lothrop,
1996 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14723-2 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12044-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 4-6
For more than ten centuries, Chinese children have learned poems from the Tang
Dynasty (618-907 A.D.), passing those cultural treasures "in one long unbroken
chain" from generation to generation. 
These poems may be "little windows
to ... China," but they can also be enjoyed for the potent simplicity of their im-
ages and language: "We stop our cart to sit among the twilight maples;/ After the
frost their leaves glow redder than spring blossoms." Ho describes how she went
about translating the poems (for example, not forcing Chinese rhyme patterns
onto the English versions); in any case, she produces strong aural effects, as in
"Riverside Song": "The spring stream churns with the twilight storm./ Deserted,
a single ferry tosses near the crossing." An appendix provides some literary com-
ment that may be over the heads of younger readers ("Many of his poems allude to
the mystical interplay between man and nature and influenced the 'Ching Hu'
style of poetry during the following Sung Dynasty") but also gives intriguing bio-
graphical information. Smoky watercolor illustrations reveal nature's mysterious
beauty through rich colors that range from vivid greens and yellows to smeared
and subtle grays and purples. If Ho had somewhere discussed the Chinese charac-
ters accompanying each illustration (which offer the poems in their original Chi-
nese), the characters might have come off as more than ornamental, but this is a
quibble with a book that will let contemporary children experience the literary
artistry of China's past. LM
16 
* THE BULLETIN
HOOKS, WILLIAM H. 
Freedom's Fruit; illus. by James Ransome. 
Knopf,
1996 
42p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-92438-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-82438-3 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-8
The author of The Ballad ofBelle Dorcas (BCCB 12/90) conjures up another tale
heard during his childhood in the Carolina Low Country. Mama Marina, a slave
and conjure woman, accepts a piece of Master Alston's gold in return for casting a
spell on his fine wine grapes; only magic will keep Master's slaves from eating the
ripening harvest, and Mama Marina is anxious to earn her daughter Sheba's free-
dom. However, when Master Alston decides to hire out Sheba's beloved, Joe
Nathan, to neighboring plantations during the coming winter, Marina must hurry
to devise a freedom plan for the two lovers: advised by her spirits, she uses the
conjured grapes to take Sheba and Joe near to death and all the way to freedom.
Though the dialogue is less effective than the narrative, Hooks' storytelling never-
theless resonates with the rhythm and power of Marina's conjure-magic. Ransome's
oils, rich and thickly applied, emphasize the story's mysticism in his swirling two-
page spreads, but fail to extend the text in the single-page, bordered illustrations,
where the figures are stilted and portrait-like. The story is reminiscent of the
Greek myth of Demeter and Persephone, in which Persephone's eating of pome-
granate seeds consummates her marriage to the god of the dead and allows her to
return to the earth only in the spring. But while Persephone remains prisoner to
the seasonal cycle of life and death, Sheba and Joe Nathan's liberation from slavery
is triumphantly uncompromised. AEB
HURWITZ, JOHANNA 
The Down and Up Fall; illus. by Gail Owens. 
Morrow,
1996 
[128p]
ISBN 0-688-14568-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Bolivia and her friends Rory and Derek (from The Up and Down Spring, BCCB 4/
93, etc.) are together again. Bolivia's parents are out of the country, so in their
absence she's staying with her aunt and uncle and attending sixth grade with her
two good friends. This at first seems a joyous prospect, but Bolivia begins to be
irritated at Rory's jealous attempts to keep the threesome's friendship exclusive.
This doesn't have the cohesion of the trio's earlier outings, with components such
as Bolivia's poison-ivy attack, the school's mock rain forest, and the discovery of a
litter of abandoned kittens entertaining but distracting, and the secondary charac-
ters are rather generically depicted. The friends are still congenial company, how-
ever, and Hurwitz has a light touch with both plot and dialogue that keeps things
inviting. Reviewed from an unillustrated galley. DS
IRVINE, JOAN 
How to Make Holiday Pop-Ups; illus. by Linda Hendry. 
Morrow,
1996 
[6 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13609-5 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13608-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
For young children who have the drive but not the dexterity to tackle origami and
older artisans eager to experiment with a paper craft, Irvine's offering is right on
the money. Most of the greeting-card-styled patterns in this volume are based on
easy measurements and simple snip-and-tuck operations, and although none will
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
17
leave Robert Sabuda's work in the dust, the designs and directions in clearly num-
bered steps yield satisfying (and reviewer-tested) results. The Valentine's Day and
Mother's Day entries are easy openers that, as the reader soon learns, can be em-
bellished or altered to fit other occasions; the projects increase in complexity to a
fairly intricate cuckoo clock for New Year's Eve and a tricky Earth Day globe. A
broad spectrum of holidays is represented, with an easy, effective Japanese
Hinamatsuri doll, an oil lamp (complete with wick) to celebrate the Hindu Diwali,
and other motifs outside European or Judeo-Christian cultural traditions. Guid-
ance for executing the pictures to be attached to the paper folds often comes in the
form of hints rather than explicit directions, but most crafters will concede that the
fun here is in the popp-ing, not the pop-ee. Each holiday is briefly explained at the
head of the directions, and an index of holidays arranged by date will be welcomed
by teachers in search of timely curriculum stretchers. EB
JOHNSTON, TONY 
The Wagon; illus. by James E. Ransome. 
Tambourine,
1996 
[34p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13537-4 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13457-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
5-8 yrs
An unnamed ex-slave recounts childhood events which center on an open wagon
built by his father for Master just before the Civil War. The narrator comes to
regard this wagon and its mules, dubbed Swing and Low by his family, as a chariot
that should take them to freedom, and when that chariot seems only to offer "false
hope," the boy takes an axe to its wheels. But emancipation eventually comes,
Master gives the family the wagon, and, after a journey to attend Lincoln's funeral,
the family sets off in their "chariot" to build a new life. The narration is top-heavy
with poetic, heartstring-plucking passages: "We were scared. Who could see down
Freedom's furrow?" and the theatrical posing of Ransome's characters underscores
the melodrama. As the narrator intones, "I had a dream. The President and I,
chopping wood together. By moonlight," we view an image of the boy chopping
wood as Lincoln the Railsplitter towers behind him in a midnight-blue haze. Much
goes unexplained, and listeners may wonder why there was a time lag between
emancipation and leaving Master's farm, how and when the broken wagon was
repaired, and where the family was going when they made their sidetrip to the
president's funeral. For a more clearly developed picture-book treatment of sla-
very, see Jeanette Winter's Follow the Drinking Gourd (BCCB 1/89). EB
JONES, CHARLOTTE FOLTZ Accidents May Happen: Fifty Inventions Discovered by
Mistake; illus. by John O'Brien. 
Delacorte, 1996 
84p
ISBN 0-385-32162-7 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Well, not all these entries can reasonably be called "inventions" (consider gravity),
and even "discovery" is a misnomer (how about nursery rhymes?), but there is an
element of serendipity that unifies the products, systems, and artifacts that Jones
so energetically describes. Her parade of did-ya-knows, each no more than a page
or two long, scores high points for browsability, entertaining trivia enthusiasts
with legendary successes (free perfume samples turned a bookseller into the founder
of the Avon cosmetic empire) and even more stunning flops (celluloid billiard
balls exploded on impact, and celluloid false teeth "curled and warped with a sip of
hot soup"). Serious report writers won't find much in-depth information here,
18 
* 
THE BULLETIN
and workbench lore, though clearly designated, mingles freely with verifiable fact.
The "flabbergasting facts" appended to many articles occasionally fall flat-that
Liquid Paper now comes in colors is hardly front-page news. Still, this is a good
source for research ideas, and plenty of goofy, Gorey-esque line drawings and vi-
gnettes should have even hardened middle-grade bibliophobes (especially those
who enjoyed Jones' previous volume, Mistakes That Worked, BCCB 10/91) steadily
flipping the pages. EB
JONES, REBECCA C. 
The President Has Been Shot!: True Stories of the Attacks on
Ten U.S. Presidents. Dutton, 1996 
134p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-45333-4 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
In this title, Jones employs her extensive experience as a fiction writer to spin lively
and cogent accounts of four presidential assassinations and seven other attacks on
chief executives. Motivations and machinations of assassins and would-be assas-
sins, attitudes of their targeted victims toward personal safety, and changes in secu-
rity procedures in the wake of each new attack are woven into a narrative that reads
more like a plot-driven novel than a social studies discussion. Jones routs out a
host of ironies amid these tragedies-a conspirator in the Lincoln murder escaped
to become a papal guard at the Vatican; McKinley's doctors, unable to locate the
bullet lodged in their patient, never think to try out the "new contraption called an
X-ray machine" on display at the exposition where the president was shot. How-
ever, Jones takes a few cheap shots herself, occasionally trivializing her subject:
"Some people think Oswald was part of a conspiracy . .
others think he acted
alone, and others are convinced he was innocent. Still others, perhaps, have no
idea what happened but enjoy guessing." A spacious layout and a generous sprin-
kling of contemporary engravings and black-and-white photos smooth the way for
reluctant readers and report writers, and Jones offers tips for further research (but,
alas, no specific source notes). EB
KELLER, EMILY Margaret Bourke-White: A Photographer's Life. 
Lerner,
1996 
127p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8225-4916-6 
$17.21 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
The life of Margaret Bourke-White, first woman photographer for Life magazine,
first photographer to fly in a bomber during World War II, famous for her photo-
graphs of the steel industry, of Stalin, of Gandhi, of South Africa during apartheid,
and of the United States during the Great Depression, is presented in this surpris-
ingly unexciting biography. Keller relates Bourke-White's life in accessible if un-
inspired prose, drawing predominantly on her autobiographies and other writings
and on Vicki Goldberg's Margaret Bourke-White: A Biography. Bourke-White
took on enormous physical challenges to get just the right photograph, risked her
life numerous times in situations of extreme danger, and developed from an ob-
server to an interpreter of world events. Keller, however, skates over much of this
accomplished artist's life, providing only brief, tantalizing hints about the remark-
able woman behind the camera. Even presented as a chronological series of epi-
sodes, Bourke-White's life is fascinating: at a time when the status of women was
still solidly traditional in the U.S., she became a visual artist of note in a new,
technically demanding medium. While it never quite catches fire, there are at least
enough warm snippets of information to make this interesting to readers. 
In-
dexed, with a bibliography. JMD
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
19
KUKLIN, SUSAN 
Irrepressible Spirit: Conversations with Human Rights Activists;
written and illus. with photographs by Susan Kuklin. 
Putnam, 1996 
227p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-399-22762-8 
$18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-399-23045-9 
$9.95 
R Gr. 7 up
Eleven activists from countries all over the globe tell their stories here: some, such
as China's Li Lu and Cuba's David Moya, are witnesses to their own persecution
as well as that of their compatriots; others, such as Ivana Nizich (who describes her
fact-finding in Bosnia) and Joe Ingle (who uses the example of a specific inmate to
discuss his opposition to the death penalty in the U.S.), fight against injustices
they feel fortunate to have been spared. Kuklin breaks the accounts up into seven
chapters, which focus on subjects such as "The Right to Freedom of Expression,"
"The Right to One's Life," and "The Right to Vote." The testimony (which fre-
quently tells of teenage experiences or addresses the status of children) makes com-
pelling reading; the voices here are intense and individual, and they often
demonstrate a vigorous sense of humor in counterpoint to their very serious sub-
ject. The interviewees' brief autobiographies and final messages don't preach but
instead show how commitment can be translated into action in many different
ways and by many different people. Far more energizing than series nonfiction
about global strife, this will offer teens an idea of the varied forms "good works"
can take and how challenging and exciting they can be. Additional material about
Human Rights Watch (the organization with which most of the interviewees are
affiliated), a list of other human-rights organizations, endnotes, and a bibliogra-
phy are included. Kuklin's photographic portraits of the activists are interspersed
with occasional photographs of the situations they hope to change. DS
LARSON, 
KIRBY 
Cody and Quinn, Sitting in a Tree; illus. by Nancy
Poydar. 
Holiday House, 1996 
86 p
ISBN 0-8234-1227-X 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
In this companion to Second-Grade Pig Pals (BCCB 12/94), Quinn and Cody's
platonic relationship is almost ruined by that relentless rogue Royse Hendricks.
Royse's heartless teasing about their non-existent romance brings their friendship
to an abrupt halt ("'I don't love her,' Cody screamed. His heart pounded like a
hammer on his ribs. 'I hate her!'") and sets the second-grade stage for Cody's
revenge on Royse. The tension mounts all the way to the principal's office as
Larson's second-graders act out this typical school story with a generous measure
of humor and sensitivity. Eleven short chapters with black-and-white watercolor
illustrations allow the reader to progress quickly to a candy-coated conclusion with
an unbelievably mature reconciliation between Cody and Quinn. The final scene
where Royse the repentant offers his "Chocobar" to Cody may leave kids pretty
sure they liked Royse better when he was rotten. Any practical second-grader may
also be more than a little skeptical with a story about a girl and a boy who are
friends: Cody and Quinn, you are very brave. PM
LEWIN, TED 
Market!; written and illus. by Ted Lewin. 
Lothrop, 1996 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12162-4 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12161-6 
$16.00 
R 
5-9 yrs
Lewin brings his audience into the heart of foreign marketplaces to learn how their
neighbors around the world go shopping. Specialized merchants deal in horses in
County Galway, Ireland or monger fish in New York, while foodstuffs and general
20 
* THE BULLETIN
housewares briskly change hands in Morocco, Uganda, Nepal, and Ecuador. Jacket
notes suggest that Lewin executed his lush watercolors from photographs taken at
the world markets, and indeed, photographic influence is strong. Each light-
drenched marketplace teems with individuated shoppers, and readers are always
close to the action. A Nepalese boy, curious but passive, makes eye contact; a
Ugandan merchant offers viewers a smoked perch; Moroccan sheep traders are
simply too engrossed in their transactions to regard us at all. The details of the
illustrations, though, are often out of sync with the litany of goods in the text-
there isn't a motor bike to be seen in the Nepalese market, no sisal ropes for sale in
Ecuador, no dried chameleons, pottery, or clothing in evidence in the Moroccan
souks, and definitely no farrier who "hammers musically on a glowing red horse-
shoe." Although Lewin shares his obvious delight in the vendors' patter ("You
want a camel for a chicken price!"; "How much? Whaddaya, kiddin' me?"), some
of his prose takes itself too seriously for the lively nature of his topic ("They come,
descendants of the Incas... with names like Salasacas and Chimborazo"). Never-
theless, children with an emerging interest in geography or a taste for exotic locales
should return well-pleased from their trek to five continents. EB
LONDON, JONATHAN 
Jackrabbit; illus. by Deborah Kogan Ray. 
Crown,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-517-59657-1 
$16.50 
.
Ad 
5-7 yrs
The natural world's beauty and its dangers illuminate Ray's gently glowing illus-
trations in this story of a baby jackrabbit that is separated from her mother, raised
by a human family, and finally released into the wild. Dark, shadowy greens and
browns emphasize the young rabbit's fear at being lost in a landscape savaged by
bulldozers while brighter oranges, yellows, and greens radiate with the luster of
thick meadows and lush berry patches; the scenes inside the adopting family's
house possess an almost luminous warmth. The anthropomorphization of the
jackrabbit at the story's conclusion clashes with the naturalistic elements that worked
effectively in the first part of the book, and the plot lacks any real suspense or
surprise. Nonetheless, details about this particular rabbit-how she likes to eat
bananas and enjoys licking the woman's hand for the salt taste-add individuality
to the story while Ray's depictions of gentle people holding the rabbit like a baby
to feed her milk or sitting in the grass to stroke the rabbit's ears resonate with the
concern these people have for nature. Those who enjoy a quiet and humane story
about respect for wildlife will snuggle into this one like the baby jackrabbit cud-
dling into its makeshift nest beside a warm stove. LM
LORBIECKI, MARYBETH 
Just One Flick ofa Finger, illus. by David Diaz. 
Dial,
1996 
34p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1949-3 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1948-5 
$14.99 
M 
Gr. 3-8
Jack is being terrorized by Reebo, "mean as a needle and skinny as a weenie," and
brings his father's gun to school to scare him. The gun goes off, and both Jack and
his best friend Sherms wind up in the hospital, Jack with a head injury and Sherms
recovering from an accidental gunshot wound ("Now we're really blood brothers
because I begged to share," says Jack). Issues of race and violence are appallingly
oversimplified as Lorbiecki awkwardly hip-hops her way through this trendy ur-
ban fable. David Diaz combines infrared photographic images and original illus-
tration into powerful but inconsistent compositions that bring the reader up close
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
21
and personal. The happily-ever-after conclusion-Sherms' brother Lee gets out of
jail determined to stay out ("instead of shooting up he's wiring up in a business of
his own") and wants to keep Jack and Sherms "straight as a church steeple and
proud as a Masai"-is naively unrealistic, but then the overall tone is unrealisti-
cally and sentimentally hopeful. Although Lorbiecki's rhyming text gains a modi-
cum of emotional authenticity when paired with Diaz' more successful illustrations,
this well-intentioned story seems unconsciously patronizing and is ultimately un-
successful. JMD
LOWERY, LINDA 
Wilma Mankiller; illus. by Janice Lee Porter. 
Carolrhoda,
1996 
56p 
(On My Own Biographies)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-87614-880-1 
$13.13
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-853-0 
$5.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
This is an easy-reader biography of Wilma Mankiller, first woman chief of the
Cherokee nation. The format demands a certain streamlined simplification of life
events, but Lowery manages to include some emotional depth along with histori-
cal context in the book's first half. Opening with the Mankiller family's move
from an Oklahoma reservation to San Francisco, Lowery identifies Mankiller as a
child dislocated, separated from the culture and place that nourished her. As an
adult, Mankiller returns to Oklahoma with her children and begins working for
the Cherokee Nation. In the latter half of the book, Lowery concentrates on
Mankiller's public life, giving little information about her life outside of her politi-
cal office. The illustrations break up the text without adding much to it; the faces
are unarticulated and the colors muddy. Aside from some sweeping fictionaliza-
tions ("'We Cherokees never had a woman as deputy chief,' they said. 'It's a job
for a man.' Wilma was shocked.... How could anyone say only men made good
leaders? Had the Cherokees picked up this idea from white people? Wilma thought
so"), this is an accessible introduction to Wilma Mankiller, the activist, although a
little lean on Wilma Mankiller, the individual. An afterword with a color photo-
graph of Mankiller and a list of important dates in Cherokee history and in
Mankiller's chronology are included. There are no references or source notes.
JMD
LYONS, MARY E. 
Painting Dreams: Minnie Evans, Visionary Artist. Houghton,
1996 
4 8p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-72032-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
In a volume similar to her titles in the African-American Artists and Artisans series
(see Stitching Stars, BCCB 12/93 and Deep Blues, 12/94), Lyons examines the life
and artistic work of self-taught artist Minnie Evans. Born at the end of the nine-
teenth century, Evans spent most of her life working at an old North Carolina
estate; from childhood, however, she saw visions that led people to call her crazy
and that eventually drove her into painting, until finally, toward the end of her
life, she began to acquire recognition for her artistry. Her art reproduced here
shows a strong interest in patterning as well as an exploration of the fantastical in
deep and ruddy colors (the captions unfortunately tend to be confusing or irrel-
evant). This is a capably written biography that touches on the unquenchability of
the artistic impulse and the vagaries of artistic fortune, while offering enough of
the visual to make it clear what all the fuss is about. The author has included
detailed endnotes that document her own interviews as well as research in second-
ary sources; an index is appended. DS
22 
* THE BULLETIN
McCuLLY, EMILY ARNOLD 
The Ballot Box Battle; written and illus. by Emily Arnold
McCully. 
Knopf, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-97938-7 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-87938-2 
$17.00 
Ad Gr. 3-5
Again McCully offers a fictionalized interpretation of an historic episode, in this
case Elizabeth Stanton's crusade for women's suffrage. In 1880, dowager Stanton's
young neighbor Cordelia comes over for riding lessons and, as tacit price for the
privilege, politely listens to the old woman carry on "about some skirmish in her
long battle for the vote." Cordelia is more interested in horses and in proving her
equestrian abilities to her brother, but Mrs. Stanton regales her with tales of her
own futile childhood efforts to please and impress her father and eventually takes
Cordelia with her to their local poll in an equally futile attempt to cast a ballot.
Compared with McCully's recent The Bobbin Girl (BCCB 3/96), which wisely
allows the action of the Lowell workers' "turn out" to hammer home its own
feminist point, this tale is relatively contrived and preachy, with Stanton some-
thing of a quaint old bore and Cordelia's sibling rivalry a weak shadow of Stanton's
own heartache over her father's repeated rejections. Watercolor portrayals of the
variously amazed and sneering gentlemen who turn away Stanton's ballot are par-
ticularly effective; an endnote fills in background about Stanton and her attempt
to vote in Tenafly, New Jersey in the 1880 election and points out that Cordelia is
a fictional character. EB
MCKELVEY, DOUGLAS KAINE 
The Angel Knew Papa and the Dog. 
Philomel,
1996 
[9 6p]
ISBN 0-399-23042-4 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Young Evangeline relates the tale of the flood that sweeps her father downstream
and strands her in the middle of a torrent. Poised on mule-back to leap into the
raging current, she is stopped by the sound of celestial music and the appearance of
a light-drenched angel. When the angel fades away, a woman in a rowboat mi-
raculously appears and reunites the girl with her father. The hand of coincidence
lies heavy on this slight tale: the woman in the rowboat is Mary, the same name as
the mother who died giving birth to the narrator; Mary's dog is the same stray that
saved Evangeline from a serpent, led Mary to the half-frozen battered father cling-
ing to life in the river below her cabin, and drew Mary to the flood-surrounded
house from which Evangeline sees the angel. The overwrought language and cliched
images ("The hands of the angel were firm and sure, the face was strong as any
river, and the eyes seemed to blaze deeper than all eternity") have a calculated
naivete that never quite achieves the light simplicity that would do justice to the
narrator's innocent faith. There is no apparent character development, the plot
being driven by little more than the need to set up the angelic encounter. When
the narrator finally gives her name in the last sentence, the question as to why she
waited so long is more irritating than revelatory. JMD
McMANUS, PATRICK F. 
Never Cry "Arp!" and Other Great Adventures. 
Holt,
1996 
133p
ISBN 0-8050-4662-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Yarnspinner McManus adds to the ranks of Paul Bunyan and Pecos Bill in this
lively collection of tall tales about growing up long ago in the wilds of Idaho. The
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 23
author admits these have been "varnished, stretched, and embroidered" beyond
recognition; but, he adds, "stories always have their own truth." And so they do,
and sometimes they're pretty funny, too. Like the one about Strange, the skunk
dog, who looked "as if he sold dirty postcards to support an opium habit." Or
take-please-Rancid Crabtree, a cantankerous mountain man who was allergic
to work and who had few earthly needs except his liquid "medicine" bottled in
crockery jars. While it's true that some of the humor, such as the allusions to
moonshine, is a tad adult, there's plenty here that kids will howl over, especially
the grosser stories, such as the one about the "scientific experiment" to see how
long it would take to fill all of Mom's canning jars with um, well, pee. McManus
reverts to an old-fashioned ethos in the title story, where it's okay for a boy to yell
"Arp! Arp!" if it keeps him from crying, but that just goes with the territory here.
There's a bit of chronological confusion as the age of the narrator shifts from eight
to fifteen and back to eight, but logic and continuity are not the main attractions
anyway. It's McManus' deadpan humor and utter disregard for reason that make
this entertaining. SSV
McQUINN, ANNA, comp. 
FarmyardAnimals; illus. by Paul Hess. 
De Agostini,
1996 
18p
ISBN 0-1-899883-34-7 
$6.95
Safari Animals; comp. by Anna McQuinn and Ambreen Husain; illus. by Paul
Hess. De Agostini, 1996 
18p
ISBN 1-899833-35-5 
$6.95 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Snippets of verse pair with illustrations of farm and African-plain dwellers to in-
troduce eight animals in each book. The poems are unfortunately reduced to
background noise: they vary substantially in sophistication level (from nursery
rhymes to elaborate wordplay) as well as in quality, and the author credits and
titles are found only on the copyright page. The draw here is the pictures: lumi-
nescent skies overlook a bulbous horse, a slightly smirking pig, or a baleful hyena,
all rendered in rich and smoky watercolor. The books' small trim-size enhances
the careful design, which includes a peekaboo vignette offsetting the text that gives
a larger glimpse of the featured animal's milieu. It's a pity more attention wasn't
paid to the words (and the category "Safari Animals" is pretty questionable), but
this is a nice duo for point-and-gape zoology. DS
MAESTRO, BETSY 
The Story of Religion; illus. by Giulio Maestro. 
Clarion,
1996 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-395-62364-2 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 2-5
It's no wonder that, at only forty-eight pages from title to index, this ambitious
work hardly fulfills its promise. Following some obvious opening comments on
the human condition ("Humans spend a good deal of time thinking. All people
have ideas and beliefs, but they do not always share the same ideas and beliefs"),
Maestro breezes over "early" or "primal" religions from Asia to the Americas. Re-
marks such as "All early religions were polytheistic" call for fine-tuning, while
summaries of specific religious cultures are too broad to be informative ("Civiliza-
tions in the Americas, such as the ancient Maya, also believed in many gods and
goddesses. The deities of sun and moon were greatly revered, and calendars and
rituals were based on their activities"). Each of the "great world faiths" receives
24 
* 
THE BULLETIN
slightly more detailed treatment, with a brief history, a cursory look at rituals, and
an honest effort to set it within a chronological and philosophical framework of
world beliefs. Mixed-media art offers a visual introduction to important religious
landmarks and images, but too often the captions fail to point out their signifi-
cance (e.g., "Athena," "a tripod jug and goblet," "a heavenly dragon disk"). The
author's staunch defense of religious plurality ("The fact that in this world there
are so many people following so many different paths to God shows that there is
no one right way") is bound to raise hackles in some faith communities but will
appeal to others. Undemanding readers looking for a few basic facts and a lot of
browsable, if unconnected, art may find what they want here. EB
MITCHELL, BARBARA 
Red Bird illus. by Todd L.W. Doney. 
Lothrop, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10860-1 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10859-8 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Bring the trunk of regalia down from the attic. Load the station wagon with
camping gear and Dad's feather headdress. September heralds the Nanticoke pow-
wow, held in a bayside grove of pines in Delaware, far away from the noise-filled
city where Katie lives with her family. For two days, Katie assumes her Nanticoke
name and identity; "Red Bird, Nanticoke Daughter" reunites with relatives, dances
to the drums with her scarlet shawl, eats fry bread with spicy beans, buys a beaded
headband, and listens to Grandfather's stories around a campfire. All of the ele-
ments comprising a powwow are there, but the personal connection one expects
from a fictional account is lacking: Who is Katie? What is she thinking and feel-
ing? Is this the only time of the year she celebrates her Native heritage? In addi-
tion, flat writing ("On Monday, Mom puts on her uniform and goes to her work
at the hospital. Dad returns to his office. Katie is off to school") interspersed with
an idealized vision in quasi-mystical and self-conscious prose ("She will hear her
people singing. She will hear the far-off drums. The heartbeat of the People stays
with her all year long") makes this A Book About Indians without conveying much
about Indians at all. It is Doney's illustrations that leave readers with an I-was-
there feeling; his figures have a photographic quality that is softened by the texture
of the oil paints against the canvas. Sunlight dapples dancers and regalia, implying
vitality and movement. Readers hoping to learn more about powwow traditions
and participants might pair this with George Ancona's photoessay Powwow (BCCB
5/93). AEB
MORRIS, 
ANN 
Karate Boy; 
illus. with 
photographs 
by 
David
Katzenstein. 
Dutton, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-525-45337-7 
$15.99 
R Gr. 1-3
David and his friend Georgie take karate lessons at a s near their home in New
Jersey. Both boys, evidently in primary grades, are preparing to advance to green
belt, and this photoessay observes them and their classmates as they punch, block,
kick, spar, and meditate. Morris incorporates very brief background on karate's
genesis as an Asian combat technique, but the focus here is clearly on its pacifistic
values: "Karate teaches balance and body coordination and helps people keep fit
and feel good about themselves." Readers who are already involved in the sport are
unlikely to find anything here they didn't already know, but the uninitiated will
enjoy viewing the crisp photos of other boys and girls working out in their white
gi s and protective gear, seriously intent on correct form, or clowning around on
the sidelines as they wait their turn to spar. The text is simple and spare enough to
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
25
entice even those with shaky reading skills, and a glossary helps out with pronun-
ciations. EB
PARTRIDGE, ELIZABETH 
Clara and the HooDoo Man. Dutton, 1996 
16 8p
ISBN 0-525-45403-9 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Clara's in trouble when she breaks one of her mother's precious crocks; in order to
earn the money to pay for it, she gathers ginseng in the Tennessee hills. This leads
to more trouble when she and her little sister, Bessie, run into the hoodoo man,
since Clara's mother fears and distrusts the local herbalist. Her mother's fears
seem justified when Bessie falls ill, but Clara takes a chance that the hoodoo man
may actually offer the help that Bessie needs. Partridge has based this portrait of a
hardworking, turn-of-the-century African-American family on the autobiographi-
cal stories of an acquaintance; the details of rural life, including the isolation and
the importance of neighborliness, are vivid and convincing, if a little rosily painted.
The story itself is predictable, and readers may find the hoodoo of Bessie's recovery
a little speedily worked despite its ostensible basis in reality. This is, however, a
rich slice of American life that historical fiction rarely treats. DS
PHILIP, NEIL, comp. American Fairy Tales: From Rip Van Winkle to the Rootabaga
Stories; illus. by Michael McCurdy. 
Hyperion, 1996 
16 0p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2171 
$22.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0207-3 
$22.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
PRELUTSKY, 
JACK 
A Pizza the Size of the Sun; illus. by James
Stevenson. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
160p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13236-7 
$17.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13235-9 
$18.00 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
The team of Prelutsky and Stevenson, famous for illustrated poetic triumphs such
as The New Kid on the Block (BCCB 11/84), has most delightfully returned. The
poems here show Prelutsky's characteristic adeptness; they vary in theme, verse
form, and length, but they all demonstrate a contagious ebullience. Several of the
most interesting poems turn into games: plays on words and reading, they offer a
chance to look at the process differently, as in "Backwards Forwards Silly Rhyme"
("I thguoht d'I etirw ekil siht yadot..." ), "'I'm Ceiling Fad!' A Money Boned"
("'I'm ceiling fad!' a money boned./ 'Alas!' a carrot pride ... "), "Reverso Is Name
My" ("Reverso is name my,/ way this talk often I . .. "), and "If" ("If a baseball
breaks a window,/ does it cause the window pain?/ If it rains upon a lion, do the
droplets water mane? . . . "). The majority, however, are straightforwardly yet
cleverly funny with a Nashian flavor, such as "Penguins" ("Penguins cautiously
reside/ on our planet's underside,/ where they're careful not to cough/ lest they
trip and tumble off'). Stevenson's line-and-wash illustrations are breezily slapdash
but expressive, with characters peering quizzically, staring dolefully, or beaming
peacefully, all out of faces made of a couple of dots and a pair of lines; he's particu-
larly inventive at illustrating creatures that never were, such as the Doddies or the
part puppy, part kitten, part mouse. There are lots of chant-aloud possibilities in
here as well as a plethora of reading delights; like P&S's other compilations, this
will be a great source whenever you really want to put on the dog-gerel. DS
26 
* THE BULLETIN
RICE, EVE 
Swim!; illus. by Marisabina Russo. 
Greenwillow, 1996 
[2 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14275-3 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14274-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
3-5 yrs
A smiling young girl relates her trip to the pool with her smiling father to her
smiling mother and smiling baby brother. After jumping ("I scramble out and do
it again-at least a dozen times") and kicking ("We kick and kick and kick-until
we are too tired to kick anymore"), they dry off and go home ("My dad wraps me
in a big warm towel as I get out. And when we're dressed, we hurry home").
Gouache illustrations in dusty tones fail to enliven the lackluster story of blandly
depicted characters stiffly engaging in various water activities. This may be useful
to introduce children to the idea of community swimming pools, but it certainly
won't entice them into the water. JMD
RIECKEN, NANCY 
Today is the Day; illus. by Catherine Stock. 
Houghton,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-395-73917-9 
$14.95 
M 
4-7 yrs
Away for six months working, Yesenia's father is coming home. The young girl
waits for his bus, never doubting his return, but Yara, her older sister, has less faith:
"Look around, Yese. Other men leave and don't come back. What makes Papa
any different?" Yese waits all day. Late that night, Mama, the two sisters, and
Juanito, the baby, walk to meet the last bus, but it doesn't stop. A car (big, with
fins), radio blaring, careens up the road; Yara trips and falls, and her family mistak-
enly thinks the car has knocked her down. When the dust settles, Papa is there.
Having missed the last bus, he hitched a ride with the driver of the big car. While
he can't promise to never go away again, he has won Yara's faith: "'I know one
thing for sure, Papa,' she said. 'Yesenia trusted you, and she was right. You'll
always come home again.'" Stock's watercolors present a dusty brown/green land-
scape, apparently rural Mexico, with the barefoot sisters in short dresses, braids,
and big eyes. Putting stereotypical visual images aside, the text is emotionally
manipulative, setting up Yese-and the reader-for several heart-tugging moments,
climaxing with the soap-opera entrance of Papa. The text lacks the cultural and
political context of Rachel Isadora's At the Crossroads (BCCB 5/91), and as a result
it lacks that book's clarity and emotional honesty as well. JMD
RIGGS, BOB 
My Best Defense. 
Ward Hill Press, 1996 
203p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-886747-01-6 
$5.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Jack Winslow is an angry thirteen-year-old who mourns his deceased mother, scorns
his sister, and misses his workaholic father. He needs a friend, and he gets an
unlikely one in a twenty-nine-year-old woman, Maki, who comes from Okinawa
to keep house for his family. The author lived in Okinawa while in the Marine
Corps and seems determined to share the experience; he uses Maki as a mouth-
piece and we learn, in asides which tend to stall the story, about Okinawan history,
language, and culture. There's a love angle, too, when the hard-boiled widower
dad falls for-ta dah!-Maki. Jack is constantly quipping, but his humor is glib
and adult (wisecracks abound about Barry Manilow, William Buckley, Ted Bundy,
Esther Williams, Aretha Franklin). Poor characterization is a recurring problem,
the women suffering especially from one-note personalities based on superficial
attributes and character traits (Maki, for example, is stereotypical in her difficulties
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 27
with English, using "preeze" for "please" and "sank" for "thank," and in her mar-
tial-arts abilities, which is ironic in light of the book's plea for cross-cultural under-
standing). While there's some appealing humor here and the genuine tearjerker
ending is surprisingly affecting, the book is overcrowded and predictable. SSV
ROCHE, DENIS 
Loo-Loo, Boo, and Art You Can Do; written and illus. by Denis
Roche. 
Houghton, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-75921-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Eleven tried-and-true art projects are repackaged here with some bold and jazzy
cartoon illustrations, along with directions delivered by bespectacled Loo-Loo and
her pet pooch Boo. With the possible exception of Stinky Clay (a hoot to make,
and, when fresh, it lives up to its name), these projects will be familiar to almost
anyone who hangs with the preschool set-Roche doesn't offer any new spins on
body tracing, cardboard hats, potato prints, and papier-mache. Measurements
range from exact tablespoons and cups to imprecise estimates: "Put some sand
into each of your cans or jars. ... Add a big squirt of glue to each jar." Perhaps a
more serious problem, common to elementary craft books, is the tendency to omit
some of the steps which are most difficult for young crafters-constructing a sculp-
ture armature ("Sometimes the shape of your cans and cartons will give you ideas")
or cutting circles into a cardboard mask ("Hold the piece of cardboard in your
hands and use scissors to make eye holes"). Still, beginners looking for some simple,
sloppy entertainment are bound to get some ideas here. EB
ROGASKY, BARBARA 
The Golem; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman. 
Holiday House,
1996 
96p
ISBN 0-8234-0964-3 
$18.95 
R Gr. 4-8
WISNIEWSKI, DAVID 
Golem; written and illus. by David Wisniewski. 
Clarion,
1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-72618-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
7-10 yrs
Heir of mythical monsters and predecessor of literary monsters, the Golem (a
Hebrew word for something not fully formed, such as an embryo-or Adam, be-
fore God gave him a soul) is a legendary creature born of Jewish mysticism and
Jewish persecution. Although a number of golems were mentioned in medieval
Jewish lore, the Golem in these two books is created by Rabbi Judah Loew ben
Bezalel in the late sixteenth century to protect the Jews of Prague from violence
resulting from false reports of ritual blood sacrifice. Rogasky's book, illustrated
with Hyman's darkly graceful evocations of a haunting ghetto setting and a
Frankensteinian giant, features thirteen chapters narrating episodes from the
Golem's creation to his destruction. The monster who serves his rabbinical master
and saves his people with robotic strength is always in danger of acquiring a will of
his own or getting out of control because his master forgets to give him specific
orders. Ultimately the Golem escalates violence rather than curbing it, and the
Rabbi must turn him back to clay. The text in this version features short, easy-to-
read sentences which nevertheless reflect a cadence of Yiddish phraseology. By
contrast, Wisniewski's version, although it is a picture book, has a text in many
ways more complex and heavily descriptive-definitely for a readaloud audience
on the sophisticated side. His dramatic paper cuttings, similar in effect to The
28 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Warrior and the Wise Man (BCCB 7/89) with its demonic forces and fiery battles,
seem to involve fewer traditional graphic motifs than the Tlingit or Mayan tales he
has illustrated. Nevertheless, this art has a theatrical formality that does capture
the massive stiffness of the Golem and conveys the force of monumental conflict.
Each book, Rogasky's and Wisniewski's, features an extensive background note
and serves a different audience. BH
ROSSELSON, LEON 
Rosa and Her Singing Grandfather; illus. by Marcia
Sewall. 
Philomel, 1996 
85p
ISBN 0-399-22733-4 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
When Rosa's Grandad was a little lad, his many-siblinged family didn't take much
notice of him. That is, until one day, amidst familial chaos in the kitchen, he
declared from his bath that he could sing a song: "You should hold a kipper in one
hand not two/ And wave it while you're talking like the big shots do." And he's
been singing (and garnering attention) ever since. Grandad chases away Rosa's
fear of the dark with a "Higgledy piggledy fee fie and fang/ Flibberty gibberty-
BANG"; attempts to teach the "Toreador's Song" from Carmen to a zoo-parrot
who would rather sing "Sam, Sam, dirty old man"; and embarrasses Rosa's mother
no end with his propensity toward song in public places ("He ought to know
better at his age"). Rosa, who is perhaps six or seven years old, is also eager for a
little attention and reassurance from her busy working mother; Grandad's musical
reminiscing inspires her to strike out on her own (well, okay, run away) and to
bring about a warm-fuzzy family reunion with a quavering reprise of the kipper
song. Rather than being authentic to Rosa's point of view, the story (originally
published in Britain as two separate titles) is unfortunately adult-oriented: Grandad
confuses Rosa with puns and musical allusions, and Rosa's mother interprets her
daughter for readers as alternately wide-eyed and innocent or bothersome. Never-
theless, Sewall's sketchy line drawings emphasize the very real and warm relation-
ship between Rosa and Grandad, with Rosa's dimples showing her excitement at
being with her droll, smiling-eyebrowed grandfather; the musical storytelling here
is sharp, even if point of view is a little flat. AEB
SABUDA, ROBERT, illus. 
The Twelve Days of Christmas: A Pop-Up Celebration;
illus. by Robert Sabuda. 
Little Simon, 1996 
6p
ISBN 0-689-80865-8 
$19.95 
R* 
All ages
If you thought all the pleasure of "The Twelve Days of Christmas" had drowned
in a sea of parodies and confusion about which birds come when, think again.
Robert Sabuda follows up his stellar A Christmas Alphabet (BCCB 10/94) with a
three-dimensional tour de force, bold and extravagant where the last book was
snowflake-quiet and subtle. Each spread opens up to display one day's gifts (a
partridge soaring among ripening fruit) and a flap on the recto folds out to display
the next (a pair of turtledoves too engrossed in their billing and cooing to take
advantage of their open cage door). Some expand entertainingly on the original
concept (the "five golden rings" are held proudly aloft by the antlers of a noble
reindeer, and the "ten pipers piping" are an angelic paper chain encircling the very
scissors that made them); some depend not only on their third dimension but also
on movement for effect, most notably the four calling birds who joyfully pop out
of their cuckoo-clock perches. The pop-ups, really paper sculpture, are largely
snowy-white anti-silhouettes against backgrounds of changing colors, but touches
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 29
like the silver mirror behind the pirouetting eleven ladies (who dance on a music
box complete with key) and the shining golden rings add a seasonal richness with-
out cluttering the purity of the design. The quintessential pop-up problem of
sturdiness is surprisingly well handled, considering the work's intricacy, but the
book will indeed last and retain its vigor longer if folded carefully, so a readaloud
approach may be best for younger children. It's still worth the trouble; this does
things you will not have expected a book could do, while capitalizing on the essen-
tial magic of its ability to tuck neatly back into itself and sit on a shelf in incon-
spicuous anticipation, like a gift waiting to be opened. DS
SIEGELSON, KIM 
The Terrible, Wonderful Tellin'at Hog Hammock; illus. by Eric
Velasquez. 
HarperCollins, 1996 
89p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024878-5 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024877-7 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
On a Georgia island, near a little village called Hog Hammock, Jonas lives with his
mother, sister, aunt, and grandmother. The menfolk live and work on the main-
land and visit when they can. Life on the island hasn't changed in generations;
many residents still live in simple cabins without running water, indoor plumbing,
or electricity. The older folks speak "old time talk," Gullah, and pass on their oral
traditions through annual "tellin's," where one member of each family spins a
story for the village. Grandpa, recently deceased, had always represented Jonas'
family; celebrated for his "gift fe lie," he told stories both terrible (about slave
transports) and wonderful (West African folktales). The family thinks Jonas has
inherited the talent (though Jonas isn't so sure), and his grandmother decides he's
ready: "Tomorrow, the sun de red fe down, you gon stand up and do you grandpa
proud-proud." Although Siegelson's prose is nondescript, she throws in just the
right touch of the supernatural to give readers an occasional chill. Characteriza-
tion is uneven-the kid sister, Rikki, is suitably obnoxious but Nana Myma is a
stock majestic matriarch. The story is predictable-the triumphant outcome is
never in doubt-but we still root for Jonas because Siegelson makes him a likeable,
sympathetic character. There is a brief author's note on Gullah. SSV
SIEGEN-SMITH, NIKKI, comp. 
Songs for Survival: Songs and Chants from Tribal
Peoples around the World; illus. by Bernard Lodge. 
Dutton, 1996 
80p
ISBN 0-525-45564-7 
$18.99 
Ad 
6-10 yrs
"Long ago our ancestors sang all kinds of songs to commemorate special events in
their lives," and Songs for Survival presents more than fifty such songs about cre-
ation, animals, and natural phenomena. Siegen-Smith attributes each song to a
particular tribe and continent and provides the source from which she acquired it.
Many songs contain potent images (". .. the Great Hunter/ who hunts the clouds
like a herd/ of frightened elephants") while some give insight into a tribe's beliefs
or reactions to nature (how do the Inuit respond to Arctic winters? "There is fear
in/ feeling the cold/ Come to the great world. .. "). Brief notes accompanying
some songs explain unfamiliar words or describe relevant rituals or beliefs; unfor-
tunately, the notes are erratic, too often neglecting terms or failing to tell how
particular songs fit into tribal life. A number of entries--especially those that
contain more recent elements such as the Ottoman Empire or the destruction of
tribal land-would benefit from a historical context more specific than the sketchy
discussion Siegen-Smith offers. Lino-cut illustrations use bright colors, bold out-
30 
* 
THE BULLETIN
lines, and flat figures to convey an overall impression of indigenous art rather than
representing any one tribe's style. Introductory comments and notes are some-
times overbearing (how often must we be reminded that we should respect the
earth as tribal people do?) or cloudy ("tribal people are not as likely to be lonely").
Although Survival International, the group receiving proceeds from sales of the
book, may intend that this collection celebrate the traditions of tribal people, the
presentation tends to make these cultural groups seem interchangeable and threat-
ens to lessen the songs' true significance by using them as a goad to drive citizens of
the industrialized world into the environmental fold. LM
SILBAUGH, ELIZABETH 
Let's Play Cards!; illus. by Jef Kaminsky. 
Simon,
1996 
48p 
(Ready-to-Read)
Trade ed. ISBN 0-689-80802-X 
$14.00
Paper ed. ISBN 0-689-80801-1 
$3.99 
R Gr. 2-4
For readers ready to move beyond Fifty-Two Pick Up, Silbaugh offers directions
for War, Concentration, Go Fish, Crazy Eights, and Clock Solitaire, all packaged
in an easy reader format suitable for beginning independent readers. Card jargon
and three methods of deck shuffling (which thoughtfully allow for differing de-
grees of dexterity) are introduced, as well as some gaming-table etiquette to keep
Crazy Eights sane and War from becoming one. Directions for War, based on a
fifty-two-card deck, include the misleading statement "in this game, Jokers are the
highest," and there are no contingency instructions for how to proceed in Clock
Solitaire if a number on the "dial" has been turned face up before play is complete;
neither gaffe should, however, be too baffling for determined players. Line-and-
watercolor cartoons clarify points along the way, and the recurrent Cool Carl the
Card Shark interjects playing tips and corny puns. EB
SINGER, MARILYN 
All We Needed to Say: Poems about School from Tanya and
Sophie; illus. with photographs by Lorna Clark. 
Atheneum, 1996 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-80667-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-8
The author of Turtle in July (BCCB 9/89) here takes on a different kind of ani-
mal-the human child subjected to a day's school routine. Tanya and Sophie are
definitely the same species, but they have polar personalities that are distinctively
voiced in alternating points of view. Tanya races to school with urgent intellectual
curiosity; Sophie dawdles creatively to observe the world around her. Mostly Tanya
gets kudos and Sophie gets into trouble, but they are drawn to each other--despite
mutual envy-in this series of narrative poems, especially through an incident
where Tanya subversively supports Sophie when a teacher catches her in a name-
calling bout with a boy ("scumsucker, pigmucker, kitty litter baby sitter"). Pre-
dominantly free verse, these eighteen poems echo with internal rhyme and thrive
on funny institutional images: "Today the meat loaf/ bright red in slices shaped
like hearts/ says aren't you glad you brought those valentines-/ and a brown bag
lunch from home?" There's also a healthy quota of wordplay: "Maybe I'm still
seeing/ ... 
poodle-perfect Tanya saying 'Aardvark'/ to that turkey Mr. Byrd."
Like the deceptively plain language, the spare black-and-white photographs are
careful neither to romanticize nor denigrate the setting but to observe with honest
perception. It's the generous format and cream-colored paper that soften these
sharp-edged visual still lifes and verbal portraits. A book with pressingly relevant
appeal for independent readers, this could also provide plenty of aural pleasure
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 31
shared out loud and should serve as a model for classroom anthologies where stu-
dents write about and photograph their own school habitats. BH
SLATE, JOSEPH 
Miss Bindergarten Gets Ready for Kindergarten; illus. by Ashley
Wolff. Dutton, 1996 
40p
ISBN 0-525-45446-2 
$14.99 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
The newest class of kindergartners are rising and shining for their first day of school,
but their teacher has a jump on them. Up at six o'clock, Miss Bindergarten packs
her hatchback with crates of classroom necessities, and while "Brenda Heath brushes
her teeth" and "Danny Hess rushes to dress," the teacher sets up the play kitchen
and hangs the growth chart. At nine o'clock "Wanda Chin marches in," "Zach
Blair finds his chair," and "oh, oh, oh!-the fun's begun!" But there's more going
on here than just getting ready for school-too much, in fact. Each student ap-
pears alphabetically by name, so some ABC study is obviously in order. Moreover,
each character is an animal whose given initial repeats its species initial (Quentin
is a quokka, as we learn from an appended chart); Miss Bindergarten herself ap-
pears to be a border collie, but since Danny the Dog is just a dog and Teacher isn't
coded on the chart, youngsters may not see how she fits into the pattern. Line-
and-watercolor animals are rendered as generically colored cartoons, making all
but the most familiar creatures difficult to relate to their real-life counterparts.
Parents prepping wary tykes for their first day in the "big school" will be better
served by the gentle humor of Stoeke's Minerva Louise at School, reviewed below.
EB
SOTO, GARY 
The Old Man and His Door, illus. by Joe Cepeda. 
Putnam,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22700-8 
$15.95 
R 
4-6 yrs
An old man (el viejo), "who was good at working in his garden but terrible at
listening to his wife," brings lapuerta (the door) instead of elpuerco (the pig) to a
barbecue. Carrying the door on his back, the old man has a series of encounters in
which the door is most useful-he plays peekaboo with a bored baby, hides from
angry bees, rests a weary goose, saves a boy from drowning, and helps a young man
move a piano. With each encounter he gains something, so when he finally arrives
and realizes his mistake, "the old man had to laugh. 'But look what else I
brought.... An egg, and some honey, a fish, and these watermelons! And even
this,' he said, and gave his wife the kiss from the baby." Based on a Mexican song
("Lapuerta. Elpuerco. There's no difference to el viejo"), this cumulative tale has
readaloud rhythm, and Soto's inclusion of the occasional Spanish word adds to the
general bounciness of the text. Cepeda's acrylics reflect a colorful neighborhood of
pink houses, yellow fences, and purple sky inhabited by animated, engaging char-
acters both human and animal. The format is a little small for large groups, but
the text lends itself so nicely to storytelling and reading aloud that that's a minor
quibble. JMD
ST. GEORGE, JUDITH 
To See With the Heart: The Life of Sitting Bull. Putnam,
1996 
182p
ISBN 0-399-22930-2 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
In this companion piece to Crazy Horse (BCCB 12/94), St. George examines the
life of the Hunkpapa leader. She explains how Sitting Bull's commitment to pre-
32 
* THE BULLETIN
serve traditional hunting grounds against ineluctable white encroachment not only
won him honor as a war chief, but led to his temporary emigration, a tenuous
rapprochement with U.S. authorities, and finally, violent death at the hands of his
former followers. As in her previous work, the author examines the territorial
struggles from the Sioux perspective, mindful of the holy visions which guided
Sitting Bull's combat strategies and augured his defeat, as well as the simple reality
that the Sioux were outgunned and outmanned. The intratribal dissension and
personal treacheries which played no small part in Sitting Bull's defeat and death
are considered seriously as well. The stilted cover art won't draw readers, but
students who pick this up to construct the perennial "American Indian report"
should be pleasantly surprised to find it's also an exciting read. EB
STANLEY, DIANE 
Leonardo da Vinci; written and illus. by Diane Stanley. 
Morrow,
1996 
[4 8 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10438-X 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10437-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
Stanley, sometimes aided by her husband Peter Vennema, has capably biographized
historical figures ranging from Cleopatra (BCCB 10/94) to Peter the Great (BCCB
10/86); here she turns to one of the greatest minds and most celebrated painters of
the millennium. She not only explores Leonardo's life and achievements but also
the Florentine culture that both offered Leonardo opportunities and circumscribed
them. Her descriptions of various artistic processes (the casting of sculptures, the
elaborate preparations for an oil painting) are clear and concise, and they gain
interest from their relevance to Leonardo's character (the artist several times failed
to carry a work through to completion, suggesting a greater interest in planning
than finishing) and to real-life exigencies (Leonardo's patron used his bronze sup-
ply for cannon rather than to mold Leonardo's planned statue of a horse). Though
she keeps speculation to a minimum, Stanley conveys a sense of Leonardo as a
man-audacious, arrogant, brilliant, and thoughtful-by judicious inclusion of
his own writings and the words of those responding to him and to his work. (She
doesn't, however, address the question of Leonardo's sexual orientation, though
she does refer to his close relationships with several young male artists.) Stanley's
mixed-media art uses muted colors and her usual flat and distanced style; it's doubt-
ful that Renaissance Italy was as tidy as it looks here, but the art conveys a different
world and also offers a dramatic contrast to the genuine da Vinci art that is not
only reproduced in vignettes but also included appropriately within the narrative
scenes. Without being overstuffed, oversimplified, or over the heads of the audi-
ence, this makes it elegantly clear what Leonardo accomplished and why his fame
endures. A historical postscript and a bibliography are included. DS
STOEKE, JANET MORGAN 
Minerva Louise at School; written and illus. by Janet
Morgan Stoeke. 
Dutton, 1996 
[24p]
ISBN 0-525-45494-2 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
In this, the third installment of the exploits of this inquisitive hen, Minerva Louise
ventures early one autumn morning into a mysteriously empty "barn" whose halls
are lined with "coops" which, as she rightly supposes, some pretty strange chickens
call home. Minerva Louise is intrigued by the furnishings ("nesting box" storage
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
33
cubes and tiny "milking stools" near the chalkboard) and somewhat concerned for
the safety of an abandoned egg (a baseball cradled in a mitt), but she definitely
admires the occupants' sense of interior design. In fact, when she returns home
she tastefully lines her own coop with shoelaces, pencil shards, and cast-off cloth-
ing, and "she knew she'd go back to the fancy barn some day ... because it was
such a wonderful place to get new ideas." As Stoeke's feathered heroine pokes her
beak into places no hen has gone before, listeners are treated to the heady rush that
comes from being in the know; yet while the laugh may be on Minerva Louise, it's
never mean-spirited, for children will recognize that her observations make perfect
sense-for a chicken. Bright, streamlined pictures will show to advantage in a
group, and the classroom details are cozy and familiar. This is good for a giggle
anytime, but keep it in mind as autumn and the pre-school jitters approach. EB
SUPRANER, ROBYN 
Sam Sunday and the Mystery at the Ocean Beach Hotel; illus. by
Will Hillenbrand. 
Viking, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-670-84797-6 
$14.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Detective Sam Sunday (a bear) is depressed because none of his friends have re-
membered his birthday, so he takes on a puzzling case: items are disappearing
from the Ocean Beach Hotel. Everybody he questions is behaving awfully suspi-
ciously-Hester Primm (the pig) is carrying a basket of refreshments, Dan Digger
(the mole) is lugging around a record player, and Donald the Grand Duke of
Denmark (a goat) and Colonel Gooldens (frog) are caught discussing secret plans.
All the secrecy, of course, is due to the suspects' being Sam's friends in disguise
planning his surprise party, and the mystery resolves in a happy cascade of cake
and celebration. There are a few holes in the plot (if Sam can't recognize his
friends in disguise, why did they need an outsider to hire him?), and some of the
hard-boiled parody will go right over kids' heads. The patter is funny, however
("Friends are like steamrollers, thought Sam. Sometimes they leave you flat"), and
youngsters may get a kick out of solving the "mystery" before Sam does.
Hillenbrand's illustrations depict Sam as ursinely rawboned and rueful; his bright
yellow slicker and the festive palette of the secret celebrants' outfits are luminous
against the pale near-noir of the rainy day. A cheerful and amusing mystery, this
might make for an offbeat birthday readaloud. DS
SUTCLIFF, ROSEMARY 
The Wanderings of Odysseus: The Story of The Odyssey;
illus. by Alan Lee. 
Delacorte, 1996 
120p
ISBN 0-385-32205-4 
$22.50 
R Gr. 5-9
Like its companion volume Black Ships Before Troy: The Story of The Iliad (BCCB
1/94), this is a dignified volume with text that reflects epic rhythms and art that
honors haunting classical images. Sutcliff organizes the episodes of Odysseus'
twenty-year journey home from Troy into chapters, including encounters with the
Cyclops, Aeolus, Circe, the Harpies, Calypso, and Penelope's suitors who have
betrayed him back in Ithaca. The action, originally paced to hold the attention of
a listening audience, is nonstop, though the style itself is stately. Here's cultural
literacy ready-made for sequential reading aloud to a high school class as well as
handing over to younger students for independent reading or research. Domi-
nated by eerie blue and golden-brown hues, the illustrations will hook browsers
with their literal yet evocative depictions of monumental deeds. A map of fabled
sites and a key to pronouncing unfamiliar names will help guide first-timers through
this seminal adventure. BH
34 
* THE BULLETIN
TANAKA, SHELLEY 
On Board the Titanic; illus. by Ken Marschall. 
Hyperion/
Madison Press, 1996 
4 8p 
(I Was There Books)
ISBN 0-7868-0283-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
We all know the story: ship + iceberg = tragedy. This fictionalized narrative of the
Titanic fills in that equation by enlivening it with photographs, cross-sections,
maps, diagrams, and informational tidbits. The account itself is couched in pedes-
trian, Reader's-Digest-y prose, and many of the smaller illustrations are in a simi-
lar vein (or are poorly reproduced); it's also a pity there are no footnotes or
bibliography for the information in the text, leading readers to wonder what as-
pects of it were invented. The sheer drama and detail, however, steam right through
these drawbacks. More than most accounts, the book conveys the slow but ter-
rible realization that this unthinkable tragedy was, in fact, occurring, and that
provisions were insufficient and help too distant to save all. Details of heroism (an
anonymous young woman voluntarily leaving an overfilled lifeboat for certain death)
and suggestions of, at the very least, inequalities (the proportion of first-class pas-
sengers saved compared to the proportion of third-class passengers) give further
depth to the account, as does hearing the fate of those individuals we "met" in the
story version. The plethora of visuals makes the book a browser's treat; Ken
Marschall's full-page art of the ship gives the tragedy an eerie majesty as the glim-
mering lights sink into a cobalt sea. Kids whose appetites were whetted rather than
dampened by Daisy Corning Stone Spedden's Polar, the Titanic Bear (BCCB 12/
94) will appreciate a closer look at this sensational historic moment. DS
TESTA, MARIA 
Nine Candles; illus. byAmanda Schaffer. 
Carolrhoda, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-87614-940-9 
$14.21 
R Gr. 2-4
It is Raymond's seventh birthday, and he and his father are going to visit his mother
in prison. Serving time for larceny (she stole money from the restaurant where she
worked), Raymond's mother has arranged for a birthday cake for Raymond and
the other visitors. Raymond protests when visiting time is over: "'I want you to
come home,' I cry. 'When can you come home?'" and Mama promises, "I will be
home when there are nine candles on your birthday cake." Raymond goes home
with his father to dream of his mother's release from prison. Schaffer's expression-
ist acrylics have an unexpected liveliness-the main characters are consistently in
the foreground, making the individual and not the environment the composi-
tional focus. An author's note cites statistics on the number of children in the U.S.
who have a mother incarcerated (1.5 million), making the point that less than
10% of them are cared for by their fathers, most being in foster care or in the care
of grandparents. The pedagogic intent of the text is a given, but Testa still man-
ages to communicate familial feeling and closeness, making the separation of mother
and child, and not the nature of that separation, the heart of the story. JMD
TUNNELL, MICHAEL O. 
The Children of Topaz: The Story ofa apanese-American
Internment Camp: Based on a Classroom Diary; by Michael O. Tunnell and George
W. Chilcoat. 
Holiday House, 1996 
74p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1239-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
While detained in the Topaz, Utah relocation camp, third-grade teacher Anne
Yamauchi recorded her students' daily reflections on camp life in a journal, which
the children themselves illustrated; entries from this 1943 diary provide a starting
point for Tunnell and Chilcoat's examination of Japanese-American internment.
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
35
Following an introductory chapter on anti-Japanese sentiment after the bombing
of Pearl Harbor and consequent U.S. government restrictions on Nikkei residents,
a selection of diary pages are reproduced and analyzed in detail. When, for ex-
ample, the children note, "On Sunday evening at 7:30 o'clock, an old man, Mr.
James H. Wasaka passed away," the authors fill in the rest of the story-Wasaka
was shot to death by a perimeter guard under suspicious and highly debatable
circumstances. Likewise, children's pastimes and education, camp organization,
and the Topaz environs are discussed. Unfortunately, line-by-line examination of
the journal entries results in haphazard organization and an odd assortment of
vital and ephemeral topics, while crowded design and broad lines of type make the
volume appear unnecessarily daunting. Much of the material here is covered in
Jerry Stanley's more attractively packaged IAm an American (BCCB 11/94), but
the ingenuous testimony left by Yamauchi's third-graders may make the Topaz
story accessible to an audience slightly younger than Stanley's. Period photos, a
reading list that includes children's works, and an index are included. EB
WARNER, SALLY 
Some Friend. Knopf, 1996 
156 p
ISBN 0-679-87620-0 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Case Hill (whom readers may remember from Dog Years, BCCB
5/95) has a working mother, a father in jail for armed robbery, a somewhat malad-
justed little sister, a landlord in a wheelchair, and a best friend headed for foster
care. In other words, he's just your average, everyday kid. It is to Warner's credit
that she manages to make these characters oddly believable, even amiable, in this
incongruously cheerful story about Case's plan to keep Ned from being returned
to his troubled mother when his caregiver grandmother has to go into a nursing
home. Each chapter is introduced by a message on the Hill family answering
machine, a cute device echoed by small thematic thumbnail sketches on the bot-
tom of each page. The one effective underlying theme is the powerlessness of
children. Though the story is unrealistically optimistic, aware readers will sigh
with relief when Ned returns to his happy foster home, because they know it could
be a lot worse. JMD
WARREN, ANDREA 
Orphan Train Rider: One Boy's True Story. 
Houghton,
1996 
80p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-69822-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Literarily speaking, the orphan trains have been rolling in force lately, with both
fiction (Joan Lowery Nixon's Orphan Train Quartet) and nonfiction (Annette
Fry's The Orphan Trains, BCCB 7/94) treatments. Warren takes a more personal
approach than Fry, alternating chapters on the general history of the trains with
chapters documenting the experience of Lee Nailling, born Alton Lou Clement,
who rode an orphan train west in 1926. Nailling's experience was eventually posi-
tive, but he had several heartbreaking rejections and separations along the way,
and the book is open about the misery as well as the joy that many of the children
found. Young readers who had thought of the orphan trains as a long ago and far
away drama will find Nailling's emotional biography an eyeopener. There are
unfortunately no source notes for any of the many quotes (it seems clear that
Nailling's comments are from interviews, but much research is left unsourced); a
bibliography and an index are included; black-and-white photos appear through-
out. DS
36 
* THE BULLETIN
WAWROSE, SUSAN C. 
Griswold v. Connecticut: Contraception and the Right of
Privacy. Watts, 1996 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs 
(Historic Supreme
Court Cases)
ISBN 0-531-11249-7 
$22.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
The 1965 Supreme Court decision not only struck down an unusually restrictive
state law forbidding provision of contraception, it also defined for the first time a
constitutional "right to privacy." Wawrose explains the setting for this particular
case, then goes back to examine the history of contraception and the law in the
U.S., touching on such figures as Margaret Sanger and Anthony Comstock. She
describes earlier efforts to get the Connecticut law struck down, the Supreme Court
case that finally overturned it, and the impact that case has had on law and culture
since its resolution. The account is more detailed than animated, unfortunately,
and the information tends to sink under its own weight; there's little involvement
with the drama of the situation, and the brief biographical sketches don't really
allow readers to connect with any of the major players. Nonetheless, the author
(herself an attorney) writes with clarity about thorny legal questions of precedent
and interpretation and capably puts the Griswold case in context in this service-
able history. Endnotes, a paragraph describing useful additional reading, and an
index are included; black-and-white photographs (some more relevant than others
and at least one misleadingly captioned) appear throughout. DS
WELLS, ROSEMARY 
The Language ofDoves; illus. by Greg Shed. 
Dial, 1996 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1472-6 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1471-8 
$14.99 
Ad 
6-10 yrs
On a Brooklyn rooftop, an Italian grandfather gives his granddaughter Julietta a
birthday dove, then tells her about growing up in an orphanage in Italy and being
drafted into the army at age nine to care for the doves used to carry messages
during World War I. When her grandfather dies, his doves are sold "to a pigeon
breeder in Providence, Rhode Island." (Wells is somewhat poetically cavalier about
the difference between doves and pigeons.) But the grief-stricken Julietta receives
a dove-carried message from her grandfather: "Do not listen to a word they tell
you. Having learned the language of doves, I have learned also to fly. Watch for
me." The magical realism element ofJulietta's bird returning with the message is
credible enough, foreshadowed as it is by the grandfather's spiritual belief in the
language of doves. The story teeters on the thin line between sentimentality and
sentiment, but Shed's syrupy gouache illustrations (framed, full-page paintings for
each double-paged spread), washed in golden light and soft around the edges,
sometimes tip the balance. Although the framing device is cumbersome, the child's
relationship with a beloved grandfather and the "when I was a boy in the war"
aspect of the grandfather's tale may well make this story successful with older chil-
dren. JMD
WILSON, BUDGE 
Mothers and Other Strangers. Harcourt, 1996 
194p
ISBN 0-15-200312-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Mothers actually don't figure nearly as much in this collection, ironically, as they
did in Wilson's The Leaving (BCCB 6/92), nor are these short stories as focused
for an adolescent audience. The youngest protagonists, featured in the first two
stories, are out of school and on the job: one looks back on the intricate dynamics
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 
37
among her university friends, including a romance later satirized in her roommate's
first novel; another finds romance at a campsite where he rushes to get the best
view after work one day. The other selections (all previously published, some in
adult anthologies) involve middle-aged or elderly characters grappling with loneli-
ness, the difficulties of marriage, or memories of long-ago family problems that
have in some way shaped their later lives. Wilson's signature ability to develop
characters in quick-study situations is certainly not lost here; her plots are a little
more uneven, however, and much of the action is internal, with repeated themes
of psychologically abusive fathers and husbands or of the scars left by parents'
preferring other siblings. Sophisticated young readers who have started exploring
adult fiction will get past openers such as the first sentence of "The House on
High Street": "When Virginia was in her midforties, she started thinking about
the past-her own past." After two pages they'll plunge into a vivid recollection of
the protagonist's epiphany at the house of relatives, where as a ten-year-old she
learns of a longstanding love affair between her uncle and his sister-in-law, "old,
deaf, and very interesting." Many teenage readers may not make it to the interest-
ing part. BH
WINTERS, KAY 
Did You See What I Saw?: Poems about School; illus. by Martha
Weston. 
Viking, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-670-87118-4 
$13.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Winters' experience as a teacher shows in her ability to choose subjects schoolchil-
dren take to heart: getting squirted in the nose at a water fountain intended for
older-and taller-schoolmates; wondering why the teacher calls on precisely those
students who don't know the answer; celebrating the snow day that means no
math test. Unfortunately, the poems, with their lack of surprising images, creative
word choice, or inventive rhymes, do little to refresh such topics. An occasional
humorous rhyme, as in "Lots of Spots" ("There's nothing shy about chicken pox./
Once they are here/they appear in flocks"), can't make up for the labored playful-
ness of poems like "Behind Closed Doors" ("do you suppose ... / ... the com-
puter tutors?/ the numbers slumber?/ the books cook?/ the chairs pair?/ the fish
wish?"). The black-outlined figures in Weston's softly colored illustrations are
livelier than the poems and adequately-if somewhat generically-express the
emotions of children mourning a dead class turtle or reveling in having tricked
their teacher on April Fool's Day. Although preschoolers may not mind the ex-
treme simplicity of some of the lines ("It's my day./ A "hi!" day./ A run day./ A fun
day"), Winters' references to math tests and passing notes in class seem better
suited to an older crowd-who just may demand more verve in their verse. LM
WISLER, G. CLIFTON 
Caleb's Choice. 
Lodestar, 1996 
154 p
ISBN 0-525-67526-4 
$14.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Long-simmering animosities explode when thirteen-year-old Caleb Dulaney, sud-
denly impoverished, is sent to live with rich maternal relatives in Houston, and for
the sake of family peace he is then promptly packed off to his paternal grandmother's
boarding house north of Dallas. When Caleb arrives, the area is infested with
bounty hunters setting their traps for runaway slaves, or even for freemen without
identification, and Caleb and his new-found friend, Granny's hired boy Micah,
become reluctantly embroiled in the relatives' Underground Railroad activities.
While Caleb's inevitable decision to assist in an illegal conspiracy provides the
38 
* THE BULLETIN
moral backbone to the tale, Wisler takes his time getting to it, and the bulk of the
novel is devoted to Caleb journeying north by coach, hanging around with the
superstitious Micah, and being harassed by slave hunters. Caleb is a congenial, if
not entirely credible, narrator, and although his story wraps up too easily with
Granny Dulaney's wise words and apple pie, at least the telling is intimate and
engaging. However, readers after a more serious look at the perils of the Fugitive
Slave Laws might want to consider Guccione's Come Morning (BCCB 1/96). EB
WISNIEWSKI, DAVID 
Golem.
See Rogasky, p. 27, for review.
WUNDERLI, STEPHEN 
The Heartbeat ofHalftime. Holt, 1996 
178p
ISBN 0-8050-4713-1 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
"It was the year of the holy transformation . . .the year the hands of the great
football god gathered together an unwitting band of heathens and turned them
into football disciples." And so a motley assortment of football players with an
unlikely assortment of nicknames come together as a team to win the champion-
ship. Thirteen-year-old Wing is losing his father to cancer, he has lost his mother
to her preoccupation with her dying husband, he has lost his dignity to the cafete-
ria bully, and he is angrily determined not to lose anything else. Emotionally
estranged from their parents, Wing and his buddies Taco Bell, Spray Can, and
Heat all have something to prove, and they prove it on the football field. The
games are related in graphic, involving language, the action always stemming from
the immediate emotions of the players, the occasionally overwrought prose high-
lighting moments of glory amid the sweat and gore. The scene where Wing's
father watches from his wheelchair on the sidelines as his injured son wins the final
game is a deliberate tearjerker but works in context. Wunderli wavers on the line
between showing and telling, occasionally explaining just a little too much, but he
has a nice touch with humor and a Stand by Me feel for adolescent male dialogue.
The cover shows a conservative brick school and clean-cut boys in clean football
jerseys, but don't let that stop you-this is an easy booktalk, with a number of
"bait" scenes that will reel in potential readers, even if the booktalker's not a foot-
ball fan. JMD
YACCARINO, DAN 
IflHada Robot; written and illus. by Dan Yaccarino. 
Viking,
1996 
32p
ISBN 0-670-86936-8 
$14.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Vibrant colors in geometric shapes spill across the pages in young Phil's fantasy of
life with a remote-controlled robot. Predictably, the robot does all those unpleas-
ant tasks Phil hates, from eating his vegetables ("Boy! I hate vegetables! I wish
someone else would eat them for me!") to protecting him from bullies ("And
those kids wouldn't dare pick on me if I had a robot"). Witty illustrations experi-
ment with proportion and point of view (we always look up to the robot) while
playfully distorting shapes in a mirrors-in-the-funhouse way. The robot morphs
from shape to shape, color to color, depending upon the task undertaken (at school,
it has a light bulb for a brain). Yaccarino keeps the visual suspense going by switching
from cartoony panels to double-page spreads, but the unoriginal text weakens the
overall production. It comes as no surprise when Mom bribes Phil with chocolate
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 39
cake for finishing his vegetables; ditto when he caves in and scarfs 'em down ("Like
I always say, if you want something done right, you've got to do it yourselfP"). Still
and all, the younger set is bound to be captivated by the robotic conceit and the
graphically bold art. SSV
YERXA, LEO 
A Fish Tale Or, The Little One That GotAway; written and illus. by
Leo Yerxa. 
Douglas & McIntyre/Groundwood, 1996 
32p
ISBN 0-88899-247-5 
$17.95 
M 
Gr. 3-6
Our piscine narrator struggles with his fishy adolescence: he's just flunked out of
dart school, and he's contemplating great questions of the universe ("And if God
did make all fish equal, why were some long and others short, some big and others
small? Did it begin with one big splash? And what of God? Was he a cod, or was
he a she and really a bass?"). A passing pike named Jack lures the narrator into
danger with flashy talk of wondrous bait; the small fry survives by virtue of being
tossed back in when the fisherman pronounces "You're too small to fry." Now an
elder statesfish, our hero teaches darting himself and has authored a book of his
adventure, while Jack is "wanted by the authorities in several ponds for his involve-
ment in getting other fish hooked." There are some amusing jokes here, but the
book is ultimately problematic. Whether taken as a serious parable or as a poker-
faced parody (signals are mixed), the tale's message is confusing and the tonal
inconsistencies unsettling. The humor shifts between various levels of sophistica-
tion, so that much of it will be over the heads of the young audience, and the story
is too slight to carry the book without it. Visually, it's a beautiful book, with
oversized pages alternating between spreads washed with underwater shades and
fields of pristine white, both dotted with bug-eyed fish glimmering against their
backgrounds (it's too bad that two of the most dramatic spreads are hampered by
the gutter). Kids who enjoy a good meaningful fish story should turn to Lionni's
Swimmy (BCCB 3/64); they'll enjoy the artwork here, but they'll probably find
both the humor and the concepts puzzling. DS
Note: The bound book of Robie Harris' Happy Birth Day!, published by Can-
dlewick Press, will not contain the fill-in-the-blanks birth record mentioned in the
Bulletin's July review.
40 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARANS
Annual '96. Fiction; Paper ed. ISBN 1-55858-594-X; 213p. Annual '96: Non
Fiction; Paper ed. ISBN 1-558580-595-8; 150p. Each book: Neugebauer/North-
South, 1996. $45.00. illus. with photographs.
1996 was the thirtieth anniversary of the Bologna Illustrators' Exhibition, and the
art displayed there seems to be as diverse as ever. As usual, for U.S. readers, this is
a chance to see the new, not to review the familiar (few U.S. artists are included),
and to revel in seeing an array of impressive artwork on oversized glossy pages.
The nonfiction includes an enticing array of sturdy realism, delicate detail, and
dramatic history, while the fiction artwork demonstrates a range of artistic visions
from subtle intricacy to dark surrealism to edgy modernism. The fiction volume
opens with a special piece on its cover artist, John Rowe. Both volumes include
comments from the selection committee in English and Italian, and, in a new
feature, both volumes finish with a matte-page section offering a photo and brief
biographical information on each artist. DS
Herz, Sarah K. From Hinton to Hamlet: Building Bridges between Young Adult
Literature and the Classics; by Sarah K. Herz with Donald R. Gallo. Greenwood,
1996. 127p. ISBN 0-313-28636-1. $29.95.
Herz is a long-term teacher of junior-high and high-school students who was con-
verted, despite her initial opposition, to the use of young-adult literature in litera-
ture curricula. She writes here of its value for her and her students, the ways she
has used the genre, and other subjects for which YA literature has instructional
relevance. Topics covered range from a summary of Louise Rosenblatt's reader-
response theories to possible specific textual pairings. The details aren't the book's
best aspect: the plot summaries tend to be perfunctory and conceptually strait-
ened, and some of the pairings seem a bit contrived (though that doesn't preclude
useful discussion). The author's strengths are her palpable enthusiasm and convic-
tion and her accessible tone, as well as her encouragement to seek fresh resources
outside the canon of traditional curricular texts. A particularly useful chapter de-
tails places to go for more information, ranging from journals to catalogs to stu-
dents themselves-though unfortunately no on-line resources are mentioned.
Educators looking for some advice on this kind of curriculum and librarians look-
ing to assist and encourage them will find this a useful volume. A bibliography
and an index are included. DS
k r
SEPTEMBER 1996 
* 41
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ACTIVITY BOOKS: Irvine;
Roche
Adoption: Warren
African Americans: Awmiller;
Lyons
African Americans-fiction:
Partridge; Siegelson
African Americans-stories: Hest;
Johnston
ALPHABET BOOKS: Slate
American Indians: Lowery; St.
George
American Indians-fiction:
Mitchell
Angels-fiction: McKelvey
Animals-poetry: McQuinn
Animals-stories: Slate; Supraner
Archaeology-fiction: Hill
Art: Carlson; Croll; Harrison;
Lyons; Roche
Art and artists-stories: Hest
Asian Americans: Tunnell
Aunts-fiction: Harding
BIOGRAPHIES: Croll;
Fleischman; Harrison; Keller;
Kuklin; Lowery; Lyons; St.
George; Stanley
Birds-stories: Wells
Birthdays-stories: Hest; Supraner
Botany: Croll
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Gibbons
Brothers-fiction: Ewing
California-fiction: Cushman
Cats-fiction: Hurwitz
Chickens-stories: Stoeke
China-poetry: Ho
Christmas: Sabuda
Civics: Wawrose
Commerce: Lewin
Creative writing: Fleischman
Crime and criminals: Jones, R.
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Ewing; Testa
Current events: Kuklin; Lorbiecki
Death-poetry: Duffy
Dogs-fiction: McKelvey
Dogs-stories: Brown
Doors-stories: Soto
Emotions-stories: Blumenthal
Ethics and values: Kuklin;
Lorbiecki
FABLES: Yerxa
Fairies-stories: Buehner
FANTASY: Evans; Gerstein
Farm life-stories: Buehner
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Hill; McKelvey
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Rice; Riecken
Fathers and sons-fiction: Riggs
Fish-stories: Yerxa
Floods-fiction: McKelvey
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Hooks; Philip;
Rogasky; Wisniewski
Food and eating-stories:
Blumenthal
Foster care-fiction: Warner
42 
* THE BULLETIN
Friends-fiction: Hurwitz; Larson;
Lorbiecki; Warner; Wunderli
Friends-poetry: Singer
FUNNY STORIES: McManus
Games: Silbaugh
Gangs-fiction: Ewing
Gold Rush-fiction: Cushman
Grandfathers-fiction: Rosselson
Grandfathers-stories: Wells
Guns-fiction: Lorbiecki
Health: Wawrose
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Cushman; Hill; McCully;
Partridge; Wisler
History: Tanaka
History, Renaissance: Stanley
History, U.S.: Johnston; Jones, R.;
McCully; St. George; Tunnell;
Warren; Wawrose
History, world: Maestro
Holidays: Irvine
Horses-fiction: Farley
India-stories: Bannerman
Inventions: Jones, C.
Islands-fiction: Siegelson
Japanese Americans: Tunnell
Judaism: Rogasky; Wisniewski
Latinos-Carlson
Latinos-stories: Riecken
Learning disabilities-fiction:
Dwyer
Literature, American: Philip
Literature, children's: Fleischman
Marine biology: Guiberson
Markets: Lewin
Mother and daughters-stories:
Blumenthal
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Cushman
Mothers and sons-fiction:
Harding; Testa
Movies-fiction: Farley
Music: Awmiller; Carlson
Music-fiction: Rosselson
MYSTERIES: Cadnum; Supraner
MYTHOLOGY, CLASSICAL:
Craft; Sutcliff
Nature study: Guiberson; London
Orphans: Warren
Photography: Keller
Physical education: Morris
POETRY: Carlson; Duffy; McQuinn;
Prelutsky; Singer
POP-UP BOOKS: Sabuda
Presidents: Jones, R.
Rabbits-stories: London
Reading aloud: Duffy; Herman; Ho;
Prelutsky; Sutcliff
Reading, beginning: Gerstein
Religious education: Maestro; Rogasky;
Wisniewski
Robots-stories: Yaccarino
Rural life: Partridge
School-fiction: Evans; Larson
School-poetry: Singer; Winters
School-stories: Slate; Stoeke
Scotland-stories: Brown
Ships: Tanaka
SHORT STORIES: McManus; Philip;
Wilson
Siblings-fiction: Cadnum; Herman
Slavery-fiction: Wisler
Slavery-stories: Johnston
Social studies: Carlson
SPORTS STORIES: Wunderli
Stepparents-stories: Gibbons
Storytelling-fiction: Siegelson
Storytime: Bannerman; Blumenthal;
McQuinn; Soto; Stoeke; Winters;
Yaccarino
Swimming-stories: Rice
TALL TALES: McManus
Tigers-stories: Bannerman
Toys-fiction: Gerstein
Transportation: Tanaka
Turtles: Guiberson
Voyages and travel: Tanaka
Weddings-fiction: Herman
Weddings-stories: Gibbons
Women's studies: Keller; Lowery; Lyons;
McCully; Wawrose
World cultures: Lewin
World War I-stories: Wells
World War II: Tunnell
^( 
*
ii. 
.
Far beyond the usual 'book review'
format. Books are described in varied, intriguing
manners by enthusiastic contributors."
-Children's Bookwatch, from a review of Booktalk! 4
# Booktalking the Award
Winners: Young Adult
Retrospective Volume
375 pp. * Covers 460 titles * 1996 *
ISBN 0-8242-0877-3 * $32
U.S. and Canada, $36 other countries
Booktalking the Award Winners:
1993-1994
190 pp.* Covers 213 titles * 1995 * ISBN 0-
8242-0876-5 * $32 U.S. and Canada,
$36 other countries
Booktalking the Award Winners:
1992-1993
224 pp. * Covers 250 titles
ISBN 0-8242-0866-8 * 1994 * $32 U.S.
and Canada, $36 other countries
Booktalk! 5
More Selections From
The Booktalker For All Ages
and Audiences
294 pp. Covers 320 titles * 1993 *
ISBN 0-8242-0836-6 * $32 U.S. and Canada,
$36 other countries
Booktalk! 4
Selections From The Booktalker
For All Ages and Audiences
320 pp. * Covers 350 titles * 1992 *
ISBN 0-8242-0835-8 * $32 U.S. and Canada,
$36 other countries
Booktalk! 3
More Booktalks for All Ages and
Audiences
386 pp. * Covers 500 titles * 1988 *
ISBN 0-8242-0764-5 * $32 U.S. and Canada,
$36 other countries
Booktalk! 2
Booktalking for All Ages and
Audiences
Second Edition
408 pp. * Covers 260 titles * 1985
ISBN 0-8242-0716-5 * $32 U.S. and Canada,
$36 other countries
Booktalking with Joni Bodart
Videocassette, 28 minutes * 1986 *
ISBN 0-8242-0741-6 * Color/VHS/HiFi with
Viewer's Guide * $89 U.S. and Canada,
$99 other countries
Now... Four Easy Ways to Order!
* Phone Toll-Free 1-800-367-6770 (Outside of the U.S. & Canada, call 1-718-588-8400)
SFaxToll-Free 1-800-590-1617 (Outside of the U.S.& Canada, fax 1-718-590-1617)
* Email: orderow@info.hwwilson.com
* By mail
H.W. Wilson. 950 University Avenue * Bronx, NY 10452-4224
http//www.hwwilson.com
W-- 
Starred in School Library Journal
By Pamela Duncan Edwards
Full-color pictures by Henry Cole
"A slug senses a slope and saunters on up, against the advice of a
sparrow, a spider, and a skink, among others. [This slug's ultimately
unhappy adventure is] told with a multitude of common and not
so common 'S' words. [With] realistically detailed illustrations ...
varied animals' perspectives reign throughout while the bumpy
surface the slug climbs remains a mystery until the end. This slug
is so appealing and full of personality that it will certainly garner
sympathy [and] the cover alone is enough
to get readers to select this book."-SLJ
An alliterative companion to
Four Famished Foxes and Fosdyke
By Pamela Duncan Edwards
Full-color pictures by Henry Cole
Ages 4-9. $14.95 TR 0-06-024925-0
$14.89 LB 0-06-024926-9
o ae
*"A story of hope, courage,
and empowerment."*
OUT OF
THE
Ages 8 up 56 pp. TR $19.00/0-688-13923-X 
B Cla 
J
A 
8 .93 
19.00/0-688-13923X 
Lothrop, Lee & Shepard Books
The proceeds from this book benefit the 
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
Out of the Dump photography project. 
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
aa
/a 
inabookJ
I1
LILLY'S PURPLE
PLASTIC PURSE
BY KEVIN HENKES
S* 
"Lilly, the delightful mouse-girl featured in Julius, the Baby
o] the World, has started school [anai as usual, nenKes gets it
all just right. The whole book, art and text, is lovingly layered
to express the mixed emotions that all of us experience."
-ALA Booklist (starred review)
'""Henkes offers useful, timeless advice for aDologizing to a
...-- 
-
-
_ 
__ 
__- 
-
-
, .. 
.
.
S 
friend and resolving a conflict.... Sympathetic and wise."
/ -
) 
--Publishers Weekly (starred review)
excitement, flashes with anger,
e, and leaps right off the page
-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 4 up. 32 pp.
TR $15.00/0-688-12897-1
LE $14.93/0-688-12898-X
S GREENWILLOW BOOKS
A division of William Morrow &6 Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10019
U
I
I
A 0 4_
i
1
HIGHLIGHTED IN ALA BOOKLIST
drive him to a difficult moral decision.... There are many
moments of Brooks' signature brilliance here, and since he
has tackled a difficult subject with passion, the novel is sure
to provoke heated--and welcome-discussion."--Booklist
Ages 12 up. $13.95TR (0-06-027060-8); $13.89LB (0-06-027061-6)
A Laura Geringer Book
Two Newbery Honor Books by Bruce Brooks
THE MOVES MAKE THE MAN 
WHAT HEARTS
1966-1992 ALA Best of the Best (YA) Books 
1993 ALA Best Books for Young Adults
Ages 12 up. 
Ages 12 up.
$15.89LB (0-06-020698-5) 
$14.95TR (0-06-021131-8)
Rack-sized $4.50PB (0-06-447022-9) 
$14.89LB (0-06-021132-6)
Digest-sized $4.50PB (0-06-440564-8) 
$4.50PB (0-06-447127-6)
A Laura Geringer Book
A HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, 10022
"To the distress of
his sophisticated,
self-indulgent
parents, 14-year-
old Zimmerman
has 'fallen in love
with God.' But
when the adults
undergo their
own religious
conversion ...
they now decide
he must become
a poster boy for
their own sect.
The boy's
resistance to
these designs
will ultimately
Choices for Preschoolers
s---------- 
e-
»1^-- 
-i
Where Do Babies Come From?
by Angela Royston
Illustrated with photographs by
Steve Gorton & Susanna Price
"An outstanding introduction for preschoolers who are
already starting to ask a lot of questions about
reproduction. A brief text and stunning full-color
photographs provide just enough information to satisfy
young questioners...smiling people of different races
and sizes in colorful clothes are especially appealing."
Vih,., Dm,_,,o
OWheret
do.babies
come
IC^OJ
S4;r M
DK Publishing, Inc.
95 Madison Avenue
NewYork, NY 10016
http://www.dk.com
Available from your regular supplier
I IE
)u.X 
« 
YOr 
ISI 
!
Popposites
Designed byJung-Huyn Yoon
"This nifty bit of paper engineering introduces toddlers
and preschoolers to the concept of opposites....Fold the
face of a 'sad' tot to make him 'happy'....With the pull of
a tab, a 'short' green pencil stub grows into a 'long'
variegated pencil....Color photos are bright
and uncomplicated....Paper construction is
about as rugged as it comes...."
-The 
Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
Grades PreK-K. ISBN: 0-7894-0576-8 - $14.95
: : :
O
OP
r
E!
UP4
poems and drawings by
Shel Silverstein
author 
of 
Where 
the 
Sidewalk 
Ends
and 
A 
Light 
in 
the 
Attic
·
Starred 
Review 
in 
ALA 
Booklist
·
Pointer 
Review 
in 
KirkusReviews
·
Starred 
Review 
in Publishers 
Weekly
· Starred 
Review 
in 
The 
Bulletin 
of 
the 
Center
for 
Children's 
Books
$16,05 
TR 
0-06-024802-5 
$16.89 
LB 
0-06-024803-3
L HarperCollinsChildren SBooks
10 East 
53rd 
Srreet, New 
York, NY 
10022 
1:
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
"A fine tribute to one of the brave early mothers of multiculturalism.
-
Publhbers Weekly
This volume reprints stories from MrA,. Spring Fragrance, including the children's
collection, "Tales of Chinese Children," featuring such stories as "The Story of a
Little Chinese Seabird" and "What about the Cat?" Also included are other pre-
viously uncollected stories and journalistic essays by the first published Asian
North American fiction writer.
During an era of extreme Sinophobia, the Eurasian Sui Sin Far (1865-1914)
courageously chose to write of the Chinese in North America as humorous, tragic,
charming, and loving - in short, as human. Her stories sympathetically portray a
group caught between worlds, inheritors of traditional Chinese values who find
themselves thrust into boomingly mercantile
and extremely race-conscious cities.
Cloth, $39.95; Paper, $15.95
I0IIIIII 
II1 96)111111
II
0008-9036(199609)50:1 *;1-P
'9. 
;*"
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
I 
UNXTERilryM ILINOS PRSS -htt://wwluiched/prvides/uires
