ILL 
NO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
:, 
.
*· 
rf,..^ 
'- * ^ 
IVI' 
*^"
William Joyce shows and tells what being an artist and writer is all
about in this boisterous collection of full-color drawings, sketches,
photographs, anecdotes, and snippets of future projects.
"This book is 
so cleverly designed, so full of interesting tidbits and
artistic insights that it will appeal to a wide range of young people"
-ALA 
Booklilst
"In spreads that encompass the formation of his drawing style and
the genesis of ideas for individual books ... Joyce definitely fulfills
his pledge [to answer questions about how he does his books]."
-The 
Bulletin
All ages. $16.95 TR 0-06-027432-8
William Joyce's most
recent picture book
THE LEAF MEN
Ages 4-8. S15.95 TR 0-06-027237-6
$15.89 LB 0-06-027238-4
Laura Geringer Books
I HarperCollinsPublishers
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
http://www.harperchildrens.com
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
A LOOK INSIDE
351 
THE BIG PICTURE
Choosing Up Sides by John H. Ritter
352 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
357 * Night at the Fair written and illus. by Donald Crews
357 * Bodiesfrom the Bog by James M. Deem
361 
* Martha Graham: A Dancer's Life by Russell Freedman
362 * Easter Parade by Eloise Greenfield; illus. by Jan Spivey Gilchrist
375 
* IAm Mordred: A Tale from Camelot by Nancy Springer
378 
* Bat 6 by Virginia Euwer Wolff
380 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
381 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
June 1998
Vol. 51 No. 10
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM)
CENTER STAFF
Shirley Chan
Linda Fenster
Kate McDowell
Jordan Martin
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1998 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Ronald Himler from Choosing Up Sides ©1998. Used by permission of
Philomel Books.
JUNE 1998 
* 351
THE BIG PICTURE
Choosing Up Sides
by John H. Ritter
Often has the Big Picture gleefully reveled in a particularly fine werewolf or vam-
pire tale or highlighted a fetchingly illustrated monster, demon, or creature that
goes bump in the night. So indulge us now as, for the second consecutive issue, we
step up to bat on the side of the angels, this time with a novel that pits fire and
brimstone Fundamentalism against a rival religion-Baseball-and treats both with
cathartic understanding.
Newcomer Luke Bledsoe has barely had time to learn the geographic and
social lay of the land in Crown Falls, Ohio, when he is confronted by temptation
in the shape of the mystifying and forbidden game of baseball. The Crown Falls
team claimed the 1920 county championship and this year hopes to take the 1921
state finals; with the help of this new kid, whose mighty southpaw can hurl a
mayapple with deadly accuracy or return a stray ball from 350 feet, victory is in the
bag. But Luke's Baptist congregation considers all sport to be sinful frivolity, and,
as his preacher father warns, "Among the left-handers we find the heathen, the
lunatic, the criminal-minded. The left side has always been the side of Satan."
Classmate "Skinny" Lappman, a talented hitter with a reasonable shot at
the pros, argues convincingly that Luke's talent is God-given and its waste the
greater sin. Maternal Uncle Micah, a sports reporter whom Preacher Bledsoe re-
gards as an incorrigible bon vivant, learns of his nephew's talent and takes him to a
exhibition game to see the great Babe Ruth, pointing out with no great subtlety
that this left-hander's talent was being put to the service of rebuilding a burned-
out orphanage. Moreover, the approbation of pretty, outspoken baseball fanatic
Annabeth Quinn is nearly incentive enough to lure Luke onto the diamond. A
long habit of obedience, deep respect for his father's beliefs, and more than a little
fear of his father's violent temper, however, make Luke a hard sell. He is also
aware that baseball's attraction is not entirely benign: "Right quick, I could see
how tempting baseball could be, the frenzy it could stir, and the Devil-like self-
importance it could give a man who had a talent for the game." Luke does in time
decide to follow the course of his own nature and play ball, but his determination
incurs his father's vicious wrath (the preacher breaks his son's left arm in a desper-
ate effort to save his soul) and inadvertently results in his father's death.
The complexity of Luke's relationship with his father takes Ritter's plot
well beyond the parameters of Kate Seago's Matthew Unstrung (BCCB 3/98),
which shares a similar boy-defies-preacher-father plotline. A Bible-thumping ty-
rant Ezekiel Bledsoe may be, but Ritter makes it clear that his love for his son is
genuine. Jealousy of Luke's bond with Uncle Micah impels Bledsoe to overcome
352 
* 
THE BULLETIN
his fear of water and learn how to fish with his boy. In an unguarded moment, he
gently touches Luke's shoulder with his own left hand, an indication that he has
suffered firsthand the self-denial he prescribes for his son. Luke is sensitive to and
appreciative of his father's tentative expressions of affection and understands-
perhaps more clearly than many readers will-that his father's meanness is prompted
by concern for his good: "I did not hate him his harshness. It was only his way."
Ritter's debut tale of epiphany and apocalypse is appropriately played
out on a dense turf of religious reference and Biblical allusion. It's no coincidence
that characters named for prophets Ezekiel and Micah urge upon Luke their mes-
sages of conversion of heart; nor that Preacher Bledsoe's first sermon to his new
congregation is based on Jesus' temptation on the mountaintop, while Luke pon-
ders his life's path on a hilltop overlooking the ball field. The preacher's chosen
hymn for the uplift of sinners is "Throw Out the Lifeline"; in a devilishly drawn
irony, Bledsoe drowns in the Ohio River (into which he had tripped in a rage)
because Luke is unable to throw him a rope with his broken left arm.
Continually leavening the sober elements of this morality tale, however,
is the pure joy of baseball and, at least in Luke's case, its redemptive power. Read-
ers rediscover the game through the innocent eyes of a rookie player who is thrilled
by the thunderous crack of the bat, delighted by the happiness of the spectators,
and above all, amazed at his own pitching ability: "Skinny swung at my first throw
as soon as he saw it. His whole body spun around like a long-shafted well auger
drilling into the ground for water. But he come up dry." Certainly all readers will
rejoice that a freer life upriver with Uncle Micah will allow Luke to exercise his
talent, but the most perspicacious will recognize that it's the legacy of conscience
from his harsh and misguided father that will assure he plays with integrity. (Im-
print information appears on p. 372.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
/4
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
BAUER, MARION DANE 
Bear's Hiccups; illus. by Diane Dawson Hearn. 
Holiday
House, 1998 
48p
ISBN 0-8234-1339-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 1-2
In this sequel to Turtle Dreams (BCCB 2/98), beginning readers will be able to cut
their teeth on six short chapters about pond occupants on "the hottest day of the
entire summer in the forest." Bear, attempting to escape the heat, takes a dip in
the pond and proceeds to declare it as his ("This pond is mine. All mine"). Frog
won't have any of it, however, and pretty soon they are in each other's faces-in
Frog's case, literally. The other pond occupants warn Frog of Bear's obvious right
to the claim, pointing out that he "is a very large bear." Frog persists, and the
confrontation results in Frog's disappearance and a bad case of the hiccups for
Bear. Young mystery solvers will surmise long before Chapter Six that Frog is the
JUNE 1998 * 353
cause of Bear's digestive disturbances, revealed when Turtle bites Bear's nose in an
attempt to find out Frog's whereabouts and it precipitates a Bear-size sneezing fit
that releases Frog. The engaging plot gathers a lot more momentum than the
previous book, and the predominantly green and brown watercolor palette of the
pond and its occupants provides plenty of visual interest and comic relief for the
reader in transition from picture books to chapter books. PM
BLACKWOOD, GARY 
The Shakespeare Stealer. Dutton, 1998 
21 6p
ISBN 0-525-45863-8 $15.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Widge is an Elizabethan apprentice, and his contract is abruptly sold to a new
master who has a use for Widge's unusual skill of taking shorthand. The use
proves to be a nefarious one: Widge is to steal the text of Mr. Shakespeare's new
play, Hamlet, by taking it down as the actors at the Globe play it. Widge soon
finds himself caught up in the good fellowship of the troupe and the excitement of
treading the boards, and he must choose between obeying his master (whose fear-
some henchman enforces orders with brutality) and remaining loyal to the com-
pany that has taken him in, shown him kindness, and offered him opportunity.
There's a pleasing air of high adventure to Widge's escapades that is enhanced by
Blackwood's careful but never dry use of period and theatrical detail. The prob-
lem of play piracy is an intriguing and effective hook for the story, and the combi-
nation of colorful backstage characters, Widge's gradual finding of his feet in the
theatrical world, and a menacing villain make the book an enjoyable historical
romp. DS
BOLDEN, TONYA, ed. 
33 Things Every Girl Should Know: Stories, Songs, Poems,
and Smart Talk by 33 Extraordinary Women. 
Crown, 1998 
159p 
illus. with
photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-70999-6 
$17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-517-70936-8 
$13.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
The title's a bit misleading-there aren't so much thirty-three things as there are
anthology entries from thirty-three women. Contributors range from cartoonist
Lynda Barry to athlete Rebecca Lobo, sociolinguist Deborah Tannen to forensic
chemist Juliann Watley. Pieces vary in form (there are poems, cartoons, fiction,
and photographs) and approach: some talk about the joy of following one's pas-
sion, some about family ties (the descendant of Elizabeth Cady Stanton provides
an essay); some speak of obstacles overcome, some of various kinds of assistance
and inspiration. The result is uneven: some articles are interesting (Bernice and
Toshi Reagon's mother-daughter offering is energetic and particular) but some are
blandly exhortatory or narrowly focused (Wendy Wasserstein's insidery piece about
the world of New York private schools seems particularly out of place). The ab-
sence of linking material or discernible overall focus makes the collection rather
uncollected-while diversity allows for the merits of contributors Vera Wang and
Lauren Hutton as well as questions about the importance of appearance, some
commentary addressing the seeming conflict would have helped considerably.
Though this lacks the concrete usefulness of Catherine Dee's The Girls' Guide to
Life (BCCB 7/97), the multivocality and the eclectic format here may appeal to
readers looking for further philosophical exploration of the possibilities of young
womanhood. DS
354 
* THE BULLETIN
BUEHNER, CARALYN 
IDidIt, I'm Sorry; illus. by Mark Buehner. 
Dial, 1998 
32p
Library ISBN 0-8037-2011-4 
$15.89
Trade ISBN 0-8037-2010-6 
$15.99 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Honesty, dependability, thoughtfulness, and obedience are some of the values en-
couraged here in a quiz format featuring animal kids facing moral dilemmas. Af-
ter playing at Grandma's, should Howie Hogg clean up his mess of straw, sticks,
and bricks, tweeze his snout hairs, or "Tell Grandma she lives in a pigsty"? (Choose
the wrong answer and she'll sic the wolf on ya.) Full-page oil-on-acrylic illustra-
tions in high-energy colors depict some seriously solid animals; each picture faces a
short scenario followed by two obviously wrong choices and one no-brainer (some-
times sycophantically phrased) right choice. The entertaining and sometimes clever
illustrations extend the amusing situations and help to lighten the moral messages,
although several jokes are more aimed at the adult reading the book rather than the
intended child. A bee, cat, rabbit, and tyrannosaurus, as well as whales and goril-
las, are hidden in the illustrations for the closer perusal of those who tire of making
moral decisions. As for those needing to verify their answers, the letter of the
correct answer is not only hidden in the picture itself but can be checked with an
answer key at the end of the book. The issues of right and wrong are a little
simplified and they don't couple well with the hidden-picture gimmick, but kids
will probably enjoy the ridiculous tone of the book and won't mind straining their
eyeballs looking for stuff long before the moral principles have been inculcated.
PM
BUNTING, EVE 
Your Move; illus. by James Ransome. 
Harcourt, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200181-6 
$16.00 
Ad 
6-8 yrs
"I'm not that dumb. Maybe I did know. But I wanted to be in with them." Ten-
year-old James recalls the near-tragic misadventure of the evening he brought his
adoring younger brother Isaac along on his initiation into the K-Bones, a young
crew of gangsta wannabes. James' mission is to climb up to a sign overhanging the
expressway and spraypaint the crew's name over a rival crew's tag. The Snakes,
however, are older and armed, and although the K-Bones escape with only terrified
Isaac's ripped pants and lacerated knees as the night's damages, this close shave is
enough to convince James that he does not want to join the crew. Bunting's text
acknowledges the allure, even the romance, ofJames's gutsy escapade, and his pride
in his accomplishment: "When I reach the s, I look. I can read it! Yeah!" Ransome's
densely brushed oils poignantly contrast the relative youth and naivetd of the K-
Bones with the menace of the more mature Snakes. The aftermath ofJames' tale is
all too facile, however. Bullets fly and miss their marks; James can simply walk
away from the K-Bones with no repercussions; Mom will quit her night job to stay
home with her sons; the issue of "belonging" is left at bay. Readers and listeners
who have caught a glimpse of the evening news can figure out there's more ro-
mance than realism here. EB
CADNUM, MICHAEL In a Dark Wood. Orchard, 1998 
24 6p
Library ISBN 0-531-33071-0 
$18.99
Trade ISBN 0-531-30071-4 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Like Springer's IAm Mordred, reviewed below, this is a creative revisioning of a
treasured literary myth. Geoffrey, the sheriff of Nottingham, lives a seemingly
enviable life, possessing the favor of the king, the company of a noble-born wife,
JUNE 1998 
* 
355
and the extracurricular attentions of a beautiful abbess. He's plagued by uneasi-
ness and self-doubts, however, which coalesce around the challenge of Robin Hood
to the sheriffs authority in the shire. Geoffrey's hunt for the outlaw and his band
turns into a game of cat and mouse; Geoffrey's failure to capture Robin and his
being embarrassingly captured instead (he's held overnight as a "guest" and re-
leased) suggests that he may in fact not be the cat, especially in light of the way
Robin Hood makes him question his own worth and value as a man. The tables
and hierarchy aren't entirely turned here (Robin Hood is as heroic as ever), but the
sheriffs viewpoint receives a new sympathy and a more complex understanding.
The dark and sophisticated psychologizing (the style, along with the questions of
law, morality, and individual values, is oddly reminiscent of P. D. James) is on the
anachronistic side, and the book's inwardness makes the focus and pacing very
different from a traditional Merry Men adventure. Cadnum plays interestingly
with medieval issues of class, language, and honor, however, in ways that will in-
trigue readers with an abiding interest in the topic or period; teens growing a bit
cynical about the time-honored legend will also appreciate the edginess of the
book's moody tension and grim evocation of commonplace violence and cruelty.
In addition to thoughtful outlaws, this might well appeal to readers with a taste for
spiky fantasies such as Megan Whalen Turner's The Thief(BCCB 11/96). DS
CAFFEY, DONNA 
Yikes-Lice!; illus. by Patrick Girouard. 
Whitman, 1998 
25p
ISBN 0-8075-9374-5 
$13.95 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
Okay, so reading it will make you itch, but this is still a very handy book about
those unpleasant realities known as cooties or head lice. The primary rhyming text
(in a large, bold typeface) shows how the little buggers travel to a young girl's hair
and how her mother discovers and treats them; the secondary text (smaller, not
bold) gives factual information (lice are about the size of a pinhead, they crawl but
don't hop, jump, or fly, it takes about ten days for a nit to hatch, etc.). Granted,
the rhyming text is determinedly cutesy, but then something has to be when deal-
ing with this timely if unappetizing topic. Girouard's cartoons help the learning
process along by rendering the insects in abrasive shades of purple and green, de-
fusing the disgust so much that kids might even start thinking cooties are cute.
Caffey is clear that cleanliness is not the issue, that home remedies are not the
answer, and that patience is a virtue in the battle to eradicate head lice. A "Note to
Concerned Grownups" written by a doctor will do much to keep parents and
caregivers from losing their cool when confronted by the creepy crawlies. JMD
CALVERT, PATRICIA 
Sooner. Atheneum, 1998 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-689-81114-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
In this sequel to Bigger (BCCB 3/94), Tyler Bohannon returns to Missouri after a
solo trek to find his father, a Rebel soldier who, with the rest of General Shelby's
Iron Brigade, refuses to acknowledge that their cause has been lost. Thirteen years
old and matured by the ordeal of locating and then losing his father, Tyler steps
into the role of man of the house with considerable success; he bargains for a mule,
directs the farm work, keeps his younger brother in line, and even outwits a pair of
scalawags attempting to pillage the homestead. Scampering among all these events
is a new puppy, Sooner-offspring of the fierce Bigger-who quickly settles in as
a loyal and protective guard dog, beloved by the whole family. But when Ellen
356 
* THE BULLETIN
Bohannon marries a recently widowed neighbor, it becomes clear that Sooner is,
first and last, Tyler's dog; unable to accept a subordinate role in the new house-
hold, Tyler hits the trail to the Western territories to stake out his independence
with Sooner at his side. Calvert injects some gritty realism not always found in
coming-of-age-on-the-prairie stories: brothers actually scuffle and cry, widows
remarry for convenience and companionship as well as affection, and even the
noblest of dogs sometimes freeze or run in fear. Fans of Bigger will welcome the
second installment of Tyler's tale, and they'll hope that Calvert follows his adven-
tures out West. EB
COOK, NICK Roller Coasters: Or, I Had So Much Fun, I Almost
Puked. Carolrhoda, 1998 
56p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-57505-071-4 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Hang on to your lunch as Cook takes you for a spin through the history and design
of "scream machines," which entice about three hundred million people a year to
"challenge death-safely." The survey begins with the coasters' tame origins in
the early scenic railroads and simple gravity "switchbacks"-tame, that is, unless
they jumped a track, rolled backward, or derailed over a stray chestnut. From
there Cook moves on to descriptions of modern thrill rides and includes a particu-
larly cogent chapter on the physics behind the fright. Throughout the text, he
reassures the chicken-hearted of the safety of roller coasters ("Riding a merry-go-
round to just tripping hurts more people each year") and refrains from any men-
tion of accidents involving rider misbehavior. But of course it's the daredevils who
will be drawn to this title, and they'll find plenty to applaud in the gallery of color
photos of shrieking thrill seekers and Cook's "Top Ten Tips for a Scarier Ride."
A glossary and bibliography are included, and for those poor wretches who can't
persuade the parents to plan summer vacation around a roller coaster tour, there's
a list of Internet sites for a virtual visit. EB
COYNE, RACHEL 
Daughter, Have I Told You?; illus. by Virginia Halstead. 
Holt,
1998 
26p
ISBN 0-8050-5301-8 
$15.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
Sentimental metaphors are set against posterlike compositions in this homage to
the bonds between mothers and daughters and the family of women. The poem,
addressed to a daughter by her mother, describes the attributes of the women who
came before: "Daughter, have I told you?/ You are of women whose words are
wildflowers./ Whose stomachs are soft hills and whose shoulders are the river's
marshy end. ... Our lives are the solid earth beneath your feet/ and our embrace,
like the paths of the buffalo, circles the heart's land." Pastel illustrations of wom-
anly riverbanks and lakes, trees with arm-like branches and faces growing out of
trunks, and placid nature scenes contribute to a bucolic picture of a generic sister-
hood of women. Halstead has done a capable job depicting in literal form the
concrete images provided by the verse. A clear, agreeable palette of greens and
blues includes contrasting splashes of yellow and red, and the spreads featuring
mothers and daughters warmly occupied with one another are nicely balanced.
The text meanders to a predictable, uneventful end, and while the metaphors may
be concrete, the concepts are lightweight and cliched. Any connection to past
ancestry and/or current sisterhood is one that will have to be made for younger
listeners. JMD
JUNE 1998 
* 357
CREWS, 
DONALD 
Night at the Fair; written and illus. by Donald
Crews. 
Greenwillow, 1998 
28p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11484-9 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11483-0 
$15.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
Crews' bold graphics are ideally suited to this view of fairgrounds at night. Food
and game booths, flashing lights, amusement rides, and neon signs are rendered in
a bright, hot palette of yellows, pinks, and greens against a black background sky,
as Crews' slight, sequential text leads readers through his pictorial evocation of the
myriad pleasures offered at a fair. The fair itself is the main attraction here, and
that's a good thing, because the faces of people in the crowds and on the rides are
unarticulated, with undifferentiated grins taking the place of any specific emotion.
Nondescript crowds notwithstanding, the illustrations work their own sort of mid-
way magic. Starting with the opening illustration of the neon-pulsing main gate,
Crews' watercolors will transport readers to the incandescent fairgrounds, provid-
ing a visual taste of carnival nightlife. JMD
CURLEE, LYNN 
Into the Ice: The Story ofArctic Exploration; written and illus. by
Lynn Curlee. 
Houghton, 1998 
40p
ISBN 0-395-83013-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Curlee offers a lucid, if somewhat superficial, overview of European and American
exploration of the Northern polar regions. Although the text is not formally di-
vided into chapters, information is chronologically arranged in three general eras
of discovery-early probes of the Northern isles and coastal regions, three centu-
ries of searching for the Northwest Passage, and finally the race to set foot on the
North Pole itself. After a sluggishly paced start, Curlee picks up steam as he re-
counts the highlights of the doomed Franklin expedition and of Peary and Cook's
rival claims as first man at the Pole. Full and double-page acrylic spreads employ
streamlined, almost na've, composition and chilly matte blues and grays to convey
the eerie bleakness of the region. Curlee acknowledges the debt most of the ex-
plorers owed to the Inuit people, from whom they learned Arctic survival skills,
but makes only brief mention of the contemporary Inuit population or the current
state of research in the area. However, a list of children's books for further reading
is included to guide readers deeper into the interior of this intriguing topic. EB
DEEM, JAMES M. 
Bodiesfrom the Bog. Houghton, 1998 
42p 
illus. with pho-
tographs
ISBN 0-395-85784-8 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-5
In this overview of European "bog body" discoveries, Deem demonstrates that he
knows his audience. First, he hooks them with a chapter filled with references to
human sacrifice; next he slips across some clearly explained scientific information
on how different bog types preserve both artifacts and human remains; finally he
examines a host of gory possibilities concerning the bog bodies' various demises.
Methods of forensic analysis are drastically simplified, but readers will easily follow
the common scientific strategies for determining cause of death. (Although he
clearly aligns himself with scientists who find value in examining human remains
for any historic light they can shed, Deem's closing pages acknowledge the often
careless disposition of the bodies in laboratories and museums.) Too often, how-
ever, Deem litanizes the finds simply for what seems to be maximum dramatic
effect. Spacious layout and exceptionally clear photographic reproductions make
this, given the grim nature of its topic, an unexpectedly attractive volume. EB
358 
* THE BULLETIN
DESSEN, SARAH 
Someone Like You. 
Viking, 1998 
28lp
ISBN 0-670-87778-6 
$15.99 
R Gr. 7-12
Devoted best friends and neighbors, Halley and Scarlett find their junior year
brings life changes they never dreamed of. First, Scarlett's boyfriend dies in an
accident, and then Scarlett discovers she's pregnant. Halley falls for Macon, a
charming but disreputable boy guaranteed to drive Halley's therapist mother, al-
ready alarmed by her daughter's increasing distance and by Scarlett's example,
crazy. The mounting intensity of Halley's yearning for Macon, for love, for au-
tonomy-and increasing questions about the overlap among the three-are brought
into sharp relief when contrasted with Scarlett's experience. As in That Summer
(BCCB 11/96), Dessen shows herself a lyrical stylist, giving Halley's narration a
freshness that keeps the book's romantic events from becoming too flowery or
purple. The occurrences do incline towards the melodramatic (a motorcycle crash,
a car crash, a dying grandmother, the start of labor at the junior prom), but the
book's nuanced depiction of relationships (particularly between Halley and her
mother) and of Halley's growth remains compelling throughout. This is a highly
wrought story of love and conflict that should be relished by fans of Mary Down-
ing Hahn's The Wind Blows Backward (BCCB 5/93). DS
DOHERTY, BERLIE, comp. 
Tales of Wonder and Magic; illus. by Juan
Wijngaard. 
Candlewick, 1998 
108p
ISBN 1-56402-891-7 
$21.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Ten beautifully textured tales, each retold in lyrical language that lends itself com-
fortably to reading or telling aloud, comprise this collection. Doherty's selection
indicates an obvious appreciation for the well-told tale and an apparent knack for
culling gems from almost forgotten volumes. The ten tales (nine are based on
traditional folktales and Doherty contributes an original "faux-tale") include the
familiar (Winifred Finlay's romantic "Tamlane" and Virginia Hamilton's inspira-
tional "The People Could Fly") and not so familiar (Humphrey Harman's version
of the African "Chura and Marwe" and A. W. Reed's adaptation of the Australian
Aboriginal story "Mirragen the Cat-Man"), but each tale is a complete world unto
itself and a fine example of literary retelling. Wijngaard's gouache illustrations are
a combination of full-page paintings, vignettes, and decorative borders that consis-
tently evoke the tales' fantasy worlds and exaggerated denizens therein, from the
bright fields of Carterhaugh to the shimmering, dark-cloaked Moon herself. Cul-
tural context is somewhat generic, but a "Permissions Granted" page gives the
written source for each story. JMD
DUNPHY, MADELEINE 
Here Is the Coral Reef illus. by Tom Leonard. 
Hyperion,
1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2135-3 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0163-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
A cumulative text is layered phrase by phrase while jewel-toned acrylics layer the
vivid illustrations with the brilliant tapestry of life in a coral reef. Having already
dealt with a tropical rain forest, the Southwestern desert, the Arctic winter and the
wetlands, Dunphy now turns to the interdependence of life in an underwater eco-
system where parrotfish, wrasses, cod, anemones, clownfish, sponges, turtles, manta
rays, remoras, sharks, and eels coexist. Although the repetitive text, as it lengthens,
JUNE 1998 
* 359
tends to get tedious rather than increasing the fun, the eye-popping visuals (the
clownfish gliding in the anemones are especially stunning and touchable) should
yield some appreciative "oohs" and "ahs" as well as helping kids anticipate what
the next creature-feature will be. While no specific information is provided on the
depicted reef residents, a page of general information is appended. This is a rela-
tively painless way to introduce the young to the amazing spectacle of Australia's
Great Barrier Reef in particular and the wonderment of coral reefs anywhere. PM
DUNREA, OLIVIER 
The Trow-Wife's Treasure; written and illus. by Olivier
Dunrea. 
Farrar, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-374-37792-8 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Dunrea has given readers several unusual tales (most recently The Painter Who
Loved Chickens, BCCB 4/95), and this title does not stray far from the road less
traveled. Kind-hearted farmer Bracken Van Eyck helps recover the child of an
odd, troll-like creature known as a trow-wife. The trow-wife's bairn has been
taken by a "tricksy wind," and farmer and mother chase the wind-carried little
bundle from henhouse to pighouse to "the top of a standing stone," finally catch-
ing it when the farmer retrieves the trow-bairn from behind a secret door in the
barn roof. Dunrea's mythical island ofNord Eyris is handily evoked by the sturdy,
folk-style gouache illustrations, which depict farm, farmer, and animals against a
gray, undetailed background. The text blocks are contained within red frames,
and the motif continues in the double red lines that serve as the bottom borders of
each double-page spread. These lines serve double duty as borders and as an inte-
grated path through the story as Van Eyck and the trow-wife walk on the path, use
it as a step, lean ladders against it, etc. This mini-suspense ends with hero Van
Eyck being given a magical, gold-egg-laying hen by the grateful trow-wife, and
while listeners may wonder about that convenient secret door, Dunrea's evocation
of place and characters is enough to make the hunt worthwhile. JMD
EMBERLEY, REBECCA 
My Mother's Secret Life; written and illus. by Rebecca
Emberley. 
Little, 1998 
28p
ISBN 0-316-23496-6 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
The exasperating narrator's exasperated mother has had it ("The dog threw up on
the carpet. The cat ate the frosting off the cake. I broke my mother's pearl neck-
lace while I was supposed to be cleaning my room") and goes to hide in her room.
After decorating the refrigerator and having a snack, our young storyteller takes a
nap. She dreams she's at the circus enjoying the acrobats and clowns, especially
the woman on the flying trapeze: 
"Suddenly . . . the air swirled around me.
'MOTHER!' I cried. 'Who else?' said the lady hanging by her heels, as she swept
me up and away. I opened my eyes. I saw my mother's smile. 'Mother,' I said. 'I
dreamt we were at the circus.' 'How exciting!' said Mother. 'I love the circus.'"
The storyline has the logic of a dream (which is to say not much) and the text is
nearly stark in its simplicity. Still, the winning elements in the text-a mischie-
vous kid, a loving if overwhelmed mom, and the circus-are brought to glittering
life in Emberley's mixed-media collages. Sparkles, spangles, pearls, feathers, tex-
tured paper and gold rickrack flash in balanced compositions easily viewed by a
group. The combination of the kid-pleasing circus motif and imaginative, expres-
sive illustrations sure to inspire some original kid-collage puts this title in the cen-
ter ring. JMD
360 
* THE BULLETIN
FARRELL, JEANETTE 
Invisible Enemies: Stories of Infectious Disease. Farrar,
1998 
[2 2 4 p]
ISBN 0-374-33637-7 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-12
The book's cover, a macabre detail from a Brueghel painting, sets the tone for this
absorbing and immensely readable account of humankind's age-old battle with
the mighty microorganisms that have changed history. The exploration focuses
on seven deadly sicknesses-smallpox, leprosy, plague, tuberculosis, malaria, chol-
era, and AIDS-that have scourged the planet and have been fought with varying
degrees of success by science of various eras. Farrell (a medical student whose
experience includes working in a TB sanatorium and with a leprosy relief agency)
explains the science vividly and clearly but also spins a good yarn, peppering her
accounts with enticingly bizarre or creepy tidbits (surgery to restore the eyelid
muscles on leprosy patients initially left them opening and shutting their eyes in
rhythm with their chewing, and the Chinese inoculated themselves against small-
pox by "snorting the scabs of smallpox patients up their nose"). Epidemiological,
bacteriological, and even sociological concerns are analyzed, providing an effective
picture of how diseases spread, what effects they had and have, and what disease-
fighters were facing societally as well as medically. It's also evident that medical
advances have often been random and providential and that the questions of dis-
ease eradication aren't as simple as they appear. The broader coverage here than in
Giblin's When Plague Strikes (BCCB 10/95) makes some of the overall patterns of
disease clearer, and Farrell's sense of drama and habit of crediting some of the
unsung (and often involuntary) heroes of medical history gives her approach a
fresh and involving slant. Suggestions for further reading, a bibliography, and an
index are included. DS
FEIFFER, JULES 
I Lost My Bear; written and illus. by Jules Feiffer. 
Morrow,
1998 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-15148-5 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-15147-7 $16.00 
R* 4-8 yrs
Our child narrator has misplaced her favorite stuffed toy, and her emotional search
is the subject of this domestic drama. She unsuccessfully seeks help from her
mother ("Try to think like a detective and remember where you were playing with
it last"), her father ("I want you to find it for yourself, and that will be a lesson to
you to remember where you put things") and her older sister ("I have never never
never played with your stupid bear, and I want you to stop playing with my nail
polish!"). Her sister ultimately offers advice and assistance in the form of her
favorite stuffed toy, and our narrator earnestly searches high and low, distracted by
other lost things she finds along the way, until bedtime, when her mother ends a
fresh onslaught of tears by pulling back the covers to reveal "Bearsy!" Feiffer tells
his story through cartoon panels and dialogue balloons, and the energetic illustra-
tions suit the vibrant text. The young narrator crawls through the panels in search
of her bear, toppling books from shelves, wandering bereft through dark empty
halls ("But I know it's gone forever"), and discovering long-lost treasures, all the
while ruminating with the intense emotionality of the young on the possible fate
of her bear. Preschoolers who listen to this tale will be enthralled by the drama of
the search and the satisfaction of the conclusion; independent readers are going to
get a charge out of the melodrama and humor of the relationships. Feiffer has
JUNE 1998 
* 
361
produced a picture book that will satisfy a number of audiences on a number of
levels, and that is no small feat. JMD
FLEISCHMAN, PAUL 
Whirligig. Holt, 1998 
133p
ISBN 0-8050-5582-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Seventeen-year-old desperate-to-be-cool Brent Bishop loses his bid for a place with
the popular crowd and storms out of a party much the worse for alcohol. Drunk
behind the wheel of his car, he attempts suicide, only to survive the car crash that
ends the life of a much-loved young woman named Lea Zamora. Brent and his
parents face Lea's mother in the office of a mediator in order to hear her request for
restitution: she wants Brent to build four whirligigs, wind toys, with Lea's face in
the design, and set them up somewhere in Washington, California, Florida, and
Maine. His parents react with dismay, but Brent is grateful for a chance to expiate
his guilt, and he accepts a how-to book and a Greyhound bus pass from the griev-
ing mother. With the design and construction of each whirligig Brent becomes
more skilled, more knowledgeable about his materials and himself. Depictions of
the people the whirligigs affect are more like fast Polaroids than studied portraits,
and characterization is slight; still, as in Seedfolks (BCCB 7/97), Fleischman has a
way of getting inside the heads of even his most thinly realized characters, impart-
ing a humanity that is both recognizable and touching. The structure of the novel
is somewhat contrived (the novel's nine chapters are divided into five chapters
about Brent's travels and travails and four about the impact of the four whirligigs
on individuals in four states), but it stands the strain by not falling into the maud-
lin even as Brent's self-absorption receives a mortal blow by his acceptance of re-
sponsibility for the death of Lea. Granted, Brent's bus ride across America is a
thinly disguised allegory of his journey to himself, but Fleischman's easy style makes
the ride smooth. JMD
FREEDMAN, 
RUSSELL 
Martha Graham: A Dancer's Life. 
Clarion,
1998 
175p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-395-74655-8 $18.00 
R* 
Gr. 6-12
Dance is such an ephemeral art that its greats seem to fade in memory with unfor-
tunate speed; Russell Freedman here does an impressive job of countering that
tendency for the legendary Martha Graham, matriarch of modern American dance.
The book follows Graham from her unpromising beginning as a pudgy but deter-
mined neophyte to her breaking out with her own company to her legion of fa-
mous students (ranging from Merce Cunningham to Madonna). The dancer's
tempestuous and magnetic personality is well conveyed with choice quotes from
her ("I think I only started to choreograph so that I could have something to show
off in") and about her ("While you were in the company, she would die for you.
The moment you left, you were gone"; "If there wasn't something to be upset
about she could make something to be upset about"). Her love life (a long-term
and rewarding love affair and a stormy and failed marriage) and her later troubles
with alcohol are frankly addressed, but it's clear that Graham's passionate vocation
outweighs all in importance. The book rises particularly well to the difficult chal-
lenge of describing dance; its evocative word pictures of Graham performances
over the years are helped considerably by strategically located and quite stunning
photographs that freeze Graham's movements into a sculptural beauty. Graham
was both emblematic of and a major force in the revolution of twentieth-century
362 
* THE BULLETIN
art, and this book effectively and engagingly conveys the hows, whys, and even
whos of her influence. Source notes, an annotated bibliography, and an index are
included. DS
GAUTHIER, GAIL 
A Year with Butch and Spike. 
Putnam, 1998 
[224p]
ISBN 0-399-23216-8 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
When Jasper finds himself seated between the Coutier cousins (the "Cootches")
Butch and Spike on the first day of sixth grade, he knows he is doomed. The
Cootches are troublemakers (and proud of it) from way back, and Jasper is supposed
to set a good example for them. Given the choice between sixth-grade teacher
Mrs. McNulty (whose mission in life is to break the spirit of her pupils) and Butch
and Spike, the almost always perfect Jasper is surprised to find himself coming
down on the side of anarchy. Characterization is sharp in this grade-school battle
of individuality vs. conformity, and Spike Coutier takes his place among anti-
heroes who refuse to be beaten in the honored tradition of Cool Hand Luke and
Ferris Bueller. Gauthier has a light touch with comic dialogue, and Jasper's
transformation from "a joy to have in class" to the mastermind of the plot to ensure
Spike's graduation from sixth grade is credible and admirable; the Cootches'
realization of the wisdom of beating the system from within is a satisfying resolution.
This fast-paced novel has heroes to cheer, villains to hiss, and conflict of titanic
proportions. Jasper's voice never wavers from his sixth-grade about-to-be-broadened
perspective, and although those adults undeserving of respect are viewed with an
irreverent eye, not all the grownups are villains. Suffice it to say that Butch and
Spike (and the happily converted Jasper) go victoriously on to junior high, and
while the Mrs. McNultys of the world may tremble at the notion, the good guys
have nothing to worry about. JMD
GREENFIELD, ELOISE 
Easter Parade; illus. by Jan Spivey Gilchrist. 
Hyperion,
1998 
41p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2271-6 
$14.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0326-6 
$13.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Miles may separate Leanna in Chicago from her older cousin Elizabeth in Wash-
ington, D.C., but occasional long-distance phone calls keep them in touch. With
Easter on the way, Leanna is full of news about the Easter Parade, an event she
clearly doesn't quite understand. Elizabeth, though, has more sobering concerns;
her father is overseas at war, and she will greet the holiday in refurbished patent
leather shoes and a hand-me-down if still lovely dress. On the eve of the big day,
the mailman arrives at Elizabeth's house with welcome tidings of her father's safety;
at Easter services she "lets herself feel [the minister's] quiet words and the comfort
of knowing that her father is all right." At the same time Leanna, expecting drums,
horns, and batons, is surprised to discover that she and her family are part of the
Easter Parade, in which the whole African-American community, dressed to the
nines, joins in a festive walk to church. Gilchrist's sepia-toned cameos, which serve
both as family portraits and 1943 fashion plates, conjure an era when hats and
gloves, glossy pumps and matching handbags were de rigueur streetwear. Small
trim size, smooth buff-colored stock, elegant type, and delicate layout further en-
hance the charm of this quiet and sensitively presented tale of Easters past. EB
JUNE 1998 * 
363
GRITZ-GILBERT, ONA 
Starfish Summer; illus. by Yong Chen. 
HarperCollins,
1998 
[9 6p]
ISBN 0-06-027193-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Summer at Aunt Jenny's seaside home is Amy's big opportunity to prove to herself
that she is not a "mama's girl," overprotected and unable to function without her
mother's companionship and encouragement. She longs to make friends with
self-assured and sea-savvy Crystal but only manages to gain the attention of Crystal's
little brother, Raymond, who invites her along on their daily adventures, visiting
neighbors and playing games in the waves and the sand. Of course, an eventual
rapprochement between the girls is inevitable, but instead of allowing the reader to
discover gradually that Crystal's crustiness springs from a fear of losing summer
friends, Gritz-Gilbert introduces a stock cast of eccentric adults, who defuse the
story's tension by filling Amy in on Crystal's state of mind. The breeze and surf
may set the mood for summer, but girls in search of a more involving and original
beach read could consider following Belton's Ernestine and Amanda off to camp
(Ernestine andAmanda: Summer Camp, Ready or Not, BCCB 9/97) instead. EB
HAHN, MARY DOWNING 
As Ever, Gordy. 
Clarion, 1998 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-83627-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
The precarious security Gordy had managed to obtain in Following in My Footsteps
(BCCB 10/96) shatters when his grandmother dies. Since Gordy and his little
sister June have no idea where their abusive father and compliant mother are, the
siblings move back to their home town, living with their older brother, his wife,
and his stepson in a cramped student apartment. Old surroundings, old friends,
and newly invigorated old anger leads Gordy into bad times and frustration, and
he can't quite figure out how not to be the troublemaker so many expect him to
be. Things come to a head when a slugfest with an enemy (in front of the girl
Gordy likes) and an apprehension for malicious mischief reveals both unantici-
pated fairness in the powers that be and some surprising allies for Gordy. Gordy's
narration effectively conveys both his wishful cockiness and his lonely bafflement
at the rotten hand life has dealt him; Hahn skillfully manages to make his actions
simultaneously Gordy-justifiable yet desperately and obviously wrong (the
policeman's daughter, for instance, is unlikely to be won over by a stolen record
album). Though the details of the postwar milieu are subtly present, this is ulti-
mately a story of an individual's self-definition and maturation, and readers who
have watched Gordy struggle for equilibrium through the previous two books (start-
ing with Stepping on the Cracks, BCCB 12/91) will want to see him beat the dark
side yet again. DS
HARDER, DAN 
Colliding with Chris; illus. by Kevin O'Malley. 
Hyperion,
1998 
[3 2p]
Library ISBN 0-7868-2098-5 
$16.49
Trade ISBN 0-7868-0125-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Chris assures his grandfather that he knows how to ride his new bike, and riding it
certainly isn't a problem. Stopping the bike once in motion, now that's a prob-
lem-Chris collides with a rosebush, spiderweb, pig pen, bear, trout, and march-
364 
* THE BULLETIN
ing band in his careen across the countryside. Harder's cumulative tall tale is a
lively combination of rhythm and rhyme that lends itself to breakneck reading
aloud. The mixed-media illustrations (oil paint, colored pencil, and marker) fea-
ture a safety-helmeted, goggled Chris hanging on for dear life as he speeds over
hill, over dale, and over Main Street, finally coming to a stop when grandfather
yells, "The brakes aren't near your feet, my boy. The brakes are near your hands!"
O'Malley depicts both human and animal characters with expression and verve,
even in the crowded parade scene. The compositions are energetic and humorous,
with the added bonus of being large enough to show to a group. This title is
bound to elicit snorts of recognition from bike riders who remember the time they
couldn't find their brakes and will serve as a cautionary tale for those who have just
recently given up their training wheels. Everybody wins in this cross-country chase,
and that's how we like our races to end. JMD
HICKOX, REBECCA, ad. 
The Golden Sandal: A Middle Eastern Cinderella Story;
illus. by Will Hillenbrand. 
Holiday House, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1331-4 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Maha is eager to see her father remarried, but her stepmother, as the folklore-wise
could have foretold, favors her own daughter at Maha's expense. When Maha
saves a red fish from becoming dinner, he becomes her magical benefactor. He
enables her to attend the gala wedding of the master merchant's daughter, where
her dropped sandal prompts a desire for marriage in the bride's brother and, de-
spite stepmotherly efforts at sabotage, results in a joyous wedding for Maha (and
punitive alopecia and jilting for her stepsister). This is a smooth and capable
retelling, and this version, with its ichthyological motif and more everyday charac-
ters, has a pleasant homeliness to it. Hillenbrand's mixed-media art shows the
fresco-like textures of his illustrations for The Tale ofAli Baba (BCCB 2/97), and
the ripples and dapples of hue add depth to the lively and often comic drafting; the
audience will also enjoy noting the strategic but unmentioned presence of the red
fish in a few spreads. A prettily sturdy Cinderella variant, this would make a
piquant pairing with other Middle Eastern tales or European Cindies. DS
HOLT, KIMBERLY WILLIS 
My Louisiana Sky. 
Holt, 1998 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-8050-5251-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Tiger Ann gets a lot of love from her parents, but they are what neighbors in her
rural town call "retarded" ("I like 'slow' better," says Tiger), and it's her grand-
mother who holds the household together. Everything changes the summer after
sixth grade, when Tiger's best baseball buddy, Jesse Wade, gives her a sudden first
kiss, Granny dies of a heart attack, a glamorous aunt invites Tiger to live with her
in Baton Rouge, and a tornado almost destroys the plant nursery where her father
works. This would be a big plot load were it not for the vivid characters and
setting that give the transitional events a natural flow matched by Holt's decep-
tively simple style ("It was funny how whatever was heavy on our minds floated
right up from our heads to the sky and made a picture"). Tiger has a distinctive
voice, and her subtle observations include an increasing awareness of those mar-
ginalized by differences of class, race, and intelligence. Commendably, Holt doesn't
try to solve these societal ills in her first novel but settles on a credible resolution
showing Tiger's values to be as strong as her family ties. BH
JUNE 1998 
* 
365
HONEYCUTT, NATALIE 
Granville Jones: Commando. Farrar, 1998 
106p
ISBN 0-374-32764-5 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Third-grader Granville Jones compensates for his lack of altitude with militaristic
attitude, stalking through the neighborhood in his combat boots and camouflage
fatigues. He's unnerved by some changes in his parents, which he first considers
indicative of their being extraterrestrials but is horrified to realize are actually due
to an impending baby in the family. Aided by his friends Jonah and Lydia, Granville
decides to demonstrate to his parents that a new baby would be superfluous when
they already have a child of Granville's prodigious talents (Granville's older sister
doesn't count, since the new baby's going to be a boy), and he aims to develop the
unique ability to glow in the dark. Honeycutt, who has written before about this
klatsch of kids (see Lydia Jane and the Babysitter Exchange, BCCB 1/94), some-
times makes Granville act excessively young for his age, but she writes with verve
and humor about primary-grades life. Some of the funny bits are also telling
(Granville's first reaction, upon learning that his embryonic baby brother can hear
sounds, is to firmly warn him, "Stay out of my tree fort!"), and some are success-
fully aimed at the broad junior funnybone (Granville attempts phosphorescence
through the consumption of large quantities of beans and exudes flatulent joke-
fuel for several chapters). Though there's an effective and unassuming displace-
ment story in this book, kids will mainly just think it's a gas. DS
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Songs ofFaith. Orchard, 1998 
103p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33023-0 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30023-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
It's 1975 and summer life in Doreen's small Ohio town isn't particularly stimulat-
ing; she busies herself by defacing Bicentennial signs, becoming friends with the
new girl in the neighborhood, and hanging around with her younger brother,
Robert (who's just taken a stand against being called "Bobo"). The impact of their
parents' divorce is only gradually becoming clear to the kids-their mother is ab-
sorbed in studying, and Doreen misses her father, now resident in Chicago, bit-
terly. Robert is affected even more, at first refusing to speak to his father on the
telephone and then refusing to speak to anyone at all. Johnson's writing is fluid,
lucid, and observant ("We're as divorced as she is," says Doreen flatly about her
mother), and her unhurried evocation of a summer of various changes (Doreen's
old friend moves out of town, her new friend is beginning to come to terms with
her own father's absence and the specter of Vietnam, and Robert goes to live with
his father) is rich and believable. Unfortunately the narration never pulls together
as it did in Johnson's Toning the Sweep (BCCB 6/93) and Humming Whispers (4/
95), the connections and momentum are so subtle that many young readers may
miss them, and the result seems almost to be a collection of slow-moving mood
pieces. Still, the emotions ring true, and the overall message of faith and redemp-
tion is quietly but steadily hopeful. DS
KARR, 
KATHLEEN 
The Lighthouse Mermaid; illus. by Karen Lee
Schmidt. 
Hyperion, 1998 
6 4p 
(Hyperion Chapters)
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2297-X 
$14.49
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7868-1232-X 
$3.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Kate's dream life about mermaids is abruptly interrupted by real life in this histori-
cal-fiction offering, which gives early readers six lively chapters filled with the per-
366 
* THE BULLETIN
ils of keeping a lighthouse in days of yore. Eleven-year-old Kate takes on the
responsibility of the lighthouse when her father leaves to replace their family's low
provisions. Readers will feel the mounting tension when Kate's father is unable to
return and she must deal with the fog bells ("The fog bells must be wound, Mama.
Our light can't get through this snow") and manage a rescue of what seems to be a
mermaid and her baby but actually turns out to be a Mrs. Cobb and her daughter,
Pearl. The seriousness of the situation is further complicated by an increasing lack
of food and Kate's mother's impending delivery of a child. Unfortunately, the
piling up of events is contrived, and all is resolved too quickly and neatly-with
the new baby, Papa's safe arrival, and a relieved Mr. Cobb's reunion with his fam-
ily all coinciding within two pages near the end. This isn't up to the standard of
Hopkinson's Birdie's Lighthouse (BCCB 9/97), but it will serve that book's fans
who aren't yet ready for the depth of Jill Paton Walsh's Grace (BCCB 6/92). An
author's note about lighthouse history is appended. PM
KERR, M. E. Blood on the Forehead: What IKnow about Writing. HarperCollins,
1998 
[22 4p]
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027996-6 
$21.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-446207-2 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Kerr is one of the smartest writers for youth around, and details of how she writes
could make for an absorbing book indeed. Unfortunately, less than sixty pages of
this book is on that topic, and those pages are doled out piecemeal in introduc-
tions to selections from Kerr's previously published writing (six short stories, as
well as meaty excerpts from Gentlehands, I Stay Near You, Fell, Little Little, and Me
Me Me Me Me, are included). There's appeal in the idea-here's a principle expos-
tulated, and here it is put into practice-but the practice overwhelms the prin-
ciples here. The novels aren't at their best in excerpts, and Kerr's chatty introductions
are often merely interesting color commentary. Serious Kerr fans will want to pore
over the segues nonetheless, and some readers may be moved to hunt down short-
story anthologies they've missed-but this is ultimately haunted by the specter of
the terrific book it might have been had it contained all new material and more
Kerr qua Kerr. DS
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
Ten Suns: A Chinese Legend; illus. by Yongsheng
Xuan. 
Holiday House, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1317-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-5
In this lavishly illustrated retelling, Di Jun, the eastern emperor and his wife, Xi
He, have ten sons (suns). Every day one son must make the walk from the eastern
horizon to the west to give light to the people on earth. Disaster results when the
boys become bored and decide to arise early and make the journey together. As
Earth and its inhabitants suffer from the scorching heat from all ten suns, their
father calls for the Archer of Heaven to bring them down, only realizing at the last
moment that one sun must be spared to provide light for the earth. The other nine
suns become crows and thereafter greet their sun-brother at dawn each day. The
polished text is stylistically balanced between wonder tale and family story as the
godlike sons make comic mischief and receive the necessary reprimands from their
concerned father. The lushness of color and stylized exaggeration of the characters
(who occasionally verge on the toylike) extends the mythological and royal over-
JUNE 1998 
* 
367
tones of the story, while the swirling and undulating lines seem to release the
intensity of the radiating heat from the suns. Read aloud or as a readalone, this
should heat up interest in the 398.2s. An author's note cites the story's origins and
primary sources. PM
KIRK, DANIEL 
Bigger; written and illus. by Daniel Kirk. 
Putnam, 1998 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-23127-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
2-5 yrs
Getting bigger is the big idea here as a nameless everychild is shown growing,
starting in the womb and continuing through early school-age years. Bright mul-
ticolored, retro-drafted images of a blond-headed little boy are superimposed on a
black background, which shrinks as the boy gets bigger and his life experiences
expand into a larger share of the page. The world of "big" includes big clothes, big
words, a big bed, a big school, big toys, and bigger boys, hammering the point
home relentlessly but to no particular end. Finally, by the last double-page spread,
the kid is not just big, he's huge. Looking like Samson posing as an overgrown
toddler (with a plasticine smile across his face), he pushes at the confines of the
book, surrounded by the accoutrements of life, while the text philosophizes in
unchildlike fashion: "Everywhere I looked, I saw my world getting bigger, and
everything I saw I took inside, and I was big enough to hold it all." Getting bigger
is not small stuff, as every preschooler knows, but this self-preoccupied and pre-
tentious tome only proves that Bigger is not always better. For a better take on the
early maturation process, use David McPhail's Pig Pig Grows Up. PM
KROPP, PAUL 
Moonkid and Prometheus. Gemini/Stoddart Kids, 1998 
294p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7736-7465-9 
$5.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Moonkid-really Ian-is a diminutive sixteen-year-old misfit, whose punishment
for an antisocial misdeed is a tutoring assignment. His pupil, Prometheus, is a
towering seventh-grader with a reading problem but a lot of real-life savvy, and the
two boys, after surmounting a few initial setbacks, form a solid friendship as well
as an effective and mutually educational partnership. The plot progression here-
nerdy white-kid tutor learns about life from his worldly-wise black tutee-is ut-
terly predictable, and some of the characters verge on the stereotypical. Moonkid's
smart-mouthed narration, however, is fizzy if adultly glib, and the Montreal set-
ting will make a change for jaded U.S. readers. The book breathes some new life
into the old situation with its obvious affection for all participants, its engaging use
of the particular, and its refreshing absence of cheaply drawn enemies (it's clear
that Moonkid's being too hard on his absent mother, and Prometheus is also hurt
by but supportive of his abandoning father). Readers who regret leaving behind
Gordon Korman's wiseacre goofiness but are looking for something with a little
more depth should appreciate this story of an oddball friendship. DS
LAWRENCE, IAIN 
The Wreckers. 
Delacorte, 1998 
[256p]
ISBN 0-385-32535-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Legends and historical gleanings about Cornish "wreckers," coastal folk who eked
out a living by claiming shipwrecked cargo, fuel Lawrence's darkly twisting debut
novel of the villagers of fictional Pendennis, who purposely lure storm-tossed mer-
chant ships aground and kill all survivors in order to make a "fair" claim on the
368 
* THE BULLETIN
wreck. John Spencer, a teenager on his first voyage on his father's ship Isle ofSkye,
is washed ashore and saved from execution by the tempestuous Simon Mawgan;
John later learns his father has also survived and is being held in chains by Stumps,
a legless man who suspects the elder Spencer is a wealthy smuggler. John and
Mawgan's niece Mary join forces to stop the slaughter of shipwreck survivors by
unmasking the village ringleader and to rescue John's father before the rising tide
drowns him in his drainpipe prison. Lawrence plays the crashing waves and cloud-
blackened skies for all they're worth, and he peoples his intricate plot with gro-
tesque and enigmatic characters worthy ofR. L. Stevenson. There's plenty of grim
and bloody menace-from John's bizarre rooftop pursuit by the legless man to his
father's rat-gnawed feet-and enough red herrings swimming throughout to keep
readers steadily in doubt of whom to trust. Here's a strong recommendation when
a dark and stormy night's in the forecast. EB
MCBRATNEY, SAM 
Just You and Me; illus. by Ivan Bates. 
Candlewick,
1998 
28p
ISBN 0-7636-0436-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
In this bucolic tale of togetherness, the author of the popular Guess How Much I
Love You? depicts the closeness between a gosling and the gander "who looked
after her." Big Gander Goose and Little Goosey are out for a walk when they
realize they need to seek shelter from a storm. Each place they find-a hole in a
ditch, a hole among the roots of a tall tree, a cave among the rocks-is occupied by
another woodland creature, and since Little Goosey wants a place "just for me and
you," the feathered duo seeks on, finally settling in "a hole behind a bush at the
bottom of a hill." After the storm is over, the geese discover that all of the wood-
land animals they previously encountered also decided to seek alternate shelter,
ending up hidden under the leaves in the very same hole. Their emergence causes
Little Goosey to exclaim "This was a good place to hide from the storm.... For
all of us!" This cumulative tale lacks any but the slightest of impacts, but Bates'
watercolor sylvan glades are sunlit and friendly. The depiction of the characters is
greeting-card cute, but the animals are also emotionally expressive, and the varied
compositions-single and double-page spreads with the occasional visual vignette
breaking up long text blocks-result in a very pleasing design. Young storytime
listeners may enjoy listening to or even acting out this semi-suspenseful hunt for
shelter. JMD
McCuRDY, MICHAEL, ad. 
The Sailor's Alphabet; ad. and illus. by Michael
McCurdy. 
Houghton, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-395-84167-4 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
McCurdy turns a variation on a traditional sea chantey into a triple treat-a lyrical
alphabet ditty, a lexicon of maritime jargon, and a visual record of a battle at sea.
Across the top of each page runs the song ("Oh, A is the anchor and that you all
know,/ B is the bowsprit that's over the bow"); across the bottom runs the defini-
tion. Amidships, so to speak, are tinted scratchboard illustrations, delicately hatched
to resemble etchings, that depict a United States frigate (circa 1837) in a thunder-
ous engagement with a pirate vessel. At "G are the guns, sir, by which we all
stand," the frigate broadsides the enemy; "O are the oars of our jolly boat's crew"
sends a boarding party to capture and retrieve the pirate captain. Occasionally
McCurdy introduces unexplained terms (although the picture clearly displays the
"bowsprit" itself, the "stays" connected to it are lost in the visual shuffle and never
JUNE 1998 
* 369
verbally defined). However, definitions generally correspond so closely to illustra-
tions, and the visual "plotting" flows so effortlessly from the alphabet verses, that
readers are bound to get the gist. A closing spread recaps the terms and clearly
labels them on a diagram of the vessel under full sail; brief notes comment on the
purpose of chanteys and on the period vessels featured. EB
MAYER, MARIANNA, ad. 
Pegasus; illus. by K. Y. Craft. 
Morrow, 1998 
4 0p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13383-5 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13382-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
The ornate, sweepingly dramatic cover of this picture book features the noble
white steed resplendent with cloudy wings and rainbow mane, making this a title
that both adventure and horse-lovers will reach for eagerly. Inside is the story of
the meeting of Pegasus and Bellerophon and their battle with the fierce Chimera.
Mayer concentrates on the independent nature of Pegasus and the heroic qualities
of Bellerophon, starting with the origin of the legendary horse and the early adven-
tures of the hero. Visits to an oracle, a pilgrimage to a magical spring, and a
visitation from a goddess all add to an atmosphere already redolent with myth and
magic. The battle of hero, horse, and Chimera is fiery and dramatic, and
Bellerophon's victory is handily won. Craft's paintings, with lighting reminiscent
of Parrish and Turner, are set in jeweled ornamental frames, and, while the draft-
ing of the horse is sometimes awkward, the sweeping vistas and unabashedly ro-
mantic compositions will hold young viewers. Mayer concludes her story with the
happy marriage of Philonoe and Bellerophon; that Bellerophon traditionally meets
his downfall in an attempt to scale Olympus on the back of Pegasus is not men-
tioned. This retelling essentially reduces the complexities of the legend to the
story of the trust between a boy and his horse, and as such it is predictable but
satisfying. An explanatory note from Mayer gives specific sources. JMD
NATHAN, AMY 
The Kids' Allowance Book; illus. by Debbie Palen. 
Walker,
1998 
86p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8651-0 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8027-7532-2 
$8.95 
R 
Gr. 3-7
Allowances may seem to be a simple subject, but they're fraught with all the com-
plicated overtones of any money transaction, and Nathan offers a clear and concise
overview of relevant issues and parameters. Drawing extensively on research and a
sample group of contributing kids, the book examines the pros and cons of receiv-
ing an allowance, allowance policies (tied to chores or not?), allowance schedules
and rates, raises, use tips, and damage-control suggestions. The synthesis of anec-
dote and concrete advice takes the subject beyond the obvious, especially for young-
sters who haven't thought about the issue, and the book's breadth of suggestion
will bolster kids as well as helping out adults (who may appreciate the book's clear
acknowledgment that an allowance isn't always something adults can afford to
provide). The breezy format, with its pull-quotes, sidebars, subheadings, and high-
energy cartoons from Palen, makes the book as accessible as its readers would like
money to be. Kids probably don't regularly besiege you for books on allowances,
and this is a specialized subject indeed-but then so is salary negotiation. As an
entry-level money-management text this has definite curricular possibilities, and
youngsters who do find the book when they need it will welcome its pragmatic
assistance. A resource list and a troubleshooting guide (keyed to pages that address
the problems) are appended. DS
370 
* THE BULLETIN
NOLEN, JERDINE 
Raising Dragons; illus. by Elise Primavera. 
Silver Whistle/Har-
court, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201288-5 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
The pig-tailed narrator of this little piece of dragon whimsy finds a rainbow-col-
ored egg, and although her farmer Pa tells her, "Now you stay away from that
thing, daughter," she cannot resist it. Day after day she watches the egg, and her
patience is finally rewarded when the egg cracks and a green, bewinged, fire-breath-
ing baby dragon pops out. She names him Hank, and the two are inseparable until
Hank, beleaguered by the crowds attracted by his dragon-ness, goes to live on
Dragon Island (located by the narrator in an atlas of imaginary places). But since
raising dragons is in her blood, Hank's pal returns to the farm with a gift of glisten-
ing dragon eggs, ostensibly to raise the hatchlings until they can fly to their island
of origin. Nolen has a casual, colloquial style that will make this a good readaloud
despite the lengthy text. Primavera's watercolors depict the African-American hero-
ine and her bright-eyed, grinning lizard with a charming insouciance that will
make dragon-lovers out of the most cynical viewer. Saturated shades of fuchsia,
mauve, and blue contrast with standard harvest browns, greens, and yellows in
scenes showing the little girl reading Hank bedtime stories, Hank popping a field
full of corn, and the two of them flying through a starlit night. Dragons are fasci-
nating critters, and Nolen's might inspire listeners to a little egg-hunting of their
own. JMD
NUMEROFF, LAURA 
If You Give a Piga Pancake; illus. by Felicia Bond. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1998 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026687-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026686-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
What's good enough for mice or moose is good enough for pigs as this new spin on
Numeroffs practiced gag sets out to prove. This time around a pudgy little porker
is given a pancake and the ensuing pandemonium, though expected, is every bit as
zany as the cookie and muffin escapades. Maple syrup on a pancake leads to a
bubble bath, tap dancing, silly photographs, letter writing, tree house building,
decorating with wallpaper, wallpaper glue, which is sticky ... like syrup, bringing
an exhausted little girl and the energetic little pig right back to where they started.
Kids who appreciated the cyclical chaos ofIf You Give a Mouse a Cookie (BCCB 7/
85) and If You Give a Moose a Muffin (BCCB 9/91) won't be disappointed with
this installment featuring Bond's good-natured watercolor and pen-and-ink pic-
tures, brimming with comical details and starring an exuberant little piglet who
knows how to get what she wants. PM
POLACCO, PATRICIA 
Thank You, Mr. Falker; written and illus. by Patricia
Polacco. 
Philomel, 1998 
[40p]
ISBN 0-399-23166-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Polacco again draws from her own life in this story about the struggle to learn to
read. By first grade Trisha is in her first reader, but "when Trisha looked at a page,
all she saw were wiggling shapes, and when she tried to sound out words, the other
kids laughed at her." She endures merciless teasing and the hopelessness of endless
school days filled with reading inability for years until Mr. Falker, her squeaky-
JUNE 1998 
* 371
clean fifth-grade teacher, realizes Trisha's problem. He enlists the help of a read-
ing teacher and eventually, "almost as if it were magic, or as if light poured into her
brain, the words and sentences started to take shape on the page as they never had
before." Period details of the 1950s add atmosphere to Polacco's watercolors,
which, with their characteristic gangly grace, are especially adept at visually captur-
ing the little girl's range of feelings. The lengthy text teeters on the sentimental
but doesn't waver in conveying the awful helplessness of a child's unwarranted
sense of "dumbness," which understanding gives the book some bibliotherapeutic
value. Read aloud or alone, the story should stir up empathy in the right direction,
and because it is quite a moving tribute to Polacco's real-life Mr. Falker (there's a
brief explanatory note on the last page), it is probably destined to become an end-
of-the-year thank-you gift for someone's favorite teacher. PM
POMERANTZ, CHARLOTTE 
You're Not My Best Friend Anymore; illus. by David
Soman 
Dial, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1560-9 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1559-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Ben (who is African-American) lives with his father and aunt on the top floor of
the same house that Molly (who is Caucasian) occupies with her parents on the
ground floor, and "Molly and Ben were best friends." Their relationship encom-
passes all the usual "together" things: walking to school, eating lunch, playing,
working on homework, and even sharing their June birthdays with a double party.
In the meantime they both have been saving their allowance money to buy a tent,
causing a fracture in their friendship ("It was a big fight. It was about the kind of
tent they should buy .... Molly wanted a pup tent. Ben wanted an umbrella
tent"). The animosity escalates until their mutual birthday party, where each gives
the other a sleeping bag and a chance to patch everything up. Watercolor paint-
ings in a brilliant palette are a little stagey, but they're fairly adept at featuring the
range of emotion on the faces of Ben and Molly. The friendship, fight, and rap-
prochement seem to operate at a much more babyish level than one would expect
from the age of the pictured protagonists, and the whole story's somewhat pro-
grammatic, but it's an otherwise coherent look at friendship. Young audiences
might well appreciate seeing kids old enough to know better behaving just as they
themselves would. PM
REEDER, CAROLYN 
Foster's War. 
Scholastic, 1998 
26 7p
ISBN 0-590-09846-2 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-7
Eleven-year-old Foster's life is changed with the bombing of Pearl Harbor: his
beloved older brother is off with the Air Force and his best friend, Jimmy, disap-
pears overnight to an internment camp for Japanese-Americans. Foster's own war
involves tiptoeing around his explosive father as well as backing accidentally into
local war work (his claims of high position in an invented organization end up
being taken seriously enough to require his service), developing a friendship with
the old man across the street, and trying to keep a correspondence going with the
distant Jimmy. Soon the war takes a toll even closer to home, and Foster and his
family must pull together in the face of tragedy. The focus on the mundane makes
things a bit repetitious and tends to overwhelm the larger shape of the plot, but the
evocation of day-to-day wartime reality is specific and effective, with kids scrap-
ping over scrap rights and playing elaborate war games but also feeling deep unease
372 
* THE BULLETIN
about the huge shadow over their lives. Reeder keeps things plainspoken without
belaboring the obvious, which makes the death of Foster's brother genuinely af-
fecting rather than merely melodramatic. Those in search of a homefront story
with a more masculine edge than Lily's Crossing (BCCB 4/97) will find this worth
the ration points. DS
REISs, KATHRYN 
Paperquake: A Puzzle. Harcourt, 1998 
264p
ISBN 0-15-201183-8 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Violet is the odd triplet out: her beautiful sisters, Rose and Jasmine, are identical
and nearly inseparable, even sharing a room, while the fraternal Violet grew up
under the shadow of ill health and is still "Baby" to the family. At her family's new
store in an old San Francisco house, Violet is fascinated to find evidence of a young
woman in a similar situation ninety years ago; intrigued by the bits of history that
research and earthquakes shake loose, Violet pursues the truth, discovering a hid-
den deception in the past and a foreboding of terrible disaster in Violet's time, a
disaster that Violet takes drastic steps to avert. Both contemporary human dy-
namics and the siren song of past mystery are compelling here, and the gradual
unveiling of the story of the house's residents will torture readers very enjoyably.
Violet's precognitions are less convincing, requiring excessive contrivance and dis-
tracting from the puzzling-out pleasures of the history (and resulting in an oddly
misleading impression about the location of the Golden Gate Bridge, which plays
a pivotal plot role). The intertwining of times still makes for an absorbing read,
and the exploration of the possible forces of individual will and of destiny may
intrigue many young people trying to determine their own places in the world.
DS
RITTER, JOHN H. 
Choosing Up Sides. 
Philomel, 1998 
[176p]
ISBN 0-399-23185-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
See this month's Big Picture, p. 351, for review.
RODDIE, SHEN 
Too Close Friends; illus. by SallyAnne Lambert. 
Dial, 1998 
28p
ISBN 0-8037-2188-9 
$14.99 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
Pig and Hippo are best friends-they spend Monday, Wednesday and Friday at
Pig's having peppermint tea and doughnuts; they spend Tuesday, Thursday and
Saturday at Hippo's taking refreshing mud baths-but when Hippo trims the
hedge between their houses and they can see into each other's windows, their friend-
ship takes an unfortunate turn. Unable to resist peering in, Pig and Hippo are
privy to some unappetizing personal habits that change the way they feel about
one another. Predictably, the hedge grows higher, the view is blocked, and they
forgive each other: "Pig and Hippo were very good friends once again. But ever
after, back in their own homes ... they did exactly as they pleased!" This little
sermonette is lifted above a messagy yawn by Lambert's splashy watercolors, which
feature the plump purple Hippo and the plump pink Pig in private and shared
space with a saucy aplomb; their expressions are priceless whether gobbling cup-
cakes, biting toenails, or wallowing happily in the mud. Informed readers may
recognize that Pig and Hippo have the same conflict as a another set of best friends
who also had a privacy problem (George and Martha, BCCB 2/73), but they prob-
ably won't mind. JMD
JUNE 1998 
* 373
ROSENTHAL, PAUL 
Yo, Aesop!: Get a Load of These Fables; illus. by Marc
Rosenthal. 
Simon, 1998 
51p
ISBN 0-689-80100-9 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
The Brothers Rosenthal present nine unique spins on Aesop's fables in this car-
toony collection of takeoffs. That the approach is irreverent is obvious from the
introduction, "Meet Mr. Aesop," in which author Paul Rosenthal explains away
the legends about Aesop's origins with "Whatever the truth, one thing is certain.
And as soon as we find out what that thing is, we'll let you know." The elemen-
tary-school humor is, on the whole, successful, as the author plays fast and loose
with some of the most well-known fables including "The Tortoise and the Hare"
and "The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing," but some entries are more senseless than
goofy. Each entry concludes with a note to Rosenthal from Aesop commenting on
the success (or lack thereof) of each fable. Illustrator Marc Rosenthal uses a car-
toon cast of characters that look like refugees from "The Katzenjammer Kids" as
they cavort through picnic grounds, under sea, and across grassy green hillsides.
The fluid nature of the compositions is a bit hyper-Seussian, but the target audi-
ence will appreciate this alternative to more traditional fable collections. JMD
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Scarecrow; illus. by Lauren Singer. 
Harcourt, 1998 
33p
ISBN 0-15-201084-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This poetic take on scarecrows has some lyrical moments ("His hat is borrowed,
his suit is borrowed, his hands are borrowed, even his head is borrowed. And his
eyes probably came out of someone's drawer"), especially when combined with
Stringer's earthily whimsical paintings. Rylant muses on the psychology of the
scarecrow, who knows he isn't real but doesn't care because "he has been with the
owls in the evening and the rabbits at dawn. He has watched a spider work for
hours making a web like lace. He has seen the sun tremble and the moon lie still."
Stringer's acrylics display the scarecrow in all his motley glory, setting him in a
seasonal progression of full- and double-page spreads of farmland and rolling hills.
The compositions are a collection of pleasantly off-kilter perspectives and the scare-
crow himself is a smiling, gentle creature; he's even friendly to the birds he's sup-
posed to scare. In a combination of the sentimental and the eerie that might
intrigue readers, Rylant attributes human qualities and motivation to the unliving
scraps that make up the scarecrow, but the absence of action contributes to a lack
of momentum that causes this mood piece to run out of steam before the quiet
conclusion. JMD
SANDBURG, CARL 
Grassroots; illus. by Wendell Minor. 
Browndeer/Harcourt,
1998 
40p
ISBN 0-15-200082-8 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Each of sixteen short poems primarily celebrating the prairie landscape faces a full-
page painting-or sets off a double spread-that reflects Sandburg's contempla-
tive descriptions. Many of the illustrations have the quality of a still life, even
though the compositions may encompass a sweeping view. The drafting is precise
if static and the colors nuanced except for some blazing sunsets. The occasional
animal-frog, horse, buffalo, cricket, owl, dog, squirrel-appears motionless, and
a hawk seems suspended in the air. Children habituated to literal reflections will
not find them in scenes such as the non-roan horse that illustrates "The Roan
Horse" or the sunny open field with a dozen distant cows that illustrates these
374 
* THE BULLETIN
lines: "A barnyard and fifteen Holstein cows, dabs of white on a black wall map,
never blink an eye./ A signalman in a tower, the outpost of Kansas City, keeps his
place at a window with the serenity of a bronze statue on a dark night when lovers
pass whispering." From "Daybreak" opening the book to "Red and White" end-
ing it, these visual and textual images have a nostalgic adult tone that will appeal
to some young poetry connoisseurs but even more to their parents. BH
SEUSS, DR. 
Hooray for Diffendoofer Day!; by Dr. Seuss and Jack Prelutsky; illus.
by Lane Smith. 
Knopf, 1998 
56p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99008-9 
$18.95
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89008-4 
$17.00 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
Students at the very silly Diffendoofer School are faced with the prospect of a test;
failure of that test means that they'll have to attend classes in dreary Flobbertown
(where "their lunches have no taste at all" and "their dogs are scared to bark").
Fortunately, the students' eccentric education has fitted them perfectly for the
exam, which they ace, and the previously worried principal is sufficiently gleeful to
abandon his former frown and declare a holiday. This is a fairly entertaining idea,
and the rhymes contain some energetic particulars. Unfortunately they also go on
rather longer than the story and its elements warrant, and the lines sometimes
creak rather than galloping and rely on too-obvious filler for scansion. A multipage
afterword (on matte paper to distinguish it from the story proper) includes Geisel's
early sketches and text for the story, and it reveals that the clunkiest parts of the
text came from the master himself and that Prelutsky has done noble labor not
only in expanding the story but in minimizing the flaws of his source material.
Smith's art achieves a more effective blend, with cutout Seuss characters (and their
creator) mingling with the sharper-edged Smith creations in a bubbling illustrative
stew that resembles an MTV homage to Seuss's original plans-young viewers will
enjoy identifying those characters who've graced previous Seuss books and match-
ing the newer ones to the sketches in the afterword. This will probably appeal
most to kids ready to be retro about their Dr. Seuss experience, especially if they're
coveting their siblings' stories of Sachar's Wayside School. DS
SIEBOLD, JAN 
Rope Burn. Whitman, 1998 
82p
ISBN 0-8075-7109-1 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 5-7
"I hate writing," confides twelve-year-old Richard, but he does a bang-up job of it
for a school assignment, with nine essays that demonstrate common proverbs and
at the same time reveal his adjustment to his parents' divorce, moving, and chang-
ing schools. It's not a new story frame, but it's full of fresh energy, strong voice,
and subtle development here. With the first proverb, "One good turn deserves
another," we learn about Richard's past life through his visit to the old neighbor-
hood to retrieve a key that opens the "book bank" his father gave him. In the next,
"He who hesitates is lost," we witness his making a new best friend who helps him
overcome his fear of rope-climbing, also a school requirement. Some of the chap-
ters are funny, some touching, some both. "Absence makes the heart grow fonder"
is an empathetic portrayal of a young person's first attendance at a funeral-the
anxiety, the awkwardness, and finally, the chance to say a private goodbye. On the
other hand, "Too many cooks spoil the broth, or How Mom and I created volca-
nic salsa"-all the proverbs have descriptive subtitles-is self-evidently funny.
Dramatic scenes include Richard's falling on a slippery rock for a bad gash ("Haste
makes waste") and his mother's discovery, through his diary, that she has been
JUNE 1998 
* 375
hurting him with her anger toward his father ("The pen is mightier than the sword").
It's perhaps too optimistic to end with her phoning Dad to apologize, but the rest
of the story is spontaneous and free of contrivance. Kids will find it easy to read,
with its friendly hand-typed look, and to relate to-a worthwhile choice for those
whose favorite books are the short ones. BH
SILVERMAN, MAIDA 
Israel: The Founding of a Modern Nation; illus. by Susan
Avishai. 
Dial, 1998 
102p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2136-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2135-8 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The strength of this broad overview is background coverage of the Jewish Diaspora
leading up to the 1948 declaration of Israel's statehood. From Abraham's settle-
ment of Canaan through epic Biblical migrations, Roman and Turkish Muslim
rule, early Zionist settlements, post-pogrom waves of immigration, World War II
refugee politics, and triangular tension between Arabs, Jews, and British bureau-
crats, the text spans centuries, cultures, and characters committed to establishing a
Jewish return to the Promised Land. The pace is breathless and the development
minimal. The viewpoint is strictly pro-Israeli-admiration for Jewish heroism is
unmixed with consideration of Arab problems or of divisive issues such as preju-
dice against dark-skinned Jewish immigrants; nor is there any suggestion in the
text that terrorism has happened on both sides or that Israel has had major techni-
cal support from the U.S. Though limited in scope, the book is easy to read and
consistently organized-a starting point for students in search of material on Jew-
ish culture and Middle Eastern conflicts. Capably drafted pencil illustrations ap-
pear throughout; a map, a list of important events, and a bibliography divided into
adults' and children's reading are appended. BH
SONNENFELD, KELLY 
Memories of Clason Point. Dutton, 1998 
165p
ISBN 0-525-45961-8 
$17.99 
M 
Gr. 9-12
As an adult memoir of growing up in a Jewish-Italian neighborhood in the Bronx
during the Great Depression, this is a sometimes engaging piece of family and
personal history, but it has little to recommend it to younger audiences. While the
details of daily life and survival have some inherent interest, they are not enough to
hold a narrative of this length together. There is little sense of pace-each inci-
dent, from setting up a still in the basement to being evicted from their home to
the death of a neighbor's son-is related in the same tone, with little regard for
dramatic content. The narrator tells the story of her own and her small-time
bootlegger father's life with sometimes bitter hindsight, but since she herself is
never specifically delineated, any empathy a younger reader might feel with a more
clearly evoked narrator is missing. The chronology of events lacks momentum,
elements in the opening prologue are never resolved, and there is no unifying
theme or thread to provide cohesion. It is doubtful that this will hold the atten-
tion of any but the most determined young reader. JMD
SPRINGER, NANCY 
IAm Mordred: A Talefrom Camelot. Philomel, 1998 
[192p]
ISBN 0-399-23143-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-12
In a riveting prologue, Arthur, goodly king of Camelot, takes his place alongside
murderers of innocents like Herod and Pharaoh when he sends a coracle-load of
376 
* THE BULLETIN
male infants to certain death in an attempt to murder this story's narrator: Mordred,
bastard son of Arthur and Morgause, fated to be the death of Arthur and the end
of Camelot. This is not Mordred the evil conniver as found in Tennyson, T. H.
White, or even Lerner and Loewe-this is a young man seeking the blessing of his
father and an escape from a prophesied doom. Springer handles the language of
fantasy with ease, from sword fight to magical transformation, as she propels the
sympathetically drawn Mordred inexorably toward his fate. The characters of
Arthurian legend are precisely and delicately evoked-Arthur, generous and kind,
and prisoner of his fate as surely as Mordred is prisoner of his; Nyneve, who saves
Mordred from a life of obscurity when she retrieves him from the fisherwoman
who fostered him; Morgan le Fay and Merlin, sorcerers who would use him for
their own ends-but next to the complexity of Mordred, they are distant if effec-
tive figures. The swift action is propelled by Mordred's voice (which conveys an
agony of moral and emotional conflict), and the tragedy of Camelot is here given
yet another facet. Readers will find themselves hoping against hope for a different
ending to the foregone conclusion. JMD
SWANN, BRIAN, ad. 
Touching the Distance: Native American Riddle-Poems; illus.
by Maria Rendon. 
Browndeer/Harcourt, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-15-200804-7 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-5
These fourteen tiny offerings, based on traditional riddles from native cultures in
the Americas, include puzzlers to be guessed and deeper enigmas to be examined
and pondered. Even without the aid of broad visual hints, the youngest readers
will probably figure out that the "stone" that "sits in the middle of the water" is a
turtle; less evident is the playful chili pepper riddle, "There is that person-if you
eat his mouth/ he'll eat yours." Among the most intriguing however, are those in
which Swann's delicate text melds with Rendon's bold mixed-media compositions
to suggest a meaning richer than the simple riddle answer. "I can touch some-
thing/ far off/ in the distance" features an arch from which a hand shape has been
cut; a bright blue sky fills the hand, and above each finger an eye hovers. "There is
a place/ I know and love well./ It is cut into gullies/ where much water fell"
partners a cut-cloth collage framed in painted wood portraying a craggy, bespec-
tacled face. Even after readers flip to the last page for the answers-eyesight, and
grandmother's face-other implicit questions emerge: what is the relation be-
tween vision and touch, and what is the water that has fallen on grandmother's
face? Rendon's complex assemblages, which enhance rather than defuse each riddle's
mystery, have been stunningly reproduced to retain their brilliant color, crisp de-
tail, and shadowed depth. Sources for the riddles are appended. EB
THOMAS, JOYCE CAROL 
IHave Heardofa Land; illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Cotler/
HarperCollins, 1998 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023478-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023477-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
6-10 yrs
The voice of an African-American pioneer woman poetically describes the lure of
the nineteenth-century frontier-specifically, Oklahoma, where (as Thomas ex-
plains in a concluding note) opportunities for independent women and black home-
steaders were plentiful. Hope, exaggeration, and even a touch of dread mingle in
the unnamed narrator's musings: "I have heard of a land where the flapjacks/
Spread out big as wagon wheels"; "I have heard of a land/ Where winter brings
JUNE 1998 
* 
377
storm warnings/ And pioneers wonder whether/ The scissortail in spring will ever
sing." Cooper's atmospheric compositions, in mottled earth tones and golds, in-
terpret the woman's thoughts with prosaic literality and, thus, portray a more cir-
cumscribed reality than her grand imaginings might promise. Awkward drafting
frequently lends the figures a rubbery look, which contrasts unfavorably with the
strong and expressive face of the narrator. Still, the text demonstrates the settlers'
quiet pride in self-sufficiency, and that alone could be a valuable starting point for
listeners to consider the relationship between dreams and success. EB
THOMASSIE, TYNIA 
Feliciana Meets dLoup Garou: A Cajun Tall Tale; illus. by
Cat Bowman Smith. 
Little, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-316-84133-1 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Feliciana Feydra LeRoux, Cajun heroine of the picture book of the same name
(BCCB 5/95), returns here in a story featuring the legendary Cajun werewolf, the
Loup Garou. When Feliciana suffers from a daylong bout of contrariness, her
brothers warn her that "d'Loup Garou's gonna come lookin' fo' you." That night
Feliciana hears howling; sure that it's her brother teasing her, she traces the sound
to the swamp and discovers the monster himself. The Loup Garou is just as awful
as his reputation suggests-until Feliciana stands up to him, begins lecturing him
on his misbehavior, and realizes they have a few things in common. The monster
isn't nearly as fun when he's de-monstered and therapeutic, so the end is a bit of a
let-down, but Thomassie's spicy style remains an energetic pleasure (the back cover's
"Recipe for a Cajun Accent" will help readers aloud with the linguistic flavor).
Smith's squiggly-lined watercolors have a cartoony touch (there are a lot of comic
teeth and round glasses here) that keeps the looming Loup from being too threat-
ening, but he's still a satisfyingly dark and bestial contrast to the lively family
scenes. Feliciana is a nervy heroine who's clearly a match for any werewolf, and
her young fans will enjoy the faceoff. DS
VAGIN, VLADIMIR, ad. 
The Enormous Carrot; ad. and illus. by Vladimir
Vagin. 
Scholastic, 1998 
32p
ISBN 0-590-45491-9 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7yrs
A huge orange carrot replaces the usual turnip in this retelling of the traditional
Russian folktale. Vagin's anthropomorphized rabbits Daisy and Floyd plant seeds
during the warm days of spring, and everything comes up just as they planned,
until one morning "Daisy and Floyd discovered an enormous carrot growing in
the middle of their garden." Those familiar with the tale won't find any surprises
in the plot as Daisy and Floyd both try-and fail-to pull up the carrot until they
enlist the aid of their friends and finally get that veggie out of the ground. Vagin's
refrain ("But the carrot stayed put. It wouldn't come out") has emphasis enough
to please those shouters-aloud in storytime, especially when combined with the
physical exertions of the anthropomorphized characters ("they heaved and they
ho'd," "they grunted and they groaned," "they stretched and they swayed," etc.)
and the concluding garden party/carrot feast at which the neighbors enjoy carrot
tart, carrot ice cream, carrot salad, and carrot pie is a satisfying one. Full-page
framed illustrations in a nearly psychedelic palette feature nattily dressed animals
that contrast oddly with the idealized manicured suburban setting. If you're look-
ing for a livelier twist on the enormous turnip, take a look at Peck's less mannered
The Giant Carrot (BCCB 3/98). JMD
378 
* 
THE BULLETIN
WENINGER, BRIGITTE 
What's the Matter, Davy?; tr. by Rosemary Lanning; illus.
by Eve Tharlet. 
Neugebauer/North-South, 1998 
28p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-900-7 
$15.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-899-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
Any young child who has misplaced the "lovey" in his or her life will have no
trouble relating to this latest offering about Davy. When Davy arrives home and
discovers that his toy rabbit, Nicky, didn't, he is heartbroken. Mother Rabbit's
kindhearted attempt to console Davy with a new toy rabbit isn't quite successful,
as anyone who has loved and lost will understand. The text's tender, comforting
tone is a little bland, and just when the kids' interest in Davy's plight should peak
as he finds Nicky, the sun shining, the flowers blooming, and the birds singing get
too sweetly in the way. The gentle narrative nonetheless finds an effective match
in the subdued, fuzzy tones of the pictures featuring a warmly supportive bunny
family, in which cuteness is obviously hereditary. A theme as well-worn and be-
loved as the lost toy it extols deserves a fresh interpretation, however, and although
kids may find this one sweetly reassuring, original it's not. For a unique and better
approach to this universal toddler dilemma, try instead Feiffer's I Lost My Bear
(reviewed above). PM
WILSON, DIANE LEE 
I Rode a Horse ofMilk White Jade. Orchard, 1998 
232p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33024-9 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30024-2 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Oyuna's damaged leg makes walking difficult, but she can ride like the wind, and
when Kublai Khan's men demand her beloved mare as a cavalry mount and her
stepbrother as a soldier for the Mongol Empire, she swaps places (and clothes)
with him and rides off with the army. She is hastily chosen, partially despite and
partially because of her discovered sex, to carry a message and a prize to the Khan,
and her journey leads her through adventures such as a proffered marriage, near-
starvation, an encounter with wild horses, a night in a cave with her dead shamaness
grandmother, and, finally, the Khan's court itself, where her way with horses makes
her surprisingly welcome and leads to a long-dreamed-for equestrian triumph. Wil-
son piles a bit too much onto her story, especially with the framing device wherein
a now-mature Oyuna waits with her granddaughter for the birth of a filly de-
scended from Oyuna's original mount, but the book's action carries the weight
capably. The book skillfully balances the hard-edged physicality of Oyuna's travel
with the richly caparisoned evocation of her culture and her spiritual connection
with her horse, so that the appeal lies in both plot and atmosphere. The details of
Oyuna's mystical bond are poetic yet concrete, so young equestrian fantasists will
particularly enjoy riding along; aficionados of journeys to very different times and
places will also consider this a steppe in the right direction. There is unfortunately
no historical note, but a glossary is included. DS
WOLFF, VIRGINIA EUWER 
Bat 6. 
Scholastic, 1998 
[24 0p]
ISBN 0-590-89799-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
Bat 6, an annual girl's softball competition between rival California towns of Barlow
and Bear Creek Ridge, has for decades been a source of civic pride in the two
communities and an honor to the girls who play in it. The fiftieth match in 1949
JUNE 1998 
* 
379
ends in tragedy and shame, though, when Barlow's center fielder, Shazam, pur-
posely and seriously injures Ridge first baseman, Aki. Through the authentically
drawn testimonies of each player on the teams, Wolff reconstructs the events which
led to the assault and their hidden roots in World War II. Shazam, whose father
was killed at Pearl Harbor, has been taught all her life to blame all Japanese for his
death; Aki, whose family was interned in a camp during the war, has not fully
reacclimated to her old community. Although the players blame themselves for
ignoring a myriad of faint "signs" that Shazam is a deeply troubled child, it be-
comes clear that the adults in the two towns are more culpable; in their haste to
return to normalcy after the war, they have swept all unpleasantness under the rug,
out of their children's sight. Although they welcome Aki's family back to the
neighborhood, they do not openly acknowledge their shame over the internment;
although they pity Shazam's widowed mother, they whisper about her "loose"
morals with ill-concealed glee. This is a gripping confrontation of the war wounds
suffered after armistice by those who never held, or even saw, a weapon. EB
MEA CULPA DEPARTMENT:
In the May issue of the Bulletin, the publisher of Vivian Alcock's Stranger at the
Window was wrongly listed as Farrar. The book is a publication of Houghton
Mifflin Company.
Also in that issue, Will Weaver, the author of HardBall, was incorrectly referred to
as "Walker" in the body of the review.
The Bulletin sincerely regrets the errors.
380 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Cummins, Julie, ed. Children's Book Illustration and Design: Volume II. PBC
International, 1998. 192p. ISBN 0-86636-393-9. $55.00. illus. with photo-
graphs.
This glossy coffee-table volume features fifty-six contemporary illustrators of
children's books, ranging from Tedd Arnold to Dirk Zimmer. Each illustrator or
illustration team gets a double-page spread or two, in which a picture and brief
biography (which often includes information about gallery displays of the artist's
work), sample illustrations from a few titles, and quotes from the illustrator about
the art are included. The result is rather like an illustrative cocktail party, where
you can't really get to know anyone but enjoy a quick encounter with old friends
and perhaps also an introduction to some promising new acquaintances. Though
some of the artists' comments offer little in the way of information, others are
eloquent and intriguingly detailed. As with other illustrative galleries, such as the
Bologna Annuals and the previous volume of this title, the limited information
undercuts the book's usefulness for research (beautiful as the book is as an actual
book, it's a great candidate for hypertexted CD-ROM in its next incarnation).
This is likely to be particularly welcomed by illustrative connoisseurs or budding
artists, be they adult or child, who will appreciate the array of artistry presented
here. A list of publishers, with their addresses, and indices for authors/illustrators,
publishers, and titles are included. DS
Butler, Dorothy. Babies Need Books: Sharing the Joy of Books with Children from
Birth to Six; illus. by Shirley Hughes. Rev. ed. Heinemann, 1998. Paper ed.
ISBN 0-435-08144-6. $16.95. 261p.
It's been nearly twenty years since this title first appeared in the U.S., but babies
haven't shown any sign of changing their requirements in the interim so it's good
to see a new version becoming available. Butler combines general advocacy with
specific suggestion, using a chapter apiece for each year in question. Her engaged
yet pragmatic tone makes this a bolstering and enjoyable read. The lengthy anno-
tated booklists, which follow each chapter and supplement the in-context examples,
understandably reflect the author's Commonwealth viewpoint (Butler is a New
Zealand resident); this may frustrate some readers in the U.S., but there are still
plenty of suggestions available on both sides of the Pacific (the publisher has also
appended an unannotated, U.S.-specific list). Parents looking to supplement Jim
Trelease or Betsy Hearne may find this useful and reassuring; other grateful audi-
ences might include volunteer readers-aloud in schools and libraries and, espe-
cially in light of Butler's repeated discussion of reading with her grandchildren,
grandparents who'd like to catch up on the protocol for the new generation. DS
JUNE 1998 
* 381
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Actors and acting-fiction:
Blackwood
ADVENTURE STORIES:
Blackwood; Lawrence
African Americans-fiction:
Greenfield; Gritz-Gilbert
African Americans-stories:
Bunting; Nolen; Pomerantz;
Thomas
ALPHABET BOOKS: McCurdy
American Indians: Swann
Amusement parks: Cook; Crews
ANIMAL STORIES: Bauer;
McBratney
Animals-stories: Roddie
Archeology: Deem
Arctic: Curlee
Baseball-fiction: Ritter; Wolff
Bicycles-stories: Harder
BIOGRAPHIES: Freedman
Books and reading-stories:
Polacco
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Gritz-
Gilbert; Johnson
Brothers-fiction: Hahn; Reeder
Brothers-stories: Bunting
China-fiction: Wilson
China-folklore: Kimmel
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Blackwood; Cadnum
Crime and criminals-stories:
Bunting
Dancers and dancing: Freedman
Death and dying-fiction:
Fleischman
Depression, the: Sonnenfeld
Divorce-fiction: Johnson; Siebold
Dogs-fiction: Calvert
Dragons-stories: Nolen
Dreams-stories: Emberley
Ecology: Dunphy
Ethics and values: Buehner;
Bunting
Explorers and exploring: Curlee
FABLES: Rosenthal
Fairs-stories: Crews
FANTASY: Dunrea; Springer
Farms-stories: Rylant
Fathers and daughters: Sonnenfeld
Fathers and sons-fiction:
Lawrence; Reeder; Ritter
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Doherty;
Hickox; Kimmel; Vagin
Food and eating-stories: Bauer
Friends-stories: Pomerantz;
Roddie
Friends-fiction: Dessen; Gauthier;
Gritz-Gilbert; Honeycutt;
Kropp
FUNNY STORIES: Gauthier
Gangs-stories: Bunting
Growing up-stories: Kirk
Health: Caffey; Farrell
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Blackwood; Cadnum; Calvert;
Greenfield; Hahn; Johnson;
Karr; Lawrence; Reeder; Ritter;
Thomas; Wilson; Wolff
History, U.S.: Thomas
History, world: Farrell
Horses-fiction: Wilson
Horses-stories: Mayer
Israel: Silverman
382 
* 
THE BULLETIN
LEGENDS: Cadnum; Springer
Lighthouses-fiction: Karr
Medicine: Farrell
Middle East: Silverman
Money: Nathan
Monsters-stories: Thomassie
Mothers and daughters: Coyne
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Dessen
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Emberley
Mothers and sons-fiction: Siebold
MYSTERIES: Reiss
MYTHS: Mayer
Mythology, classical: Mayer
Oceans and ocean life: Dunphy
Parents-fiction: Holt
Pigs-stories: Numeroff
POETRY: Sandburg
Pregnancy-fiction: Dessen;
Honeycutt
Rabbits-stories: Weninger
Reading aloud: Doherty;
Emberley; Fleischman;
Greenfield; Rosenthal
Reading, beginning: Bauer; Karr
Reading, easy: Greenfield;
Honeycutt
Recreation: Cook; Crews
Religion-fiction: Ritter
RHYMING STORIES: Seuss
RIDDLES: Swann
Roller coasters: Cook
Romance-fiction: Dessen
Rural life: Sandburg
Sailors and sailing: McCurdy
Sailors and sailing-fiction: Lawrence
Scarecrows-stories: Rylant
School-fiction: Gauthier
School-stories: Polacco; Seuss
Science: Cook
Sisters-fiction: Reiss
Sisters-stories: Feiffer
South, the: Holt
SPORTS STORIES: Ritter; Wolff
Storytelling: Doherty; Hickox; Vagin
Storytime: Dunrea; Emberley; Harder;
Nolen; Numeroff; Thomassie
Teachers-stories: Polacco
Toys-stories: Feiffer; Weninger
Trolls-stories: Dunrea
Tutors and tutoring-fiction: Kropp
Voyages and travel-fiction: Fleischman
Women's studies: Bolden; Coyne;
Freedman
World War II-fiction: Greenfield; Reeder;
Wolff
Writers and writing-fiction: Siebold
Writers and writing: Kerr
a p ~^
-
SCHOOL LIBRtIRY JOURNAL stars
Grandpa's Teeth
ROD 
CLEMENT
Full-color pictures by the author
Soon after Grandpa's false teeth are stolen, Officer Rate
launches an investigation. But the crime remains unsolved
and the townsfolk chip in for a new set of teeth for Grandpa.
Now everyone is grinning- 
including Grandpa's always
dour dog, sporting a very "familiar" smile.
"Qrandpa's Teeth is a hoot." -School Library ournal
"Australian cartoonist Clement's pictures are a hoot and a half,
and his story has enough sly touches to keep readers
grinning.. toothily!" -ALA 
Booklist
"A happily eccentric twist to the lost-tooth picture book
collection." -Bulletin 
of the Center for Children's Books
Ages 3-8.
$14.95 TR (0-06-027671-1)
Also written and illustrated
in full color by Rod Clement
JUST ANOTHER
ORDINARY DAY
Ages 3-8.
$14.95 TR (0-06-027666-5)
$14.89 LB (0-06-027667-3)
$5.95 PB (0-06-443500-8)
"TALL is terrific ...
It's energized
and it's gutsy."
-Jonathan Kozol
0 
y clearly
defining
academic expecta-
tions and setting
specific professional
standards TALL is
leading the way in
the teaching and
the learning of
children's and young
adult literature.
"TALL is the Rolls Royce of the field."
- Joan E Smutny
National-Louis University
Uniquely organized, each issue brings you 16 inspiring,
practical, jargon-free articles guaranteed to enrich and
expand your professional practice.
For more information and a catalog
call 1-800-337-6525 or write to:
Essmont Publishing, P.O. Box 186, Brandon, Vermont 05733
A "triumphant picture book".
SLeon and libertine
by Christine Davenier
1
Ce 
and3letn
\ 
s\
/)
* "Leon is a happy pig until he falls in love with Albertine, a
hen. Suddenly, his life becomes a series of attempts to gain the
attention of 'the wonderful chicken.'... A lovely addition to any
collection." 
- School Library Journal, starred review
"A charming love story that makes gentle points about not
losing one's true self in the pursuit of romance.... Davenier's
large, loosely rendered line and watercolor illustrations are
expressive and packed with action. They are often hilarious."
- Kirkus Reviews*
'A love story for little ones? If it's a simple, silly one, like this
one, it might just go over." 
-- Booklist
is e- 
U 
p J.3J 
11 
I 
U-OJ-3UU I 
-
Orchard Books
A Grolier Company
I
i1/
j
A 
3 
6 
$1595 
T
Teaching K8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
Teachimn··~~··· 
22K S~
Every issue of Teaching K-8
provides informative articles on
the cutting edge of education.
' 1 
.
1 • 
• 
.
YOU I aiso inn insigntul
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
cl-illc
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
'^- 
_i .
-
_ 
- A 
_ * r 
-
-
1 -
1 1
Don t miss out on tis 
valuaule
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
TeachtngK8
x 54808, Boulder, CO 803224808
-8793
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I 
I
luJltJlJ.O
adapted 
~y Rober D. San SOuci
d Iiusae by Raiji Coi~n
*c "Drrawnfrom many ources of Armnian
bAktore, the story weves strn characters, an
Ldventurous plot, an underlying wisdom into a
Ibric as beautiful as the: captKng Vachagn
reaves to save his life. [The illustraions 
ar] rich
ith subtle colors and strong composition."
- Bokist, starrd reie
"A concise yet evoative text roantic liaisons and
'h illustrtins an evi vilain a clever king, a brav
een, and an exiting resue-mk ths]: a hokal
watin to hapen."
:-The 
Bulti 
f te Ceter for Children's Bok, Starred reiv
9 $;15.95 T 
051-305-6 
$16.99~ RL 
01-3
by Sonia Levitin * illustrated by Cat Bowman Smith
"A California gold-rush town prospered and grew, all thanks to one
girl's gooseberry pies.... Amanda's narration lends just the right
touch of humor to an authentic though exaggerated look at the
development of the West." 
-School Library Joumal*
"A deeply satisfying story starring a resourceful heroine.... It's fun to
watch the town grow, spread by spread, and a map and a recipe for
gooseberry pie grace the endpapers." 
-Kirkus Reviews
"Levitin and Smith mine a nugget
of American history and turn it into
picture book gold."
-Publishers Weekly
Ages 5-9
$15.95 TR 0-531-30043-9
$16,99 RLB 0-531-33043-5
Orchard Books
A Grolier Company
Don't forget how it all started!
Nine for California
An SL Best Book of the Year
$15.95 TR 0-531-09527-4 $16.99 LB 0-531-088774
.....................................................-
"This is a powerful book,
and it is an important one"*
FROM SLAVE SHIP TO
FREEDOM ROAD
Text by JULIUS LESTER
Paintings by ROD BROWN
j"Brown's 22 brilliant and dramatic paintings of slaves and
slavery in America are the attention-riveting basis for this picture-
book history. Lester's carefully crafted words are the threads that
weave about the pictures, inviting readers, whether black or white,
to reach 'an understanding in the heart' of what Africans endured
over the 250 years from the first slave ships to Emancipation."
-*School Library Journal (Starred Review)
Full color. Ages 10 up. 0-8037-1893-4. $17.99
SDial Books * A member of Penguin Putnam Inc.
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(199806)51:10*;1-0
4 ?
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
SBulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1997
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more ... updated monthly!
";"
""
rr
~t":iP
x1. .~
~a~17~;1
P 
~-p 
Y
6"61
:*IC"t-
P a:
.~ -. i
,*
rL:i
