T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
March 2008
Vol. 61   No. 7
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
March 2008
Vol. 61 No. 7
279  the BIg PICture
 
 A Couple of Boys Have the Best Week Ever  written and illus. by Marla Frazee
280  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
280  • The Chicken of the Family  by Mary Amato; illus. by Delphine Durand
289  • The Attack of the Frozen Woodchucks  by Dan Elish; illus. by Greg Call
307  • How I Learned Geography  written and illus. by Uri Shulevitz
309  • Crimes of the Sarahs  by Kristen Tracy
310  • Big Fat Manifesto  by Susan Vaught
313  ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2008
316  suBjeCt And use Index
278 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $85.00; combined print & electronic $119.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $53.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $14.30 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.90. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2008 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Marla Frazee from A Couple of Boys Have the Best Week Ever ©2008. Used by permis-
sion of Harcourt, Inc.
March 2008 • 279
the BIg PICture
A Couple of Boys Have the Best Week Ever
written and illustrated by Marla Frazee 
Summer can seem a long time away during the colder portions of the year, and 
summer books can hold a special promise and poignancy in the long run-up until 
the months of freedom. Truly stellar summer books, such as Lynne Rae Perkins’ 
Pictures from Our Vacation (BCCB 7/07), can evoke the weirdness and unexpected 
magic of summer’s free-form experiences even in the darkest season. Add in some 
snarky and boisterous grade-school humor, and you’ve got A Couple of Boys Have 
the Best Week Ever.
The two boys of the title are James and his friend Eamon, who are spend-
ing a week with Eamon’s grandparents Bill and Pam to attend the nearby Nature 
Camp. Nature Camp itself is, to put it kindly, a mixed success (James: “I think it 
should be called Sit-Around Camp”; Eamon: “Yeah, or Sweat-a-Lot Camp”), but 
the stay with Bill and Pam is an unqualified triumph. The boys scarf down Pam’s 
generous and indulgent cooking, deflect Bill’s obsession with Antarctica, and 
make the basement their kingdom, camping on an enjoyably bouncy air mattress 
and luxuriously overdosing on videogames, overall relishing the combination of 
grandparental doting and modest running wild.
The book employs some ironic humor, allowing its illustrations to reveal 
the truth behind the straightlaced text in a way that will tickle kids on the funnybone 
right from the start (James “was very sad when his mother drove away,” the text 
assures viewers, while the illustrations show a beaming kid waving and encourag-
ingly hollering “Bye!”). The irony is all the more delicious for its sly suggestion of 
subversion, with the well-meaning text offering the stodgy adult take on events 
while the knowing and irreverent illustrations divulge the kid reality. Yet there’s 
palpable affection here, and not just in the buddyhood between the two guys; in a 
conclusion that believably combines warm inclinations with the unrelenting urge 
to fiddle, the boys spend their last night out on the dock under the stars, making a 
mock Antarctica from beach detritus for Bill (the boys’ excited glosses on the ele-
ments, wherein “the white rocks are icebergs and the brown rocks are whales” and 
“this big stick is a big stick,” are dexterously authentic as well as hilarious).
Frazee is probably best known for her illustrations, and they do the greatest 
share of the work here. The art marks roundheaded, skinny-legged J&E as virtu-
ally identical, especially when hats obscure their differently unruly hair; while the 
viewers can identify them by the color of their shorts (James’ are blue, Eamon’s 
are red), they may just follow Bill’s droll lead and refer to the pairing as “Jamon.” 
The pencil-touched watercolors run to appropriately beachy aquas, even as they 
focus on the kids rather than the natural world; the vignette sequences of the duo’s 
various hijinks convey the boys’ tireless exuberance, while speech balloons contain 
280 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
utterances in pure Kidspeak (of course Bill’s gift of binoculars requires the two to 
examine each other up close, each happily exclaiming over his friend’s repulsiveness). 
The pell-mell jokeyness extends to covers—bedecked with the price label “25¢ 
(you wish)” and offering a thumbnail guide to the characters—and even the back 
flap, which helpfully offers instructions on how to make your own penguin out of 
a rock and a mussel shell, just as the boys do. Overall, it’s a format that works for 
reading alone as well as reading aloud, with the comradely tone ensuring a feeling 
of cool inclusion for reader or readee.
This sweetly captures the pleasures of youthful time-wasting in the 
company of your best friend with a keen understanding that those pleasures are 
best when they’re unsentimental. The result is just realistic enough to be perfect, a 
grade-schooler’s idyllic summer with limited demands for learning and bettering 
and a whole lot of reveling in kid priorities. A wonderful late-winter reminder that 
summer is coming, this will cheer up audiences by encouraging them to reflect on 
glorious summers past and even more glorious summers to anticipate. (See p. 292 
for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
AmAto, mAry The Chicken of the Family; illus. by Delphine Durand. Putnam, 
2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-399-24196-3 $16.99   
R* 6-9 yrs
When older sisters Kim and Clare sadly inform young Henrietta that she is not, in 
fact, their human sister but rather a chicken adopted from the farm down the road, 
Henrietta is incredulous—at first. She protests that she doesn’t even have feathers, 
but Kim insists that it’s her and Clare’s job to pluck them out of Henrietta each 
night while she sleeps (“It’s why we get more allowance than you,” Kim helpfully 
explains). As Henrietta’s further objections are each met with Kim’s convincingly 
clever explanations, she finds herself believing the story enough to head off to the 
farm to find her true family. The gentle friendliness of the chickens and peacefulness 
of their meadow home comfort her, and when Kim and Clare show up to confess 
their falsehoods and bring her home, she decides she’s better off a chicken and is 
joined by Clare, who, surprisingly, has also had enough of Kim’s domination. Amato 
successfully captures the casual cruelty of elder siblings and the unwilling gullibility 
of younger ones, managing to be both poignant (Henrietta comments that the 
chickens are nicer to her than her own sisters are) and funny (when frustrated Kim 
screams, “You’re not a chicken!”, Henrietta responds, “This is a peaceful meadow. 
Please use a peaceful voice”). Durand’s bug-eyed, big-headed figures are goofily 
appealing as they parade against backgrounds that are highly detailed and slightly 
off-kilter. Henrietta’s tiny but perky red bows accentuate her pluckiness, and it’s 
quite easy to see why she prefers her poultry pals, with their winsomely top-heavy 
bodies and slightly maniacal grins (some complete with a full set of teeth), to her 
March 2008 • 281
devious sisters. Siblings everywhere will nod in recognition at Henrietta’s travails, 
and listeners may eye those chickens at the petting zoo with a little more longing 
after this.  JH
Andersen, HAns CHristiAn The Ugly Duckling; ad. by Stephen Mitchell; illus. 
by Steve Johnson and Lou Fancher. Candlewick, 2008 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2159-9 $16.99   
R 7-10 yrs
Mitchell’s retelling of the classic Andersen tale sticks pretty close to its original, 
except for some elaboration of the mother’s defense of her “duckling”: “He may 
not be pretty, but he has a very good heart. He’s kind and considerate, and that’s 
worth at least as much as good looks.” Other than that line, Mitchell’s retelling is 
refreshingly free of external moralizing, and his version of the animals’ dialogue is 
eloquent yet entertainingly conversational. It’s the illustrations that are on display 
here, however, and Johnson and Fancher’s mixed-media art will engage viewers 
with its elegant and unusual collage patterning. Kids familiar with doing crayon 
rubbings and adults who fondly remember the old “Fashion Plates” toy will be 
especially intrigued by the underlying textures here: the baby cygnet’s feathers look 
like bits of lace cobbled together, while thumbprint-type patterns render the downy 
feathers of his duckling siblings surprisingly fluffy. While the use of pattern is oc-
casionally a bit overwhelming, especially in some of the larger spreads, the intricate 
texturing is nicely balanced by the measured stillness and solidity of the figures 
and backgrounds. The dreamy blues and greens of water, sky, and vegetation are 
attractively complemented by the warm browns and yellows of the mallards and the 
other flora and fauna in the scenes. The ugly duckling himself, while occasionally 
a bit cuter than he should be, is different enough in appearance from the other 
birds to make his ostracism fairly believable. Use this to spark a discussion about 
judging by outward appearance, or pair it with Pinkney’s version (BCCB 3/99) for 
a comparison of illustrative styles.  JH
BArnes, Jennifer Lynn The Squad. Laurel-Leaf/Random House, 
2008 [288p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73454-7 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
The last thing social malcontent Toby Klein ever imagined herself doing was becom-
ing a member of the Bayport Lion(esse)s cheerleading squad; she enjoys her social 
anonymity as much as she enjoys not having a beauty regime. She is athletic, sure, 
but her preference for leisure time had been hacking into supposedly unbeatable 
computer systems (like the Pentagon’s—oops!), and code-breaking. Thus, when 
her invitation to join the squad comes in a coded if entirely too glittery message, 
she is compelled to go see what’s what. It turns out that the squad is a cover for 
an elite team of government operatives, and that her little hack into the Pentagon 
hasn’t gone unnoticed after all. As she is swept into the world of large-scale intrigue, 
danger, and makeovers, Toby’s biggest challenges are to overcome her cognitive 
dissonance regarding the ditziness of cheerleaders and to learn the trick of using a 
vapid pretty-girl demeanor as a weapon of subterfuge. She’s got good teachers, as 
the other members of the squad emerge as complex characters with diverse skill sets 
behind their glossy smiles. In addition to offering crafty plotting and time-honored, 
typical teen conflicts and rivalries, Barnes maintains a sharp sense of humor in this 
action-adventure series, self-consciously referencing Charlie’s Angels and repurposing 
282 • The BulleTin
the accoutrements of popularity for espionage—Tasers that look like iPods, bullet-
proof bras, tongue-stud microphones, bubble-gum explosives in strengths that vary 
by flavor, etc. There’s probably a message here about girl power and not judging by 
appearances, but who cares? For readers who have outgrown Kim Possible or who feel 
a wee bit guilty over their Gossip Girls addiction, this adds just the right amount 
of substance without leaving the mind-candy dimension. Give me a C, give me an 
I, give me an A, give me more of Toby’s adventures in espionage.  KC
BAskin, norA rALeigH The Truth about My Bat Mitzvah. Simon, 
2008 [144p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-3558-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
When Caroline’s grandmother dies, Caroline is grief-stricken; when she discovers 
that Nana has left Caroline her Star of David necklace, Caroline begins to consider 
its meaning. With a gentile father and non-practicing mother, Caroline has had 
little involvement with her grandmother’s Jewish faith, but as Caroline mourns the 
loss of her beloved grandmother and watches her best friend, Rachel, approach 
her bat mitzvah, she realizes she must develop her own relationship with Judaism. 
A tenderly told story, this is more about family and identity than about theology. 
Caroline’s ignorance about Judaism is pretty considerable (“But hadn’t there just 
been a Jewish holiday last week?” she thinks when Rachel misses school for Yom 
Kippur) and doesn’t change all that much; what does change is her attitude toward 
her Jewishness and her knowledge about her grandparents’ and parents’ history 
in and out of faith. That’s a realistic transformation in the face of bereavement, 
and it’s a warm and credible touch that Caroline’s parents accept her new interest; 
there’s another layer added by Caroline’s discovery that her immigrant grandmother 
was considered to be “too Jewish” by her assimilated in-laws, further complicating 
Caroline’s nascent investigation of religion. Caroline’s situation will be familiar to 
many readers, and they’ll warm to her growth and self-discovery.  DS
BeCker, tom Darkside. Orchard/Scholastic, 2008 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-545-03739-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-7
In this British import, the world with which we are familiar, Lightside, is comple-
mented by another; when Jonathan realizes there is no respite for him in the 
known, he slips into the violent underworld of Darkside, seeking sanctuary and 
a remedy for his mentally ill father. Jonathan knew nothing of his own status as 
a half-Darksider, his father’s earlier forays into this dangerous world, or even the 
existence of the parallel sphere, but he quickly gets up to speed with the aid of a 
wereman, an ally of his father, who explains that Darkside was created to house all 
of London’s worst criminals (Jack the Ripper was the original law enforcer, and his 
descendants still play this role). Here Jonathan must both avoid capture and find a 
way to help his father, whose comatose state in an asylum puts him at heightened 
risk for being murdered by a Darksider vampire hungering for an easy human feed. 
Darkside is a true maelstrom of evil and danger, and Becker sprinkles ominous 
details throughout, intricately describing a memorable world wherein one is less 
likely to be welcomed than stabbed. However, the impetus behind Jonathan’s first 
venture into Darkside is weakly described, seeming more plot contrivance than 
integral development (he is one of two half-Darkside boys hunted to be part of a 
March 2008 • 283
staged fight). In addition, there are far more questions left open than answered in 
this first novel of the series, and the attention on creating a setting in which future 
adventures can be based may leave readers frustrated for more action and more 
resolution in this one. Nevertheless, early plot glitches in a series may not deter true 
horror fans, who will likely find the portrayal of this hauntingly well-developed 
underworld worth the read.  AS
BisHop, niC Nic Bishop Frogs; written and illus. with photographs by Nic 
Bishop. Scholastic, 2008 [48p]
ISBN 978-0-439-87755-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-5
moffett, mArk W. Face to Face with Frogs; written and illus. with photographs 
by Mark W. Moffett. National Geographic, 2008 32p (Face to Face with 
Animals)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0206-0 $25.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0205-3 $16.95   
R Gr. 3-5
Amphibian aficionados rejoice! Stalwart photoessayist Bishop and National Geo-
graphic contributor Moffett, in the promising Face to Face series, have each produced 
a visually arresting introduction to our froggy friends. Bishop follows the format 
of his Spiders (BCCB 10/07), with stunning close-ups of individual frogs serving 
as starting points for discussion of that particular species or region; Moffett has 
a slight preference for an overview approach, with personal accounts of his own 
explorations providing entertaining specifics to go with the arresting visuals, as 
casual sidebars offer information on random hoppy topics. This duo is a both/and 
rather than an either/or; the Bishop is probably a tad more accessible, despite its 
slightly greater length, and the Moffett a frog’s whisker more informative, but 
critter-loving kids aren’t going to want to miss Moffett’s gallery of jewellike poison 
dart frogs or Bishop’s stop-motion frog leap or eyeball-to-eyeball encounters, and 
both will draw browsers as much as serious readers. Bishop’s book concludes with 
a lengthy note about his photography, an index, and a glossary; end matter on the 
Moffett gives kids tips on environmental preservation and frog observation, covers 
some basic frog facts and provides a global map keyed to the featured frogs, and 
includes a glossary, list of print and net resources, and an index.  DS
BoLden, tonyA George Washington Carver. Field Museum/Abrams, 
2008 41p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8109-9366-2 $18.95   
R Gr. 3-6
This companion book to the Field Museum’s George Washington Carver exhibit 
exceeds standard souvenir-shop fare, offering an informative introduction to the 
ex-slave’s landmark career in agricultural science and his dedication to improving 
the fortunes of some of the poorest of the nation’s farmers. Although the picture-
book format precludes much depth and detail, Bolden nudges beyond the facts of 
Carver’s childhood, his groundbreaking success at an all-white college, and his tenure 
as professor at the Tuskegee Institute to address his religious beliefs, his grumpiness 
at being forever associated with peanut study, and the critique within the African-
American community that he, like Booker T. Washington, “rejected open protest 
of segregation.” Layout is exceptionally attractive, with spacious blocks of text, 
beautifully reproduced historical photographs “mounted” in filigreed scrapbook 
284 • The BulleTin
corners, and some of Carver’s own paintings and personal effects. Source notes are 
provided for all quotations, and a selected bibliography is included.  EB 
BunCe, eLizABetH C. A Curse Dark as Gold. Levine/Scholastic, 
2008 [422p]
ISBN 978-0-439-89576-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
The death of her father leaves Charlotte Miller the last in the long line of Millers, 
a family that has kept its woollen mill going throughout the 1700s despite poor 
fortunes and an increasing belief that the mill is cursed. Charlotte is too practical-
minded to fully believe in such natterings, but as debt, vandalism, and a profligate 
uncle bring the financial situation of the mill to a dire turn, she finds herself in the 
reluctant position of having to accept the help of a strange visitor calling himself 
Jack Spinner, who appears at the most desperate times and sports such wondrous 
skills as spinning gold thread from straw and restoring ruined cloth. When his price 
for services becomes too high, Charlotte realizes that she must not only believe in 
the curse but break it, and that she must allow the people who love and admire her 
to help. Bunce blends multiple elements in her savory stew of genres—mystery, 
romance, work, and chicanery simmer in a rich broth of history infused with light 
touches of traditional beliefs and folk magic. The Rumpelstiltskin story progression 
is deftly integrated into a plot that enfolds and extends its implications regarding 
class and the value of skilled workmanship. In an author’s note, Bunce readily admits 
where she has tweaked historical detail to align more favorably with folkloric belief, 
and her instincts prove right on target as she gives flesh to distinctively individual 
characters with almost archetypal resonance. Charlotte’s complex loyalties to her 
family, the mill, and the townsfolk who depend upon it for their livelihood make 
her an estimable character indeed, well worth applauding in a tale that is as spooky 
and suspenseful as it is satisfying.  KC
BusBy, CyLin, ed. First Kiss (Then Tell). Bloomsbury, 2008 212p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-199-2 $15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-241-8 $8.95   
R Gr. 7-10
Of all of the tidbits of wisdom and shared experience that are collected here in this 
volume of first-kiss reminiscences, the one that stands out most memorably is that 
a first kiss might be a second or even third kiss, depending on how you want to 
look at things. First kisses tend to be bumbling, awkward, even faintly disgusting 
things, but real first kisses are those that give you stories to tell. So say the likes 
of Deb Caletti, Nikki Grimes, Leslie Margolis, David Levithan, Scott Westerfeld, 
Lauren Myracle, Micol Ostow, Jon Scieszka and thirteen other contributors. A 
few of the stories, poems, and comics are sentimental, a few funny, some limned 
with a whimsical sadness; overall, they present a range of first times that sweeten 
anticipation and/or memory, depending on reader experience. Interstitial quotes 
and factoid spots provide enlightening context for the kiss that will remind alert 
readers that kissing doesn’t come naturally, as current wisdom would have us believe, 
but is instead a cultural development with a history and with rules and customs 
that vary among peoples. For readers still practicing with pillows and those who’ve 
already puckered up for real, this anthology lays out the welcome mat for entry 
into contemporary teen-style kissing in all its spitty glory.  KC 
March 2008 • 285
CABot, meg Moving Day. Scholastic, 2008 [240p] (Allie Finkle’s Rules 
for Girls)
ISBN 978-0-545-03947-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Nine-year-old Allie wants to make sure she learns from the wisdom she encounters 
and the lessons experience teaches her, so she writes down her rules of life, ranging 
from “Don’t stick a spatula down your best friend’s throat” to “You’re not sup-
posed to hate people, especially grown up people.” That last lesson is currently an 
important one, since Allie’s parents have decided it’s time to move house, and Allie 
isn’t exactly on board. True, she’s not that grieved at trading in her lachrymose and 
traitorous friend Mary Kay for what look like cool new friends at a cool new school, 
but she’s sure that their new house, a spooky old Victorian, has a killer zombie hand 
in its attic (Allie’s uncle secretly lets her watch horror movies), and she’s ultimately 
just indignant that she’s being relocated without any say in the matter. Usually a 
snarky narration like Allie’s would partner with a snappy pace, but events move 
along with surprising slowness here, and there’s too much focus on Allie’s dislike 
for her ostensible friends at her old school, which sours the narrative. Allie’s ar-
rogance is age-appropriate and often funny, though, and the book is subtle about 
her masking her essential resistance to change with more acceptable and seemingly 
sophisticated objections to relocation; there’s also some reassuring implications 
about the possibility that a move can, in fact, be a good thing (it’s clear that Allie’s 
been stuck in a real rut with Mary Kay and will benefit from finally finding friends 
of like minds and tastes). Offer this to Jacqueline Wilson fans, or to those longing 
after their older sisters’ titles in the Cabot oeuvre.  DS
CAdnum, miCHAeL The King’s Arrow. Viking, 2008 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-670-06331-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
There’s no dispute that William II, son of William the Conqueror, met his death 
on a hunting expedition in New Forest in 1100; nearly a millennium later, though, 
suggestions of murder rather than accident have not been thoroughly quashed. 
Cadnum spins this controversy into an engrossing novel in which fictional characters 
mingle freely with historical figures and the generally accepted culprit, Walter Tirel 
of Poix, steps out of the footnotes and into a co-starring role. Fictional protagonist 
Simon Foldre, eighteen-year-old son of an English mother and deceased Norman 
father, has ambitions to rise in the Norman milieu of William II. The murder of 
a poacher by the locally despised royal marshal, Roland Montfort, is the unlikely 
catalyst for bringing Simon to the attention of William’s brother, Prince Henry, 
who arranges for Simon to serve as varlet to the king’s friend, Walter Tirel, at the 
following day’s stag hunt. Still reeling from the death of the well-liked poacher, 
Simon seizes the opportunity not just to improve his social prospects, but also to rile 
Marshal Roland, who has no great regard for Tirel. He’s swept instead into a morass 
of royal intrigue in which a suspected plot against the king throws suspicion on a 
number of courtiers. When Tirel’s arrow pierces the king’s chest during the hunt, 
Simon finds himself a hunted fugitive headed for France with a man he scarcely 
knows as his protector and Marshal Roland, fiercely loyal to the fallen king, hot on 
their heels. Rather than a historical reconstruction, Cadnum instead offers a fully 
imagined literary entertainment filled with treachery and violence, wherein life is 
286 • The BulleTin
often held cheap but honor dear. Simon’s eye-opening encounter with his betters 
is convincingly drawn, and Tirel’s character and motivations, though obviously 
fictionalized, are equally credible. Fans of medieval adventure will, of course, be 
drawn to the conundrum of William II’s death, but teens looking for an offbeat 
murder mystery might also want to revisit the tragedy in New Forest.  EB
CALetti, deB The Fortunes of Indigo Skye. Simon, 2008 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-1007-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
Initially, Indigo’s fortunes are modest but reasonably satisfying; she has a boyfriend 
she loves, a waitressing job she finds so gratifying that she’d rather do that than head 
on to college after graduation, and a warm if quirky family. Change arrives with 
shocking suddenness, however, when a patron at Indigo’s restaurant, motivated by 
her advice to flee the corporate world for something he’ll genuinely enjoy, leaves 
her a big tip. A really, really big tip. A $2.5 million tip. After overcoming her initial 
reservations about keeping the money, Indigo struggles to sort out not only her 
options but also her obligations. Caletti is a superlative stylist, and as usual her 
real achievement lies in the creation of voice and world: Indigo is sympathetic but 
realistically flawed, guarded against the changes she expects the money to bring 
but vulnerable to surprise challenges (her self-righteous streak flourishes with the 
new financial protection, and she’s forced to spend a considerable amount of time 
responding to the questions and concerns of family and friends). Though char-
acterization skews somewhat, with some of the haves portrayed reductively while 
the have-nots are sympathetic and vivid, the cast is a memorable collection, with 
Indigo’s family especially effective in their believable individuality. Aside from the 
straightforward financial issues, the book subtly explores questions of class and 
power (“Money . . . Take it from me, someone who didn’t have it and then did, 
you feel different when you’ve got it. You’ve got rights. You’ve got a voice”). Teens 
who are looking for a counteractant to the unreflectively moneyed pleasures of the 
Gossip Girls and their ilk will find rich food for thought here.  DS
CeeLen, ViCky, illus. Baby! Baby!; illus. with photographs by Vicky Ceelen. Ran-
dom House, 2008 22p
ISBN 978-0-375-84207-8 $6.99   
Ad 6-24 mos.
Babies’ taste for looking at baby faces is widely known, and Ceelen indulges that 
inclination and takes it a step farther, with each spread in this wordless board book 
paralleling a photo of a baby with a photo of an animal in a similar pose. Some of 
the comparisons are more geared to adult than baby appeal (infants aren’t likely 
to see the humor in the similarity between a frog’s shape seen from above and a 
baby sprawled out on its stomach), and some images (such as the up-close face of 
a turtle) may be difficult for tinies to recognize, with the vacillation between black-
and-white and color additionally confusing the situation. Many of the comparisons, 
though, are apt and inviting—a sacked-out kitten sprawls with careless paws just 
like the sleeping human baby opposite; a young ape sucks its fingers busily, just 
like the facing baby—and the multiracial cast of babies is expressive and enticing 
in its own right. Pictures are attractively inset into colored pages, with the human 
babies mostly shot against white backgrounds for additional clarity. Older kids with 
new sibs may also enjoy the beastly reflections, while little ones just beginning to 
focus on pages will likely want to get their paws on this.  DS
March 2008 • 287
CLine-rAnsome, LesA Young Pelé: Soccer’s First Star; illus. by James E. 
Ransome. Schwartz & Wade, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93599-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83599-5 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
Not many children will recognize the name Edson do Nascimento, but it’s likely 
that they already know him by his soccer nom de guerre, Pelé. Here Cline-Ran-
some describes his younger years as an indifferent student in his Brazilian village, 
his constant fascination with the game, the ambitions of Edson and his friends 
to garner the respect accorded to well-equipped and uniformed teams, and their 
eventual rise to the youth soccer tournament at the Bauru Athletic Club—with 
team uniforms and actual shoes, no less. As listeners follow the legend, they not 
only hear how Edson came by the somewhat mysterious moniker whose origin 
has never been finally determined, but they also witness the fact that the talented 
boy’s success hinged in part on the efforts and enthusiasm of his teammates and 
the dedication of the father of three of his teammates. James Ransome’s burly 
oil paintings deliver plenty of the field action the audience will demand, but his 
rendering of Pelé’s facial features and size is inconsistent, making it occasionally 
difficult to spot the subject or pinpoint his age from spread to spread. The narra-
tion, however, is smooth, the endnote summarizing his later career is informative, 
and hero worship is nearly guaranteed.  EB
CoLemAn, eVeLyn Freedom Train. McElderry, 2008 140p
ISBN 978-0-689-84716-5 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Clyde is mostly proud of having an older brother who is a decorated 
Marine serving as a guard aboard the Freedom Train, the locomotive that’s traveling 
the country in 1947 bringing historical documents and artifacts to excited throngs, 
but he’s a little grumpy, too, since all anyone can talk about is how wonderful his 
brother is, while he spends most of his time in trouble. Plus he’s being bullied by 
Phillip Granger and he can’t really fight back, since Phillip’s father is a boss at the 
cotton mill where his mother works. When Phillip jumps him on the way home 
from school and knocks him unconscious with a plank to the head, help comes 
from the shadows as a black boy named William pelts Phillip with stones from 
his slingshot and then takes Clyde home to his father, a doctor, who fixes him up. 
Clyde tells no one about his encounter with the black family, but he has his chance 
to repay the favor when the Columbians, a group similar to the Klan, attempt to 
run the doctor and his family out of town. While Coleman captures the voice 
of a Southern, working-class white boy of the ’40s, the narrative is ungainly in 
its purposiveness, and it debases to outright sermonizing as Clyde overcomes his 
problem with stuttering and speaking in public just in time to recite the Freedom 
Pledge, supposedly because he has finally understood what it really means. When 
Clyde declares that the resultant courage he finds to openly befriend William is a 
better Christmas present than the American Flyer train set that he had his heart 
set on, the sap all but clogs the works. However, if subtlety isn’t a necessary virtue 
in historical fiction for this age group, Coleman’s blend of trains, fights, frogs, and 
male honor will appeal to burgeoning young patriots. An historical note on the 
Freedom Train, including some pictures and a website where the songs referenced 
can be heard, is included.  KC
288 • The BulleTin
Cooper, eLisHA Ridiculous/Hilarious/Terrible/Cool: A Year in an American High 
School; written and illus. by Elisha Cooper. Dial, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3169-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Cooper went back to school for a year, tagging around after a handful of students 
at Walter Payton College Preparatory High School in Chicago and coaxing revela-
tions about their interests, activities, and aspirations. Rather than an interview-style 
report, however, he spins his discoveries into a monthly survey of how everybody’s 
getting by, with cuts from scene to scene as swift as a prime-time hospital or cop 
drama. Readers meet Daniel, an African-American student with his sights set on 
Harvard and a career in politics; soccer star Emily, whose year-end makeover does 
nothing to soften her fierceness on the field; Diana, the first in her Latino family 
to have a shot at college; Anais, perplexed about whether to pursue her passion 
for dance in a college program or with a troupe; and Aisha, a Muslim girl who 
seldom forms friendships since her family is constantly on the move. Not all are 
high achievers—there’s Zef, whose dysfunctional sleep habits get him booted from 
Payton and relegated to an alternative program through a community college; and 
Anthony, whose complicated love life and petty drug dealing leave him no room for 
study, only a post in the cafeteria from which he seldom moves. Cooper maintains 
a reportorial distance from his subjects and an unfailingly nonjudgmental perspec-
tive, and he displays a keen eye for what really matters at the moment, from college 
acceptance letters to the sartorial challenges of winter footwear in Chicago. Teeny 
gray-tone vignettes punctuate the text and extend Cooper’s impressionistic take on 
high-school life. No dates are mentioned, but references to the White Sox World 
Series, Christmas season at Marshall Field’s (now, oh-so-sadly, Macy’s), and Dick 
Cheney’s hunting accident place this unmistakably in the 2005-6 academic year, 
a freshness date that’s certain to expire pretty soon. All the more reason to get this 
title into circulation quickly.  EB
CrAne, e. m. Skin Deep. Delacorte, 2008 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90477-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73479-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
“I move through the halls of school as if I’m not really there,” says Andrea Anderson, 
who feels largely invisible in life as well as high school. That invisibility changes 
when a neighbor, Honora Menapace, goes into the hospital suddenly, and dog-lov-
ing Andrea leaps into the breach to take care of Zena, Mrs. Menapace’s St. Bernard. 
When Mrs. Menapace returns home, she’s facing chemotherapy, so she wants Andrea 
to stay on; in getting to know the artistic, free-thinking Honora and becoming a 
part of her life, Andrea finds her views of life and herself expanding. Debut novel-
ist Crane has a pleasing and polished style, and the book authentically reflects the 
galvanizing effect an outsider’s positive opinion can have on the changing teen 
self-image. The characterizations don’t always match up well to the book’s approval 
ratings, however: Andrea’s new friend Ashley is perfectly happy to trash-talk her old 
popular friends despite being ostensibly better than they, Mrs. Menapace is rather 
tediously self-romanticizing, and Andrea’s mother seems to be problematic more 
for her polyester pants and taste for popular sitcoms than for actual mistreatment 
of her daughter (indeed, the story seems mostly an unacknowledged drama of class 
difference, as Mrs. Menapace’s delightful life is clearly made possible by having the 
March 2008 • 289
kind of money that Andrea’s mother will never see). The book does create some deft 
and effective secondary characters, though, and it doesn’t resort simply to being 
a morality play, since it’s clear that Andrea’s viewpoint of many people, including 
her mother, has been strictured. Most of all, there’s a terrific appeal in the idea of a 
sophisticated adult finding a teen worthy and interesting in a way her family never 
has, and readers will enjoy the notion of finding their own Mrs. Menapace to see 
through to their undervalued souls.  DS
dipuCCHio, keLLy Grace for President; illus. by LeUyen Pham. Hyperion, 
2008 36p
ISBN 978-0-7868-3919-3 $15.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Ginger-skinned, dreadlocked Grace is outraged to learn that no woman has ever 
been elected United States President. When she expresses a desire to hold office, her 
teacher seizes the teachable moment to arrange an election pitting Grace against an-
other primary-grade hopeful, golden boy Thomas Cobb. They’re off to an even start 
with the predictable posters, slogans, and school-improvement promises. Thomas, 
though, studies the electoral chart, determines that he has an advantage in the guy 
demographic, and slides back into his customary routine of spelling, science, and 
soccer; Grace, meanwhile, puts some action behind her campaign chatter, serv-
ing on several school committees. Election day finds the pair in a dead heat, with 
electoral votes falling along gender lines just as Thomas predicted. Then it’s down 
to Wyoming (“The Equality State,” most appropriately) to break away in favor of 
Grace. DiPucchio keeps the proceedings at believable kid level, from the fish-taco 
campaign issue to primary-grade cronyism (“The Badger State of Wisconsin casts 
its 10 votes for my best friend, Grace Campbell”), but her attention in both text 
and concluding notes to the byzantine electoral system may enlighten as many adult 
readers as children. Pham cleverly imbeds visual clues concerning the campaign into 
the classroom and schoolyard scenes of her enthusiastic multiethnic cast. Viewers 
who follow her pictures closely will note that the bespectacled redheaded boy who 
participates in myriad activities and listens attentively at competing rallies turns out 
to be the Wyoming swing voter, demonstrating that each vote does, in fact, carry 
crucial weight. Now’s the time to bolster the collection for the November run-up, 
and Grace is a worthy candidate.  EB
eLisH, dAn The Attack of the Frozen Woodchucks; illus. by Greg Call. Geringer/
HarperCollins, 2008 247p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-113871-3 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-113870-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Ten-year-old Jimmy just wants his abducted father back from the extraterrestrial 
woodchucks, but if he has to save the planet to save his dad, he’ll do it. Luckily, 
Jimmy has the help of his brilliant toddler sister, his friend William (descended 
from President Taft and quick to remind you of it), and a spacecraft-building 
classmate, Janice. Together, the four determine that the giant woodchuck spotted 
on Earth is but one of thousands who have been created to decimate forests across 
the galaxy, making citizens desperate to purchase Plastawood, a synthetic wood 
product. Unfortunately, with other worlds (including the cotton-candy-production 
planet) successfully deforested, a focused invasion of Earth is next, and the four 
intrepid heroes, after slowly ascertaining the mysterious person behind this nefari-
ous plan, have mere seconds to avert disaster (as we all know, woodchucks sure can 
290 • The BulleTin
chuck wood, and giant ones are rather efficient). This is ridiculous, over-the-top 
fun all the way, and Elish commits fully with exaggerated characters, a rollicking 
pace, and, of course, the enormous rodents who hatch from pods. Interspersed 
black-and-white illustrations add to the humor, conjuring images of 1950s horror 
movies that made tomatoes, moles, or beetles equally threatening menaces against 
humanity. Science fiction fans who welcome absurdity as much as planet-hopping 
in their reads will find this an ideal balance of both, and readers who loved the 
quirky hilarity of Anderson’s Whales on Stilts (BCCB 4/05) will revel in this equally 
offbeat humor.  AS
eLLiott, dAVid On the Farm; illus. by Holly Meade. Candlewick, 
2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3322-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
This well-stocked farm has representatives from just about every farm animal spe-
cies, from cow to sheep, goat to pig, goose to duck to chicken, and they’re each 
the subject of a portably sized poem. The verses scan a bit rustically at times and 
readers aloud will have to decide whether or not to include the titles as part of the 
poems (it’s necessary with several but obtrusive with a few), but they’re pithy and 
crisply rhymed, making for easy reading and listening. Tone varies from gently 
playful (the cow is “utterly/ amazing!”) to pastorally musing (the bees’ story “begins 
in clover” and “ends with gold”), offering a pleasing seasoning of imagery. Meade’s 
watercolored woodblock illustrations are elegant yet homely, cheerfully depicting 
the unpolished charm of a well-filled pigpen (the farmer wisely wears wellies) as well 
as the sunny idyll of a field of wildflowers. Whether you’re looking for a broader 
treatment than Schertle’s poetic How Now, Brown Cow? (BCCB 12/94) or just 
poetic company for Denise Fleming’s many barnyard outings, this should satisfy 
the young human menagerie.  DS
entHoVen, sAm Tim, Defender of the Earth. Razorbill, 2008 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-184-2 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 6-8
Newly elected Prime Minister David Sinclair is startled to learn that Britain has 
been developing a secret weapon, Tyrannosaurus: Improved Model (Tim), which 
has now outgrown its underground lab facility but has yet to show any true military 
promise. Sinclair pulls Tim’s funding and transfers it to Professor Mallahide and 
his nanotechnology project. Bad move. Tim isn’t about to go quietly into any dark 
night, Mallahide is a predictably deranged scientist focused on world domination, 
and the stage is set for a smackdown between mega- and micro-forces, with the 
fate of the world at stake. Artlessly woven into this B-movie plot are the requisite 
humans who save the day—fourteen-year-old Chris, who wears a magic bracelet, 
clamped on his wrist by a weird museum guard, that focuses human energy on 
Tim’s behalf; and Mallahide’s daughter Anna, who knows what dear old Dad has 
been up to. This may supply some light and cheesy entertainment for Godzilla vs. 
Whatever devotees, but the attacking swarm of ’bots won’t offer much to hardcore 
sci-fi fans, and overall Enthoven’s take on nanobots and cloning makes the first 
season of Star Trek look wildly sophisticated by comparison. EB 
March 2008 • 291
fAHy, tHomAs The Unspoken. Simon, 2008 [176p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-4007-4 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Allison has tried for years to forget her old life in the small town of Meridian, and 
she has excellent reasons. A cult leader, Jacob, had taken over the town, torturing 
the disobedient (including Allison and all of her close friends) in grisly ways and 
making dire threats about the end of the world. After Allison and her five friends 
murdered him (and the rest of the adults all supposedly died in a fire), the chil-
dren were sent away to foster care. The bizarre murder of one of the six surviving 
teens brings the remainder back together in Meridian, and they quickly realize 
that someone or something is carrying out Jacob’s predictions that they will all 
die within five years. With protagonists being horribly executed right and left, the 
intriguing unfolding mystery is dampened by the real possibility that no one will 
be alive to solve it. Luckily for Allison, she and her hottie crush are the two who 
escape, scathed but optimistic that they’ve finally killed the last remaining member 
of the cult. Unfortunately, a solid horror plot with built in suspense is marred by 
largely unexplored references to supernatural forces that may or may not be playing 
a role: although the villain is revealed to be human, some of the killings appear to 
be physically impossible, and the last-minute question about whether the world 
will actually be ending as predicted seems in direct contradiction to the rest of the 
plot. However, fans of the Saw movies or readers who have long graduated from 
middle-school horror series but are still seeking gross-out thrills may find this novel 
an enjoyably hair-raising read.  AS
ferrAro, tinA How to Hook a Hottie. Delacorte, 2008 196p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90444-5 $11.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73438-7 $8.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Kate DelVecchio, president of the Future Business Leaders of America and a deter-
mined disciple of the Donald, is always on the lookout for an Ideal Opportunity. 
One lands in her lap when Brandon, the school’s most popular guy, asks her out, 
and girls immediately want to know her secret for hooking a hottie. Although she 
has no idea why Brandon is interested in her (she’s incredibly put off by him, but 
she can’t seem to give him a firm brush-off), she senses that this is a potential cash 
cow. By researching hookup tips on the Web and contracting some subterfuge 
and communication duties out to her best guy friend, Dal, she soon has a going 
business, but, since she really doesn’t know anything about matters of the heart, 
she has mixed success. Meanwhile, she is trying to sort out her newfound feelings 
for Dal, who already has a girlfriend, and to cope with her anger over her mother’s 
abandonment of the family to pursue her own dreams of PhD glory. Kate is con-
vincingly drawn as a savvy entrepreneur who understands the S & P Index much 
better than she understands herself and other people; she is endearingly vulnerable 
as she careens toward her inevitable crisis of the heart as well as the crash of her busi-
ness. Her conflict with her mother follows its own well-crafted narrative arc as she 
consciously sets herself up to avoid the trap of selfishness for which she condemns 
her mom even as she fears she is like her at every turn. Dal’s sensitive articulation 
of the differences he sees allows her to come to terms with how she might benefit 
from the traits she’s inherited while not collapsing into wholesale forgiveness for 
the pain her mom has dealt around to her family. Readers whose emotions haven’t 
yet caught up to their intellects will sense a kindred spirit in Kate. KC 
292 • The BulleTin
frAzee, mArLA A Couple of Boys Have the Best Week Ever; written and illus. by 
Marla Frazee. Harcourt, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-15-206020-6 $16.00   
R* 6-9 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 279, for review.
geisert, ArtHur, illus. Hogwash; illus. by Arthur Geisert. Lorraine/Houghton, 
2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-618-77332-9 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-8 yrs
It’s hard to know which is more fun, getting dirty or getting clean, in Geisert’s 
latest engineering addition to his porcine universe. What could be better than the 
piglets’ first stop at the mud wallow? How about a roll in paint that’s tipped out of 
huge barrels at the paint shack on the edge of town? Broom-wielding mamas arrive 
to gently herd their grimy offspring to the absolutely literal hogwash, where each 
piglet is clamped into a crane-like arm, deposited in a large wooden tub (stream-fed 
and heated by a complex system of pipes and bellows, culminating in an enormous 
tippable teapot that fills the tub), and sloshed about in this soapflake-infused wave 
pool. From there they’re rinsed in a double-decker, sieve-styled shower contraption, 
taken on a walk though some cozily heated coils, and clipped onto a mechanized 
clothesline to dry. Not a single word accompanies Geisert’s scenes, but it’s obvious 
from the contented grins on his piglets that not a grunt or oink of protest is uttered. 
Pore over the cleverly devised ink-hatched and watercolor-tinted gadgetry, then pour 
in the warm water and round up some kitchen gear for tear-free tubtime.  EB
gordon, roderiCk Tunnels; by Roderick Gordon and Brian Williams; illus. by 
Brian Williams. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2008 [480p]
ISBN 978-0-439-87177-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-8
This British import features a bizarre, expansive world that exists below London and 
a fourteen-year-old boy who must find a way into it to save his father. Will and his 
dad have always been insatiably curious diggers, seeking treasure below the surface, 
but when his dad disappears, Will begins to uncover an ominous mystery behind 
his absence. It seems that Will’s father has found a way down into an entire parallel 
world, but when Will follows, he finds the citizens anything but welcoming, even 
to a native-born like himself (he quickly discovers that his birth mother took him 
above ground years before, and he was then adopted by the only family he has ever 
known). It soon becomes clear that Will, and his father for whom he is still search-
ing, may never escape this grim world, and that mere survival rather than a daring 
escape may be the best for which he can hope. Although the primary focus of the 
novel is the heroic quest on which Will embarks, there is also enough thoughtful 
exploration of family dynamics to intrigue readers who may not normally be drawn 
to fantasy: Will’s troubled negotiations with his topside family are poignant and 
memorable, and his immediate, even desperate, bonds with his below-surface rela-
tives speak to the loneliness and isolation that drove him to such a drastic effort to 
save his father, the one solid link he has to the world above. Sparse black and gray 
drawings add atmospheric touches to the already dark narrative, offering disturbing 
glimpses into this dangerous world. The novel ends with a surprising twist, all but 
guaranteeing anticipation for the promised sequel.  AS
March 2008 • 293
grAff, LisA The Life and Crimes of Bernetta Wallflower. Geringer/HarperCol-
lins, 2008 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-087593-0 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-087592-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Initially, Bernetta Wallflower has committed only one crime, that of cheating on 
one of her sixth-grade tests; unfortunately, her erstwhile best friend, Ashley, had 
been running a nicely complementary cheating and blackmail operation, and she 
not only snared Bernetta in it, she managed to frame Bernetta as its perpetrator. 
Desperate to make the tuition money to return in fall to her beloved school, which 
has withdrawn her scholarship, she’s intrigued by an unusual proposition: Gabe, 
a boy who’s a fan of old movies, yearns to be a con artist in the tradition of The 
Sting and Paper Moon, and he wants Bernetta, who’s been working in the family 
tradition of stage magic since her babyhood, as a partner. This is an entertaining 
and offbeat outing, following cinematic convention by developing its own moral-
ity rather than worrying too much about societal rules, by escalating things with 
cons within cons and subsequent counter-cons, and by focusing on enjoyability 
rather than plausibility. Too much depth would sink the light ’n’ airy story, but 
it’s a nice touch that Bernetta does actually undergo some personal growth in the 
midst of her grifting. What’ll likely be more important to readers is that the evil 
Ashley finally gets her comeuppance, and they’ll relish the twists and turns of the 
plotters’ plot.  DS
HArris, JoAnne Runemarks. Knopf, 2008 526p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94444-4 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84444-7 $18.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Maddy, fourteen and shunned by most of her European village because of her 
magical ability, has only ever known one true friend and ally, a traveling sage called 
One-Eye, who has been teaching Maddy to use her powers wisely. Maddy’s life 
changes irrevocably when she is sent on a quest to find a magical item, the Whis-
perer, which confers on its holder a huge advantage in a battle brewing between 
good and evil. In this impressively intricate novel, Harris blends fantasy, mythology, 
and mystery as it is slowly revealed that the Whisperer is an evil oracle, destroyed 
Gods can be recreated, and Maddy, foretold as a new mage of old Runic magic, 
is integral in defeating the overwhelmingly powerful evil force of the Order, who 
use religion as a weapon against the world. Dauntless and fiercely loyal, Maddy 
is carefully developed as a strong and memorable enough protagonist to not get 
lost in the complex mix of bizarre settings, creepy monk-like villains, and vengeful 
gods (the fact that one of her traveling companions is the trickster Loki, who has 
accumulated endless enemies, makes life particularly challenging). Readers will 
likely feel deep sympathy with her in her isolated early years, and they will happily 
follow her through this substantial, tightly plotted adventure. A cast of characters, 
diagrams of important runes, and maps are all key aids in tracing Maddy’s quest 
into the unknown.  AS
294 • The BulleTin
Henderson, LAuren Kiss Me Kill Me. Delacorte, 2008 260p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90485-8 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73487-5 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Scarlett Wakefield doesn’t give a second thought to her faithful B-list friends when 
she is invited to join the inner circle, the glittering children of the rich and famous, 
in her posh British prep school. She’s even further over the moon when the boy of 
her fantasies kisses her at her first A-list party, but when he drops dead moments 
later, so does her social life. She is exiled to an even posher school in the country, 
this one all-female (except for the obligatory cute teenaged gardener) and run by 
her formidable grandmother. Fearful that she is somehow a deadly toxin who will 
never be able to kiss again, she sinks into a depression until she receives a strange 
note that intimates that the apparent death-by-kissing wasn’t what it seemed. 
Teaming up with a menacingly fit girl, she’s determined to figure out where the 
note came from, clear her name once and for all, and summon up the courage to 
kiss the gardener. Bearing the classic earmarks of murder-mystery genre fiction, the 
book offers a suspenseful plot and the clues well laid for the alert reader. However, 
the casual attitude toward murder necessary for that genre to work sits uneasily 
with Scarlett’s teen angst over first love and second kisses; since the book lacks the 
breezy insouciance of Clement-Moore’s Prom Dates from Hell (BCCB 7/07), the 
result is a jarring mismatch of emotion and genre that makes Scarlett seem callous 
at best, and certainly less than credible. What will be worse for some mystery fans, 
however, is that justice is never really served; while Scarlett has figured out means 
and opportunity, there is no drawing-room confrontation that establishes motive 
and ensures that the guilty party is punished. Still, fans of murder lite may enjoy 
the novelty of teen protagonists in their genre of choice.  KC
Hennesy, CAroLyn Pandora Gets Jealous. Bloomsbury, 2008 264p
ISBN 978-1-59990-196-1 $14.95   
R Gr. 5-6
A school project about the gods should have been easy for Pandora, the daughter 
of Prometheus: after all, her father still has a piece of his liver that was pecked out 
after his godly theft, saved in a jar and ready for show and tell. Pandora is bored with 
jarred liver, however, and thus begins a horrible mistake leading to a life-changing 
adventure as she instead selects a small forbidden box to bring to school. Of course, 
the box is opened, and seven evils and miseries are immediately released into the 
world (unlucky Pandora here manages to slam the box shut before Hope can, as in 
the original, make its way into the world as well). Although the gods’ first “solution” 
of simply torturing Pandora and her family for all eternity is temporarily discarded, 
the task she is given to avoid that fate will be nearly impossible: Pandora must re-
capture all of the evils in only six months. It quickly becomes clear that this novel 
is the first in a series, with Pandora only seeking one of the evils, jealousy, in this 
outing. Even with little realistic uncertainty about whether Pandora will ultimately 
emerge triumphant (she is remarkably quick-witted in spite of her clumsiness, and 
she is surrounded by admirably well-suited friends and allies who are secretly as-
sisting), Hennesy ably creates tension through unpredictable pacing, the inclusion 
of unexpected villains, and the satisfyingly over-the-top interventions of the gods. 
In an increasingly rich field of mythology-based fiction for upper elementary and 
middle school students, Pandora’s attempts to save herself, her family, and the world 
represent a worthy addition.  AS
March 2008 • 295
kAtz, ALAn Oops!; illus. by Edward Koren. McElderry, 2008 [144p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-0204-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-6 
Katz, author of the silly song-adaptation collection Where Did They Hide My Pres-
ents? (BCCB 12/05), turns here to original verse in this collection of approximately 
100 poems. He hasn’t abandoned goofiness, though, as the verses are short jokey 
entries dependent on the puns, twists, and bathroom humor that marked his re-
worked songs. Subjects include farty TV viewers (“On the Air”), schoolwork (“The 
Penmanship Has Sailed”), and sibling discord (“No Sale”), and the doofily comic 
treatment and unthreatening compactness of the poems will endear the verses to 
young readers. The craftsmanship is unfortunately less satisfying, though: meter 
is often anybody’s guess, and the jokes tend to be labored rather than witty, with 
poems sometimes relying on the topics to bring their own comedy. New Yorker 
cartoonist Koren brings his familiar scratchily hatched monochromatic sketches 
to illustrate the verses, adding a touch of texture to the pages. Florian’s Bing Bang 
Boing (BCCB 11/94) or Colin McNaughton’s Making Friends with Frankenstein 
(BCCB 4/94) are superior collections of droll giggly verse for a similar reading 
level, but Oops! may still entertain as an opportunity for irreverent readalouds and 
read-togethers as well as private, if not quiet, enjoyment.  DS
kerLey, BArBArA What To Do About Alice?: How Alice Roosevelt Broke the 
Rules, Charmed the World, and Drove Her Father Teddy Crazy!; illus. by Edwin 
Fotheringham. Scholastic, 2008 [46p]
ISBN 978-0-439-92231-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
Eldest daughter and frequent thorn in the side of Theodore Roosevelt, Alice Roos-
evelt, with her propensity for “eating up the world” and her tomboyish, envelope-
pushing ways, could clearly be a liability for a politically ambitious father. Here 
Kerley reviews some of Alice’s flamboyant activities, from gallivanting through the 
D.C. streets at night and joining an all-boys club, to driving a runabout and betting 
on horses. The text is generally limited to a freewheeling litany of Alice’s antics, 
with any serious discussion of her relationship with her famous father consigned 
to concluding notes. Moreover, many of Alice’s proclivities—resistance to formal 
education; a heartfelt wish to wear pants rather than skirts; a love of picnics, make-
believe, and pioneer stories—may strike modern listeners as pretty tame business. 
Fotheringham’s digital illustrations, which follow Alice from gamin to grownup, 
slyly caricature an often exasperated and occasionally proud T. R.; compositions 
dominated by dynamic curves and strong diagonal lines (and sometimes even 
crisscrossed by dotted lines following Alice’s peripatetic path) generate a sense of 
nonstop action. Peeking behind the White House door at its child residents is always 
a kid-pleasing enterprise, and stories of spirited Alice may set listeners to scanning 
the current political horizon for equally fascinating presidential offspring.  EB 
kLuger, steVe My Most Excellent Year: A Novel of Love, Mary Poppins, & Fenway 
Park. Dial, 2008 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3227-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
For three inseparable friends, the titular “excellent year” is ninth grade. That’s when 
Alejandra Perez, daughter of a retired diplomat, learns to mingle with the hoi polloi 
296 • The BulleTin
at her new public school, challenges parental expectations by pursuing clandestine 
dance opportunities, and falls reluctantly but hard for smooth-talking, baseball-
loving Tony (T.C.) Keller. That’s when T.C. launches a bumbling but ultimately 
successful assault on Alé’s heart, joins with Alé in cheerleading his closest friend 
(and unofficially adopted “brother”) Augie through his coming out, and helps a 
mistrustful little deaf boy, Hucky, establish friendships and self-confidence. And it’s 
the year when Augie Hwong, the Chinese-American guy who had years ago helped 
T.C. work through the grief at his mother’s death, embraces his gay identity, wows 
the high school with his directorial and musical performance skills, and hooks up 
with light of his life Andy Wexler. The convergent stories unfold along a paper trail 
of emails, playbills, IMs, letters, and journal entries from a required retrospective 
assignment for the trio’s junior year, and although the documentary novel is no 
longer particularly, well, novel, Kluger employs its conventions ably, even mixing 
in missives among the significant adults in the teens’ lives, who quite clearly have 
lives, pasts, and agendas of their own. The feel-good story takes a tad longer to 
reach its deliriously happy conclusion than is strictly necessary, but YAs seeking 
respite from darker, problem-driven novels may find that this pack of good kids 
(with—gasp—bemused but supportive parents) who work hard for and achieve 
their bliss is a welcome gust of fresh air.  EB
LArios, JuLie Imaginary Menagerie: A Book of Curious Creatures; illus. by Julie 
Paschkis. Harcourt, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-0-15-206325-2 $16.00   
R Gr. 3-6
Author of the animal poetry collection Yellow Elephant (BCCB 5/06), Larios turns 
here to the mythical world for her beastly subjects, treating fourteen beings out of 
myth and legend. Featured creatures span the globe and range from broadly popular 
figures such as the mermaid and the dragon to mythological entities such as the 
centaur to more regional figures such as the naga and the thunderbird. The verses 
are elegant yet compact, with rhyme and structure subtly underpinning them, and 
the touches of humor and lyrical artistry remain easily accessible to grade-school 
readers (“Can he be half man, half horse?/ The answer is no./ And yes, of course”). 
The mythology is broadly evocative rather than specifically explanatory, resulting 
in an effective collection of fantastical vignettes evincing an easy and appealing 
grace. Gouache illustrations are strongly stylized, with a firm outline, high contrast, 
and determined two-dimensional intricacy that suggests medieval bestiary without 
losing contemporary freshness. This offers a useful and browsable bridge between 
alluring fantasy and curricular mythology, and readers may find it an invitation to 
their own poetic efforts. The last page offers thumbnail annotations for the poetic 
subjects.  DS
LoCkHArt, e. The Disreputable History of Frankie Landau-Banks. Hyperion, 
2008 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-7868-3818-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
As the baby of the family, Frankie bristles at being everyone’s “bunny,” protected 
at her posh boarding school by her older sister, but mostly ignored or not taken 
seriously. In between her freshman and sophomore year, however, she acquires 
some assets (read: breasts) and puts them to good use back at school to lock in a 
senior boyfriend and become part of the school’s coveted inner circle. She is frus-
March 2008 • 297
trated, however, that her boyfriend Matthew won’t trust her enough to talk about 
his involvement with the school’s secret society, and that her hold on him isn’t as 
strong as that of the alpha male, aptly named Alpha, who competes with her for 
Matthew’s time and attention. Putting together clues from her father’s drunken 
reminiscences with old school chums, she uncovers some of the society’s secrets, and 
she sets out to be its covert head, using Alpha’s arrogance against him to accomplish 
her own behind-the-scenes power plays and up the ante on their anemic pranks. A 
certain arch quality to the narration that occasionally slips into a Twilight Zone-like 
voiceover creates a detached tone of inevitability to Frankie’s rise and eventual fall; 
as a girl in this boys’ club, she is fated to accept either anonymity or ignominy. Her 
choice marks Frankie as a character we rarely meet in YA fiction—an older version 
of Cynthia Voigt’s Bad Girls, a young woman for whom power trumps romance 
and even friendship, who leads with her head and not her hormones, and who is as 
calculating as she is intelligent. There are thus subtle and evocative connections to 
be drawn here between this and power explorations such as Cormier’s The Choco-
late War, nuances of gender and power with disturbing implications, even though 
Frankie’s story is decidedly more light-hearted than Jerry Renault’s.  KC
LuCHsinger, denA fox Playing by the Rules: A Story about Autism; illus. by Julie 
Olson. Woodbine House, 2007 28p
ISBN 978-1-890627-83-6 $16.95   
Ad 7-10 yrs
“Josh kind of has his own rules,” says narrator Jody about her brother, and while 
Jody knows those rules cold, their visiting Great Aunt Tilda is new to Josh’s com-
plicated world. Jody therefore offers Aunt Tilda guidance as they try to play a board 
game together despite Josh’s interruptions; at the end of the game, Jody’s the gleeful 
winner, Josh has gotten more comfortable with Aunt Tilda, and the kids are both 
happily buzzed to the sky on illicit soda that they wangled from Tilda. The text 
has rare verve for an issue book (in fact, autism is only explicitly mentioned in the 
title), with Jody a credible blend of happily self-important expert on her brother 
and jealous sibling annoyed at his intrusions. The information about Josh’s “rules” is 
kid-level understandable as well as capably interwoven; it’s a particularly nice touch 
that Jody parallels her liking her crayons to be in order with Josh’s insistence on 
his toy animals remaining in their proper places, thus giving the audience an easy 
point of shared reference. Unfortunately, the book’s design and layout are stodgy 
and amateurish, and the illustrations are stiffly cartoonish, lacking the text’s creative 
energy. Nonetheless, kids with their own offbeat siblings will appreciate this recog-
nition of their importance and those figuring out a new classmate with perplexing 
differences may find this a helpful window into a working relationship.  DS
Lyon, george eLLA My Friend, the Starfinder; illus. by Stephen Gammell. Jack-
son/Atheneum, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-4169-2738-9 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
In this story based on a real figure from Lyon’s childhood, a female narrator recalls 
her elderly neighbor’s mesmerizing tales about finding a fallen star (a story backed 
up with his presentation of the meteorite-like star itself as evidence) and stumbling 
across the end of a rainbow. Though the story might have been better balanced by 
including three of the man’s artistic tales rather than the less narratively conven-
tional number of two, Lyon’s poetically conversational text, arranged artistically 
on the page, is spare but vivid; for example, she describes the fallen star as “glassy, 
298 • The BulleTin
blackish green like puddles around a coal pile.” Gammell’s distinctive multimedia 
(watercolor, pastel, colored pencil, and gouache) illustrations are a perfect match for 
the imaginative, dreamlike quality of the narrative. Streaky washes of color, drippy 
spatters, and hair and branches that seem electrically charged create a feeling of 
tremendous (perhaps even cosmic) movement. The scenes that depict the recount-
ing of the old man’s stories are particularly powerful, with the fantastical elements 
providing the only spots of color in an otherwise shadowed and monochromatic 
world. Use this to discuss fact vs. fiction or to spark the imaginations of young 
writers, or simply share it as a tribute to storytellers everywhere.  JH
mArrin, ALBert The Great Adventure: Theodore Roosevelt and the Rise of Modern 
America. Dutton, 2007 248p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-525-47659-7 $30.00   
R Gr. 7-10
Marrin introduces Theodore Roosevelt as “a man of outsize strengths and weak-
nesses,” and, as this densely written biography demonstrates, the president’s personal 
contradictions mirror the state of the country as it emerged into a fully modern 
nation. While Marrin’s overall assessment of Roosevelt is one of approbation, even 
admiration, he draws readers’ attention to the many brash contrasts in Roosevelt’s 
career: sickly boy and activity-obsessed adult; Nobel Peace Prize-winner and war 
hawk; political reformer and Panama Canal schemer; rough-and-tumble soldier in 
a Brooks Brothers uniform. True to the book’s subtitle, Marrin spends considerable 
time establishing historical context, which lends a dry touch to the biography of 
a very lively man, but deeper researchers will appreciate his thoroughness. Those 
who navigate the partly chronological, partly topical organization from start to 
finish will also appreciate the large array of period photographs and witty political 
cartoons, chapter notes, bibliography, and index. And they’ll certainly be ready to 
shine when the Progressives unit in U.S. History rolls around.  EB
mArsden, CAroLyn The Buddha’s Diamonds; by Carolyn Marsden and Thay Phap 
Niem. Candlewick, 2008 [112p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3380-6 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
When a raging storm hits ten-year-old Tinh’s Vietnamese seaside village, it’s up to 
him to secure his family’s fishing boat. The ferocity of the storm and the distraction 
of discovering his wealthier friend’s cool remote-control car almost buried in the 
sand cause him to abandon his task, resulting in the boat’s near-destruction and 
his father’s subsequent anger and disappointment in him. As Tinh reflects upon his 
actions and upon the ability of both his friends and the Buddha to find happiness 
in the face of sadness and destruction, he matures enough to take a major role in 
repairing the boat, thus restoring his father’s pride in him. The depiction of Tinh’s 
life in what seems to be a primarily Buddhist fishing village in post-war Vietnam (an 
endnote states that “in this story the war has been over for several years”) contains 
enough piquant detail to be genuinely intriguing. However, the brevity of the story 
leaves the characters too underdeveloped to be truly meaningful. Tinh’s continual 
musings are sometimes insightful, but they tend to slow the book’s pace, and the 
Buddhist message of happiness “no matter what” is occasionally somewhat clichéd 
and didactic (“Why hadn’t he stayed and learned the secret of the Buddha’s smile?”). 
Still, this is an interesting look at a time and place that will be exotically new to 
most kids today, and many may relate to Tinh’s struggle to prove his maturity to 
March 2008 • 299
his father. A glossary and pronunciation guide and short notes about Buddhism 
and the Vietnam War are included. JH
mCkenzie, nAnCy Guinevere’s Gift. Knopf, 2008 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94345-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84345-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
This particular entry into Camelot lore focuses on twelve-year-old Guinevere of 
Gwynedd, a pretty and intelligent maid with a head for horses and nary a thought 
for that far-off young warrior king of Britain. As the orphaned ward of her aunt and 
uncle in Northgallis, Gwen does worry about the schemes of her cousin Elaine and 
the resulting punishments, which invariably limit her own riding time or threaten 
to get her nurse sent packing. Above all, she curses the constricting prophecy laid 
on her at birth that she “would one day be the highest lady in the land, who would 
wed a great king and come to glory with him.” Ironically, Guinevere’s determination 
to live independently of her supposed fate marks her with the courage and clearness 
of sight of one destined to be a queen, and her mettle is proven when a vainglori-
ous and greedy neighbor threatens Northgallis; Guinevere rises to the occasion, 
partnering with the woodland people and the last of the loyal house guard to save 
her family and her home. A rather slow beginning picks up into a steady pulse of 
courtly intrigue and action, and strong secondary characters command readers’ 
loyalty and respect. Guinevere’s aunt, Queen Alyse, is a compelling mixture of 
motherly instincts, bitter resentment, and forceful domination; the story here is as 
much hers as Guinevere’s, and better for it. McKenzie offers a piece of the Arthurian 
puzzle but does not try to force it into place, slipping in well-known details and 
culminating in one tantalizing glimpse into Guinevere’s future. Adventure seekers 
can be content with this tale of a heroine and her castle while dedicated legend 
fans will appreciate where it fits in the overall tapestry.  KB
miLWAy, kAtie smitH One Hen: How One Small Loan Made a Big Difference; illus. 
by Eugenie Fernandes. Kids Can, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-55453-028-1 $18.95   
R Gr. 3-4
In Ghana, young Kojo has a business idea, borrowing a small bit of money from 
his mother to purchase a hen, intending to sell her extra eggs at the market. Slowly 
his income grows so that he can not only pay his mother back but he can also buy 
more hens; eventually, he has enough money to go back to school, and he begins 
to think about running a chicken farm all his own when he grows up. Which is 
just what he does, garnering a loan with his explanation of his childhood financial 
empire; his chicken farm provides jobs to many, gives them their own capital for 
business starts, and plays a part in the national and international economy. The 
story is unusual in its economic focus and topical in its championship of the 
benefits of microfinance, gaining power from its modeling on a real Ghanaian 
entrepreneur, Kwabena Darko. Though the book is a little rosy about the certainty 
of growth and it skips a key element of fortune in the real Kojo’s life (his mother 
married a chicken farmer), the beneficial effects of small loans and small projects 
are thoughtfully and carefully explained in the extensive text. Each page is sum-
marized in a “House That Jack Built”–styled epigraph that wisely forgoes elaborate 
cumulation for pith and clarity (“This is the school Kojo attends with the fees he 
paid from the money he made selling his eggs”). Acrylic illustrations, vivid and 
300 • The BulleTin
lively with an emphasis on sunny hues and warm earthtones, balance out the large 
blocks of text; though compositions are sometimes unfocused, they’re clever in their 
imaginative representations of village life (tiny diorama-esque landscape elements 
pack in broad overviews beneath huge striding people). End matter includes an 
overview of Darko’s life, specific information about microfinance donations and 
beneficiaries, and a glossary.  DS
moffett, mArk W. Face to Face with Frogs; written and illus. with photographs 
by Mark W. Moffett.
See review under Bishop, p. 283.
nApoLi, donnA Jo Hush: An Irish Princess’ Tale. Atheneum, 2007 308p
ISBN 978-0-689-86176-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 8-10
Napoli fleshes out a barebones character from an Icelandic work, the Laxardal saga, 
and adds historically accurate details from Ireland, Russia, and Scandinavia from 
the 900s to bring her to life. Melkorka, fifteen, is an Irish princess, who goes from 
a life of extraordinary privilege to one of privation, torture, and danger in just a 
few days after she is kidnapped by Russian slave traders. Melkorka luckily stumbles 
upon the one thing that saves her (to some degree) from the fates the other slaves 
suffer: she does not speak in an effort to conceal her high birth, leading the captors 
to wonder if she might be an enchantress (and therefore too dangerous to sexually 
assault and too valuable to sell off). Although no true happy ending is possible, 
Melkorka grows enough throughout the novel to accept life as a journey of small 
and significant disappointments and joys, and she finds a remarkable peace that will 
resonate with readers who will have suffered along with her. Indeed, the first-person 
narration, an unveiling of every unrestrained feeling and thought she refuses to utter, 
reinforces this intimate bond between the reader and the protagonist as the only 
ones who truly know her soul: all of the other slaves and captors see only glimpses 
of her desires, fears, and changes. The richly detailed storytelling offers an often 
uncomfortable (though always eloquent) mix of violence and beauty, resulting in 
potent historical fiction that is at once haunting and uplifting.  AS
neWBery, LindA Lost Boy. Fickling/Random House, 2008 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93617-3 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84574-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
His family’s move to a small Welsh village has brought surprises for Matt, not least of 
which is his supernatural shadowing by a boy with his initials, who died in a traffic 
accident years ago. Matt’s new friends, Tig and Rob, tell him that elderly farmer Wil 
Jones was at fault for the accident, and indeed Wil seems to be haunted in some 
way, as he repeatedly mistakes Matt for someone else. Wil’s seeming recognition 
of Matt excites Tig and Rob, who are convinced that Wil deserves punishment for 
his past wrongdoing, but is Matt getting caught up in a situation that’s more dan-
gerous than he realizes? The story maintains a measured pace and accessible style, 
but it packs a lot in: there’s suspense and mystery, some supernatural touches, an 
academically overwhelmed older sister, and an ethical dilemma with questionable 
friends. While the plot might have been served better with a deeper focus on fewer 
elements, the threads combine effectively, and Matt is a classic everyguy hero, a 
sympathetic average kid who’s landed himself in a quandary through no fault of 
March 2008 • 301
his own but who has to take the responsibility to right things. A slender and easily 
readable volume, this brings spooky tension to an audience not yet ready for Alan 
Garner or Kevin Brooks.  DS
niLsson, per Seventeen; tr. by Tara Chace. Front Street, 2007 263p
ISBN 978-1-932425-89-5 $17.95   
R Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Jonatan is unconscious in the emergency room, condition un-
known, but this is not Jonatan’s story; rather, it is the story of Guran, his estranged 
father. The father hasn’t seen the son since the boy was five, and he takes this op-
portunity to fill Jonatan in on his history, starting with Guran’s own experiences as 
a seventeen-year-old hippie in 1972 Sweden. Throughout the night, he recounts 
what amounts to a requiem for an age and an attitude; the story of the music, the 
protests, the lifestyle, the dream of a New Society achieved through people living, 
smoking, dropping acid and sleeping together unfolds through Guran’s account of 
his early life and the years when he and Jonatan’s mother lived together before having 
Jonatan, an account that drifts between storytelling and sermonizing, adulation and 
apology. Sometime in the night, Jonatan’s girlfriend arrives, and eventually Jonatan’s 
mother appears as well. When she realizes that Jonatan’s girlfriend has likely been 
seduced by Guran’s stories, she decides to cut through his purple haze with her own 
version, which casts the hippies as ineffectual dreamers, good for staging romantic 
protests and annoying capitalist fathers, but not much else. Though readers never 
get Jonatan’s reaction to it (turns out he’s just passed out from drinking too much 
after a fight—the details are left vague and thus smack of device), the story thus 
achieves fair and balanced accounting. Rather than plotted fiction, the accounts of 
Jonatan’s parents are captivating oral history, important for giving two perspectives 
on how individuals and society might achieve social justice, and what factors might 
get in the way. The Swedish viewpoint gives a different slant than many American 
readers see on the turbulent era, and since many contemporary teens (and/or their 
parents) romanticize or are at least fascinated by this recent era in social and political 
history, this will likely find a small but committed readership.  KC
o’Connor, BArBArA Greetings from Nowhere. Foster/Farrar, 2008 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-374-39937-5 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Aggie can no longer keep up her little motel off the main highway leading to the 
Smoky Mountains, so she regretfully puts it up for sale. Now that his wife’s left 
him, Willow’s dad is looking for some purpose in life, and running a little motel 
is exactly it. Kirby, a boy with a passel of behavior problems, is being carted off to 
a boarding school for troubled kids when his mom’s car breaks down near a little 
motel in the Smokies. Loretta, who has just received a box full of mementos from 
her deceased birth mother, is on a pilgrimage with her loving adoptive parents to 
places her mother might have visited: first stop, the Smoky Mountains. The four 
families converge at Aggie’s Sleepy Time Motel, and as the building ownership is 
transferred, the three tween-agers strike up a tentative friendship that draws each 
beyond his or her own concerns. O’Connor isn’t quite as agile with the alternating 
point-of-view chapters as she has been in straightforward narration (most recently, 
How to Steal a Dog, BCCB 6/07), and the kids—particularly Pollyanna-ish Lo-
retta—are more obviously typecast than her previous players. Still, O’Connor fans 
have come to expect satisfying endings all around, and they won’t be disappointed 
302 • The BulleTin
here as Kirby and Willow and Loretta, with their attitudes and prospects adjusted, 
make plans to meet again at the newly renamed Mountainview Inn, which Aggie 
will happily still call home.  EB
pArkinson, sioBHán Blue Like Friday. Roaring Brook, 2008 [160p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-340-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Hal is an odd little guy, with quirks that include viewing the world synesthetically 
(he interprets abstract concepts in colors and tastes), but he’s Olivia’s best friend. 
She therefore feels obliged to support him when he decides to wage war on his 
mother’s new live-in boyfriend, Alec, who seems to be on the verge of stepfather-
hood. Hal’s big plan misfires slightly (he and Olivia end up confessing a prank 
to the police) but then seems to have had even more drastic consequences when 
his mother takes off in a rage, leaving Hal with Alec and no word on his mother’s 
whereabouts—until Olivia solves the mystery. While the truth behind Hal’s mother’s 
disappearance is fairly shocking—it’s a deliberate setup to force Hal to let go of 
his resistance to Alec, which seems a rough trick to pull on a kid traumatized by 
the death of his other parent—this is a lively and original story of familial and 
friend relationships. Olivia’s highly active narration, which moves beyond direct 
address to bouncy involvement with her reader, is believably preteen in its frenetic 
impulsiveness, but she’s also credibly perceptive in her understanding that Hal’s 
resentment of Alec is baseless. The generally fizzy storytelling keeps what could be 
a rather haunting tale fairly light-hearted without turning it lightweight, and color-
ful background about Olivia’s own family and especially her relationship with her 
older brother, Larry, makes this feel like a rich slice of life rather than a single-issue 
plot. It’s therefore likely to have wide appeal, and it’s especially likely to please fans 
of the Irish author’s previous works blending humor, friends, and family, such as 
Second Fiddle (BCCB 6/07).  DS
rHodes-Courter, AsHLey Three Little Words: A Memoir. Atheneum, 
2008 304p
ISBN 978-1-4169-4806-3 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Ashley Rhodes was, with her younger half-brother, removed from her mother’s home 
by Florida’s Department of Children’s Services when she was three, and she spent 
the subsequent nine years bouncing from foster home to foster home to relative to 
institution and around again. Trying to stay afloat amid occasional longed-for visits 
from her unreliable mother, a blend of irritation with and need for her younger 
brother, a sustained stay in an abusive foster home, and a high-speed revolving 
door of case workers and other officials, she finally acquired a champion in her 
court-appointed advocate and eventually found an adoptive home with the Courter 
family. Though settling into a new family wasn’t easy, Ashley ultimately discovered 
security with the Courters, and she has since become an advocate for children in 
care. This is a sobering chronicle, and Rhodes-Courter is candid about her own 
behaviors and attitudes as well as her experiences, never overdramatizing herself as a 
wounded innocent, just a real kid who’s understandably troubled by her experiences. 
The indictment of the children’s services agencies, especially Florida’s, is clear and 
well made, with sheer bureaucratic carelessness the source of much of the author’s 
lost and misplaced childhood, and the book gains considerable energy at the end 
when Rhodes-Courter participates in a lawsuit against Florida for their placement 
March 2008 • 303
of children in an obviously abusive foster home. Most of the book, however, is 
raw and unshaped, feeling like a draft for a memoir rather than a finished product; 
references to people and events appear randomly and lack explanation, emotional 
context is often absent, and follow-through on issues raised is inconsistent. It’s a 
moving account nonetheless, and it’ll be an easy sell to readers fascinated by a real-
life counterpart to Giff’s Pictures of Hollis Woods (BCCB 12/02).  DS
rosentHAL, Amy krouse Little Hoot; illus. by Jen Corace. Chronicle, 
2008 28p
ISBN 978-0-8118-6023-9 $12.99   
R 3-6 yrs
In general, Little Hoot is a happy little owlet who enjoys school, staring practice, 
and other owly pastimes; what he does not like, however, is bedtime, “because when 
you’re an owl, you have to stay up late, late, late.” Familiar tropes are employed in 
service of the inverted rule, with Little Hoot complaining that all his other friends 
get to go to bed early, while Papa Owl informs him that LH must obey the rules of 
this family; eventually, despite his parents’ attempts to tempt him with a bedtime 
story or a glass of water, LH crashes out. The text effectively mines humor from 
owly puns (“They owl lived happily ever after”) and soundplay from owly noises 
even as it echoes traditional human parent admonitions (“Ten more minutes of 
playing, Mister. And please don’t ask me again,” says Little Hoot’s mother sternly), 
making this an amusing alternative to the traditional bedtime story. Visually, the 
colors are a little unbalanced, with splashes of dark hue taking emphasis away from 
tow-headed Little Hoot, but the spidery-lined vignettes against creamy white space 
are drolly comic; with their retro wardrobe (Mama Owl relaxes in pearls, Papa in 
a tie), arboreal home decor, and expressive head tilts, the owl family are a color-
ful and entertaining clan. Kids who fight the seductive charms of straightforward 
bedtime books may find this reversal of the usual persuasions too funny—and 
convincing—to resist.  DS
sAnders, sCott Loring The Hanging Woods. Houghton, 2008 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-618-88125-3 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-9
In what initially seems like one of those small-town boyhood friendships, Walter 
is virtually inseparable from his pals Jimmy and Mothball; the trio roams through 
the Alabama woods and engages in some of the traditional mischief of young 
teenage boys, such as spinning stories about “the Troll,” a veteran of the recently 
concluded Vietnam War, who’s camping by the river. As events progress, however, 
the darker notes in Walter’s narration, foreshadowed by his initial mention of 
finding a family secret, become more prominent, and the erstwhile friends dip 
increasingly into abusive bullying of one another. Dark then turns to disastrous in 
a sequence of intertwined lethal events that recalls Greek tragedy even as it sug-
gests a cursed reconfiguration of To Kill a Mockingbird. Sanders handles Walter’s 
narration deftly, seeding it with clues to the upcoming wreck but masterfully 
camouflaging the story as an atmospheric period buddy tale, complete with the 
lacerating unchallenged racism of the place and time, until the corruption becomes 
inescapably overt. Readers accustomed to literary morality setting like concrete 
from the get-go will find this bracingly unsettling as well as enticingly mysterious, 
and it is sure to provoke discussion if used in the classroom as well as absorption 
as an independent read. DS
304 • The BulleTin
sCHWABACH, kAren The Hope Chest. Random House, 2008 274p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94095-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84095-1 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Eleven-year-old Violet Mayhew is furious when she discovers that her mother has 
been intercepting Violet’s letters from her older sister, Chloe; Chloe was kicked 
out of their house three years ago for her radical ideas about socialism and women’s 
suffrage, and she used her hope-chest money to buy a Model T instead of those 
indispensable items a proper girl needs to set up housekeeping. In her anger, Violet 
runs away to join her sister in New York. Bedraggled and lost in the big city, she is 
befriended by a ten-year-old black girl named Myrtle; together, they track Violet’s 
sister from the New York settlement house where she had been working, to Wash-
ington, to Nashville, where the vote to ratify the Susan B. Anthony Amendment 
is throwing the Tennessee legislature into a tizzy. The frankly unbelievable plot of 
two preteen girls finding each other on the streets of New York City, riding the rails 
to Washington under the direction of yet another intrepid preteen soul, this one a 
veteran hobo, and ending up playing an important role in the fortunes of women’s 
suffrage turns laughably implausible when Violet hops into her sister’s Model T 
and Mr. Toads it through the streets of 1920 Nashville to bring back an escaping 
politician. That said, this is a well-paced and comprehensive history lesson about 
the fight for women’s right to vote. Violet and Myrtle manage to meet all the key 
players in the battle between the Suffs and the Antis, and they learn all of the idealist 
rhetoric that surrounded the movement: When women got the right to vote, war, 
child labor, and racism would end, the prohibition of alcohol would spread all over 
the world, and corruption would become a thing of the past. Of course. This is 
contrived indeed, but it’s an energetic read for those who like their history with a 
side of peppy American Girls’–style feminism and sentiment. Historical notes with 
pictures and a timeline of voting rights in America are included.  KC
sCHWArz, ViViAne Timothy and the Strong Pajamas; written and illus. by Viviane 
Schwarz. Levine/Scholastic, 2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-545-03329-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Little Timothy Smallbeast yearns for great strength, and he gets his wish when his 
mother mends his pajamas so strongly and sturdily that a pajama-wearing Timothy 
now has the power to pull his bedroom door right off its hinges. Using his power 
for good (of course), Timothy helps a colorful array of the afflicted, ranging from 
an elephant (she falls off a cliff while picking berries) to a princess (imprisoned in 
a tower) to a kitten (stuck in a tree). When he carries a huge sleepy bear back to his 
hibernation home, however, there’s a double tragedy: Bear accidentally rips Timo-
thy’s pajamas, rendering them powerless, and then falls asleep sitting on Timothy’s 
beloved toy monkey. Will Timothy have to wait until Bear’s spring awakening to 
reunite with his friend? The narrative has an enjoyably breathless and exclama-
tory tone, spiced up by often wry or over-the-top observations in speech bubbles 
(“You are wearing the paTches of power and the BuTTons of Braveness,” Monkey 
explains to Timothy), that’s sure to both tickle and entice youngsters. Blessedly, 
the plot avoids the saccharine “the strength was in him all along” cliché, instead 
having Timothy’s good karma save him when the beneficiaries of his superstrength 
join forces to safely retrieve Monkey from under the sleeping bear, an ending that 
allows superheroism its reality even as it delivers a bolstering message. The matte 
March 2008 • 305
page surfaces soften the intensity of the illustrations, enhancing their coziness and 
gentling the contrast of the informal linework; while some compositions are a bit 
overbusy, the planes of temperate color provide a nice backdrop for homey little 
Timothy (a small fluffy-tailed critter, perhaps a polecat). Use this with Pinkney’s 
Adventures of Sparrowboy (BCCB 6/97) for a pair of unusual superheroes, or just as 
a cozy and empowering readaloud to youngsters snuggled up in their own lovingly 
repaired pajamas.  DS
sCieszkA, Jon Smash! Crash!; illus. by David Shannon, Loren Long, and David 
Gordon. Simon, 2008 [38p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-4133-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 3-5 yrs
In all of Trucktown you’d scarcely find closer buddies than Jack Truck and Dump 
Truck Dan, an automotive duo whose single-minded pursuit of mayhem manages 
to result in a fair amount of community improvement. At the site of a massive, 
barricaded pothole, they “SMASH! CRASH!” piles of neatly stacked construction 
materials into its gaping maw for fill. Cement Mixer Melvin isn’t getting his load 
mixed quickly enough to suit Jack and Dan, so the guys overfill their pal Melvin 
and “SMASH! CRASH!” his sides until he regurgitates a tubful of cement. Barrels 
get stacked, a pirate ship gets built, a building gets demolished in a nifty vertical 
foldout. And that’s that—there’s really no plot, trajectory, or even point to the antics 
of Jack and Dan. Anyone who’s watched preschoolers play trucks, though, will nod 
in recognition of the authentic build-’em-up and knock-’em-down ritual. Com-
puter-generated artwork features a mashup of anthropomorphized Tonka™-esque 
vehicles cruising a Fisher-Price™–styled community in just about every hue molded 
plastic has to offer. Endpapers showcase a host of vehicles that play no part in Jack 
and Dan’s debut but evidently star in upcoming Trucktown tales (“More titles are 
rolling down the road in no time!” vows the jacket blurb). While this particular 
title may do little more than gleefully validate the undeniable pleasure of banging 
wheeled toys into stuff, the manic vision of Trucktown’s creative illustration team 
is bound to please tykes who’d rather be on the floor vroomin’ than sitting through 
a more genteel storytime.  EB
sCott, eLizABetH Perfect You. Simon, 2008 [304p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-5355-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
Life has changed for Kate: her father recently quit a steady job to sell vitamins 
from a booth in the mall, and her best friend, Anna, returned from camp with a 
new svelte shape, glossy appearance, and preference for the popular girls over her 
old friend. Not changed is Kate’s classmate and fellow mall-worker Will, a noted 
player with whom Kate has an adversarial relationship that’s only partly playful. As 
her family and best-friend situation become increasingly strained, Kate inexplicably 
finds herself engaging in random makeout sessions with Will, but she refuses to 
believe that they could be embarking on an actual relationship. Bloom overplays 
Kate’s misjudgments, requiring soap-opera-level contrivance for her to remain 
convinced that Will’s not just using her even as she’s an obvious sap for Anna’s 
periodic apologies and claims of friendship, with the result that Kate is simultane-
ously gullible and excessively suspicious. It’s therefore Kate’s complicated family 
saga that’s the most successful of the three plots, and the book depicts the increasing 
306 • The BulleTin
tensions with poignancy and keen perception; it’s clear that Kate’s mother loved 
her husband for his contrast to her parents, but that contrast is now spiraling the 
family into a financial black hole as Kate’s father expects both financial and labor 
support from kids and wife for following his chimerical dreams. Since most stories 
of parental reassessment are divorce-centered, this is an original approach to the 
subject; those willing to wade through the formulaic romance and friend story to 
get to a thoughtful family drama may find this a tense but satisfying read.  DS
sHeArer, ALex Canned. Scholastic, 2008 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-439-90309-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Fergal Bamfield is under pressure from his mother, who likes to think he must be 
clever because he looks so odd, that leads him to adopt a weird hobby to maintain 
his mystique—he collects unlabeled cans from the bargain bin at the supermarket. 
When he finds that one of his cans contains a severed finger, he longs for a kindred 
spirit with which to share his discovery, and he finds her—a fellow collector who 
has herself found an ear. Convinced that no one will believe them, they set out to 
discover the mystery behind the canned body parts on their own and end up nar-
rowly escaping getting canned themselves. There’s a distinct flavor of Dahlesque 
nastiness here, but the book lacks Dahl’s antic hyperbole and instead dissolves 
into the just plain gross absent the more literary context of the grotesque. Fergal 
certainly twangs a sympathetic chord as a misunderstood social misfit with a lot 
to live up to, but the laggy pace often undermines the humor as it overplays his 
melodramatic attachment to his cans and his imaginings regarding the mystery. 
The pace quickens as the danger intensifies, however, and the climactic scene has 
strong cinematic appeal. With its detailed, multisensory descriptions of the canned 
body parts of the villains, this might do well to come with a warning label “Not 
for the squeamish,” but readers with strong stomachs and a taste for gory urban 
myths may nonetheless eat this right up.  KC 
sHefeLmAn, JAniCe I, Vivaldi; illus. by Tom Shefelman. Eerdmans, 
2008 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-8028-5318-9 $18.00
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 6-9 yrs
Early eighteenth-century Italian composer Antonio Vivaldi looks back on his life 
and tells his audience how his career emerged from a struggle between his mother, 
who had bargained with God for her newborn son’s health by promising he would 
become a priest, and Antonio and his father, who recognized his passion and abil-
ity to be a musician. A compromise was reached in which Vivaldi became a priest, 
dedicated to the musical education of orphan girls. The tension between spiritual 
and secular demands makes for an involving story, and Shefelman’s smooth tell-
ing does it justice. However, in Shefelman’s concluding note that sorts fact from 
fiction, she presents no suggestion, much less evidence, that this romantic path to 
the priesthood is true. Nor, for that matter, does she support other details proffered 
as fact in the text, such as Vivaldi’s rumored flight from Mass to notate a com-
position taking shape in his mind. That makes this pretty untenable as an actual 
biography, but listeners who are content with a broadly imagined, biographically 
inspired tale may be pleased with both the domestic drama and Tom Shefelman’s 
watercolor tour (in a style reminiscent of Emily Arnold McCully) along the canals 
March 2008 • 307
and through the churches and palaces of Venice. A brief glossary, a suggestion for 
further listening, and a dozen-bar arrangement of “Spring” from The Four Seasons 
are included.  EB
sHuLeVitz, uri How I Learned Geography; written and illus. by Uri 
Shulevitz. Farrar, 2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-374-33499-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
In this autobiographically rooted story, our young narrator and his parents flee a 
war-torn country but end up in straitened circumstances in a new land: “We slept 
on a dirt floor. I had no toys and no books. Worst of all: food was scarce.” When the 
boy’s father comes home one night with a map instead of bread, the boy is hungry 
and furious, but after his father hangs the huge map on the wall, the youngster 
becomes absorbed in its infinite possibilities, traveling in his daydreams far away 
from his miserable current existence. A tribute to the powers of wide imaginative 
horizons, this gains impact from its basis in Shulevitz’ own experiences, which give 
it reality beyond mere wishful thinking. Ragged right text is clear and straightfor-
ward but vivid, and small memorable touches—such as the boy’s resentment at 
his neighbor’s loud chewing and his incantation of place names taken from the 
map—add dimensionality. Watercolor illustrations avoid demonizing the boy’s real 
life: the town (Turkestan, according to Shulevitz’ note) looks like an interesting place, 
but the family’s dull patched clothes speaks to their privations and contrasts them 
with the teeming colorfully turbaned prior inhabitants. Chunky lines and sweeps 
of washy watercolor gain additional textures in the map worlds, with soft intricate 
details in nubbly fresco-like surfaces or cities evincing a polish and regularity of 
pattern in their multiwindowed skyscrapers that suggests photocollage even as the 
changing colors recall the traditional map hues. Use this as an entrée to a discussion 
of maps and geography or as a resonant reminder of the power of imagination in 
difficult circumstances.  DS
smitH, CHArLes r., Jr. Twelve Rounds to Glory: The Story of Muhammad Ali; 
illus. by Bryan Collier. Candlewick, 2007 80p
ISBN 978-0-7636-1692-2 $19.99   
Ad Gr. 5-9
Winter, JonAH Muhammad Ali: Champion of the World; illus. by François 
Roca. Schwartz & Wade, 2007 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93787-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83622-0 $16.99   
M 6-9 yrs
Two fresh contenders for the title of Ali Bio Champion enter the ring with markedly 
different strategies, but neither claims a victory. In an introductory-level picture 
book, Winter limits his attention to Ali’s ascending career and highlights his ar-
rival on the scene as smack-talking Cassius Clay, his 1964 KO of Sonny Liston, his 
conversion to Islam, his suspension from boxing for refusing Army induction, and 
his Rumble in the Jungle against George Foreman. The jazzy free-verse narrative 
style that worked so well in Dizzy (BCCB 11/06) loses its punch here (“He recited 
poems about how great he was./ He spoke out against racism./ And this made some 
people mad and very mad”), and his extended quasi-religious metaphor of Ali as 
boxing’s savior and king is overplayed (“And his people held him high/ in their arms, 
and rejoiced—/. . . And there in the center of Africa,/ they crowned their King”). 
308 • The BulleTin
Roca’s oil paintings, though well suited to a young audience in their literal rendering, 
showcase figures with a waxy stiffness reminiscent of posable action figures. Smith 
also employs a free-verse approach but offers a more complete and less adulatory 
treatment of Ali’s career, dividing his work into chapters (“rounds”) delivered as a 
second-person tribute. Although an apologist for nearly every excess of Ali’s char-
acter and career, Smith nonetheless brings some perspective to the “prefight hype 
[that] turned sinister and ugly” in Ali’s first match with Joe Frazier. Lengthy poems, 
often running to three columns per page, that fall flat on the silent printed page 
require a buoyant rap-style oral delivery to bring out their music (although some 
passages like “One/ by one/ by one/ they all fell;/ each time you were victorious/ at 
the DING-DING of each bell” are probably beyond saving). Collier’s watercolor 
and collage pictures fail to approach his achievement in Martin’s Big Words (BCCB 
1/02), but their varied angles and dark moodiness offer a satisfying complement to 
Smith’s text. An informative timeline of Ali’s career is also included.  EB 
smitH, Jennifer e. The Comeback Season. Simon, 2008 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-3847-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Ryan Walsh’s freshman year of high school is shaping up to be a bummer: old friends 
have deserted her for a trendier crowd, Mom’s pregnant with her new husband’s baby, 
and Ryan can’t stop dwelling on how perfect her life would be if only her deceased 
father were still around to share her wholehearted and totally illogical devotion to 
the Chicago Cubs. Life throws a curve ball, though, when she meets sophomore 
math classmate, Nick Crowley, outside Wrigley Field and they spend Opening Day 
sitting on the curb, soaking in the atmosphere and the broadcast from other ticketless 
fans’ radios. Drawn together by the yin-yang of optimism and fatalism that marks 
the true Cubs fan, Ryan and Nick grow steadily from two buddies into one item. 
Just when Ryan begins to settle comfortably into this new relationship, though, 
she learns why Nick’s developed his particular affinity to the “lovable losers”—he’s 
in remission from osteosarcoma, and he never really knows what his next personal 
“season” will hold. Ryan’s doomed romance with Nick delivers all the tenderness 
and heartache love story readers crave, and the baseball theme, with its emphasis 
on hope and loss, is neatly woven into this involving tale.  EB 
stAuffACHer, sue Nothing but Trouble: The Story of Althea Gibson; illus. by Greg 
Couch. Knopf, 2007 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93408-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83408-0 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
Just as Cline-Ransome’s picture-book biography of Pelé (reviewed above) recognizes 
the community support that helped launch the soccer player to fame, Stauffacher’s 
retelling of tennis pro Althea Gibson’s ascent is also a tribute to the patrons and 
mentors who saw past her stubborn belligerence to glimpse the ground-breaker she 
would become. The narrative tone matches Gibson’s sassiness (“Her teacher said: 
. . . I’d see a lot more of Althea if I taught lessons on the playground”), and the 
details of her temperamental outbursts—particularly poor sportsmanship—testify 
to her being a less-than-model protégée. It comes through loud and clear that that 
stubbornness translated into the raw determination to break through racial bar-
riers for a landmark victory at Wimbledon. In the illustrations, stylized figures in 
earthy watercolor hues have an appealing translucence, and the streamer of rainbow 
March 2008 • 309
colors that trails Gibson’s every move—perhaps a token of favor from the goddess 
Nike?—conveys a perpetual flurry of action. Pair this lively account with Krull’s 
Wilma Unlimited (BCCB 4/96) and Adler’s America’s Champion Swimmer (BCCB 
4/00) for a winning triumvirate of women record-smashers.  EB 
sturm, JAmes Satchel Paige: Striking Out Jim Crow; illus. by Rich Tommaso. Cen-
ter for Cartoon Studies/Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2007 [96p]
ISBN 978-0-7868-3900-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-10
With its planned two-color artwork (according to the galley’s back cover) and com-
ics trade collection trim size, this latest graphic bio from The Center for Cartoon 
Studies bears a strong initial resemblance to Jason Lutes’ Houdini: The Handcuff 
King (BCCB 6/07). But while Lutes offered a close-up, day-in-the-life study of his 
subject, Sturm moves his lens much further back, portraying the legendary Negro 
leagues and major league pitcher through the eyes of a fictional has-been black player, 
Emmet Wilson, whose career was ended on a knee-shattering slide into home on 
a Paige pitch. Wilson follows Paige’s career from a distance as he struggles with his 
own life as an Alabama sharecropper, whose dreams for his son’s future are thwarted 
at every turn by his landowner’s violent pressure and the pervasive system of Jim 
Crow. When Paige and his barnstorming All-Stars show up in Wilson’s hometown of 
Tuckwilla for a match, Wilson’s long simmering resentment and his black neighbors’ 
self-esteem hang on the visitors’ ability to put the all-white Tuckwilla nine in their 
place—without repercussion. Sturm patiently paces his plot between 1929 and 
1944, introducing each section of Wilson’s narration with a recap of how baseball 
and Paige were faring far beyond Tuckwilla and tacitly reminding readers of the 
weight of years passing under segregation. Tidily bordered frames, generally five or 
six to a page, keep Paige at a distance from his awestruck admirers, both fictional and 
readerly, while cagily conveying through the naïvely formed figures Paige’s signature 
blend of cheeky showmanship and consummate skill. The sole double-page spread, 
a view of Wilson and son picking cotton together on the morning following a brutal 
racist attack upon Emmet, Jr., underscores the message that Paige’s significance can 
only be understood in the context of Jim Crow. Appended notes synched to pages 
and frames in the text provide additional background.  EB
trACy, kristen Crimes of the Sarahs. Simon, 2008 [368p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-5519-1 $7.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
“Being a Sarah takes up all my free time,” says narrator Sarah T., who is, like Sarah 
B. and Sarah C., a devoted acolyte of daring and charismatic Sarah A. The quartet 
has moved in lock-step according to Sarah A.’s plans, engaging in finely honed feats 
of shoplifting while currying adult favor to get college recommendations, and now 
Sarah A. reveals that with senior year approaching it’s time to start a new phase—the 
“guy phase.” To Sarah T., however, it seems to be the phase of her own endanger-
ment, as Sarah A. threatens the nervous girl with expulsion from the sisterhood, 
while at the same time spinning increasingly out of control. Walking a delicate 
and effective balance between psychological thriller and realistic social drama, the 
book sets up its situation credibly; the follower Sarahs are regular girls rather than 
wounded and vulnerable souls, and it’s the situation and the Sarah cachet that keeps 
them involved as Sarah A. becomes more unstable. Sarah T., a girl so anxious that 
310 • The BulleTin
she wets her pants in crisis moments, provides an interesting lens into the sisterhood, 
since her omega status makes her the least questioning but perhaps most observant 
of all of the Sarahs. There’s enough cunning deviousness to keep things juicy but 
also enough genuine affection and sympathy to keep things humane; Sarah A. may 
have Bad Seed elements, but ultimately she’s an unhappy teenager who’s luckier 
with her friends than she realizes. Edgier than most friendship dramas and more 
authentic than most psychodramas, this will absorb fans of both genres, who will 
understand both the thrill and the strain of being a Sarah.  DS
VAugHt, susAn Big Fat Manifesto. Bloomsbury, 2008 308p
ISBN 978-1-59990-206-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-12
Jamie’s fed up with hearing from the skinny world about what it means to be 
fat, and she’s out to set the record straight and earn a journalism scholarship in 
the process. She writes a weekly feature called “Big Fat Manifesto” for her school 
newspaper, wherein she sounds off about everything to do with fat, from vanity 
sizing to the pornographic quality of news reporting about obesity that focuses on 
lurid and sensational shots of people’s overweight parts. Between columns, she is 
the main character of her own story, something fat girls rarely get to be unless it’s 
a story about them getting skinny or wanting to; instead, Jamie’s is a story of a 
hyper-busy senior year full of drama on and off stage as she preps for her part in 
The Wiz and tries to figure out why she feels all fluttery around Heath when she is 
supposedly committed to Burke. When overweight Burke decides to have bariatric 
surgery despite its dangers, particularly for African Americans, she tries to be sup-
portive, but he becomes so focused on his own weight loss that, frankly, she gets 
bored with him . . . and Heath just smells so good. Jamie’s forcefully articulated 
perspectives about body image and her well-justified anger provoke soul-searching 
at every turn, especially as she works through her own emotions regarding Burke’s 
surgery and its aftermath; through both the events of the narrative and the rhetoric 
of the column, she shows how hard society makes it to be okay with your body 
even if you really are mostly okay with it, making this a strong read for teens of all 
sizes. Mostly, though, what Jamie accomplishes is a full accounting of her senior 
year—a year of adventures with friends, successes and failures, last kisses and first 
ones, all seen through the eyes of an unapologetically fat girl whose feelings can be 
hurt, but who can fight back and forgive. Readers will not only be challenged but 
also changed by meeting Jamie.  KC
WALden, mArk The Overlord Protocol. Simon, 2008 [384p]
ISBN 978-1-4169-3573-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
In this sequel to H.I.V.E. (BCCB 7/07), evil-genius-in-training Otto still finds 
himself trapped at the Higher Institute of Villainous Education, though his close 
friends and affinity for the lessons make escape seem less urgent. As one might 
expect of a school for villains, things at H.I.V.E. are rarely quiet, and Otto soon 
finds himself in a new life-threatening scrape: while accompanying his friend 
Wing on a rare trip away from school, he sees Wing brutally murdered, and he is 
himself blown off the top of a building in an ensuing explosion. However, Otto 
learns that things are rarely as they seem in his new world of evil brilliance, and the 
dead (whether they be honorable best friends or crazed villains who are unclear on 
whether they are trying to take over the world or save it) quite often resurface. The 
March 2008 • 311
setting remains appealing and the new plot is enjoyably twisty; the combination 
of nicely detailed futuristic technology and an embracing of all the actions readers 
are expected to avoid in themselves (lying well is high art, breaking school security 
systems earns extra credit) will continue to make this series an irresistible treat for 
science fiction fans as well as kids disgruntled with their own relatively obedient 
lives. Fans of tough heroines will particularly appreciate Raven, who takes a much 
more central role in this outing as the fearless and astonishingly agile bodyguard 
assigned to keep Otto alive. Although enough background is given that the novel 
works as a stand-alone, readers will almost certainly want to venture back and see 
Otto’s first year at H.I.V.E. play out, and they will likely just as eagerly anticipate 
his next one.  AS
Weyn, suzAnne Reincarnation. Scholastic, 2008 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-545-01323-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The concept of a love destined through the ages is an appealing one: if it doesn’t 
work out as planned the first time, try again in Greece in 400 B.c., Salem during 
the Witch Trials, or modern-day New York. Two prehistoric souls that meet briefly 
and feel a powerful connection before plummeting over a cliff to their deaths do just 
that, and they are reincarnated over and over again as they each learn the lessons 
or life skills (letting go of addictions, learning to not fear fire) necessary to be true 
soul mates. Although there is little uncertainty as to whether or not the modern day 
Samantha and Jake will finally get it all right, Weyn ably injects dramatic tension 
into each of the earlier attempts as the lifespan, race, gender, and socioeconomic 
status is almost entirely fluid (though they are always a heterosexual pairing), lead-
ing to widely varied interactions between the two protagonists. Unfortunately, the 
book is vague and fantastical with its history (Weyn has her character executed for 
witchcraft by burning at Salem, where no such burnings took place), and it reads 
more as a collection of (mostly tragic) romance vignettes that are intriguing on their 
own but seem forced together herein—even firm believers in love at first sight may 
struggle to see a brief moment of connection millennia ago powerful enough to 
warrant this much effort. In addition, the fact that each character only ever meets 
shady, lecherous, disrespectful alternative potential partners is far too convenient; 
of course they would be drawn to each other. However, the final pairing, after so 
much struggle and so many foiled attempts, is undeniably the sweeping conclusion 
for which romance readers will be fervently hoping.  AS
WiLLis, JeAnne Cottonball Colin; illus. by Tony Ross. Eerdmans, 
2008 [25p]
ISBN 978-0-8028-5331-8 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-8 yrs
It’s a big, bad world out there, and poor Colin Smally is so fragile and tiny (“even 
for a mouse”) that his mother thinks it best to keep him safe and sound inside, 
never daring to let him venture forth. By winter, Colin is going stir crazy, watching 
his bigger brothers and sisters having all the fun outdoors, until Grandma comes 
up with the brilliant idea to swathe him in cotton for protection. As it turns out, 
his cotton padding seems to actually invite danger: it is gradually pulled off as he 
is mistaken for a snowball by a boy, a piece of bread by a duck, and a fat white 
rabbit by a fox. Still, Colin survives even sans cotton and returns home triumphant 
312 • The BulleTin
to his horrified mother (“Colin, where is your cotton?” she shrieks), who finally 
realizes that it’s best to let her boy go rather than smother him with safety. Willis’s 
matter-of-fact tone and occasional short phrases (“She wouldn’t let him climb. Or 
run. Or jump. In case he fell”) keep her story fresh, active, and immediate, and the 
book’s underlying message is handled without sentimentality or heavy-handedness. 
Ross’s watercolor mice are charming and highly expressive, with delicate touches of 
pink on ears and pointy noses, and fetching wardrobes of plaid skirts, stripy night-
shirts, and high-top shoes. There is plenty of humor in Ross’ depiction of Colin’s 
transformation into “Cottonball Colin,” with his mom chasing him around the 
house, cotton in hand, and the cotton-clad Colin looking like a walking snowball 
with only green boots and long tail visible. The animal chase scenes provide plenty 
of action for the formerly inert Colin, as the duck and fox each stretch menac-
ingly across their two-page spreads in pursuit. Both parental sorts who sympathize 
with Colin’s mother and kids who chafe under too much protection will relate to 
Colin’s travails.  JH
Winter, JonAH Muhammad Ali: Champion of the World; illus. by François 
Roca.
See review under Smith, Charles R., Jr., p. 307.
yLVisAker, Anne Little Klein. Candlewick, 2007 186p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3359-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-8
Little Klein is so nickamed because he arrived late on the scene in the Klein family, 
following his three beefy, thuggish older brothers, Matthew, Mark, and Luke. He 
spends most of his time trying to catch up and keep up, but as his mother is con-
vinced he is frail and not long for this world, she keeps him on a very short leash. 
Little Klein nevertheless manages to find adventures both mild and wild, with and 
without his brothers, in his rural town in mid-century America, poking around 
the nearby river and woods. If Norman Rockwell wrote fiction, he would likely 
have written something like this tale of boyish pleasures; the nostalgia is palpable 
without being cloying, as Ylvisaker’s wry sense of humor both conveys and teases 
period manners and the undeniable charms of rural boyhood. Several chapters are 
cleverly told from the perspective of a rather timid and ineffectual hound named 
LeRoy, who follows his nose to the deliciously gross scents of the Klein boys and 
stays on, despite protests from both Mother Klein and the boys’ traveling salesman 
father. Little Klein himself is a corker, full of vinegar but a might short on sass, with 
a voice too small for most to hear it. Readers who have felt the bittersweet pangs 
of being the underdog and the fierce protection of older, bigger, meaner siblings 
will find him irresistible.  KC
March 2008 • 313
ChILdren’s Book AwArds 2008
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Laura Amy Schlitz for Good Masters, Sweet 
Ladies!: Voices from a Medieval Village, illustrated by Robert Byrd (Candlewick). 
Three Newbery Honor Books were also named: Elijah of Buxton, by Christopher 
Paul Curtis (Scholastic); The Wednesday Wars, by Gary D. Schmidt (Clarion); and 
Feathers, by Jacqueline Woodson (Putnam).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Brian Selznick for his book The Invention 
of Hugo Cabret (Scholastic). Caldecott Honor Books are Henry’s Freedom Box: A 
True Story from the Underground Railroad, illustrated by Kadir Nelson and written 
by Ellen Levine (Scholastic); First the Egg, illustrated and written by Laura Vaccaro 
Seeger (Porter/Roaring Brook); The Wall: Growing Up Behind the Iron Curtain, il-
lustrated and written by Peter Sís (Foster/Farrar); and Knuffle Bunny Too: A Case of 
Mistaken Identity, illustrated and written by Mo Willems (Hyperion).
The Coretta Scott King Author Book Award will be presented to Christopher Paul 
Curtis, author of Elijah of Buxton (Scholastic). The King Illustrator Book Award will 
be presented to Ashley Bryan, illustrator and author of Let It Shine (Atheneum). Two 
King Author Honor Books were selected: November Blues, by Sharon M. Draper 
(Atheneum) and Twelve Rounds to Glory: The Story of Muhammad Ali, written by 
Charles R. Smith, illustrated by Bryan Collier (Candlewick). The King Illustrator 
Honor Books are The Secret Olivia Told Me, illustrated by Nancy Devard, written 
by N. Joy (Just Us Books) and Jazz on a Saturday Night, illustrated and written by 
Leo and Diane Dillon (Blue Sky/Scholastic). The Coretta Scott King/John Steptoe 
New Talent Author Award goes to Sundee T. Frazier, author of Brendan Buckley’s 
Universe and Everything in It (Delacorte).
The Pura Belpré Award for writing will be awarded to The Poet Slave of Cuba: A 
Biography of Juan Francisco Manzano, written by Margarita Engle and illustrated 
by Sean Qualls (Holt), and the award for illustration goes to Los Gatos Black on 
Halloween, illustrated by Yuyi Morales and written by Marisa Montes (Holt). Belpré 
Honor Books for writing are Frida: ¡Viva la vida! Long Live Life!, written by Car-
men T. Bernier-Grand and illustrated with photographs (Cavendish); Martina the 
Beautiful Cockroach, adapted by Carmen Agra Deedy and illustrated by Michael 
Austin (Peachtree); and Los Gatos Black on Halloween, written by Marisa Montes 
and illustrated by Yuyi Morales (Holt). Honor books for illustration are My Name 
Is Gabito: The Life of Gabriel García Márquez/Me llamo gabito: La vida de Gabriel 
García Márquez, illustrated by Raúl Colón and written by Monica Brown (Luna 
Rising) and My Colors, My World/Mis colores, mi mundo, illustrated and written by 
Maya Christina Gonzales (Children’s Book Press).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most 
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is VIZ 
Media for Miyuki Miyabe’s Brave Story, translated from the Japanese by Alexander 
O. Smith. Two Honor Books were also selected: The Cat: Or, How I Lost Eternity, 
written by Jutta Richter, translated from the German by Anna Brailovsky and pub-
314 • The BulleTin
lished by Milkweed Editions; and Nicholas and the Gang, written by René Goscinny, 
translated from the French by Anthea Bell and published by Phaidon Press.
The Michael L. Printz Award for a book that exemplifies literary excellence in 
young adult literature goes to Geraldine McCaughrean for The White Darkness 
(HarperTempest). Honor books are Dreamquake: Book Two of the Dreamhunter 
Duet, by Elizabeth Knox (Foster/Farrar); One Whole and Perfect Day, by Judith 
Clarke (Front Street); Repossessed, by A. M. Jenkins (HarperTeen); and Your Own, 
Sylvia: A Verse Portrait of Sylvia Plath, by Stephanie Hemphill (Knopf).
The Robert F. Sibert Award for most distinguished informational book for children 
goes to author/illustrator Peter Sís for The Wall: Growing Up behind the Iron Curtain 
(Foster/Farrar). Two Sibert Honor Books were also named: Lightship, written and 
illustrated by Brian Floca (Jackson/Simon) and Nic Bishop Spiders, written and 
illustrated with photographs by Nic Bishop (Scholastic).
The Theodor Seuss Geisel Medal for the most distinguished contribution to begin-
ning reader literature is There Is a Bird on Your Head!, written and illustrated by Mo 
Willems (Hyperion). Honor Books are First the Egg, written and illustrated by Laura 
Vaccaro Seeger (Porter/Roaring Brook); Hello, Bumblebee Bat, written by Darrin 
Lunde and illustrated by Patricia J. Wynne (Charlesbridge); Jazz Baby, written by 
Lisa Wheeler and illustrated by R. Gregory Christie (Harcourt); and Vulture View, 
written by April Pulley Sayre and illustrated by Steve Jenkins (Holt).
The Schneider Family Book Award for young children is Kami and the Yaks, written 
by Andrea Stenn Stryer and illustrated by Bert Dodson (Bay Otter Press). Tracie 
Vaughn Zimmer is the winner of the middle school award for Reaching for the Sun 
(Bloomsbury). The winner of the teen award is Ginny Rorby for Hurt Go Happy 
(Doherty/Starscape).
The Andrew Carnegie Medal for excellence in children’s video goes to producers 
Kevin Lafferty, John Davis, Amy Palmer Robertson, and Danielle Sterling for Jump 
In! Freestyle Edition.
The 2009 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by Walter Dean 
Myers.
Orson Scott Card is the 2008 winner of the Margaret A. Edwards Award for lifetime 
achievement in writing for young adults, honoring an author’s lifetime contribution 
in writing books for teenagers.
The Scott O’Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Christopher Paul Curtis for 
Elijah of Buxton (Scholastic).
The Canadian Library Association’s 2007 Book of the Year for Children is Johnny 
Kellock Died Today, by Hadley Dyer (HarperCollins). Two Honor Books are Rex Zero 
and the End of the World, by Tim Wynne-Jones (House of Anansi/Groundwood) 
and I Am a Taxi, by Deborah Ellis (House of Anansi/Groundwood). The Amelia 
Frances Howard-Gibbon Illustrator’s Award goes to Mélanie Watt for Scaredy Squir-
rel, written by the illustrator (Kids Can). Honorable mention goes to Barbara Reid 
March 2008 • 315
for Fox Walked Alone, written by the illustrator (Scholastic) and Julie Morstad for 
When You Were Small, written by the illustrator (Simply Read). The Young Adult 
Canadian Book Award goes to William Bell for The Blue Helmet (Doubleday). Two 
Honor Books are Johnny Kellock Died Today, by Hadley Dyer (HarperCollins) and 
The Droughtlanders, by Carrie Mac (Penguin).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Meg Rosoff for Just in Case (Penguin).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to The Adventures of the Dish and the 
Spoon, written and illustrated by Mini Grey (Knopf).
The 2007 NCTE Orbis Pictus Award for outstanding nonfiction for children goes 
to Sy Montgomery’s Quest for the Tree Kangaroo: An Expedition to the Cloud Forest of 
New Guinea (Houghton). Honor books are: Gregory Mendel: The Friar Who Grew 
Peas, by Cheryl Bardoe (Abrams); Freedom Walkers: The Story of the Montgomery Bus 
Boycott, by Russell Freedman (Holiday House); John Muir: America’s First Environ-
mentalist, by Kathryn Lasky (Candlewick); Something Out of Nothing: Marie Curie 
and Radium, by Carla Killough McClafferty (Farrar); and Team Moon: How 400,000 
People Landed Apollo 11 On the Moon, by Catherine Thimmesh (Houghton).
316  •  The BulleTin
Adoption: Rhodes-Courter
AdventuRe: Barnes; enthoven; 
Hennesy; McKenzie; napoli; 
Walden
Africa–stories: Milway
African Americans: Bolden; Smith, 
C.; Stauffacher; Winter
African Americans–fiction: Sturm
Animals: Larios
Animals–poetry: elliott
AntHoLogieS: Busby
Appearance–fiction: vaught
ARtHuRiAn Legend: McK-
enzie
Athletes: Cline-Ransome; Smith, C.; 
Stauffacher; Winter
Autism–stories: Luchsinger
Babies: Ceelen
Baseball–fiction: Smith, J.; Sturm
Baths–stories: geisert
BedtiMe StoRieS: Rosenthal
BiogRApHieS: Bolden; Cline-
Ransome; Kerley; Marrin; 
Rhodes-Courter; Shefelman; 
Smith, C.; Stauffacher; Winter
Birds–stories: Andersen; Rosenthal
BoARd BooKS: Ceelen
Brothers–fiction: Ylvisaker
Brothers and sisters–stories: Luch- 
singer
Businesses–fiction: Ferraro
Cars and trucks–stories: Scieszka
Cheerleaders–fiction: Barnes
Chickens–stories: Amato
Clothing–stories: Schwarz
Clubs–fiction: Lockhart
Construction–stories: Scieszka
Crime and criminals–fiction: Becker; 
Cadnum; Fahy; graff; Hender-
son; Sanders; Shearer; tracy; 
Walden
Cults–fiction: Fahy
Economics: Milway
elections–stories: dipucchio
epiStoLARY FiCtion: Kluger
Ethics and values: Andersen; 
Caletti; Lockhart; newbery; nils-
son; tracy; vaught
Families–fiction: Baskin; Caletti; 
Crane; o’Connor; parkinson; 
Scott
FAntASY: Becker; Bunce; gordon; 
Harris; McKenzie; Weyn
Farms—poetry: elliott
Fathers–fiction: Becker; gordon; 
Marsden; nilsson; Scott
FoLKtALeS And FAiRY tALeS: 
Andersen; Bunce
Foster children: Rhodes-Courter
Friends–fiction: Cabot; Coleman; 
Crane; graff; Kluger; newbery; 
o’Connor; parkinson; Sanders; 
Scott; tracy
Friends–stories: Frazee; Schwarz
Frogs: Bishop; Moffett
gays and lesbians–fiction: Kluger
Government, U.S.: dipucchio
grandparents–fiction: Baskin
grandparents–stories: Frazee 
gRApHiC noveLS: Sturm
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
March 2008  •  317
HiStoRiCAL FiCtion: Bunce; 
Cadnum; Coleman; Marsden; 
napoli; Sanders; Schwabach; 
Sturm; Ylvisaker
History, British: Cadnum
History, medieval: Cadnum
History, U.S.: Bolden; Kerley; Mar-
rin; Schwabach; Sturm
HoRRoR: Becker; Fahy
HuMoR: Amato; elish; Frazee; 
Katz; Rosenthal; Schwarz; 
Shearer; Willis; Ylsivsaker
identity–fiction: Crane
identity–stories: Andersen
illness–fiction: Crane; Smith, J.
imagination–stories: Shulevitz
Jews–fiction: Baskin
Kissing–fiction: Busby
Latinos: Cline-Ransome
Magic–fiction: Harris
Maps–stories: Shulevitz
Mice–stories: Willis
Money: Milway
Money–fiction: Caletti
Mothers–fiction: Ferraro; parkinson
Mothers–stories: Willis
Moving–fiction: Cabot
Music and musicians: Shefelman
MYSteRieS: Fahy; Henderson; 
newbery; Sanders; Shearer
Mythology: Larios
Mythology, classical: Hennesy
Nature study: Bishop; Moffett
parents–fiction: nilsson
Physical education: Cline-Ran-
some; Smith, C.; Stauffacher; 
Winter
pigs–stories: geisert
poetRY: elliott; Katz; Larios
politics–fiction: Cadnum
politics–stories: dipucchio
poverty–stories: Shulevitz
presidents: Marrin
princesses–fiction: napoli
Quests–fiction: Harris; Hennesy
Racism–fiction: Coleman; Sturm
Reading aloud: Katz; Larios
Reading, easy: Bishop; Moffett
Reading, reluctant: Bishop; Moffett
Reincarnation–fiction: Weyn
Relationships–fiction: Caletti; Fer-
raro; Kluger; Lockhart; Scott; 
Smith, J.; vaught
Revenge–fiction: Fahy
Robots–fiction: enthoven
Romance–fiction: Smith, J.; Weyn
Royalty–fiction: Cadnum; McKenzie
School: Cooper
School–fiction: Barnes; Henderson; 
Walden
SCienCe FiCtion: elish; en-
thoven
SHoRt StoRieS: Busby
Sisters–stories: Amato
Slavery–fiction: napoli
Spies and spying–fiction: Barnes
SpoRtS StoRieS: Smith, C.; 
Winter
Stars–stories: Lyon
Storytelling–stories: Lyon
Summer–stories: Frazee
SupeRnAtuRAL StoRieS: 
newbery
SuSpenSe: Fahy; Sanders
toddLeR BooKS: Ceelen
vacations–stories: Frazee
vietnam–fiction: Marsden
voyages and travel–fiction: 
o’Connor; Schwabach
Women’s studies: Schwabach; Stauf-
facher
WoRdLeSS BooKS: Ceelen; 
geisert
Writers and writing–fiction: vaught
