T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
January 2008
Vol. 61   No. 5
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
January 2008
Vol. 61 No. 5
201  the BIg PICture
 
 The Arrival illus. by Shaun Tan
202  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
205  • Old Dog by Teresa Cárdenas; tr. from the Spanish by David Unger
206  • What’s Eating You?: Parasites—The Inside Story by Nicola Davies; illus. 
 
 by Neal Layton
207  • Passion and Poison:  Tales of Shape-Shifters, Ghosts, and Spirited Women  
 
 by Janice M. Del Negro; illus. by Vince Natale
216  • How They Met, and Other Stories by David Levithan
222  • Let Sleeping Dogs Lie by Mirjam Pressler; tr. from the German by Erik J.  
 
 Macki
232  BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons 2007
234  suBjeCt And use Index
200 • The BulleTin
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
 
 
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
 
 
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Katrina Bromann, Reviewer (KB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Katrina Bromann, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $85.00; combined print & electronic $119.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $53.00; students, 
$15.00. In countries other than the United States, add $14.30 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $9.90. Single copy rate: $9.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.uiuc.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2008 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image by Shaun Tan from The Arrival ©2007.  Used by permission of Levine/Scholastic Inc.
January 2008 • 201
the BIg PICture
The Arrival
illustrated by Shaun Tan
With sorrow and hope, a man packs up a few treasured belongings and leaves his 
beloved wife and daughter, crossing the ocean to find a new life in a strange and 
overwhelming country of possibility, seeking to earn enough money there to send 
for his family to join him. It’s an oft-told story, so well worn that both adults and 
youngsters can grow a little numb to its poignancy. In this wordless Australian 
import, Shaun Tan not only makes the old immigration story new again, he also 
ingeniously puts the reader in the immigrant’s position to give the experience an 
immediacy one would have thought impossible to obtain from a fictional explora-
tion.
A plot summary of The Arrival would follow the familiar lines. Our pro-
tagonist leaves behind a troubled city and embarks on a long ocean voyage. At the 
other end, he undergoes baffling entrance procedures and finds himself in bewilder-
ing alien territory. He manages to obtain himself a lonely set of rooms, brightened 
slightly by a friendly pet; his attempts to get work are less successful, initially (hired 
to put up posters, he glues them upside down, since he can’t read them), but finally 
he settles into quality-control work on an assembly line. As he strives to learn the 
ways of his new home, he’s cheered by friendly encounters with residents who tell 
him their own stories of sad departures and timid early days in this city; after his 
earnings bring his wife and daughter to join him and they too become part of this 
startling country, his daughter carries on the tradition of assisting the newcomers 
when she becomes the helper of another puzzled new arrival. 
Tan turns this classic story into an imaginative as well as a visual tour de 
force by making the elements of the immigrant’s new country as strange, fantastical, 
and incomprehensible to the reader as to the new arrival. The new world is actu-
ally full of words, but they’re printed in an invented foreign lettering that neither 
the immigrant nor the reader can understand. Our protagonist’s companionable 
pet resembles a pale cat-sized whale with feet and ears; the city is covered with 
mysterious symbols and strangely shaped architecture over which fishy-looking 
birds soar; he’s stumped by a marketplace filled with tentacled, spiny vegetables 
(it’s a particularly skillful touch that the beauteous marvels tend to have sharp 
and pointy elements that make them elicit wariness as well as wonder). While the 
immigrant wears vaguely European clothing, city denizens generally sport garb of 
various fictional styles, so the occasional individual in familiar clothing offers a 
shock of desperate recognition felt keenly by the reader as well as the protagonist. 
The book is breathtaking not only in its imaginative interpretation of specifics (the 
Statue of Liberty equivalent is a pair of huge figures, one marked by his suitcase 
as a traveler, grasping hands in fellowship) but also in its creative depiction of the 
202 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
general experience (a spread containing a grid of sixty different views of the clouds 
in the sky conveys the tedium and sameness of the days on board ship during the 
ocean crossing). Stylistically, the illustrations are orderly squares in realistic, softly 
drawn tones of gray or sepia, color choices that ground the fantasy and emphasize 
the historical nature of the tale, as do the touches of faux-aging in the scrapbook-
like framing and photograph-styled sections; a scribbled child’s drawing on the final 
page enhances the unspoken notion that this is a well-thumbed family history. 
It’s a peculiar literary paradox that telling it exactly how it is is not always 
the best way to convey how it was. Tan’s fictional newfound land is overwhelmingly 
glamorous, alien, and plausible, conveying culture shock in a way that straightfor-
ward historical chronicles simply can’t manage. This could electrify a curriculum, 
provoke conversation if shared within a family, or simply bring a reader a startling 
new way of seeing a familiar story. A note explains Tan’s influences, which range 
from Ellis Island artifacts to Australian immigrant history. (See p. 228 for publica-
tion information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
AdA, AlmA Flor, comp. Merry Navidad!: Villancicos en español e inglés/Christmas 
Carols in Spanish and English; by Alma Flor Ada and F. Isabel Campoy; tr. from 
the Spanish by Rosalma Zubizarreta; illus. by Viví Escrivá. Rayo/HarperCollins, 
2007 64p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-058435-1 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-058434-4 $16.99   
Ad 7-10 yrs
This compact compilation of villancicos, Spanish-language Christmas carols, of-
fers nineteen songs in nine thematic sections. Sectional topics range from “On 
the Road to Bethlehem” to “The Shepherds” to “The Christmas Tree,” each part 
opening with a discussion of that particular theme’s importance and traditions; 
each villancico is followed by an English-language translation. Though the English 
translations aren’t always very poetic, it’s a sprightly collection; unfortunately, it’s 
seriously marred by the fact that musical notations (for melody only) are included 
for only six of the villancicos, and they’re tucked in at the end of the book. Illustra-
tions generally interpret the events of the songs, blending Latin American scenery 
and elements with Middle Eastern (Mary and Joseph’s donkey is outfitted with a 
serape, for instance) and providing a rosy-cheeked and multiracial cast celebrating 
the holiday in town and in country. If the collection had included music for all 
its entries, it would have been a terrific way to broaden knowledge of some lovely 
songs and festive traditions; even with its limitations, it will give carol-hungry 
young audiences a few more opportunities to raise their voices. There is no index, 
but a table of contents is included.  DS
January 2008 • 203
Becker, Bonny A Visitor for Bear; illus. by Kady MacDonald Denton. Can-
dlewick, 2008 [56p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-2807-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
“No visitors allowed,” says the sign on Bear’s door, though it’s apparently a superflu-
ous warning, since he never has visitors anyway—not until the mouse, “small and 
gray and bright-eyed,” turns up at his house. No matter how Bear tries to exclude 
the mouse, the wee rodent gets in, leading to Bear’s thundering denunciations 
and the mouse’s apologetic excuses. When the persistent mouse finally convinces 
Bear to share tea, however, the bruin discovers that company is a pleasant thing 
to have. The well-built story supports its gentle whimsy effectively, and the comic 
grandiosity of Bear’s fulminations (“This is impossible! Intolerable! Insufferable!”) 
provides a humorous counterpart to the mouse’s polite yet stealthy persistence. 
Denton, deftly imbuing her watercolor illustrations with expression and character 
as well as tidy charm, makes her scenes softly inviting with pastel tones and warm 
brown edging lines as well as old-fashioned interior detail that makes Bear’s house 
seem a place anyone might wish to infiltrate. The two adversaries are notable visual 
personalities, Bear gifted with a balletic lightness of foot and tendency toward 
dramatic poses, the mouse with a studied nonchalance in his sideways glances. 
With its vitality, friendliness, and individuality, this is a standout in the “unlikely 
friends” genre.  DS
Bell, JuliA Dirty Work. Walker, 2008 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-9741-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Oksana is Russian, from a home where she suffered grinding poverty and where, 
following the death of her mother, she was solely responsible for the care of her 
baby brother; Hope is English, from a home with well-heeled parents and all the 
traditional comforts save convenient access to shopping. The paths of these two 
teens cross after Oksana becomes ensnared in forced prostitution, which puts her 
under the thumb of a man who transports her through Europe. Trying to escape 
him, Oksana hides away in Hope’s family’s van on the cross-channel ferry, but soon 
not only Oksana but also Hope are his captive victims, sold into service at a secret 
London brothel. There’s a fair amount of improbability and melodrama in this 
British import, and some of the logistics and events are unclear; the book also never 
really explores its underlying implications about the difference between Oksana 
and Hope. The writing is swift and involving, though, and the use of alternating 
narrators is effective; Hope’s involvement in the story may be stretching credibil-
ity, but she’ll be an easier point of identification than Oksana for many readers. 
There’s also an undidactic exploration of the basic economics of the situation and 
the vulnerability of young people seeking better lives. This isn’t up to the level of 
Patricia McCormack’s Sold (BCCB 12/06), but it’s compelling reading, and it will 
be a useful reminder to those who figure such events transpire only far away from 
lives like theirs.  DS
Benedict, Helen The Opposite of Love. Viking, 2007 290p
ISBN 978-0-670-06135-8 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The daughter of a white British ex-con mother living illegally in the U.S. and an 
absent Jamaican father she’s never met, Madge finds life as a black girl in a white 
204 • The BulleTin
Pennsylvania town all but unbearable. Her mother is brash, abrasive, uncommu-
nicative, and she’s given to disappearing for weeks on end, leaving Madge to stay 
with her aunt and her adult cousin, Bob, who is a journalist in nearby New York 
City. A short stay with Bob introduces her to the problems of the foster care system, 
which, combined with her own feelings of being abandoned, eventually motivate 
her to kidnap a four-year-old boy who appears to be severely neglected. Despite 
their misgivings, her mother and aunt make a home for Timmy, giving Madge time 
to realize the magnitude of what she’s done. Meanwhile, she is plagued by racist 
comments and threats in school and around town, even as she finds first love with 
Krishna, the only other person of color in her school. The plot moves quickly, but 
it is decidedly purposive and message driven; the author’s note leaves no doubt as to 
what readers are supposed to be especially agitated about when they put the book 
down (neglected children and the persistent presence of hate groups), and little 
decontextualized digs about American foreign policy won’t go unnoticed either. That 
said, though, Madge is sufficiently troubled by her own motives in taking Timmy 
to mitigate a stance that’s overly self-righteous, even when circumstances show her 
to have had the right instincts all along. The question of whether it is better to try 
to change the system or simply to work outside it thus gets decided by default, a 
plot move that merits serious post-reading discussion.  KC
BrAnnen, SArAH S. Uncle Bobby’s Wedding; written and illus. by Sarah S. 
Brannen. Putnam, 2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24712-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
“Bobby was Chloe’s favorite uncle,” so when he announces that he’s getting married 
to Jamie, Chloe’s initial response is jealousy. Soon, though, our little guinea-pig 
heroine is enamored with Jamie as well, and by the time the wedding comes around, 
she’s convinced that it was all her idea from the start and thrilled with her newlywed 
pair of uncles. This is a sturdy little wedding story, but compared to such sparklers 
about niecely jealousy as Look’s Uncle Peter’s Amazing Chinese Wedding (BCCB 
1/06) and Lindenbaum’s Mini Mia and Her Darling Uncle (BCCB 10/07), it’s a 
bland and sweetly sedate exploration. Since the book seems to strive for matter-
of-factness about the maleness of Bobby’s partner, the text’s laborious avoidance of 
any indication of Jamie’s gender in the first half is a strange evasion that makes the 
revelation into a tone-incongruent “gotcha!” Watercolor and graphite illustrations 
create a cast of guinea pigs; the art is pleasant and the critters cute, but the scenes 
are fairly static, and identification is complicated by the fact that Jamie and Bobby 
are a similar-looking gray and white. While the title may not rise to the extant high 
standard for uncle/niece stories, it’s a vast improvement on the gay-marriage theme 
over old Daddy’s Wedding (BCCB 6/90), and its quiet coziness may help reassure 
youngsters uneasy about family change.  DS
BrodSky, dAniellA One Trick Pony. Delacorte, 2007 279p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90452-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73452-3 $15.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
That perfectly brewed coffee can be a bit of heaven seems indisputable, but this 
novel, centered on a new owner of a local coffee shop and a quartet of its teen 
regulars, questions whether it can actually change the lives of drinkers. Jesse, 
Abigail, Kate, and Randall, the four teens, have been friends for years, and each is 
January 2008 • 205
at a crossroads. Abigail and Randall must sort out their long-standing friendship 
from their newly heightened romantic feelings, Kate is realizing that her blustery 
confidence and obsession with being perfect may not lead her to happiness, and 
Jesse can no longer find comfort in his one-night stands. Luckily, the mysterious 
and gorgeous Caroline, the coffee-shop owner, has advice and personalized coffee 
drinks for each of them; whether it is the advice or the beverage changing their 
personalities seems only clear to Caroline herself. Brodsky realistically explores the 
normal ebbs and flows of this four-person friendship, with each teen emerging as 
not only part of the group but also sometimes as the outsider within it. Unfortu-
nately, the pseudo-mystical touch of (perhaps) magic coffee beans minimizes the 
hard-won growth of each of the friends in its suggestion that whimsy was as likely 
a catalyst for change as bravely discarding old protective shells. In addition, the 
budding romance between Caroline and Jesse, with his immediate rejection of all 
old relationship habits and slavish dedication to fulfilling her needs, is awkwardly 
rushed (and perhaps overly hopeful for a relationship between a seventeen-year-old 
boy and his his twenty-two-year-old boss). However, teens who frequent coffee-
houses themselves will see a familiar cast, and they will revel in the idea that their 
next cup of caffeinated joy could actually transform their lives.  AS
cárdenAS, tereSA Old Dog; tr. from the Spanish by David Unger. Groundwood/
House of Anansi, 2007 [144p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-88899-757-9 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-88899-836-1 $8.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Perro Viejo, a slave in prerevolutionary Cuba, has become too old to do any of 
the hard work in the sugarcane fields, so he spends his days as gatekeeper, waiting 
for his body to join his spirit in the endless death that has been his life as a slave. 
He shuffles through his memories as his tired, painful legs shuffle him through his 
days, recalling friends he has lost to the cruelty of white masters, and the heart he 
lost long ago to a woman he saw only once. He despairs that the thing he most 
wants to recall is the one thing he can’t—the face of his mother. Old and soul-
tired as he is, though, he experiences an epiphany when he realizes that he still has 
the capacity to love and even to act against all hope, as he and Beira, the woman 
who has found her way into his heart, work together to save a young runaway by 
taking her with them as they attempt to run away themselves. The story focuses 
preponderantly on adults, but it’s written accessibly for a young audience. Students 
whose knowledge of slavery is limited to the U.S. will recognize familiar patterns 
of abuse and may well marvel and despair at their ubiquity, as well as their ability 
to crush the spirit of the enslaved and abused; Perro Viejo’s story is not a unique 
one, but it is uniquely well told. In poignant prose with an emotional depth and 
lyricism that thrives even in translation, Cuban author Cárdenas maps the lonely 
fears and sorrows that haunt Perro Viejo as he plays his endgame and earns his 
spiritual, if not actual, freedom.  KC 
cHoldenko, GenniFer If a Tree Falls at Lunch Period. Harcourt, 
2007 216p
ISBN 978-0-15-205753-4 $17.00   
R Gr. 7-10
Kirsten is a fairly average girl trying to live up to her parents’ increasingly difficult 
demands: her dad wants her to be a brilliant student like her little sister, and her 
206 • The BulleTin
mom wants her to stop gaining weight. Their constant fighting, though, is what 
repeatedly sends her to the potato chips and Snickers for emotional healing. 
Walker is the brilliant student Kirsten wants to be, but as the only black student 
in their private school, he’s got his own issues. Both come under the unwelcome 
attention of the school beauty and beast, Brianna, who is startlingly overt in her 
racism and genuinely mean, and as a result the pair become friends. Narration 
alternates between Kirsten and Walk, with Choldenko doing an impressive job 
of authentically representing both slightly whiny adolescent white girl and gently 
defiant black vernacular dialects. Kirsten’s well-plotted revenge against Brianna is 
hearteningly realistic, a convincing example of an underdog settling a bully without 
making things worse, and a truly surprising plot twist keeps things moving in a 
fresh direction. Though the end is somewhat abrupt, the complexity is sustained; 
Kirsten and Walk both have major adjustments to make, and they work on these 
without overly precocious levels of insight. This is a refreshingly honest look at 
how ordinary kids negotiate the soap-opera scenarios and emotional fallout that 
make up their family dynamics.  KC
croGGon, AliSon The Crow: The Third Book of Pellinor. Candlewick, 
2007 511p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3409-4 $18.99   
R Gr. 7-12
In this third book of the Pellinor quartet (The Naming, BCCB 9/05, The Riddle, 
BCCB 1/07), the focus shifts from Maerad, currently away on her quest to solve 
the Riddle of the Treesong, to her younger brother, Hem, who is just coming into 
his own Bardic powers. Although Hem is happy to be out of the orphanage where 
he grew up, he is unhappy with the strictures of formal education, he misses his 
sister desperately, and he, like everyone else, is concerned with the unceasing march 
of the Black Army that is headed toward Turbansk. The evil Dark forces, with 
armies of brainwashed children, poisonous birds, and soulless Hulls, threaten not 
only individual lives but also the balance of Light everywhere. Although prophecy 
suggested that Maerad alone might save the world, Hem soon realizes that his own 
skills and access to key objects may mean he also has a part to play, though readers 
may not initially see the potential hope after watching the joyful and defiant spirit 
of the protagonist get crushed beneath nearly unendurable loneliness, fear, and grief. 
Australian author Croggon masterfully bolsters this high fantasy with substantial 
extra material including maps, a pronunciation guide, and intricate notes on the 
mystical forces that shape these lands; the careful craftsmanship of story and sup-
port and the effective use of this installment’s—and the series’—considerable length 
result in a richly developed, engrossing, and epic quest. Fantasy fans will relish the 
elaborate and vivid settings, complex histories, and the searing emotional growth 
of both Maerad and Hem, and they will eagerly await the concluding volume to 
finally see what happens with this land and its people who seem all but doomed, 
even with the heroic efforts of the siblings.  AS
dAvieS, nicolA What’s Eating You?: Parasites—The Inside Story; illus. by Neal 
Layton. Candlewick, 2007 60p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3460-5 $12.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Davies has taken readers through many aspects of the natural world, including 
poop (Poop: A Natural History of the Unmentionable, BCCB 10/06) and denizens of 
tough habitats (Extreme Animals, BCCB 10/06); now she turns to the diminutive 
January 2008 • 207
world of parasites. The text starts off with a paradigm shift (“You Are a Habitat!”) 
and then goes on to discuss the different kinds of parasites (ectoparasites live out-
side the body, endoparasites live inside of it), the complicated life cycles of some 
interesting residents, and some beneficial effects of parasites. The author writes 
with her usual verve and taste for entertaining—if offputting—specifics, and the 
compact sections (a few paragraphs for each enticingly parasitical topic) make the 
facts go down easy. Layton’s edgy, zine-like scrawls, clever scenes, and comic yet 
informative captions make epidemiology cool and funny (readers will be mesmer-
ized by “The Two-Host Tapeworm Game”). Davies is rapidly becoming a science 
curriculum all on her own, and this will horrify and delight those readers not yet 
ready for Westerfeld’s Peeps (BCCB 9/06) or the adult Parasite Rex. An index and 
glossary are included.  DS
del neGro, JAnice m. Passion and Poison: Tales of Shape-Shifters, Ghosts, and 
Spirited Women; illus. by Vince Natale. Cavendish, 2007 [64p]
ISBN 978-0-7614-5361-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Gather around a fire somewhere to share these creepy tales of women rubbing 
against the netherworld. These eight original tales and retellings all possess the 
uncanny feeling common to new takes on familiar traditional motifs, and they 
are enlivened by a voice so penetrating that it seems to be in the room rather than 
just on the page. From beastly men who get their just deserts, to bold women who 
brook no sass from inhabitants of this world or the next, to lonely children who 
find playmates among the green world, the tales explore themes of justice, cour-
age, betrayal, vengeance, love, and just plain spookiness. The most moving is “Sea 
Child,” wherein a mother grieving for her drowned son hears the wail of a child 
over several nights; she finally finds a young mother who has not allowed her own 
death by drowning to prevent her from caring for her infant until someone from 
the living world heeds the baby’s call. Another mother protects her fortune from 
beyond the grave, ensuring that she find a female successor more worthy of its 
prize than her wastrel husband and son. Other tales find young girls taking care 
of business in various ways that usually result in the utterly just dispatch of their 
oppressors. While the focus of the stories is on strong women, there is no intrusive 
feminist message hampering the storytelling here—each of the tales finds its nar-
rative arc naturally and without ideological coercion, with just a well-timed shiver 
here and there to let readers know that the unseen hands of justice in the universe 
are not idle.  KC 
donoFrio, Beverly Thank You, Lucky Stars. Schwartz & Wade, 
2008 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93964-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83964-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
The first day of fifth grade is filled with promise for Ally Miller—until she finds her 
erstwhile best friend, Betsy, dressing to match former enemy Mona and not Ally 
as planned. It becomes immediately clear that Betsy has dropped Ally for Mona, 
leaving Ally bereft and friendless, as well as at the mercy of the ironically named 
Mrs. Joy, her stern teacher. She’s initially put off by the attention of an offbeat 
and unselfconscious new student, Tina, but soon she’s realizing that Tina is a real 
208 • The BulleTin
friend—but will Ally leave Tina in the lurch when Betsy wants her back for an act 
in the talent show? This is a fairly well-worn plot, and the story tends to be more 
purposive than credible; it’s also steeped in old-fashioned music and dancing that 
give the story a dated feel despite the contemporary setting. Ally is a sympathetic 
character, however, whose acknowledged tendency toward immaturity (she’s a bit of 
a crybaby) enhances her authenticity; Tina is also enough of a controversial package 
that Ally’s uncertainty about friendship with her isn’t entirely a shallow fear about 
status. This won’t take readers anywhere they haven’t been, but they may find it a 
reassuring treatment of a perennial anxiety.  DS
downArd, BArry, ad. The Race of the Century; ad. and illus. by Barry 
Downard. Simon, 2008 36p
ISBN 978-1-4169-2509-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 2-4
The titular race is the classic match-up between the tortoise and the hare; Flash 
Harry Hare has topped his usual teasing by sneering at Tom Tortoise as “Twinkle 
Toes,” Tom has challenged the bun to a race, and television commentator Don Key 
provides color coverage of the event that’s electrifying all of Critterville. Text is rough 
in spots but breezy, getting the characterization across, but the illustrations are the 
main point here. Digitally created photocollages of an animal cast, they’re packed 
with silly exaggeration and humorous visual personification, from the rabbit’s ap-
pearance in the classic Saturday Night Fever getup and pose, to the turtle’s workout 
with weights and sweatband, to the multiple groups of animals following the race 
on their vintage televisions with brands such as “Pony” and “Telebunniken.” While 
this doesn’t have the overall brilliance of Wattenberg’s effervescent Henny-Penny 
(BCCB 5/00), the sheer ludicrousness of this scenario will elicit snickering even 
in kids allergic to fables.  DS
elliS, deBorAH Sacred Leaf. Groundwood/House of Anansi, 2007 206p (The 
Cocalero Novels)
ISBN 978-0-88899-751-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-10
After his heart-pounding escape from cocaine manufacturers who forced him to 
work in the pits and killed his friend Mando (I Am a Taxi, BCCB 12/06), Diego is 
enjoying the simple family life of the Ricardos, who took him in when he emerged, 
weakened and defenseless, from the Bolivian forest. Their life reminds him of his 
family life before his parents were falsely accused of cocaine smuggling and incarcer-
ated in San Sebastian prison. Even the angry resentment of Bonita, the Ricardos’ 
daughter, seems familiar and comforting as Diego readjusts to the rhythms of the 
cocaleros (coca farmers). When soldiers come and destroy the family’s cash coca 
crop, he joins the campesinos in blockading a local bridge; nationwide, the protests 
from other cocaleros bring Bolivia’s commerce to a standstill and force the govern-
ment to negotiate with the farmers. The exciting nature of this recent history (the 
blockades took place in 2000) joins with Diego’s appealingly strong but vulner-
able character to create a high interest and fast-paced read. Ellis uses her soldiers 
in particular to voice multiple perspectives on the situation: they are sympathetic 
to their countrymen, and yet they have been ordered by the Bolivian government, 
which is being paid by the U.S. government to stem the flow of cocaine into the 
States, to destroy the cocaleros’ livelihood and interfere with the legal growing of 
coca because the illegal trade is too strong to attack directly. Diego is repeatedly 
commended for his bravery in standing up for his beliefs, keeping this a kid-hero 
January 2008 • 209
story even as it stands as a richly detailed introduction to a complex and unresolved 
situation; the absorbing story and compelling hero will make readers want to read 
the first book if they haven’t already. A brief synopsis of Diego’s earlier adventures 
begins the story and an author’s note follows.  KC 
FerriS, JeAn Underground. Farrar, 2007 168p
ISBN 978-0-374-37243-9 $16.00   
R Gr. 5-8
Decades before the Civil War, Charlotte Brown finds herself sold once again to a new 
master, the owner of the Mammoth Cave Hotel in Kentucky. Five slaves, including 
herself, make up the entire staff, and it’s not long before two of the cave tour guides, 
Stephen and Nick, are vying for the affection of pretty sixteen-year-old Charlotte. 
She favors the more serious-minded Stephen, who has made something of a name 
for himself by discovering new sections of the cave. It’s hard for romance to take 
root, though, when life is fraught with such anxieties as the threat of being sold 
away once again and the nerve-wracking business of hiding runaways in the cave. 
Moreover, the courage and determination of the fugitive slaves tempts Charlotte to 
flee as well, and Stephen’s commitment to stay on and explore the caves leaves her 
struggling with competing desires for freedom and love. Ferris bases her tale very 
loosely on real persons, but she points out fairly and firmly in her closing notes 
that little is known of their actual characters and that there is no evidence that the 
Mammoth Cave was ever used to shelter runaways. The story offers an enticing 
what if?, though, and a quick and satisfying read for historical fiction fans.  EB
FiSHer, vAlorie When Ruby Tried to Grow Candy; written and illus. by Valorie 
Fisher. Schwartz & Wade, 2008 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94015-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84015-9 $16.99   
Ad 5-8 yrs
When Ruby accidentally tosses her ball over the fence and into the neighbor’s yard, 
she’s nervous about retrieving it, because she’s afraid of the mysterious lady next 
door. Once over the fence, she discovers that her neighbor is even stranger than 
she had thought: Miss Wysterious has a lush and enchanting garden that grows 
teacups, playing cards, shoes, buttons, and other gloriously improbable produce. 
Miss W. sets Ruby up with a garden of her own, wherein the candy-restricted girl 
sows a clutch of sweets in eager anticipation of a delicious crop of butterscotch, 
toffees, and lemon sours. Though there are some entertaining turns of phrase 
(“And in the blink of an eye, Ruby Louise Hawthorn had tossed herself into quite 
a pickle”), the story lacks focus and, occasionally, logic (when did Ruby retrieve 
the ball that presumably grew the concluding ball tree?), resulting in a narrative 
that seems basically shimmed into place to support the central concept and art. 
Fisher’s photographic visuals are, as usual, arresting, photographed mixtures of realia 
and designerly drawn elements cut out and arranged. The cheery, elaborate garden 
scenes have the sweet vigor of mid-mod kitchen design, and they gain additional 
allure from being jam-packed with whimsical inclusions, with the blurring of the 
background components suggesting endless depths in this botanical fantasy. The 
enticing idea and visuals will be enough to draw many youngsters, who will simply 
enjoy poring over the pages of the fanciful gardens.  DS
210 • The BulleTin
FrederickS, mAriAH In the Cards: Fame. Jackson/Atheneum, 2008 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-689-87656-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
The previous In the Cards novel (In the Cards: Love, BCCB 1/07) introduced 
readers to Anna, Eve, and Syd, a trio of three friends who use a pack of tarot cards 
to help them find answers about their future, with a different friend getting a card 
reading in each book. This time it’s the turn of mercurial Eve, who’s desperate to 
be a famous actress and dismissive of everything else. When the school decides to 
stage Cabaret, it’s put up or shut up time for Eve, and the cards are suggesting that 
the production may be the way she finally catches the eye of a producer—or are 
they? Fredericks demonstrates her usual canny sympathy for her young protagonist, 
with prickly, self-absorbed Eve a character who’s not immediately likable but whose 
anxieties (“Did everybody get picked for the famous and nobody teams, and I’m 
with the nobodies?”) are familiar and credible. The book gently moves Eve along 
the experiential road so that she begins to grasp that stardom does actually involve 
some hard work and smaller achievements along the way, and it’s authentic in 
pulling her ethical limits from a desire to differentiate herself from really mean 
girls as much as an awareness that the jealous treatment of the show’s star is cruel 
and destructive. As with the previous title, the cards are a convenient device for 
structuring the narrative without overwhelming it, and the three friends are vivid 
and varied; the story will leave readers wanting more and happy that they’ll be 
getting it in the upcoming volume focusing on Syd.  DS
FreemAn, mArtHA The Trouble with Twins; illus. by Cat Bowman Smith. Hol-
iday House, 2007 [85p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2025-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
In an expansive moment, middle-schooler Holly offers to plan a party for her 
twin brothers’ second birthday, and with the help of friends Xavier and Annie, 
she readies a science-themed bash. She blithely invites all thirteen of her brothers’ 
preschool classmates, expecting that only some will come, but when all thirteen 
show up, the party initially seems more than she can manage. However, with the 
help of a homemade sensory-deprivation tube (the kids think it’s cozy), a friendly 
tattooed “baristo guy” named Fred, and a last-minute cake constructed of Twinkies 
and whipped cream (one of the family’s four cats eats the icing off Holly’s cake), 
the party is a success. Freeman offers a nice little slice of family life here, with 
Holly good natured but believably exasperated by her brothers’ and cats’ antics, 
her mom and stepfather pleasant but frazzled, and the twins neither too naughty 
nor too saccharine to be credible. Middle-graders (and their adults) will appreci-
ate Freeman’s quick pacing, understated humor (“The twins shouted and clapped. 
They loved noise and breakage”), and keen sense of the absurd (as evidenced in the 
party scenes). Smith’s occasional sketchy black-and-white line drawings echo the 
frenetic action of life in a house full of cats and preschoolers. Parents and teachers 
looking for a good middle-grade readaloud will find this fits the bill, and kids who 
like Judy Blume’s Fudge series or who have preschool-aged sibs themselves will 
find plenty to enjoy here.  JH
January 2008 • 211
GAllAGHer, liz The Opposite of Invisible. Lamb, 2008 [160p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94329-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84152-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-12
Alice has been content with her comfortable life in the shadow: she adores her best 
(male) friend, Jewel, a talented artist, and her urban life in exciting Seattle. Now 
gorgeous jock Simon, on whom she has long had a crush, has surprisingly singled 
her out for his attention, just as Jewel has indicated that his interest in her is more 
than platonic; when she begins dating Simon, it cools off her friendship with Jewel 
and finally leaves her to explore her independent identity—whether she wants to or 
not. Gallagher writes with tenderness of a girl who’s just beginning to realize that 
she’s limited only by her own assumptions and self-image, and Alice’s narration 
manages to make the dilemma of being torn between two attractive boys believ-
ably problematic as well as desirable. The actual exploration of the situation is less 
credible, however: both Alice and the book seem unaware that Jewel is insecurely 
parochial and snobbish, and her rejection of Simon in Jewel’s favor seems a literary 
contrivance unjustified by her emotional responses (either Simon or independence 
seem like better choices). Her blossoming into herself is still gratifying to see, 
though, and readers may take away a useful message about looking beyond their 
own self-limitations.  DS
GiBlin, JAmeS croSS The Many Rides of Paul Revere. Scholastic, 2007 86p il-
lus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-439-57290-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 5-8 
In this economically presented biography, Giblin clearly conveys the fact that 
Paul Revere had far more to do with jump-starting the American Revolution than 
Longfellow’s poem would suggest; in fact, he was the go-to guy for carrying vital 
messages during the run-up to the opening battles of the war. Although the famous 
“midnight ride” is a focal point of the Revere story, the contributions of other patriots 
such as Dr. Joseph Warren and William Dawes are examined as well. In addition 
to the expected source notes and index, exceptionally useful back matter includes 
a timeline of Revere’s life, a detailed “tour” of extant sites related to Massachusetts 
in the Revolution, the full text of Longfellow’s “Paul Revere’s Ride,” and a brief 
essay that encourages readers to compare differences between the poetic and his-
torical accounts. Double-columned text is relieved by a wealth of period portraits, 
maps, and black-and-white photographs of Revere-related artifacts. History buffs 
interested in the backstory to Dennis Fradin’s excellent Let It Begin Here! (BCCB 
6/05) can start with this.  EB 
GiFF, PAtriciA reilly Eleven. Lamb, 2008 [144p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90098-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73069-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Between uneasy dreams and the finding of mysterious papers in his attic, eleven-
year-old Sam is beginning to suspect that his beloved grandfather (who is also 
Sam’s guardian) is keeping secrets from Sam about the past. Since Sam has trouble 
reading, he elicits the assistance of his new classmate Caroline, and they try to piece 
together clues to figure out what happened to Sam when he was little and what that 
212 • The BulleTin
means about his life now. Though the secret past event itself—a stint in a children’s 
home and a boating accident upon his retrieval by his grandfather—is implausible 
in its elaborate high melodrama, the storytelling is polished and compelling while 
remaining accessible to a young audience. Sam’s literacy issues aren’t merely included 
for didactic value, as they play a key role in heightening the suspense and bringing 
him together with Caroline, and it’s also clear that they’re shaping his personality 
and his class role in troubling ways. There are also touches of classic orphan-story 
pleasures here, with Sam living an idyllic life with his grandfather and friendly 
collective of neighbors and additional tension deriving from the possibility that his 
discovery may destroy this utopia. This will therefore intrigue fans of Giff’s Pictures 
of Hollis Woods (BCCB 12/02) and other home-finding tales as well as those readers 
who enjoy a smooth tale of psychologically touched mystery.  DS
HelAkoSki, leSlie Woolbur; illus. by Lee Harper. HarperCollins, 
2008 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084727-2 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-084726-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
Poor Maa and Paa: their son, Woolbur, is causing them no end of worry as he strays 
from the sheep norm. Woolbur runs with the dogs, cards his own wool while he’s in 
it, and dyes himself bright blue—and each time he greets his anxious parents with 
a happy “Isn’t it great!” Gleeful, heedless Woolbur is endearing in his enthusiasm 
and inventiveness as well as his independence, and the book’s clear structure will let 
kids feel like insiders in predicting the pattern. That structure has a few too many 
iterations, however, and it winds the story up for a big, funny tension-release that 
never really comes. Instead, the story disappointingly underplays its dénouement 
and muddles its message (parents, be careful what you wish for? Individualism is 
good because otherwise we wouldn’t recognize our children?), and nothing ever 
comes of Grandpaa’s wise admonitions of “Don’t worry.” The combination of 
intense color throughout and arresting texture in both sheep coats and landscape 
elements makes some of the illustrations too busy for successful focus, and audi-
ences are going to immediately ask why Woolbur doesn’t stay blue after he’s dyed 
himself, but the nubbly-coated lamb, his fleece twisted in dreadlock-like cardings, 
has the happy magnetism of the contented eccentric. Use this with Puttock’s Miss 
Fox, reviewed below, to talk about individuality—or just to romp with some en-
tertaining sheep.  DS
HolmeS, mAry tAvener My Travels with Clara; illus. by Jon Cannell. Getty, 
2007 36p
ISBN 978-0-89236-880-8 $17.95   
R 6-9 yrs
With her big ears, substantial girth, and saggy skin, she was the toast of mid-eigh-
teenth century Europe. Clara the rhinoceros, an orphan from India, ended up in 
the care of Dutch sea captain Douwe Van der Meer, who rightly calculated that 
she would be a sensation—a lucrative sensation, at that—among the royalty and 
chattering class throughout the continent. Here Van der Meer himself provides 
the breezy narration, regaling readers with details of Clara’s appetite (sixty pounds 
of hay daily, and a penchant for oranges and beer), transport (eight horses to pull 
a custom-made crate loaded on a wagon), and public acclaim (Frederick the Great 
brings his whole court and leaves a big tip). Text and illustrations take the form of 
January 2008 • 213
a scrapbook of paintings, doodles, journal entries, and reproductions of souvenirs 
and period artwork, with arrows that direct attention to points of particular interest, 
such as a porcelain rhino “made in the city of Meissen,” or a pile of “Clara poop” in 
the corner of Pietro Longhi’s oil painting, The Rhinoceros. Notes on contemporary 
artwork and a pronunciation guide are welcome added touches. Although Holmes’ 
title is intended as a companion book to the J. Paul Getty Museum exhibition of 
paintings by Jean-Baptiste Oudry, who created a life-sized portrait of the fetching 
Clara, the quirky subject and vivid presentation will find an appreciative audience 
beyond museum-goers. Pair this with Mary Jo Collier’s The King’s Giraffe (BCCB 
3/96) for a look at the eccentric enthusiasms of our fad-crazed ancestors.  EB
Jonell, lynne Emmy and the Incredible Shrinking Rat; illus. by Jonathan 
Bean. Holt, 2007 346p
ISBN 978-0-8050-8150-3 $17.95   
R Gr. 4-7
Ever since her parents inherited a great deal of money and a huge mansion from a 
distant relative, Emmy has seen them less and less as they take long vacations and 
leave her in the care of Miss Barmy, an officious and unpleasant nanny. What’s more, 
nobody seems to notice her at her new school except the class rat, and he bites her. 
Oddly, he also talks to her. In a fit of rebellion, she sets the rat free, skips her dance 
class, and wanders into a seedy section of downtown that she knows Miss Barmy 
would never approve of, where she finds a store with a secret business of renting 
out rodents with strange powers, including one that Miss Barmy has been using on 
her parents to make them stay away, and one that she has been using on Emmy’s 
schoolmates to make them forget about her. The rat she freed has the power to 
make people shrink, and when he accidentally shrinks one of Emmy’s classmates, 
the trio—Emmy, the rat, and the now-diminutive Joe—embarks on an adventure 
that leads them to discover a whole rodent city underground, a shrunken but still 
spry rodent scientist, and the way out of Emmy’s difficulties with the nefarious 
Miss Barmy. With an evil nanny, bewitched parents, and lots of cute, furry helpers, 
this is irresistible storytelling, drawing on the best traditions of Redwall, Narnia, 
and Wonderland with a healthy dose of Lemony Snicket thrown in. Jonathan 
Bean’s border illustrations form a flip book that features the rat, who is blustery, 
arrogant, and only accidentally helpful (though he does become a hero of sorts in 
the end), getting his just deserts by falling from a tree. As a readalone or a shared 
readaloud, this will be a winner with fans of light fantasy, animal tales, and mild 
gothic adventure.  KC 
kenAH, kAtHArine The Best Chef in Second Grade; illus. by Abby Carter. Harper 
Collins, 2007 48p (I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-053562-9 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-053561-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 1-3
Everyone in second grade is the best at something, except Ollie. His spirits rise, 
however, when he finds out that the famous food-tossing, dessert-igniting Chef 
Antonia from TV is coming to his class. Since Ollie loves to cook, his excitement 
increases when his teacher asks each student to discover and prepare his or her 
family’s favorite dish to share with Chef Antonia. Desperate to find his “Family 
Favorite,” Ollie questions his family repeatedly, but picky little sister Rosy torpedoes 
one suggestion after another. Finally, everyone settles on macaroni and cheese (“But 
only if it has a face,” insists Rosy), and Ollie’s fruit-faced macaroni and cheese is a 
214 • The BulleTin
big hit with Chef Antonia, who proclaims, “This dish was made by a chef!” Ollie’s 
dismay at his seeming mediocrity amidst his classmates’ success and his worry that 
his dish won’t measure up are conveyed simply and believably. Kenah’s pacing is 
quick and tight, and her language is spot on for her audience of developing read-
ers. Carter’s watercolor illustrations are a little bland overall, but the sweet-faced, 
curly-haired Ollie is quite endearing in a round-headed, Charlie Brown-ish sort of 
way. All in all, young readers (and especially Rachael Ray wannabes) will find this 
a tasty little morsel.  JH
kinG, dAren Mouse Noses on Toast; illus. by David Roberts. Putnam, 
2008 [128p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25037-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-5 
Paul Mouse has essentially exiled himself from the rest of the mouse world, as 
exposure to cheese makes his fur fall out, his tail curl, and his bottom turn blue. 
However, when Paul and his friends/roommates (Sandra, a plastic Christmas angel 
and the Tinby, a small, mute, armless creature) visit a posh restaurant, they discover 
a hideous human practice: humans apparently love to eat “mouse noses on toast.” 
Horrified, Paul and his friends join forces with his fellow mice (including a hip-
pie mouse named Larry who’s eager to agitate) and a friendly dog named Rowley 
Barker Hobbs to put a stop to the serving of this gruesome dish. Though the group’s 
attempts at radical action fail, they do lead the rebellious rodents to a supposed 
“mouse nose abbatoir,” where they learn that the “mouse noses” are actually clever 
fakes made out of marzipan by cunning and well-paid mice. This odd and offbeat 
British import evinces a certain weird charm, and the absurd yet dry humor (“It 
took a lot for the Tinby to lose its cool, but something about the plate of mouse 
noses on toast pushed it over the edge”) will appeal to its middle-grade audience. 
Unfortunately, the characters, while often amusing, are fairly one-note, and the 
story is slender and random, with the book’s ending particularly feeling flat and 
abrupt (Paul decides that his allergy, while embarrassing, need not hold him back 
from enjoying the mouse-nose factory’s Cheddar Mountain). Roberts’ black-and-
white drawings are helpful in picturing some of the silliness and entertaining in 
their own right (the Tinby, for example, is depicted as a beady-eyed, plaid sort of 
oval household implement with legs). Readers who like a little more substance to 
their mouse-capades will be better off with Graham Oakley’s church mice, but kids 
looking for something quirky and quick will find this a breezy read.  JH
knAPmAn, timotHy Guess What I Found in Dragon Wood; illus. by Gwen 
Millward. Bloomsbury, 2008 32p
ISBN 978-1-59990-190-9 $16.95   
R 4-7 yrs
The “I” of the title is a young dragon, who tells of his odd discovery: a human 
kid, to him a strange creature called a “Benjamin,” which the dragon takes home 
to his parents and then to school the next day. The schooldragons are intrigued by 
the Benjamin’s absence of tail and scales, the puniness of its claws, and the fluffy 
stuff on its head, and they’re stunned to find out that the Benjamin is homesick 
for its own land of Benjamins of all sizes. The dragon therefore takes the Benjamin 
back to his human home, eager for a trip to the Benjamin’s school in turn, but 
not before the Benjamin has left his legacy at the dragon playground—soccer. 
This diverting “who’s really the monster?” concept, set up right with the opening 
January 2008 • 215
spread that cleverly makes the narrator’s identity ambiguous (viewers will likely 
think initially that it’s the boy who finds a dragon, not the other way around), is 
executed with humor and cozy, scaly charm, and audiences will relish the narrative 
irony that allows them to understand what the Benjamin’s host dragon does not. 
The tidy linework in the line-and-watercolor art adds a certain comic formality 
to the dragonworld, even as helpful handscrawled captions identify elements such 
as the narrator’s reptilian schoolmates and the key components of dragon soccer. 
There’s just enough exaggeration in the dragons to keep them amusing but not 
threatening, small blond Benjamin makes a suitable Everykid, and smartly varied 
compositions keep the momentum going. Kids who giggle at Jeanne Willis’ Earthlets, 
as Explained by Professor Xargle (BCCB 4/89) will similarly snicker at the outsider’s 
perspective here.  DS
knowleS, Jo Lessons from a Dead Girl. Candlewick, 2007 215p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3279-3 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 9-12
The death of Leah Greene (was it an accident, or was it suicide by car?) causes 
seventeen-year-old Laine to re-examine her relationship with the troubled girl who 
had once been her best friend. In flashblacks, Laine recalls their friendship, starting 
in fifth grade, when beautiful and self-confident Leah turns her attention to the 
mousy Laine, who is seduced by the promise of a seat at the popular table. It turns 
out, though, that Leah has other seductions in mind: convincing Laine that they 
were “just practicing,” Leah turns Laine into her sexual victim. Over the years, Laine 
figures out that her victimization is the result of a trickle-down effect, as Leah is 
herself being sexually abused by a friend of her father’s. Laine eventually cuts Leah 
off and develops her own friendships, but Leah isn’t content to let Laine go quietly, 
torturing her whenever they meet by suggesting that Laine enjoyed their intimate 
moments and therefore prefers girls. This is an intense story, but Laine’s focus on her 
responses to Leah makes it seem as though this were the only thing going on in her 
life over the many years of their relationship, resulting in a limited, claustrophobic, 
and somewhat maudlin sense of Laine’s character rather than a full, sympathetic 
portrait. Worse, the plot points emphasize the unfortunately prevalent ideological 
stereotypes that haunt this sort of problem fiction, namely that questioning one’s 
sexuality is only ever the result of abuse, and the death of the sexually damaged 
girl is a troubling cliché. Laine’s taking some measured responsibility for Leah’s 
death because she couldn’t see past her own fear and pain to understand Leah’s is 
the main lesson readers are supposed to walk away with here; such broad-minded 
forgiveness and the honest assessment of one’s own complicity after abuse between 
peers are certainly lessons worth serious consideration.  KC 
lASer, micHAel Cheater. Dutton, 2008 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-525-47826-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
“Karl Petrofsky has spent most of his eleven years in school trying to hide the 
100s and A+s scrawled across the top of his tests.” Unfortunately, his efforts have 
failed, and he’s firmly ensconced in the “class nerd” position, along with his clutch 
of geeky friends. After he chances to see Blake, the class god, cheating on a test, 
he’s stunned to be invited into Blake’s inner circle, where he finds out that there 
is a Confederacy, an organized group of students who arrange to cheat on tests 
via high-tech methods. Enticed by their arguments and the pleasures of belong-
216 • The BulleTin
ing (and the pleasures of closeness to sexy Cara), Karl agrees to join their group, 
but little does he realize that he’s put himself in the middle of more high-pressure 
factions than he even knew existed. There’s plenty of cunning and craftsmanship 
here: the cheating itself is cleverly engineered (there’s overt contrast, in fact, with 
a sad-sack analog cheater who gets caught early on), the characterizations (ranging 
from the enigmatic Cara to smooth but not insincere Blake to Karl’s straight- 
arrow friend Lizette) are intriguingly complex, and the web of strings being pulled 
behind the scenes is mysteriously suggested and satisfyingly revealed. The ethics 
of Karl’s participation are discussed from both sides, and the Confederacy’s claims 
that 1) everyone does it and 2) the system is inherently unfair anyway will prompt 
plenty of discussion.  DS
lee, tAnitH Indigara: Or, Jet and Otis Conquer the World. Firebird/Penguin, 
2007 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-14-240922-0 $11.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-8
Fourteen-year-old Jet has no interest in being dragged along to Ollywood (the 
movie capital of her world) while her sister pursues her movie-star dreams. Unfor-
tunately, no one asked Jet, and so she and her remarkably lifelike robot dog, Otis, 
find themselves neglected and disgruntled while her parents and sister hobnob 
with the filmmaking elite. An exploratory journey into a mysterious subway sends 
Jet and Otis into a parallel world that is a bizarre conglomeration of four rejected 
fantasy and science-fiction movie pilots. Even though they are surrounded by B-
movie dialogue and trite plot twists, Jet’s dry sarcasm and Otis’ quick wit serve the 
pair well as they inject their own revisions into the movies and find a way back 
home. The ridiculous contrivances of the rejected movies (complete with awkward 
costuming, overblown landscapes, and endless character stereotypes) are hilariously 
accurate, and they make Indigara, the land of reject films, quite memorable. Un-
fortunately, while Jet and Otis are away, the plot bounces between their adventures 
and the destructive actions of their replacement doppelgangers, whose presence is 
underexplained and superfluous in such a trim self-proclaimed novella. In addition, 
Jet’s temporary pique (and Otis’ sturdy contentment) hardly seems equivalent to 
the true desperation supposedly needed to jolt humans into Indigara. All the same, 
those seeking a quick-paced science fiction read will find this quest of a girl and her 
dog trying to get back home an amusing way to spend an afternoon.  AS
levitHAn, dAvid How They Met, and Other Stories. Knopf, 2008 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94886-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84886-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
Every couple has a how-we-met story, and the wonder of two people among the 
six billion on the planet coming together at just the right moment never ceases 
to fascinate. Levithan samples eighteen such meetings (five published previously 
in other collections), playing with everything from kismet to chemistry to the 
deliberate machinations of six-year-olds to bring together new twosomes of boys, 
girls, and boyandgirls, as well as the remembered trysts of dear old couples. The 
author is a master of texture and detail, managing a deft and eloquent exploration 
of feeling through circumstance and event rather than belabored statements of 
personal philosophy and voiceover-type narration. Each richly imagined story will 
January 2008 • 217
tap familiar veins of longing, memory, and anticipation, often at the same time; 
some are moving enough to elicit tears, others lend themselves more to affirm-
ing nods and satisfied sighs. While many of the stories are tinged with nostalgia, 
they are never offputting or condescending, but rather empathetic to the present 
circumstances of younger readers and reassuring that this moment in their lives is 
both important and fleeting. Interestingly, some of the most effective stories are 
those where the process of meeting an other leads to a greater understanding of 
what it means to be one rather than being one of a couple. Levithan is a seasoned 
spelunker in the caves of the middle-class heart; this is a great choice for book 
clubs and GSA reading lists, as well as for those who are home alone on dateless 
but hopeful Friday nights.  KC
mAcleod, douG I’m Being Stalked by a Moonshadow. Front Street, 
2007 200p
ISBN 978-1-59078-501-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-10
Demure and hapless Seth has a lot to worry about these days—his father has gone 
to war with an environmental health officer over trumped-up code violations, his 
younger brother delights in stealing Seth’s potential girlfriends, and his parents don’t 
seem to be having as much sex as they used to. He drools over muscular women, 
and he finally meets Miranda, the girl of his dreams, at the local community center, 
only to find that she is the daughter of the health officer and the ex-girlfriend of 
a jealous thug. However, Seth is a problem-solver, so, armed with a list of things 
to look for in a perfect boyfriend, he sets out to become one, and to help his dad 
become one as well. Seth’s deadpan delivery of sometimes screamingly funny, 
sometimes mildly witty, and sometimes thoughtful way-homer quips, observations, 
and anecdotes is the gas that makes this Australian story go. His interactions with 
a couple who have emigrated from Serbia deserve their own laugh track, as does 
his relationship with his strangely metrosexual little brother and his musclebound 
love talk with his crush (gotta love the feel of callus on callus when holding hands 
with your best girl). The escalating war between Seth’s and Miranda’s fathers is 
comic in its boyish immaturity and the scatological nature of the pranks; the plot 
draws together one eccentric thread after another into a tightly woven climax with 
a gentle resolution, giving the entire package a Hilary McKay sensibility. Readers 
who like quirky situation comedies with funny, oddball narrators will enjoy this 
boy meets girl, boy gets threatened with bodily harm by girl’s father, community 
intervenes, boy gets girl story.  KC 
mAddern, eric, ad. Nail Soup; illus. by Paul Hess. Frances Lincoln, 
2007 [28p]
ISBN 978-1-84507-479-1 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
Maddern retells the familiar old tale of a traveler who begs hospitality from a cot-
tage dweller, promising to prepare her a delicious soup from only a nail and then 
hoodwinking her into providing a collection of savory ingredients. The retelling is 
modeled very closely on the Yolen version a note cites as its source; changes—includ-
ing a final moment and afterword that imply the woman was in on the joke—make 
the players more two comrades in a fancy than a trickster and ungenerous victim, 
an interesting twist. The stylized views in the watercolor art favor scenes of backs 
and hands, but they also emphasize the playful possibilities of the text, making 
218 • The BulleTin
our traveler not an impoverished hobo but a movie-idol gypsy in a shimmering 
patchwork coat; despite textual reference to the hostess as “granny,” she’s an ample 
young matron whose home-decorating touches suggest an artistic soul, and who 
might well be impressed with more than the handsome traveler’s cooking. This isn’t 
a definitive version of the much-adapted tale, but its interesting take could make 
it a useful variant to employ in contrast to others, such as Compestine’s The Real 
Story of Stone Soup (BCCB 4/07).  DS
mAlley, GemmA The Declaration. Bloomsbury, 2007 300p
ISBN 978-1-59990-119-0 $16.95   
R Gr. 7-9
In the year 2140, girls such as Anna, born to two parents on Longevity drugs, are 
considered surplus beings taking up necessary space and resources. Although Anna’s 
parents tried to hide her, she was found as a toddler and brought to a Surplus Hall 
for indoctrination and training to become a servant. Since then, she has taken to 
her lessons well and now instructs others in self-loathing and obeying orders. Peter, 
whose arrival is shocking both because he is a teen (surplus children are usually 
ferreted out much younger) and because he refuses any attempts at brainwashing, 
horrifies Anna further by whispering secrets about her loving parents and the life 
that awaits her outside. Anna’s limited dreams of no beatings and a quiet servitude 
are suddenly replaced with visions of having a family, escaping to the mysterious 
Underground, and experiencing her first romance with the dashing Peter. In this 
dystopic society, however, happiness seems impossible without a price, and before 
Anna can be free, her parents will have to sacrifice themselves to carve out space in 
the world for her to exist. Anna’s clandestine journal entries, interspersed throughout 
the novel, are memorable and emotionally taut, mapping out her torturous journey 
from perfect drone to bewildered but idealistic rebel. Although the adults remain 
largely interchangeable, this treatment too is an effective tool employed by Malley, 
establishing a faceless world in which placid, bored, and vaguely regretful adults 
plod through their hard-earned endless days, in which they now find themselves 
with little to do. Against this backdrop, the risk of true happiness, even if fleeting, 
becomes a heroic quest, and science-fiction fans will find Anna and Peter to be 
quite worthy seekers.  AS
mAnkell, HenninG A Bridge to the Stars; tr. from the Swedish by Laurie 
Thompson. Delacorte, 2007 [176p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90489-6 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73495-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
It’s spring, 1956, in northern Sweden, and eleven-year-old Joel is fixated on a dog 
he’s seen running through the night. He starts making nocturnal outings in hope 
of finding the dog, recording his experiences in a journal titled “The Search for the 
Dog That Was Headed for a Star.” Joel is increasingly distanced from his father, 
who refuses to talk to the boy about his long-gone mother and who seems to be 
dating a waitress from the local bar, so he’s ripe for a companion in rebellion when 
he meets twelve-year-old Tore. Tore, though, has a different intent than Joel, and he 
soon involves the younger boy in harassing a local woman and planning dangerous 
stunts. The translated narrative is cool and distant, with motivations and meaning 
often difficult to tease out, and the deliberate pace further hampers involvement. 
Characters are original and memorable, however, from the woman the boys torment 
January 2008 • 219
(facially disfigured and thus somewhat of an outcast) to the eccentric wanderer who 
befriends Joel; even the somewhat mysterious Tore, whose own questionable words 
are all that describe his life, is believable both in his taste for malice and his panic in 
the face of unintended consequences. Determined readers may find that the allure 
of secret adventures and the intriguing cast retain their interest.  DS
mArrone, AmAndA Uninvited. Simon Pulse, 2007 204p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-3978-8 $8.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Jordan would like to get rid of her ex-boyfriend, but now that he’s a vampire stalking 
her bedroom each night, a repeat of last year’s simple dumping just won’t do it. In 
fact, her resistance to Michael is wearing down after three months of nightly visits 
wherein he alternately begs, cajoles, threatens, and seduces her into letting him into 
her room. She’s certain she’s scared off her potential new boyfriend for good, she 
hates herself for her too-frequent drunken binges (and her mother for never notic-
ing them), and she can tell that soon Michael’s adept plays on her social anxieties 
(he was one of the school gods, while she knows she is even more invisible without 
him) are going to result in her accepting him as her only real option. While she is 
still plotting his destruction, Michael discovers a new way to get to Jordan through 
her vulnerable friend Lisa, who is much more easily swayed. Methodical plans give 
way to a frenzied beach showdown, with Jordan attacking Buffy-style, armed with 
little more than a stake and hope. Readers will be immediately sympathetic to 
Jordan: even when she royally screws up (and she does often), she is so endearing 
in her vulnerability and resiliency that she is easy to forgive. She and her motley 
group of supportive but mostly clueless friends and family are well developed and 
intriguing, each facing their own demons (though none as literally bloodthirsty 
as Michael). Fans of realistic fiction who don’t mind a measure of horror thrown 
into their drama will find this a solid exploration into the psyche of an outsider 
who’s not really seeking insider standing so much as a degree of peace about her 
current status.  AS
mAzer, normA Fox The Missing Girl. HarperTeen, 2008 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-623777-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-623776-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
There are five Herbert sisters, from Beauty, seventeen, who longs to escape, down 
to Autumn, eleven, who longs to be noticed, all of them troubled by the parental 
tension since their father’s injury has left him unable to work and left the family in 
straitened circumstances. What the girls don’t know is that they’re being watched 
by a predator, a nameless man who revels in his encounters with them and luxuri-
ates in contemplating possible interactions. When a family crisis sends Autumn 
storming out of the house on her own, he seizes his chance and takes her prisoner 
in his isolated home, leaving her distraught family searching desperately for their 
missing child. Mazer’s narration shifts between four viewpoints, with those of 
Beauty, Autumn, and Autumn’s predator in third person and that of Fancy, the 
girls’ ebullient, mentally handicapped sister, in first person; the result is rather like 
viewing the proceedings from overhead as the different players move toward and 
away from one another, largely oblivious to the overall pattern. There are elements 
of a classic thriller here, from the evildoer, who is a chillingly vivid yet faceless 
villain, to the inexorable march of events that bring him closer to his victim. The 
220 • The BulleTin
book steers its storytelling carefully, making Autumn’s experience threatening and 
horrible without actually going into rape or serious violence and then neatly dis-
posing of its miscreant (he kills himself); there’s also room for discussion about the 
book’s title, since other Herbert sisters are missing in their own ways as well. Fans 
of Lois Duncan’s novels and other classic tales of high-tension peril will appreciate 
the way this successfully plays on their deepest fears.  DS
mcclementS, GeorGe Night of the Veggie Monster; written and illus. by George 
McClements. Bloomsbury, 2008 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-234-0 $15.85
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59990-061-2 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 5-8 yrs
“Something TerriBle happens every Tuesday night”: the narrator must face off 
against a plateful of peas, resulting in paroxysms of revulsion on his part that are 
the hallmark of his transformation into “the veggie monster.” Acute viewers may 
have a question or two (since he concludes by deciding peas aren’t so bad, does 
that mean he reaches that conclusion every other Tuesday too?), but the hilarity 
of the proceedings will overpower such petty concerns. The narrator’s melodra-
matic torments are hysterically histrionic, and they’re pithily counterpointed by 
his parents’ sardonic commentary (“Time for another fun-filled hour,” says Dad 
as dinner starts), providing humor from a variety of perspectives. Illustrations are 
a creative medley of photographed realia (the elements of the meal, including the 
offending vegetables), cut-out brown paper (the human figures), and simple pastel 
lines and textural elements (adding features to the humans and furniture to the 
rooms), resulting in a spare vigor that nicely supports the textual humor. Just about 
every kid has a culinary kryptonite and many of them with fussy siblings will also 
ruefully recognize the parental exasperation, so this will have a wide audience of 
giggling, understanding eaters.  DS
morGAn, AnnA My Worst Best Sleepover Party; by Anna Morgan and Dr. Rachael 
Turkienicz; illus. by Heather Castles. Second Story, 2007 122p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-897187-20-3 $7.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
With plans for build-your-own-pizza and the telling of scary stories, it seems like 
Rose’s sleepover party will be the best time Rose has ever had. That’s until she’s 
caught in a typical middle-grades political vise when popular pair Hailey and 
Bailey demand that Rose uninvite her best friend, Stacey, to stave off a boycott 
of the party by the duo and their minions. Torn between becoming a pariah and 
rejecting her best friend, Rose must steer her way through a prickly social and 
ethical dilemma. Rose’s narration is credible in its anxious ingenuousness, and the 
story has a deft touch with elements of individual and classroom character (Hailey 
is a creative inventor of games and pastimes, a skill that makes her a particularly 
sought-after companion). It’s also refreshingly honest in its acknowledgments that 
adult involvement can make such a situation worse and that totally satisfying solu-
tions are pretty unlikely. Purposiveness rudely interrupts the flow at several points, 
however, and results in a conclusion that involves Rose didactically reflecting on 
her growth and undercutting the story’s dramatic impact; the black-and-white 
full-page illustrations are stilted and amateurish. Kids will nonetheless relate to 
Rose’s dilemma, and they’ll be relieved to learn that it’s survivable with a little help 
from good friends.  DS
January 2008 • 221
morGAn, nicolA The Highwayman’s Footsteps. Candlewick, 2007 354p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3472-8 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
William de Lacey, age fourteen, can no longer tolerate his family’s accusations of 
cowardice, and he runs away. Desperate for money, he steals a purse full of coins, 
only to find himself, in turn, at the wrong end of a highwayman’s pistol. This is no 
ordinary robber, though, but the love child of Alfred Noyes’ tragic couple of bal-
lad fame, named Bess, of course, after her mother. Bess understandably has some 
issues with King George’s soldiers, having been raised on tales of how they were 
responsible for her mother’s death, and as she and Will join forces, they become 
caught up in the flight of military deserter, Henry Parish (based on a real person) 
and in holding up William’s own father, a corrupt high sheriff who has been fleecing 
the people in his charge. Narrator Will is annoyingly prone to breathless musing: 
“How had she come to choose a robber’s life? What evil must lurk in her heart? . . . 
What corruption of mind had brought her to this?” Moreover, Morgan’s efforts to 
fit young Bess and Will’s story into the overarching plot of “The Highwayman” can 
be embarrassingly forced: “Not till dawn did my father hear what had happened, 
and they say his face grew gray when he heard how Bess, his beautiful Bess, Bess 
the landlord’s black-eyed daughter, had watched for her love in the moonlight and 
died in the darkness there.” Happily, however, there’s enough action and romantic 
drama to sustain the substantial page count, and an afterword graciously includes 
the Noyes poem to augment the readers’ enjoyment of this literary exercise.  EB
nAGdA, Ann wHiteHeAd The Perfect Cat-Sitter; illus. by Stephanie Roth. Hol-
iday House, 2007 104p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2112-1 $15.95   
Ad Gr. 2-4
When grade-schooler Rana and her family must suddenly fly to India right before 
Christmas, her buddy Susan is thrilled to take on the job as pet-sitter for the family’s 
cat and fish. Unfortunately for perfectionist Susan, the job is somewhat trickier 
than she envisions, and it is further complicated by the recurring appearance in 
Rana’s yard of a deer with Christmas lights entangled in his antlers. As she goes 
about her pet-sitting duties, Susan also completes a school project based on Rana’s 
trip and learns to get along with a difficult classmate. Young readers new to chapter 
books will find the writing very accessible, but this isn’t as strong as Nagda’s other 
adventures featuring this same group of kids. The characters’ dialogue is sometimes 
stilted (“I will spend at least an hour a day at your house, keeping the cat company,” 
said Susan. “Otherwise, Tiger could get very lonely”), the classroom scenes seem 
intended to instruct readers more than advance the plot (“‘I thought lions were 
only in Africa,’ said Richard. ‘India has the only lions left in Asia,’ said Susan”), and 
the troubles with the various animals (e.g., Tiger throws up on the carpet, the deer 
gets into the birdseed) are fairly humdrum (though the cat does take a brief spin 
in the dryer at one point). Frequent black-and-white pencil and wash drawings of 
pleasant-looking people and animals add warmth and interest to the rather bland 
story, however, and young readers may well relate to Susan’s struggles with her less-
than-perfect achievements. Just as Susan finally accepts the job she has done, readers 
may also decide that a story that is “pretty good” is “good enough.”  JH
222 • The BulleTin
nolen, Jerdine Pitching In for Eubie; illus. by E. B. Lewis. Amistad/Harper-
Collins, 2007 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-056960-0 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-688-14917-8 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9 yrs
The entire family is thrilled when Eubie gets her college acceptance letter with a full 
academic scholarship. A slight pause interrupts their jubilation when they read the 
part about having to come up with three thousand dollars for living expenses, but 
Papa insists they can do it, because, he says, “dreams are meant to come true.” While 
the whole family quickly figures out what they can do to raise money, younger sister 
Lily feels left out. While she helps by doing her chores without complaining, she 
itches to actually make some money for the cause, finally hitting on a winner when 
she takes care of an elderly woman while the lady’s family is out of town. This is an 
important and unusually frank acknowledgment that a free ride isn’t free, and that 
it’s up to an entire family to make the sacrifices necessary for the success of each 
member. Both story and art make it a little difficult to get a hold of the proceed-
ings, however. The text conveys more message than character, and Lewis’ generally 
luminous and emotionally evocative watercolors falter in their tendency toward 
indistinct faces, further impairing the audience’s involvement with the family. The 
rural setting is likewise indeterminate in terms of era, making it difficult to assess 
whether the patchwork of jobs the family manages to cobble together will indeed 
get them to their dollar mark. Still, Lily’s desire to be a key player in this sweet tale 
of family cooperation may resonate with young audiences, and her story persuasively 
communicates the power of persistence in achieving your goals.  KC
orGill, roxAne Footwork: The Story of Fred and Adele Astaire; illus. by Stéphanie 
Jorisch. Candlewick, 2007 41p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2121-6 $17.99   
R Gr. 3-6
Fred may have become the household name, while sister Adele now takes her encores 
as a five-letter word in the crossword puzzles, but one would have been unlikely to 
predict their destinies from childhood experience. Here Orgill focuses on the youth 
of the sibling hoofers, through the early years in which Adele was the darling and 
younger Fred was considered little more than an acceptable partner, to the fork in 
the road that sent Adele into marriage to a British lord and Fred into a solo career 
in the movies. Readers familiar with Don Brown’s picture-book biographies may 
note a similarity of approach in this somewhat weightier title, from the chatty 
narration to the carefully controlled scrawl of Jorisch’s line and watercolor scenes. 
Though this is definitely a partial life story, the rise, stall, and revived ascent of 
the child vaudeville stars should grab the attention of readers donning their own 
dancing shoes and top hats, and appended suggestions for further reading, listen-
ing, and viewing will guide them to the media that will bring Orgill’s pages to life. 
Children whose interest is focused on terpsichorean matters may find enough fuel 
here to fire their own dreams of living out of a trunk.  EB 
PreSSler, mirJAm Let Sleeping Dogs Lie; tr. from the German by Erik J. 
Macki. Front Street, 2007 207p
ISBN 978-1-932425-84-0 $16.95   
R* Gr. 9 up
It’s 1995 in Germany, and eighteen-year-old Johanna has been changed irrevocably 
by a school trip to Israel for a history project that involved interviewing old alumnae 
January 2008 • 223
of their school. Since then her grandfather has committed suicide (as did his wife 
thirty years previously), and Johanna is struggling with new revelations about her 
family history: the family store was bought cheap in 1938 from oppressed Jews seek-
ing to flee the country, and her grandfather had the opportunity to buy it because 
of his established status in the Nazi party. The story is deliberately paced and the 
exposition is elliptical, realistic in the way that characters rarely bother to explain 
references that eventually become clear to the reader through greater exploration 
and consideration, and the result is a gradual teasing out of Johanna’s familial history 
that keeps pace with our deepening knowledge of the family. Johanna’s quandary is a 
gripping one, and it’s explored with sensitivity but also fairness and sad practicality: 
the narration acknowledges the impossibility of reparation even as it condemns the 
refusal to acknowledge wrongdoing—even though that acknowledgment is only 
a start, not a solution. Characters are clear and rounded, with the book speaking 
skillfully in specific, individual terms; even Johanna’s sexual experience involves a 
personification of the political when she has an encounter with the grandson of 
the woman whose store her grandfather conveniently acquired. Books for young 
people have rarely directly addressed the moral issues surrounding the legacy of 
historical sins; this thoughtful and provocative volume will elicit plenty of discus-
sion about American historical heritage as well as European, and it could therefore 
be an interesting partner to Mildred Taylor’s Logan family saga.  DS
Puttock, Simon Miss Fox; illus. by Holly Swain. Frances Lincoln, 
2007 [28p]
ISBN 978-1-84507-475-3 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R* 5-8 yrs
“I am a WONDERFUL teacher,” Miss Fox tells her new class in the Niceville 
school, and all of the animal kids in her class agree—all, that is, except Lily Lamb, 
“a headstrong girl who always asked annoying questions and never EVER would 
be told what to do.” As the rest of the class enjoys Miss Fox’s sweet treats and 
exciting tales of “noble foxes doing wonderful things,” promising to follow her 
anywhere, Lily remains adamant: “I am a free spirit and I WILL NOT BE LED!” 
Lily’s intransigence proves the class’ saving, however, when Miss Fox reveals her 
true carnivorous colors, but will that really be the end of Miss Fox? Witty turns of 
phrase take an already interesting plot into a glorious story of waywardness justi-
fied. Miss Fox’s unctuous insistence will make viewers as suspicious as Lily right 
from the start, and they’ll adore the notion that the misbehaving student is the 
hero over the villainous teacher (it’s also a sly touch that it’s the sheep who won’t 
follow). The watercolor and colored pencil illustrations carefully control the palette, 
contrasting pale colors with intense ones and verdant greens with Miss Fox’s russet 
glory. Trim drafting with stylized graphic touches makes a pleasant Niceville, and 
Miss Fox’s appearance is cunningly balanced between smooth professionalism and 
a tendency toward discomfitingly pointy components that suggest . . . something 
other than kindly intentions. This would be a hilarious readaloud from a daring 
and self-assured sub; you could also use it as a follow-your-own-drummer reminder 
when kids are clamoring about sticking together, but be prepared for the inevitable 
sheepish rebellion.  DS
224 • The BulleTin
reeve, PHiliP Starcross: A Stirring Adventure of Spies, Time Travel and Curious 
Hats; illus. by David Wyatt. Bloomsbury, 2007 370p
ISBN 978-1-59990-121-3 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-8
Hardly a year has gone by since Arthur Mumby, his prissy sister Myrtle, and inter-
galactic adventurer Jack Havock and his crew defeated a nefarious megalomaniac, 
and now—wouldn’t you know it—the universe is in need of saving once again. Sir 
Launcelot Sprigg returns as villain this time around, and he’s mustered the forces of 
mind-altering Moobs (who prefer to manifest themselves as innocent top hats) to 
compel his victims to do his bidding. The righteous defenders of Reeve’s alternative 
British Empire are bound to prevail, though, with Myrtle displaying an aptitude 
for running the alchemical engine of the starship, the Mumby siblings’ millions-
year-old mother back in domestic command, and the services of the Threls and 
their prodigious knitting skills (don’t ask—it actually makes perfect sense within the 
story) to bring the baddies to bay. Readers who delighted in the clever send-up of 
British imperialism in the debut adventure Larklight (BCCB 2/07) will be equally 
pleased with this sequel, wherein Reeve manages to make the most outlandish 
creatures and plot points conform to loopy but unassailable internal logic. With 
Myrtle showing unexpected mettle, and myriad cosmic nooks and crannies yet to 
explore, fans will be primed for another installment.  EB 
roddA, emily The Key to Rondo. Scholastic, 2008 [342p]
ISBN 978-0-545-03535-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-9
It’s sensible Leo who inherits the intricately painted music box, but on the day his 
impetuous (and least favorite) second cousin Mimi comes to visit and breaks the 
rules governing the Langlander family heirloom, it’s she who first gives a logical 
explanation of the strange events taking place in his room: “The music unlocks 
the gate of the music box world. Four turns are enough to make the gates swing 
open—wide enough to let things like the butterflies out. Five or six turns open it 
enough for—for anything.” “Anything” turns out to be the tyrannical Blue Queen, 
who kidnaps Mimi’s beloved dog and forces the two cousins to follow her back into 
Rondo, the fantastical world decorating the sides of the music box. It turns out that 
Leo and Mimi aren’t the first of their family to visit Rondo, and while cautious Leo 
gets a crack at adventure and overlooked Mimi gets a shot at distinction, they both 
get a chance to right some family wrongs and prove that the Langlanders really 
are the stuff of legends. Rodda fills the cousins’ quest with image-rich prose and 
compelling action; each chapter reveals a bit more about the history of Rondo, 
allowing attentive readers to hazard guesses along the way. Leo and Mimi are just 
two of a crew of likable characters, some of whom are possessed of intriguingly 
ambiguous motives, and the world of Rondo is an engagingly eclectic mix of fairy-
tale figures and memorable new wonders, including hidey-holes, woodland Flitters, 
human-tiger Terlamaines, and impish gingerbread vermin known as “dots.” This 
warm fantasy presents a fresh score of thwarting evil, strengthening family ties, 
and achieving personal growth, and questors who have recently returned from the 
wardrobe or Gardner’s Into the Woods (BCCB 10/07) will be eager to turn the key 
and slip into the music box.  KB
January 2008 • 225
roHmAnn, eric A Kitten Tale; written and illus. by Eric Rohmann. Knopf, 
2008 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-517-70916-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-517-70915-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 3-5 yrs
Three kittens who have never seen snow before await its winter arrival with trepi-
dation; it’s cold, it’s wet, and it covers everything, so what’s to love about it? A 
fourth kitten, more adventurous, “can’t wait,” and when the snow finally comes, 
his obvious delight in it convinces the other three to venture out and discover that 
snow is actually pretty cool stuff. While cat owners can attest to the believability 
of the trio’s aversion to snow, and winter-dreading adults may heartily relate to it 
as well, snow-loving preschoolers may wonder why the kittens are worried about 
something so wonderful. It’s also not clear where they’ve gotten their information 
about a season they’ve never experienced; the fourth kitten’s concluding “I can’t 
wait” is a bit puzzling as well, since it’s in response to the other three’s declaration 
that they’ll “be right out,” but it captions an illustration in which all four kittens are 
happily scampering in the snow together. Rohmann’s crisp and cheerful illustrations, 
monotype prints, offer elegantly limned, dappled and striped kittens accented with 
chunky black outlines and subtly shaded backgrounds, and the attractive capering 
cats will probably override any textual difficulties readers and listeners might have. 
The large size, clean layout, and boldness of the illustrations also make this a good 
choice for a storytime selection. Despite the book’s logical glitches, little ones who 
just “can’t wait” for winter’s snows and cat-loving kiddos may enjoy spending some 
time with this kitten quartet.  JH
rovetcH, GerdA There Was a Man Who Loved a Rat and Other Vile Little Poems; 
illus. by Lissa Rovetch. Philomel, 2008 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25014-9 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
Despite the subtitle, these fourteen poems aren’t particularly vile; what they are, and 
so much the better, is matter-of-factly odd and startling in the tradition of Edward 
Lear. Like Lear’s limericks, these tetrameter quatrains tend to start with “There was 
a man . . . ” (“There was a man who loved a prune./ He cherished it and named it 
June . . .”) and end in disaster (“. . . until, one fateful autumn night,/ his girlfriend 
ate it in one bite”). Lissa Rovetch illustrates her mother’s verses in, according to 
a note, ink on paper plates; digital touches of color, bold circular framing, and 
bright backgrounds ensure the visuals aren’t chromatically dry, and stylistically they 
blend their Learian heritage with a slyness and tendency toward pop-eyed figures 
reminiscent of Victoria Chess’ work. This witty collection will have multiple, if not 
multifarious, uses as: an offbeat readaloud, a mordant addition to curricula, or just 
a gratifying successor to X. J. Kennedy’s Brats (BCCB 7/86).  DS
SAncHez, Alex The God Box. Simon, 2007 248p
ISBN 978-1-4169-0899-9 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Paul hoped that his senior year would be calm, successful, and full of God and 
friends. Instead, things are almost immediately thrown off track with the arrival 
of Manuel, a gay Christian whom Paul finds both irresistible and abhorrent. All 
226 • The BulleTin
of Paul’s hidden sexual feelings about boys come unbidden to the surface, sending 
him down a path to self-discovery that includes a meeting with an ex-gay organiza-
tion, a painful breakup with his best friend and girlfriend (who suspected this for 
years), and, ultimately, a first stab at true love with a boy who makes him feel alive 
and, surprisingly, closer to God than ever. Paul’s torturous journey evokes strong 
sympathy: he is clearly a young man whose fear of disappointing others and losing 
his faith have driven him away from his own heart for years. Unfortunately, Manuel 
is little more than an idealized martyr, available to quote the perfect scriptures, 
endlessly patient in his gentle pursuit of Paul, and even brave and forgiving in the 
face of a cruel and life-threatening beating. In addition, the strong focus on religious 
exploration and discussion overshadows all, resulting in a powerful message book 
that will likely comfort gay teens struggling with religion but may disappoint readers 
who are simply seeking a love story. However, Sanchez fans may still see enough of 
his humor and warmth to balance out the goal-oriented writing.  AS
SedGwick, mArcuS My Swordhand Is Singing. Lamb, 2007 205p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94689-9 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84689-2 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-12
Peter has had a difficult life with his darkly mysterious, alcoholic father, Tomas. 
The seventeenth-century Eastern European countryside, where they eke out an 
existence, is equally harsh and unforgiving, and Peter’s life consists of endless days of 
trying to chop enough wood to survive and struggling to keep his mercurial father 
alive and uninterested in beating him. Cruelties unknown even to Peter, however, 
are unleashed on the small village nearby when the previously dead come back, 
unnaturally powerful and seeking victims. Suddenly, Tomas’ secret past becomes 
urgently important, as his ownership of the perfect weapon to combat them is 
desperately challenged by other ancestors who grow frustrated with his refusal to 
use it, and the undead themselves, who seek to destroy it. Although Tomas’ heroic 
actions cost him his life, Peter is finally left with answers, the peace of knowing 
that his father loved him, and an innate gift he will now use to quell evil and unrest 
outside of his comforting but constricting small village. Although the characters 
are all well developed, it is the setting itself that emerges as strikingly memorable: 
the atmospheric creepiness is established as much in the endless woods, spare and 
dark-cornered graveyard, and the small island futilely built by Tomas to protect 
them as it is in the lurching menace of the bloodsucking, rotting undead or the 
superstitious desperation of the townspeople. An author’s note explains Sedgwick’s 
compilation of details from many early vampire legends as well as the places where 
he created elements to form this haunting story. The trim size and effectively taut 
pacing make an ideal combination for reluctant readers who don’t mind a bit of 
gore, and the topic will easily find a home with horror and supernatural fans as 
well.  AS
SHeFF, nic Tweak: Growing Up on Methamphetamines. Seo/Atheneum, 
2008 325p
ISBN 978-1-4169-1362-7 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 10 up
At the opening of this memoir, Nic has been sober for eighteen months, and he’s 
convinced that he can handle using drugs casually. He’s wrong: he spirals into a 
meth and heroin-centered world of dealing, degradation, and using of drugs and 
people. When he breaks free after a month to detox with his twelve-step sponsor 
January 2008 • 227
in Los Angeles, he then gets sucked back into a relationship with old flame Zelda, 
a troubled actress of peripheral Hollywood fame who’s almost a decade and a half 
older than Nic, who’s barely past twenty. The relationship is marked by their con-
stant drug use, leading Nic to criminal activity that results in his heading again 
to rehab, only now as an alternative to a jail stint, but this time also looks like it’s 
finally addressing some of his broader issues. Sheff’s account of his deterioration 
and obsession is rich in absorbing, appalling detail; his narration strongly conveys 
the self-created pitfalls and delusions of the addict, using or not, that make recovery 
a monumental task. For all its careful observation, however, the account is oddly 
detached, with feelings described rather than conveyed, and there’s a fascination 
with the film industry evinced in the constant credit-dropping—both tenden-
cies, interestingly, pointed out by Nic’s colleagues in rehab. There’s also a paucity 
of authorial inflection and shaping, so there’s not much perspective, pacing, or 
trajectory to enhance the report. It’s nonetheless a raw and sad account, vivid in 
its depiction of the pleasures and tunnel vision of addiction and the challenges 
of sobriety. Interestingly, Sheff’s journalist father is telling the same story from 
the parental angle in a title released this season, so readers may well find the most 
reward in comparing viewpoints.  DS
SmitH, rolAnd Elephant Run. Hyperion, 2007 318p
ISBN 978-1-4231-0402-5 $15.99   
R Gr. 5-9
Nick Freestone’s mother and stepfather agree that the German blitz has made Lon-
don too dangerous a place for their son, so they send him off to his father’s lumber 
plantation in Burma. Nick’s arrival unfortunately coincides with the Japanese oc-
cupation of that country, and within days Jackson Freestone and several of his best 
workers are sent on a forced march to an internment camp, a pair of employees is 
executed, and Nick is placed under house arrest. Nick’s treatment and his father’s 
very survival are dependent on the vagaries of Japanese commander assignments, 
shifting political alliances within the local Burmese community, and most of all, 
a long-standing friendship between Hilltop—a longtime employee of the planta-
tion, now turned monk—and Japanese sergeant Sonji, who becomes complicit in 
a plot to rescue the elder Freestone from his camp and spirit the Freestones and 
Hilltop’s great-grandchildren out of the country. The Burmese setting and the role 
of elephants in the lumbering industry are exceptionally well integrated into this 
wartime adventure tale, and indeed the climax revolves around a dangerous bull 
elephant that quite inadvertently turns out to be the Freestones’ savior. Suggest this 
title to fans of Graham Salisbury’s World War II novels.  EB
SonnenBlick, JordAn Zen and the Art of Faking It. Scholastic, 2007 264p
ISBN 978-0-439-83707-1 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
After his father’s imprisonment for all sorts of fraud forces San and his mom to 
move to a new town and start over, San decides to follow his dad’s meretricious lead 
and reinvent himself. Casting about for options, he lands on Zen master, a choice 
made convenient by his being the only Asian in his school, and his having studied 
enough Buddhism in his old school to be able to shine in his new social studies 
class. His crush, a girl named Woody who is trying desperately to be countercul-
tural in her white-bread Pennsylvania high school, is suitably impressed, but their 
relationship is complicated by the fact that Zen masters are not supposed to have 
earthly attachments and desires. This light-hearted situation comedy is peppered 
228 • The BulleTin
with genuine Zen insight despite the fact that the plastic San completely misses the 
main point of his faith—that truth should be at the center of all things—as well 
as missing the fact that he is emulating the exact traits that he loathes in his father. 
Sonnenblick author of (Drums, Girls and Dangerous Pie, BCCB 11/05; Notes from 
the Midnight Driver, BCCB 1/07) continues to hone the comedic narrative voice 
of a smart guy at the end of his tether becoming more and more desperate. In San’s 
case, the desperation seems a bit contrived, as his crime is relatively minor—after 
all, who in high school isn’t trying on new identities and shedding old ones?—and 
the bigger deal, socially speaking, of having a father in prison, is presented as no 
big deal at all; this, rather than his precarious persona, is rather incredibly glossed 
over when all of the dirty laundry is aired. The humor and the romantic comedy 
will carry most readers past the less credible bits, however, and more than one 
reader will likely become interested in finding out more about Zen and the art of 
whatever. KC 
tAn, SHAun, illus. The Arrival; illus. by Shaun Tan. Levine/Scholastic, 
2007 128p
ISBN 978-0-439-89529-3 $19.99   
R* Gr. 6 up
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 201, for review.
vAuPel, roBin Rules of the Universe by Austin W. Hale. Holiday House, 
2007 265p
ISBN 978-0-8234-1811-4 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-7
It’s understandable that thirteen-year-old Austin has been throwing himself into 
his science experiments in an attempt to avoid facing the world: he is hiding from 
the looming deaths of both his adored grandfather and his beloved dog. A curious 
gift from his grandfather, meant to be the study of a new series of experiments, 
shakes up Austin’s life in unimaginable ways, since the mysterious thing gives him 
the power to alter the universe around him. Though at first small effects such as 
fish evolving overnight or plants with wild growth spurts lead Austin to believe 
he can manage the object’s actions, he quickly realizes he is in way over his head 
when his dog becomes a puppy, his friends are transformed into doddering old 
men, and his sister’s teen angst gives way to childish enthusiasm as she loses three 
years. Although he should be much more wary of this powerful new ability and 
the havoc he is wreaking, he cannot see past his obsession with saving his grandfa-
ther, even against the old man’s express wishes. The captivating blend of scientific 
research and magic is effectively balanced against the stark realism of a boy facing 
his first significant losses; the overall tone is one of cautious optimism, both about 
the potential positive impacts of this magical object and Austin’s own ability to 
recover. The combination of genres is a quirky one, but as several humorous and 
thoughtful passages would be ideal booktalking selections, there should be little 
trouble in conjuring an audience.  AS
weAtHerFord, cArole BoSton I, Matthew Henson: Polar Explorer; illus. by Eric 
Velasquez. Walker, 2008 [32p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9689-9 $17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9688-2 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Having received the photobiography treatment in Johnson’s Onward (BCCB 5/06), 
January 2008 • 229
Matthew Henson is here the subject and narrator of a lyrical picture-book account of 
his bold and unconventional life as an African-American explorer alongside Robert 
Peary. Weatherford phrases each event in Henson’s life as a refusal to be limited: “I 
did not start as cabin boy . . . to be shunned by white crews. . . . I did not sail to 
the tropics just to launder shirts and cook meals.” The phraseology is occasionally 
a little ambiguous, but the intent—both Weatherford’s and Henson’s—is clear 
from the start, and it’s a dramatic presentation of a determined man who achieved 
much in the face of great odds. Pastel illustrations are somewhat stiff, especially 
in the faces, but there’s a dramatic sweep in their full-spread images of the frosty 
Arctic that will give youngsters a shivery idea of the physical demand of Henson’s 
achievement. The near-poetic flow and the explorer focus make this a natural for 
fans of Robert Burleigh’s Black Whiteness (BCCB 2/98) and Tiger of the Snows 
(BCCB 6/06); it would also make for an effective readaloud to fire up youngsters’ 
adventurous imaginations. A few more details about Henson’s life appear in an 
appended author’s note; no sources are cited.  DS
weiGelt, udo Super Guinea Pig to the Rescue; illus. by Nina Spranger. Walker, 
2007 26p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9706-3 $17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-9705-6 $16.95    
R 4-8 yrs
“The Cohen family had four pets: a yellow canary, an old hound dog, a plump 
goldfish, and a little guinea pig.” They’re a happy quartet, fond of watching televi-
sion, especially the guinea pig, who adores Super Guinea Pig to the Rescue. Miffed 
at the others’ teasing, the guinea pig claims that Super Guinea Pig is his best friend, 
soon to arrive; he then kits himself out as Super Guinea Pig, ready to appear as his 
idol, but when he plummets into the goldfish’s tank, it’s not his TV friend but his 
real friends who save him. The lesson may be predictable, but the journey in this 
German import is divertingly odd and humorous, and the emotions and behavior 
are recognizably true to life (“You’re just jealous!” yells the piqued guinea pig to 
his snickering friends). Blotchy, fresco-like textures counterbalance orderly patterns 
and fields of white space in the acrylic and watercolor art, but it’s animal figures 
that really bring the comedy: with a friendly homemade lumpiness to their bodies 
and huge, peering eyes, they’re vivid characters, and the rawboned dog and pouting 
guinea pig have a splendidly comedic charisma. Since there won’t be many kids 
who can resist the attraction of a wannabe flying guinea pig, this will have broad 
appeal, while fans of Wonder Pets! will feel right at home.  DS
wilSon, n. d. 100 Cupboards. Random House, 2007 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93881-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83881-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Henry York isn’t taking his parents’ kidnapping too badly at all; there’s a lot to dis-
tract him at the home of his aunt Dotty and uncle Frank, particularly after Henry 
discovers that beneath the plaster on his bedroom wall is an array of small doors 
that lead into alternative worlds. Some, like the sunny yellow post office, appear 
to be benign, but others house malignant forces that try to draw Henry and his 
equally curious cousin Henrietta into them. Moreover, the system proves to be 
connected to a large cupboard in a downstairs bedroom. As the cupboards steadily 
reveal their secrets to the investigating adolescents, Henry also learns a few family 
230 • The BulleTin
secrets as well: neither his parents nor Uncle Frank are who the boy had been led 
to believe. Though the pacing lags at times, there’s an appealing blend of genuine 
creepiness and kindly domesticity here, and Henry becomes a stronger and more 
resourceful kid as he tests his mettle against the creatures in the cupboards. Much 
of Wilson’s effort is obviously directed at setting the stage for a sequel: Henry has 
freed a formidable witch, and now the “faeren” have decreed that “he be hampered, 
hindered, detained, damaged, or destroyed.” With Henry’s life on the line and so 
many cupboard doors yet to open, readers can reasonably hope for more adventure 
in a subsequent title.  EB
woodSon, JAcqueline After Tupac and D Foster. Putnam, 2008 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24654-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
The unnamed narrator of this coming-of-age tale is twelve years old and safely 
ensconced in her Queens neighborhood when a new girl shows up and makes the 
narrator and her best friend, Neeka, see things in a new light. Calling herself D 
Foster because she has grown up in foster care, the new girl comes to represent for 
the other two some part of themselves that they’ve never quite understood—the 
part that wants to wander, the part that feels like there is a world out there beyond 
their block that might also be a home. The three girls connect through double 
dutch, hanging out, and Tupac Shakur, with whom D identifies at a deep level. 
Because of D and Tupac, the girls begin to wonder what their Big Purpose is, and 
Shakur becomes a sort of beacon around which the entire neighborhood, mothers 
included, takes soundings with regard to their future. D floats in and out of their 
lives—lives that are already full of family highs and lows, like Neeka’s brother’s 
scholarship to Georgetown, the narrator’s absent father, and Neeka’s other brother’s 
incarceration—yet both girls feel as though D fills in their gaps while preserving her 
own secrets. Like Woodson’s most recent Feathers (BCCB 4/07), this is light on plot 
points and heavy on a kind of self-reflection tinged with melancholy; this narrator 
and the friends and folks in her neighborhood, however, are much more grounded 
and realistic in both context and language. The narrator’s thoughts on D’s place in 
her life—part best friend, part enigma—offer an insightful reminder of the way 
we find bits of ourselves in others, and the way our identities are a tapestry of the 
people and places we love, even if we don’t entirely understand them.  KC
zuckermAn, lindA A Taste for Rabbit. Levine/Scholastic, 2007 310p
ISBN 978-0-439-86977-5 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-8
Winter is desperately harsh in this world where several species of animal have de-
veloped elaborate humanoid civilizations, and the instinct for survival pushes many 
of the creatures away from their civilized societies and back to their predator roots. 
The foxes are especially challenged when rabbits, long hidden in a protective war-
ren where they’ve built their own city, are suddenly offering up their own citizens 
as meat. Although eating other talking creatures is not only considered unethical 
but also illegal, Harry, a fox who is just scraping by, and Quentin and Zack, two 
rabbits who leave their homes seeking adventure but who will soon settle for sur-
vival, all discover a horrifying profit-driven agreement arranged by two nefarious 
rabbits who provide their dead neighbors in exchange for cash. In their quest to 
bring down the guilty parties, they discover new cores of strength, daring, and 
sympathy for others that will leave them better for the danger, if they live through 
January 2008 • 231
it. Zuckerman ably balances the clear moral message with high adventure, a rapid 
pace, and intriguing side characters (Elton, a badger of few words, is particularly 
memorable for his dry wit). In addition, the format of alternating focus between 
Harry and the rabbits, whose paths grow closer to converging with each chapter, 
effectively heightens the tension. In this allegorical examination of the primitivism 
of society where fear trumps knowledge and where self-interest seems to be easily 
winning over altruism, heroes are desperately needed, even flawed ones; into this 
void come protagonists who are haunted by their own demons and anxious about 
their own abilities, but who are also fiercely determined to right the wrongs of 
others. Fantasy readers (particularly Redwall and Watership Down fans) will easily 
identify with these imperfect but well-intentioned saviors, and they will cheer their 
valiant efforts to change their world.  AS
232 • The BulleTin
BuLLetIn BLue rIBBons 2007
Each year the Blue Ribbons process is familiar yet surprising. This year we struggled 
with the series issue—what to do with the Harry Potters or Hungry Cities, wherein 
the final volume concluded a remarkable literary achievement without necessarily 
being in the top literary rank independently—and decided that in future we would 
attempt to address that situation with a culminating series review when we felt 
the overall achievement warranted. Then we turned our gaze to our sparse field of 
nonfiction and decided that we’d rather sacrifice list length than standards. What 
is strong this year are visuals: not only does the fiction list contain three graphic 
novels, but also nonfiction is dominated by graphic and picture-book narratives. 
So there’s good news on the state of illustration—let’s hope that the words take 
up the challenge.
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
FICTION:
Alexie, Sherman. The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian; illus. by Ellen 
Forney. Little. Gr. 7-10 (October)
Bang-Campbell, Monika. Little Rat Makes Music; illus. by Molly Bang. Harcourt. 
Gr. 2-3 (September)
Clement-Moore, Rosemary. Prom Dates from Hell. Delacorte. Gr. 7-10 (July/Au-
gust)
Hest, Amy. Remembering Mrs. Rossi; illus. by Heather Maione. Candlewick. Gr. 
2-4 (March) 
Leavitt, Martine. Keturah and Lord Death. Front Street, 2006. Gr. 7-9 (March)
Peet, Mal. Tamar: A Novel of Espionage, Passion, and Betrayal. Candlewick. Gr. 
9-12 (May)
Sfar, Joann. The Professor’s Daughter; tr. by Alexis Siegel; illus. by Emmanuel Guibert. 
First Second/Roaring Brook. Gr. 7-12 (July/August)
Stewart, Trenton Lee. The Mysterious Benedict Society; illus. by Carson Ellis. Tin-
gley/Little. Gr. 6-9 (May)
Tan, Shaun. The Arrival; illus. by Shaun Tan. Levine/Scholastic. Gr. 6 up (Janu-
ary 2008)
Varon, Sara. Robot Dreams; illus. by Sara Varon. First Second/Roaring Brook. Gr. 
3-8 (November) 
January 2008 • 233
NONFICTION:
Debon, Nicolas. The Strongest Man in the World: Louis Cyr; written and illus. by 
Nicolas Debon and with photographs. Groundwood/House of Anansi. Gr. 
3-6 (May)
Levine, Ellen. Henry’s Freedom Box; illus. by Kadir Nelson. Scholastic. 6-9 yrs 
(April)
Lutes, Jason. Houdini the Handcuff King; illus. by Nick Bertozzi. Hyperion. Gr. 
4-8 (June)
Schlitz, Laura Amy. Good Masters! Sweet Ladies!: Voices from a Medieval Village; illus. 
by Robert Byrd. Candlewick. Gr. 6-9 (September)
Sís, Peter. The Wall: Growing Up behind the Iron Curtain; written and illus. by Peter 
Sís. Foster/Farrar. Gr. 5-10 (October) 
PICTURE BOOKS:
Boelts, Maribeth. Those Shoes; illus. by Noah Z. Jones. Candlewick. 5-9 yrs (De-
cember)
Broach, Elise. When Dinosaurs Came with Everything; illus. by David Small. Ath-
eneum. 6-9 yrs (October)
Gravett, Emily. Orange Pear Apple Bear; written and illus. by Emily Gravett. Simon. 
3-6 yrs (June)
Issa, Kobayashi. Today and Today; comp. and illus. by G. Brian Karas. Scholastic. 
Gr. 3-6 (May)
Perkins, Lynne Rae. Pictures from Our Vacation; written and illus. by Lynne Rae 
Perkins. Greenwillow. Gr. 2-5 (July/August) 
Pinkwater, Daniel. Bad Bears Go Visiting: An Irving & Muktuk Story; illus. by Jill 
Pinkwater. Houghton. Gr. 2-4 (June)
Townsend, Michael. Billy Tartle in Say Cheese!; written and illus. by Michael 
Townsend. Knopf. Gr. 2-4 (September)
Van Fleet, Matthew. Dog; illus. with photographs by Brian Stanton. Wiseman/Si-
mon. 2-5 yrs (February)
Watt, Mélanie. Scaredy Squirrel Makes a Friend; written and illus. by Mélanie Watt. 
Kids Can. Gr. 2-4 (June)
234  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Benedict; Knowles
Actors and acting–fiction: Fredericks
Adventure: Jonell; Morgan, n.; 
reeve; Smith
African Americans: Weatherford
African Americans–fiction: Chold-
enko; Woodson
African Americans–stories: nolen
Animals: Holmes
Animals–fiction: King; Zuckerman
Animals–stories: Becker; Helakoski; 
Puttock; Weigelt
Art: downard; Fisher; tan
Art and artists: Holmes
BiogrAPHieS: giblin; orgill; 
Sheff; Weatherford
Biology: davies
Brothers and sisters: orgill
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Crog-
gon; reeve
Bullies–fiction: Choldenko; Mankell
Cats–fiction: nagda
Cats–stories: rohmann
Caves–fiction: Ferris
Cheating–fiction: Laser
Christmas: Ada
Cousins–fiction: rodda
Crime and criminals–fiction: Bell; 
ellis; Mazer; Morgan, n.
Cuba–fiction: Cárdenas
Current events: Bell; ellis
dancers and dance: orgill
death–fiction: Knowles; vaupel
dragons–stories: Knapman
drug abuse: Sheff
dystopias–fiction: Malley
elephants–fiction: Smith
Ethics and values: Benedict; 
donofrio; ellis; Helakoski; Laser; 
Malley; Morgan, A.; Pressler; 
Zuckerman
explorers and exploring: Weather-
ford
FABLeS: downard
Faith–fiction: Sanchez
Families–fiction: Choldenko; Free-
man; MacLeod; Pressler; rodda; 
Woodson
Families–stories: nolen
FAntASy: Croggon; Jonell; King; 
Lee; reeve; rodda; vaupel; Wil-
son; Zuckerman
Fathers–fiction: Mankell; Sedgwick; 
Sonnenblick
FoLKtALeS And FAiry tALeS: 
Maddern
Food and eating–fiction: Brodsky; 
Kenah; Maddern; McClements
Friends–fiction: Brodsky; donofrio; 
Fredericks; gallagher; Laser; 
Mankell; Marrone; Morgan, A.; 
nagda; Woodson
Friends–stories: Becker; Weigelt
gardens–stories: Fisher
gays and lesbians–fiction: Levithan; 
Sanchez
gays and lesbians–stories: Brannen
germany–fiction: Pressler
gHoSt StorieS: del negro
grAPHiC noveLS: tan
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
January 2008  •  235
Health: davies
HiStoriCAL FiCtion: Ferris; 
Morgan, n.
History, European: Holmes
History, U.S.: giblin
Holocaust, the–fiction: Pressler
Houses–fiction: Wilson
HuMor: downard; Freeman; 
Helakoski; King; Knapman; Lee; 
MacLeod; McClements; Puttock; 
rovetch; Weigelt
identity–fiction: gallagher; Son-
nenblick
immigration–fiction: tan
Jealousy–stories: Brannen
Kidnapping–fiction: Mazer
Language arts: rovetch
Latinos: Ada
Lies–fiction: Sonnenblick
Literature, English: Morgan, n.
Love StorieS: Levithan
Magic–fiction: Jonell; vaupel
Money–stories: nolen
Movies–fiction: Lee
Music: Ada
Parties–fiction: Morgan, A.
Poetry: rovetch
Prostitution–fiction: Bell
racism–fiction: Benedict
rats–fiction: Jonell
Reading aloud: del negro; Free-
man; Jonell; rovetch; Weather-
ford
Reading, beginning: Kenah
Reading, easy: Morgan, A.; nagda
Reading, reluctant: davies; 
rovetch; Sedgwick
relationships–fiction: Brodsky; 
gallagher; MacLeod; Marrone; 
Sanchez
revolutionary War: giblin
roMAnCe: Morgan, n.
SCAry StorieS: del negro
School–fiction: Choldenko; dono-
frio; Laser; Morgan, A.
School–stories: Knapman; Puttock
SCienCe FiCtion: Malley
Secrets–fiction: Choldenko; Wilson
Sex and sexuality–fiction: Knowles
SHort StorieS: del negro; 
Levithan
Sisters–fiction: Mazer
Slavery–fiction: Cárdenas; Ferris
Snow–stories: rohmann
SongBooKS: Ada
South America–fiction: ellis
Storytime: Becker; Maddern; 
rohmann; Weigelt
SuPernAturAL StorieS: del 
negro; Sedgwick
teachers–stories: Puttock
tricksters–stories: Maddern
twins–fiction: Freeman
underground railroad–fiction: Ferris
vampires–fiction: Marrone; Sedg-
wick
visitors–stories: Knapman
voyages and travel–fiction: rodda
Weddings–stories: Brannen
Women’s studies: Bell
WordLeSS BooKS: tan
World cultures: ellis
World War ii–fiction: Smith
