H
I LLINI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
ibrary and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
4*n 
0,
6 
#
"An outstanding contribution to
the growing number of books that introduce
American readers to other cultures."*
s 1990 nominee for the
-
has selected 20 of his
gual edition, each page
tylized animals by Japan's
"Mado, the foremost contemporary poet writing for children in Japan, offers verses
that are delicate, thoughtful and quiet -
small gems that reflect the poet's intense
affinity for nature....Anno' artwork..invites the reader to focus on the words them-
selves."-*Publishers Weekly
"Artfully written and gracefully staged."-Booklist
$16.95 SBE0-689-50574-4/AI ages
SBE indcaes a rinforced hardcovr edin
SMARGARET K. MCILDERRY BOOKS
An irint of the Macmillan Children's Book Group
866 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10022
-
I- I-·;I* -
I;
* :
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
March 1993
Vol. 46 No. 7
A LOOK INSIDE
203 THE BIG PICTURE
Living in Secret, written by Cristina Salat
204 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
208
208
210
212
220
222
231
232
Reviewed titles include:
* The Boggart by Susan Cooper
* A Bone from a Dry Sea by Peter Dickinson
* Amzat and His Brothers by Paula Fox
* Many Thousand Gone by Virginia Hamilton;
illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon
* Low Tide by William Mayne
* Malcolm X: By Any Means Necessary by Walter Dean Myers
CHILDREN'S BOOK AwARDS 1993
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, U. of Illinois. at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Assistant Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Dept. of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, II
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois, and additional mailing offices
© 1993 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Fredericka Ribes, from jacket art of Living in Secret © 1993 by Fredericka
Ribes and used by permission of Bantam Books.
MARCH 1993 
* 203
THE BIG PICTURE
Living in Secret
by Cristina Salat
The "problem novel" is a genre in disrepute these days; the term summons up
images of lurid storylines, car crashes, and excessive amounts of info-preaching by
the author, often in the guise of a teacher, a twelve-step sponsor, or a pamphlet the
characters happen to find lying around in the cafeteria. Although usually dis-
missed by reviewers as "didactic," these books remain popular with young adoles-
cents, who may bear with the message for the sake of the melodrama.
"In the middle of the night my mother comes to steal me away," begins
Cristina Salat's Living in Secret, and that's plenty of drama right there; heck, it's
the whole booktalk. Amelia's mother, with her daughter's complicity, is taking
Amelia away from her father to live in San Francisco with Mom and her lover
Janey-Mom's lesbianism is the reason she lost custody of Amelia in the divorce.
The "kidnapping" is tense and complicated. Janey and Amelia, in wigs and with
new names, will fly from New York to San Francisco and settle in while Mom
waits and berates her ex-husband for letting Amelia "run away"; later she will quit
her job on the pretext of looking for Amelia and join her and Janey in a new life.
Amelia, eleven but pretending to be twelve, finds herself in a situation
hemmed with secrets. She has to change her name to Julie, she frosts her hair, she
can't go to school because of the required paperwork (a tutor is found), Janey
insists she keep her whole past a secret from her new best friend Elizabeth, who is
black and at first suspects that "Julie" is secretive because she's prejudiced. When
Mom arrives, Amelia has to pretend that her mother and her mother's lover are
sisters. While writ in extremis, these evoke the more ordinary secrets every child
keeps, and it's this bond with the child reader, forged through Salat's firm focus on
Amelia's feelings and perceptions, that will gain the book its necessary empathy.
Certainly, the novel wants young readers to understand that lesbians and gay men
make good parents and that judging people on the basis of their sexual orientation
is wrong and hurtful, but it makes these points through Amelia's authentic and
immediate present-tense narration. She fights with Janey, who, instead of being
Ms. Lesbian Role Model, fights back: "I left my home and my business, and
moved across country so that you could be with your mother. Does that mean
anything to you?" Amelia gets mad at her mother, resentful at the toll secret-
keeping takes on her friendship with Elizabeth, who has problems with her own
parents: "my mother doesn't get it. I don't want to be white. I just want to do fun
things with my hair."
204 
* THE BULLETIN
In the end, Amelia is found by her father, which is really no surprise,
given that the kidnapping scheme was at best naive and at worst self-centered on
the part of Mom and Janey, and while it's clear that novelist and narrator prefer
Mom, Dad isn't a monster so much as he is small-mindedly oblivious. It looks like
Amelia may just have to tough things out until she turns eighteen, a lesson that
lacks the neatly edifying wrap-up of many problem novels. What Salat's book has
in common with the best of the genre is its allegiance to story first and sermon
second, the lessons of the latter served by strict attention to the former.
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. A Picture Book ofAnne Frank; illus. by Karen Ritz. 
Holiday
House, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1003-X 
$14.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
As Holocaust history enters elementary school curricula for younger age groups,
teachers and librarians are faced with the formidable task of finding titles that
present a complex, horrifying subject for primary graders' listening or indepen-
dent reading. Adler's picture book biography presents one excellent solution
(Isabella Leitner's The BigLie, BCCB 1/93, is another) as he describes, with simple
dignity, the life and death of Anne Frank. The challenge seems to have brought
out the best in both writer and illustrator: Adler's text is less choppy and more
cohesive than in some of his other volumes in this series, and Ritz' watercolors,
though obviously based on photographs, avoid the stiff effect that often results
from artists' copying photos. The story itself is, of course, inherently dramatic,
with suspense and tragedy that cannot fail to touch children and broaden their
empathy. An author's note and a list of important dates are appended. BH
BAUMANN, KURT 
The Hungry One, tr. and ad. by Naomi Lewis; illus. by Stasys
Eidrigevicius. 
North-South, 1993 
26 p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-196-0 
$14.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-121-9 
$14.95 
R 
6 -9 yrs
"Strange is the tale of Rum Tum Tum." Indeed-Rum Tum Tum is an ever
hungry omnivore, devouring food, fields, and forests in a quest to fill up his eternal
emptiness. When he asks for the hand (in marriage) of the miller's daughter, he is
refused but bides his time for seven years and then returns for his revenge: he eats
the miller's daughter, the miller, and the jail cell in which he is imprisoned. Naomi
Lewis' adaptation of Baumann's poem has a chanting creepiness that recalls Dr.
Fell and some of the other darker Mother Goose: "Now I shall eat her; she'll be
mine,/ And then on you yourself I'll dine./ Don't plead. Don't pray. 'Twill soon
be done./ For I am still the Hungry One." As he did for Ramachandar's equally
strange Little Pig (BCCB 11/92), illustrator Eidrigevicius places phantasmagoric
MARCH 1993 
* 
205
mask-paintings upon human shoulders for a gallery of moody photographs. Text
and photographs together provide an elegant read-aloud horror story, one that
leaves plenty of room for the imagination to play-unlike Cindy Sherman's lurid
version of Grimm's Fitcher's Bird, reviewed below. RS
BERRY, JAMES 
The Future-Telling Lady and Other Stories. Perlman/
HarperCollins, 1993 
140p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021435-X 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021434-1 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
These six Caribbean-set tales include a variety of characters: Sherena, who en-
counters "white-people ghosts" from a 1692 plantation; Yuuni, who tries to use
magic to make her younger brother disappear; Boy-Don, who is overwhelmed
with homesickness after only a few hours of a supposedly week-long visit with
Granny-May; Son-Son, stymied by a mule that will not obey him on his first big
job; Mother Eesha, who heals children of their emotional problems; and Mrs.
Hen, the victim of a political folk allegory in which Mr. Mongoose gets away with
murder. In the medium of contemporary short stories for younger children, Berry
does not seem as commanding as he has been in folklore (SpidermanAnancy, BCCB
12/89) and historical fiction (Ajeemah and his Son, 11/92). The flashes of vivid
development are sometimes accompanied by unnecessary explanation ("It hurt
him that Maroontugger didn't take him as a friend. 'How can he not take me as a
friend?' he whispered") and the quality of the collection is uneven, the title story
being weakened by switches in point of view and the last story presenting a jarring
contrast of tone. When Berry is at his best, however, the voices are pure and
strong, skillfully playing with ambiguity in a sibling relationship or with a child's
ambivalence about juggling responsibilities and privileges in the business of grow-
ing up. BH
BIBLE 
The Story of the Creation; ISBN 0-525-44946-9; Spanish ed. La Historia
de la Creacion, ISBN 0-525-45055-6. 
Each book: illus. by Jane Ray. 
Dutton,
1993 
[25p] 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Ray's interpretation of the first seven days is, like her previous books Noah's Ark
(BCCB 11/90) and The Story of Christmas (11/91), an elegant collage of birds and
beasts, sun and moon and seasons, the images imaginatively placed about the pages
in a variety of friezes, vignettes and muralistic double spreads that culminate in a
Garden bursting with life. The colored-pencil and watercolor art is well-drawn
and subtly hued, tastefully accented with gold paint. Although more strictly deco-
rative than the previous books (each of which had more of a story to work with),
this is still an attractive, often exuberant frame for the sonorous King James text.
RS
BLACKMAN, MALORIE 
Girl Wonder and the Terrific Twins; illus. by Lis
Toft. 
Dutton, 1993 
72p
ISBN 0-525-45065-3 
$12.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Most newly independent readers should enjoy the antic doings of a young black
girl named Maxine (Girl Wonder) and her little brothers (the Super Twins) as
they execute various schemes that invariably go wrong. The disaster humor is
206 
* THE BULLETIN
fatuous and repetitive, but the episodes (involving a swimming pool, a cat in a tree,
wet paint) have lots of dialogue, slapstick pratfalls, and primary appeal. RS
BROWN, PAULA 
Moon Jump: A Cowntdown; written and illus. by Paula
Brown. 
Viking, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-670-84237-0 
$13.50 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
The ten cows and one steer (presumably) are drawn with cartoon-like humor in
this take-off of the familiar nursery rhyme line "the cow jumped over the moon."
Angus Le Boeuf is the Master of Ceremonies who introduces every cow before she
attempts her jump. Each one, dressed in a modest aerialist costume and tights,
uses a different ingenious method to try to get over the moon-a high-rise trapeze,
a power-spring pogo stick, a mootorcycle. Anything that could be a vague play-on-
words regarding cows is emphasized in boldface, in case the reader should some-
how miss it. The countdown idea is clever and the cows are funny, but there is one
big design problem in this book-on every double spread there is a drawing of a
stable where the remaining cows wait to take their jumps, and the cow who is
jumping on those pages watches herself from the stable as she is jumping. For
example, the spread labeled "3 Cows Waiting to Jump Over the Moon" shows the
third cow waiting to jump and making her attempt at the same time. Try explain-
ing that to your lap audience. The text is in verse form, sometimes witty, but
always interrupted by "There she goes . . Oh, no! She missed" before the rhyme
scheme is picked up again. Slight but amoosing. KJ
BROWNE, ANTHONY 
Zoo; written and illus. by Anthony Browne. 
Knopf,
1993 
26 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-93946-6 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-83946-1 
$15.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Has this sly artist gone existential or just lost his sense of humor? The voice here is
a child's, but the viewpoint is very grownup as a family trip to the zoo turns into a
sequence of traffic jams, sibling bickering, and Dad's stupid jokes at the sight of
animals caged in sterile environments. The kids prefer burgers, fries, and monkey
hats. "I don't think the zoo really is for animals," says Mum sadly. "I think it's for
people." Of course, the story serves as a showcase for Browne's witty graphics
featuring humans' acquiring animal features to suit their behavioral characteristics
(see Gorilla, BCCB 11/85, and Piggybook, BCCB 11/86). The ubiquitous bars
that set the animals off in poignant isolation and shadow the humans, as well, are
as effective here as they were in Hansel and Gretel. But the ending of Zoo seems
intrusively geared to launch a discussion among preschool consciousness-raising
groups: "That night I had a very strange dream," says the narrator from his cage.
"Do you think animals have dreams?" Kids are more likely to absorb the message
through a strong story that establishes kinship with animals than through a didac-
tic fable. BH
CALABRO, MARIAN 
Zap! A BriefHistory of Television. 
Four Winds, 1992 
206p
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-02-716242-7 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Television is a fascinating topic and its history is full of cultural milestones and
footnotes: Calabro offers a competent survey of the subject. After outlining the
technological start of television, the book addresses genres of programming, with
MARCH 1993 
* 207
chapters on comedy, drama, daytime shows, sports, and news; it then discusses
advertising, cable and public television, and some arguments against the medium
and predictions for its future. Many of the shows discussed will probably be less
familiar to young readers than Calabro seems to imagine, but the survey is impres-
sively broad. Although the writing is sometimes awkward ("Kovacs ... bounced
from network to network before dying young"), some important statements are
made plainly ("Viewers pay for television by buying what is advertised on it") and
enlivening trivia is included ("Because the moon has no wind, the American flag
planted there had been prerippled and made rigid for a good picture"). Viewers
looking for new juice on their favorite soap or sitcom will be disappointed, but
they'll come away with a better understanding of how it got on the air and what
they're participating in by watching it. Three appendices (listing Emmy winners,
top-rated programs, and network addresses), a bibliography and reading list, and
an index are included; black-and-white photos, primarily scenes from programs,
appear throughout. DS
CAREY, VALERIE SCHO 
Tsugele's Broom; illus. by Dirk Zimmer. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020987-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020986-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Tsugele, an independent young woman who "washed the family's clothes, fed the
chickens, swept the floor, baked the challah, and did the shopping," has every
qualification to become a wife. But no one passes her tests; she wants a man "as
reliable as my broom"-it sweeps floors, chases cats, beats rugs, and cleans ashes,
and it is the broom who becomes Tsugele's husband, after a magical transforma-
tion. Because this original tale begins with so many folktale elements, it surprises
listeners expecting Tsugele to find her husband the formulaic way, by meeting a
man whose logic and common sense serve to prove he is more valuable than a
broom-groom. Zimmer's illustrations, bordered with an intricate print, have sharp
color contrasts and humorous characters, whose foxy features reveal foolish expres-
sions. Carey's story is a kissing cousin to Van Allsburg's The Widow's Broom (BCCB
10/92), in which the relationship between Widow Shaw and her broom is more
complex and secretive than the relationship between Tsugele and her broom. Yet
both books celebrate a strong heroine who defies tradition with satisfying results.
KJ
CHOCOLATE, DEBBI 
NEA TEM to the Rescue! Just Us Books, 1992 
90p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-940975-42-4 
$3.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Followers of Chicago politics should recognize the events that form the spring-
board for this story: Feisty, black, be-hatted Chicago councilwoman Shannon
Gordon is threatened with a special election resulting from the fact that her ward
(at the impetus of a slimy white opponent) has been redistricted to include some
white suburbs. Gordon's daughter, Naimah, herselfa candidate for office at DuSable
Junior High School, is determined to get her mother reelected and enlists her
friends to help. It's good to see a school-teen series with an African-American cast
(see also Stacie Johnson's Sort of Sisters, BCCB 9/92); it's also good to see series
teens involved in political action. But like most series, the characterization is stock
and the plotting too easy: Naimah's mother is reelected handily, and Naimah is
208 
* THE BULLETIN
elected class president after her brilliant speech ("vote for the best candidate-and
not for the color of the candidate's skin") defeats the racially self-serving cam-
paigns of her white and Latino opponents. The book is didactic but reader-flatter-
ing, and kids will also enjoy the predictable range of Naimah's friends, who, it
appears, will each be highlighted in future volumes of the series. The paperback is
digest-sized, with an engaging cover painting of the five friends. RS
COOPER, SUSAN 
The Boggart. McElderry, 1993 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-50576-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
The Boggart is an invisible, indestructible Celtic mischief maker who becomes
wary of attachment to those whom he is bound to outlive. When the last MacDevon
clan chief dies and leaves his crumbling castle to his heirs, a Canadian family named
Volnik, the Boggart gets trapped in a desk shipped from Scotland. His ancient
presence in a modern world electrifies (literally) Emily and Jessup Volnik's lives
until they finally figure out what he is and how to ship him back home in a com-
puter game that could either save or lose him forever. Cooper's careful ground-
work in establishing contrasted settings of a Scottish loch and a modern city, her
sure quickstudies of the inhabitants, and her overlay of the mechanical and the
emotional make this an absorbing but sharp departure from her more formal Dark
Is Rising series. The scene in which the Boggart creates havoc and then art by
manipulating the keyboard for lighting a Shakespeare play casts a real spell, while
a psychiatrist's subscribing to the supernatural in "exorcising" Emily's "anger" (how
else to account for the household chaos?) satirizes bogus magic, not to mention
bogus publicity. Dr. Stigmore is a bit of contrived villainy that breaks tone with
the rest of the book, but young readers steeped in Stephen King culture may, in
fact, appreciate him as slapstick humor. Using both electronics and theater as
metaphors for magic, Cooper has extended the world of high fantasy into contem-
porary children's lives through scenes superimposing the ordinary and the extraor-
dinary; children will return the compliment by considering anew the possibilities
of both. BH
DICKINSON, PETER 
A Bone from a Dry Sea. 
Delacorte, 1993 
[208p]
ISBN 0-385-30821-3 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Two girls, two tribes, separated by millions of years, together are used to explore
the controversial evolutionary theories of Elaine Morgan, who believes that hu-
mans are descended from sea-apes (Dickinson cites her books in an afterword). Li
is a sea-ape; Vinny (Lavinia) is a contemporary girl who has joined her father on an
archeological dig in the Rift Valley. The social structures of both Li's tribe and the
members of Vinny's dig are complex and ritualized, with the "rules" of the former
allowing readers to appreciate the ironies of the latter. Dickinson is careful not to
anthropomorphize Li ("we have to imagine them in words, but the tribe were only
about halfway toward words"), and never allows theory to overwhelm story. Told
in alternating chapters, Li's half of the story is more involving as her tribe, living by
the sea and swimming from place to place, enjoins a profitable relationship with
dolphins that is severed when earthquakes and an enormous tidal wave force the
tribe inland and into a new way of living. Vinny's side of the story is focused on
both archeological and family squabbling, and if the concerns sometimes seem a
MARCH 1993 
* 209
* little adult, Vinny's growing engagement with the revelations of the dig brings us
closer to both protagonists. RS
DOHERTY, BERLIE 
Snowy; illus. by Keith Bowen. 
Dial, 1993. 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-1343-6 
$14.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Young audience members will conclude that Rachel is exceedingly fortunate: she
and her family live "on a boat called a barge, on a waterway called a canal." And as
if her colorful habitat (named Betelgeuse, referred to as Beetle Juice) weren't enough,
Rachel has Snowy, their barge horse, who "lives in a barn on the banks of the
canal, and his job is to pull Beetle Juice along the water when Rachel's mom and
dad take people for rides." Pet Day at school brings some grief to Rachel; she can't
take Snowy, who has to work, and her classmates seem dubious about his exist-
ence. Rachel's clever and kind teacher repairs the situation in style when the entire
class heads down to Beetle Juice, meets Snowy, and gets a barge ride. The heady
combination of boat and horse may surprise young listeners (and might serve as an
introduction to canal transportation), but Doherty keeps the explanations simple
while depicting her small protagonist with warmth and humor ("Rachel made her
eyes big and round to show how much she wanted to take Snowy to school, but
her mother wasn't looking"). The heavily textured pastel illustrations have an
impressionistic flavor, employing light, shadow, and reflections on water for a cozy
and romantic mood. While more detail of that child-appealing barge would have
been welcome, Snowy is realistically depicted as an honest, steady plowhorse who's
also a boon companion, nestling his pink nose comfortingly on Rachel's shoulder.
A gently exotic adventure with a barge like a swan and a loyal four-footed friend-
this will seem like a dream-come-true to many young listeners. DS
EMBERLEY, ED 
Go Away, Big Green Monster!; written and illus. by Ed
Emberley. 
Little, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-316-23653-5 
$12.95 
R* 
2 -5 yrs
It's a bit like a do-it-yourself Wild Thing, with kids getting to perform Max's
taming trick. This monster has "two big yellow eyes, a long blue nose, a big red
mouth with sharp white teeth," and each turn of the page, through the use of die-
cut overlays, reveals yet another scary feature, including squiggly ears, scraggly
purple hair and a "big scary green face!" As with Sendak's Wild Things, it's impos-
sible to know whether a particular child is going to be scared silly or highly amused
by this monster; in either case, the second half of the book is devoted to a ritual
banishment ("GO AWAY, big red mouth!") that removes each feature page by
page: "and DON'T COME BACK! Until I say so." The shapes and features are
bold and simple, with intense colors that provide some eye-popping contrasts.
Braver children might even appreciate the book at bedtime, and after just a couple
of readings by you, they will have the incantation memorized and will be able to
make the monster come and go anytime they want to. RS
FARMER, PENELOPE 
Thicker than Water. Candlewick, 1993 
[208p]
ISBN 1-56402-178-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Becky's already unhappy with her life: she's a plump adolescent, recently forced
by family financial reversals to attend the local school, where she's teased for being
210 
* THE BULLETIN
a private-school reject. Things are made more difficult when her hitherto-un-
known cousin Will comes to stay with them after the death of his mother. Will is
Becky's age but raised amid urban squalor; his ungrammatical and people-smart
narration alternates chapter by chapter with Becky's more sheltered and petulant
account. Will's mourning and adjustment is complicated by the strange experi-
ences he keeps having: a sound of sobbing fills his room at night, and he begins to
see a face at the window and hear cries of "Help me." With the reluctant aid of
Becky and the more stable assistance of his quietly eccentric friend Zakky, Will
determines that the ghost is the shade of a young boy who was killed a century ago
while working in the nearby mine and who seeks a burial for his long-abandoned
and ignored bones. This is a successful and worthy English ghost story (reminis-
cent of David Wiseman's Jeremy Visick, BCCB 10/81), with contemporary emo-
tional resonances echoing those of the past (about feelings, lonely Will says "no
one understood mine except that ghost, and no one understood his except me"),
and traditional appurtenances-the sensitivity of animals to the supernatural, the
refusal of the rational family to believe the true cause of disruption-are deftly
woven into the story of familial disruption. Even the minor characters, such as
Becky's school tormentors, are vivid and interesting, and the human dynamics are
compelling all the way through the danger-filled climax. DS
FLEISCHMAN, 
PAUL 
Bull Run; illus. by David Frampton. 
Geringer/
HarperCollins, 1993 
104 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021447-3 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021446-5 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
In a sequence of sixty one- to two-page narratives, fifteen fictional characters (and
one real general) recount their experiences during the Civil War. A few encounter
each other, most meet unawares or not at all, but they have in common a battle,
Bull Run, that affects-and sometimes ends-their lives. The writing is clean and
the idea clear, but too many tracks muddy the water. Some individuals appear
three times, some six, but the broad interspersion makes the identity of each diffi-
cult to remember and the development of various scenarios hard to follow. The
advantage of such a large cast is, of course, the broadly represented range of soci-
ety, from a bewildered general to a photographer who gets involved in the fighting
to a slave determined to follow her freedom where it leads her. Students who
perform the work on stage or as readers' theater, which is suggested in an endnote,
will have the advantage of visual portrayals to help sort things out, and any reader
will find an absorbing amount of information personalized in these all too brief
accounts. BH
Fox, PAULA, ad. 
Amzat and His Brothers: Three Italian Tales Remembered by
Floriano Vecchi; illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
[80p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08612-7 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05462-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 3-5
"No sooner had the tiny rooster led his friends into the house than he felt chicken
feathers around his feet. 'I don't care for these feathers,' he said. 'They make me
wonder where the chickens have gone."' With sly humor and classic restraint, Fox
styles a folktale reminiscent of "The Bremen Town Musicians"; here, five animal
friends who've been savaged by a wolf find his house in the woods and get even. In
MARCH 1993 * 
211
another tale, a variant of Joseph Jacobs' English folktale "Mr. Vinegar," a widow
and her son, Cucol, collect a bag of gold abandoned by frightened thieves (like Mr.
Vinegar, Cucol drops a door on their heads from a treetop) and best the villagers
who have taunted them. Without violating folkloric compression, the author
manages to personalize archetypes, as in her consideration of the widow's son:
"Cucol was not backward, only very slow in reaching a conclusion, and as is true
for most people, it was often the wrong one." Fox also respects the laws of folklore
justice; when, in the trickster tale of the title, Amzat's two villainous brothers try to
take away his humble inheritance, their punishment is cheerfully merciless. These
three stories, illustrated with canny pen-and-ink hatch drawings, will make deli-
cious fare for independent readers, but don't neglect to share the book aloud with
younger listeners as well. After all, Fox heard them from Floriano Vecchi-whom
she introduces in the preface as an Italian transplanted to New York City-and
has passed them on in the belief that "stories do not disappear. They last longer
than anything else." BH
GLEESON, BRIAN 
Koi and the Kola Nuts; illus. by Reynold Ruffins. 
Rabbit Ears,
1992 
34p
ISBN 0-88708-281-5 
$14.95
Book/cassette combination ISBN 0-88708-282-3 
$19.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The youngest son of a dead chief, Koi leaves the village where he has been cheated
of his inheritance. On the way to finding a new home, he helps a snake, an ant,
and an alligator, all of whom return the compliment when he's forced to pass three
tests by cannibalistic strangers. This male Cinderella variant, styled easily in the
present tense, has good pace and structure, but it raises a couple of questions that
boil down to how politically correct it is to portray undesignated Africans eating
each other, in what claims to be a folktale but has no cited sources. When, where,
and by whom was the story originally collected or published? Did it really portray
"a very large and fat woman" who keeps repeating, "I say cook him in the pot," or
did the adaptors throw that in as a funny bite of suspense? We'll never know,
because there's no way to track down the original. If you're comfortable with the
details or comfortable with adapting them, this will make rhythmic reading aloud,
and the graphics, while overdesigned by the insertion of icons punctuating the
text, are warmly colored, jocular, and humorously drawn. BH
GREENE, CONSTANCE C. 
Odds on Oliver; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
Viking,
1993 
60p
ISBN 0-670-84549-3 
$12.99 
M 
Gr. 3-5
Ever since Oliver was kicked out of nursery school (just the first of many silly plot
contrivances), he has wanted to be a hero. Somehow, though, he keeps screwing
up: a rescue of his drowning friend Arthur proves pointless when Arthur realizes
he can touch bottom; Oliver's attempt to save the grocery checkout girl from an
armed robber is foiled when she rescues him instead; when he tries to get Mrs.
Murphy's cat out a tree, the fire department has to be called to get Oliver out of
the tree instead. The reading is easy, but the story and writing are slapdash, and
Green's attempts at humor will not amuse even those used to a steady Saturday
morning TV diet: "Oliver and Arthur dropped everything and went fishing. Edna
[Arthur's dog] went too. Edna liked to bark at the fish. Sometimes the fish barked
back. Those were the dogfish." Heh-heh. RS
212 
* 
THE BULLETIN
GRIMM, JAKOB LUDWIG KARL 
Fitcher's Bird; illus. with photographs by Cindy
Sherman. 
Rizzoli, 1992 
32p
ISBN 0-8478-1567-6 
$17.95 
M 
6 -9 yrs
"Now this is a story for those who are not squeamish, for it is about a wicked
wizard who liked to cut people up." Fair warning, but do the illustrations have to
be so sensationalized? Sherman's photorealism in using dolls and doll parts has the
effect of a horror movie such as Child's Play, thus her picture book seems to go
beyond the unpredictable act of scaring children to a calculated effort to do so.
Blood coagulates in the sticky beard around the villain's mouth, for instance, and
terror reflects off the closeup of a maiden's plastic skin and glassy eyes. A grinning
skull, along with the bloodshot eyes of the sweating Bluebeard character, will as-
sure parents of nursing their preschoolers through nightmares, while older kids
will get the wrong kind of kick out of this. If you're looking for redeeming social
value, there's a smart heroine who puts all the dead ladies together again, sends
them home, and traps Fitcher in his house, while her relatives lock the door and
burn him to death. BH
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA 
Many Thousand Gone: African Americans from Slavery to
Freedom; illus. by Leo and Diane Dillon. 
Knopf, 1993 
152p
Library ed. ISBN 0-394-92873-3 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-394-82873-9 
$16.00 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
The real voice of history must be individual, and these thirty-some historical per-
sonalities give witness to slavery's toll on African-Americans. Each one speaks for
thousands silenced. Hamilton shows her versatility here with an ambitious two-
century story told in vignettes that never shortcut their subjects of complexity,
however compressed the information. Part of her success derives from changing
her rich, idiosyncratic fiction style into a straightforward prose that lets the facts
speak louder than their presentation. This takes a lot of trust in the young audi-
ence and in the story itself, and Hamilton's faith is justified. From the "running
away" of a slave named Somersett in 1671 to a South Carolina slave's celebration
of the Emancipation Proclamation in 1863, these moving episodes run the gaunt-
let of tragedy, comedy, nobility, and trickery as each slave struggles to become free
in whatever way is viable. One wins her case in court; another mails himself in a
large crate from his plantation to an abolitionists' headquarters. One, in despair,
cuts her daughter's throat (shades ofToni Morrison's Beloved) and jumps into the
river with her baby when her family is recaptured. The baby drowns, and Marga-
ret Garner is sold into the deep south, where she dies in the rice fields. A slave
named Jackson poses as his light-skinned wife's maid, and they both fool a boat-
load of Southern ladies all the way from New Orleans to Cincinnati. These tales
of high drama never run longer than a few pages, illustrated with some of the
Dillons' most emotive, strongly shaped art in black and white. The frontispiece
and closing illustration alone speak volumes-a ship leaving a dungeon, with a
broken doll on the floor; a family leaving a mammy-doll behind in a shack as they
drive off in a mule-drawn wagon. The format is open, spacious, and inviting.
This should be required reading for history curricula, but once introduced, it won't
need to be. And don't cheat yourself of the opportunity to share it aloud. An
index and bibliography are included. BH
MARCH 1993 
* 
213
HASKINS, JIM 
Get On Board: The Story ofthe Underground Railroad. Scholastic,
1993 
[160p]
ISBN 0-590-45418-8 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Like Virginia Hamilton's more general history of slavery, reviewed above, Haskins'
book on the Underground Railroad will hold readers' attention by the sheer drama
of the subject, which Haskins has organized and presented with a fine balance
between background information and human interest detail. Although there is
some factual overlap in the two titles, Haskins' book is geared toward older readers
and generally includes more extensive information within his more selective scope.
Both sources, for instance, tell the story of Eliza, the slave who escaped across ice
floes in the Ohio River, but from Haskins we also learn that she settled happily in
Canada with her daughter and was visited by the Quaker couple who helped them
through Indiana. In fact, Hamilton's and Haskins' books complement each other:
Hamilton tells us that the carpenter who helped Henry Brown mail himself to
freedom tried the same trick unsuccessfully with two more slaves and was impris-
oned; Haskins tells us that he was a white man, which adds another dimension to
the situation. Even more important is the way the two books reinforce each other:
Hamilton's story about Jackson, the Alabama slave who disguises himself as his
light-skinned wife's maid, finds a rich counterpart in Haskins' story of Ellen Craft,
a lightskinned Georgia slave who poses as a planter traveling by steamer with her
"slave"-in truth, her husband. Haskins has synthesized a massive amount of
information here and has argued forcefully for the often downplayed role that
African-Americans played in their own escape networks. A timeline and bibliogra-
phy are appended. BH
HERSHEY, KATHLEEN 
Cotton Mill Town; illus. by Jeanette Winter. 
Dutton,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-525-44966-3 
$12.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
This idyllic country catalog tells of a little girl's visit to her grandmother's home in
a cotton mill town, although "town" conjures up a vision of something slightly
more bustling than the rural pleasures presented here. The girl picks berries and
violets, swims in the mill pond with her aunt, goes fishing with Grandmama ("She
never tells anybody I only caught a stick") and spends the evenings in Chinese
checker games with the family. A trip into town brings some easy work at the
peach farm, an ice cream treat, and a letter from home. These are felicitous attrac-
tions all, enhanced considerably by Jeanette Winter's richly toned and attentive
paintings, but there's no story, and the language lacks the concentration that would
at least give the book the (doubtful) appeal of a mood piece. Kids will enjoy the
intense colors and roundly comfortable lines of the illustrations; like many cata-
logs, this book provides the details for daydreams. RS
HODGE, MERLE 
For the Life of Laetitia. Farrar, 1993 
214 p
ISBN 0-374-32447-6 
$15.00 
R* 
Gr. 5-8
Laetitia Johnson is twelve years old, smart, and diligent enough to test into a gov-
ernment secondary school that is far removed, in both miles and milieu, from her
rural Caribbean village. Raised by loving grandparents in a boisterous extended
214 
* 
THE BULLETIN
family that is partially supported with money sent by her mother from New York,
Laetitia cannot adjust to the cold, authoritarian household of her father and his
new wife in La Puerta, where she lives during the school term. As the emotional
and cultural gap grows, Laetitia's confidence erodes, especially in face of the preju-
dice-blacks and East Indians against each other-that she observes at school and
the shock of watching her best friend suffer and fail because the men in Anjanee's
family oppose her education. The vulnerability and pain exposed in the story are
balanced and even sharpened by a satiric edge, as in the description of a social
studies lesson "about Happy Families and their opposite, Broken Homes," the
former illustrated by a picture of "some white people-a tall, square-jawed man
looking ahead of him with great determination; a little woman with yellow hair
who didn't quite come up to the man's shoulder; and next to the woman a boy and
a girl with round, red cheeks, the boy up to the woman's waist, the girl up to the
boy's shoulder. . . they seemed very pleased about something that was not in the
picture." The discrepancies between this stereotype and the complex family dy-
namics realized in Laetitia's world exemplify Hodge's skillfully understated ap-
proach in her first novel, where the island dialect flows smoothly, the school dialogue
is realistic, and the scenes are developed with confident energy. BH
JOHNSON, NEIL Jack Creek Cowboy; written and illus. with photographs by Neil
Johnson. 
Dial, 1993 
[3 2 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1229-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1228-6 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
This photoessay concentrates really on two young cowboys: Justin, ten, and Corey,
twelve, whose father is a hand on a Wyoming ranch. This summer the brothers,
who until now have done all their ranch work on foot, are going to help "work the
cattle up on summer range." In order to prepare for this serious job, they must
first learn to ride and rope; then they help herd the cattle up to the mountain
pasture (still coming home every night). Finally the cattle are at their summer
grazing in the National Forest, and for two weeks the hands must rotate the herd
so that no overgrazing takes place. The ranching information is interesting, but
it's oddly distributed at times (the paragraph on shoeing horses comes out of no-
where, and why do we suddenly hear about the boys' pigs at the end?); nor is it
explained early or fully enough exactly what ranching task the boys are performing
and why. Photographs vary from breathtaking (the home pastures with moun-
tains beyond) to washed out, dark, or blurry (pictures of life at Jack Creek cabin)
but they show a rustic milieu likely to please those with a longing for wide open
spaces. It's fun to see the kids roughing it and moving from tenderfeet to ranch
hands in a summer, and youngsters will envy them their life on the range. DS
JORDAN, SHERRYL 
Winter of Fire. Scholastic, 1993 
[336p]
ISBN 0-590-45288-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
All Elsha remembers from her sixteen years as a Quelled slave is working in the
firestone mines. Although the whole Quelled race is denied the right to speak or
even look at members of the privileged Chosen class, Elsha alone is brave enough
to speak out against the unjust traditions. Her stubbornness not only gets her into
trouble, but also gives her the courage to fight the prejudice that has enslaved
MARCH 1993 
* 
215
generations of Quelled. The story's action is maintained as Elsha advances from a
slave in the mines to the most powerful position in her world-Firelord. The
ultimate solution to the Quelled and Chosen's common problems, cold and dark-
ness, is a simplistic one of mind over matter; however, genre fans will savor Elsha's
dignity, as well as her charisma, the loyalty of the companions she finds, and the
ecological quirks of her badly-polluted world. The prose is high fantasy stately,
and if the message is a little obvious, it is also undeniable-no group has the right
to enslave another. KJ
KING-SMITH, DICK 
Lady Daisy; illus. by Jan Naimo Jones. 
Delacorte,
1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-30891-4 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
Here's the classic story of a venerable doll, left for lost in an attic, discovered-and
brought back to life-by a loving new owner. The switch here is that the new
owner is a boy, Ned, who endures insult and injury for his new passion for "play-
ing with dolls." Ned doesn't play with the exceedingly Victorian Lady Daisy, of
course; he talks to her, she answers, and the two become fine friends. The cultural
exchange ("'You'll be telling me next that men wear earrings and necklaces.' 'Quite
a lot of them do'") is funny and unsophisticated, and there's plenty of real-boy
action (Lady Daisy gets kidnapped) that provides momentum for the friendship.
In a touching epilogue, Ned has passed the doll on to his daughter. While he can
no longer hear Lady Daisy, the daughter is a natural successor: "'Please, Lady
Daisy Chain,' said the small girl, 'Daddy sends you his love.'" RS
LEIGH, NILA K. 
Learning to Swim in Swaziland: A Child's-Eye View ofa Southern
African Country; written and illus. by Nila K. Leigh. 
Scholastic, 1993 
[48p]
ISBN 0-590-45938-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 2-4
More than a child's-eye view, this book is also a child-written and child-illustrated
travelogue, with the handwritten text presumably being the penmanship of the
young (twelve now, eight when she lived in Swaziland) author. The design is fresh
and witty, and the book has an appealing scrapbook quality, but the drawing looks
like it was done by an eight-year-old, which, of course, it was. The writing is
equally naive in a way that adults may find cute but that will probably not impress
Nila's peers, as when she proffers a "few facts about Swaziland": "It is smaller than
New Jersey but sort of round. It is ruled by a King. It does not have a beach. ... "
The drawing of a Swazi man in native regalia with "feathers and sticks in his hair"
belies the fact that Swazis generally dress in Western clothes; in general the book
emphasizes exotica at the expense of telling us what it was like to live there. Books-
by-kids make great classroom projects but do not generally travel well into the
wider world. RS
LERNER PUBLICATIONS COMPANY 
Ukraine. Lerner, 1993 
6 4 p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Then & Now)
ISBN 0-8225-2808-8 
$14.96 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
An entry in a new series of books devoted to the nations emerging from the former
Soviet Union, Ukraine is up-to-date in its coverage, is efficiently formatted with
216 
* THE BULLETIN
many good color photos, and gives a clear and evenhanded history and contempo-
rary overview of the country. So what's missing? Any spark that would differenti-
ate it from a comprehensive encyclopedia article. Perhaps due to its anonymous
authorship, the book's tone tends towards the impersonal drone: "Tobacco and
wine grapes grow in the hills of southwestern Ukraine and on the Crimean Penin-
sula. Livestock raised in Ukraine include cattle, sheep, poultry, and pigs." While
the book will be useful for school reports (a glossary and index are appended) a
good National Geographic article might provide a more involving balance of the
informational and anecdotal, allowing kids the insights of an armchair visit. RS
LEVINE, ELLEN 
Freedom's Children: Young Civil Rights Activists Tell Their Own
Stories. Putnam, 1993 
[192p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-399-21893-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6 up
With an organic sense of structure, Levine has stitched together thirty African-
American participants' accounts of key incidents in the Civil Rights movement
from 1955 to 1965. The life-and-death suspense inherent in each dramatic situa-
tion, from James Roberson's description of the bombing of the Bethel Baptist
Church parsonage to Sheyann Webb's gripping memory of Bloody Sunday, moves
this along like fiction. The details are vivid: how much Mickey Schwerner meant
to a neighborhood boy, for instance, and how much James Chaney's brother looked
up to him before both young men were murdered for their voter registration ac-
tivities. Lighter moments come unexpectedly, as in a woman's recollection of
being noticed, when she was aa very young demonstrator on her own, by Martin
Luther King, Jr., who takes her into his group for protection-"they said, 'Get her
a club sandwich.' 
I didn't know what a club sandwich was. It was the biggest
sandwich I had ever seen, and it was with chips and a pickle." Levine never in-
trudes more than necessary in providing brief explanations for background or con-
text. Consistently, these witnesses make a reader realize the weight of the injustice
they suffered, but they also project a sense that, despite the fear and suffering, their
activities in the movement were the most important thing they've ever done, leav-
ing them with deep-rooted values, a sense of achievement, and bonded relation-
ships among those who worked with them. A chronology of events, notes on the
contributors, and bibliography are appended. To be illustrated with photographs.
BH
LEVITIN, SONIA 
Annie's Promise. Atheneum, 1993 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-31752-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
It's 1945, and German-Jewish refugee Annie Platt (of the Platt family featured in
Journey to America, BCCB 2/71, and Silver Days, 4/89) is twelve going on thirteen
in an America blown by "the howling winds of change." Annie's adventures, how-
ever, are more local: despite her family's initial reluctance, they allow her to accept
an offered (and free) place at a coed and multiracial Quaker summer camp. At
camp, Annie makes a good friend, has a serious crush, finds a few idols, and devel-
ops a serious enmity with a girl who's a bigoted bully. It may sound like fairly
traditional camp-story fare, but this is a thoughtful book about blossoming and
independence that possesses a particular poignancy due to its characters and time.
Levitin has the integrity to leave in loose ends and sad truths without making them
MARCH 1993 
* 217
the point of the book: there's no rapprochement between Annie and the bully
(upon whom Annie plays a truly nasty trick), Annie and her African-American
camp friend have a disastrous post-camp encounter, after which they never see
each other again, and there are occasional reminders that the war has taken its toll
on Annie's relatives (her father's family have all perished in the Holocaust). Read-
ers will empathize with Annie's struggle to define herself in the face of her strong
family, and they'll enjoy this well-written account of her summer adventures. DS
LITTKE, LAEL 
Getting Rid ofRhoda; Paper ed. ISBN 0-87579-636-2; 156 p. The
Mystery ofRuby's Ghost; Paper ed. ISBN 0-87579-656-7; 16 6 p. 
Each book: Cin-
namon Tree/Deseret, 1992 
Paper ed. $4.95 
(The Bee Theres) 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Okay, so it's another series about five girls who have a club; the switch here is that
Becca, Sunshine, Carlie, Marybeth, and Elena are the Bee There girls, a closely
knit group of Mormons in the same "Beehive" class. The setting is contemporary
Southern California; the girls share the same concerns as their Sweet Valley secular
sisters (boys, friends, parents); the religious background is more social than sacred
("Jason was the ward hunk, but it was a well-known fact that his eyesight didn't
register any girl under fifteen"). In Rhoda, the girls conspire to rid themselves of a
starchy new Beehive leader; Ruby's Ghost takes the girls to a restored old Mormon
settlement in Utah, where they solve the romantic mystery of a girl who disap-
peared long ago. While remaining faithful to the formulas that series readers de-
mand, Littke writes smoothly and with some wit, and her Bee There girls help and
harass each other with equal enthusiasm. Non-Mormon readers won't understand
the references to stake dances and sacrament meetings, although surely such details
are no more exotic than the plenitude of ski weekends, fancy summer camps, and
first-class trips to Europe that most series characters find waiting around every
corner. RS
LYON, GEORGE ELLA 
Dreamplace; illus. by Peter Catalanotto. 
Jackson/Orchard,
1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08616-X 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05466-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Lyon's low-key prose poem and Catalanotto's evanescent watercolors combine to
convey the experience of a young girl wandering the ruins of an Anasazi village and
thinking about what life might have been like for the cliff-dwellers: "Food, too,/
had to be grown above them or hunted below them// harvest and kill/ borne home
on their backs// hands/ and/ feet/ finding/ slots/ in the/ stone." Although there's
potential drama in the Anasazi's tragic abandonment of their homes, the story is
oversmoothed. It's a quiet, contemplative poem, probably too understated for its
picture book audience, and the hazy, light-softened paintings are skillful but stud-
ied, echoing the almost monotonous tone of the text. RS
McCOLLEY, KEVIN 
The Walls ofPedro Garcia. Delacorte, 1993 
[112p]
ISBN 0-385-30806-X 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
NR 
Gr. 5-8
Pedro Garcia is twelve, and he and his grandfather live on a Mexican estate along
with the rest of the servants of Roberto de Lupe. When the American groundskeeper
orders a wall built that cuts the servants off from their river view and breezes ("the
218 
* 
THE BULLETIN
river was gone, replaced by cold, gray stone that did not reflect golden the light of
the setting sun"), Pedro takes his objections-at first, he thinks, successfully-to
Sefior de Lupe himself. Senfor de Lupe eventually threatens Pedro and his grand-
father with dismissal, however, if the boy keeps up his protests, which shatters
Pedro's self-image of adulthood. This story is paralleled by a recurring dream of
Pedro's about a deer hunted by wolves, a metaphor he attempts to understand and
use as a guidepost on the road to manhood. The sentences are square and inexpli-
cably uncolloquial ("It was not good to speak too quickly to maidens"), filled with
metaphor and repetition in a way that combines with the belabored theme of
manliness to make the book seem parodic of Hemingway, who would not, how-
ever, have fallen into the sentimental and self-conscious poesy rampant here ("Pedro
Garcia was born a man. On a sunny summer day with the heat shimmering over
the bean fields, his mother dropped her hoe and lay down between the rows and he
was born a man. From her blood and her pain he came into the world, crying the
cry of a man. .... In his tiny infant eyes, she saw the pride of a man, and in his grip
on her little finger, she felt the strength of one. Pedro Garcia was born a man, and
he lived as a man. He knew that one day he would die as one"). Nor is there a plot
or theme worth the trip: the dream metaphor is unsubtle and unnecessary, and
Pedro's battles with the groundskeeper aren't particularly believable or interesting.
DS
MCKENNA, COLLEEN O'SHAUGHNESSY 
Camp Murphy. 
Scholastic, 1993 
[160p]
ISBN 0-590-45807-8 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Collette, Marsha, and Sarah are looking forward to the week-long summer camp
for little kids they are planning for Collette's backyard, but disaster strikes when
Sarah finds she has to go to Ohio, and the only other counselors the girls can find
are boys. More predictably patterned than most of the Collette books, this entry
also suffers from the unvarying focus on camp activities: Collette's backyard be-
gins to feel a bit claustrophobic. Still, the banter and squabbling are fun, there's
lots of fresh humor at the expense of the little campers, and the suspense of Mrs.
Murphy's pregnancy (announced in Mother Murphy, BCCB 2/92) is concluded
happily-though one still wonders how it started, since Mr. Murphy is hardly ever
around. RS
MCPHERSON, STEPHANIE SAMMARTINO 
I Speak for the Women: A Story about Lucy
Stone; illus. by Brian Liedahl. 
Carolrhoda, 1992 
6 4 p 
(Creative Minds Books)
ISBN 0-87614-740-6 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
This book traces Lucy Stone's busy life from her hardworking childhood in Mas-
sachusetts through her attendance at Oberlin College to her speeches across the
country for women's rights and the abolition of slavery. On a more personal level,
Lucy managed to convert both her overworked mother and initially antagonistic
father to her cause, and she suffered harassment for refusing to take her husband's
name. The biography is simply written and accessibly formatted-big print, lots
of white space-like the other books in the series (e.g., McPherson's Rooftop As-
tronomer, BCCB 11/90), and it covers well the interrelationship of the abolitionist
and feminist movements in the nineteenth century and the sacrifices the latter
made for the former. We don't get much sense of Lucy's character beyond her
determination and devotion to her causes, and it's surprising that the text never
mentions how "Lucy Stoner" become a term for any married woman who retained
MARCH 1993 
* 219
her own name. It's an approachable and readable-if not deep-biography, how-
ever, on a lesser-limned figure of the era. Black-and-white illustrations are stiff
and awkward but do not romanticize their subject; a bibliography is appended.
DS
MAESTRO, BETSY 
The Story of Money; illus. by Giulio Maestro. 
Clarion,
1993 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-395-56242-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
The Maestros prove rather decisively here that while money changes everything,
it's more to the point that everything changes money. Their concise history goes
all the way back to hunters-and-gatherers, who had no need for money ("There
was no place to spend it"), through bartering cultures and on to the use of prod-
ucts such as salt, shells, blankets, and barley as currency. The Sumerians were the
first to invent metal money (out of silver-"Everybody wanted it"), and various
countries went on to further refine the process by which humans could trade, up
to and including credit cards and ATMs: "In the future, there will be other kinds
of electronic cashless money." Explanations are clear and seamless in the way they
explain how changing societal needs affect what kind of money people use and
how it is transacted. In depicting human figures and landscapes the illustrations
are somewhat generic, but the pictures of various currencies are detailed and usu-
ally life-sized, and the format is large and spacious. Appended material includes
various anecdotes about money, but there is neither an index nor a bibliography.
RS
MANGO, KARIN N. 
Portrait ofMiranda. Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1993 
232p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021778-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021777-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Miranda's a junior in high school, and she still hasn't figured out who she really is:
oppressed by the figure of her strong-willed and mysterious grandmother Miranda,
whose portrait hangs in the family parlor, she unsuccessfully attempts to create a
similarly dramatic character for herself, which leaves her feeling hollow. She's also
frightened that she will go deaf at an early age, just like her grandmother and her
mother before her. Miranda's involvement in the school play (The Tempest, in
which she plays-of course-Miranda) brings her closer to Noel, a British boy in
America just for the year, and the gently blossoming romance allows Miranda to
develop confidence in herself as a person. The book is a little overstuffed with
subplots (Miranda's grandmother, her mother's deafness, the school play, Miranda's
fascination with a bag lady), but Miranda's relationship with the appealing Noel is
tenderly and engagingly depicted. The book deals matter-of-factly and overtly
with the important adolescent question of identity, and it will strike a familiar and
comforting chord with many readers. DS
MANSON, AINSLIE 
A Dog Came, Too: 
A True Story; illus. by Ann
Blades. 
McElderry, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-689-50567-1 
$13.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
Based on information in Alexander Mackenzie's exploration writings, this book
tells the story of the dog who accompanied the explorer and his team on his eigh-
220 
* THE BULLETIN
teenth-century crossing of Canada, the first such crossing by Europeans. The big
brown dog "had never worn a collar or had a family to call his own," and he
"didn't even have a name." The book-and possibly Mackenzie-simply calls
him Our Dog, describing his important contributions in fetching downed game,
retrieving lost paddles on the river, guarding men and food from animals, and
galloping along the rocky shore to keep up with the canoes (there was no space for
him in the boats). He becomes separated from the explorers right before their
moment of victory, but he eventually meets up with them again and returns east
with them in triumph. This is an intriguing story with an adventurous backdrop,
and although it occasionally ascribes unprovable thoughts to Our Dog ("Our Dog
knew the explorer usually followed rivers") or tells as fact undocumentable actions
(anything the dog did in the absence of human chroniclers), the narration treats
the animal with unsentimental respect and generally keeps him authentically doggy.
The watercolors are in pale and liquid tones that somehow make the scenes tem-
porally distant despite their modern line; the human faces are somewhat naive in
execution, but the pictures of Our Dog alone in the wilderness are misty and
somber. After reading this, kids may find tales of explorers without dogs disap-
pointing, but it's really not a westward expansion book so much as a restrained and
effective true-life dog story. DS
MARKLE, SANDRA 
A Rainy Day; illus. by Cathy Johnson. 
Orchard, 1993 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08576-7 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05976-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4 -7 yrs
Rather than starting with a description of the water cycle (a logical place to begin
but rather abstract for younger children), Markle and Johnson open their explana-
tion of rain with the sensory experiences most children will be familiar with: feel-
ing the drops, hearing the wind, watching the ways various animals seek shelter (or
not, as in the case of ducks and earthworms). Why cardboard collapses when wet,
why raincoats are made of rubber or plastic, how a rainbow is formed-in a smooth
narrative format, the book answers children's questions about rain in a way that
adds up to a cogent description of the cycle. Johnson's smooth watercolors pro-
vide atmosphere and at the same time amplify statements in the text, as in a se-
quence of double-spread landscapes that show the progression of puddles into
ponds and drains and rivers to the ocean and back into the air. Many books make
attractive rainy day reading, but this one is especially fine when paired with look-
ing out the window. RS
MAYNE, WILLIAM 
Low Tide. 
Delacorte, 1993 
[208p]
ISBN 0-385-30904-X 
$14.00 
R* 
Gr. 7-10
It's turn-of-the-century New Zealand, and Charlie, his tagalong little sister Elisabeth,
and his Maori friend Wiremu have been swept up by a tidal wave and deposited in
wild and unknown territory. Their worst fears are confirmed when they encoun-
ter a mythical wild man, the cannibalistic Koroua, who haunts the hills ("'Ouaigh,'
he said. Its teeth were black from eating people"). The old Koroua, hampered by
an inability to communicate, proves kindly and eventually helps the children back
to their town. Mayne has created a superb variant on the adventure tale: he keeps
completely to the children's point ofview and never narratively demonstrates knowl-
edge beyond theirs, so that one never knows, until the very end, that the story is
not a fantasy, and the mysterious ship, the tidal wave, the ghost town copy of the
MARCH 1993 
* 221
children's home village, and of course the Koroua himself (he proves to be a ship-
wrecked German sailor) are elements of a realistic story. The tone is carefully
controlled and utterly reasonable, with both humor ("Eating others did not seem
wrong to him, unless he was going to be eaten. Then it ought to be stopped,"
thinks Charlie) and harshness ("Why did you not stay away if this is all you can say
or do?" thunders Charlie's father, hearing his son's wild tale upon his return), but
it also has a quiet poetry of the everyday that makes Elisabeth's growing attach-
ment to the Koroua quite touching. Kids who pick this up for the adventure story
will keep reading for the writing and the suspense; a book where you really don't
know what's going to happen next is welcome, so don't spoil it by booktalking the
ending away. DS
MOORE, LILIAN 
Adam Mouse's Book of Poems; illus. by Kathleen Garry
McCord. 
Karl/Atheneum, 1992 
53p
ISBN 0-689-31765-4 
$11.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Whether or not the kids in your classroom or library are fans of the Adam Mouse
books (I'll Meet You at the Cucumbers, BCCB 3/88; Don't Be Afraid, Amanda),
they should have a chance to hear these poems. The first, "Conversation with a
Salamander," cleverly acknowledges the convenience of growing back a tail or legs
that are lost. The last, "Waiting," makes a wise-but not tiresomely wise-chant:
"Waiting/ is a road that/ winds,// winds to a faraway/ end.// No matter how you/
hurry/ the road has another bend." In between are thirty poems in several sections
celebrating animals, plants, and natural ("Sky View") or manmade ("In the Li-
brary") phenomena familiar within a child's experience. Overall, the words are
easy to read but meaningful, and the tone is quiet but laced with humor, as in the
description of "Arabella the Cat," who wears a collar of bells ("ring-a-ling ding-a-
ling . . . jing-a-ling ting-a-ling") that tells where she goes "so softly,/ on pounce-
ready toes." Small, light, pen-and-ink sketches nestle at the end of every other
poem or so. BH
MORPURGO, MICHAEL 
Twist of Gold. Viking, 1993 
24 6 p
ISBN 0-670-84851-4 
$14.99 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Like Marita Conlon-McKenna's Wildflower Girl (BCCB 1/93), this is a story of
survivors from the Irish famine immigrating to America, but unlike McKenna's
more realistic work, this is filled with fortunate coincidences that repeat them-
selves in a contrived pattern. In defiance of army regulations, a British dragoon
keeps Sean and his sister Annie from starvation; a ship's officer and a fiddler con-
spire to retrieve the O'Briens' golden torc from an evil captain and help the two
children become the only survivors of a wreck; two rich sisters and their black
servant ("I's can see I's gonna have to keep my eye on you two") rescue the chil-
dren from the Boston streets; a riverboat colonel restores the torc, stolen again,
and gives up his life for the children's safety; a mountain man rescues them from
the desert and offers to give them half the gold he's found; Indians return the torc
(stolen once more); and finally, after crossing the continent to California, the chil-
dren find not only their father, but also their mother, whom they thought had
died back in Ireland. Despite occasional information loading, the writing is com-
petent, the characterizations are consistent, and the action is fast paced, but to
impose such tidy plotting on historical fiction distorts the difficult immigrant ex-
perience into an unlikely adventure. BH
222 
* THE BULLETIN
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Malcolm X: 
By Any Means Necessary. 
Scholastic,
1993 
[2 2 4 p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-46484-1 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 6-12
"People do not just 'happen' in history." What distinguishes this biography from
many others in children's and young adult literature is its point of view; instead of
presenting a collection of facts, Myers shapes the information on Malcolm X with
a consistent, well-supported argument as to what determined the course of his
subject's life. Motivation is as important as action here, and neither is neglected as
Myers observes the "blending of the four Malcolms into one dynamic personality
that is distinctively American in its character": the child whose father was mur-
dered; the teenager who turned to crime in his fight for survival on the streets and
for a strong identity; the religious organizer determined to restore pride and justice
to African-Americans (especially young men striking back at racism in self-de-
structive ways); and tragically-perhaps inevitably, according to Malcolm X's own
prediction-the defiantly maturing philosopher gunned down in his prime. Both
the writing and the photographs are direct. Myers' book can give perspective on
and lead to Haley's Autobiography of Malcolm X, which will be tough reading for
junior high and even some high school students, who nevertheless would do well
to follow up a viewing of Spike Lee's popular movie with some varied print sources,
including this one and a number of others that are listed in Myers' bibliography
following a chronology of Malcolm X's life. BH
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Alice in April. Karl/Atheneum, 1993 
[17 6 p]
ISBN 0-689-31805-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
"When am I ... well, officially, I mean . .
a woman?" Alice (of Alice in Rapture,
Sort of, BCCB 6/89, etc.) asks. The male doctor to whom she addresses the ques-
tion after her first post-pubescent physical (and Naylor gives a tender, reassuring,
and funny account of that experience) basically says it's a state of mind and it's up
to her. Her aunt says that Alice's thirteenth birthday makes her officially the
Woman of the House, in charge of the household she shares with her brother and
widowed father. At school, womanhood seems to occur when the boys award a
girl the name of a state that supposedly suits her physical contours-Alice's friend
Elizabeth is devastated to be labeled "Illinois" ("Illinois is f-f-flat!"), Pamela is thrilled
to be the mountainous Wyoming, and Alice is more and more uneasy about her
possible designation, or, worse, being passed over. Naylor sensitively handles the
more serious threads of the story, such as Alice's longing for a connection with her
mother and the eventually suicidal despair of her former enemy, Denise Whitlock.
The regular cast (Dad, brother Lester, Alice's friend/boyfriend Patrick, and the
rest) provides both dramatic and emotional support as well as enlivening the pages.
Readers new to Alice's adventures won't be lost, and Alice fans will welcome an-
other sweet and witty chapter in the Alice McKinley bildungsroman. DS
NELSON, 
VAUNDA 
MICHEAUX 
Mayfield Crossing; illus. by Leonard
Jenkins. 
Putnam, 1993 
[96 p]
ISBN 0-399-22331-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
With Mayfield's school boarded up, the neighborhood kids gear up for Parkview
MARCH 1993 
* 
223
Elementary, a larger, central facility where it quickly becomes apparent that
Mayfielders, especially black Mayfielders, are not welcome. The eight friends (some
black, some white) determine to stick together as they always have, however, and
one of them proposes a baseball game to challenge their racist rivals after an ugly
incident of fighting on the playground. Good is good and bad is bad here: the
good guys are never anything but generous to each other; the bad guys are despi-
cable bullies, one of them physically attacking the narrator, though she's smaller
than he, when she does well in class. There's also a Boo Radley-like character in
the form of Old Hairy, whom the narrator comes to accept when she begins to
understand how painful it is not to be accepted. Although all the characters could
use more depth-including parents who seem idyllically virtuous-the game play
and group interactions carry this first novel, set in 1960 just before Kennedy's
election. BH
PERETZ, I. L. 
The Magician's Visit: A Passover Tale; ad. by Barbara Diamond
Goldin; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. 
Viking, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-670-84840-9 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
A magician mysteriously appears in the town square and dazzles the Passover crowds
with his tricks. A poor but upright couple, who have "just spent a winter the likes
of which they would not wish on even their worst enemy," open their door to the
magician, who sets a Seder feast upon their bare table. True to tradition, he is the
prophet Elijah, sent with a gift from heaven to reward the couple for their faith
and charity towards persons even poorer than they. Goldin has simplified Peretz'
tale without losing-or trying to explain-the sense of mystical wonder. Parker
picks up on the tone with his expressionistic, thickly textured paintings, in which
mottled colors are subtly juggled against dark backgrounds. As much a folktale as
a religious legend, this will have the broad appeal of introducing Passover to non-
Jewish children as well as entertaining Jewish children who celebrate the holiday.
BH
RINALDI, ANN 
In My Father's House. Scholastic, 1993 
[30 4 p]
ISBN 0-590-44730-0 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 6-10
Rinaldi's latest historical drama is based upon an intriguing fact: the first battle of
the Civil War (Manassas) was fought on the land of Will McLean; the terms of
Lee's surrender to Grant were signed on the same man's table, at a house he was
renting in Appomattox. This is a fabulous frame, but unfortunately, the author
has attempted to work too much information about the war into a novel about
McLean's family. The heroine, Oscie, is McLean's stepdaughter, and she's a clas-
sic Civil War heroine. Headstrong, heedless, brave (and if the cover is anything to
go by, a looker), Oscie loves unwisely, cares for her sisters, and fights with her
stepfather. Only the last relationship, fictionally developed through a series of
confrontations, has any real impact. Neither Oscie's sisters nor her suitors have
enough personality to sustain our attention. The view of slavery here is Margaret
Mitchell-benign, with a convenient distinction made between good and bad
slaveholders: "We owned slaves, yes, but our nigras were family." But the real
problem here is the sprawling canvas, with the information on the progress of the
war sometimes going on for paragraphs and distracting attention from the fic-
tional focus. RS
224 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ROCKWELL, ANNE 
Pots and Pans; illus. by Lizzy Rockwell. 
Macmillan,
1993 
[2 4 p]
ISBN 0-02-777631-X 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
1-3 yrs
A little girl and a little boy invite the reader into their kitchen, which is full of "lots
and lots of pots and pans and lots of other things." There follows a page-by-page
inventory of kitchen implements (such as wooden spoons, a colander, plastic stor-
age containers) with which little teenies could play without serious damage to
themselves or to the kitchen (although a truly enterprising toddler might be better
off without those chopsticks). There's no plot-after the list, the text announces
"Hooray for pots and plans! Will you play, too?" and that's the end of it all. This
would be a good lap-read or even floor-read for the kitchen, since your audience
will be scrambling around for their equivalent utensils, although you could try and
make things more manageable by relating it to toy cookware rather than the real
McCoy. The watercolor children are too sweet and rosy-cheeked and pristine but
fortunately incidental; the pots and pans are beautiful objects in their isolated
splendor upon the page, although kids will find more familiar the clutter (if not
the never-used freshness) of the plastic storage boxes and their lids. Slight and
idealized, but it could provide some fun-and a satisfying mess underfoot. DS
SALAT, CRISTINA 
Living in Secret. Bantam, 1993 
183p
ISBN 0-553-08670-7 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
See this month's Big Picture, page 203, for review.
SCRIBNER, VIRGINIA 
Gopher Takes Heart; illus. by Janet Wilson. 
Viking,
1993 
136 p
ISBN 0-670-84839-5 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Matthew Goff, known to friends and acquaintances as Gopher, has a serious bully
problem: every day before school he's forced to surrender his milk money to fierce
Fletcher Simpson (rumored to have a brother in prison). When the fifth-grade
class allots artistic Gopher three dollars to buy material and make a valentine for
their teacher, he rightly fears that Fletcher will try for that money too. Gopher
finally takes a stand and he finds Fletcher not such a bad guy after all, and he's
grateful for Fletcher's help with the rather aesthetically disappointing valentine.
The eventual rapprochement of victim and bully (who's lonely and doesn't know
how to make friends-and his brother's really just at college) may be a trifle pre-
dictable, but Scribner keeps it energetic. The haunting pain and humiliation of
being a victim are particularly well-captured, as is the arbitrariness of the designa-
tion (Gopher is stunned when classmates-gir/classmates-simply refuse to toler-
ate Fletcher's behavior). Some nice classroom gestalt flavors the book, with kids
conspiring on the teacher-pleasing project and Gopher clearly heading into grade-
school romance with perky Stephanie. It's a good boy-centered school story with
sympathy for the dark moments and a cheerful depiction of the lighter ones. DS
SILLS, LESLIE 
Visions: Stories about Women Artists. Whitman, 1993 
[6 4 p]
ISBN 0-8075-8491-6 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
A successor to the author's earlier book Inspirations (BCCB 1/89), which covered
MARCH 1993 
* 225
Georgia O'Keeffe, Frida Kahlo, Alice Neel, and Faith Ringgold, Visions treats the
life and work of artists Mary Cassatt, Leonora Carrington, Betye Saar, and Mary
Frank. These four subjects may have been chosen to exemplify variety, since they
differ in era, style, and region, but they're all interesting and biography-worthy
artists, and the contemporaneity of the last three may particularly inspire young
readers. The biographies are very simply written, tracing each woman's life from
early childhood influences to the flowering of her talent; the text's greatest value,
however, is in providing background and continuity for the stunning artwork re-
produced in color throughout the book. Cassatt's tender mother-and-child paint-
ings may be familiar, but readers are less likely to know Carrington's eerie, symbolic
surrealist painting, Saar's sometimes grand, sometimes homely assemblages, and
Frank's textural and evocative sculptured figures. It's great to see an eye-catching
and readable book that includes living artists, making it clear that the tradition
continues and could include a hopeful young reader. DS
SILVER, NORMAN 
An Eye for Color. Dutton, 1993 
186p
ISBN 0-525-44859-4 
$14.99 
M 
Gr. 7-10
These twelve brief, loosely connected stories focus on a South African Jewish boy's
random growth of awareness that apartheid shapes his society and that he has a
role in acquiescing to it. Basil's indecisive and usually ineffective responses to the
injustice surrounding him are realistically drawn, and many of the other characters
are vivid, including an Indian who has supported his retarded daughter and grand-
children by preserving his dead father's thumb to make prints on the pension
papers, and a girl whom the government isolates from her white family by a deci-
sion of the Race Classification Offices that she carries "colored" genes. Unfortu-
nately, the writing style is grammatically awkward ("he and me opened our front
door with the key"), the plot structures are thin, and the efforts at humor fall flat
("I reckon stamps were for the birds, and even then birds have got better things to
do with their time"). Without a stronger sense of irony, some of the narrator's
observations will sound pretty offensive to U. S. audiences, too ("This man couldn't
have been Jewish because his skin wasn't white and his hair grew in little clumps
on his head like a colored"). In the end, Basil's ploy to opt out of the military by
faking schizophrenia leaves the reader wondering whether he's done it for the sake
of those he's seen persecuted or because of a personal squeamishness that keeps
him from wanting to see them persecuted. Has he learned courage or has he learned
to lay low? In fiction which depends for its thematic cohesion on some perception
into this issue, there aren't enough clues in the protagonist's action or depth in his
characterization to clarify a reader's understanding. BH
SMITH, DORIS BUCHANAN 
Best Girl. Viking, 1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-670-83752-0 
$13.99 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Nealy Compton is her hot-tempered mother's "best girl." That doesn't keep Mama
from slapping her hard enough to knock her over, but at least Nealy still has a
home, whereas her older sister has been locked out for defying Mama's volatile
commands. Unfortunately, this complex situation is upstaged by the action-a
fire that consumes a neighbor's house under which Nealy had hidden her treasures
and sheltered in hard times. To these two plot strands Smith adds a third, about
Nealy's protest against old trees being cut down on their block; a fourth, about
Nealy's discovering the arsonist by sighting a bicycle stolen from the burned house;
226 
* 
THE BULLETIN
and a fifth, about Nealy's various relationships with the neighbor who suspects her
of arson, with a family friend who seems to appear out of nowhere to restore the
house, and with her absentee father. Each of these subplots offers intriguing pos-
sibilities, but none is adequately developed, and the reader feels shifted from one
to the other in what seems more a slice of life than an internally shaped work of
fiction. BH
SNYDER, ZILPHA KEATLEY 
Fool's Gold. Delacorte, 1993 
[22 4 p]
ISBN 0-385-30908-2 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Rudy is a "natural-born extrovert and probably the second most
popular guy at Pyramid Middle School." Most popular guy is Rudy's perennial
pal Barney, but lately Barney has been spending time with urban transplant and
self-styled cool guy Tyler Lewis, much to Rudy's dismay. Tyler, who brings out
the dangerous daredevil streak in Barney, plans a search for gold in a local aban-
doned mine. Rudy suffers from claustrophobia as a result of a traumatic child-
hood experience and tries everything possible to get out of the horrifying prospect,
but he ends up conquering his fears to help his friend when Barney gets lost in the
mine alone. Though the psychologizing can become excessive (everybody, includ-
ing Rudy's little sisters, has a well-explained reason for the insecurity which prompts
his or her behavior), the dynamics of two friends reluctantly becoming three are
well explored. With the exception of the wise and folksy old neighbor, the charac-
terization is strong, credible, and interesting, with Rudy appealingly unaware of
his own good-kidness. Mix that in with some horseback riding and mine-explor-
ing in the California Gold Country, and you've got a likeable adventure. DS
SUTCLIFF, ROSEMARY 
The Minstrel and the Dragon Pup; illus. by Emma Chichester
Clark. 
Candlewick, 1993 
[4 2p]
ISBN 1-56402-098-3 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
An accident with a dragon's egg unites a wandering minstrel with an orphaned
baby dragon. As Lucky the dragon grows older, he and the minstrel remain de-
voted to each other. When a traveling showman kidnaps Lucky, the two best
friends are miserable until they find one another again. Sometimes the simplest
plots are the best, especially when combined with Sutcliffs fine writing and Clark's
muted oil-pastel art. The illustrations depict an enchanted world in which the
happy ending is very believable. It's long for a picture book, but the length is
worthwhile because Sutcliffs leisurely prose enhances the flavor of the story. The
true happiness of the reunited friends is evoked on the last double spread, where
"the world smelled of sunshine and tree shadows and wayside dust, and there was
a cuckoo calling in the next valley." KJ
SWENTZELL, RINA 
Children of Clay: A Family ofPueblo Potters; illus. with photo-
graphs by Bill Steen. 
Lerner, 1992 
4 0p 
(We Are Still Here: Native Ameri-
cans Today)
ISBN 0-8225-2654-9 
$14.96 
R 
Gr. 3-5
For slightly younger readers than Diane Hoyt-Goldsmith's Pueblo Storyteller or
Marcia Keegan's Pueblo Boy (both BCCB 4/91), this also seems to be written more
from an insider's viewpoint. The focus is Gia Rose, a Santa Clara Pueblo potter
MARCH 1993 
* 227
whose trip to the mountains to collect clay begins the book. Her extended family
is involved in the whole process, from digging to cleaning, soaking, shaping, and
firing. Descriptions of the work are accompanied by references to cultural lore
(including a story Gia Rose tells her grandchildren) that explain Pueblo traditions.
As in other titles of this series (Peters' Clambake and Regguinti's The Sacred Har-
vest, BCCB 11/92), the color photographs are abundant, fresh, and clear, with
maps, landscapes, and closeups varying the format. Michael Dorris gives a brief
introduction; a glossary and a current bibliography of children's books about con-
temporary Pueblo culture are appended. BH
TOLL, NELLY S. 
Behind the Secret Window: A Memoir of a Hidden Childhood;
written and illus. by Nelly Toll. 
Dial, 1993 
[176p]
ISBN 0-8037-1362-2 
$17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Although the quality of writing varies widely in the many Holocaust memoirs
being published now, they all contain stories under pressure to be told, and this is
no exception. Since Toll is more an artist than a writer, she sometimes forgets the
importance of narrative details and loses impact by generalizing: "Food was very
hard to get. Although it was strictly forbidden, the adults continued to risk their
lives to smuggle goods from the Aryan part of town." When she focuses on the
specifics of her own story, however, the tedium of waiting in a bricked-up bay
window hidden from the Nazis, the tense dynamic with the couple who hides her
and her mother, and the narrow escapes from discovery are unforgettably clear.
Though not as cohesive and gripping as Isabella Leitner's The Big Lie (BCCB 1/
93), this first-person account is simple without sacrificing the complexities of the
situation. Twenty-nine full-color reproductions of naively eloquent paintings,
which were made by the author as an eight-year-old in hiding, illustrate the book.
BH
TOWLE, WENDY 
The Real McCoy: The Life of an African-American Inventor; il-
lus. by Wil Clay. 
Scholastic, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-590-43596-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
This picture-book biography covers the life of Elijah McCoy, born to former slaves
in Canada, from his engineering studies in Scotland and his hard manual labor on
the American railroad to his life as an inventor and important member of the
Detroit community. McCoy, creator of the lubricating oil cup that may have
given rise to the expression "the real McCoy," was indeed a technological and
entrepreneurial pioneer who made important contributions in spite of racial dis-
crimination. Towle states that biographical information about McCoy is scarce,
but it seems plausible that more might have been found or more general period
information employed ("a la Diane Stanley in her biographies) to create a clearer
picture of the man and his times; the few quotes from contemporaries make one
wish for more. The acrylic illustrations are thickly pigmented and dominated by
woody browns and lamplight yellows that give them an appropriately turn-of-the-
century feel, although aspects of them are occasionally confusing (the map of the
McCoy family's Underground Railroad route to Canada makes the geography
very unclear, and it's hard to tell why MtCoy's lawn sprinkler design is pictured as
a turtle or why the inventor is depicted with a space capsule on the last page).
228 
* THE BULLETIN
McCoy is an important but little-known figure in American history, and his work
with exciting things like trains and gadgets will make him appealing to kids. DS
VANCLEAVE, JANICE Janice VanCleave's Molecules: ISBN 471-55054-X, illus. by
Karen Pellaton; Janice VanCleave's Gravity: ISBN 0-471-55050-7, illus. by Laurel
Aiello; Janice VanCleave's Animals: ISBN 0-471-55052-3, illus. by Kathleen
McCord. Each book: Wiley, 1993 
Paper ed. $9.95 
90p 
(Spectacular Sci-
ence Projects) 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
These three experiment books have a science fair twist. Each book contains two-
or three-page descriptions of an experiment, beginning with a problem: "How do
elephants use their ears to cool their bodies?," "Why do things fall over?," "What
happens when the shape of a protein molecule is changed?". The material that
follows includes procedures, results, and explanations, but the results are written
out so completely that it is almost unnecessary to do the experiment, although the
end of every experiment presents a new related problem to investigate. In general,
the experiments in Molecules and Gravity are more clear than those in the Animals
volume. For example, the experiment that investigates how newts, salamanders,
and fish hear without ears involves moving salt crystals around in one pan and
water in another. The author is explaining by metaphor how the animals would
react to these vibrations, but the allusion is confusing. The introduction to each
book explains how to set up an experiment in a successful science fair format, and
a few black-and white-line drawings illustrate the directions in each procedure
section . Although the series seems a bit like science-fair-in-a-can, these books will
give a lot of ideas and help to budding scientists. KJ
WEAVER-GELZER, CHARLOTTE 
In the Time of Trouble. Dutton, 1993 
275p
ISBN 0-525-44973-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In an ambitious novel that begins in 1958 during the political uprising that even-
tually drives the French from Cameroon, fourteen-year-old Jessie realizes that she
has long felt abandoned by her parents, who send their three children to boarding
school so they can concentrate on their teaching at a Presbyterian mission station.
While Jessie's twin brother has his piano playing and her sister excels at math,
Jessie struggles to find a calling of her own, to work through the resentment she
feels toward her mother and sister, and to understand the political situation that
eventually threatens her parents' lives. When the author allows the characters'
thoughts and actions to speak for themselves, her writing shows real power. Some-
times she overexplains her protagonist's feelings (Jessie's heart is forever lurching
or thudding or burning in sometimes mixed metaphors), overexposes her theme
("Was that what Mom meant by using her gifts?"), or substitutes an explanation
for action, as in the interruption of a moving scene where the siblings resolve their
differences by "playing twins," a childhood game that could have been forecast
earlier instead of described in a summary flashback. Once, the point of view shifts
abruptly from Jessie to her mother, held captive in the jungle; at another point, a
mysterious African prophet-figure appears and disappears suddenly with a jarring
effect that overwhelms the subtle religious issues lacing the story. However, narra-
tive control comes from experience, and the character dynamics in this first novel
are strong enough to create suspense and sustain interest. BH
MARCH 1993 
* 229
WILKINSON, BRENDA 
Definitely Cool. Scholastic, 1993 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-590-46186-9 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In breathless, exclamatory prose Wilkinson relates the school saga of Roxanne,
who's excited and apprehensive about going to a new, suburban junior high. Like
Chocolate's NEA TEM to the Rescue, reviewed above, this is a fairly generic school-
and-friends story that features an African-American cast. The author delivers some
messages about being true to yourself, and listening to mother, and staying away
from the bad crowd; the story is basically plotless but easygoing and cozy in its
reliance on the little dramas of a young teen's day-to-day life. RS
WILLEY, MARGARET 
The Melinda Zone. 
Bantam, 1993 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-553-09215-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Spending the summer with relatives in Michigan because her divorced parents
each made plans that did not include her, Melinda, fifteen, is looking forward to
some cozy family time. But her older cousin Sharon, whom Melinda has long
admired, is in the throes of romance and manages simultaneously to avoid all
family togetherness while keeping herself the focus of the family's exasperated at-
tention. Margaret Willey often uses the theatrical troubles of one girl to throw the
quieter problems of another into relief (see Finding David Dolores, BCCB 5/86);
here, however, the author's subtle geometry of family and friendship is program-
matic: we see much more of the characters talking about their relationships than
we see of the relationships themselves. This is particularly true in the long conver-
sations Melinda has with the boy next door about how she feels about her parents.
The characters are fully individualized, so readers will care very much about their
problems, but the sacrifice of dramatic conflict and resolution to the discussion of
conflict and resolution gives the book a therapeutizing distance. RS
WILLIAMS, SHEILA, ed. 
The Loch Moose Monster: More Stories from Isaac Asimov's
Science Fiction Magazine. Delacorte, 1993 
[304p]
ISBN 0-385-30600-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
This is a strong collection of fourteen short stories from Isaac Asimov's Science
Fiction Magazine, a sequel to the first collection, Why I Left Harry's All-Night Ham-
burgers. The title story is not the best, but it does have the most captivating name.
In "The Loch Moose Monster" by Janet Kagan, space settlers from Earth have
inhabited a planet and rely on genetic scientists to reproduce as many authentic
Earth-like life forms as possible, even mythical beasts. "The Water Bringer" by
Mary Rosenblum tells of an ostracized boy who is befriended by a con man on a
desperately desiccated Earth. In "Kites" by Maureen F. McHugh, futuristic ath-
letes ride kites in high-stakes races. "Gerda and the Wizard" by Rob Chilson is a
medieval feminist tale. In most of the stories, the sci-fi element is not strongly
developed and is basically incidental to the plot and characters, but the inexact
handling of the scientific components is a small criticism when compared to the
strong styles, variety, and engrossing plots of nearly every story. KJ
230 
* 
THE BULLETIN
WITTMANN, PATRICIA 
Scrabble Creek; illus. by Nancy Poydar. 
Macmillan,
1993 
[3 2 p]
ISBN 0-02-793225-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The narrator here is the second youngest of five kids, but she's "one of the big kids
now," which means that on the family's idyllic vacation at Scrabble Creek she
sleeps in the bunkhouse with her brothers and sister, not in the trailer with Mom,
Dad, and the baby. "I like everything at Scrabble Creek, except ... the night," the
girl says worriedly, as she hears spooky noises coming from the same forest where
she had played so happily in the daytime. The family finally has a nocturnal noise-
making contest that outstrips any murmurs in the bushes, and our protagonist
settles down cheerfully for the night-unlike her now-nervous siblings. The fear-
conquering is a slender although reassuring plot, but the real pleasure of this book
is the slice-of-life on vacation, as the family plays in the water ("I swim underwater
like an otter and look at everyone's toes") and enjoys summer cookout food. The
watercolor art conveys both the verdant peace and the surrounding darkness of a
big forest, and it contains enough birds and small mammals to make careful scru-
tiny worthwhile. It can be hard to tell the pictured people apart, but their depic-
tion is imaginatively realistic, with weird flashlight maneuvers from the brothers,
and Mom rarely getting a chance to sit down. This is a nicely woodsy version of a
vacation youngsters will want while they empathize with the narrator's fear; the
final picture will reassure them that the night scares "big kids" too, but everybody
can still have fun. DS
YOUNG, ROBERT 
Action Figures; ISBN 0-87518-516-9; Dolls; ISBN 0-87518-
517-7; 
Teddy Bears; ISBN 0-87518-520-7. 
Each book: 
Dillon,
1992 
$13.95 
6 4p 
illus. with photographs 
(Collectibles) 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Each book in this series featuring toys that kids like to collect has just the right
balance of current and historical facts about the collectibles. The author's style is
simple and clear; for example, when he describes the growth in the popularity of
dolls: "Children were not needed quite as much for work, and adults began to
change their views of children." The books are amply illustrated by sharp photo-
graphs with good captions. However, it is sometimes frustrating for the reader
when a toy is described in detail but not illustrated, like the Sir Koff-a-Lot teddy
bear. A young reader who picks up one of these books because he or she is inter-
ested in the toy will find many more things of interest-history, potential careers
in toy making, and information on how to collect toys. Each book is appended
with an index, glossary, and list of addresses to contact for further information. KJ
71
MARCH 1993 
* 
231
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 1993
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Cynthia Rylant for Missing May (Jackson/
Orchard). The Newbery Honor Books are Somewhere in the Darkness by Walter
Dean Myers (Scholastic), What Hearts by Bruce Brooks (Geringer/HarperCollins),
and The Dark-Thirty: Southern Tales ofthe Supernatural by Patricia C. McKissack,
illustrated by Brian Pinkney (Knopf).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Emily Arnold McCully for Mirette on the
High Wire (Putnam). The Caldecott Honor Books are The Stinky Cheese Man and
Other Fairly Stupid Tales, written by Jon Scieszka and illustrated by Lane Smith
(Viking), Seven BlindMice by Ed Young (Philomel), and Working Cotton by Sherley
Anne Williams and illustrated by Carole Byard (Harcourt).
The Coretta Scott King Award will be presented to Patricia C. McKissack, author
of The Dark-Thirty : Southern Tales of the Supernatural (Knopf) for writing and to
Kathleen Atkins Wilson for The Origin of Life on Earth: An African Creation Myth
(Sight Productions) for illustration. Honor Books for writing include Walter Dean
Myers' Somewhere in the Darkness (Scholastic), Patricia and Fredrick McKissack's
Sojourner Truth: Ain't I a Woman (Scholastic), and Mildred Pitts Walter's Missis-
sippi Challenge (Bradbury). Honor Books for illustration are Little Eight John,
written by Jan Wahl and illustrated by Wil Clay (Lodestar), Sukey and the Mer-
maid, written by Robert San Souci and illustrated by Brian Pinkney (Four Winds),
and Working Cotton, written by Sherley Anne Williams and illustrated by Carole
Byard (Harcourt).
The Scott O'Dell Award for historical fiction will be given to Michael Dorris for
Morning Girl (Hyperion).
The Canadian Library Association's Best Book of the Year for Children is Eating
Between the Lines by Kevin Major (Doubleday Canada). The Amelia Frances
Howard-Gibbon Award for illustration goes to Ron Lightburn for Waiting for the
Whales, written by Sheryl McFarlane (Orca Books).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Berlie Doherty for Dear Nobody (Orchard).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Janet and Allan Ahlberg for The Jolly
Christmas Postman (Little, Brown).
The Margaret A. Edwards Award will be given to M. E. Kerr.
The 1993 May Hill Arbuthnot Lecture will be delivered by Margaret McElderry.
Much of the above information was graciously provided by the Children's Book
Council, which offers a materials brochure listing their many helpful publications.
To receive this, send a request, enclosing 6" x 9" SASE with 2 oz. first-class post-
age, to the Children's Book Council, 568 Broadway, Suite 404, New York, NY,
10012.
232 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this rather
idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books that could fill
a particular gap in a collection, to help teachers and librarians find books that
might be useful in various school or recreational settings, and to help in those
requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject headings, the
subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those
books intended for independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Mayne;
Morpurgo
African-Americans: 
Hamilton;
Haskins; Myers; Towle
African-Americans-fiction: Berry;
Chocolate; Hodge; Nelson;
Wilkinson
Africa-fiction: Dickinson
Africa-folklore: Gleeson
Anthropology: Dickinson
Arson-fiction: Smith
Art history: Sills
Art: Swentzell
Babysitting-fiction: McKenna
BEDTIME STORIES: Emberley
BIOGRAPHIES: Adler; McPher-
son; Myers; Sills; Toll; Towle
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Weaver-
Gelzer
Bullies-fiction: Scribner
Cameroon-fiction: Weaver-Gelzer
Canals-stories: Doherty
Caribbean Islands-fiction: Berry;
Hodge
Civil Rights Movement: Myers
Civil War-fiction: Fleischman;
Rinaldi
CONCEPT BOOKS: Rockwell
COUNTING BOOKS: Brown
Cousins-fiction: Farmer; Willey
Cows-stories: Brown
Dogs: Manson
Dolls-fiction: King-Smith
Dragons-stories: Sutcliff
Drama: Fleischman
England-fiction: Farmer
Ethics and values: Browne; Silver
Everyday life stories: Greene
Evolution-fiction: Dickinson
Explorers: Manson
Family problems-fiction: Willey
FANTASY: Cooper; Jordan;King-
Smith; Sutcliff
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Hodge
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Carey; Fox; Gleeson; Grimm
Food and eating: Jaspersohn
Food and eating-stories: Baumann;
Gleeson
Friends-fiction: Snyder
FUNNY STORIES: Blackman
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Salat
GEOGRAPHY: Leigh; Lerner
GHOST STORIES: Farmer
Government: Chocolate
Growing up-fiction: Mango;
McColley; Naylor; Willey
HISTORICAL FICTION: Fleisch-
man; Levitin; Mayne; Morpurgo;
Nelson; Rinaldi; Weaver-Gelzer
History, Canadian: Manson
History, U. S.: Hamilton; Haskins;
McPherson; Myers; Rinaldi
History, world: Maestro
Hobbies: Young
Holocaust: Adler; Toll
Horses: Johnson
Horses-stories: Doherty
Immigrants-fiction: Morpurgo
MARCH 1993 
* 233
Inventing: Towle
Italy-folklore: Fox
Jews-fiction: Levitin
Jews-stories: Peretz
Journalism: Calabro
Kidnapping-fiction: Salat
LOVE STORIES: Mango
Manufacturing: Jaspersohn; Young
Mexico-fiction: McColley
Mice-poetry: Moore
Money: Maestro
Monsters-stories: Emberley
Mormons-fiction: Littke
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Salat; Smith
Native Americans: Swentzell
Native Americans-poetry: Lyon
New Zealand-fiction: Mayne
Night-stories: Wittmann
POETRY: Baumann; Lyon; Moore
Prejudice-fiction: Hodge; Nelson;
Salat; Silver
Ranch life: Johnson
Reading aloud: Baumann; Bible;
Fleischman; 
Fox; Manson;
Sutcliff
Reading, easy: Blackman; Greene;
McKenna; Moore
Reading, family: Bible; Emberley;
Markle; Rockwell
Reading, reluctant: Chocolate;
Littke; Salat; Wilkinson
Religious education: Bible; Peretz
Rural life-stories: Hershey
SCHOOL STORIES: Chocolate;
Scribner; Wilkinson
SCIENCE FICTION: Williams
Science experiments: VanCleave
SHORT STORIES: Berry; Silver;
Williams
Slavery: Hamilton; Haskins
Social issues: Calabro
South Africa-fiction: Silver
Story hour: Brown; Carey; Doherty;
Gleeson; Peretz; Rockwell
Suicide-fiction: Naylor
Summer vacation-fiction: Levitin;
McKenna; Willey
Summer vacation-stories: Wittmann
Swaziland: Leigh
Television: Calabro
Toys: Young
Transportation: Doherty
Treasure hunting-fiction: Snyder
Ukraine: Lerner
Underground Railroad: Haskins
Valentine's Day-fiction: Scribner
War-fiction: Weaver-Gelzer
Weather: Markle
Women's studies: McPherson; Sills
World War II: Adler; Toll
Writing by children: Leigh
Zoos-stories: Browne
4F;r
By the Winner of the
1992 Coretta Scott King Award
"A fist-swinging adventure narrated by voluble 'brown as an
Indian' Artemis Bonner. After Uncle Ugly's gunned down by
that sneaky dog Catfish Grimes, 15-year-old Artemis leaves his
sainted Dear Moth,
and turns cowboy
avenger.... The pa
is brisk, the tongue
in-cheek humor is
beautifully main-
tained, and the
conclusion hints of
madcap adventure
to come."
-ALA 
Booklist
"An entertaining ya
that could well intri
duce new readers I
historical fiction."
-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 10-14.
$14.00* (020844-9)
$13.89t (020846-5)
Author of the 1989
Scorpions and The Mouse Rap, Walter Dean Myers's most recent
HarperCollins book is
NOW IS YOUR TIME!
The African-American Struggle for Freedom
Winner, 1992 Coretta Scott King Award
ALA 1992 Notable Children's Books
ALA 1992 Best Books for Young Adults
Ages 11 up. $17.95* (024370-8); $17.89t (024371-6)
Harper Trophy paper ed. $10.95* (446120-3)
For a free Walter Dean Myers
biographical brochure write: 
HarperCollins ISBN prefix 0-06 *Trade and paper eds.
m HarperCollinsChildren sBooks 
tLibrary ed. Publisher's prices only and in no way reflect
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022 
the prices at which available from any other source.
A Practical Guide to Library Programming
fGNr Infqnte T•Adrlore rnA
se
172pp. 
1992 
ISBN -8242-0850-1
$30 U.S and Canada, $34 other countries
A unique, hands-on guide to planning and producing library
programs for babies (newborn to age 2 1/2) and their caregivers-with
over 160 rhymes, songs, and fingerplays!
Mother Goose
Programming: Step-by-Step
Mother Goose Time details
the what, why, and how of
programming to the youngest
library users, offering invalu-
able advice on:
* Getting Started
* Material Selection
* Advertising/Promotion
* Registration
* Rehearsal
* Greeting the Babies and
Caregivers
* Transition to the
Programming Area
* Leading the Program
* Closing the Program
* Contingencies
* Evaluating the Program.
Foster a New Generation of
Readers!
By experiencing the soothing
words and rhymes of Mother
Goose Time in a comfortable
atmosphere created by you-
and reinforced at home-infants
will quickly develop the skills they
need to speak and, eventually,
to read!
Organized for Easy Access
All of the rhymes in Mother
Goose Time are classified by
developmental stage and activity
level, enabling you to gear your
program to the desired age
group. The handbook also
includes a bibliography of sug-
gested picture books, display
books, and resource books.
Various indexes categorize
rhymes by title, first line, and
whether they are spoken or
sung-making it easy to find
that just-right rhyme!
To Order Call Toll-Free
800-367-6770
Outside the U.S. and Canada,
call 718-588-8400
Fax 718-590-1617
I
THE 
H.W 
WILSON 
COMI
9 
0 
UN 
ER 
TY 
A 
NU 
R0N 
6 
INY 
1045
an
"A clever, classic collection
of purely pleasurable poetry" *su
C 
ND6gp
ig
Each verse plays with a letter of the alphabet "in this zany, appeal-
ing alphabet soup. Jeanne Steig's witty and wacky verses challenge
and amuse. William Steig's distinctive, offbeat illustrations enhance
the humor. The appeal is timeless." * School Library Journal
"Marvelously witty ... Not to be missed." * Kirkus Reviews
"Clearly Jeanne Steig belongs among the great light versifiers . ..
The words and the pictures seem of equal brilliance."
The Washington Post Book World
"A splendid collaboration ... There is never a dull moment."
* Publishers Weekly
"Jeanne Steig sets words off like skipping stones, and William Steig's
wry drawings are sublime." The New Yorker
All Ages $15.00 TR (0-06-205006-0); $14.89 LB (0-06-205007-9)
Publisher's prices only and in no way reflect the prices at which available from any other source.
Michael di Capua Books * HarperCollins Publishers
-
--- 
-
*"A stimulating blend of diverse art styles that
derive inspiration from many masters." 
*sLI. Starred
*"An imaginative exploration of the world of
dream."-Kirkus Reviews, Pointer
"Filled with activity and expression....A book sure to
delight cat lovers and dreamers everywhere."-Booklist
"Demonstrates some of the best and liveliest
picture book art this year." 
BCCB
'A perfect blend of art and text....It will have both
you and your child laughing."-New York Times Book Review
L~ 
Ages 4 7, 0531 05997-9 TR $1495, 0531 08597X RLB $1499 
4
by Ann Turner 
There is a better way
illustrated by 
to make a woman.
illustrated y 
Cut her from cloth,
Barry Moser 
gabardine,
so strong and fine
Poignant and powerful, this 
it will not stretch or tear.
poetry collection gives voice 
Sew eyes of black that will
to the many pioneer women 
not cry.
who journeyed west to a new 
Paint one nose not over-
life. Intense, vivid language 
particular about cattle
and dramatic portraits will 
smells and prairie ills.
leave no reader unmoved 
Fashion two ears that do not
by the stories of the extra- 
listen for love,
ordinary women who 
that are content
ventured across the prairie. 
with the wind and rain
and sleet. . .
0-15-136788-4 
March
Ages 12 and up
$16.95
0-15-636477-8
$10.95 (pbk.) 
Harcourt
Brace
lovanovich
Avenue
,CA 92101
1918
it © 1993 by Barry Moser.
IT'S HERE!
The most memorable and dramatic
Children everywhere have made the Indian in the Cupboard
series one of the most popular of all time, and no wonder. Lynne Reid
Banks weaves together magic, mystery, and adventure with the
flawless touch of a born storyteller. In the fourth novel in the series,
Omri and his family move to an old farmhouse where he discovers a
long-lost journal. "Open the magic cupboard," it seems to say to him.
And although he tries to resist, Omri knows what he must do.
April. Ages 10 up. 256 pp. TR $13.95/0-688-12138-1; LE $13.88/0-688-12635-9
Morrow Junior Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc. U 1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
BIG TOP Boss
John Ringling North and the Circus
DAVID LEWIS HAMMARSTROM
"This is a book that every circus fan will devour... one of the best researched and written circus
books ever, and a great contribution to the documented history of America's 20th century circus
scene. ... Big Top Boss is a compelling and thoughtful book about North which details his life, loves,
and circus achievements as never before. Hammarstrom has done an outstanding job in pulling all
the pieces of the puzzle together." - Bandwagon
Order toll free 800/545-4703
University of Illinois Press
54 East Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820
'L Starred In The Bulletin and 
KIrkus Reviewe 
pointer*
School Lbrwy Journal 
Bookfist Youth Editori Choices'92
ATJEEMAH
AND HIS SON
by James Berry
"Ajeemah is taking his son Atu to be wed when they are seized
by slavers and shipped [from Africa] to separate plantations in
Jamaica. Refusing to accept that their freedom is permanently lost,
each finds a way to escape-Atu by killing himself, Ajeemah by
raising a new family and surviving until slavery is outlawed decades
later.... Brilliant, complex, powerfully written." 
-Kirkus Reviews
Albert Whitman
& Company
Spring 1993
Where Do
Uttle Girls Grow?
by Mlly Jane Limmer
Il Rosaonre Hoffman
Ages3-7 March $14.95
ISBN 0-80758924-1
Two of Everything
Retold and illustrated
by Uly Toy Hong
Ages5-8 March $14.95
ISBN 
O-8075-8157-7
The Way Mothers Are
30th Armcvary Eton
by Miriam Schlen
New illustrations
by Joe Lasker
Ages 3-5 April $1395
ISBN 0-8075-8691-9
A Concept Book
And God Created
Squash: How the
World Began
by Martha Whitmore
Hickman
lilus. 
Giulano Ferd
Ages 4-8 March $14.95
ISBN 
0-8075-0340-1
Howl Named the Baby
Written and Ilustrated
by Linda Shute
Ages 5-8 March $1395
ISBN 0-8075-3417-X
Kelly in the Mirror
by Martha M, Vertreace
mIu Sandr Speidel
Ages 6-8 March $1395
ISBN 
O-8075-4152-4
FarouSeawed Soup
byAnfolrnefTrugloMartin
IAus 
Nodine Bernard
Westcott
Ages 3-7 April $13.95
ISBN 0-8076-2263-5
Great Rabbit and the
Long-tailed Wildcat
Retold by Andy Gregg
I*lA Cat Bowman Smith
Ages 6-10 April $1395
ISBN 
0-8075-3047-6
All the Better
to See You WithI
by Magaret Wild
III Pat Reynolds
Ages 6-8 April S13.95
ISBN 0-8075-0284-7
A Concept Book
The Dreams oa
Hummingbirds:
Poems from Nature
by Mary Ann Coleman
Illus Roert Masheris
Age 8-12 Mach $14.95
ISBN 
0-8075-1720-8
Visons. Stories
about Women Artists
by Lele Sils
Ae»9+ April $1.95
ISBN 
0-8075-8491-6
Chelsea Martin
Turns Green
by BeckyThomanUndper
&A Nancy Poydar 
-
Ages 7-9 May $1195
ISBN 
048075-1134-X
s Therea Woman in the
House. .or Senate?
by Bryno J Fireside
Ages 9-14 May $14.95
ISBN 0-8075-3662-8
Someone Was
Watching
by David Patneoude
Ages 11-14 May $1395
ISBN 
0-8075-7531-3
The Boxcar Children' 
Albert Whitman
Mysteries 
Prairie Paperbacks
Characters created by
Gertrude Chandler Warner
#33, The Pizza Mystery
ISBN 0-8075-6535-0 Paper
ISBN 0-8075-6534-2 Cloth
March
#34, The Mystery Horse
ISBN 
0-8075-5339-5 Paper
ISBN 
0-8075-5338-7 Cloth
May
#35, The Mystery
at the Dog Show
ISBN 0-8075-5394-8 Paper
ISBN 0-8075-5395-6 Cloth
July
Ages 7-12
$3,50 Paperback
$1095 Hardcover
Prces su ecI to chonge
Send Fo, ao re aoloeiog
Al hoci3 
bs 
In 
oHnLr's
wnokViced 
Wdr~g
*A <M3 by Rwetosewado 
Halm
fho.n 
Who* 
1,u1e 
0I1t Grow?7
Easter
Written and ilustrated
by Miriam Nerlove
Ages2-6 February $495
ISBN 
0-8075-1872-7
Passover
Written and lustiated
by Miriam Nerlove
Ages 2-6 February $495
ISBN 
0-8075-6361-7
Alex, the Kid with AIDS
by ULinda 
Walvoori Grard
Iu1 Blanche Sim
Ages 7-11 April $595
ISBN 
0-8075-0247-2
A Concept Book
Losing Uncle Tim
by MaryKate Jordon
IIs. Judith Friedman
Ages 7-12 April $5.95
ISBN 
0-8075-4758-1
A Concept Book
I Wish Daddy
Didn't Drink So Much
Written and lustrated
by Judith Vigna
Ages 3-8 April $5.95
ISBN 0-8075-3526-5
A Concept Book
Who is a Stranger and
What Should I Do?
by Linda Watvoord Girard
IIuA Helen Cogancherry
Ages7-12 April $495
ISBN 
0-8075-9016-9
A Concept Book
Albert Whitmn & Company * 6340 Oakton Street 
Morton Grove, llnois 60053-2723
University of Illinois Press
54 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTuED
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
