I LLINOI S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
tsr"^™
I +m 
Reiw Pt 
.»mvwsPi an 
.. 
.
iS 
ib
by 5ort! 
WCIA"i
AT "The time is present,
but this tale of an arranged
marriage is as ancient as
India. Koly [is married]
off at 13 [to a] sickly
young bridegroom.
He dies before their
marriage is consummated,
and she finds herself a
widow in service to a
spiteful mother-in-law.
Whelan maintains Koly's
perspective so precisely
that readers begin to take
for granted the limitations
and formalities by which
she is bound, and to
understand that her
[sewing skill]-the means
of her salvation-is a gift
not granted to every widow. Her path to a new life and work in the
wake of many hardships is spun out against an exotic background.
[And] with its vividly realized setting and characters the tale is both
fascinating and chastening." -Pointer review / Kirkus Reviews
"~ '"A satisfying story with loving detail about traditional Indian
life, the harsh reality of feudal customs that persist today, and the
complexity of cultural change."-Starred review / SLJ
Ages 8-12. $15.95TR (0-06-028454-4) * $15.89LB (0-06-028452-8)
i HaroerCollinsChildren'sBooks
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
March 2000
Vol. 53 No. 7
A LOOK INSIDE
235 THE BIG PICTURE
One Lucky Girl by George Ella Lyon; illus. by Irene Trivas
236 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
240 
* Buttons written and illus. by Brock Cole
241 
* WhatJanie Found by Caroline B. Cooney
241 
* Night Hoops by Carl Deuker
242 * Mammalabilia written and illus. by Douglas Florian
247 * Grizz! ad. by Eric Kimmel; illus. by Andrew Glass
250 * 145th Street: Short Stories by Walter Dean Myers
261 
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 2000
263 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL
61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Associate Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Janice N. Harrington, Reviewer (JNH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
CENTER STAFF
Melanie Kimball
Jeannette Hulick
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $60.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from Bell & Howell, 300 North Zeeb
Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates,
P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the
University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2000 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Irene Trivas from One Lucky Girl ©2000. Used by permission of Jackson/DK
Ink.
MARCH 2000 
* 
235
THE BIG PICTURE
One Lucky Girl
by George Ella Lyon; illus. by Irene Trivas
There's lots of scary stuff out there, as any preschooler will attest; every step further
from home seems to bring a new parcel of problems that Mom and Dad cannot
mitigate. Perhaps most frightening are those violent acts of nature that pepper the
TV news-fire, floods, hurricanes, twisters-against which there seems to be no
adequate defense. Frightening, yes, but equally alluring; few children of even the
tenderest age can resist a peek at disaster, especially if it's someone else's disaster,
and especially if it all ends happily. What, then, could be more enticing than a
picture-book cover featuring a baby slumbering amid wildflowers in an open field
while a coal-black cloud spews debris on the not-so-distant horizon? Has it passed
the baby by, or is it headed her way? What child won't clamor to find out?
Hawkeye, brother of baby Becky and narrator of the story, tells about the
summer day in which, without warning, a tornado churns its way through his
trailer camp, shredding mobile homes and tossing them off their sites. His shell-
shocked family has barely recovered from the force of the winds that passed over
them when they realize that their home is gone, and Becky with it. Now Hawkeye
must use all his perceptive ability to track down his sister, hoping for the best yet
fearing the worst.
Lyon understands that for most listeners it's ferocious Mother Nature,
not Hawkeye, who's the star of this show, and that youngsters' tolerance for the
niceties of rising action has its limits. Her pacing, dictated by the parameters of
the standard thirty-two page picture-book format, is a masterful roller coaster of
roiling emotion. Two double spreads with a mere ten lines of text set the scene; by
the third spread the sky has darkened, and by the fourth the first drop of eagerly
anticipated terror has arrived: "Right then it got sick quiet-no breeze, no bird
cry. I could see a black finger of wind twisting toward us. 'Tornado!' somebody
yelled. We hit the dirt." Then comes destruction, then a quiet pause for disbelief,
then another gut-wrenching dip as the family realizes the baby is gone: "All the
screams nobody had screamed tore out of my mother's mouth . .. 'Becky!' she
hollered into the sky."
Trivas matches Lyon thrill for thrill, with blended pastel opening scenes
of a sunny yellow picture-perfect day breaking abruptly into a dense ebony twister
tinged with demonic red, a riotous confusion of whirling debris, and again the sun
spreading its warmth and peace over the wreckage. Against the indefensible ex-
panse of prairie and under the looming pressure of the funnel cloud, people and
structures appear all the more fragile and vulnerable.
In the end, however, Lyon and Trivas know there is only so much panic
a child audience can withstand, and, as sure-handedly as they manipulate their
thrills, they speed the distraught family along to its happy ending, racing Hawkeye
236 
* THE BULLETIN
through rubble-strewn fields until he spots Becky: "It looked like... it couldn't
be, but it looked like-a dream, the best dream you could ever have, the one where
you find your treasure." Swathed in her pink blanket, tenderly guarded by the
smiling sun-and-moon mobile arching above her white slatted crib, lucky Becky is
as resilient as the verdant prairie grasses and brilliant wildflowers around her.
A delightful flurry of shivers, followed by the comforting relief of a fam-
ily unharmed and inseparable-this is the action picture book at its best. Doubt-
less some stubborn listeners may mistrust the benign ending and protest, "This
couldn't really happen." Reassure them with the lead lines of the jacket flap, "Here
is a true story... " (Imprint information appears on p. 248.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADOFF, ARNOLD 
The Basket Counts; illus. by Michael Weaver. 
Simon,
2000 
48p
ISBN 0-689-80108-4 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
The speaker in the first of this collection's twenty-eight basketball poems, "We
Start With Early Morning," explains that "on the bus my books are in the/ b a c k
p a c k on the floor./ The ball is always in my hand," and it seemingly stays there
until the last poem when he brings the ball "inside 
to the table/ for the post/
game/ in ter view s." In between, a variety of speakers describe aspects of the game
such as the "soft/ clang/ b a n g i n g of/ r u s t y/ chains/ that/ hang/ down/ from/
h o o p s," the "s h a r p e s t wheelchair/ wheeeelies," and their failures and
successes on the court. The insider perspective of these evocative shaped-speech
poems is complemented by the dynamic but straightforward street-art-inspired
illustrations. The gouache images possess the sandy texture of pastels, and they
put a diverse mix of faces and bodies to their voices and subjects. While some kids
may find the overt didacticism of many poems inspiring, others may tune out the
familiar adult voice of poems like "Most Players Don't Go Pro," in which the
speaker argues that players "must keep the books as open/ as the o p e n shot."
Nonetheless, the clear physical descriptions of time spent with the "pebble rubber
ball" should resonate with those who know that basketball is the stuff of poetry.
Inbound this one to them. FK
AGEE, JON, comp. 
Elvis Lives! and Other Anagrams; comp. and illus. by Jon
Agee. 
Farrar, 2000 
[80p]
ISBN 0-374-32127-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Having previously dabbled in palindromes (Go Hang a Salami, I'm a Lasagna Hog!,
BCCB 10/96, etc.) and oxymorons (Who Ordered the Jumbo Shrimp?, BCCB 11/
MARCH 2000 
* 237
98), Agee now turns his pen to anagrams. Though some of these entries are origi-
nal, most are mined from other sources (which are credited in the back, along with
a bibliography of additional tomes on wordplay); all are treated to Agee's signature
vigorous-lined cartoonage. The quality is uneven, with some of the anagrams
failing to engage creatively with their originals, especially at a child-reader's level.
Many, however, are spirited and pithy: "Southern California/ Hot sun, or life in
a car" is wryly apt; "Astronomer/ Moonstarer" and "Piet Mondrian/ I paint mod-
ern" are cleverly definitive; and "Pub's motto/ Bottoms up" is a witty jest. The
illustrations carry the imaginative energy in many of the spreads, such as the mime
artists "Lionesses/ Noiseless" or the boa constrictor encircling a victim and asking
for "One hug?" to which she responds, "Enough!" Young word gamesters will
appreciate this lively assortment; you may want to follow up by pointing them to
websites for anagram creation. DS
ALEXANDER, SALLY HOBART 
Do You Remember the Color Blue? and Other Ques-
tions Kids Ask about Blindness. 
Viking, 2000 
[80p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-88043-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-7
Alexander, author of Mom Can't See Me (BCCB 11/90) and other books about her
blindness, here takes an even more direct approach to the subject, answering the
questions that she's been asked in her author visits with kids. The thirteen ques-
tions range from the practical ("How do you read?") to the medical ("If your eyes
don't see, do they work at all?") to the philosophical ("Would you rather be blind
or deaf?"). Though generally apolitical, Alexander obliquely addresses larger social
issues through her own personal experiences, tellingly relating, for instance, her
frustration at the hospital's official refusal to let her care for her newborn baby; she
also offers some fresh insights into aspects young readers may not have thought
about ("Friends always wonder how I knew I was attracted to a date when I couldn't
see") in an easy and confiding manner that will keep youngsters from feeling guilty
for wondering. Interspersed between responses are sections devoted to additional
details, such as "Helpful Tools" (featuring Brailled clothing tags, a talking clock,
etc.) and "A Dog Guide History"; black-and-white photos, some useful, some
filler, appear throughout and provide images of Alexander's tools and life (that,
ironically, she herself cannot see). The author's clearheaded and pragmatic ap-
proach ("There is no perfect substitute for vision") refreshingly resists mythologiz-
ing, and her balanced account will give kids a feeling for a life that on the one hand
seems very different and on the other could be anybody's. Appended are a blind-
ness exercise, a doctor's note about blindness, and addresses for further informa-
tion. DS
BACHRACH, 
SUSAN 
D. 
The Nazi Olympics: Berlin 1936. 
Little,
2000 
[132p] 
illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 0-316-07086-6 
$21.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-316-07087-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5 up
Far more than a sports history, this compelling title examines the importance of
sport and physical development in Nazi ideology and sheds light on the reasons for
U.S. participation in the games, even as information about Nazi persecutions made
238 
* THE BULLETIN
its way into the American press. The presentation is organized into chronological
sections covering the rise of Nazi Germany, sport in the Reich, debate over a pos-
sible U.S. boycott of the games, and the host propaganda throughout the Olym-
pics. Within each section, brief, concise chapters make the respective positions of
the Reich, the Olympic Committee, the competitors, the boycotters, and the U.S.
federal government clear even for readers with limited knowledge of the period.
Each chapter is amply illustrated with thoroughly captioned photos (a color insert
will be included in the final copy), and appendices include a bibliography and
index as well as a timeline and charts of early modern Olympic games and 1936
participant countries. Bachrach eschews editorial comment, allowing readers to
empathize as they will with various historical factions on their decisions to join or
boycott the games; only in her afterword does she make her own stance explicit:
"Many people falsely think that by capturing four gold medals in track and field
events and becoming the hero of the Olympics, Jesse Owens destroyed the Nazi
myth that claimed superiority of an Aryan master race. . .. In reality, Owens'
performance at Berlin ... had little impact on Nazi racism." The final chapter's
chilling photo gallery of publicly lauded European athletes who were to lose their
lives in the Holocaust is the most eloquent testimony. EB
BATTLE-LAVERT, GWENDOLYN 
The Music in Derrick's Heart; illus. by Colin
Bootman. 
Holiday House, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1353-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Harmonica virtuoso Uncle Booker T. plays music that comes from his heart. At
the end of each day he leaves his harmonica with his nephew Derrick, who hopes
to play as well as his uncle and practices daily, even sleeping with the harmonica.
Derrick's skills grow, but he doesn't manage to achieve true music until "old Arthur"
(arthritis) visits Uncle Booker T.'s hands, whereupon Derrick, to console his uncle,
at last plays from his heart and his uncle rewards him with the gift of the har-
monica. Though the text runs on a bit, the sentiment is sweet and wistful rather
than heavy-handed; the narrative flows smoothly, and provocative figurative lan-
guage and rhythmic phrases ("Derrick and Uncle Booker T. scampered away, away,
away") sustain interest. Impressionistic illustrations reminiscent ofJames Ransome
are imbued with light and painted in pine greens, indigo blues, and earthy browns.
The characters are expressive, occasionally catching the viewer in their direct gaze.
Like the author, Bootman also attends to details that capture the story's gentle
nostalgia (boys in overalls, front porch sitters, laundry on the backyard line). This
may need the intercession of an adult with a sense of family history to make a
connection for young listeners, but kids will still identify with Derrick's energetic
struggle to learn a new skill. JNH
BERG, BARRY 
Opening Moves: Michael Thaler, the Making ofa Very Young Chess
Champion; illus. with photographs by David Hautzig. 
Little, 2000 
4 4p
ISBN 0-316-91339-1 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 3-5
This glossy photoessay documents the rise of young chess champion Michael Thaler.
The reportorial language follows Michael's entry into the world of juvenile chess
competition, including descriptions of training, championship games, and the com-
mitment necessary for success. The text includes the young chess master's "seven
precepts" (lessons he has learned through chess competition), several games de-
picted move by move, and a reiteration that he is still just a normal kid. While the
MARCH 2000 
* 239
production values here are relatively high (the color photos are technically profi-
cient, and Michael is an engagingly photogenic subject), the intended audience is
unclear. No information about the rules of chess is included, and foreknowledge
of the moves and strategies of the game is necessary to make sense of much of this
title. The afterword by Michael's father about being a "chess dad" is obviously
aimed at parents but even here useful information is very sketchy. References to
national chess organizations and a list for further reading would have made this a
more valuable book. JMD
BIERHORST, JOHN, ad. 
The People with Five Fingers: A Native Californian Cre-
ation Tale; illus. by Robert Andrew Parker. 
Cavendish, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5058-0 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
"There was a world before this one, and all the animals were in it," but there
weren't any humans. Coyote, in the role of divine creator, takes charge, proclaim-
ing, "This earth cannot stay naked." Assisted by the Gopher brothers, Eagle, Griz-
zly Bear, Blacktail Deer, and other animals, Coyote prepares the earth for the
coming of the humans. His plan to give the people hands like his own is thwarted
by Lizard, who, knowing that "the people can't make baskets with round hands,"
makes sure they have five fingers like her. Bierhorst's economy of text gives a
rugged elegance to Coyote's declared plan for the people and results in effectively
streamlined storytelling. Parker's watercolors contribute to a sense of the primor-
dial as characters emerge from gauzy cloud, light, and mist to take their places.
The earth-and-sky tones of the palette merge into blended horizon lines that give
a sense of space to the uncluttered compositions, and the illustrations carefully
avoid anthropomorphizing the animal characters. An introductory cultural note
mentions the numerous American Indian nations of California and their many
languages, but the absence of a specific source note for this particular origin tale
makes its own origin unnecessarily generic. JMD
BLAKESLEE, ANN R. 
Summer Battles. 
Cavendish, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-7614-5064-5 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
When Kath arrives with her little sister Posy at their grandfather's home for the
summer of 1926, she can tell that something is wrong. Grando explains to her that
the Ku Klux Klan is organizing in Peaceable, his small Indiana town; he's a target
not only because, as a minister, he preaches against the Klan, but also because he
employs Serena, a "colored person," in his home. After listening closely to Grando's
sermons, Kath begins to connect the assumptions that the Klan makes about Serena
because of her race with judgments she herself has made against a stiff-seeming
piano teacher and the diminutive town barber. Her self-improvement includes
humanizing setbacks, as she wavers between deepening her understanding of preju-
dice and her occasional childish fits, telling Grando, "I think you're prejudiced
against me." While Kath's struggles are engaging, other characters are sketchily
portrayed, and when unlikely events lead Kath to singlehandedly save her grandfa-
ther from a Klan tar-and-feathering, the story concludes too abruptly for readers to
savor the victory. Despite these shortcomings, the topic of the Klan's activities,
particularly in a Northern state, is both historically captivating and ripe for cur-
ricular connections. Blakeslee's writing conveys the still heat of a long summer in
a troubled town, and Kath's experiences may inspire readers to uncover a few
prejudices of their own. KM
240 
* THE BULLETIN
BRADBY, MARIE 
Momma, Where Are You From?; illus. by Chris K.
Soentpiet. 
Orchard, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33105-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30105-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-9 yrs
This mother's poetic answer to her daughter's insistent question ("Momma, where
are you from?/ Where are you from, Momma?") introduces the abstract idea that
we are formed by our past experiences as Momma describes her origins: "I'm from
Monday mornings, washing loads of clothes in the wringer washer and peach bas-
kets full of laundry to hang on the clothesline strung from tree to tree-the sun
bleaching the sheets, the wind whipping them dry." Not all Momma's childhood
memories are warm: she recalls wondering "why the sidewalk ended at the edge of
my neighborhood, and why my brothers and sisters didn't go to the school right
up the street" but instead were bussed "past school... after school .. , after school
... until [they] came to a school where all the children were brown." In general,
however, her recollections reflect the perspective of a child whose sense of her
place in the world was affected by family and neighborhood more than these clear
injustices, and her memories lead her questioning daughter to the satisfying real-
ization that she too is "from" this place. A relentless yellow glare unfortunately
suffuses the illustrations and the identities of past and present characters become
somewhat confusing. Still, visual details and involving perspectives may draw
viewers into this place "where the edge of town met the countryside" and pull
them into the circle of children who "played 'One-Two-Three Red Light,' while
the adults listened to ball games on the radio." While this is a bit abstract and
retrospective for young listeners, they may be similarly inspired to ask questions
that allow them to explore their parents' past and their own. FK
COLE, BROCK 
Buttons; written and illus. by Brock Cole. 
Farrar, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-374-31001-7 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
7-10 yrs
Cole's original story has the feel of a traditional fool or dunderhead tale, and it may
remind adult readers of "The Three Sillies" in its compendium of the not-so-
bright lights that illuminate the pages. An old man "who ate so much his britches
burst and his buttons popped one, two, three, into the fire" takes to his bed. His
three daughters endeavor to replace his buttons: the elder swears to marry a rich
man (with lots of buttons); the middle daughter disguises herself as a man and
joins the army (the uniforms have lots of buttons); and the youngest promises to
run in the field by the river, apron outstretched (to catch any buttons that fall from
the sky). The two older girls find true love and forget their mission; the youngest
however, keeps her promise daily, even though "not a single button fell into her
apron. No, not even a cuff link." A young cowherd, dazzled by "the way her
brown legs flashed through the green grass," tells her of an old oak tree that has "a
frequent fall of buttons." All's well that ends well: father gets new buttons, the
family is reunited, and the youngest daughter and the cowherd (sans buttons) are
married. Cole's watercolors are a slice of Regency couture, with striped vests,
empire waist gowns, and curly tresses done up in a pageant of pastels; audiences
will remember his Winter Wren (BCCB 10/84), although these paintings have
more vigor. The tone of Cole's text, like the tone of the best noodlehead tales, is
one of pompous but good-natured silliness, and while Cole recognizes his charac-
ters' foolishness, he evinces a genuine affection for them. The vivid dialogue and
MARCH 2000 
* 241
theatrical motions (the father puts his hand to his head and cries "We are un-
done!"; the eldest daughter, hand to her bosom, sways with romantic fervor) pro-
vide opportunities for creative dramatics that will rock even less willing participants
with laughter. JMD
COONEY, CAROLINE B. 
WhatJanie Found. Delacorte, 2000 
181p
ISBN 0-385-32611-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
As the whole world knows, Janie (of The Face on the Milk Carton, BCCB 2/90,
etc.) has been undergoing various turmoils after the discovery that the people she
knew as her parents are actually the parents of her kidnapper, Hannah. Now her
adoptive father lies in a coma in intensive care, and Janie, trying to clear up his
affairs, discovers that he has secretly been sending payments to Hannah for years.
Janie determines to meet the woman who destroyed her life and takes off to Colo-
rado, ostensibly to visit her birth brother at college there, with another birth brother
and with Reeve, former boyfriend seeking reinstatement, in tow. Janie's saga is
classic potato-chip reading; fans will chow down until the bag is empty. This is
despite the fact that Cooney's produced tastier snacks: there are a lot of unresolved
plot threads lying around (and according to the jacket flap, this is the concluding
volume in the series), and some of the characterizations are problematic (it's not
clear why Janie's brother Steven is so stuck on his pushy and obnoxious girlfriend).
Since Janie's chronicle has been one of melodrama and operatic action, it's a bit of
a letdown to reach a closure dependent on internal resolution (Janie decides not to
meet her kidnapper); the end therefore seems less conclusive than cliff-hangery.
There's still plenty of breathless angst here, though-should Janie continue to
send payments to her kidnapper? Does her father love his daughter gone astray
better than the one standing by his hospital bed?-and readers who've consumed
the earlier adventures will eat this one up. DS
DEUKER, CARL 
Night Hoops. 
Houghton, 2000 
[25 6 p]
ISBN 0-395-97936-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Tenth grade promises to be the year Nick Abbott sees his hoop dreams begin to
come true, as Dad tears out Mom's rose garden to install a basketball court and
older brother Scott abandons his own promising high-school basketball career in
favor of jazz band, leaving the athletic spotlight to shine on Nick alone. The
coveted slot on the varsity roster is no guarantee of the good life, though-Dad's
parental aggressiveness breaks up the family; Trent, the juvenile delinquent across
the street, makes Nick's life a misery; plummeting grades threaten his team eligi-
bility; his own cockiness as rookie point guard promptly consigns him the bench.
As Nick makes his painful way toward the playoffs, he begins to appreciate that
teamwork pays off in the long run and realize that basketball may be the ticket to
Trent's redemption. Once again Deuker strikes a happy balance between issues
and action, examining topics such as parental pressure and the edgy relationship
between play makers and their less gifted teammates while transporting his readers
right into the bleachers with vivid play-by-plays. While this title doesn't quite
crackle with the electricity of Painting the Black (BCCB 6/97), fans will be well
satisfied to share Nick's epiphany: "Seniors and sophomores, first stringers and
bench warmers, we were all one, all doing things together that we couldn't have
done on our own." EB
242 
* 
THE BULLETIN
EDWARDS, JULIE ANDREWS 
Little Bo: The Story ofBonnie Boadicea; illus. by Henry
Cole. 
Hyperion, 1999 
90p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2449-2 
$17.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0514-5 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
An abandoned but plucky kitten (Little Bo, the runt of the litter) becomes the
beloved companion of a kind sailor (Billy, first mate on a herring boat) in this old-
fashioned short novel. Little Bo's struggle to find a safe home is overshadowed by
a storm at sea and a brave rescue (Billy saves a shipmate from being swept off the
deck) but young readers will appreciate the inclusion of more adventurous ele-
ments. Eleven episodic chapters are ideally arranged for reading aloud, and the
large blocks of text are relieved by a generous helping of spot art. The anthropo-
morphized animal characters are depicted in the cartoony oils as bright-eyed and
expressive (alley cat Bounder, father of the litter, is one of the more attractive
rogues in children's literature). While the story is slight and the ending anticli-
mactic (after the ship's captain refuses to allow Bo to stay, Billy walks into the
sunset with Bo perched on his shoulder), young readers will be attracted to the
perky Little Bo and her escapades at sea. JMD
FLOCA, BRIAN 
Dinosaurs at the Ends of the Earth: The Story of the Central Asiatic
Expeditions; written and illus. by Brian Floca. 
Jackson/DK Ink, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2539-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Floca leads dinosaur buffs on a fictionalized recreation of Roy Chapman Andrews'
1922-3 expeditions into Mongolia, where his team unearthed a previously undis-
covered Psittacosaurus and a nest of fossilized dinosaur eggs. A young assistant
named George Olsen seems to be responsible in this account for all the major
finds, but Floca's end note fails to indicate explicitly whether George (or, for that
matter, paleontologist Walter Granger) is real or fictitious, leaving the reader at sea
regarding the veracity of events as described. The combination of backbreaking,
tedious labor and pure serendipity that leads to important discoveries is clearly
conveyed, however, as the team painstakingly uncovers the fragile bones only to
have them threatened by a sandstorm, and George slides clumsily into a gorge,
where he spots the eggs. Watercolor scenes dominated by improbable shades of
yellow and orange feature slightly cartoonish figures (animal and human) that
make rescuing a mud-mired jeep, sweltering in the 1000 F+ temperatures, and crash-
ing down a rocky slope look like entirely too much fun. Still, there's enough here
to pique interest and send readers off to research the expedition in more detail.
Endpapers supply information on subsequent interpretations of Chapman's dis-
coveries. EB
FLORIAN, 
DOUGLAS 
Mammalabilia; written and illus. by Douglas
Florian. 
Harcourt, 2000 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-15-202167-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Continuing his poetic rounds through the animal kingdom, Florian returns to the
warmblooded beasts, offering encomia to animals from Aardvarks (" ... Aardvarks
look better/ By faar in the daark") to Zebras ("How many zebras/ Do you see?").
MARCH 2000 
* 243
His poetic style is increasingly epigrammatic, so the collection doesn't have quite
the variety or freshness of beast feast (BCCB 7/94) and the earlier animal antholo-
gies, but it's a witty array nonetheless. Though he employs some concrete effects,
the poems are particularly rewarding in their rhythm and soundplay, making en-
tries such as "The Coyote" (" ... I love/ A vowel/ For I am coyooooote") beg to
be read aloud. Florian's returned to more technically straightforward gouache in
his illustrations, but the creative distortions (there's something Thurberesque about
the shape of many of the animals) and the odd goofy touch (a woodpecker ham-
mers away at a leg on the stubborn mule, for instance) keep things far from dull.
This is a worthy addition to Florian's pixilated poetic stable of natural history. DS
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Rabbits, Rabbits er More Rabbits!; written and illus. by Gail
Gibbons. 
Holiday House, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1486-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
It's hard to resist a rabbit, and Gibbons offers up a raft of them in this accessible
overview of the endearing lagomorphs. The book covers history and anatomy,
habits and behavior, focusing particularly on rabbit ways and on the care of pet
rabbits. While the chunks of information are interesting, they're skimpy (the book
offers little more information than an encyclopedia article); the construction is
disjointed and sentences choppy, and errors and misleading statements (the use of
the word "tame" in place of "domestic" gets particularly confusing) creep in. The
illustrations are cheerful if sometimes awkward cartoons; their frequent annota-
tions are unevenly helpful, since the breed names are never matched with breed
characteristics and the anatomical labels aren't always clear. Young rabbit fans will
want more than this, but Gibbons is child-friendly enough that this could provide
them with a starting point. DS
GILLILAND, JUDITH HEIDE 
Steamboat!: The Story of Captain Blanche Leathers;
illus. by Holly Meade. 
Kroupa/DK Ink, 2000 
[34p]
ISBN 0-7894-2585-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
At eight years old, Blanche Douglas is fascinated by the Mississippi and preco-
ciously aware that its surface masks myriad secrets; at twelve she is determined to
become a steamboat captain. Marriage at twenty-one to Captain Leathers does
nothing to alter her dream; in fact, life aboard the Natchez allows her to study the
river's vagaries night and day ("A faint shadow: That means WATCH OUT, a
sandbar lurks below, waiting to capture any boat that strays too near!"). With the
apparent support of her husband, Blanche passes the oral exam in New Orleans,
moves on to the navigational exam in which she must pilot the steamboat up-
stream on "a starless, moonless night, black as ink," and earns the distinction of
becoming, in 1894, the first woman steamboat captain in the country. Mead's
paint and collage compositions capture Blanche in all her dreaminess and determi-
nation and the Mississippi in its many moods. Particularly effective are night
scenes in which the Natchez floats between nearly indistinguishable indigos of
river and sky, and the spread in which self-confident Blanche, backed by fiery
orange, charts a stretch of river hazards for a punctilious board of examiners who
appear as black silhouettes in the foreground. 
Blanche Leathers arrives just in
time to join her pioneering sisters in the Women's History Month display. EB
244 
* THE BULLETIN
GOVENAR, ALAN, ed. 
Osceola: Memories of a Sharecropper's Daughter; illus. by
Shane W. Evans. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2000 
[64 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2357-7 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0407-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4 up
Childhood experiences, family stories of rural life in segregated Waskom, Texas,
and the sociocultural history of a black Texas community are relayed through the
memories of Osceola Mays, an African-American sharecropper's daughter. Govenar
transcribes this oral history as a first-person monologue, allowing Mays' compel-
ling voice and poignant storytelling to pull readers through twenty-one brief chap-
ters covering a range of topics from "My Hometown" and "How I Got My Name"
to "The Civil War" and "Juneteenth." The narrative seems like a direct address to
the reader: "Every day when I went to school, I remembered stories and poems
that Mama taught me. I would say poems over and over to myself, that way Mama
was always with me. Mama loved poems and I wanted to keep them alive after she
had passed on." The textis accompanied by single-page illustrations and smaller
vignettes in a faux-naive style that depict the rural setting and scenes from Mays'
family history. The palette ranges from citrusy oranges to rusty reds, set against
muted turquoise. Osceola's face is expressive and articulate while other characters
are left purposely distorted, like crudely molded clay. 
Readers may find them-
selves pondering their own memories after encountering Osceola, while teachers
will find a resource for exploring African-American culture, oral history, storytell-
ing, or creative writing. JNH
HARLOW, JOAN HIATT 
Star in the Storm. 
McElderry, 2000 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-82905-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Maggie lives a quiet rural life on Newfoundland in 1912 until a
law is passed outlawing all non-sheepherding dogs in her little village. 
Maggie
refuses to part with her beloved Newfoundland, Sirius, despite a hostile neighbor's
insistence that he's a sheepkiller (and despite that neighbor's power, as boat-owner,
over Maggie's fisherman father). Maggie's attempts to secrete Sirius rather than
send him away fail, however, and it looks like she'll lose her dog until a storm at sea
endangers the neighbor's daughter and requires water-dog Sirius to assist in the
rescue. This is circumscribed and old-fashioned, with Maggie a stock spunky
historical heroine and the plot developments predictable and Disneyesque, largely
because of the thinness of character development. What's appealing here are the
details of early twentieth-century island life, such as Maggie's getting ice for a sick
friend by rowing out into the harbor and chipping it off of an iceberg, and Sirius
is, of course, pert-near irresistible as well as heroic. An undemanding and pictur-
esque read, this will offer youngsters a nice safe adventure. An afterword (provid-
ing real historical background for the story of fictional Maggie) and a map of
Newfoundland are included. DS
HERMAN, GAIL Just Like Mike; illus. by Meryl Treatner. Delacorte, 2000 [80p]
ISBN 0-385-32542-8 $13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Michael's mother is getting remarried, and that means a lot of upheaval for Michael
in the form of a new school, new stepdad, and new name: Michael Jordan. Since
MARCH 2000 
* 245
Michael adores basketball but lacks any noticeable talent at the game ("I don't
want to be Michael Jordan. Michael Jordan is the best basketball player ever, and
I'm the worst"), the name is an invitation for teasing in his new third grade. Though
Michael does indeed get teased, he also manages to develop a socially effective
reputation as a clown, brush up his basketball skills, and find a new niche as an
actor. Aside from the plot-driven insistence of Michael's mother on the name
change, this is a credible and low-key adjustment story, and its gentle but unprissy
treatment of the subject will reassure kids who are uncomfortable with more rau-
cous or slapstick reads. Herman protects her protagonist from any serious cruelty,
but the uneasiness of his situation ("I wish those girls would make fun of me
instead of trying to be nice. That's way worse!") makes for sufficient tension. The
simple language and uncomplicated sentences are particularly accessible to strug-
gling readers, and though they may get less basketball action than they'd hoped
for, they'll empathize with Michael's dilemma. Black-and-white illustrations are
on the stiff side, but Michael has the realistic look of the new kid next door. DS
HOBBS, VALERIE 
Charlie's Run. 
Farrar, 2000 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-374-34994-0 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Charlie, a naive eleven-year-old, believes if he runs away from home his parents
will reconsider their decision to divorce. Boy Scout extraordinaire, he packs his
knapsack with camping equipment and a few supplies and sets out to teach his
folks a lesson. Charlie falls in with a fourteen-year-old runaway named Doo, who,
after being sexually assaulted by her stepfather, set his house on fire and stole a car.
The two wanderers land in Venice Beach where they crash for the night with two
streetwise teenage drug dealers (Charlie, who is the proud earner of a CPR merit
badge, saves the life of one dealer when he overdoses). Doo and Charlie get picked
up by the police; Doo goes to juvie and Charlie goes home. Since it is a foregone
conclusion that this Boy Scout will emerge relatively unscathed, there is little sus-
pense in this predictable plot. While the pace of the opening pages drags, Hobbs'
characterizations are involving enough to carry the plot, and the action picks up
considerably when Doo and Charlie get to Los Angeles. Readers should have little
difficulty reaching their final destination. JMD
HOBERMAN, MARY ANN, ad. 
The Eensy-Weensy Spider; illus. by Nadine Bernard
Westcott. 
Little, 2000 
27p
ISBN 0-316-36330-8 
$12.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
By now the spout-scaling spider has probably made more thankless ascents than
Sisyphus, but for preschoolers who can't get enough of the classic fingerplay
Hoberman provides a host of fresh verses. The little pink spider in her flowered
blue hat explores her environs in a dozen rhymes (eleven original), which find her
swimming with a frog, marching with a bug band in a parade, wandering down a
spooky, shadowy park path after sunset, and other kid-pleasing activities. Hoberman
makes the most of the spider's multipedal possibilities with a trip to the shoe store
("We'd like to buy three pair"), scraped knees (she'll need six Band-Aids for that
one), and general clumsiness (she tends to trip over her own legs). If arachnid-
savvy listeners protest all these "sixes" for an eight-legged creature, be assured that
Westcott's spider always has at least two appendages in use as arms at any given
time. The fanciful line-and-watercolor bug wonderland is on the cutesy side, but
246 
* THE BULLETIN
it's as cheery and inviting as a viewer could wish, with its cast of grinning, crayon-
colored critters acting as the friendliest of guides, guardians, and good neighbors to
the little spider who makes her first ventures out of Mama's cozy web. Musical
notation and hand motions are included only for the original rhyme, but little kids
will have no trouble supplying some new ones as long as an accommodating adult
is willing to sing this again and again and again ... 
EB
HOROWITZ, ANTHONY 
The Devil and His Boy. 
Philomel, 2000 
[128p]
ISBN 0-399-23432-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Orphan Tom Falconer has nothing to lose but a backbreaking job in near bondage
to a pair of thieving innkeepers, so when a mysterious nobleman on horseback
offers to take him to London, Tom never looks back. They've hardly put distance
between themselves and the inn when a highwayman murders Tom's benefactor
during a robbery; with his dying breath the stranger urges Tom to hurry on to
"Moorfield." London is a labyrinth of crime and confusion to rural Tom, and he's
immediately taken up by the leader of a gang of beggars, who tries to sever Tom's
legs to make him a more pitiable street figure. Tom's luck seems to go rapidly
down from there, as he becomes enmeshed in a Spanish plot to assassinate the
queen. The action is fast and furious as Tom dodges the highwayman and the
hangman before discovering his true royal identity. Horowitz capitalizes on some
of the more unsavory historical characters of the Elizabethan age, as well as the
Bard and the Queen herself, and turns the rumor of Elizabeth's illegitimate child
into a period adventure that refuses to take itself or any of its fact-based cast too
seriously. Readers with a penchant for macabre wit will especially relish Horowitz's
flair for detail ("[pox-eaten] Sebastian tried to pick his nose, remembered it wasn't
there, and bit his nail absentmindedly instead") and chuckle with satisfaction as all
villainous heads are finally mounted on pikes. A note on historic background is
included. EB
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Down the Winding Road; illus. by Shane W. Evans. 
Jackson/
DK Ink, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2596-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A girl contemplates her family's annual visit "to the Old Ones' house," to see the
uncles and aunts who raised her daddy and who "live down the winding road."
The text goes on to describe the warmth of the greeting, the celebratory feasting,
and the gratifying indulgence of the children, with the poetry ofJohnson's quietly
lyrical prose emphasized by ragged right margins ("Then we walk again along/ the
winding road for home,/ slowing down a bit for the Old Ones"). The book suffers
from an absence of story, being overdependent on family closeness to provide plot
point as well as emotional reward. The affection is gratifying, however, and it
might lead kids to contemplate and share about their own family gatherings. The
illustrations provide the main impact here: Evans' richly hued oils depict a luxuri-
antly verdant countryside perfectly suited for a childhood idyll. His people are
personable and individual; though the faces sometimes seem unintentionally stiff,
they usually are imbued with the memorable asymmetries of long life and strong
character, with personal accoutrements to match (particularly in the credible vari-
ety of headgear on both sexes), and everybody seems authentically like somebody
MARCH 2000 
* 247
you'd meet and pass time with down at the corner store. The familial bonds are
palpable in every scene, with one spread featuring some of the most authentic
family hugs in the picture-book lexicon. Use this as a counterpart to a noisier
family story such as Woodson's We Had a Picnic This Sunday Last (BCCB 9/98),
or just to expand the increasing category of warm and positive African-American
stories of home and loved ones. DS
KAPLAN, HOWARD 
Waiting to Sing; illus. by Herve Blondon. 
Jackson/DK Ink,
2000 
[40p]
ISBN 0-7894-2615-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
A retrospective air informs this account of a boy who's "family's story was played
on the piano." The narrator embarks on the family tradition with "Fir Elise,"
laboring away under the loving eye of his mother; when his mother gets sick, "'Fir
Elise' is what she liked to hear." When his mother dies, the boy's relationship with
music is chilled, until finally his father's piano-playing brings him back. There's a
hushed poetry to the text that's technically impressive but emotionally distancing,
and the effects and events will be oversubtle and overlengthily presented for much
of the young audience. The pastel illustrations run to the bittersweet orange-
informed hues of late afternoon, which adds to the past-tense flavor; the creative
compositions are visually interesting, but the minimalist faces similarly resist reader
engagement with the narrator's experiences. Young readers with a taste for nu-
anced mood pieces may nonetheless warm to this quiet story of a boy's adjustment
to loss. DS
KIMMEL, ERIC A., ad. 
Grizz!; illus. by Andrew Glass. 
Holiday House,
2000 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-8234-1469-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Lucky Doolin is a cowboy "back in the days when an automobile was just a buggy
with a gas engine and the Wright brothers were still trying to get their flying ma-
chine off the ground." Unfortunately, Lucky is unlucky in love (the father of his
beloved Shelby refuses to let her marry a cowboy) so the disappointed buckaroo
takes off, ostensibly to seek his fortune. What he finds is a slick card sharp (with
horns and hooves) who offers him a lifetime of good luck if he won't wash, shave,
comb his hair, cut his nails, or change his clothes for seven years. Lucky agrees,
and sure enough, he gets rich, richer, richest, and seven years roll smellily by.
Meanwhile, back at the Rocking M Ranch, slick lawyer Parmelee Jones is black-
mailing Shelby into marriage; his dastardly plan is foiled by Lucky, who, in the
time-honored tradition of folktales and westerns, shows up at the last minute to
save the day (and who wins his bargain with the devil because of the difference
between Central and Mountain time). Kimmel's retelling of this folktale (found
in German and Russian traditions, among others) has a rip-roaring hilarity that is
expertly reflected by Glass' seriously funny illustrations. The pastel and water-
color images are textured with broken lines, scratches, and dashes that shimmer
with energy. Lucky goes from being handsome and clean-cut to being such a sorry
sight his aroma almost wafts from the pages, and Wild West motifs (cacti, horses,
coyotes, railroad stations, etc.) add local color. Pair this with Alan Schroeder's The
248 
* THE BULLETIN
Tale of Willy Monroe (BCCB 6/99), also illustrated by Glass, for a lively example of
the Americanization of traditional tales. Detailed source notes are included. JMD
LEVY, ELIZABETH 
Seventh Grade Tango. 
Hyperion, 2000 
[144p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2427-1 
$16.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0498-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Rebecca starts seventh-grade ballroom dance classes with a reputation as a "Killer
Dancer"; this appellation isn't a flattering one, since she earned it by breaking her
friend Scott's toe in mid-gavotte the previous year. Teamed with Scott for ball-
room, however, she finds that she has real talent, as does Scott. She also has a
crush on the teacher, which makes Scott jealous; he's hardly in a position to com-
plain, however, since Rebecca's friend Samantha has claimed him as a boyfriend,
which makes Rebecca, pushed by Samantha into party kissing games, jealous her-
self. While there's a hasty edge to the writing and Scott's a bit too good to be true,
the preteen-romance story is amiably unfurled, with Rebecca's uneasiness about
Samantha's bossy precocity well captured. The ballroom dance plot is pleasingly
unusual, and the details are diverting; Levy boldly ignores the air of geekdom that
lingers over junior-high dance and creates a plausible world where a good seventh-
grade tango is an admirable thing. Youngsters yearning to trip the light fantas-
tic-and maybe secretly to kiss their supposedly platonic friends-will waltz right
through this one. DS
LOGUE, MARY 
Dancing with an Alien. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
[14 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028319-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028318-1 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
When Tonia saves a beautiful but strange young man from drowning, she finds
herself in love for the first time. Branko, who claims to be an exchange student
from Romania, is actually a tall and sexy alien from another planet. In narration
that alternates between the two characters, Tania is busy falling in love while Branko
contemplates the babies he and Tonia will make to help insure the survival of his
species, whose female population was decimated a generation ago. The story is
marred by lapses in logic, such as Branko's seeming ability to breathe underwater
one day and yet nearly drown the next. Tonia's abrupt switch from romantic
cynic to love-swamped teenager is more matter of fact than passionate, and Branko's
awkward alien ways make it difficult to see the appeal. However, for girls who
dream of love from a world completely outside of their own, Branko's extraterres-
trial existence may be justification enough. In a quick turnaround at the end, love
sets Tonia free; Branko realizes he cares too much for her to subject her to the life
of reproductive confinement that awaits the women lured to his planet, and he
rides his spaceship off into the sunset. Tonia is left to watch the stars and dream of
love, and romantically inclined UFO aficionados may wish to join her. KM
LYON, GEORGE ELLA 
One Lucky Girl; illus. by Irene Trivas. 
Jackson/DK Ink,
2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7894-2613-7 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 4-7 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 235, for review.
MARCH 2000 
* 249
MACK, TRACY 
Drawing Lessons. 
Scholastic, 2000 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-439-11202-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Rory is looking forward to starting seventh grade, which seems nearly grown up to
her; she's also looking forward to teaming her artistic talent with her father's in a
birthday mural for her mother. The strains of her parents' marriage become too
much, however, and her beloved father leaves. Rory can't bring herself to tell
anyone or to resume her art, in which she has been very much a pupil of her father,
and she grows more and more distant from friends and teachers as her father's
departure proves to be permanent. First novelist Mack paints Tracy's distress and
increasing isolation effectively and realistically; while Rory's tendency towards adult
use of metaphor occasionally adds a false touch to her narration, her engagement
with her art is believably depicted. The end isn't entirely surprising (Rory finds
rapprochement with her father and begins painting in her own style), but it's sat-
isfying and plausible. Readers who've enjoyed Zibby Oneal's novels about gifted
young women will appreciate this portrait of a young artist going through a diffi-
cult time. DS
MCPHAIL, DAVID 
Drawing Lessons from a Bear; written and illus. by David
McPhail. 
Little, 2000 
32p
ISBN 0-316-56345-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
An imposing and artistically inclined brown bear is the narrator of this exhortation
to embrace the creative life. The bear talks about how even when he was a cub he
drew whenever he got the chance; the more he drew, the better he got, until he
reached his present success: "Many years have passed. I am a big bear now, but I
still love to draw. I am invited to dine with kings, and queens, and presidents. (I
even draw pictures for them on napkins!)." Bear encourages young listeners to
consider themselves artists ("I was born a bear, and I will always be a bear. But I
am an artist, too, because that is what I have decided to be") even going so far as to
cheerlead them in a shout of "I AM AN ARTIST!" 
It's hard to believe that
McPhail pulls this one out of its sentimental quicksand, but, even with a hack-
neyed conclusion, he does. The pictures radiate reassurance and cozy warmth
from the ovoid shapes of the illustrations to the golds and violets of the sunset-
hued light. The text is contemplative and narrow in scope, but the bear is thor-
oughly engaging and may well convince budding artists to take stronger root. This
simple vocational piece lends itself to a multitude of curriculum uses. JMD
MAYNARD, BILL 
Pondfire. Putnam, 2000 
[96 p]
ISBN 0-399-23439-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Jed's the son of the volunteer fire chief; in his attempt to emulate his widely ad-
mired father and overcome his trepidation about fire ("I kept trying to learn more
about fires so they wouldn't scare me so much"), he's already blotted his copybook
by causing one destructive conflagration. Now other fires are beginning to blaze
around town, and people are suspecting Jed. Already keen to uncover the real
culprit, Jed grows even more determined when one of the fires results in his father's
serious injury and in his father's chief detractor's taking over the fire department.
250 
* THE BULLETIN
The book starts out with a great hook ("It wasn't much of a swamp, but we were in
the middle of it. And it was on fire") and continues in that vein, keeping interest
sparking throughout. The side plots (Jed's enmity with some difficult classmates,
his grandmother's life in a nursing home, his father's coma) are heartily corny, as is
the plot resolution, but there's heated excitement and high action aplenty. The
pace is swift, and it's hard to beat the testosterone-rich heroism surrounding the
final dramatic conflagration (a derailed train carrying fuel provides explosions as
well as flames) as Jed shows his fire-fighting talents in the face of danger. Kids not
looking for the sophistication of Maurice Gee's The Fire-Raiser (BCCB 12/92)
will find this a crackling good read. DS
MAYO, MARGARET, ad. 
Brother Sun, Sister Moon: The Life and Stories ofSt. Francis;
illus. by Peter Malone. 
Little, 2000 
[70p]
ISBN 0-316-56466-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Mayo combines biography and folklore in this look at Francis ofAssisi, founder of
the Franciscan Order. A succinct biography of the mendicant friar precedes eight
legends of the miracles and blessed events associated with him. The story of St.
Francis' conversion from a rich and idle young man to a believer who gives up
everything for his faith is a powerful one; the tales of his miraculous way with birds
and beasts are the stories that make him a favorite saint, especially among younger
children. Simple, restrained language and a respectful but friendly tone give this
title just the right amount of reverent pizzazz to make it a Sunday school favorite
accessible to a wide range of readers and listeners. Malone's arresting paintings
feature elegant spare lines and intensely saturated opaque golds, blues, and reds
combined in stylized compositions that subtly echo religious iconography and missal
art. Mayo mentions the existence of biographies and lore written about the Chris-
tian saint but never names any, offering specific source notes for only one tale.
Still, libraries seeking to expand their comparative religion section with a high-
quality title shouldn't miss this one. The lyrics for "The Canticle of Brother Sun"
are also included. JMD
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
145th Street: Short Stories. 
Delacorte, 2000 
151p
ISBN 0-385-32137-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Myers' collection of ten short stories set in New York City's Harlem opens with
"Big Joe's Funeral," wherein Big Joe decides to have his funeral while he can still
enjoy it. The humor of Big Joe's celebration of the beyond is followed by the
tragedy of "The Baddest Dog in Harlem," in which a young boy is killed by care-
less police gunfire; and a boxer on his way down goes back to the ring to earn
money against the wishes of his loving wife in the multilayered story of "The
Fighter." Faith, family, and neighborhood unity are recurring motifs in Myers'
collection, and complex but subtle character portrayals add depth and nuance.
Narrative voices vary: the chatty first-person narrations are close-up, front-porch
observations of what's been happening on the block; the third-person narrations
provide a distance that adds clarity to the pathos of the tale being told. Each story
builds on the others and supplies another facet of the community Myers carefully
and lovingly constructs. As a whole, this is a model compilation of interconnected
tales that are strong standing alone but stronger still standing together. JMD
MARCH 2000 
* 
251
OSBORNE, MARY POPE 
Adaline Falling Star. Scholastic, 2000 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-439-05947-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Adaline Falling Star, daughter of fabled scout Kit Carson and his Arapaho wife, is
left with white relatives in St. Louis when her father accompanies John C. Fre-
mont, "The Pathfinder," on a trip through the Rocky Mountains. Adaline is
unable to adjust to life with her cousins; their overt racism and mistrust provoke
her worst qualities. Her cousin's destruction ofAdaline's corn-husk doll and other
personal belongings in an attempt to "wash the Indian out of her" causes Adaline
to run away. Convinced her father has broken his promise to return for her, she
heads for home; she is soon joined by a mongrel dog who becomes her constant
companion. The packed plot is held together by Adaline's first-person narration;
her voice is emotional, intelligent, and touchingly naive. The highly fictionalized
Adaline is the only well-articulated character; the two-dimensional peripheral char-
acters lack substance and individuality. Adaline's ruminations on her mixed-race
parentage and familial roots are background chatter for what is essentially a Jour-
ney ofNatty Gann survival story-young girl searches for her father accompanied
by canine sidekick-and her ultimate reunion with her father is in no doubt. JMD
PACKARD, EDWARD 
Big Numbers: And Pictures That Show Just How Big They Are;
illus. by Salvatore Murdocca. 
Millbrook, 2000 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-1570-5 $22.40
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-1280-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
From one to one quadrillion, peas are the article of choice to demonstrate the
relative, well, bigness of numbers. Pea-eating Pete, of the round spectacles and
backwards baseball cap, starts with a single pea on a plate, increases his serving to
one hundred peas, then a thousand (heaping plateful), one million (overflowing
table full), one billion (overflowing houseful)... you get the picture. There's a lot
going on in each crowded, Technicolor spread. Critters parade along the sidewalk
with a caption explaining how far a (fill in the number) of them would stretch; the
number is written out in words, numerals, and scientific notation (with expo-
nent); the number is expressed in multiples of other numbers ("A million is a
thousand thousands"); cartoon characters kibitz about the growing pea pile ("Yikes!
Where's the table?"). Jovial as all this may be, it gives a better sense of volume than
of numbers. The quadrillion peas that make a mountain covering Pete's town is a
green lump, conveying little idea of the actual number of discrete units that com-
prise it. If a curriculum demands that very young children contend with
meganumbers, by all means give this a try. To convey large numbers in a visually
explicit format, however, choose from David Schwartz's How Much Is a Million?
(BCCB 7/85), Demi's One Grain ofRice (BCCB 2/97), or even Arthur Geisert's
Roman Numerals I to MM (BCCB 3/96). EB
PALATINI, 
MARGIE 
Good as Goldie; written and illus. by Margie
Palatini. 
Hyperion, 2000 
[24p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2435-2 
$15.49
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0502-1 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
It's such a trial to be a role model to a younger sibling, as oh-so-mature Goldie is
quick to point out. She decries baby brother Nicholas' limited life skills ("Guess
252 
* 
THE BULLETIN
what? He doesn't eat with a fork or a spoon. Yech! He's a very sloppy eater").
One glance at the watercolor pictures, though, clues the audience that the pot's
calling the kettle black. Nicholas may have a bowl on his head and a bottle en-
route to the floor, but Goldie herself has tipped over her milk, trashed her dinner
plate, and spooned as much meal onto her face as into her mouth. "Nicholas can't
read books like me," says Goldie complacently. No, indeed. But while baby
chomps on a book spine, Goldie peruses her volume upside down. Goldie's verbal
self-righteousness is well matched by the slit-eyed, sidelong glances she casts at her
brother and her droll smugness at her own accomplishments. Oversized print, a
cheery palette, and uncomplicated scenes on pristine white backgrounds perfectly
complement Palatini's on-target selection of milestone achievements, making this
an excellent choice for preschoolers defining their own position in the family hier-
archy. EB
PETERS, JULIE ANNE 
Define "Normal." Little, 2000 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-316-70631-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Eighth-grader Antonia is accustomed to success through diligence at school, but
she's afraid a new challenge may be too much for her: she's supposed to peer
counsel the rebel Jazz, whose dyed hair, eyebrow ring, and tough friends intimi-
date Antonia. While it'll be no surprise to readers that Antonia's initially judg-
mental attitudes ("She was a what. A subhuman. A foreign body to steer clear of
in the hallway. All punkers were") give way to a greater understanding of Jazz, the
book cleverly moves beyond that predictable result when it turns out that Jazz,
acting under secret orders, is actually peer counseling Antonia. The girls' budding
friendship is a bit of a setup in literary terms as well as in literal terms, but it's still
convincing, as is Antonia's initial determination that preservation of her family in
the face of her mother's debilitating depression is her own private responsibility.
The book effectively makes some quiet points about the dangers of walling your-
self into a particular identity: gifted musician Jazz keeps her talent secret from her
punk friends, and Antonia's terrified of being anything other than the super-reli-
able good kid. Peters (author of How Do You Spell Geek?, BCCB 10/96) has a gift
for adding some original flavor to solid school-and-friends dramas, and this gives
the different-as-day-and-night friendship story heart that readers from both sides
of the equation will appreciate. DS
PETERSEN, P. J. 
I Hate Weddings; illus. by Lynne Cravath. 
Dutton,
2000 
[11 2p]
ISBN 0-525-46327-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
Poor Dan (star of I Hate Company, BCCB 11/94): his divorced father's getting
married to Joan, whom Dan has only met once, and he doesn't even get the man-
to-man prewedding visit he was expecting, instead having to bunk up at Dad's
fiancee's house with her kids. While young Riley adores Dan instantly, resentful
Hannah is trouble, and with a few tricks from her Dan has managed to turn him-
self into a problem rather than the good guest he's genuinely trying to be ("I didn't
want Dad to forget about his old son. I had to do better with Joan"). Despite
setbacks, Dan et al. make it unscathed to the wedding, where Dan saves the day
with a great act of heroism (removing Riley's pet tarantula from Joan's wedding
MARCH 2000 
* 
253
dress mid-ceremony) all the more heroic for its remaining largely a secret. Petersen
has Dan's voice down pat: plagued by uncertainty amid all the curves being thrown
him, Dan's still a good, well-meaning, and ruefully funny middle-grade guy. The
book wisely provides its angst through realistic human stress, making its characters
credibly flawed rather than conveniently villainous and providing immediate new-
family benefits in the worshipful Riley and cool step-uncle Tony. It's a breezy read
with a sympathetic hero and a tarantula at a wedding-what's not to like? Re-
viewed from an unillustrated galley. DS
PIERCE, TAMORA 
The Circle Opens: Magic Steps. 
Scholastic, 2000 
[272p]
ISBN 0-590-39588-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The first title in this new series (a spinoff of Pierce's Circle of Magic quartet) finds
fourteen-year-old mage Lady Sandrilene fa Toren (the Sandry of Sandry's Book,
BCCB 11/98) nursing her uncle Duke Vedris through his convalescence after a
heart attack. Her nursing includes accompanying the Duke on his daily rides
through the city; during one such ride Sandry discovers Pasco, a twelve-year-old
boy who can dance magic, and becomes his teacher. Another ride does not end
quite so pleasantly: Sandry is present when the grisly murder of a shady merchant
is discovered, and she becomes instrumental in the solving of the crime. This
novel, even more than the opening title in the Circle of Magic series, serves more
as set-up than as a well-developed story of its own. The characterizations are less
richly layered, relying on the previous series to fill in the blanks, and the descrip-
tions of Pasco's magic-making dances do not reflect the same complexity as the
descriptions of the other magical workings. The occasional insertion of modern
slang is disconcerting, there is a bit more talking than doing (which is unusual for
the plot-driven Pierce), and it is unclear which character is the novel's primary
focus. The murder and suspense angle of the tale is well thought out, however,
and the villains of the piece deserve their ultimate gory end. The relationships
between Sandry and her older mentors-her uncle, the law-enforcement officer
Wulfric-are subtly and often humorously depicted. Despite an occasional thin-
ness, there is more than enough action and suspense to keep fans of the previous
titles dancing right along. JMD
RADIN, RUTH YAFFE 
Escape to the Forest: Based on a True Story of the Holocaust;
illus. by Janet Hamlin. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
[80p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028521-4 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028520-6 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Radin's based-on-history tale is told by Sarah, a young Jewish girl observing the
impact of the Nazi invasion of Poland. Her parents, brother David, and her brother's
fiancee, Lili, manage to eke out a subsistence level existence as Nazi-enforced dep-
rivation escalates. As the hardships and dangers grow, David argues for an escape
to the forest and the partisans; unable to convince his parents of his argument, he
remains to keep the family together. Rounded up for transport to Treblinka, the
family faces almost certain death until David and Lili get lost in the crowd and
Sarah's parents tell her to flee and live. Alone, Sarah makes her way to the Bielski
partisans and reunion with David and Lili. Radin captures the stark horror of a
family living under extreme circumstances. Stylistically simple but strongly plot-
254 
* THE BULLETIN
ted, the narrative makes good use of suspense and contrast. The bravery and close-
ness of Sarah's family is clearly defined; juxtaposed against the increasing Nazi
threat, their eventual sundering has substantial impact. Radin includes two notes,
one giving biographical information on the real Sarah, and the other a historical
note on the Bielski partisans. The story is divided into chapters by season and year,
which will enable classroom teachers to provide context by making connections to
other wartime events. Black-and-white line drawings of domestic items and theme-
related images are interspersed throughout. JMD
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
Moosey Moose; ISBN 0-7868-0581-1; Sluggy Slug; ISBN 0-7868-
0584-6; Whaley Whale; ISBN 0-7868-0583-8; Wormy Worm; ISBN 0-7868-0582-
X. 
Each book: 
written and illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Hyperion,
2000 
[17p] 
$3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
1-3 yrs
This series aims to teach "young children to read using simple sounds paired with
easy word repetitions." Ultra-spare storylines (Whaley Whale hides, Sluggy Slug
won't go, Moosey Moose is mad, Wormy Worm wiggles) feature three or four
words in large text on one page; on the facing page is a related illustration. The
texts are uneven (a representative sample of a more successful attempt is "Sluggy
Slug won't go. No, Sluggy Slug will not go. Sluggy Slug says no. 'No'") and
illogical (even the youngest listener is going to wonder what Whaley Whale is
doing out of the water). The lack of context clues (to encourage word recognition)
and the use of complex consonant combinations and contractions make these well-
intentioned titles too difficult for the intended audience of young emergent read-
ers. Raschka's talent is such that he can make even the simplest concept at least
visually appealing; unfortunately, these construction-paper-colored figures, out-
lined in black like coloring book images for tiny fingers and jumbo crayons, are
attractive but insufficient. JMD
RODOWSKY, COLBY 
Spindrift. Farrar, 2000 
[112p]
ISBN 0-374-37155-5 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-8
Thirteen-year-old Cassie Barnhart is upset and confused when she sees her brother-
in-law Mickey secretly kissing another woman. She doesn't tell her family about
the incident and struggles to believe the best, defending Mickey even after her
sister seeks a divorce upon discovering further evidence of his infidelity. Cassie
sees herself as a problem-solver ("I fix things: smooshed-down sand castles on the
beach, lopsided bird's nests that the birds have long since abandoned, clocks, and
sometimes life. At least I try") but suddenly her life is out of control: her sister is
moving back home with a new baby, her grandmother wants to remarry and sell
the Spindrift, the family home, and Mickey is a stranger. The straightforward
narrative has a conversational tone and, told from Cassie's perspective, it flows
smoothly from incident to incident. Cassie is given some emotional depth, and
her growth and actions evolve naturally from the plot. With the exception of
Mickey, who seems a little too much the classic cad, the adults are believably drawn;
realistically, these grownups do have needs of their own. Cassie's difficulties with
change and human disappointment will resonate with readers, although her naivet6
makes her seem younger than her age would indicate. The predictable story is
MARCH 2000 
* 
255
wrapped up tidily: Cassie tells her teacher everything that has happened to her,
and Mrs. Quattlemayer tells her to "store it up, Cassie. Store it up and sort it out.
And maybe someday you'll write about it." JNH
Ross, MICHAEL ELSOHN 
Nature Art with Chiura Obata; illus. by Wendy Smith
and with photographs. 
Carolrhoda, 2000 
48p 
(Naturalist's Apprentice)
ISBN 1-57505-378-0 
$19.93 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The life and art of Japanese-American sumi-e artist Chiura Obata are described in
this combination biography, nature journal, and art instruction book. Ross con-
veys basic information about Obata's childhood in Japan, his personal life, and his
work as a maturing artist in the United States, where he painted the aftermath of
the San Francisco earthquake, the wildlife of Yosemite National Park, and Topaz,
the detention center where he and his family were imprisoned during World War
II. The writing is accessible but choppy, and at times the text has the rhythm of
controlled-vocabulary prose: "When Zoroku [Obata] was seven, he began his
training in sumi-e. This art form uses a type of ink called sumi and specially
shaped brushes for drawing and painting. Sumi-e takes years to learn. For nearly
two years, Zoroku painted lines and circles without resting his elbows on the table.
It was hard work, but he learned to paint with a steady hand." Clearly captioned
black and white photographs and reproductions of Obata's paintings are inter-
spersed throughout the work along with fifteen art exercises and information blocks
about the natural world. Obata's sumi paintings reveal an expressive beauty in
their precise lines, delicate washes of color, and eloquent balance of negative and
positive space. Overall, the art and nature exercises add little to the work, and
readers will regret that more of Obata's inspirational paintings were not included
in their stead. Report writers will gratefully find a timeline, a short glossary, a
useful biography, and an index. JNH
SIMMONS, JANE 
Daisy and the Beastie; written and illus. by Jane Simmons. 
Little,
Brown, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 
0-316-79785-5 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
2-5 yrs
There's nothing like two youngsters going off in search of adventure to pique the
interest of young listeners. Duckling Daisy (ComeAlong, Daisy!, BCCB 9/98, etc.)
and her little brother Pip go in search of "the Beastie" from Grandpa's story. On
their journey they encounter a variety of farm animals and their young, which
encounters provide opportunities for imitative vocalizations from the ever-
enthusiastic Pip. The two exploring ducklings hear a noise from the shed ("'Run,
Pip, run!' cried Daisy. 'It's the Beastie!'") and flee to their grandfather, only to
discover that "the Beastie" is really three kittens, "and Daisy and Pip played with
the kitten beasties all day long." Daisy and Pip's mini-odyssey is going to make a
lively addition to storytime; chances for participatory animal sounds abound
("'Honk! Honk!' said the goslings. 'Honk!' said Pip") and the right dramatic reading
will give this reassuring tale a suspenseful resonance that is just the right intensity
for preschoolers. The illustrative action is depicted on double-page spreads large
enough to be seen from the back of the room, with compositions that balance light
and color while they contrast big and small (tiny ducklings against huge sow and
piglets, etc.). Simmons' illustrations have that sunny palette readers will recall
256 
* THE BULLETIN
from Daisy's previous outings, and the depictions of the animal characters, both
ducks and others, are just as winning. JMD
SINGER, MARILYN 
On the Same Day in March: A Tour of the World's Weather;
illus. by Frane Lessac. 
HarperCollins, 2000 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028188-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028187-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 1-3
A companion to Nine O'Clock Lullaby, a tour of the world's time zones, this pic-
ture book shows the weather conditions prevailing from the Arctic to Antarctica
and fifteen places in between on "the same day in March." Lively folk-art inspired
gouache spreads illustrate one to ten lines of text, showing how "the biggest snow
fort ever/ is nothing but a dragon-shaped patch/ in somebody's backyard" after the
chinook blows through Alberta, Canada; how "sunlight sparkles on the market" in
Dakar, Senegal and "dazzles on the sand" in Barbados; how people in Darjeeling,
India respond to the sight of "hailstones all over the hillside"; and how "a tiny
twister" in the Texas Panhandle managed to "suck up a bucket of water/ and give
Grandma's dirty old truck the first wash it's had in weeks." Though the poetry is
uneven, the specificity of the text and the clearly individualized illustrations effec-
tively communicate the basic message that "on any given day in March, some-
where in the world, it may be raining, snowing, or hailing. It may be sunny, foggy,
or windy." The author's brief explanation of the impact of the earth's rotation on
global weather would be a good jumping-off point for a more effective physical
demonstration, one of the many ways this book could be used across the curricu-
lum, whether you read it in March or save it for a rainy day. FK
SOUHAMI, JESSICA, ad. 
No Dinner!: The Story of the Old Woman and the Pump-
kin; ad. and illus. by Jessica Souhami. 
Cavendish, 2000 
28p
ISBN 0-7614-5059-9 
$15.95 
R 
4 -7 yrs
An old woman, "so bent and frail that she was nothing but skin and bone," goes to
visit her granddaughter on the other side of the forest. On her way she meets a
wolf, a bear, and a tiger; despite the animals' urgent hunger, she convinces them to
wait until later to eat her, because she is sure to "get nice and fat" at her loving
granddaughter's house. Clever genes must run in the family: to keep her from
being eaten, the granddaughter hides her grandmother in a hollow pumpkin so
she can roll home without being seen by the hungry beasts. The tiger and bear are
easily deceived, but the wolf has "never heard a TALKING pumpkin," and, his
curiosity aroused, he discovers the old woman. With one last trick the old woman
gains her home, "happy, fat, and safe." Souhami illustrates her spare, fast-moving
tale with watercolor ink and charcoal illustrations. The characters and setting are
boldly rendered, constructed of solid geometric shapes in poster-paint-like opaque
colors, and set against stark white pages in uncluttered compositions. The hungry
animals loom hugely over the old woman, and, on the way home, they take up
much of the available space. That sense of size-related danger is stylistically rein-
forced by the use of capital letters, larger typefaces, and bold lettering in the text
itself when the beasts address the wily woman. This crisply tellable rendering is
"based on a popular folktale, 'The Old Woman and the Pumpkin,' told across the
Indian subcontinent." Dramatic visuals and concise language make this a tasty
storytime treat. JMD
MARCH 2000 
* 
257
STEIN, STEPHENJ. 
AlternativeAmerican Religions. 
Oxford, 2000 
[15 6 p] 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-19-511196-6 
$22.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 8-12
Stein examines the emergence of New Religious Movements ("NRMs") and their
leaders in the United States from Roger Williams and his colonial dissenters through
Marshall Applewhite and Heaven's Gate in 1997. Chronologically organized in
broadly defined eras, each chapter's discussion centers on a particular theme-
colonial peace movements, communitarian sects in the early to middle 1800s,
apocalyptic believers in the middle to late 1800s, women healers and occultists at
the turn of the last century, urban black churches in the early and middle 1900s,
and late twentieth century cults. Although this schema illuminates patterns in the
development of NRMs, it may lead readers with little background in religious
history to view these themes as time-bound (how about apocalyptic movements in
the late 1900s, or male healers and occultists at any period?). The tone is generally
pedantic ("Rising economic success accompanied the geographical and numerical
expansion of the Shakers"), but primary source inserts for each chapter and an
abundance of period illustrations move the discussion along. Researchers of a
particular NRM may want to take a peek in the excellent index to see if their
quarry is included here before tackling the entire volume; readers seeking more in-
depth information can consult the appended bibliography. EB
TABACK, SIMMS, ad. 
Joseph Had a Little Overcoat; ad. and illus. by Simms
Taback. 
Viking, 1999 
34p
ISBN 0-670-87855-3 
$15.99 
R 
3-5 yrs
Taback has reillustrated his 1977 version of a well-known and popular Yiddish
folk song. While the image of Joseph himself will be familiar to readers of the
earlier title, the artist has enhanced his original concept in mixed-media illustra-
tions (watercolor, pencil, gouache, ink, and collage) that include saturated colors,
busy patterns, and the same die-cut technique used in his previous book, There
Was an OldLady Who Swalloweda Fly (BCCB 3/98). The sometimes overcrowded
compositions teem with inside humor and subtle commentary on all things Yid-
dish: samplers feature theme-related proverbs, the lead story on the front page of
a discarded newspaper reads "Rabbi from Chelm Visits Kazrilevke," a card from
Joseph's sister reads "Zayn Gezundt," and photos of famous Jews (Sigmund Freud,
Sholom Aleichem) hang on the walls. Musical notation and English lyrics for "I
Had a Little Overcoat" (Hob Ich Mir a Mantl) are included, as is an author's note
linking the story's moral ("making something out of nothing") to his being able to
redo the pictures for this popular title. Adults fond of the 1977 version or of
Phoebe Gilman's adaptation Something from Nothing (BCCB 2/94) will appreci-
ate this visually clever revision. The simple, cumulative text lends itself to group
sharing, and now, thanks to Taback's re-imaging, so do the pictures. JMD
UPDIKE, JOHN 
A Child's Calendar; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman. 
Holiday
House, 1999 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1445-0 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
This newly reillustrated version of Updike's poems takes listeners through the cal-
endar year via verse. Each month receives four brief stanzas in tight ABCB rhyme;
258 
* THE BULLETIN
while the pattern gets a little wearing and some of the scansion and images are a bit
forced, there are still some pithy and fresh turns of phrase ("The trees are bored/
With being green./ Some people leave/ The local scene"-"August"); the specific-
ity about various seasonal aspects is pleasantly evocative. Hyman adds impact to
the cycle by embodying it in a bustling interracial family cozily ensconced in the
New England countryside, and her tableaux are lovely without losing sight of real-
ism or humor. The most magnetic family member is the sturdy preschooler, who
proffers a newly uprooted daffodil to his dismayed mother in April, stands glee-
fully suitless on the beach in August, and peers wistfully at the sparkling Christmas
tree in December. Warm and friendly, this'll come in handy when you need a
paean to the progressing year. DS
WALLACE, KAREN 
Scarlette Beane; illus. by Jon Berkeley. 
Dial, 2000 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8037-2475-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
When Scarlette Beane was born, her face was "as red as a beet, and the ends of her
fingers were green," and her mother said "she will grow tall and strong and do
something wonderful." At the age of five, Scarlette gets her first garden and dis-
plays an enormous talent for making things grow: "Her carrots were as huge as
tree trunks. Her onions were as big as hot-air balloons. Her parsley was as thick as
a jungle." Neighbors gather to harvest the gigantic veggies and indulge in some
delicious vegetable soup. That night, trowel and seed packets in hand, Scarlette
goes out to the meadow and plants the seeds in the light of the moon and "as she
covered them with earth, the ends of her fingers flashed like green stars." The next
day "in the middle of the meadow stood a castle made of vegetables," and Sarah
and her folks move in. The theme (the wonder of growing things) may lean to-
ward the corny, but Wallace's stoutly positive text has an appealing simplicity and
humor. Berkeley's acrylics are rendered in an intense palette (his veggies aren't just
the biggest, they are the greenest and the reddest) that makes horticultural miracles
easy to believe. The overall-clad Scarlette, her loving parents, and their brightly
garbed multi-ethnic neighbors bustle through the pages planting, harvesting, and
soup-eating, good-naturedly having their second helpings under the picnic table
when it begins to rain. Unusual perspectives and sharp contrasts between light
and dark combine in balanced, uncrowded compositions large enough to use with
a group. Large text with generous leading makes this a good choice for beginning
readers as well. Endpapers loaded with succulent produce will have listeners won-
dering if there isn't something to this vegetable-soup thing after all. JMD
WHITE, LINDA ARMS 
Comes a Wind; illus. by Tom Curry. 
Kroupa/DK Ink,
2000 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-7894-2601-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Mama's hopeful that her two grown boys, Clement and Clyde, can put aside their
obsessive competitiveness for a visit on her birthday, but it doesn't look promising.
Even the sign of a breeze ("Looks like it comes a wind") is an occasion for a yarn-
off about the biggest wind ever. Soon it's apparent that this wind is actually the
biggest ever, since it hurls livestock and buildings through the air and sails Mama
up to the weathervane on top of the barn; the brothers throw competition aside
and work together to bring Mama back to earth. The longhorn flavor of the tall-
MARCH 2000 
* 
259
taling brothers is droll and appealingly childlike. Though the plot blows out a bit
abruptly, the great chaos of outhouses and cattle flying through the air will tickle
young audiences, and they'll appreciate the recurring elements ("Squeak, squeak,
squeak went the windmill" heralds each big blow). Curry, also illustrator of Lowell's
downhome The Bootmaker and the Elves (BCCB 12/97), textures his acrylics as
thickly as oils but keeps a lightness in the exaggerated figures, whose long faces and
casually applied features give them a Toy Story look (while Mama is serene under a
neatly bunned expanse of cerulean-blue hair). If you're focusing on weather or
looking for an offbeat tall tale, this'll be a breath of fresh air. DS
WORMELL, MARY 
Why Not?; written and illus. by Mary Wormell. 
Farrar,
2000 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-374-38422-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Barnaby is a scalawag of a kitten, responding to his mother's admonitions ("Don't
chase the chickens, Barnaby!"; "Don't scare the birds, Barnaby!" etc.) with "WHY
NOT?" His question is answered by a succession of bigger animals (rooster, crow,
etc.) that each say "Because I'll chase you!" or a variation thereof. Barnaby gets in
a tight spot when, despite his mother's warning, he squeezes under the hay bales;
the arrival of all the animals he's bothered on his walk motivates him to pull him-
self out, after which "he ran up the garden path and back to his mom in time for
supper." Little listeners will easily follow this very simple cumulative tale, appreci-
ating the recurrence of similar events and repetitive language. Wormell's colored
block prints are reminiscent of Ashley Wolff, though with more delicacy of line;
the wryly expressive faces of the animals add a needed touch of humor to the
somewhat bland compositions. The story is slight but useful, and storytime listen-
ers are bound to catch on to that "WHY NOT?" refrain with ear-splitting enthu-
siasm. JMD
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
The Moonlight Man. Scholastic, 2000 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-590-25237-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Fifteen-year-old Jenny and her younger sister, Allie, are hoping their new house
(their seventh abode in five years) will be the final stop on their father's restless
journey to escape his grief over their mother's death. Jenny's desire to stay put is
one reason she doesn't tell her father about "the moonlight man" and his dog, the
ghosts that haunt their house and yard. A third ghost sobbing in the cellar of the
house next door propels Jenny into an investigation of the past that reveals an
accidental death, lost love, and a shade with vengeance on his mind. Jenny tells
the story through her journal, an inconsistent and clumsily superimposed literary
device that clutters up the straightforward narrative of this relatively simple ghost
story (Jenny's direct address of the reader is especially disingenuous). Despite the
dependence on coincidence and unexplained ghostly powers, doomed weddings
and vengeful hauntings are pretty heady elements, and Wright puts them together
in an undemanding page-turner. If Jenny is sometimes just a little too perkily
perfect to be believable, there are still some scary moments that will make this an
easy sell to ghost-story lovers and reluctant readers. JMD
260 * THE BULLETIN
YACCARINO, 
DAN 
Deep in the Jungle; written and illus. by Dan
Yaccarino. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2000 
34p
ISBN 0-689-82235-9 
$16.00 
R* 5-9 yrs
The mighty lion may be king of the jungle, but he's hardly a benevolent despot:
"The leopards brought him food, the gorilla brushed his mane, and the elephant
gave him shade. The animals couldn't stand him one bit." The lion is lured away
by the flattery of a fast-talking human into what's supposed to be his big showbiz
break but turns out to be a circus lion-taming act. The lion puts an end to his
career gone wrong by chowing down on the lion-tamer ("Well, then, I'm afraid I
must eat you up. Jungle law, you know"). Upon return to the jungle, he atones
for his past misdeeds by saving his fellow animals from yet more human exploita-
tion by tricking another interloping man into his capable jaws. The text is humor-
ously laconic, especially in its airily matter-of-fact acceptance of the lion's
anthropophagic solutions. The showbiz aspects are amusingly slick, and it's a hoot
to see the big cat trounce the fat cats. The visuals parallel the poker-faced anarchy
of the story with matte pages, sans serif print, and solid figures in vignettes rather
than full page art, giving the book the look of a mid-century Margaret Wise Brown/
Leonard Weisgard project. Yaccarino puts more emphasis on the strength and
richness of the colors, however, as well as on the toylike smoothness of the figures,
which makes the man-eating cheerfully jokey rather than violent. Sly even about
being sly, this happily cavalier readaloud will set young audiences roaring. DS
YOLEN, JANE 
Off We Go!; illus. by Laurel Molk. 
Little, 2000 
26p
ISBN 0-316-90228-4 
$12.95 
Ad 
2-6 yrs
A swamp full of baby fauna make appropriate noises as they extol the virtues of
visiting grandmother's house: "Tip-toe, tippity toe,/ Over the leaves and down
below,/ Off to Grandma's house we go,/ Sings Little Mouse.// Hip-hop, hippity
hop,/ Through the slime and over the slop,/ Off to Grandma's, never stop,/ Sings
Little Frog." There's one too many little animals in this cumulative romp (the
duckling rhyme is the least successful), which causes the sing-song saga to become
wearing, but an imaginative reader-aloud is going to have a melodramatically good
time. Molk's watercolors have a bright-eyed and bushy-tailed expressive attitude,
with a delicacy of line and shading that gives them a robust grace. The scenic idylls
have a cool green charm enhanced by white light, in a natural world that has
spiders but no mosquitoes; expert drafting helps draw the line between pretty and
cute. JMD
MARCH 2000 
* 261
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 2000
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Christopher Paul Curtis for Bud, Not
Buddy (Delacorte). The Newbery Honor Books are GettingNear to Baby by Audrey
Couloumbis (Putnam), 26 Fairmount Avenue by Tomie de Paola (Putnam), and
Our Only May Amelia by Jennifer L. Holm (HarperCollins).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to Simms Taback for Joseph Had a Little
Overcoat, adapted by the illustrator (Viking). The Caldecott Honor Books are
Sector 7, written and illus. by David Wiesner (Clarion); The Ugly Duckling, ad.
and illus. by Jerry Pinkney (Morrow); When Sophie Gets Angry-Really, Really An-
gry, written and illus. by Molly Bang (Scholastic); and A Child's Calendar, illus. by
Trina Schart Hyman and written by John Updike (Holiday House).
The Coretta Scott King Award for writing will be presented to Christopher Paul
Curtis, author of Bud, Not Buddy (Delacorte), and the award for illustration goes
to Brian Pinkney for In the Time ofthe Drums, text by Kim L. Siegelson (Jump at
the Sun/Hyperion). The King Honor Books for writing are Francie, by Karen
English (Farrar); Black Hands, White Sails, by Patricia C. and Fredrick L. McKissack
(Scholastic); and Monster, by Walter Dean Myers (HarperCollins). King Honor
Books for illustration are My Rows and Piles of Coins, illustrated by E. B. Lewis,
written by Tololwa M. Mollel (Clarion); and Black Cat, written and illus. by Chris-
topher Myers (Scholastic).
The Pura Belpre Award for narrative goes to Alma Flor Ada for Under the Royal
Palms: A Childhood in Cuba (Atheneum, 1998) and the award for illustration goes
to Carmen Lomas Garza for Magic Windows: Cut-PaperArt and Stories (Children's
Book Press, 1999). Honor Books for narrative are From the Bellybutton of the
Moon and Other Summer Poems by Francisco X. Alarc6n (Children's Book Press,
1998) and Laughing Out Loud, I Fly: Poems in English and Spanish by Juan Felipe
Herrera (HarperCollins, 1998). Honor Books for illustration are Barrio: Jose's
Neighborhood, written and illustrated by George Ancona (Harcourt, 1998); The
Secret Stars, illustrated by Felipe Davalos, written by Joseph Slate (Cavendish, 1998);
and Mama and Papa Have a Store, written and illus. by Amelia Lau Carling (Dial,
1998).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is
Walker and Co. for Anton Quintana's The Baboon King; honors go to R&S Books
for Vendela in Venice, by Christina Bjork, illus. by Inga-Karin Eriksson; Farrar,
Straus, and Giroux for The Collector of Moments, written and illus. by Quint
Buchholz (Farrar); and Front Street for AsphaltAngels by Ineke Holtwijk.
262 
* THE BULLETIN
The Michael L. Printz Award for a book that exemplifies literary excellence in
young adult literature goes to Walter Dean Myers for Monster (HarperCollins).
Honor books are Hard Love by Ellen Wittlinger (Simon), Skellig by David Al-
mond (Delacorte), and Speak by Laurie Halse Anderson (Farrar).
The 2001 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by Susan Cooper.
Chris Crutcher is the 2000 winner of the Margaret A. Edwards Award for Out-
standing Literature for Young Adults honoring an author's lifetime contribution
in writing books for teenagers.
The Scott O'Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Miriam Bat-Ami for Two
Suns in the Sky (Front Street/Cricket).
The ALSC Distinguished Service Award goes to Peggy Sullivan.
The Canadian Library Association's Best Book of the Year for children is Tim
Wynne-Jones's Stephen Fair (Kroupa/DK Ink). The Amelia Frances Howard-
Gibbon Illustrator's Award goes to Kady MacDonald Denton for A Child's Trea-
sury ofNursery Rhymes (Kingfisher).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to David Almond for Skellig (Delacorte).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Helen Cooper for Pumpkin Soup
(Doubleday).
MARCH 2000 
* 
263
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Floca;
Horowitz; Pierce
African Americans: Govenar; Myers
African Americans-fiction:
Blakeslee; Herman
African Americans-stories: Battle-
Lavert; Bradby; Johnson
Aliens-fiction: Logue
American Indians-fiction: Osborne
Animals: Gibbons
Animals-folklore: Bierhorst
Animals-poetry: Florian
Animals-stories: Simmons;
Wormell; Yaccarino; Yolen
Arithmetic: Packard
Art and artists: Ross
Art and artists-fiction: Mack
Art and artists-stories: McPhail
Basketball-fiction: Deuker; Herman
Basketball-poetry: Adoff
Bears-stories: McPhail
BIOGRAPHIES: Alexander; Berg;
Gilliland; Govenar; Mayo; Ross
Blindness: Alexander
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Radin
Brothers and sisters-stories: Lyon;
Palatini
Brothers-fiction: Deuker
Brothers-stories: White
Cats-fiction: Edwards
Cats-stories: Wormell
Chess: Berg
CONCEPT BOOKS: Packard
Courage-fiction: Maynard
Cowboys-stories: Kimmel
Creativity-stories: McPhail
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Cooney; Hobbs; Maynard
Crime and criminals-stories:
Horowitz
Dancers and dancing-fiction: Levy
Death and dying-fiction: Kaplan
Depression-fiction: Peters
Dinosaurs-fiction: Floca
Disabilities: Alexander
Disabilities-fiction: Peters
Divorce-fiction: Hobbs; Mack;
Rodowsky
Dogs-fiction: Harlow
Earth sciences: Singer
Ethics and values: Deuker
Families-stories: Johnson
FANTASY: Pierce
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Cooney; Mack; Osborne; Wright
Fathers and daughters-stories: Cole
Fathers and sons-fiction: Deuker;
Kaplan; Maynard; Petersen
Fire-fiction: Maynard
FOLKTALES AND FAIRYTALES:
Bierhorst; Kimmel; Souhami;
Taback
Food and eating-stories: Wallace
Friendship-fiction: Deuker; Levy;
Peters
FUNNY STORIES: Cole; Petersen;
Yaccarino
Gardens and gardening-stories:
Wallace
Ghosts-fiction: Wright
Grandfathers-fiction: Blakeslee
Grandmothers-fiction: Rodowsky
264 
* THE BULLETIN
Grandmothers-stories: Souhami
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Blakeslee; Harlow; Horowitz;
Osborne; Radin
History, U.S.: Bachrach; Govenar;
Stein
History, world: Bachrach
Holocaust, the: Bachrach; Radin
Islands-fiction: Harlow
Kidnapping-fiction: Cooney
Language arts: Agee
LOVE STORIES: Logue
Magic and magicians-fiction: Pierce
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Radin; Rodowsky
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Bradby
Mothers and sons-fiction: Herman;
Kaplan
Mothers and sons-stories: White
Music and musicians-fiction:
Kaplan
Music and musicians-stories: Battle-
Lavert
Numbers: Packard
NURSERY RHYMES: Hoberman
Olympic Games: Bachrach
Orphans-fiction: Horowitz
Paleontology-fiction: Floca
Pet care: Gibbons
POETRY: Adoff; Florian; Singer;
Updike
Rabbits: Gibbons
Racism-fiction: Blakeslee
Reading aloud: Bierhorst; Edwards;
Florian
Reading, easy: Herman
Reading, reluctant: Maynard;
Wright
Religious education: Mayo; Stein
RHYMING STORIES: Hoberman;
Yolen
Runaways-fiction: Hobbs
Saints: Mayo
School-fiction: Herman; Levy
SCIENCE FICTION: Logue
Seasons-poetry: Updike
SHORT STORIES: Myers
Sisters-fiction: Blakeslee;
Rodowsky; Wright
Sisters-stories: Cole
South, the: Blakeslee
Spiders-stories: Hoberman
Sports: Bachrach
SPORTS STORIES: Deuker;
Herman
Storytelling: Bierhorst; Cole;
Kimmel; Souhami; Taback
Storytime: Hoberman; Simmons;
Souhami; Taback; Wallace;
White; Wormell; Yaccarino;
Yolen
TALL TALES: Kimmel; White
Tornadoes-stories: Lyon
Uncles-stories: Battle-Lavert
Voyages and travel: Gilliland
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Edwards; Floca
Weather-poetry: Singer
Weather-stories: Lyon
Weddings-fiction: Petersen
West, the-stories: Kimmel; White
Women's studies: Gilliland
World War II-fiction: Radin
Kppn 
n 
Teachinn-~{ F 1
with the
latest in
Teaching!
Teaching K-8 is filled with hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers present new challenges to their
students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
Monthly articles include:
Carol Otis Hurst on...
* Children's Books * Teaching in the Library
Plus... * The Parent Connection * Interviews with
children's book authors and illustrators * Science
* Technology and more!
)on't miss this valuable
resource for your library -
subscribe today.
Call 800-678-8793 or visit
our website at
www.TeachingK-8.com
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.S.A.
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
"In a book as accessible as the
literature and film he explores,
Tim Morris journeys through
secret gardens of high and low
culture for kids. His witty, sensible
blend of critical scholarship and
personal observation gives us a
fresh view of selected children's
'classics'-those narrative sur-
vivors that grownups sometimes
call treasure and sometimes call
trash." -
Betsy Hearne, author
of Choosing Books for Children
0008-9036(200003)53:7;1 -M
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
