I LLIN
I S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
-~ 
2~
-,
Ar 
441
. * "A novel that promises and delivers."*
Promise
ia Levitin
nq thI 
hana'irtrn fnr this third •t•k
Ir tale In a real-
nediately drawn
snce are keenly
*le's break from her over-
elling. -BookItst
lependence that possess-
rs and time."
enter for Children's Books
SBE ndcate a reinfoed hardcover edition.
A 
rATENEUM
An imprint of the Macmillan Children's Book Group
866 Thitd Avenue, New York, NY 10022
.
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
June 1993
Vol. 46 No. 10
A LOOK INSIDE
305 THE BIG PICTURE
Raven: A Trickster Tale from the Pacific Northwest adapted and illustrated
by Gerald McDermott
306 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
315 * The Lost Children written and illus. by Paul Goble
327 * Garth Pig Steals the Show written and illus. by Mary Rayner
327 * Who Do You Think You Are? comp. by Hazel Rochman and Darlene Z.
McCampell
330
331
300
301
* Komodo!written and illus. by Peter Sis
* Grass Songs by Ann Turner; illus. by Barry Moser
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
L p  ,
^^^^W^^^Ar
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 54 East Gregory Drive,
Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Betsy Hearne, Editor and Associate Professor, GSLIS (BH)
Roger Sutton, Executive Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Kathryn Jennings, Reviewer (KJ)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Assistant Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Carol Fox, Youth Services Consultant, Illinois State Library
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $3.00. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 54 E. Gregory Drive, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Betsy Hearne, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois, and additional mailing offices
© 1993 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Gerald McDermott, from Raven: A Trickster Tale from the Pacific Northwest
©1993 by Gerald McDermott and used by permission of Harcourt Brace.
JUNE 1993 * 
305
THE BIG PICTURE
Raven: A Trickster Tale from the Pacific Northwest
adapted and illustrated by Gerald McDermott
"Raven came. All the world was in darkness. The sky above was in darkness. The
waters below were in darkness. Men and women lived in the dark and cold. Raven
was sad for them. He said, 'I will search for light.'" In frugal, measured phrases,
Gerald McDermott describes Raven's flight to the lodge of the Sky Chief. There
Raven changes shape to become a pine needle floating down into the water, which
the daughter of the Sky Chief drinks. Reborn as a child who delights the Sky
Chief, Raven begs for the sun, and-once it's uncovered from its box within a box
within a box-steals it and throws it into the sky.
This Native American myth echoes with imagery of getting inside things
in order to get things outside, a theme dynamically tuned to the reversible role of
a trickster-hero. And like all trickster heroes, Raven has a savior aspect. The
parallels with Christian theology include a virgin birth, with a redeemer who gives
light to the world. Raven appears as a painted-wood totem superimposed on natu-
ral backgrounds, just as stories are superimposed on life to explain and pattern it.
McDermott's seasoning as an illustrator shows in the understated humor here;
Native American lore translated into picture book format is too often reverentially
serious. The brilliantly patterned Raven-child, taking his first steps and throwing
a temper tantrum to get what he wants, contrasts vividly with the foggy gouache
landscapes, in themselves a departure from the artist's characteristic sharp edges.
Primary blues and reds dominate the spreads until Raven finds the sun, where-
upon pale shades beginto dawn toward a climactic yellow glow so intense that the
sun comes as a white-hot surprise.
Raven's transformations are cleverly devised by the coordination of vi-
sual image, page design, and wording. To show a progression of events across a
double spread without confusing young viewers is always a technical challenge:
Raven rolls the sun-ball across the floor in the verso ("Ga! Ga!"), begins changing
into a bird in the first half of the facing picture ("Ha! Ha!"), and flies full fledged
with the sun in the right-hand segment ("Caw! Caw!"). Each panel deepens in
hue and moves the central figure higher on the page, with textual blocks used for
balance.
Calmer in tone and rounder in shapes than McDermott's fast-paced,
angular Zomo the Rabbit: A Trickster Tale from West Africa (BCCB 9/92), this has
the same kind of introductory note giving some background on the story without
naming any specific tribal groups or citing printed sources, which would have
been helpful in assessing the adaptation. This is a common problem in evaluating
picture book folklore, a fast-growing genre in children's literature; five of the thir-
teen reviewed in this issue lack adequate source notes. As a knowledgeable disciple
of Joseph Campbell and an innovative creator of picture books, McDermott can
contribute more of what he knows within the admittedly limited space of an au-
thorial note.
306 
* THE BULLETIN
What's impressive about his Raven is the respectful simplicity of the tell-
ing and the clarity of the graphic interpretation. Spare enough verbally to use with
young listeners, whom he involves with occasional questions (" Who do you think
the child was?... What do you think the ball was?... And why do the people always
feed Raven?'), and spare enough visually to succeed with groups, this is like the
very nest of boxes that holds the sun-there's more revealed with each opening of
the book.
Betsy Hearne, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE 
( 
-
AASENG, NATHAN 
The Locker Room Mirror: How Sports Reflect Society. 
Walker,
1993 
136p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8218-3 
$15.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8217-5 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-9
As his title suggests, Aaseng views the myriad problems of amateur and profes-
sional sports as reflections of the same problems in American culture as a whole.
He devotes chapters to drug use, violence, cheating, race discrimination, sex dis-
crimination, and money, generally concluding that social pressures and expecta-
tions from without are what cause the problems within: "Violence in sports is
nothing more than a reflection of our society. Our games will continue to be as
violent as we want them to be." (The second sentence does not necessarily follow
the first, a conundrum Aaseng does not explore.) While Ann Weiss' Money Games,
reviewed below, is more deeply argued, Aaseng's book has broad coverage, is sim-
ply written, and is geared to a younger reading level. Its topical organization, open
format, and black-and-white photos makes Aaseng's book more browsable than
Weiss', and an index and bibliography increase the term-paper possibilities. RS
ADA, ALMA FLOR My NameIsMaria Isabel; tr. from the Spanish by Ana M. Cerro;
illus. by K. Dyble Thompson. 
Atheneum, 1993 
57p
ISBN 0-689-31517-1 
$12.95 
Ad 
Gr 3-4
Maria Isabel, nine, is dismayed when she changes school and her new teacher
changes her name: "We already have two Marias in this class. Why don't we call
you Mary instead?" Marfia Isabel has been taught to obey her teachers, but she
misses her own name and the connection it gives her to the two grandmothers for
whom she is named. This is a potent twist on the new-school story, but the book
is too abbreviated to engage much emotional response to Maria's dilemma. We're
told, for example, that Maria's mother goes out one day to look for a job, and later
we see that she has one, but there seems to be some story missing in between. At
another point, a new character is introduced as if readers have already met her and
disappears as quickly as she came: "One day, Suni Paz came to the school," and
that's it for Suni Paz. Maria finally gets her own name back when she writes a
composition on "My Greatest Wish," and the teacher realizes her mistake. This
resolution seems a bit pat, but kids will still enjoy Maria's reclamation of her name,
JUNE 1993 
* 307
culture, and identity. While the occasional pencil illustrations are stiff and
overliteral, the book is short and easy to read, and it will be accessible to readers
just starting chapter books. RS
AHLBERG, JANET 
The Bear Nobody Wanted; written and illus. by Janet and Allan
Ahlberg. 
Viking, 1993 
14 2p
ISBN 0-670-83982-5 
$15.00 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Due to an accident at birth, the titular hero has a disdainful look sewed upon his
stuffed little face, and his resulting attitude problem leads to a sorry existence:
"For how a bear looked, especially when he was new, was how he was." The book
follows the bear through various abandonments and rescues, and the rollercoaster
ups and downs get a bit fatiguing. Peppered with parenthetical knowing asides,
the story seems to have one eye winking at an adult audience and on the whole
appeals to a sophisticated world-weariness, as in the narrator's comment about the
bear's expectation for affection: "(What an optimist he was.)" Unlike Ahlberg's
Ten in a Bed (BCCB 9/89), which fractures fairy tales in a way that's funny for
both kids and adults, this book has a sour, arch sensibility in which wit triumphs
over humor and won't mean much to the audience for talking toys. RS
ASKOUNIS, CHRISTINA 
The Dream of the Stone. 
Farrar, 1993 
[30 4 p]
ISBN 0-374-31877-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Sarah's parents have been killed in a plane crash while on their way home from
visiting Sarah's older brother Sam, a science genius who's gotten himself involved
in a mysterious organization called CIPHER. And we're off and running in this
science fantasy that features time and space travel via a special mirror, a wise crone
who keeps popping up in various guises, and a handsome Gypsy boy who helps
Sarah on her quest: to return a magic Stone to its rightful place in the Door.
CIPHER, it turns out, is just one instrument of the Umbra, an evil shadow that
seeks to control the universe; it is opposed by the forces of Light, led by the
Amarantha, who in turn reports to the One Whose Name Cannot Be Spoken.
Although the book seems derivative of Madeleine L'Engle's work and has an over-
crowding of ideas and devices, Askounis knows how to pace a story, so that the
urgency of Sarah's quest has a momentum that sweeps it through the mechanical
plot. Fans of L'Engle, John Christopher, and other adventure-oriented SF writers
will find much to enjoy here, and the eerie cover art will pull them right in. RS
BANKS, 
LYNNE REID 
The Mystery of the Cupboard; illus. by Tom
Newsom. 
Morrow, 1993 
24 6p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12635-9 
$13.88
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12138-1 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Followers of Omri's last two adventures with his miniature toy figures, brought to
life in a magic cupboard, will have to survive a complicated and melodramatic tale
of family history before the mystery of the cupboard is revealed. It seems Omri's
grandmother in the pre-World War I years was appalled when her younger sister
Jessica Charlotte left home to tread the music hall stage and to bear a son without
benefit of marriage. Jessica Charlotte's outcast status led to jealousy, theft, death,
and the sisters' irrevocable separation. Left only with her embittered son, who lost
his metal toy business to the post-war plastic industry, Jessica Charlotte instructed
308 
* THE BULLETIN
him to build a cabinet and mentally deposit all his bitterness and disappointments
into it. Imbued also with Jessica Charlotte's extrasensory powers, the cabinet brings
to life some of her son's miniature figures, who befriend Jessica Charlotte in her
old age. Will readers of the series be disappointed that the cabinet was not really
found in an alley by Omri's older brother, that neither the old nor the new minia-
ture people come alive in this book until chapter fifteen, or that Omri's father
discovers the secret of the cupboard in the final pages? Devoted fans will endure
and rejoice that the next installment is obviously on its way, but the uninitiated
will be lost and wonder what the fuss is all about. Studied and literal pencil illus-
trations appear throughout. ELIZABETH HUNTOON
BERNHARD, EMERY, ad. Spotted Eagle 6- Black Crow: A Lakota Legend, illus. by
Durga Bernhard. 
Holiday House, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1007-2 
$15.95 
R 
5-7 yrs
A dramatic story of two warriors who love the same woman shows one, Spotted
Eagle, respecting the laws of both nature and society, first when he refuses to kill
two eaglets and later when he refuses to kill his rival, the brother who had left him
stranded to die on a ledge by the nest. The tale has a number of powerful images,
including Spotted Eagle's flight with the birds and Black Crow's death at the hands
of enemy raiders, that are sometimes supported by the art but at other times seem
overwhelmed by it. The paintings feature doll-like figures, pastel hues, and tradi-
tional Native American motifs framing a text in various shapes. This makes for
compositions whose complex graphic design can become distracting despite their
careful crafting and rich effects. The author notes the background of the tale, its
source, and the alterations he's made. Read this one aloud in conjunction with
European variants of the good and bad brothers (the Grimms' "Water of Life," for
instance), or, for that matter, Cain and Abel. BH
BIRDSEYE, TOM, ad. 
Soap! Soap! Don't Forget the Soap!: An Appalachian Folktale;
illus. by Andrew Glass. 
Holiday House, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1005-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Presumably based on the popular variant "Soap, Soap, Soap" collected by Richard
Chase in Grandfather Tales (there's no source note), this follows the fate of a for-
getful little boy who is sent to town for some soap but inadvertently offends a raft
of folks along the way. Whatever he repeats from one makes the next one mad.
Birdseye has named the character Plug Honeycut, given him a fancy introduction,
and altered the people he runs into: an old woman falls into a creek on account of
Plug, so she pulls him in after her; a boy who has fallen off his bicycle and broken
his eggs pushes Plug into the brambles when he thinks Plug's making fun of him;
a farmer whose truck has a tree fallen on it makes Plug help him cut up the wood;
a bald man makes Plug apologize; and the vain mayor's wife takes offence. This
finally reminds Plug of the soap, which he fetches home to his mama, who washes
him clean with it. In some ways this is a gentled version-for instance, the one-
eyed man is deleted ("One's out, get the other'n out")-but the illustrations do
emphasize the main character's sequential misfortunes. Glass' art also underscores
conventional, even stereotyped, images of Appalachian hill people, though he's
skilled at projecting graphic action with hatch and cross-hatch and his dominating
colors of yellow, orange and red lighten up a rural fool's tale, which, when told
plain, reveals to listeners a bittersweet streak of serio-comedy. BH
JUNE 1993 
* 309
BOYD, CANDY DAWSON 
Chevrolet Saturdays. Macmillan, 1993 
176 p
ISBN 0-02-711765-0 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
While Joey doesn't find his new stepfather Mr. Johnson "a bad man or even a
mean one," he wants his own dad back, and the anxiety about his parents' divorce
and his mother's remarriage is causing Joey some trouble in school, not helped by
his hostile new fifth-grade teacher. This adjustment-to-divorce story covers all the
bases in a way that's predictable but still sympathetic, as Joey grows to trust his
stepfather via a series of Saturdays spent working with Mr. Johnson in his remod-
eling business. Mr. Johnson is a perfect role model, strict yet paternal, but his
frequent sermons sound too much like the author talking to her readers with an
earnestness that sometimes distracts from the fictional focus. Still, the African-
American cast is a lively one, and Joey's school problems will strike a responsive
chord among readers frustrated when their best efforts never seem to be quite good
enough. RS
BRIDGERS, SUE ELLEN 
Keeping Christina. HarperCollins, 1993 
[288p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021505-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021504-6 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Annie Gerhardt seems to have everything: a best friend since kindergarten, a won-
derful boyfriend for almost as long a time, good grades in high school, a guaran-
teed spot as first-chair clarinet/concertmaster in a band that plays for the school's
musicals, and most of all, a strong family-including a loving brother and sister
and supportive parents. What turns her world upside down is a new girl in school,
Christina, who insinuates herself into the family, plays on Annie's weaknesses, lies
pathologically, manipulates Annie and her friends against each other, and ulti-
mately causes an automobile accident that almost kills Annie's best friend. It's a
powerful character study of the protagonist, and Bridgers cagily builds suspense
through Annie's first-person narrative, which makes readers want to shake her into
seeing through Christina's ploys. Unfortunately, the only real insight we get into
the antagonist's problems-aside from the stock explanation of a broken home
and a mother who's unpleasant in a shadowy way-is Christina's concluding and
only effort at honesty, when she tells Annie, "Just look at all this. You didn't do
anything to get it-it was all here, it was all handed to you. You don't even know
how to make things happen." In the end, Annie gets it all back, and Christina
loses her illusory gains. Intentionally or not, there are some strong messages here:
beware the stranger, and get born into the right family. Beyond that, there's also
some first-class characterization, if not a lot of plot. The smooth writing and
authentic school dynamics, including a showdown between students and adminis-
tration over intellectual freedom (the question of who really wrote the plays attrib-
uted to Shakespeare becomes a hot issue when the head of the English department
refuses to allow a debate as part of the curriculum), will capture readers. BH
CARRIS, JOAN 
Stolen Bones; illus. by Stephen Marchesi. 
Little, 1993 
160p
ISBN 0-316-13018-4 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
"Who's got my jawbone?" bellows an angry paleontologist at the beginning of this
archaeologically themed mystery, which immediately sets the artifactual tone. The
book's protagonist, eleven-year-old Alec, is the grandson of that paleontologist,
the esteemed Dr. David Dillon. Alec and his mother are spending the summer at
310 
* THE BULLETIN
the professor's dinosaur dig in Montana, and Alec is troubled by his grandfather's
coldness toward him; he hopes to gain the old man's respect by finding the thief
who's been taking artifacts from the dig. The plot is formulaic but lively as Alec,
local girl Rina, and Alec's huge dog Isabel search through people's belongings,
hunt down red herrings, and withstand adversity in order to unravel the mystery
(which comes benignly clean without their help-dig workers were borrowing the
artifacts in order to sketch them for a special birthday celebration for the profes-
sor). Also predictable is Alec's relationship with his grandfather-Dr. Dillon finds
Alec's resemblance to the late Mrs. Dillon (who died the day Alec was born) too
great to bear, hence his avoidance of Alec. The paleontological lore is laced thickly
through the text, and there are textual explanations as well as a glossary. The dig
story proves more rewarding than the mystery, but it's still an amiable book of
mild adventure. Full-page black-and-white illustrations appear occasionally with-
out adding much to the story; a glossary of archeological terms is included. DS
CASELEY, JUDITH Sophie and Sammy's Library Sleepover; written and illus. by Judith
Caseley. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10616-1 
$13.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10615-3 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
Don't panic! Sophie and her mom attend a "pretend" library sleepover where the
children's librarian, dressed in a modest pink nightgown and bunny slippers, lights
the storytime candle and leads her pajama-clad preschoolers and their parents (who
stick to their early evening wardrobes) through three stories and lots of audience
participation-swinging from jungle vines, listening for monster noises, and crawl-
ing into bed. Sophie wishes her toddler brother Sammy had been allowed to
attend, but Sammy's under parental order to put away his books until he can treat
them like friends. The next night in her own bed Sophie conducts a library sleepover
just for Sammy, who announces at its conclusion that he's ready to have his books
back. And Sophie declares her ambition to become a librarian. The story is a bit
programmed, but Caseley's warm colors, cozy patterns, and round-faced preschool-
ers help make this user-friendly for both library and home readalouds. ELIZABETH
HUNTOON
CASSEDY, SYLVIA 
Zoomrimes: Poems about Things that Go; illus. by Michele
Chessare. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
51p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-022633-1 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-022632-3 
$14.00 
M 
Gr. 3-5
This posthumous followup to Roomrimes (BCCB 2/88) takes a transportational
trip through the alphabet, from "Ark" ("Packed/ back to back/ on rack after rack,")
to "Zeppelin" ("zipper all the people in/ and let them sail away"). While there are
some fresh bursts of imagery and sound here and there throughout the collection,
most of the poems seem overextended, belaboring not very interesting premises to
either cutesy or pedestrian conclusions. "Floppy, sloppy," begins "Jalopy," which
soon runs out of gas: "Stop/ goes my jalopy./ Stop/ goes my jalopy. Stop/ goes my
jalopy. Stop." Other poems suffer from over-rhyming, such as "Limo": "Come
now, every her and him-o, be you fat or be you slimo;/ glad or grim-o; smart or
dim-o; loud or prim-o .... " There aren't enough ideas here to support the word-
play, and the ultimate effect is jingly and sometimes desultory. Cozy, rumpled,
black-and-white watercolors enliven the spacious pages. RS
JUNE 1993 
* 
311
CHOI, SOOK NYUL 
Echoes of the White Giraffe. Houghton, 1993 
137p
ISBN 0-395-64721-5 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In this sequel to Choi's dynamic Year oflmpossible Goodbyes (BCCB 10/91), teen-
aged Sookan recounts her experience as a refugee for two and a half years in Pusan,
where she and her mother and younger brother have fled after the bombing of
Seoul. Separated again from her father and older brothers, Sookan helps her mother
get enough food, water, and supplies to eke out their existence in a barren shack
high atop a mountain so slick with mud that they can barely manage to climb it
every day. To some extent, the author has abandoned the storytelling style that
casts such a spell in the first book; this one relates a situation without developing it
consistently as fiction or decisively as nonfiction. For instance, the three older
brothers who are introduced near the end of the book appear too briefly to become
familiar despite their importance to the main character; we know that they are real
in a factual sense and that she knows them, but we don't know them because their
activities are summarized rather than detailed. Of course, the pace of waiting is
always more technically difficult to sustain than the pace of survival. Like Siegal's
Grace in the Wilderness (the sequel to Upon the Head of the Goat), this must aban-
don wartime drama for a kind of post-traumatic stress syndrome that is inherently
less forceful. There are, however, some powerful scenes, along with a well-realized
romance that is doomed by religious commitment and social differences; Sookan's
total sense of displacement will offer young readers a natural point of empathy.
BH
CLIMO, SHIRLY, ad. 
The Korean Cinderella; illus. by Ruth Heller. 
HarperCollins,
1993 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020433-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020432-X 
$15.00 
Ad 
5-7 yrs.
When Pear Blossom's mother dies, her father marries Omoni, who, with her daugh-
ter Peony, torments Pear Blossom and forces her to do impossible tasks. As in the
Grimm variant of "Cinderella," Pear Blossom has the help of magical animals: a
frog stops up the hole in a jug she must fill with water, sparrows hull rice that
Omoni scatters on the ground, and a black ox weeds the fields. On her way to the
village festival, Pear Blossom drops a sandal, which is picked up by a watchful
magistrate who finds and marries her. Like Climo's The Egyptian Cinderella (BCCB
10/89), this has an author's note on the history of the tale, including the fact that
her text is based on three variations, but no specific sources are cited. Heller, too,
has a note on the traditional patterns she has adopted; however, these are not
always incorporated successfully into her over-elaborate compositions, in which
decorative designs crowd stiffly drawn figures. If this is to become a series (there
are more than 500 Cinderella variants), it might be useful to students doing mul-
ticultural comparisons, but some textual documentation and graphic simplifica-
tion are in order. BH
COMPTON, KENN 
Jack the Giant Chaser: An Appalachian Tale; written and illus.
by Kenn and Joanne Compton. 
Holiday House, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-0998-8 
$14.95 
R 
4-6 yrs.
The Comptons have trimmed to picture book size a long, complex, and very rich
tale, "Jack in the Giants' Newground" from Richard Chase's Jack Tales (which
they acknowledge in a commendable introductory source note). Some of the drama
312 
* 
THE BULLETIN
is lost by the reduction of five many-headed, cannibalistic giants to one single-
headed giant who confines his taste to stolen cows and pigs, but the tricks are still
fun. Jack fools the giant into thinking he's going to rechannel a stream, throw a
150-pound knife over the mountains, and save the giant from an army by hiding
him in a barrel, which he then rolls down the hill. The Comptons' introductory
seven-in-one-blow motif is an addition that will draw listeners, and the slapstick
watercolors have a Sue Truesdell/Jack Kent flair that will appeal mightily to the
cartoon crowd. BH
CRESPO, GEORGE, ad. 
How the Sea Began: A Taino Myth; ad. and illus. by George
Crespo. 
Clarion, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-395-63033-9 
$14.95 
R 6-9 yrs.
A hunter who never fails to provide food for his people, Yayael is overtaken by a
hurricane and never seen again. In searching for him, his father finds the young
man's bow and arrows and hangs them in a gourd from the ceiling of their hut "in
case Yayael's spirit should wish to visit them." Sure enough, during hard times
Yayael's parents lower the gourd and tip out fresh fish, a wonder that repeats itself
whenever the people are hungry-until several boys break the gourd and the water
pours out to form the sea and all the fish therein. Crespo's oil paintings are naive
in tone and lush in hue without becoming gaudy. His background note is ex-
tremely helpful, explaining both the geography described in the myth (the forma-
tion of the Greater Antilles occupied by Indians migrating from South America)
and the cultural context: "It was the custom among the Taino to keep the bones of
dead relatives in a gourd hung from the ceiling of the hut. When Yaya places
Yayael's weapons in the gourd, he is symbolically burying his son." He also cites
the five-hundred-year-old Spanish source, commissioned by Columbus, and of-
fers a pronunciation guide. This will be especially welcome as a read-aloud in
conjunction with histories such as Francine Jacobs' The Tainos (BCCB 5/92) and
other alternative Columbus Day studies. BH
CROSS, GILLIAN 
The Great American Elephant Chase. Holiday House,
1993 
193p
ISBN 0-8234-1016-1 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Tad is fifteen and has never done anything right from the moment of his birth (so
his caretaker aunt tells him), but his life changes when he semi-accidentally stows
away in the wagon of an itinerant showman, a wagon which contains an elephant.
Tad takes well to Khush the elephant, and when the showman is killed soon after
giving Tad a job, he and Cissie, the showman's daughter, join forces to save Khush
from the people who claim to be his new owners. This effort involves a traipse
across nineteenth-century America as strong-willed Cissie and loyal Tad attempt
to keep the elephant secret (with varying degrees of success) while they float down
the Ohio and steam up the Mississippi, trekking across the prairie to Cissie's dear
friend and hoped-for sanctuary in Nebraska. This isn't quite Huckleberry Finn
with elephant but it's still good fun: Cross keeps her characters colorful (the trav-
eling show is actually a classic medicine show scam), and the encounters with
various friends, foes, and elephant gapers along the way are entertaining. Cissie,
the old trouper but young kid, is a believable driving force, the villains are properly
alarming, and the resolution satisfying. DS
JUNE 1993 
* 
313
DEAVER, JULIE REECE 
You Bet Your Life. 
Zolotow/HarperCollins, 1993 
[22 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-021517-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-021516-X 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Bess has been a schoolroom comic and a fan of Lucille Ball since she was little, and
she's excited about her senior-year internship at a comedy/variety television show.
Particularly important among her new colleagues are Elliot, an aspiring young
comedian with whom she begins to work as a stand-up comedy team, and Geor-
gia, the motherly writer, whose warmth comforts Bess, still grieving over her
mother's recent suicide. Bess is a likeable character, and it's nice to see a funny
young female who's depicted as talented rather than smartmouthed or pathetic;
the TV studio setting adds appeal. The novel has some credibility problems, how-
ever: Georgia is too wonderful to be true, and Bess's letters to her dead mother
have an unlikely degree of self-awareness. Nor is the comedy as funny as the
characters seem to find it, although the broad humor is likelier to amuse kids than
adults. The book is well-paced and readable, however, and Bess's professional and
personal gains (including a real job in television starting next year, the beginning
of a career as a comedian, and the commencement of a romance with Elliot) are
satisfyingly depicted. DS
DEVITO, CARA 
Where I Want to Be. 
Houghton, 1993 
[192p]
ISBN 0-395-64592-1 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Kristie is fourteen and rebellious, too smart and energetic for her tiny Arizona
town in the desert, and although she pretends she doesn't, she misses her father,
who died last year. Her adult half-brothers Derrin and Kyle, who've helped raise
Kristie, adore her but don't know what to do for her as she tries to define herself
and her place in the world. While she deals with adolescence, she hitches across
the state to harass her cousins, becomes a reluctant heroine in a school-bus mishap,
comes to grips with the return of her mother (who abandoned the family when
Kristie was a toddler), and almost loses her brother Kyle, a deputy sheriff, in an
attempted robbery. DeVito is a superb writer, so the various dramas blend to-
gether smoothly, making this not a book about events but about Kristie, a flip
young woman whose life is unfolding more rapidly than she likes. The character-
ization-from dopey, lovable Kyle; to Kristie's Indian "grandmother"; to the irri-
tating but safe Tyler twins who are Kristie's regular dates-is funny and individual,
and the lively dialogue rings true. The atmosphere of the desert town of Show
Low (the school-bus accident involves eight children, which is virtually the entire
school-going population of the town) is vividly evoked, including the no-option
nothingness, the old family knowledge of everybody else and vice versa, and the
isolation. The unreliability of Kristie's narration may be too subtle for some young
readers, but they'll enjoy her gutsy and successful struggle towards adulthood. DS
DEWEY, JENNIFER OWINGS 
Spiders Near and Far; written and illus. by Jennifer
Owings Dewey. 
Dutton, 1993 
4 8p
ISBN 0-525-44979-5 
$14.99 
R Gr. 4-6
Deceptively packaged, this carefully researched and detailed look at the spider world
first appears to be an oversized treatment destined for the picture book shelves.
Communicating her awe of the natural world as well as her respect for scientific
observation, Dewey begins with a Pima Indian creation myth and then points out
314 
* THE BULLETIN
the differences between spiders and insects. Both common and scientific names
are used in the text and to identify the many colored-pencil drawings that give
texture to jaws and fangs and place spiders in their natural habitats. By qualifying
her general statements-spiders are silk spinners but they are not the only animals
who do this-and by emphasizing that spiders can be found everywhere-from
New Mexico to Mount Everest-the author avoids the sweeping generalizations
often found in juvenile science treatments. Even the scientifically impaired will
understand the technicalities of web spinning and spider digestion. And readers
are not encouraged to collect but are given instructions on how to observe spiders
in backyards and parks. An index and content headings provide access for report
writers, and a note on the verso of the title page indicates that the manuscript was
reviewed by the curator of zoology at the New Mexico Museum of Natural His-
tory. ELIZABETH HUNTOON
FALWELL, CATHRYN 
Feast for 10; written and illus. by Cathryn Falwell. 
Clarion,
1993 
32p
ISBN 0-395-62037-6 
$14.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
A lively African-American family shops for, prepares, and eats a big dinner in Feast
for 10, an appealing number book that counts to ten twice. Colorful cut-out
illustrations on pages with lots of white space clearly identify the items to be counted.
Cathryn Falwell, creator of the popular Nicky books, has not only delivered an
action-filled counting book, but also provided a number of bonuses. The family
bubbles over with their pleasure in being together. In addition, Dad is a strong
domestic presence who helps with dinner. Spots of humor (one of the five kinds
of beans they buy in the grocery store is jelly beans) help us to share in the delight
of both family and story. This works as a counting book and as a picture book
with a pleasing message of family togetherness. Pair with Molly Bang's Ten, Nine,
Eight and children couldn't have a more satisfying count to ten and back again.
CAROL Fox
GAY, KATHLYN 
Breast Implants: Making Safe Choices. New Discovery,
1993 
128p 
(Open Door Books)
ISBN 0-02-737955-8 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Gay raises this book above the usual "good for reports" level of a nonfiction treat-
ment by going directly to women who've made choices, to their regret or satisfac-
tion, about breast implants and by speaking to some experts involved in the
controversy over the silicon-filled implants, as well as performing a sterling job of
research on up-to-date secondary sources. She addresses the hows and whys of
implant surgery and its historical evolution, the psychological and cultural reasons
for reconstructive and cosmetic augmentation surgery, the medical and consumer
confusion over the safety of silicon implants, possible corporate fraud, legal ac-
tions, and government response. The book presents various sides of the issue, but
the overall message, an important one for medical care generally, is that a patient's
best defense is information. This is a useful source made readable by personalizing
anecdotes, and it explores some issues, such as the uneasy relationship between
commercial corporations and medicine, that apply to health care in general. Young
women (and any young men reading in the vain hope of racy description or enter-
taining illustrations) who pick up this book casually are likely to keep reading and
JUNE 1993 * 315
to become more thoughtful medical consumers as a result. Endnotes, a bibliogra-
phy, and an index are included. DS
GOBLE, PAUL, ad. 
The Lost Children: The Boys Who Were Neglected; ad. and illus.
by Paul Goble. 
Bradbury, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-02-736555-7 
$14.95 
R* 
5-8 yrs
"Nobody was kind to the brothers. Nobody wanted them." A family of six or-
phaned brothers have only castoffs for clothes, scraps for food, and camp dogs for
friends. The other children in the tribe torment them so much that the brothers
"did not even wish to be people any longer," and after much debate, decide to
become stars. Goble's dignified, quiet retelling intensifies the painful story, and
it's cold comfort to know that the brothers shine today as the Pleiades, surrounded
by smaller stars, their loyal dog friends. The artist's familiar diagrammatic style is
used to advantage, formalizing the poignant tale as well as providing some dra-
matic tableaux, as when Sun Man and Moon Woman welcome the children to the
sky. A final spread takes the story into the present, showing the stars shining above
tepees and cars and telephone wires; "how beautiful the children look! And yet,
how very far away they are now." Compared with the many problem-picture
books about homelessness we've been seeing (as in Wild's Space Travelers, reviewed
last month), this one achieves contemporary resonance via mythic projection and
avoids both sentimentality and half-baked bibliotherapy. Scrupulous, interesting
notes are included, as is a bibliography. RS
GRAVELLE, KAREN 
Where Are My Birth Parents?: A Guide for Teenage Adoptees,
written by Karen Gravelle and Susan Fischer. 
Walker, 1993 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8258-2 
$15.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8257-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Adoptees, say Gravelle and Fischer, "feel different because, in a fundamental sense,
they are." For those adoptees whose search for their identity during the teen years
includes the possibility of searching for their birth parents, this is a useful and
supportive book. It isn't so much a how-to-search detective manual as an emo-
tional guide: chapters address matters such as "Why Search?", "Telling Your Par-
ents," and "The First Contact." Throughout, anecdotal reports from adoptees,
adoptive parents, and birth parents help concretize more general statements, and
the authors make a point of showing how birth parents and adoptive parents, as
well as biological and adoptive siblings, might feel about the search, encouraging
the realization that it may change many people's lives but still be a positive experi-
ence. The authors discuss variations on the process, such as international adoptees
searching abroad for birth parents, and variations on response, from fear and re-
sentment to great pleasure to lack of success. They also include opinions that may
challenge the orthodox line on adoption ("If a child is surrendered, no one sees
that as a tragedy," says one adoptee. "I wish the parents that do adopt could
somehow try to acknowledge that this is a bad thing that happened [to the child]")
but may also comfort those readers whose similar feelings have never been ex-
pressed. This is a straightforward, easily readable, and reassuring book that many
young people will find helpful to read even if they choose not to search as teens, or
at all. An extensive list of search and support groups, registries, and counseling
centers is included, along with a bibliography and index. DS
316 
* THE BULLETIN
GREGG, ANDY, ad. 
Great Rabbit and the Long-tailed Wildcat, illus. by Cat Bow-
man Smith. Whitman, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-3047-6 
$13.95 
R 4-6 yrs
After a helpful note citing the Native American storyteller from whom a nine-
teenth-century folklorist collected this pourquoi tale-which is loosely adapted
from The Algonquian Legends ofNew England (1884)-Wildcat and Great Rabbit
are off and running on a chase Great Rabbit is sure to win. And as soon as we find
out that Wildcat is proud of his long, beautiful, bushy tail, we know he's going to
lose it, along with his bid to eat Great Rabbit. Both words and illustrations are
styled to highlight the humor of these two characters without becoming cute or
condescending. Gregg plays on the pattern of their encounters: each time, Wild-
cat falls prey to an illusion of food and shelter provided by Great Rabbit variously
disguised as a medicine man ("I can't help but notice that you have very long
ears"), an old woman ("Your braids look just like rabbit ears"), and a warrior ("You
know, those feathers in your hair look very much like the ears of a rabbit"). Matching
the sly verbal rhythms (including a quick-paced end rhyme) are refreshingly rough-
hewn paintings in a book of unprepossessing size, an aesthetic combination that
manages to avoid the plush effects overcushioning so much picture book folklore.
Heavy outlines, deep hues, and expressionistic textures in the full-page recto com-
positions face off with a clean verso of text framed in traditional Native American
patterns. A sure read-aloud, but leave plenty of time to look at the pictures. BH
GUTMAN, DAN 
Baseball's Biggest Bloopers: The Games that Got Away. 
Viking,
1993 
160p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-670-84603-1 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 4-7
This book describes several infamous errors made by professional baseball players
and umpires during World Series games. There are two sections: "The Four Most
Dramatic Mistakes in Baseball History" include Merkle's 1908 "Bonehead" play,
Snodgrass' 1912 muff, Owen's dropped third strike in 1941, and Buckner's boot
in 1986; but the eight "Other Legendary Bloops and Blunders" seem equally un-
fortunate. Gutman's taste for drama goes beyond the sports broadcaster language
he employs; his use of the device "FREEZE THIS MOMENT" on the verge of a
blooper will put readers into a television replay mode. The statistics and trivia that
fans lust after close every chapter: "Also in 1924 . . . Wheaties-the Breakfast of
Champions-was introduced." A black-and-white portrait and action shot or two
illustrate each highlighted. Professional sports are so macho that it's nice for little
leaguers to be able to read about heroes blowing it big time. BH
HAN, OKI S., ad. 
Sir Whongand the Golden Pig; ad. by Oki S. Han and Stephanie
Haboush Plunkett; illus. by Oki S. Han. 
Dial, 1993 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1345-2 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1344-4 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4 -6 yrs.
Sir Whong is renowned for his wisdom, but he falls dupe to a con-man named Mr.
Oh, who borrows one thousand nyung for medicine to cure his "poor, old
mother"-actually, he squanders it on parties. Sir Whong soon discovers that the
golden pig Mr. Oh has put up for security is fake, so he must trick Mr. Oh into
returning the money. Han's watercolors, reliant on earth tones of brown and
JUNE 1993 * 317
green, have a graceful fluidity and sly humor, especially in the two main characters'
expressions. The rural Korean landscape and domestic scenes use rounded, or-
ganic shapes suddenly contrasted with angular verticals, which vary the composi-
tions without making them cluttered. It's too bad there's no note as to the story's
source, although the book jacket hints that Han's father told her "many traditional
Korean tales" (was this one of them?). There is, however, a brief introductory
description of ancient Korean money, of the alphabet, and of the wedding cer-
emony, which figures in the story. The narration is fully realized but not too long
for the target audience, who will enjoy seeing the tables turned on a shyster ( for
another Korean tale of genial comeuppance, see Rhee's Magic Spring, reviewed
below). BH
HARRIS, MARK JONATHAN 
Solay. 
Bradbury, 1993 
137 p
ISBN 0-02-742655-6 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Melissa hates her new school, hates California (she's a New Yorker), and hates her
fifth-grade class, which hates her right back. She's a mild-mannered, brainy type,
out of step with the Fashion Critics (as she terms the nasty and popular girls) who
torment her both verbally and with practical "jokes." When Solay, a pugnacious
girl from a distant planet, turns up, she encourages Melissa to be nasty in return,
which only causes more trouble until finally Melissa's schoolwork suffers and her
parents have to get involved, which leads eventually to solution of the problem.
Although the anguish of misfit newness is well-depicted, the meanness of the popular
kids, Melissa, and Solay makes the book unpleasant to read, since there are really
no moments of respite from the back-and-forth cruelty. Solay is less an extrater-
restrial than a random preteen without a superego who could have just as easily
been an out-of-town cousin, so the interplanetary theme distracts from rather than
focuses the narrative. The school story rings true, however, and kids (who are less
likely than one would wish to internalize the "make nice" moral) may enjoy root-
ing for the comeuppance of the snotty grade-school nobility. DS
HENDRY, DIANA Double Vision. 
Candlewick, 1993 
[271p]
ISBN 1-56402-125-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9 up
This leisurely, lengthy, very British import charts the delights and heartbreaks of a
postwar family with three daughters: Rosa, romantic, dramatic, and intent on
marrying up; Eliza, fifteen, who has a desperate crush on a graduate student boarder
at her best friend Jo's house; and little Lily, half plague-child to her older sisters
and half elf-wise enfant. The best, least self-conscious parts of the book focus on
Eliza and her turbulent friendship with the overly sophisticated Jo; Eliza's intense
crush on the boarder and easygoing courtship with a boy her own age also provide
for a satisfyingly romantic atmosphere. However, the point of view jumps around
too much, letting us into the thoughts of not just the three girls but their parents as
well, so we get lots of dry, sometimes arch adult pondering on religious assimila-
tion (Mrs. Bishop was born a Jew) and class: "They had moved forward in the
cinema-to the expensive seats in the dress circle-and forward in life, into the
ranks of the middle class." 
While it lacks the extravagant sweep of Michelle
Magorian's Not a Swan (BCCB 9/92), the book might find an audience among
Anglophile high school girls not quite ready for Elizabeth Bowen or Muriel Spark.
RS
318 
* THE BULLETIN
HOFF, SYD 
Captain Cat; written and illus. by Syd Hoff. 
HarperCollins,
1993 
4 8p 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020528-8 
$12.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020527-X 
$13.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. K-2
Captain Cat has joined the Army, and boot camp seems a pretty nice place, with
soldiers of various races and both sexes sometimes finding a moment between
chores and maneuvers to say hi to kitty, who "has more stripes than we have." But
Captain Cat's truest friend is Pete, who spends so much time neglecting his chores
for Captain Cat that he's assigned kitchen duty: "Pete let Captain Cat play with
the potato peels." The storyline is fairly slender, but the friendship rings true, and
kids will enjoy watching the cat go through his military paces. As always, Hoffs
cheerful, expressive cartoons have a welcoming appeal to new readers. RS
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Toning the Sweep. 
Jackson/Orchard, 1993 
103p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08626-7 
$13.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05476-4 
$13.95 
R* Gr. 6-10
Every summer, Emmie has gone to visit Grandmama Ola in the California desert
that she loves with the same energy with which Mama hates it. This, her four-
teenth summer, may be her last there for a long time, because Ola is dying of
cancer. Mama and Emmie are helping her pack up the house, and the three women
are saying goodbye-Ola to her friends, Emmie to her childhood, and Mama to a
past that includes the murder of her father by Alabama racists back in 1964.
Through the videotape she makes of Ola and her friends, Emmie learns much
about the two older women and even about herself; by the time they leave, some of
the lifelong tensions among the three have eased into a better understanding. Per-
haps because of her practice on books for younger children (TellMe a Story, Mama,
BCCB 2/89), Johnson has avoided any hint of didacticism in this traditional rite
of passage. Emmie's understanding, and even the dramatic incident of her
grandfather's death, are unfolded through subtle action at a pace natural to the
protagonist's development. There are no long explanations or sudden epiphanies,
and Johnson trusts the reader to discover, as do the characters, how events of the
past circle into the present. The first-person, present-tense narrative occasionally
runs the risk of being fragmentary, but the character dynamics and compression
generate enough tension to give readers a sense of viewing a rich situation through
the camcorder, right along with Emmie. BH
KERMIT THE FROG 
For Every Child, a Better World; as told to Louise Gikow and
Ellen Weiss; illus. by Bruce McNally. 
Muppet Press/Golden Books, 1993 [4 8 p]
ISBN 0-307-15628-1 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Multicultural muppets (purple, blue, and orange, as well as Kermit's familiar green)
are used here to explain in simple terms the basic rights of children as set down by
the United Nations. Concepts are presented through opposition: "Every child
needs food to eat," is illustrated with a painting of a happy muppet family enjoying
dinner together; the page-turn reveals that "sometimes there isn't enough to go
around," illustrated by skeletal muppets, one with a distended stomach, starving
under a hot desert sun. While the upbeat illustrations are sometimes luridly col-
ored, the darker-toned sad pictures face facts, and the use of muppets rather than
JUNE 1993 * 319
human characters may allow for both necessary distance and empathy with TV
favorites. Other rights included are clean water, a home, clean air, medical care,
schooling, play, peace, and intellectual freedom. It's rare that a message book
works so well, and this one is clear and well-paced enough for individual reflection
and at the same time for use as a discussion starter at school or home. RS
KRAMER, S. A. 
To the Top!: Climbing the World's Highest Mountain; illus. by
Thomas La Padula and with photographs. 
Random House, 1993 
4 8p 
(Step
into Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-93885-0 
$7.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-679-83885-6 
$3.50 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Action-packed watercolors and occasional color photos illustrate a you-are-there
sketch of Sir Edmund Hillary's historic ascent of Mt. Everest. Unlike many books
that give Hillary most of the credit, this one gives equal time to the Sherpa guide
Tenzing Norgay, emphasizing that the final attainment of the summit was gained
by both men. The narrative progress is steady, and exclamation points are kept
under control until the last chapters ("Then Hillary has an idea!"). For struggling
and reluctant readers, the present-tense text is easy, and the appeal is solid as a
rock. RS
LANGONE, JOHN 
Spreading Poison: A Book about Racism and Prejudice. Little,
1993 
178p
ISBN 0-316-51410-1 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
With a stated commitment to the idea that prejudice is based on ignorance, fear of
the unknown, and perception of a scapegoat as economic or political threat, Langone
selects particular groups as examples for his systematic overview of discrimination.
After an introduction "exploding the myth of racial purity," he devotes chapters to
African Americans, Jews, other religious groups, Native Americans, various immi-
grant peoples, women ("oppressing the majority"), homosexuals, and the disabled.
There's a mix of historical background and contemporary situations described for
each group, there's a footnote citing the source for every quote (but no bibliogra-
phy), and for the most part, there's substantiation for Langone's argument. Every
once in a while, he oversimplifies and/or generalizes without sufficient documen-
tation. For instance, the statement that "No one knows how many women were
executed as witches, but the estimates range into the millions" begs for a reference
as to whose estimates. On the whole, however, this provides a solid start for junior
high and high school students researching minorities in American history and so-
cial studies. Readers may not want to plow through the whole survey, but brows-
ing for specifics will be easy because of the clear organization and index. BH
LAVIES, BIANCA 
Compost Critters; written and illus. with photographs by Bianca
Lavies. 
Dutton, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-525-44763-6 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 3-6
The last time Bianca Lavies was reviewed in these pages, she was dangling from a
riverbank with her camera submerged in frigid waters to photograph Atlantic Salmon
(BCCB 4/92). This time she's in her own backyard making a compost pile and
documenting the "community of critters" that "come through the air and soil in
her yard to feast there." This inside look at the compost community examines the
life and times of some of its members, including earthworms ("Earthworms are the
320 
* THE BULLETIN
untiring plows of the pile") and lesser-known beasties such as millipedes and nema-
todes. The close-up pictures of glistening worms, shimmering millipedes, and
gleaming bread-molds reinforce the extraordinariness of the ordinary, and every-
thing looks good enough to-well, pretty darn fascinating, anyhow, in a way that
will elicit cries of "Cool!" as well as "Gross!" It's also interesting to see the effect of
the rich compost on the nearby plants ("the tomatoes were three times bigger than
usual") in the garden. Scale of the pictured creatures is sometimes difficult to
determine, and the tone here is a little cuter than usual for Lavies, with the recur-
ring usage of the term "critters" and the narration inexplicably in the third person
about "Bianca's compost pile"; a technical note about the photography (as was
appended to Atlantic Salmon) would have been welcome. Still, it's an intriguing
look into a vital microcosm that kids will dig. DS
LAWLOR, LAURIE 
George on His Own; illus. by Toby Gowing. 
Whitman,
1993 
191p
ISBN 0-8075-2823-4 
$11.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old George is the oldest child in the family now that his sister Addie
(featured in Addie's Dakota Winter, BCCB 12/89, etc.) has gone away to school.
The position only seems to bring him trouble, however: he can't please his father,
who works hard to eke out the family's livelihood on the nineteenth-century Da-
kota prairie, and George's love of music (in the form of his beloved trombone)
brings him further parental scorn. After his little sister dies of measles, George's
guilt leads him to run away, joining up with a band of traveling players and char-
latans until his loneliness drives him back home. Lawlor has a simple and gentle
style that nonetheless deals matter-of-factly with the hard life on the frontier and
the changing family dynamics. Pa does love and miss his son, but he is a hard
man, and George's struggles are sympathetically portrayed. Much closer to the
Wilder spirit than many such efforts, this will please young fans of apolitical his-
torical fiction. DS
LAWRENCE, LOUISE 
Keeper of the Universe. Clarion, 1993 
228p
ISBN 0-395-64340-6 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Christopher (a British teen from Earth), Kysha (a young woman from orderly,
sweetness-and-light Erinos), and Mahri (a warrior queen from Herra-Venda) have
been brought to the castle of the powerful Ben-Harran, a Galactic Controller.
Ben-Harran is on trial for what the High Council of Atui terms genocide, but it
seems things are not so simple: Atui keeps planets, such as Kysha's Erinos, under
complete control, leaving no room for free will, and dissenter Ben-Harran, by
allowing planets in his jurisdiction (including Earth) self-determination, has per-
mitted one of them to blow itself up. Christopher and Kysha, who are drawn to
each other despite their differences, and newly-reformed Mahri are to speak in
Ben-Harran's defense, and Lawrence twists the philosophical aspect interestingly
by having Kysha, after her initial horror, espouse Ben-Harran's cause while Chris-
topher, fearing for the fate of Earth, refuses to support him. The philosophy,
however, is preachy, protracted, and obvious, with concepts that will be familiar to
any reader of A Wrinkle in Time discussed as if novel, and the anthropomorphic
machines and robots, apparently intended to provide humor, grow rather tire-
some. The characters of Kysha and Christopher are appealing, so a fantasy fan
sufficiently philosophical to warm to the ethical debate may find their story worth
pursuing. DS
JUNE 1993 * 321
LEVITIN, SONIA 
The Golem and the Dragon Girl. Dial, 1993 
18 8 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1281-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1280-4 
$14.99 
M 
Gr. 6-8
Levitin has contrived a situation in which two junior high classmates must deal
with similar problems: a move neither of them wants, Jonathan into Laurel's
beloved old home and Laurel into a new house; a family change that threatens
their status quo, immigrating grandparents for Laurel and a new stepfather for
Jonathan; and a set of ethnic traditions-Chinese for Laurel and Jewish for
Jonathan-that seem to become more demanding even as the two kids become
more ambivalent about them. Given the complicated parallels, the plot hardly
needs the further weight of an attack by racist vandals on Laurel's Chinese school
and a romance on the part of Jonathan's Uncle Jake, at which point stock conven-
tions and well-intended cliches replace complexities of development. It's odd, too,
that in a novel about traditions, these are slightly askew. Uncle Jake, who has
taught Jonathan about Judaism, introduces the golem as "a sort of ghost from
Transylvania or Poland or Germany." Although he goes on to define it more
accurately, the golem is repeatedly referred to as a ghost, which it is not. At one
point, Jonathan plays percussion to the beat of a klezmer band, "echoing Uncle
Jake's joy until the two of them were clearly celebrating New Year's Eve, though it
was only September"-an odd comment in light of the fact that the Jewish New
Year is in September. Laurel's reliance on fortune cookies for advice borders on
stereotypical, as do Grandmother's "large almond-shaped eyes." Jonathan seems
to resolve his problems with his stepfather by epiphany and then celebrates by
running a ten-kilometer race although, as far as the reader knows, he's never even
jogged before. The problematic details and trite style indicate a broad surface
skimmed too lightly. Where Laurel and Jonathan find room to explore, their story
deepens, but too often they are simply fitted into the purposive scheme of things.
BH
LEWIN, TED 
I Was a Teenage Professional Wrestler. Jackson/Orchard,
1993 
128p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08627-5 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-05477-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
More a series of vignettes than an autobiography, this book tells of well-known
illustrator Ted Lewin's professional wrestling career, which supported him through
art school. He and his two brothers, fascinated with the sport from early youth, all
ended up in the ring, where they became acquainted with the likes of Dangerous
Danny McShain (later to marry Lewin's sister), Kola "the Russian Bear" Kwariani,
and Frank Hickey (alias Bozo Brown). Lewin tells not only of the hard work of
wrestling but also the hard work of pleasing crowds, in venues ranging from insane
asylums to farmers' fields; to call the depicted milieu of caped characters, rioting
crowds, and midget wrestlers colorful is to engage in understatement. This is a
painter's book, filled not only with photographs of the cast of characters but also
Lewin's sketches and paintings of his comrades-in-trunks (who admired his artis-
tic talent). It's also written in scenes rather than as a story, leaving us to wonder
what happened to many of the people in the book who show up larger-than-life
only to fade away, and the scenes are more notable for content than for style. The
book is an interesting evocation of a particular kind of Americana, however, and
fans of Chris Crutcher and John Irving (as well as those who regularly tune in to
322 
* THE BULLETIN
WWF) will relish this easy and redolent read. A glossary of wrestling terms and
holds is included. DS
McDERMOTTr, 
GERALD Raven: A Trickster Tale from the Pacific Northwest; writ-
ten and illus. by Gerald McDermott. 
Harcourt, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-15-265661-8 
$14.95 
R* 4-6 yrs
See this month's Big Picture for review.
McGRAw, ELOISE 
Tangled Webb. 
McElderry, 1993 
154 p
ISBN 0-689-50573-6 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Juniper is twelve, and she and her best friend Alison love mysteries-they weave
the slightest hint of the unusual into a tapestry of drama. Juniper becomes uneasy,
however, when her own life begins to provide fodder for these fantasies, as her new
young stepmother, Kelsey, can't come up with a believable account of her or her
son's past. The oddities mount up: Kelsey's recollection of her first husband's
name is faulty, she privately calls her son Preston by another name, and she may be
dyeing his hair as well as her own. Juniper, along with Alison and old-friend-
returned Peter, tracks down the mystery with the aid of chance, research, and
some duplicitous phone calls, until all is revealed. This is sort of the sunny side of
a Lois Duncan mystery: Juniper genuinely likes Kelsey and is pleased that the
mystery's solution allows her new family to grow closer, and the story doesn't need
to menace or endanger Juniper for its excitement. McGraw does address the step-
situation, with Juniper mourning her mom and feeling displaced by Kelsey's pres-
ence, but it blends seamlessly into the melodrama. The story as narrated by Juniper
is well-paced and smoothly written, and kids will enjoy the excitement of the young
sleuth's tracking down the important truth. DS
McMIUAN, BRUCE 
A Beach for the Birds; written and illus. with photographs by
Bruce McMillan. 
Houghton, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-395-64050-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-6
McMillan's full-color photodocumentary of the endangered Least Tern describes
the bird's physical characteristics, its beach habitat along the Little River on the
Maine coast, mating and reproduction cycles, and migration. The Least Tern
presents an interesting example of adaptation to a salt water environment, since it
derives its water from the fish it eats and from actually imbibing salt water, with a
special gland to collect excess salt and secrete it in concentrated droplets from nose
holes on the upper bill. The text is clear and full of information, though it seems
to jump around a bit when the author abruptly introduces comparisons between
children's behavior and birds' behavior. The brilliant action shots are enough to
lure kids into a nature watch of their own, however, and further facts are listed for
reference at the book's end, along with a glossary and index. BH
MADDERN, ERlc, ad. 
The Fire Children: A West African Creation Tale; illus. by
Fran6 Lessac. 
Dial, 1993 
26 p
ISBN 0-8037-1477-7 
$14.50 
R 
5-8 yrs
Just as two spirit people peek out of his mouth, the great sky-god Nyame sneezes.
Propelled downward, Aso Yaa and Kwaku Ananse make themselves comfortable
on Earth and eventually shape some children out of clay. These bake to different
JUNE 1993 
* 323
colors when Nyame appears unexpectedly for visits (the two spirit people are un-
easy about pulling their creations out of the fire in the presence of the sky-god).
And those fire children-brown, red, yellow, pink, and white, all loved alike by
their parents-populate the world. Implanted in Lessac's naive, earth-toned gouache
paintings, this adaptation of a West African myth (an earlier printed source is
cited, along with a note of thanks to someone who remembered hearing the tale
from her grandmother) nurtures strong images in both art and text. The mask-
face of Nyame is the strongest graphic feature, with verdantly patterned composi-
tions consistent throughout. The story itself acquires fresh relevance in both
celebrating differences among children and caring for them equally, whatever their
differences. BH
MARTIN, RAFE, ad. 
The Boy Who Lived with the Seals; illus. by David
Shannon. 
Putnam, 1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22413-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
This Chinook legend recounts the story of a young boy who disappears by a great
river and is found, years later, sunning with seals. Although his parents teach him
to walk, talk, and eat normally again, he is haunted by his underwater past; the
only thing that brings him peace is carving beautiful objects on the shore. At last
he can resist the calling seals no longer, and he leaps from his parents' canoe.
They, in turn, sink his carving tools and receive, each spring, a beautifully carved
new canoe and paddle. Shannon's paintings are dark and dramatic, with his trade-
mark textures of smooth, almost sculptured surfaces and brooding figures. This
sometimes creates a cold effect, but the motif of a boy adopted by seals will draw
children who have heard Kipling's Mowgli and other wild child stories, as well as
those who enjoy the Celtic selkie tales (Cooper's The Selkie Girl BCCB 11/86;
Gerstein's The SealMother, 11/86; Yolen's Greyling, 5/69). An author's note gives
the source and some background on the story, which is the second collaboration
by the author/artist team who produced The Rough-Face Girl (BCCB 4/92). BH
MATHEWS, 
JUDITH 
An Egg and Seven Socks; illus. by Marylin
Hafner. 
HarperCollins, 1993 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-020208-4 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-020207-6 
$14.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Three silly sisters-Lacey, Doily, and Thimblethreads-are content to do the only
thing they know how to do, which is mend socks, until a wind comes in and blows
all their work and Thimblethreads' darning egg away. "We must get that egg
back!" says Lacey. "It came from MOTHER!" On their journey, they meet a
donkey, a king, and a dragon. The first is useful, the second useless, and the third
dispensed with when he chokes on a sock: "Darn it! Darn this sock!" he cleverly
gasps before breathing, or rather not breathing, his last. The story is just a bit
crowded: Thimblethreads talks in rhyme, and the king interrupts the sisters' quest
more than moving it along; both devices dissipate the momentum rather than
heighten it. However, the wordplay is fun, the feminist adventure (complete with
a traditional women's motif of weaving/mending/sewing) is lively, and these are
some of Hafner's best illustrations. The watercolors are intensely hued and ac-
tively rendered, with an imposing dragon who's color coordinated with several
impressive landscapes. At the same time, the artist hasn't lost her sprightly sense of
cartooning, with humorous touches reminiscent of Paul Galdone's. BH
324 
* 
THE BULLETIN
MATTHEWS, DOWNS 
Arctic Summer; illus. with photographs by Dan
Guravich. 
Simon, 1993 
33p
ISBN 0-671-79539-2 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
At first, it seems that this photo-logue of the Arctic will take a cyclical approach
("Plants make all life possible"), but the text, while always clear, soon takes on the
function of glorified captions to a set of glorious photographs. Every double spread
introduces a new Arctic animal and sometimes the transition seems abrupt, mov-
ing, for example, from ermines to muskoxen. Sometimes the text indulges in
anthropomorphism, as in a comment on the parenting talents of the Arctic tern:
"Arctic terns are good parents." This necessarily invites a comparison, but what
species are "bad parents"? Each of the spreads, though, is informative, and the
color photographs, clear and close-up, together give a full picture of Arctic flora
and fauna. RS
MICHEL, FRANCOIS 
Water; illus. by Yves Larvor. 
Lothrop, 1993 
10p
ISBN 0-688-11427-X 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 3-7
An extravagant array of pop-up, pull-tab and lift-the-flap devices animates this
introduction to water in its many homes and guises, from groundwater to oceans
to icecaps, and its many uses, such as drinking, heating and hydroelectric power.
The five double-spreads are titled "Water for Life," "Underground Water," "Wa-
ter in the City," "Water Power," and "The Seacoast," and, as is not true of most
pop-up books, the gimmicks here are actually useful. A picture of a limestone cliff
opens to reveal a cave with a further tab that shows the formation of stalactites and
stalagmites; a tab that pulls the tides in and out also reveals a moon from behind a
cloud. The information is a bit scattered-it's hard to tell what to pull first-but
each of the spreads is ultimately coherent and the elegant illustrations are finely
detailed and filled with beautiful blues. There's lots to look at and lots to do, and
when kids get tired of tossing the bucket down the well, they can turn the turbine
and watch a little light bulb glow yellow, or make the boat go up and down in the
lock. The pages are sturdy, in fact, practically waterproof. RS
MIKAELSEN, BEN 
Sparrow Hawk Red. Hyperion, 1993 
185p
Library ed. ISBN 1-56282-388-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 1-56282-387-6 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-8
When eighth-grader Ricky discovers that the mother he thought was killed in an
accident was actually murdered by drug dealers, he determines to get revenge. His
father, a former DEA agent, wants nothing to do with the agency's latest scheme
to hijack the drug dealers' surveillance plane out of Mexico, but Ricky, a junior ace
pilot, decides he can do it and sneaks across the border, disguises himself as a
ratero, a street kid, and with the help of a Mexican girl makes his way to the cartel's
compound. Realistic it ain't, but the pace and the chase are tremendously excit-
ing, and the glimpse into the lives of the rateros is unflinching. The daredevil
aerobatics Ricky and his dad perform in their plane are heart-pounding, and reluc-
tant readers will fly through the story to the finish. RS
MoRlus, ANN 
Puddle Jumper: How a Toy Is Made; illus. with photographs by
Ken Heyman. 
Lothrop, 1993 
24p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-10205-0 
$12.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-10204-2 
$13.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
JUNE 1993 * 325
A modern day Geppetto and his preschool daughter are the subjects of this photo-
graphic essay, which takes readers step-by-step through the design and construc-
tion of a puddle jumper, an updated version of a rocking horse. Sarah is pictured
helping her father with some of the simpler tasks such as selecting wood, measur-
ing, and packing the finished toys; her father operates the planer, the rotary saw,
and the drum sander on his own, while the text identifies but only briefly explains
the woodworking equipment. Admittedly, a complicated process like woodwork-
ing must be simplified for preschoolers, but the posed photographs and utilitarian
prose may strain readers' attention unless they have a technical bent. Older read-
ers, whether experienced or inexperienced woodworkers, will notice that precau-
tions such as safety glasses are worn by Sarah's father, but they're not emphasized
in context or in notes to parents and teachers. ELIZABETH HUNTOON
MuRRow, LIZA KETCHUM 
Twelve Days in August. 
Holiday House, 1993 
202p
ISBN 0-8234-1012-9 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Todd is intrigued with two newcomers to his small Maine town: the Beekman
twins are from California, and Rita Beekman is gorgeous while Alex Beekman
turns out to be a terrific soccer player, presenting the possibility that Todd might
find himself on the junior varsity team once again. Both boys make the varsity
team, but Alex is hounded by the local bully Randy, who, protective of his own
star status, spreads a rumor that Alex-and maybe Todd-is gay. While a touch
formulaic, the novel takes a good look at high school homophobia, capturing par-
ticularly well Todd's ambivalence toward Alex, his natural impulse to be friendly
tempered by his desire not to be labelled as gay. Seasoned readers of problem
novels will spot early on that Todd's favorite uncle is gay, but they will also appre-
ciate the easy integration of the soccer action with the serious theme, as Randy
struggles with his own prejudices while still wanting to be part of a winning team.
The conflicts are well-paced and while the message of tolerance is pervasive, the
book is never preachy. RS
O'BRIEN, ANNE SIBLEY, ad. 
The Princess and the Beggar: A Korean Folktale; ad.
and illus. by Anne Sibley O'Brien. 
Scholastic, 1993 
[32 p]
ISBN 0-590-46092-7 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs.
A romantic tale in the Pygmalion mode reverses sex roles in a most satisfying way,
as the Weeping Princess escapes her boring aristocratic fate by marrying a beggar,
Pabo Ondal, and teaching him to ride in the Festival of Hunters and to write the
winning poem in the Festival of Scholars. His merit is soon recognized by the
king, who subsequently recognizes his daughter as well, and offers to reward them
both. But the wise couple wish only to serve him and return to their familial
happiness in the forest: the final spread shows their four girls running to meet
Pabo Ondal. Framed in tan rice paper, the pastel illustrations are studied and
sometimes overcolored, with distant landscapes better drafted than closeups, and
impressionistic effects more imaginative than literal effects. Her note about cos-
tumes, setting, and the popularity of Pabo Ondal in Korea mentions that "several
written versions place the story in the late sixth century" but does not name them.
Children will enjoy hearing this alongside tales of physical transformation such as
"Beauty and the Beast." BH
326 
* 
THE BULLETIN
O'DONNELL, ELIZABETH LEE 
Are You Flying, Charlie Duncan?; illus. by Karen
Milone. Morrow, 1993 
[9 6p]
ISBN 0-688-09027-3 
$14.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Charlie is a shy, awkward, lonely fifth-grader who gets along poorly with people
but splendidly with balloons. In fact, they talk to him: Green, the street-smart
balloon Charlie acquires at a circus, is a lively companion until he takes off. Charlie
discovers that he himself must be part balloon, because he can make himself fly
like one; this allows him (with the assistance of a cheerful lark and a snobbish
yellow balloon) to find his friend Green, who helps him understand his own indi-
viduality. The whimsy here is applied rather than integral, the sensibility is down-
right babyish, too young for this level of reading, and the phenomena of Charlie's
communicative and aerodynamic powers are protracted rather than explored. The
characterization, especially of the evil bully, is simplistic, and Charlie's specialness,
which leads him to ask the teacher questions that inspire her to give the class new
assignments, is unlikely to garner much reader sympathy. The style is competent;
perhaps this gentle story's best chance is as a readaloud for younger grades. DS
OSBORNE, MARY POPE 
Spider Kane and the Mystery at Jumbo Nightcrawler's; illus.
by Victoria Chess. 
Knopf, 1993 
14 2p
ISBN 0-679-80856-6 
$14.00 
R Gr. 4-7
While Spider Kane and the Mystery under the May-Apple (BCCB 5/92) had its
operatic dimensions, this one has the hot blues of a summer night, as the master
detective Kane and his cohorts descend upon Jumbo Nightcrawler's nightclub on
Waterfront Row. Each member, except young Leon, of Spider Kane's Order of
the MOTH has received a message from Kane to come to the nightspot, but it
turns out the notes aren't from him, and the faithful crimefighters have instead
been kid-, er, bug-napped. In a star turn 't la The Crying Game, the torchy hostess
of the club, Saratoga D'Bee, is the glamorous center of the mystery, which Spider
Kane wraps up in his inimitably tidy fashion. The story is fast and jazzy, imbued
with the wink of a send-up but never betraying readers' empathy for the inhabit-
ants, both friendly and ferocious, of its bug-world. Precise ink-and-wash illustra-
tions project the many-legged denizens of the Cottage Garden and Waterfront
Row with wit and affection. RS
PULLMAN, PHILIP 
The White Mercedes. Knopf, 1993 
171p
ISBN 0-679-83198-3 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Fans of Robert Cormier should appreciate this tense new thriller that gives away its
ending-though none of its suspense-in the first sentence: "Chris Marshall met
the girl he was going to kill on a warm night in early June." They meet at an
Oxford prom, where Chris hides Jenny from some drunken and voracious under-
graduates. Chris is an Oxford townie; Jenny has run away from her sexually abu-
sive father and settled in a squat with a couple of small-time drug dealers. Their
fast-track romance is surrounded by secrets, lies, and misunderstandings; as in
Avi's Nothing But the Truth, all the characters here spend a lot of time bumbling in
the dark, a metaphor that turns true in the novel's tragic climax and skin-crawlingly
ironic conclusion. The book moves fast, sometimes to the point of being rushed,
as in a scene where Chris falls far too easily into a trap set by a criminal who is
intent upon killing Chris' boss, and the psychologizing can be overtly stated rather
JUNE 1993 * 327
than demonstrated. But as with Cormier's We AllFall Down, for example, there is
within the violence and intrigue a fierce moral core that both informs and impels
the action. RS
RAYNER, MARY 
Garth Pig Steals the Show; written and illus. by Mary
Rayner. 
Dutton, 1993 32p
ISBN 0-525-45023-8 
$13.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Mary Rayner's pigs (Mr. and Mrs. Pig's Evening Out, BCCB 1/77, etc.) are back,
all ten piglets and their parents, and they've formed a band called the Pig Players.
Their advertisement for an outside musician brings in a sousaphone player with a
furry face, pointy ears, Granny-eating smile, and the enthusiastically ambiguous
statement, "There's nothing I like better than a helping of pig." Her fiendish plot
involves sucking Garth Pig right into the bell of her sousaphone in the middle of
the concert (presumably the better to store him for a post-concert supper, my
dear), but quick-witted William Pig saves his brother's bacon; he seizes the
conductor's baton and directs the brassy wolf in a solo oom-pah-pah which forc-
ibly ejects Garth, sending him flying to center stage in a well-received star turn
while the sousaphone player flees in disappointed hunger. Rayner sets the situa-
tion clearly and carefully, and kids will get their usual kick out of spotting the wolf
(who lurks behind her instrument with comic ominousness) long before the pigs
do. The pig family, pictured in airy line-and-watercolor with abundant white
space, are stylish down to their perky tails in their concert garb (although Father
Pig tends towards five o'clock shadow), and there's something about the high-
heeled effect of cloven hooves that thrusts out porky derrieres in a particularly
droll fashion. Young musicians will wish their concerts were as interesting as this,
but Rayner's perky production will please the piglets. DS
RHEE, NAMI, ad. 
Magic Spring: A Korean Folktale; ad. and illus. by Nami
Rhee. 
Whitebird/Putnam, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22420-3 
$14.95 
R 4-6 yrs
With a confident simplicity that never becomes condescending in either brushstrokes
or narration, Rhee passes on a story told to her as a child, about the way a hard-
working old couple become young again and find a child of their own. The water
of life, which the old man discovers with the help of a bird, rejuvenates first him,
then his wife, and finally the rich neighbor who has taunted them. But the greedy
neighbor drinks too much, turning into a baby whom the couple adopts. It's a
happy ending that twists neatly into a new beginning for everyone, and Rhee's
strong ink outlines emphasize the strong lines of the story, just as her restrained
watercolors highlight the understated compositions without becoming distract-
ing. Korean written characters form a decorative line that bridges pictures and
text. Of the several Korean folktales recently published in picture book format
(see Climo, Han, and O'Brien in this issue), this is the most centered and the most
accessible to young children. BH
ROCHMAN, HAZEL, comp. ed. 
Who Do You Think You Are?: Stories ofFriends and
Enemies; compiled and edited by Hazel Rochman and Darlene Z.
McCampbell. 
Joy Street, 1993 
170p
ISBN 0-316-75355-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Sixteen stories, all fairly contemporary and focused on youth, address the delicate
328 
* 
THE BULLETIN
and dangerous art of involvement with another, whether as friend or foe. A friend
can be a dog (Martha Brooks' "A Boy and His Dog"); a friend can be another's
enemy (a selection from Tobias Wolff's This Boy's Life); he can lure you into de-
struction (Joyce Carol Oates' "Where Are You Going? Where Have You Been?"),
or she can reach across a generation to introduce you to the world (an excerpt from
Maya Angelou's I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings). Enemies, with whom the
obsession and absorption can be as great or greater, populate these pages too (ap-
pearing, for instance, in Isabel Huggan's "Celia Behind Me" and a pair of gritty
Tim O'Brien pieces about Vietnam). Although the majority of the stories end in
sorrow, there's a pleasing variety in style, ranging from Gish Jen's lively and bub-
bling "What Means Switch" to Carson McCullers' colloquial and direct "Sucker."
This is a thoughtful collection that kids can peruse one story at a time or in toto;
either way, they should appreciate the exposure to some sensitive reflections, good
storytelling, and excellent writing. Biographical notes on the authors are included.
DS
SACHS, MARILYN 
Thirteen Going on Seven. 
Dutton, 1993 
[112p]
ISBN 0-525-45096-3 
$12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-7
Dee is sophisticated, smart, and yearning for adolescence; Dezzy, her far-from-
identical twin, flounders at school, resents her blossoming body, and yearns to stay
even with Dee in what both twins clearly regard as a race for attention and signifi-
cance ("If Dee grew taller than Dezzy, didn't that also mean Dezzy grew shorter
than Dee? And if Dee ran faster and climbed higher, didn't that also mean that
Dezzy ran slower and climbed lower?"). This is mainly Dezzy's story of the year in
which she begins to find her own identity. She becomes close to her newly-wid-
owed grandfather (he drives along after her to keep her safe when she goes for her
daily jog in the Golden Gate Park), she makes friends with a boy her age (who
avoids jogging with his critical father by riding in the car with Dezzy's grandfa-
ther), and she develops an interest in what her science teacher terms "waste man-
agement" (she picks up garbage). The emotional and honest heroine is a sympathetic
figure, and her sibling rivalry will ring a lot of familiar bells with readers. The
story, with its straightforward, friendly tone and gentle humor, hearkens back to
early Sachs such as Amy Moves In (BCCB 9/64), and it's nice to have a book not
dependent on obvious crisis or denouement-Dezzy doesn't so much come into
her own as settle more firmly into being the girl she's always been. The quiet self-
definition theme is reminiscent of Susan Shreve's Wait for Me (BCCB 10/92), but
this will also appeal to older readers who will appreciate a tender tale of confi-
dence-building. DS
SAN SoucI, ROBERT D., ad. 
Cut From the Same Cloth: American Women ofMyth,
Legend, and Tall Tale; illus. by Brian Pinkney. 
Philomel, 1993 
[160p]
ISBN 0-399-21987-0 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 4-6
Grouped by region-Northeast, South, Midwest, Southwest, and West-these
fifteen stories offer a satisfying balance to the male-dominated tall tale figures so
familiar from books such as Paul Robert Walker's Big Men, Big Country (reviewed
below). There's also a good ethnic mix here: six of the heroines are Native Ameri-
can, four African American, two Anglo American, one Mexican American, and
one Hawaiian. 
If any particular characteristic seems to distinguish these
JUNE 1993 * 
329
superhumans from their male counterparts, it's the fact that the women's deeds
tend to be less staggering than haunting. The Miwok legend of Hekeke, for in-
stance, in which Hekeke is kidnapped by a cannibalistic giant and must watch him
consume his victims until she destroys him, has a tone more reminiscent of Odysseus'
experience in the cave of the Cyclops than of any Paul Bunyan-type feats. Otoonah's
determined survival after being abandoned on an island by her brothers during a
period of starvation is as adventurous a quest as you'll find anywhere. Others, such
as "Molly Cottontail," are lighter-hearted or, like "Sweet Betsey from Pike," sharp-
edged. San Souci has varied his retellings to suit the style of each story, and his
introductions, source notes, and bibliography are commendably thorough. Brian
Pinkney's signature scratchboard illustrations, one of which introduces each tale,
are particularly well tuned to the heroic mode. This is a first-class resource for
school media centers where students work with tall tales, or for public libraries
where parents and professionals read folklore aloud and do storytelling. BH
SATTLER, HELEN RONEY 
The Earliest Americans; illus. by Jean Day
Zallinger. 
Clarion, 1993 
126 p
ISBN 0-395-54996-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Explaining the unknown and the complex to children is a difficult task for adults.
Often we oversimplify; occasionally we over-elucidate. Helen Sattler's beautiful
book falls victim to the latter problem. The complicated business about who
knows when and how America was first settled and what evidence there is to sub-
stantiate the theories is not made easier to understand here. The constant overlap-
ping of dates and references to multiple conflicting views about what might have
happened requires, at the very least, some prior knowledge of the migration pro-
cess and the methods by which information is verified in this field of science.
These chapters read as if they were written from notes without a synthesis of thought.
Zallinger's illustrations, while elegantly conceived, are occasionally mismatched to
the text (microblades, cores, and bifacially flaked projectiles are shown on page 20
but not addressed in the text until page 24). 
In addition, the sense of reality
created by the well-crafted scenes of Paleo-Indian life and presented without com-
ment either in text or caption may be misleading since we know so little of these
peoples' dress and habits. On the other hand, labelled pictures such as a display of
"sinodonty, the tooth pattern that only Native Americans and northern Asians
share," will lure kids into reading the text above it. Later chapters give brief over-
views of a number of the better documented cultures without an overwhelming
amount of detail. Although the book does not always give a clear representation of
the overall picture and therefore does not stand well on its own, it could help
children piece together a fuller understanding of the distant past and our knowl-
edge of it. The time chart, extensive bibliography, and index are exemplary; stu-
dents researching particular aspects of settlement and migration will have easy
access to their subject. CAROL Fox
SERVICE, PAMELA F. 
Stinker's Return. Scribner's, 1993 
87p
ISBN 0-684-19542-9 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Karen and Jonathan still haven't gotten over their encounter with the alien-turned-
skunk who wreaked havoc in Stinkerfrom Space (BCCB 3/88), especially since the
government covered up the incident and made them look like liars. Now Tsynq
330 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Yr's back to include the kids on another mission, and the Feds are after them all.
This is basically an extended chase scene, by spacecraft, auto, and even on foot
through the White House (including a very brief encounter with the president and
his dog). Via a neat twisting of plot, the kids get what they wanted and more than
they dreamed: their story is vindicated, not to mention photographed, by the
press; their hero, the lead actor in Star Raiders, helps save them; and they get a little
spin into space ("Let's boldly go where no humans and darn few skunks have gone
before!"). There's plenty of room for another sequel, which is all to the good-the
story is fast-moving and lots of fun, just the right prescription for science fiction
fans or reluctant readers of any persuasion. BH
SINGER, MARILYN 
It's Hard to Read a Map with a Beagle on Your Lap; illus. by
Clement Oubrerie. 
Holt, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-2201-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
This is a collection of twenty-six silly dog poems ranging in length and format
from the title couplet to longer poems about particular breeds or canine habits
("Dogs ... like to sleep on sofas/ Instead of on the floor/ They like to crawl in bed
with you/ And then they like to snore"), plus a few lickety-split paeans to "Ears,"
"Tails," and "Fur." The poems are entertaining, although most of them seem
driven by rhyme rather than a guiding idea, and the rhythm is sometimes forced.
Oubrerie's scratchy lines and mixed-media art emphasizes the variety in both dogs
and poetry by depicting the protagonists sometimes in cartoonish exaggeration
and sometimes in highly detailed realism, ranging from full-page bleeds-or, in
the case of the dachshund, four full pages-to a tiny Mexican Hairless adrift in
white space. The effect, coupled with interestingly varied type arrangements (circles,
snakes, and so on) and a continuing rhyme that unfolds in the upper-right-hand
corner throughout the book, can be visually overwhelming, although it's always
energetic. Kids won't exactly take these up as chants, but the tilted investigation of
the doggy world has a giggle-provoking appeal. DS
SIS, PETER 
Komodo!; written and illus. by Peter Sis. 
Greenwillow, 1993 
[34 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-11584-5 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-11583-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
The androgynous young narrator of this book is fascinated by dragons of all kinds,
so s/he is thrilled when Mom and Dad decide they'll all take a trip to Komodo in
Indonesia to see the Komodo Dragon. After a long trip, the narrator and family
arrive at the island only to find it disappointingly crowded (litter-flinging tourists
huddle around in a ring waiting to see the "Dragon Show"), but the young dragon-
lover wanders away and has a brief private encounter with a wild Komodo. The
story, assisted by the art in its moodily surreal tone, is simply written but implies
worlds, and not just about Komodo Dragons (information about which is dis-
creetly inserted in an illustration and an endnote, both relevant but neither man-
datory to the story's enjoyment). Sis' illustrations are what really bring allure to
the story; his delicate stipple and hatch faux-engraving pairs with the dappled
verdancy of the watercolors to create a lushly precise view of the world. Visual
treats await the patient observer, including a couple of Where's Waldo-like pages in
which the narrator is subsumed into a crowd, and the constant repetition of dragon
figures in places both realistic (the narrator's wallpaper and curtains) and fantastic
JUNE 1993 
* 331
(the foliage on Komodo suggests dragons in no uncertain terms). The subject's a
little off the beaten path, and that's part of what the story's about-young readers
will be lured by this tale of obsession, adventure, and the magic of private experi-
ence. DS
THESMAN, JEAN 
Molly Donnelly. 
Houghton, 1993 
186 p
ISBN 0-395-64348-1 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Heading each chapter with an excerpt from Molly Donnelly's wartime diary-
December 7, 1941, to August, 1945-the author focuses on the maturation of a
Seattle teenager who sees her best friend taken off to an internment camp, copes
with an increasingly fragmented family life, gets bored with the boy she has a crush
on, falls deeply in love with a soldier, discovers her vocation as a writer, determines
to go to college, and grieves over her cousin, an army nurse killed in a Japanese
camp. All of these experiences are realistically detailed, but reality has a tendency
to ramble, and so does the story. Despite some intense scenes, this has more
portrayal than plot. Nevertheless, the home-front is well realized without becom-
ing informationally forced. Each clearly rendered character collects a reader's in-
terest: Molly's depressive father, sliding into alcoholism; her mother, escaping
into a first job; her brother, running wild toward juvenile delinquency; and her
uncle, on whom she relies when the others consistently fail her. Not as forcefully
shaped of The Rain Catchers (BCCB 3/91), this nevertheless affirms Thesman's
skill in revealing human dynamics. BH
TURNER, ANN 
Grass Songs-, illus. by Barry Moser. 
Harcourt, 1993 
54p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-136788-4 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-15-636477-8 
$10.95 
R* 
Gr. 8 up
"All day, since first light/ we had been traveling./ Not a bird, nothing furred,/ just
rock and shadow/ and a light that made the stones/ look bloody." This stanza
from "Stones Speak" represents the voice of a pioneer woman, one of seventeen
portrayed in these narrative poems based on letters, diaries, and historical anec-
dotes of the harsh westward journey. Some rejoice in their newfound freedom
from the restriction of traditional roles, others yearn for the familiar comforts of
their old homes. Some give birth along the way, and others die. Turner's free
verse flows easily, with internal rhymes that turn a corner in sound, inviting read-
ers to share these aloud-a particularly appropriate idea for American history classes.
On the other hand, the subjects are often private, even intimate: an Indian captive
recaptured by whites longs to return to her Native American family; a woman's
joyful response to her husband's sexuality will lead, she realizes, to one child too
many; women delight in what they have or long for what they have not. Turner
has matched the intensity of their struggle with a poetic intensity of her own, spare
and plainspoken. Moser's pencil drawings, based on historical photographs and
especially eloquent in depicting the characters' eyes, echo Turner's verbal portraits
with concentrated expression. BH
VYNER, SUE 
Arctic Spring; illus. by Tim Vyner. 
Viking, 1993 
32p
ISBN 0-670-84934-0 
$13.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Like Matthews' Arctic Summer, reviewed above, this is a catalogish display of the
animals that inhabit the region, here illustrated with snowy-greeny tempera paint-
ings notable both for their sense of the Arctic and for the fine detailing of the
332 * THE BULLETIN
animals. There's a bit of a narrative here, some of it confusing: it's not apparent
until well into the story that the polar bear introduced on the first page is adrift on
a piece of sea ice where she has constructed her winter cave. Still, this is a simple
introduction to an exotic ecosystem where land and sea habitats are bridged by ice.
RS
WALKER, PAUL ROBERT BigMen, Big Country: A Collection ofAmerican Tall Tales;
illus. by James Bernardin. 
Harcourt, 1993 
[80p]
ISBN 0-15-207136-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Walker's informal style and easygoing humor make a natural fit for these nine
stories of larger-than-life heroes, and he's done a thorough job of researching the
background for them and telling us about it. A note at the end of each gives the
oral and/or publishing history for the story, while an annotated bibliography will
help readers look further into the tall tale of their choice. Although the selection is
traditional, Walker has varied it, with some figures well-known and others less so:
Davy Crockett, Old Stormalong, Big Mose, John Darling, 01' Gabe (Jim Bridger),
Paul Bunyan, John Henry, Gib Morgan, and Pecos Bill. Bernardin has captured
this cast with strong black-and-white drawings, plus full-color pictures with a kind
of muscular Frederic Remington energy. In fact, this is such a down-home mascu-
line collection that you should be sure to order San Souci's Cut From the Same
Cloth: American Women of Myth, Legend, and Tall Tale (reviewed above) just to
maintain a little balance in the library. BH
WALKER, KATE 
Peter. Houghton, 1993 
170p
ISBN 0-395-64722-3 
$13.95 
R Gr. 7-10
In this Australian import Peter, fifteen, is intrigued with his older brother Vince's
friend David, who is self-assured, good-looking, and gay. Gossip starts one day
when David is helping Peter out with the grocery shopping; the excursion makes
Peter the perfect target for the beastie boys who, along with Peter, rev their motor-
bikes around a deserted paddock. Unlike many YA novels that start out about
homosexuality and end up being about tolerance or "phases," this one has Peter
confront the possibility, even the likelihood, of his being gay. There's one espe-
cially funny/sad scene where Peter, attempting to test his preferences, buys a gay
skin magazine and peruses it in a men's room stall, and then tries to flush the
magazine away: "it was going to seize up the city's plumbing and I'd be to blame.
It'd be all my fault, because I was gay." While the most engaging relationship here
is actually between Peter and Vince, a pain-in-the-neck older brother who cares
deeply for Peter, the sparks between Peter and David fly sexy, even though David
gently-and wisely-rejects Peter's timid overture. Occasional preaching, espe-
cially via the macho posturing of the motorbikers and Peter's father, is overdone,
but the dialogue is perfectly tuned and Peter's narration, both scrappy and plead-
ing, is freshly voiced. RS
WEISS, ANN E. 
Money Games: The Business ofSports. Houghton, 1993 
186 p
ISBN 0-395-57444-7 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 9-12
While covering the same sports issues as Aaseng's The Locker Room Mirror, re-
viewed above, Weiss' book is a carefully argued expose, building a case that such
problems such as drug use, cheating, and violence can be traced to the enormous
sums of money involved in both amateur and professional competition. Where
JUNE 1993 
* 
333
Aaseng states that "sports authorities must continue to search for realistic ways to
discourage drug abuse among participants," for example, Weiss casts a gimlet eye
upon the intentions of the executives who would provide help via such methods as
drug testing: "testing's true goal [state critics]-like the goal of sports drug poli-
cies overall-is a public relations one: convincing ticket-buying and television-
viewing fans that sport's drug problem is under control." Weiss much more than
Aaseng focuses upon the big business of sports, and builds a convincing case that
management is far more responsible than individual players for the problems in
the game. Lots of statistics (and each chapter has an extensive bibliography) add
evidential weight, and while Weiss' book is more difficult to read than Aaseng's, it
avoids his summary and sometimes superficial tone and benefits from a dedicated
muckraking idealism. An index will be appended. RS
WOOD, AUDREY 
Rude Giants; written and illus. by Audrey Wood. 
Harcourt,
1993 
[32p]
ISBN 0-15-269412-9 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4 -8 yrs
A slovenly and mannerless giant and giantess move into the castle on the hill and
terrorize the local folk until the giants snatch Beatrix the butter maid's cow Gerda.
Beatrix stops the meal not once but three times by claiming the cow will taste even
more delicious if the giants clean their castle, improve their manners, and submit
to a complete hair and wardrobe makeover. The town celebrates with a weekly
potluck party, and when a rude giant baby is born Beatrix and Gerda are hired as
tutors. Kids won't mind the obvious message on civilized behavior; they'll be too
busy enjoying the exaggerated close-ups of hairy fists, triple chins, and stringy
green hair and the double-page spreads full of giant clutter and bad taste. Even
cleaned up, the giants are more than a bit garish, but the dialogue is snappy and
swift paced, just right for pre-school storytime. The plot and characters may seem
contrived to adults, but their young listeners will plead "read it again!" ELIZABETH
HUNTOON
WRIGHT, BETTY REN 
The Ghost of Popcorn Hill; illus. by Karen Ritz. 
Holiday
House, 1993 
81p
ISBN 0-8234-1009-9 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Martin and Peter like their new house, really a rustic old cabin, on Popcorn Hill,
and they're thrilled that it means they can get a dog. The brothers want "the
biggest dog in the world," but their father puts his foot down and instead they
acquire medium-sized Rosie, whom Martin and Peter avoid in favor of a huge Old
English Sheepdog who hangs around the cabin. More of a problem is spectral
laughter in their room at night, which turns out to emanate from the ghost of old
Tom Buffle, who used to live in the cabin and who's been terribly lonely since he
died. While they don't bear harmless old Tom any ill-will, he is scary and makes
Peter cry; it turns out, however, that the boys' desired sheepdog is a ghost too, so
they bring Tom and the ghost dog together to the satisfaction of everybody, and
they decide that Rosie's a pretty good dog in her own way ("And you can't see
through her," Peter says matter-of-factly). This is a nice friendly ghost story, tidily
plotted and unthreatening enough (without being a joke story) for spook fans with
weak nerves. The big print, large page-size, and frequency of full-page pencil
illustrations (which feature homey, big-eared boys and dogs) should make the book
an inviting read for kids uneasy about pages full of print. DS
334 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
Announcement: With this June issue, we begin to incorporate periodic editorial
contributions from our Advisory Board members, who will be writing Professional
Connections columns in their specialty areas, as well as occasional reviews. Their
names will be used in full (Elizabeth Huntoon and Carol Fox this month, for
instance) rather than indicated by initials, as staff writers' are.
Professional reading:
Compiled by Carol Elbert, Rene Lynch, and Robin Currie, Double Rainbows: More
Storytimes about Things Kids Like, is a collection of eighteen story hour suggestions
organized around themes such as bathtime, bedtime, monsters, and magic wishes.
Each section includes a lengthy bibliography of picture books, a fingerplay, and a
simple craft project. The sixty-six page booklet (unbound, punched for a standard
three-ring binder) is available for $7.00 postpaid from the Iowa Library Associa-
tion, 823 Insurance Exchange Building, Des Moines, IA 50309
Many Faces, Many Voices: Multicultural Literary Experiences for Youth is a collec-
tion of presentations given at Kent State University's annual Virginia Hamilton
Conference. Edited by Anthony L. Manna and Carolyn S. Brodie, the contents
include papers by Virginia Hamilton, Arlene Harris Mitchell, and Nicholasa Mohr,
among others; topics covered include the depiction of Appalachia in books for
children, books about the Jewish-American experience, and African-American
poetry and folklore. A "Selected Listing of Multicultural Trade Books for Chil-
dren and Young Adults" and a directory of "Sources of Multicultural Materials"
are appended (Highsmith Press, ISBN 0-917846-12-5, 183p, paper ed $29.00).
Edited by Judy Taylor, "So I Shall Tell You a Story... . ' Encounters with Beatrix
Potter is a collection of essays relating the experiences of those who met the often
prickly Mrs. Heelis ("When a person has been nearly thirty years married it's not
ingratiating to get an envelope addressed to 'Miss'"), as well as contemporary views
on Potter's work by writers such as Brian Alderson and Maurice Sendak. Rose-
mary Wells' "Sitting in Her Chair" is a standout contribution, a detailed response
of an artist to Potter's craft and technique (Warne, ISBN 0-7232-4025-6, 22 4p,
$22.00).
Earthsea Revisioned, a lecture originally delivered at a Children's Literature New
England conference by Ursula K. Le Guin, is now available in an elegant 28-page
pamphlet format. Copies are $10.00; order from Children's Literature New En-
gland, c/o Norwood G. Long, 334 Woodland Road, Madison, NJ, 07940.
A third edition of Fiction for Youth: A Guide to Recommended Books, compiled by
Lillian L. Shapiro and Barbara L. Stein, annotates more than six hundred young
adult and adult titles of interest to teen readers (Neal-Schuman Publishers, ISBN
1-55570-113-2, 263p, paper ed. $35.00).
JUNE 1993 * 335
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this new index, which
will appear in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In no way meant to be a cataloging aid, this rather
idiosyncratic index is instead intended to lead readers to those books that could fill
a particular gap in a collection, to help teachers and librarians find books that
might be useful in various school or recreational settings, and to help in those
requests for a "love story" or a "scary story." In the case of subject headings, the
subhead "stories" refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those
books intended for independent reading.
Adoption: Gravelle
ADVENTURE STORIES: Cross;
Mikaelsen
Africa, West-folklore: Maddern
African Americans-fiction: Boyd;
Johnson
African Americans-stories: Falwell
Archeology: Sattler
Archeology-fiction: Carris
Arctic regions: Matthews; Vyner
Arizona-fiction: DeVito
Art: Lewin
Australia-fiction: Walker, K.
Aviation-fiction: Mikaelsen
Balloons-fiction: O'Donnell
Baseball: Gutman
BEDTIME STORIES: Caseley
Birds: McMillan
Birds-stories: McDermott
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
DeVito
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Caseley
Brothers-fiction: Walker, K.
Brothers-stories: Bernhard
Bullies-fiction: Murrow
Chinese Americans-fiction: Levitin
Cliques-fiction: Harris
Columbus Day: Crespo
Comedians-fiction: Deaver
COUNTING BOOKS: Falwell
Death-fiction: Deaver
Dogs-poetry: Singer
Dogs-stories: Wright
Ecology: Lavies
Elephants-fiction: Cross
England-fiction: Hendry; Pullman
Ethics and values: Weiss
FAIRYTALES AND FOLKLORE:
Bernhard; Birdseye; Climo;
Compton; Crespo; Han;
Maddern; Martin; Mathews;
McDermott; O'Brien; Rhee;
San Souci; Walker, P.
FANTASY: Ahlberg; Askounis;
Banks; O'Donnell; Osborne
Farm life-fiction: Lawlor
Fathers and sons-fiction:
Mikaelsen
Foster children-fiction: Griffin
Friends-fiction: Bridgers;
Rochman
FUNNY STORIES: Service
GHOST STORIES: Wright
Giants-stories: Compton; : Wood
Grandmothers-fiction: Johnson
Grandfathers-fiction: Carris
Guidance: Gravelle
Gypsies-fiction: Askounis
Health: Gay
HISTORICAL FICTION: Choi;
Cross; Hendry; Lawlor;
Thesman
History, American: Sattler
History, U. S.: Cross; Lawlor;
Thesman; Turner
Homelessness-stories: Goble
336 
* THE BULLETIN
Homosexuality-fiction: Murrow;
Walker, K.
Identity-fiction: Ada; Sachs
Insects-fiction: Osborne
Jews-fiction: Levitin
Korea-folklore: Climo; Han;
O'Brien; Rhee
Korea-fiction: Choi
Latinos-fiction: Ada; Mikaelsen
Libraries-stories: Caseley
Lizards-stories: Sis
LOVE STORIES: Hendry
Maine: McMillan
Mexico-fiction: Mikaelsen
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
DeVito
Mountain climbing: Kramer
Music and musicians-stories:
Rayner
MYSTERY STORIES: Carris;
McGraw; Osborne; Pullman
Native Americans: Sattler
Native Americans-folklore:
Bernhard; Crespo; Goble;
Gregg; Martin; McDermott
Nature study: Dewey; Lavies;
Matthews; McMillan; Michel;
Vyner
Pet care: Landau
Pigs-stories: Rayner
Pioneer life-poetry: Turner
POETRY: Cassedy; Singer; Turner
Prejudice: Langone
Prejudice-fiction: Murrow
Reading aloud: Ahlberg; Cassedy;
O'Donnell; San Souci; Turner;
Walker, P.
Reading, easy: Ada; Kramer;
Wright
Reading, family: Falwell
Reading, reluctant: Mikaelsen;
Service
Refugees-fiction: Choi
Safety education: Landau
SCHOOL STORIES: Harris
School-fiction: Ada; Boyd;
Bridgers
SCIENCE FICTION: Harris;
Lawrence; Service
Seals-stories: Martin
SHORT STORIES: Rochman
Sisters-fiction: Hendry; Sachs;
Mathews
Soccer-fiction: Murrow
Social issues: Aaseng; Gay; Kermit;
Langone; Weiss
Spiders: Dewey
Sports: Aaseng; Gutman; Lewin;
Weiss
Stepparents-fiction: Boyd;
McGraw
Story hour: Bernhard; Birdseye;
Caseley; Climo; Compton;
Falwell; Goble; Gregg; Han;
Kermit; McDermott; Maddern;
Mathews; O'Brien; Rayner;
Rhee; San Souci; Sis; Walker,
P.; Wood
Television-fiction: Deaver
Texas-fiction: Griffin
Time travel-fiction: Griffin
Toys: Morris
Toys-fiction: Ahlberg; Banks
Travel-stories: Sis
Twins-fiction: Sachs
United Nations: Kermit
United States-folklore: Birdseye;
Compton; San Souci; Walker,
P.
Water: Michel
West, the-poetry: Turner
Women's studies: Gay; Turner
Woodworking: Morris
World War II-fiction: Thesman
Wrestling: Lewin
C:
Discover
the storyteller
-ai
the story-
everyone's
raving about!
)onna Jo
Napoli
THE PRINCE
)F THE POND
'therwise Known As De Fawg Pin
Illus. by Judith Byron Schachner
An exciting new talent arrives with this
sparkling tale of a bewitched prince
who finds himself at sea in a pond...the
og fatale who soon has him jumping for
joy (and insects)...and their ill-fated love
among the lily pads. Is it a comedy? A
tragedy? A romance? A nature book?
Yes. Its also the "find" of the season!
*"Endearing screwball charm...
whimsical drawings...and an astonishing
amount of in-depth natural history."
-Kirkus Reviews (Pointer)
"An animal fantasy that fairy tale
readers will relish."-The Bulletin
"The frog prince motif has inspired
many books, but few as original as this."
-Booklist
Ages 7-10. 0-525-44976-0. $13.00
DUTTON
--
A Division of Penguin USA 
ti
_______ 
_^^____^ 
-0doBoi^
A family celebration
every child can share
DANCING SHOES
Denise Lewis Patrick
Illustrated by James E. Ransome
"Ransome's oil paintings present beautifully individualized
smiling portraits and an upbeat view of a loving African
American family." 
-ALA 
Booklist
"Almost as much fun as a new pair of shoes."
-
School 
Librar
oj 
l
Ages 4 up. 32 pp.
TR $14.00/0-688-10392-8
LE $13.93/0-688-10393-6
TAMBOURINE BOOKS
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
Quintessential Charlotte Zolotow
5NIPPETS
A Gathering of
Poems, Pictures, and Possibilities...
by Charlotte Zolotow
Full-color pictures by Melissa Sweet
"Like a sampler of
herbal teas, Snippets
is warm, soothing, and
satisfying, with some-
thing for everyone.
Bits and pieces from
over twenty-five of
Zolotow's books are
gathered together and
set in the fine frame of
Sweet's delicate water-
colors. Included are
holiday selections,
friendship themes, pet
pieces, and poems to
ponder. As a sturdy
bridge to Zolotow's
works, a pleasant trip down memory lane with marvelous
illustrations, or a new discovery, this title will charm...."
-School Library Journal
Ages 4-8. $15.00* (020818-X); $14.89t (020819-8)
Author of more than seventy books for children, among them
Mr. Rabbit and the Lovely Present and William's Doll,
Charlotte Zolotow's 1992 HarperCollins picture book is
THE SEASHORE BOOK
Full-color paintings by Wendell Minor
Ages 3-8. $15.00* (020213-0); $14.89t (020214-9)
For a free Charlotte Zolotow biographical brochure write: 
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06.
iHarperCollinsChildren'sBooks Trde e. Uby e. 
she' price only
10 East 53rdand 
n no way relects the price at which avalsource.e
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022 
from any other source.
-'-School Library Journal 
Kirkus Reviews pointer+
stars
ZOOMRIMES
POEMS ABOUT THINGS THAT GO
Poems by Sylvia Cassedy * Pictures by Michele Chessare
"Similar in fof-rma+ +t
is is an alpha-
> betical col-
lection of
L 
twenty-six
poems about
hings that go,
from Ark to
ppelin. Some
in free verse,
ne in metered
ime -
all dis-
y imagination
t, making use
ive word play
norous twists.
msical illustra-
ture the levity,
collection for
e imagination
cting ordinary
ia fresh light."
-SLJ
.00* (022632-3)
89t (022633-1)
Author of Behind the Attic Wall, M. E. and Morton, and Lucie
Babbidge's House, two earlier Sylvia Cassedy books of poetry are
ROOMRIMES
Pictures by Michele Chessare Ages 8-12. $12.89t (0-690-04467-4)
1988 Fanfare Honors List (The Horn Book)
RED DRAGONFLY ON MY SHOULDER
Haiku translated by Sylvia Cassedy and Kunyhiro Seutake
Full-color collages by Molly Bang
Ages 5-10. $15.00* (022624-2); $14.89t (022625-0)
A 1993 ALA Notable Children's Book
M1 HarperCollinsChildren 'sBooks 
HarperCollins ISBN prefix: 0-06. Trade Ed. tLibrary ed.
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022 
Publisher's price only and in no way reflects the price at
which available from any other source.
_-" Starred in 
Highlighted in ALA Booklist
School Library Journal
STEALING HOME
MARY STOLZ
"The story of Thomas, now ten, and Grandfather that began
as a picture book in Storm in the Night and advanced to a
first chapter book in Go Fish, now continues as a novel.
In this book, their idyllic world is jolted when Grandfather's
cantankerous sister-in-law moves in with them. Aunt Linzy
and bachelor life just don't mix. . . . [Thomas' definition of
what family means widens as] Stolz scores with finesse in this
masterful book that really hits home."-SLJ
Ages 8 - 12. $14.00* (021154-7) $13.89t (021157-1)
Author of a new edition of Say Something
and the Newbery Honor book Belling the Tiger, Mary Stolz's
earlier books about Thomas and Grandfather are
Storm in the Night 
Go Fish
Full-color pictures by Pat Cummings 
Pictures by Pat Cummings
1989 Coretta Scott King Honor Book for 
Ages 7-11. $13.00* (025820-9)
Illustrations (ALA) 
$12.89t (025822-5)
I 
r O 
nr 
, 
-l 
.. 
.
-.
_ 
T.-.L. ---
1 
-
t- ncCI
Ages 5-8.
15.00" (025912-4)
14.89t (025913-2)
Harper Trophy paper ed.
$4.95* (443256-4) e.m
HarperCollins
ISBN prefix: 0-06.
*Trade and paper eds.
tbrary ed. Publisher's prices
only and in no way reflect the
prices at which available from
any other source.
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
-"1, Starred in School Library Journal
BY
1OICRDICAI 
GLER 
{ 
TEL1N
FULL-COLOR PICTURES BY THE AUTHOR
"May is a spi
the daughter
December, h
joyous little month of a girl. She's
1, a goddesslike earth mother, and
itee father whom she sets out to
f through the calendar, she meets
ths), who explain to her how the
n their resent order. The story is
Mordicai Gerstein's HarperCollins picture books include:
THE MOUNTAINS OF TIBET 
ARNOLD OF THE DUCKS
Full-color pictures 
3-color pictures
Ages 4-8. $14.00* (022144-5) 
Ages 4-8. $14.89t (022003-1)
Harper Trophy paper ed.
$5.95* (443211-4) 
THE NEW CREATURES
1987 New York Times 
Full-color pictures
Best mllustrated Books 
AQes 4-8. $14.89t (022167-4)
1
THUNDER BELOW!
The USS Barb Revolutionizes
Submarine Warfare in World War II
ADMIRAL EUGENE B. FLUCKEY
Here is a gripping adventure story of the most successful American
submarine in World War IL Masterfully told by the sub commander
himself, this exciting book is chock-full of"you-are-there" moments. It is
a firstrate, true-life, inspirational story of the courage and heroism of
ordinary men under fire. 
Iius. $29.95
"The real story of a real hero." -
Tom Clancy.
"A standout in a field crowded with first-rate entries." -
Kirkus
Reviews.
Oner to free 800/54-4703
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS PRESS
54 East Gregory Drive * Champaign, IL 61820
University of Illinois Press
54 East Gregory Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
RETURN POSTAGE GuAANwEED
SECOND CLASS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
