ILLI NI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
ULIE'S WOLF TACK
By Jean Craighead George
Pictures by Wendell Minor
"George continues the story
of the splendid male pup
Julie nursed to life in Julie
of the Wolves. This third
adventure chronicles six years
in the life of Kapu and his
pack family [and] readers will
feel they too are in the wild,
rooting for the pack. Those
who have enjoyed Julie's
story thus far will want to
read this latest encounter."
-School Library Journal
"[Written] with astounding
intimacy... the drama
succeeds because of George's
complete command of the
wolves' world:'
-(Starred) Publishers Weekly
Ages 10 up. $14.95 TR (0-06-027406-9) $14.89 LB (0-06-027407-7)
Jean Craighead George's earter JuHe books
ESJUUE OJF I 
MHE 
WOJLVE
Pictures by John Schoenherr
Winer, 1973 Nwbery Medal
25th Anniversary Edition
Ages 10 up.
$15.95 TR (0-06-021943-2)
$15.89 LB (0-06-021944-0)
$4.95 PB (0-06-440058-1)
JUUE
Pictures by Wende Minor
Ages 10 up.
$15.00 TR (0-06-023528-4)
$14.89 LB (0-06-023529-2)
$4.95 PB (0-06-440573-7)
I HarperCollins Cildren 'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10022
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
November 1997
Vol. 51 No. 3
A LOOK INSIDE
79 
THE BIG PICTURE
Velcome written and illustrated by Kevin O'Malley
80 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
86 
* Bugs written by David T. Greenberg; illus. by Lynn Munsinger
86 
* A Ring of Tricksters: Animal Tales from America, the West Indies, and
Africa adapted by Virginia Hamilton; illus. by Barry Moser
87 
* Home on the Range: Cowboy Poetry comp. by Paul Janeczko; illus. by
Bernie Fuchs
98 
* The Subtle Knife by Philip Pullman
101 
* The Halloween House written by Erica Silverman; illus. by Jon Agee
102 * Buried Onions by Gary Soto
108 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
110 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
I
00 
o
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM))
CENTER STAFF
Shirley Chan
Jennifer Sherwood DeBaillie
Linda Fenster
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1997 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Kevin O'Malley, from Velcome ©1997 and used by permission of Walker and
Company.
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
79
THE BIG PICTURE
Velcome
written and illus. by Kevin O'Malley
Sometimes even the Bulletin staff regresses to fourth-grade humor, and often it has
to do with a book we're reviewing. If you are seeking a crowd-pleaser, a reluctant-
reader pleaser, or an easy chuckle accompanied by moans of recognition, welcome
to a grownup's nightmare and a grade-schooler's dream come true.
Everything old is new again as O'Malley retells a variety of old chestnuts
in this campy spoof of urban legends, old horror movies, and really bad jokes. The
stories aren't new-in fact, they are cliche-ridden groaners with protagonists that
adult readers will easily recognize, including a boy being chased by "The Coffin,"
which is ultimately stopped by a cough drop; a lone girl terrorized by "The Viper,"
who has come "to vash and vipe" the windows; and a youngster seeking the source
of a strange rapping sound who discovers (are you ready?) a roll of brown wrap-
ping paper. Accompanying these refurbished, revamped, and refreshed schoolyard
favorites are some truly corny jokes, both written and visual. The host--dressed
in a smoking jacket, seated in a red chair in front of a roaring televised fireplace,
and looking a bit like a mad, moustachioed Peter Lorre-welcomes readers to a
night of his favorite scary stories. He then proceeds to narrate from some oddly
titled tomes, intruding willy-nilly on the tales and addressing his comments di-
rectly to the reader.
O'Malley's text is so terribly cornball it's actually funny, and his visuals
support the outrageously over the top, self-aware humor. A disdainful-looking
bloodhound holds up signs with such comments as "Listen to me. You should
stop reading . .
now!" and "I guess it's no use telling you not to turn the page,
HUH?" as the narrator mugs his way through his comedic commentary and the
stories themselves careen to their appropriately ridiculous conclusions. O'Malley's
multimedia (colored pencil, oil paint, and watercolor) illustrations are nearly all
large enough for group viewing; they combine with his text in a perfect meld of
buffoonery and cartooning, with dialogue balloons and a carefully designed type-
face that uses upper-case letters and a variety of fonts to emphasize the textual
absurdities. The atmospherics are enhanced by the bit players (spiders, mice, a
black cat) and all the accoutrements of B-grade horror: sputtering candles, cob-
webs, and a nattering skull that would put Yorick to shame. Grade-school readers
are going to whoop with laughter while too-sophisticated adults try to stifle their
unwilling guffaws when perusing this bound-to-be-a-favorite title.
What makes this book such a guilty pleasure for mature readers? Well,
for one thing, this title is such a relief. It has no message, it has no morally redeem-
80 
* 
THE BULLETIN
ing social value, and it has no mission-except to make the reader laugh, and out
loud at that. What this book does have is a sense of humor, kid's humor, some-
thing that is often not taken seriously (enough) in mainstream books for youth.
There will be a definite difference in how this title is viewed by children and adults:
the kids are going to love it because it gives recognizable, hilarious shape and form
to the silliness they already use to keep the really scary stuff at bay; the grown-ups,
after they get through smacking their foreheads, will start chuckling because
O'Malley is light-heartedly and deliberately absurd. The whole package-the text,
illustrations, and design-conjures up an image of the author/illustrator crouched
over his drawing table chuckling with maniacal glee. (Sort of the way the Bulletin
reviewers crouched over this book, emitting little snorts of guilty laughter.)
The jokes start and end on the endpapers, so make sure you don't miss
them. This is one silly spooky spoof that is sure to become close to every middle-
grader's pun-loving little heart. (Imprint information appears on p. 95.)
Janice Del Negro, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
BALGASSI, HAEMI 
Tae's Sonata. 
Clarion, 1997 
123p
ISBN 0-395-84314-6 
$14.00 
R Gr. 6-8
Tae loves her parents but wishes sometimes they weren't quite so Korean. She is
torn between her desire to fit into her very American school with her very Ameri-
can school friends and her fond but fading memories of life in Korea with her
extended family. Tae's adjustment is difficult--she's shunned by the popular crowd,
stereotyped by well-meaning but apparently ignorant adults, and divided between
her affection for her parents and culture and her desire to belong. Balgassi paints
Tae's struggle without sensationalizing it, personalizing every incident so that it's
not just an example of how to fit in, but part of the universal struggle of all adoles-
cents to find their friends, their place, and their connection to the world. The
closing scene, in which Tae holds hands with the school golden boy and finally
"feels the music," is a bit anticlimactic considering the strength of what has come
before, but young readers may not mind the happy if somewhat sappy ending.
Strong characterizations and believable emotions make this stand out from other
early young adult fare. JMD
BIAILEE, ANNR. 
A DifferentKindofHero. Marshall Cavendish, 1997 
143p
ISBN 0-7614-5000-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Mine owner Mrs. Maynard enrolls the academically gifted son of her Chinese
servant in Miss Steele's one-room schoolhouse and then bribes twelve-year-old
Renny Sholto into taking Wong Gum Zi under his wing. Renny, whose Da hates
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
81
the Chinese and considers his son a soft-hearted sissy, undertakes the task grudg-
ingly. However, several fights toughen him, and Zi's intelligence and stoic cour-
age beguile him into a friendship that ultimately requires Renny to brave both fire
and Da's retribution for Zi's safety. Blakeslee fills each predictable role with stock
characters from central casting and somewhat mechanically assigns each an unex-
pected twist. Renny is openly bored by the preachiness of the town's saintly Irish
priest; Miss Steele resents Zi, but braves the town bullies to defend her right to run
the school her own way; Da's bigoted prediction that the Wongs' presence will
attract Chinese low-life proves right on the mark. While Laurence Yep's stories of
Chinese immigration clearly excel in plotting and characterization, this offering
nonetheless provides worthwhile insight into the social and economic rationales
that fueled anti-Chinese oppression in the nineteenth century. EB
BONNERS, SUSAN 
The Silver Balloon; written and illus. by Susan Bonners. 
Farrar,
1997 
71p
ISBN 0-374-36913-5 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 2-4
From the fourth floor of a city apartment building, Gregory attaches his natural
history museum admission tag and an index card with his name and address to a
silver helium balloon and lets the balloon go. A farmer, Pete Mayfield, intercepts
the balloon, and he and Gregory begin exchanging not only letters but mystery
gifts with serendipitous results: "Dear Mr. Mayfield, Thanks for the rose hips. I
found some more of them growing on a rosebush right here in my neighborhood."
Not only does Bonners surreptitiously promote letter-writing, personal research,
and the value of the public library, she does it with an economy of words and a
fast-paced, credible plot while her black-and-white drawings flesh out the text.
The final mystery gift from Pete, which turns out to be a tooth from a saber-
toothed cat, facilitates Gregory and Pete's meeting when the tooth ends up in the
new Pleistocene exhibit at the local museum. Anyone who has ever longed for an
adventure with bottle or balloon will find themselves involved in these nine short
chapters. Kids will revel in discovering the identity of the mystery objects and it
just might encourage a response like Gregory's: "He began to see things he'd never
noticed before." PM
BOOTH, MARTIN 
War Dog. McElderry, 1997 
14 4 p
ISBN 0-689-81380-5 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Originally a skilled poacher's dog, black Lab-cross Jet is requisitioned by the army
to help fight World War II. She then becomes a capable sentry, alerting her new
handler to the presence of the enemy, and serving valiantly until both she and her
master are seriously wounded at Dunkirk. Then she throws in her lot with the
Home Guard, finding buried survivors in bomb wreckage, but soon the war re-
quires her return to the front-where things come full circle and she encounters
her first owner again. This is unsubtle, with exposition obligingly appearing as
Jet's various owners describe the situation to her, but it's effective in the classic
animal-story manner. Booth generally keeps the overt anthropomorphism mini-
mal without reducing Jet's heroism, and her exciting war experiences may well
bring history home to readers more than human adventures could. The imme-
diacy and high drama of the story might also make it a gripping readaloud for
older listeners, and fans of dog stories, who often have to go awhile between satis-
fying reads, will be grateful for this engaging entry. DS
82 
* THE BULLETIN
BROWN, LAURIE KRASNY 
What's the Big Secret?: Talking about Sex with Girls and
Boys; written and illus. by Laurie Krasny Brown and Marc Brown. 
Little,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-316-10915-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8yrs
The Browns, authors of When Dinosaurs Die and Dinosaurs Divorce (BCCB 3/96
and 2/87) here focus more explicitly on our species, discussing the differences be-
tween boys and girls, issues of touching and privacy, and the basics of reproduction
and birth. Information is conveyed in cheerful, matter-of-fact tones, with the
likelihood of individual variation always acknowledged. The text's exclamations
occasionally tip it into gushiness, however, and some aspects of the book raise
more questions than they answer. "In most births, the baby comes out the vagina"
allows for myriad imaginable possibilities beyond merely that of Caesarian section,
and some of the relevant anatomy gets short shrift (the clitoris is mentioned in one
diagram but not in the other, and it is never depicted or explained). The cartoon
art is upbeat and expressive (the human figures lack the inherent interest of the
dinosaurs, but the logistical problems of making a dinosaur sex book were prob-
ably insurmountable) and the diagrams clear, though much of the humor about
adults' nervousness in explaining sex will mean more to readers-aloud than to kids
themselves. Though it's not a junior It's Perfectly Normal, it's hard to cover these
topics for a younger age group, and this book does a pretty capable job despite its
flaws. Adults uncomfortable with the sex discussion may find this a useful starting
point. DS
BUCHANAN, JANE 
Gratefully Yours. 
Farrar, 1997 
117p
ISBN 0-374-32775-0 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Like many other young children in the 1920s without parent or guardian, Hattie
rides west on an orphan train. Her destination is Nebraska, where she's placed
with Henry and Elizabeth Jansen on their old farm. She's at first ill at ease in the
role of farm girl, and she finds it hard to cope with the teasing of her classmates and
the moods of Elizabeth, who still mourns her dead children. Buchanan writes with
clarity of Hattie's resentment of the situation and of being perpetually expected to
be grateful; the first-person narration is authentically prickly and yearning, and the
period rural setting is casually but believably conveyed. Unfortunately, the plot is
predictable (right from the start, we know Hattie is going to bring Elizabeth out of
her doldrums and become part of the family) and its workings obvious (particu-
larly the contrivance that makes Hattie think the Jansens want to get rid of her),
and the end gets downright sentimental. Ultimately this ends up a somewhat
flawed blend of Anne of Green Gables and Andrea Warren's Orphan Train Rider
(BCCB 9/96); kids who enjoyed either of those may appreciate Hattie's story. DS
CHRISTIANSEN, CANDACE 
The Mitten Tree; illus. by Elaine Greenstein. 
Fulcrum
Kids, 1997 
32p
ISBN 1-55591-349-0 
$16.95 
R 
6-9yrs
In this fanciful wintry offering, old Sarah becomes a secret philanthropist by knit-
ting mittens for the neighborhood children and leaving them to hang on the old
blue spruce tree near the school bus stop. Her kindness culminates in the tree
bedecked with her handiwork on the day before winter break ("The children stood
very still for a few minutes looking at the mysterious, beautiful mitten tree"). The
children's winter coats and hats, fir trees, scurrying animals, and Sarah's cozy home
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 83
lie against a pale winter sky and snowy landscape detailed with smudgy, scratched
black lines. An old-fashioned sensitivity in both art and text serve to exalt Sarah's
quiet generosity while avoiding excesses of sentimentality. The children's matter-
of-fact acceptance of the free mittens and a gentle surprise at the end ("There in
the corner was a basket woven with thick brown vines and decorated with a large
white bow. In it were balls and balls of beautiful, colorful yarn") may engender
wonder, speculation, and thoughts on the power of giving. PM
DAVIS, AUBREY, ad. 
Bone Button Borscht;, illus. by Dusan Petricic. 
Kids Can,
1997 
32p
ISBN 1-55074-224-8 
$15.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
A beggar stumbles into a poor village and convinces the shamas of the local syna-
gogue that he can make borscht out of buttons. Davis takes the traditional tale of
"Stone Soup" and sets it in a Jewish community, by the look of it somewhere in
Eastern Europe. The language has rhythm and style, rolling off the tongue and
making it clear that this is a tale meant to be told and heard. From the wise beggar
("Oy, if only I had one more button"), to the shamas begging for that same extra
button ("Listen, Mendel, give me the button. What's it going to hurt? Maybe
we'll have a miracle"), to the hoarding villagers, exemplified by Mendel ("What's
he going to do [with my button]? Raise it from the dead? Teach it to sing, maybe?"),
the characterizations are sharp and the wit is sharper. Petricic's watercolors start
out gray, snowy, and sleety and, as each spicy ingredient is added to the borscht,
warm up-the villagers' dark clothes turn bright, the copper pot for the commu-
nal meal gleams merrily, and the borscht itself is a steamy, colorful delight. The
villagers turn the pot of borscht into a feast and the feast into a party as they eat,
laugh, sing, and dance the night away. The transformation from tight-fisted to
open-hearted is obvious in both text and pictures. When the beggar first comes
upon the village the row of houses is gray, their windows without light, their doors
tightly closed; the concluding spread shows a row of houses with glowing win-
dows, the neighbors leaning from open doors, smiling and holding hands. The
words reflect this visual change of heart: "But it is a strange thing, a wonder,
perhaps. The townsfolk learned that they didn't really need the buttons. They
learned to make borscht without them. And they learned to help one another
without borscht, even in hard times. That was the real miracle the beggar left
behind." JMD
ELLIS, SARAH 
Back of Beyond: Stories of the Supernatural. McElderry,
1997 
136p
ISBN 0-689-81484-4 
$15.00 
R Gr. 7-10
The subtitle's a bit misleading: this is a collection of a dozen insightful, carefully
drawn short stories each touched with the inexplicable. Some entries are overtly
supernatural: "Knife" involves a selkie's restoration of a long-lost gift; "Pinch" is a
contemporary version of the midwife rewarded for assisting with the fairy birth.
Some, such as "Gore" (about a sister's machinations to retrieve her horror novel
from her brother's clutches) and "Sisters" (where a girl missing her runaway sister
finds solace with a pair of foster grandmothers), merely play with the notion of
supernatural happenings. The mysterious twists aren't the best parts of the stories
(and sometimes their logic or incorporation are a little uneven); the merit here is
Ellis' deft phrasing, wry humor, and telling examination of human relationships.
84 
* THE BULLETIN
The magic here only highlights the rich complexities of everyday events, made
more immediate by the stories' first-person narrations. Like Carol Dines' Talk To
Me (BCCB 9/97), this is a good choice for readers who want something more
concrete in their short stories. DS
ENGEL, DIANA 
Holding On. 
Marshall Cavendish, 1997 
96p
ISBN 0-7614-5016-5 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Thomas is reluctant to stay with his mother's eccentric uncle, and at first it looks as
if his reluctance is justified: the house smells, he has to do chores, and Uncle Tano
is crusty and set in his ways. Soon, however, the old man and the boy warm to one
another, after finding first a bone of contention .and then common cause in a
wounded goose and its mate. The intergenerational friendship after an unpromis-
ing start is a hoary old plot, and there's nothing particularly new added here. Engel
writes with a certain charm, however, and the presence of the geese and Thomas'
increasing skill at uncle-taught crafts enliven the story. It's an undemanding read,
and kids will empathize with Thomas' discomfort at being in a strange and alien
place. Occasional pen sketches enhance the book's accessibility. DS
Fox, PAULA 
Radiance Descending. DK Ink, 1997 
[101 p]
ISBN 0-7894-2467-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Paul has been denying his Down Syndrome brother Jacob for years, ever since the
boy was born. His parents are so involved with their younger son that they ignore
the withdrawn Paul almost completely, and only Paul's grandfather tries to reach
him, to understand his problems with his "eerie" younger brother. The novel's
action is almost completely internal, with little dialogue or momentum. It is Paul's
view of Jacob that the reader sees; it is Paul's world view that dominates the story;
and it is Paul's view that shifts ever so slightly at the odd and unexplained entrance
of Jacob, coming down the stairs in a homemade sun costume (hence the title) for
his seventh birthday party. There is a distressing lack of internal cohesion in the
gently meandering plot, compounded by apparently important but unexplained
adult references (to the movie La Strada, for example, to which Paul's grandfather
insists on taking him) and other symbolic obscurities. As a case study, this is an
intriguing if spotty look at the internal life of a child trying to adjust to stunningly
obtuse parents and a younger brother he is physically and emotionally repelled by,
but appeal to middle grade readers is, at best, tenuous. JMD
GERSTEIN, MORDICAI, ad. Jonah and the Two Great Fish; ad. and illus. by Mordicai
Gerstein. 
Simon, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81373-2 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
In simple prose Gerstein retells the story of the reluctant prophet Jonah, enriching
the Biblical account with details from Jewish legend. The unwilling Jonah, fleeing
the task God has given him of warning the sinful inhabitants of Nineveh of their
impending destruction, runs away to sea. But he cannot run away from God,
Who sends first storm and then fish to persuade Jonah to His will. This Old
Testament.Bible story has strong forward momentum and rising dramatic action
that make it an involving, action-filled reading experience. The text is enhanced
by richly detailed oil paintings that move from framed full and double-page spreads
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
85
to uncontained images of the overwhelming sea and its creatures and back again.
The land palette is full of clean yellows and blues, with a fine handling of generous
amounts of white space, while the sea palette is murky green with Jonah in his
white robe the only real spot of light within it. Gerstein's before-and-after repen-
tance pictures of Nineveh are masterful depictions of mankind at its worst and
best; God's image is created by white clouds of beard and a yellow sun eye against
a clean blue sky. Add this to your Bible stories indeed, but don't forget to put it on
a readaloud shelf as well. JMD
GIBBONS, FAYE 
Hook Moon Night: Spooky Tales from the Georgia Mountains;
illus. by Ronald Himler. 
Morrow, 1997 
112p
ISBN 0-688-14504-3 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Using the frame of front-porch storytelling, Gibbons relates some eerie tales from
her Georgia childhood. The stories range from "The Burial," about a mother-in-
law buried alive by her hasty son-in-law, to "The Painter," featuring a shape-chang-
ing, storytelling girl with a vengeful bent, to "The Girl in the Painting," in which
a malevolent girl trapped in a painting finally gets out, much to the distress of a
young neighbor. Tight plots and punchy conclusions typify offerings such as "The
Necklace," in which an old woman gets rid of her bad luck only to steal it back in
error. The tales, supposedly being told to youngsters resting on a porch with their
elders on a moonlit night, strain the frame after awhile, but they are inherently
creepy if not spectacularly scary. Himler's black-and-white ink and wash illustra-
tions feature a number of characters with worried faces and add an appropriately
somber note. This collection has something for everyone, from the kid who wants
a spooky read to the librarian looking for a successful booktalk to the reader-aloud
seeking some chilling new material. An author's note indicates that these are origi-
nal tales very loosely based on stories Gibbons heard while growing up. JMD
GOLD, ALISON LESLIE 
Memories ofAnne Frank: Reflections of a Childhood
Friend. Scholastic, 1997 
135p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-590-90722-0 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Fifty years after Anne Frank's diary was published, Hannah Pick-Goslar contrib-
utes memories of their friendship from ages four to thirteen, including several
conversations over a barbed-wire fence separating different areas of Bergen-Belsen
where they were incarcerated. This straightforward account will satisfy the diary's
international readership on two counts: first, it extends the information we have
about Frank; and second, it deepens our knowledge of her situation through Pick-
Goslar's own experiences of living in Nazi-occupied Amsterdam and of surviving
both transit and concentration camps. The most telling moments here, in some
ways, are the normal everyday details of a rift Pick-Goslar was already feeling-
because of differences in development and temperament-before Frank went into
hiding. In fact, Pick-Goslar's story (as reported to the author) is involving in its
own right, particularly the determination she shows in caring for her younger sis-
ter after their mother dies. Occasionally the narrative moves back and forth in
time, resulting in a disjointed effect, and the two girls' stories are not always smoothly
interwoven. Still, the last meetings before Frank's death (when Pick-Goslar risked
detection by guards to throw a food packet over the forbidden fence) are emotion-
ally involving. An insert of black-and-white photos from an album rescued by
Pick-Goslar's Christian neighbor includes pictures of both girls. BH
86 
* THE BULLETIN
GREENBERG, DAVID T. 
Bugs!; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. 
Little, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-32574-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
The author of Slugs is grossing us out again, but this time with "a million maggots
in a vase,/ Lice as thick as mayonnaise." This is not for the fainthearted, which is
why the kids will eat it up (oops, sorry) as page after page serves up creepy, skin-
crawling verse. Greenberg never falters as creatures show up in your underwear,
your nose, even your lunch ("Praying mantis pizza/ Is a culinary must/ With lots
of extra maggots/ And a daddy longlegs crust"). The momentum disgustingly
increases until the inevitable happens and the bugs completely take over with "you
as their pet!" and the main character ends up in the bugs' "Human Being Collection
on permanent display." The wicked humor is visually accessorized with a person-
able little boy and his Scottie dog who endure all the itchy antics with amazing
aplomb, and Munsinger makes the eeky most of furry multi-jointed limbs and
groping antennae as well as bug pastimes and literature. The multi-legged, pop-
eyed insect population invades every facet of life with hilarious results. Whether
read alone or read aloud, this is repulsively fun poetry, although the more squea-
mish may feel the urge to run out and buy a can of Raid. PM
GREENWALD, SHEILA 
Rosy Cole: She Grows and Graduates; written and illus. by
Sheila Greenwald. 
Orchard, 1997 
92p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33022-2 
$15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30022-6 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Rosy's a perennial favorite, but even she has to move on: her beloved Miss Read's
School stops at the eighth grade, and she and her family must decide which high
schools she should apply to. Originally thinking she just wants to be with all her
friends, she begins to set her sights on the exclusive Hilyard School, knocking
herself out to meet their standards, until she realizes that's not the place for her at
all. This isn't the most widespread situation in the land, but it's increasingly com-
mon, and there's little depiction of it in children's literature. Rosy's conflicting
desires and secret ambitions are credibly and sympathetically portrayed. The mis-
understanding regarding Rosy's sort-of-boyfriend Donald and the feel-good end-
ing are stock and unsurprising, but Rosy's vigor and recognizability make things
enjoyable nonetheless. Readers afraid of those frightening changes looming in
their future will be comforted by the idea that the big kids find them intimidating
too. Greenwald's engagingly slapdash line drawings keep the pages Rosy. DS
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA, ad. 
A Ring of Tricksters: Animal Tales from America, the
West Indies, andAfrica; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1997 
112p
ISBN 0-590-47374-3 
$18.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Divided into sections on American, West Indian, and African tricksters, these eleven
tales each feature an animal trickster either getting his comeuppance or giving as
good as he gets, whether in a well-known story like "Buh Rabby and Bruh Gator,"
a variant of how Alligator found trouble, or lesser known tales like "Cunnie Rabbit
and Spider Make a Match," in which the trickster figure is not a rabbit at all, but
a small "water deerlet." Hamilton's text is as clean as the book's elegant design,
and the incorporation of some gentle, dialectical rhythms are unobtrusive. Barry
Moser's watercolor illustrations are, for the most part, gracefully rendered, his trick-
ster portraiture clever and sly, with a strong dose of anthropomorphic humor.
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
87
The occasional lackluster composition and awkward drafting is superseded by the
overall craft of the bookmaking itself, which features glossy pages and a generous
amount of white space highly reminiscent of Hamilton and Moser's last collabora-
tion, When Birds Could Talk and Bats Could Sing (BCCB 6/96). Hamilton gives
some background on trickster tales in general and posits theories about how these
tales traveled from Africa to North America and the West Indies and back again in
her "Note from the Author." There is additional author commentary in a con-
cluding section "About These Tales," but the absence of any citations for original
source material is surprising and incompatible with serious contemporary folklore
retellings. Those seeking a more extensive collection of trickster stories should
consider Josepha Sherman's well-documented Trickster Tales (BCCB 6/96). JMD
JACKSON, ALISON 
I Know an Old Lady Who Swallowed a Pie; illus. by Judith
Byron Schachner. 
Dutton, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-525-45645-7 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
The grandmotherly guest at Thanksgiving dinner evinces a startling appetite, no-
table even amid the general air of gluttony that pervades the season. Having dis-
patched "a Thanksgiving pie, which was really too dry," the old lady washes it
down with some cider "that rumbled and mumbled and grumbled inside her."
You can guess the rest-rolls, salad, turkey, cake, even the cooking pot-with each
cumulative course followed by the traditional "perhaps she'll die." The old lady
binges and bulges to the varied amazement, delight, and horror of her bug-eyed
hosts, until they tether her with heavy rope and shove her out the door, where she
joins the other festive balloons in a Thanksgiving Day Parade. This frenetic feast-
ing is captured in cheerfully irreverent ink and watercolor pictures, with spidery
black lines reminiscent of a jolly Stephen Gammell. Sing it once, and kids'll beg
for seconds. EB
JANECZKO, PAUL B., comp. 
Home on the Range: Cowboy Poetry; illus. by Bernie
Fuchs. 
Dial, 1997 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1911-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1910-8 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-8
Cowboy poetry is a booming genre these days, and now it's finally galloped into
the children's section. Janeczko gathers nineteen poems, almost all likely to be
brand new to young readers (the exception being the selection from "Home on the
Range"), on topics such as barn cats, friendship, coyotes, weather, rodeo vs. range
cowboys, and, of course, horses. Cowboy poetry depends on plain-spoken lan-
guage and direct impact, so it's about as accessible as you can get; there's also an
effective array of traditional ballad meter and other formal arrangements that will
make a useful contrast to the plethora of free verse in collections for youth and
provide a driving rhythm for students reading the poems aloud. Without drawing
over readers' heads, Fuchs' art makes it clear this is no baby book: coarse-grained
colored paper in twilight hues of taupe, lavender, and cinnamon provides texture
for Fuchs' elegantly rustic pencil work, which uses dense strokes in a kind of ro-
bust hatching that contrasts starkly with the glowing backgrounds brushed with
oils. The Western images have enough personality to be classic rather than stock,
with hardworking cowhands and horses straight out of Will James. There have
been a lot of good books about cowboys and cowboying recently (see Anderson's
88 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Cowboys, BCCB 6/96, and Cody's The Cowboy's Handbook, 3/96), and this will be
a particularly flavorful addition to that list. DS
JENKINS,A. M. 
Breaking Boxes. 
Delacorte, 1997 
182p
ISBN 0-385-32513-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Charlie Calmont and Brandon Chase's friendship isn't exactly made in heaven-
it's the aftermath of Charlie's decking the rich and high-profile Brandon when his
clique's taunting becomes too much to take. Soon, however, the teens become
close, with Brandon relishing the respite from his judgmental parents that Charlie's
quiet life (Charlie has lived with his older brother, Trent, since their mother's
death) offers him. When Brandon finds out that Trent is gay, he repudiates Charlie;
Charlie must then struggle not only with the loss of a friend but also with his
lifelong habit of walling himself off from his feelings. Jenkins takes some fairly
predictable parameters (the disaffected rich kid, the diligent and honorable poor
one) and breathes new life into them. As narrator and victim of bad circum-
stances, Charlie is sympathetic, but the book pulls no punches about his behavior,
especially his cavalier, if self-protective, treatment of girls (including having sex
with one and never speaking to her again). Brandon's parents aren't textbook
evildoers but are still obviously capable of driving any offspring to distraction, and
readers will root for the salvageable Brandon despite his follies and limitations.
Reminiscent of Barbara Shoup in its combination of wit, accuracy, and empathy,
this is a canny depiction of the difficulties of crossing into manhood. DS
JOHNSTON, TONY 
Sparky and Eddie: The First Day of School; illus. by Susannah
Ryan. 
Scholastic, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-590-47978-4 
$13.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-47979-2 
$3.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Next-door neighbors and inseparable companions, Sparky and Eddie enjoy a glo-
rious summer and eagerly anticipate the first day of school-until they're assigned
to different teachers. They initially plan a boycott of school ("We're not in the
same room, so we won't go to school this year"), but then they feel sorry for their
poor deprived teachers, decide to give them a chance, and judge them sufficient
compensation for the separation. The message is fairly obvious and there are no
surprises here, but there's a charm in the "opposites attract" friendship and in
Johnston's pared-down but rhythmic text. Ryan's watercolors have a textured
pastel flavor in their soft edges, but there's energy aplenty in the dynamic duo,
with Eddie a strapping freckle-faced redhead and Sparky pint-sized and dark-
skinned. Quite a few novice educatees will recognize both the trepidation about
and the rewards of the new world of school, and they probably won't mind the
predictability. DS
KEHRET, PEG 
Searching for Candlestick Park. Cobblehill, 1997 
149p
ISBN 0-525-65256-6 
$14.99 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Spencer's mother tells him he cannot keep his cat Foxey when they move in with
his aunt, so he runs away with little money, the cat, and the vague destination of
Candlestick Park in San Francisco on a search for his long-absent father. In a
series of unlikely events, Spencer loses his money, his cat, and a bicycle (stolen);
then he finds his cat, is befriended by a lonely old man named Hank, finds Candle-
stick Park (now renamed), gets into the stadium on a ticket generously bestowed
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
89
by a ticket scalper, and finds his father, a stadium usher. Spencer optimistically
believes his father will welcome Spencer and his cat with open arms, but Spencer's
father sends him home to his mother as quickly as possible, leaving him unat-
tended at the bus station. Spencer buys a ticket back to Hank's instead of a ticket
home, and he arrives only to find that his friend has died and left him all his
worldly goods. The plot is contrived to the extreme, growing out of coincidence
and chance rather than evolving from any inner character motivation. Spencer is
the only character even remotely developed, and only sympathy for Spencer will
keep readers reading until the end. JMD
KHERDIAN, DAVID, ad. 
The Rose's Smile: Farizad of the Arabian Nights; illus. by
Stefano Vitale. 
Holt, 1997 
34p
ISBN 0-8050-3912-0 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
As a work of literary elaboration, The Arabian Nights leans toward long, complex
tales, and Farizad-more popularly known as "The Jealous Sisters"-is no excep-
tion. Her story, smoothly adapted from sources described in an introductory note,
begins with a sultan who overhears three sisters, the youngest of whom wishes to
marry him. Charmed, he makes the beautiful girl his queen, but her jealous sisters
hide her babies, a son and a daughter, who grow up in the care of a kind gardener.
The daughter eventually undertakes a dangerous journey, saves her brother, and
rescues her mother from lonely sorrow. As in many of these tales, fate takes a
strong hand, but Farizad is singular in her female role of overt courage (as opposed
to Morgiana's behind-the-scenes cunning in "Ali Baba"). Vitale draws on Persian
art in styling his full-page illustrations, though shapes and hues are westernized
with a slightly toylike quality. The compositions are organically graceful within
geometrically decorative frames, sophisticated enough to hold the kind of experi-
enced listeners or fairy tale readers who will be drawn to the book. BH
KINSEY-WARNOCK, NATALIE 
As Long As There Are Mountains. Cobblehill,
1997 
139p
ISBN 0-525-65236-1 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Iris steadily resists efforts by her mother and Aunt Lurdine to
develop her domestic skills; it is she, after all, rather than her college-age brother
Lucien, who has an affinity for farming, and Iris regards her sphere as field rather
than farmhouse. When their father loses a leg in a lumbering accident, Iris finds
great satisfaction working beside her brother to keep the operation going; their
herculean labor, however, cannot be sustained indefinitely, and it is clear that Lucien,
whose love for the land manifests itself in nature writing, needs to get back to
school. Meddlesome Aunt Lurdine is a tad overdrawn, and the happy ending in
which wannabe farmer Uncle Sturgis contrives to keep the business in the family is
a bit pat, but Iris's loving, taciturn Vermont family is convincing, her close rela-
tionship with her brother is refreshing, and her near veneration of the region's
rugged beauty is infectious. EB
KUSHNER, DONN 
The Night Voyagers. 
Lester/Stoddart, 1997 
220p
ISBN 1-895555-69-8 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Manuel flees a small Central American village with his mother and older brother
after his schoolteacher father "disappears." Refugees befriended by the sanctuary
movement, the three flee north, first to the United States, then to Canada. Manuel
90 
* 
THE BULLETIN
refuses to talk-it is clear that he has witnessed something terrible related to the
disappearance and probable death of his father-but his fantasy life teems with
active dialogue, for he is accompanied on his journey by the possibly ghostly mani-
festations of his father and two homeless children. These comforting shades are
present to protect Manuel from the Lords of Xibalba, the underworld denizens of
the Popul Vuh who have only his destruction at heart. Journeys are important in
mythic tales, and after a somewhat disjointed beginning Kushner gets his charac-
ters on the chronological and actual road and keeps them there, revealing their
inner lives through their actions and reactions. The magical realism of Manuel's
double life is convincingly well-integrated into the chase-and-escape suspense as
the family flees the migras (immigration officials). Manuel's silence, his brother
Pepe's anger, and his mother's desperate dignity provide the emotional hook nec-
essary to hold readers, with the added attraction of insight into the nature of Mayan
mythology. This is an issue-oriented novel that is not issue driven. The emotional
truth of the main characters is never far from the action, and even politically naive
readers will be drawn in by the emotional suspense. A foreword and afterword give
some political and social context to the novel; a glossary and list of sources are also
included. JMD
LATTIMORE, DEBORAH NOURSE 
Cinderhazel: The Cinderella ofHalloween; writ-
ten and illus. by Deborah Nourse Lattimore. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-590-20232-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
While her witch sisters primp for Prince Alarming's ball, Cinderhazel actually pre-
fers to stay at home in the hearth, pouring ashes over her head-"This is what I'm
good at! ... D-I-R-T!" Only when her witchy godmother informs her that the
palace has fifteen filthy fireplaces does Cinderhazel agree to "Va-roooom, vroom,
vroom" to the festivities on her conjured vacuum cleaner. There true love takes its
course and Prince Alarming, who is as grimy as the maiden herself, recognizes his
soulmate. This is a one-giggle plot, which falls flat since little visual distinction is
made between the relative repulsiveness of Cinderhazel and her ugly sisters. In-
stead of allowing "they lived filthily ever after" to bring satisfying closure, Lattimore
appends an obnoxious "P.S. Cinderhazel never did have any glass slippers. But on
their first wedding anniversary, the Prince gave her a more useful present: grass
clippers." 
The storyhour set may relish the zany variety of Lattimore's colorful
coven, but expect a resounding "Huh?" when you get to the punchline. EB
LEVN, BETTY 
Island Bound. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
218p
ISBN 0-688-15217-1 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
On a dare from his buddies, Chris plans to spend a week roughing it on a Maine
island; elsewhere on the island, a sulky Joellen avoids her naturalist father and his
new girlfriend by wandering away. The two meet, and after a few initial skirmishes
they find common ground in the solving of a mystery that they happen on by
discovering the old diary of a mid-nineteenth-century Irish immigrant. The more
they uncover of the events surrounding the diary-writer's unhappy visit to the
island, the more it sounds like the short story Joellen was already writing, and the
more it seems likely to shed light on Chris' family's superstition about the island.
Two kids alone, or nearly so, on an island unraveling an enigma is heady stuff, and
Levin brings in plenty of island atmosphere with nesting birds and geographical
details. Unfortunately the details of the hidden history are overcomplicated, and
readers will have a harder time putting things together than the characters do (ex-
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
91
cept for an overobvious conclusion). Multiple plot turns weight down the already
slow-moving story (the kids don't even crack open the diary until the second hun-
dred pages), and the supernatural hints in Joellen's presaging history with her story
and Chris' possible ghost viewing are never dealt with. The basic elements may be
enough to keep some readers interested, but for a better use of them, try Pamela
Service's Phantom Victims (BCCB 6/94). DS
MCDONALD, JOYCE 
Swallowing Stones. 
Delacorte, 1997 
24 5p
ISBN 0-385-32309-3 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 7-10
On the Fourth of July eve of his seventeenth birthday, Michael MacKenzie ran-
domly fires his birthday present-an heirloom Winchester passed down from his
grandfather; the bullet lands a mile away, in the head ofJenna Ward's father, who
is repairing his roof. Michael realizes as soon as he hears the next morning's news
that he is Ward's unwitting murderer ("I shot it into the air. ... In the air, man.
The bullet wasn't supposed to go anyplace"), and months of guilt, denial, and
deceit begin. McDonald alternates Michael's story with Jenna's, as Jenna and her
mother cope with Ward's death, Michael tries both to hide and to atone for his
action, and police investigators painstakingly narrow their search. The grave con-
sequences of Michael's heedlessness should make for a compelling read, but Jenna
sulks relentlessly, Michael is as absorbed with his love life as with his guilt, and the
teens' shared fixation on the local "Ghost Tree" introduces a supernatural subplot
that fits ill with the novel's realistic premise. Readers who chilled to the psycho-
logical torments of Bauer's On My Honor (BCCB 10/86) and Fox's One-Eyed Cat
(BCCB 10/84) may want to pursue this theme as played out by an older cast. EB
MCDONALD, MEGAN 
Beezy; illus. by Nancy Poydar. 
Orchard, 1997 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33046-X 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30046-3 
$3.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Author McDonald (Insects Are My Life, BCCB 4/95) essays the easy-reader genre
with her three stories featuring the cheerful Beezy. In the first story, friends join
Beezy and her grandmother at home as they wait out a storm; in the second, Beezy
acquires a new dog; and in the third, Beezy and her old friend Merlin make a
daring new friend. McDonald has a nice sense of regional Floridian atmosphere,
with anticipation of hurricanes and the appearance of a wintering circus family;
with Beezy's living with Gran and the interracial group of young characters, it's
also an understatedly contemporary cast. While the stories aren't covering much
new plot territory and they trail off a bit at the end, the text cleverly uses repetition
in all of them and keeps the vocabulary fairly unintimidating. Poydar's gouache
illustrations pack a bit more oomph than the usual easy-reader watercolors, and
Beezy's bouncy high pigtails, wild striped leggings, and bare toes bring the heroine
to life. The book also obligingly looks a bit more sophisticated than it reads, so it
might make a nice ego-soothing faux chapter book for readers not quite ready for
longer journeys. DS
McKAY, HILARY 
The Amber Cat. McElderry, 1997 
134p
ISBN 0-689-81366-X 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
The crew from Dog Friday (BCCB 10/95) are all back: Robin Brogan and his
mother, the neighboring Robinson family (twins Ant and Perry, otherworldly Sun
Dance, cheerful Beany, and their long-suffering parents), and enemy-turned-friend
92 
* THE BULLETIN
Dan. Chicken pox is raging, and the philosophical Mrs. Brogan allows afflicted
Dan and Sun Dance to join Robin in waiting the spots out. Her reminiscences
about childhood with Robin's soon-to-visit uncle hint at a mystery about another
childhood playmate that begins to intrigue the youngsters, and that turns out to
have impinged on the daily lives of all (especially Sun Dance). The flashbacks
don't have the frenetic fascination of contemporary life with the Robinson/Brogan
gang, and the stories operate a bit at each other's expense. McKay's still excellent
at the pack dynamics, however, and Sun Dance's eccentricities are both brilliantly
depicted and plot-relevant. The ghostly mystery is intriguingly left-handed, which
suggests perhaps more future exploration of the concept. Fans of the first book
may not find exactly what they expect here, but they'll enjoy themselves nonethe-
less: even when they're only listening, this crowd of characters is hard to resist. DS
MARICONDA, BARBARA 
Turn the Cup Around. 
Delacorte, 1997 
14 8p
ISBN 0-385-32292-5 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Evie and her two younger brothers live with their grandmother-their mother is
dead and their mentally ill father has been hospitalized for the last six years. The
action of the novel revolves around Evie's discovery of a cave on the beach, only
accessible at low tide, in which she finds mysterious, still-wet oil paintings reflect-
ing the day-to-day activities of her and her brothers. Evie has many questions:
who is the mad stranger (with the piercing blue eyes) Evie saw in the woods? Why
does the professor (with the piercing blue eyes) now boarding at her grandmother's
remind her so much of her father? And what fortune is it that Evie's grandmother
reads in the coffee grounds that disturbs her so much? And what about the green
and blue eyed stray cat her brothers are determined to keep? All these potent hints
and dark foreshadowings raise the expectation of something spectacular, but it
turns out to be quite pedestrian. The professor is just a professor, despite his
resemblance to her father; the madman in the woods (despite his resemblance to
her father) is just an eccentric painter off his rocker; her father is still institutional-
ized and it's apparent he's going to remain so for quite some time. The fortune is
actually just coffee grounds, the self-help wisdom is it all depends on how you look
at it (turn the cup around until you get the fortune you like), and this is just one
unsatisfactory book. JMD
MARSDEN, JOHN 
The Dead ofNight. 
Houghton, 1997 
278p
ISBN 0-395-83734-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
At the close of Tomorrow, When the War Began (BCCB 4/95) Ellie and her com-
panions were holed up in outback territory (known by the locals as Hell), evading
the unnamed army that had invaded Australia, and launching modest but effective
guerrilla campaigns against the enemy. Their survival story continues, tension
unabated, as the teens smoke-bomb their way into the hospital to see their wounded
friend Corrie, ambush a troop convoy, encounter another renegade group of so-
cially conservative and tactically naive adults, and finally blow up a block of houses
that harbor enemy brass and a treacherous informer. Ellie, Lee, and Homer learn
that they are able and willing to kill in cold blood, if necessary, and the group
contends with the horror and guilt of that discovery. Marsden awkwardly disrupts
the tone of his adventure tale with an unexpectedly graphic play-by-play of Ellie
and Lee's sexual initiation which (while it is sure to stimulate the circulation of
both the novel and the reader) abruptly and unaccountably dumps action/adven-
ture fans into a pulp romance. A cliff-hanging conclusion finds the original band
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 93
down to five, with no end to the war in sight; American readers will just have to
wait for the rest of this Australian series. EB
MAYNARD, BILL 
Incredible Ned; illus. by Frank Remkiewicz. 
Putnam,
1997 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-399-23023-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
Ned is incredible-whenever he utters a noun, a picture of the thing appears over
his head. This causes havoc when he starts school, and a distracted staff passes him
around in an effort to get the problem solved: his teacher sends him to the nurse,
who relays him to the band leader, who palms him off on the French teacher, who
resorts to calling the principal. The principal is of the dictatorial mode and simply
informs Ned he's to say nothing at all, and he doesn't-until the art teacher hap-
pens along, encourages him to draw his thoughts, and diagnoses the problem as
artistry misdirected ("When your head's full of pictures, they have to come out").
Though it's not quite as zany, the text evinces a distinct Seussian slant, with both
the tumbling anapestic verse and the neat painless moral reminiscent of the good
Dr. The drollery of the concept, the consistent rhythms, and the school-authority
grief will keep the audience entertained and sympathetic. The watercolor and
colored-pencil art show Ned as a kid next door with scrawny legs and stand-on-
end red hair; there's a certain Hanna-Barbera camp to the stylized high-heeled
teachers (and to the occasional jokes, such as the legend on the eye chart in the
nurse's office). Enterprising teachers might wish to consider using this as the in-
spiration for projects involving language and art. DS
MIRANDA, ANNE 
To Market, To Market; illus. by Janet Stevens. 
Harcourt,
1997 
[3 6p]
ISBN 0-15-200035-6 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-7 yrs
The shopping list extends far beyond the "fat pig" of the well-known nursery rhyme,
as a bulky old lady with a, um, flamboyant fashion sense brings successive livestock
home from market, only to discover that her previous purchase has trashed the
premises: "To market, to market, to buy a plump goose./ Home again ... Uh-oh!
The hen's on the loose." When her home is reduced to shambles, she and her
menagerie return to the market to pick up the fixings for a vegetarian lunch-hot
soup. The story may be lean, but Stevens' mixed-media illustrations dish out
plenty of fun. Bright acrylic and pastel drawings of the intrepid shopper and her
animal companions cavort among grainy black-and-white photo collages of super-
market and home furnishings, cleverly shadowed and embellished with gray-toned
pencil work. Viewers versed in Nickelodeon reruns will recognize (if not fully
appreciate) the iconography of 1960s domestic terrain, recast here with sly nostal-
gia into the 1990s. The storyhour set should howl as Miranda's retake blindsides
Mother Goose with a shopping cart. EB
MOORE, LILIAN .Poems Have Roots; illus. by Tad Hills. 
Karl/Atheneum,
1997 
44p
ISBN 0-689-80029-0 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-7
These are mostly poems of the environment, both in the broad sense and the
specific, as they describe many of the poet's surroundings and stamping grounds.
94 
* THE BULLETIN
Some of the poems slip into contrivance, but Moore's best offerings display a
lyrical simplicity reminiscent of the Imagists as they comment in free-verse on the
rain ("The Wetter the Better"), the snow ("Snow Dust"), and the clouds and hills
("Love Affair"). The poems are accessible and immediate, and the environmental
theme helps focus the collection (as well as providing a jumpstart for "write one of
these" assignments). This isn't as distinctive a collection as the author's Sunflakes
(BCCB 2/93), but younger readers looking to explore their poetic horizons will
appreciate it; it might also provide some useful, succinct readalouds for listeners of
a wide variety of ages. The book's compact design and careful use of spot art and
pale images underlying the text make it an appealing package; the illustrations,
created in Adobe Photoshop, look more like easygoing wood- or linocuts than
computer-generated art. DS
Nix, GARTH 
Shade's Children. HarperCollins, 1997 
[288p]
ISBN 0-06-027324-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
It is a near-future earth inhabited only by those humans under the age of fourteen,
a future ruled by Overlords from a parallel universe engaged in a violent, sadistic
game of "hunt the children." Only Shade stands between the children and certain
death; only Shade can return the world to the way it was before the coming of the
Overlords. Shade is a computer hologram, the mind, psyche, and personality of
the only adult remaining on earth. Shade trains those that have escaped from the
Overlords to survive in this strange new world, and interspersed throughout the
narrative chapters are interviews with Shade's trainees, telling how they escaped
the Overlords and came to Shade, what they know about the world before the
Overlords, and what they've learned since. This is, for all its sci-fi trappings, a
survival story in which four disparate individuals become a team so closely aligned
that three risk their lives for one. The plot has a little of everything-a post-
apocalyptic setting, the perfect YA cast (no adults except the bad guys), and short
bursts of chapters that hint at horrors, violence, and betrayal. The mechanism of
the arrival and departure of the Overlords is simplistic, characterization is slim,
and the conclusion is precipitous. No consequences are seen from the rule of the
Overlords; they simply go back where they came from and the world returns to the
way it was before they arrived. Even with these apparent anomalies, the action-
packed plot has enough momentum to keep sci-fi enthusiasts reading until the
happy if illogical conclusion. JMD
NYE, NAOMI SHIHAB 
Habibi. Simon, 1997 
259p
ISBN 0-689-80149-1 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-9
Just when Liyana Abboud's love life seems to be getting off the ground in St.
Louis, her father decides the time is right to return to Jerusalem with his daughter,
son Rafik, and their American mother, so the children can become acquainted
with their Palestinian relatives and roots. At first Liyana is overwhelmed by the
weight of change-the language barrier, enrollment in an Armenian high school,
new foods, lost friends, a plethora of hovering, smothering, adoring relatives, and
the politicaltensions and outbreaks of violence that necessarily intrude in the
Abbouds' lives. Dr. Abboud, who found it easy to be religiously tolerant and
politically liberal in the United States, now finds it difficult to accept Liyana's new
Jewish boyfriend, and it is his elderly mother's Islamic faith in the intervention of
angels that unexpectedly draws Omer into the family circle. Nye chronicles the
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
95
family's adjustment in brief, episodic chapters introduced by entries from Liyana's
notebook of "first lines" and strung together like gleaming links in a narrative
chain. The stuff of ordinary contemporary teen life, reconfigured on foreign turf,
is thoroughly engaging, and the warmth and solidarity of this most credible family
has powerful appeal. EB
O'MALLEY, KEVIN 
Velcome; written and illus. by Kevin O'Malley. 
Walker,
1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8629-4 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8628-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
See this month's Big Picture, p. 79, for review.
ONYEFULU, IFEOMA 
Chidi Only Likes Blue: An African Book of Colors; written and
illus. with photographs by Ifeoma Onyefulu. 
Cobblehill, 1997 
[22p]
ISBN 0-525-65243-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-8 yrs
When Nneka plays the game Colors with her younger brother Chidi, he insists
that blue "is the best color in the whole world." 
Mother suggests his
singlemindedness may be due to the fact he doesn't know any other colors yet, so
Nneka explores the spectrum with him, in terms that relate to their Nigerian vil-
lage: "Black is the color people in my village use to decorate their houses during
the dry season"; "I like red because Great-Uncle wears a special red cap ... when-
ever he goes to ceremonies and meetings." Each color selection opens a window
on an intriguing village scene or custom-men make wishes using white chalk
marks on the ground; older sister Ebele cleans her teeth with cream-colored chew-
ing sticks. Pristine photos, simply framed in delicate hatching and set against
spacious white backgrounds, bring the colors into vivid relief, and although Chidi
stubbornly clings to his preference to the end, viewers will certainly be charmed by
the luminous range of tones that sets Nneka's world aglow. EB
PARASKEVAS, BETTY 
The Tangerine Bear; illus. by Michael Paraskevas. 
di Capua/
HarperCollins, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-205147-4 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205146-6 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Shortly after arriving on the shelf of a department store, Bear's forty-nine brothers
and sisters are "carried off in shiny white boxes tied with gold ribbons. 'Why
doesn't anybody take me home?' the little bear asked himself." Alas, all teddy
bears are not created equal, and the frozen frown on Bear's mouth (instead of a
smile) disqualifies him from being adopted. Bear eventually winds up sitting on a
chair in Mr. Winkle's second-hand-store window where the sun supposedly dis-
colors his fur to tangerine (though the art doesn't reflect the change). He develops
a familial kinship with a defective jack-in-the-box and a damaged cuckoo-clock
bird, and they spend their evenings alone in the dark store telling funny stories
from their past ("'Please don't make me laugh,' the Tangerine Bear would cry as
tears ran down his cheeks. 'My face won't dry for a week'"). The stories amuse the
bear more than they will the readers, and the book tips into the precious at times.
In the effective illustrations, shop scenes reveal the shapes and textures of life among
the rummage using deep blues, rusts, browns, and golds washed in dark overtones.
In one notable moment the hodge-podge occupants of the shop window, silhou-
96 
* 
THE BULLETIN
etted against a dark, snowy night, stare back at an elegant stranger "peering through
the glass." "I'd like to see the bear in your window" is the inevitable request. Stop
right here to allow young listeners an opportunity to discuss possible outcomes
before proceeding with this cozy if sometimes sentimental depiction of family,
toys, and belonging. PM
PAULSEN, GARY 
Sarny: A Life Remembered. Delacorte, 1997 
180p
ISBN 0-385-32195-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Ninety-four-year-old Sarny picks up the story where Nightjohn (BCCB 2/93) left
off, with each slave who has learned to read teaching others in turn. After Yankee
soldiers liberate the plantation, Sarny is able to track down her children through
bills of sale to their owner in New Orleans. The journey involves hunger, exhaus-
tion, military skirmishes, and the dangers of a ravaged countryside through which
Sarny's angel of mercy-a wealthy madam named Miss Laura with a heart of gold
and a few tight black curls that betray her African heritage-guides her in a horse-
drawn carriage. There's more information than tension once this deus ex machina
arrives on the scene, although the murder of Sarny's second husband by Klansmen
who have burned Sarny's school provides a dramatic climax. After raising her
children, Sarny devotes the rest of her life to teaching, with no thought of spend-
ing the fortune she has inherited from Miss Laura except on writing tablets, pen-
cils, and books. This portrait of the post-Civil War South reveals the prevailing
violence and confusion that threatens Sarny despite her protected status as servant
to the privileged octoroon madam, and young readers will identify strongly with
the narrator. BH
PELGROM, ELS 
The Acorn Eaters; tr. by Johanna H. Prins and Johanna W.
Prins. 
Farrar, 1997 
211p
ISBN 0-374-30029-1 
$16.00 
R Gr. 8-12
This Dutch import, "based on the childhood recollections" of Pelgrom's husband,
focuses on the experiences of narrator Santiago, who lives in an Andalusian com-
munity of impoverished cave dwellers at the close of the Spanish Civil War. At age
eight, Santiago is pulled from school to take on a man's work, and his many and
varied jobs over the next six years allow him-and the reader-to explore the
surrounding countryside, from the privileged clerical and lay landholders, whose
guardas maim and kill the starving peasants who poach upon their lands, to the
poorest families like his own, who scramble for hard-earned pesetas and pillaged
sustenance with fatalistic resignation. Each chapter is fashioned into a self-stand-
ing narrative, resonant with the fireside entertainments, gossip, and cautionary
tales of Santiago's community; "The Monastery" and "Gun Shells," which com-
ment on class division and mountain guerrilla fighters, could be particularly adapt-
able and provocative as social c .dies readalouds. Spanish song lyrics and a glossary
of Spanish words are appended. EB
PETERSEN, P. J. 
Can You Keep a Secret?; illus. by Meredith Johnson. 
Dutton,
1997 
106p
ISBN 0-525-45840-9 
$15.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Mike's a nice kid, liked by his classmates, but he has one big problem: he simply
cannot keep a secret. He blurts out his own wrongdoings, reveals his friends'
misdemeanors when trying to deny them, and generally cannot keep anything
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
97
delicate to himself. Now there's a surprise party planned for Mr. Warren, the
principal, and confidential information from friend Amy that Mr. Warren has
been kissing the kindergarten teacher, Miss Dean, and Mike is determined that
he's not going to let either cat out of the bag. Petersen's been snappier than this,
but he's got a good sense of basic classroom dynamics. He's also captured the
wonder and responsibility of secret-keeping, and Mike's dilemma will be all too
understandable to kids, especially in the squirmy moments when Mike nearly leaks
his news. The understated friendship between Amy and Mike is appealing and
unsappy, so it shouldn't put off young cynics. Kids will share Mike's triumph at
making it to the celebration without breach of confidentiality (and the kissing is
okay because the principal and the kindergarten teacher are getting married). Swift,
realistic pencil sketches use slight comic exaggerations to reflect the lighthearted
tone of the book. DS
PFISTER, MARCUS 
Milo and the Magical Stones; tr. by Marianne Martens; written
and illus. by Marcus Pfister. 
North-South, 1997 
26p
ISBN 1-55858-682-2 
$18.95 
M 
4-7 yrs
Milo and the other happy little cliff mice live blissfully on a lovely island in the
middle of the sea. Bliss can't last long, though, and it doesn't. Milo finds a stone:
"Milo was amazed to see that the darker it got, the more brightly the stone glowed,
and not only did it provide light, it also gave off a comforting warmth." When the
other mice see Milo's new gold acquisition they all want one of their own, but they
are admonished by the ecologically minded and wise Balthazar that "if you take
something from the island, you must give something in return." At this point the
book divides into two sections with the happy ending on the top portion of the
book and the sad ending on the bottom. The happy ending results in the mice
replacing the gold stones with their own handiwork of carved, etched, wrapped, or
decorated stones in a dramaless, goody-goody "aren't-we-wonderful-mice" lesson.
The sad ending shows greedy, jealous little mice who excavate the gold stones until
the island's mountain wall is completely hollowed out. When the mountain col-
lapses, only Milo and Balthazar are left. The watercolors executed in lush blues
and greens depict an island paradise where the cuddly mice with their deliberately
cute little pink ears and paws and the glitter of the gold-foiled stones extend the
gimmicky quality of a predictable story whose satisfaction lies only on superficial
levels. PM
PIERCE, TAMORA 
Circle ofMagic: Sandry's Book. 
Scholastic, 1997 
252p
ISBN 0-590-55356-9 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Four adolescents, three girls and one boy, are taken in by a temple community of
magicians when their idiosyncrasies result in their ostracism from more mundane
environments. Sandry is an orphan of noble birth who is rescued from a walled in
sanctuary that nearly becomes her tomb; Daja is an orphaned Trader, the only
survivor of a sunken vessel; Briar (formally known as Roach) is a street thief res-
cued from the galleys; and Tris is a despised daughter, unloved and unwanted. All
four have suffered great loss, and all four have that spark of magic that just might
make them into great mages. Pierce has created four attractively eccentric adoles-
cents with universal concerns, and she develops them individually and as a group
in a manner that young adults will relish. Fans ofAnne McCaffrey's Dragonsong
trilogy will happily latch onto this quartet of heroes as they each discover their
special talents and finally find a family of sorts. The title is a bit misleading, as this
98 
* THE BULLETIN
first book is about all four of the children, not obviously centered on the one. The
action is swift, the fantasy world nicely defined, and the ending will leave readers
wanting more. With a multicultural cast and enough gender role-reversal to make
a lot of people happy, this is a promising first title in a series. JMD
PORTER, TRACEY 
Treasures in the Dust. Cotler/HarperCollins, 1997 
148p
ISBN 0-06-027563-4 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-8
A clean, well-sculpted first novel portrays life in Depression-era Oklahoma, where
two friends grow up with life-threatening, dream-busting dust as a way of life.
Annie and Violet alternate chapters, each contributing a distinct point of view as
well as insights into the other and information about each other's families. Violet,
the more fanciful of the two, is forced to leave the farm with her family for migrant
work in California when their chickens are killed in a dust storm and their last cow
dies along with its calf. Annie, determined to become an archaeologist, pursues
her search for arrowheads and helps the local librarian set up a mini-museum.
Porter continues the girls' exchange through an effective device of unsent letters,
and their reunion is just realistic enough to be credible. An elderly third character
who dies after being taken in by Violet's family is well integrated into the plot.
Focused and unassuming, this is a natural readaloud companion for Virginia
Hamilton's mythical Drylongso (BCCB 10/92). BH
PULLMAN, PHILIP 
The Subtle Knife. 
Knopf, 1997 
326p
ISBN 0-679-87925-0 
$20.00 
R* Gr. 6-10
Once again Pullman succeeds in pushing readers headlong into other worlds in
this eagerly awaited and extraordinary sequel to The Golden Compass (BCCB 4/
96). It has been worth the wait. In his quest to find his father, Will Parry collides
with Lyra Silvertongue (nee Belacqua), in her quest to find Dust. The children
travel through torn windows between England and a parallel universe containing
the strange, sunny city of Ci'gazze, a place where only children can survive. They
encounter soul-eating Specters, the earnest Dr. Malone of the Dark Matter Re-
search Unit, angelic watchers, witches-to-the-rescue, crazed children, the sinister
Sir Charles, and the knife: "This edge . . will cut through any material in the
world..... The other edge ... is more subtle still. With it you can cut an opening
out of this world altogether." The masterfully turned plot will alarm, electrify,
and astonish readers as they see Will and Lyra journey towards a destiny which is
leading up to an unthinkable conflict: "Imagine the daring of it, to make war on
the Creator!" Despite its harrowing complexities, this well-crafted story never
sacrifices characterization. Human dynamics and their entanglements are not only
convincing but deeply moving as well. Will's tender concern for the troubled
mother he has left behind haunts him throughout the book. It will be enjoyable in
the extreme for readers of the first book in this series to see such diverse strands
woven together so expertly in the second. We eagerly await the third. PM
PYLE, HOWARD 
Bearskin; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman. 
Books of Wonder/
Morrow, 1997 
[41p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09838-X 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09837-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 3-6
A powerful king persuades a poor miller to give up his infant son in this newly
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 99
illustrated version of a classic tale. Pyle's story (the first in his collection The Won-
der Clock) is rich with folkloric elements as the miller's son is saved from death by
a great she-bear and grows to be "ten times stronger than the strongest man in the
land." In the course of the tale the handsome hero leaves his she-bear mother,
receives the name Bearskin, saves a brave princess from a dragon, and then claims
her willing hand in marriage, foiling the king's plot to overturn a fate decreed by
the stars. Pyle's masterful storytelling is masterfully interpreted by Trina Schart
Hyman in watercolor-and-ink illustrations that depict a fairy-tale land with a mul-
ticultural cast of thousands ... okay, dozens. Expressive characters, gorgeously
rendered textiles, and elegant detailing combine in clean, balanced compositions
to make this a visual as well as storytelling gem. Hyman's hero is both jolly and
handsome, her princess is beautiful and smart, and the villains are appropriately
villainous (and somewhat silly) as they are undone by their own doings. The
supporting cast is in on the joke, and their facial expressions and jaunty demeanors
add greatly to the overall impression of a land where happily ever after is not only
the desired conclusion, it is the only possible conclusion. JMD
ROBINSON, AMINAH BRENDA LYNN 
A Street Called Home; written and illus. by
Aminah Brenda Lynn Robinson. 
Harcourt, 1997 
24p
ISBN 0-15-201465-9 $18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
An introductory note describes the start of the old African-American neighbor-
hood in Columbus, Ohio, with its intense and crowded street life, while on the
title page a lift-the-flap portrait of the author/artist opens to reveal a rear view and
a small description, introducing the methodology of the work in general. Each
spread depicts a dense and lively street scene, with a liftable flap on each side
focusing on one individual (the vegetableman, the chickenfoot woman, the ragman)
and revealing a brief paragraph explaining that person's work and habits; the suc-
cession of spreads, printed on heavy cardboard, can also lift out of the book en-
tirely and stand as a frieze, with the street scene continuing on the back.
Unfortunately the substance of the book isn't as intriguing as the mechanics. While
the art (thick pigment on canvas stitched through with red thread securing scraps
of cloth and a diverse multitude of shining buttons) has a vivid urban busyness
with its crammed compositions and shaded intense hues, it has a certain sameness.
Ultimately it's more an ingenious large snapshot than a work such as Romare
Bearden's The Block, where individual figures suggested human depths and offered
greater insight. Kids will find the gallery of street characters historic and colorful,
and the inclusion of old street cries might well prompt some entertaining demon-
stration. Sometimes, however, the descriptions indulge in pat and unexplained
summations ("The vegetableman loves the people on the street, and the people on
the street love him"), and there's no conclusion or synthesis, which may leave
readers wondering what the series of thumbnail sketches were in aid of. The major
use for this book is likely to be in prompting similar literature/art projects from
kids thinking about their own neighborhoods. DS
RYDEN, HOPE 
WildHorseSummer; illus. by Paul Casale. 
Clarion, 1997 
[160p]
ISBN 0-395-77519-1 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Alison has a collection of embarrassing fears and a strong reluctance to spend her
thirteenth summer airing them at her aunt and uncle's Wyoming ranch. At first ill
100 
* 
THE BULLETIN
at ease with life there and with her blind cousin Kelly, Alison learns to ride, devel-
oping enough confidence to go in search of Kelly's beloved horse when the mare
takes off to join the local mustangs. The situation here is familiar and predictable
to the point of cliche, and the long sections of information on wild horses make for
stilted dialogue, but the eastern-girl-goes-west story retains its traditional appeal.
Ryden, one of the best-known photodocumentarians of the American mustang,
writes about the animals with appreciation and verve, and her affection for the
open range is evident in the casual but effective descriptions of hogbacks and ridges.
Readers who like some factual basis to their fantasies of wild horses will appreciate
Alison's story. DS
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Cat Heaven; written and illus. by Cynthia Rylant. 
Blue Sky/
Scholastic, 1997 
34p
ISBN 0-590-10054-8 
$15.95 
R 4-7yrs
An array of colors vividly illustrate this folk-artsy view of a heaven for cats only.
Rylant uses a simple rhythmic text to tell us about the place of everlasting cat bliss:
"And when cats are hungry, there's God's kitchen counter all covered with white
kitty dishes, full of tuna and salmon and mounds of sardines, and wonderful little
pink fishes." There's also an eternal supply of kitty toys, soft angel laps, and even
a benevolent God allowing sleepy cats to lie on His bed and sleep on His head.
The theology may be a bit dubious but no one can fault the sentiment of a final
resting place (and such a pleasing one) for a beloved feline. Riotous splashes,
splotches, blips, and blossoms of color energize this joyful, shamelessly sentimen-
tal expose of paradise, kitty style, where cats of all kinds enjoy the "other side."
Cats pretty much divide people into two categories-lovers and haters-so don't
expect felinophobes to be crazy about this book. Kids will love it, though, and cat
owners will get all misty-eyed. PM
SCHANZER, ROSALYN, ed. 
How We Crossed the West: The Adventures of Lewis &6
Clark; written and illus. by Rosalyn Schanzer. 
National Geographic, 1997 
[42p]
ISBN 0-7922-3738-2 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Deftly selected excerpts from the letters, lists, and journals of Meriwether Lewis,
William Clark, and John Ordway recreate the 1804 journey of the Corps of Dis-
covery from the commission of boats and supplies to their arrival at the shores of
the Pacific Ocean. Schanzer confines her comments to an opening note on
Jefferson's charge to the expedition and introduction of several crew members,
allowing the adventurers to tell their own gripping story. The brief passages (few
exceed a paragraph in length) not only describe their considerable perils, but reveal
their awe at exotic fauna and terrain and their condescending attitude toward in-
digenous peoples: "The Arikaras are the best-looking, cleanest Indians I have ever
seen on the voyage. Their men are tall and well-proportioned, their women small
and industrious." Schanzer's acrylic and colored-pencil pictures are over-busy and
sometimes garish, with more cartoonish levity than one might expect of "the quaint
painting style of American folk artists of the period" upon which these illustrations
are based. Still, details such as cowardly Charbonneau's gape-mouthed supplica-
tion in a squall and the retreating derriere of a crew member eluding a swarm of
bugs are enticing. Concluding notes recap the return voyage and the Corps' ac-
complishments, and endpaper maps retrace the route. EB
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
101
SILVERMAN, ERICA 
The Halloween House; illus. by Jon Agee. 
Farrar, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-374-33270-3 
$15.00 
R 4-8yrs
In a hilarious spoof of the counting classic Over in the Meadow (BCCB 12/57),
Silverman deposits two escaped convicts in a haunted house, and then lets the
inhabitants scare the escapees back to prison. Cheerfully rendered ghoulies ac-
company each delightfully understated verse: "In the Halloween house,/ on a bed
made of pine,/ a mama vampire woke/ with her little ones, nine.// 'Rise,' said the
mama./ 'We rise,' said the nine./ So they rose through the night/ from the bed
made of pine." Agee's watercolor illustrations have a James Stevenson-esque flair
with a slightly smokier palette that suits the semi-scary progression of events. The
convicts in their subdued red stripes become progressively more uncomfortable
with the proceedings-their faces never fully reflect outright terror, but their brows
get more furrowed, and their frowns more pronounced. Meanwhile, the werewolves,
vampires, bats, ghosts, and witches that inhabit the castle appear thoroughly good-
natured and pleased with themselves. The concluding illustration of the two now
willingly re-incarcerated but still worried-looking convicts (one sewing a Home
Sweet Home sampler and the other reading a brochure on cell-decor classes) is an
image that will elicit chuckles and groans. This is going to be a hit if read aloud or
read alone, no matter what the time of year. JMD
SIMON, SEYMOUR 
The Brain: Our Nervous System. 
Morrow, 1997 
illus. with
photographs 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14641-4 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14640-6 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Following in the path of The Heart (BCCB 10/96), as it were, this book tackles the
complicated subject of the brain. Simon explains the work of the nerve cells and
the different functions of the various parts of the brain, using specific examples to
illustrate. There are some complicated concepts and terms, but they're defined
with relative clarity considering their density, and there are some interesting tid-
bits included ("Synapses always pass signals in the same direction; they cannot
work in reverse"). The art includes diagrams, magnified images, CAT scans, and
some nifty cross-sections that will appeal to the clinical. The book provokes some
questions that remain unanswered (Which end of the brain is which in the pic-
tures showing brain activity when someone's eyes are open? Are the photographed
cross-sections real brains, or are they, like the spinal cord image, models?), but
overall this is about as entry-level as a treatment of that complicated organ is going
to get. Junior MDs will appreciate the look inside. DS
SIOMADES, LORIANNE 
A Place to Bloom; written and illus. by Lorianne
Siomades. 
Boyds Mills, 1997 
32p
ISBN 1-56397-656-0 
$7.95 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Using big, double-page spreads filled with brightly colored cut-paper images,
Siomades offers young children both visual and rhythmic connections to everyday
things that are often taken for granted but that have value to someone or some-
thing else. For example, "The part I usually throw away, someone loves to eat!"
captions a picture of a pink pig eagerly approaching discarded apple cores. Occa-
sional unevenness in the simple rhymes ("The scary snake on the garden path who
doesn't look friendly ... is someone else's mother who is more afraid of me!") is
offset by kid-appealing situations. The figures' stylized, toylike appearance is some-
102 
* THE BULLETIN
what depersonalized, but kids will appreciate the silly, laid-back humor. The visu-
als are large enough for sharing with a group, and don't forget to extend the fun by
finding the worm on every spread. PM
SLEATOR, WILLIA 
The Beasties. Dutton, 1997 
198p
ISBN 0-525-45598-1 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
It's hard to resist this classic horror-story opening: a family alone in a remote,
mysteriously abandoned house in the woods; rumors of vile creatures; area workers
who are missing body parts. Within a couple of dozen pages, high-schooler Doug
and his younger sister Colette are lured through a trapdoor in the forest floor and
swept into a subterranean adventure involving a race of mole-like humanoids whose
livelihood is threatened by the local logging industry. Narrator Doug plays the
unwilling skeptic throughout, pulled into the Beasties' (they prefer to be called the
Family) war of survival by his brighter, braver sibling. It's Doug, though, who
saves the day with a sharp-witted assessment of the creatures' inbreeding problems
and the indispensable donation of one of his own eyes (a scene not for the faint of
heart) for the Beasties' communal welfare. For every Beastie hole in the woods
there seems to be a hole in the text as well, with unanswered questions about the
noseless housekeeper, the connection between Dad's fungus research and the
Beasties' diet, and the utter obtuseness of the adults in the story. Still, Sleator fans
will be willing to ignore or fill in the gaps, and they may find themselves avoiding
that tight space behind the basement furnace for some time to come. EB
SMALLS, IRENE 
Because You're Lucky; illus. by Michael Hays. 
Little, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-79867-3 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When Aunt Laura agrees to take in her nephew, Kevin, he is immediately assaulted
with the selfish and rude behavior of her own two children, the teenaged Dawn
and her younger brother, Jonathan. They "welcome" their needy cousin with
"Momma, how come that raggedy little boy has to come and live with us?" and
"It's not fair! How come I have to share my clothes? How come he gets to sleep in
my bunk bed?" The extraordinarily patient mother replies, "Because you're lucky."
Inevitably Jonathan and Kevin begin to enjoy the life they must share until a typi-
cal sibling-like blow-up results in Kevin's move to another room, "but Jonathan
had trouble going to sleep. It had been a long while since he had slept in his room
all by himself." Readers will get the ending they expect, where everyone is friends
again and mother repeats the "Because you're lucky" mantra. Richly hued paint-
ings depict the African-American family in stiffly posed scenes. The story is obvi-
ously well-intentioned, and it is refreshing to have some honest acknowledgment
of the strain such a family change can be, but the book never reaches quite deep
enough to be meaningful. For a lyrical picture book on the same theme, try John
Steptoe's classic Stevie. PM
SOTO, GARY 
Buried Onions. Harcourt, 1997 
149p
ISBN 0-15-201333-4 
$17.00 
R Gr. 7-12
Eddie is a sixteen-year-old Mexican-American trying to survive in an environment
that is not conducive to longevity. Fresno is torn by gang violence and street
crime, and try as he might, Eddie cannot seem to avoid it. His cousin has been
senselessly killed, and his aunt is urging him to avenge the murder by committing
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
103
another one. He is a dropout with no visible means of support surrounded by
those who create meaning in their lives through violent action, and his only way
out seems to be enlisting in the armed forces, like his friend Jose who has enlisted
in the Marines. Forced to the edge of violence, Eddie finally joins the Navy, only
to have an epiphany of sorts in an onion field on the way to boot camp. Soto
depicts gang- and violence-torn Fresno in an immediate, visceral way, portraying a
cultural milieu that values the ideas of honor and revenge. Early in Eddie's story
he gives his impression of the vapors that emanate from the city's black asphalt: "I
had a theory about those vapors, which were not released by the sun's heat but by
a huge onion buried under the city. This onion made us cry. Tears leapt from our
eyelashes and stained our faces. Babies in strollers pinched up their faces and
wailed for no reason. Perhaps as practice for the coming years. I thought about
the giant onion, that remarkable bulb of sadness." By the end of this story, Eddie
himself is weeping in an onion field in recognition of his lost childhood and the
senselessness of violent death. The conclusion is swift and somewhat ambivalent,
but Eddie is a character with whom readers will empathize as they alternately grieve
and hope for him. A glossary of Spanish words and phrases is appended. JMD
ST. GEORGE, JUDITH 
Sacagawea. Putnam, 1997 
[128p]
ISBN 0-399-23161-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 4-6
St. George follows her recent biographies of Crazy Horse (Crazy Horse, BCCB 12/
94) and Sitting Bull (To See With the Heart, BCCB 9/96) with a less successful
portrait of Sacagawea, the Shoshone wife of a boorish fur trapper, who served as
interpreter for Lewis and Clark's Corps of Discovery. Most information on
Sacagawea is gleaned from the journals of her employers, who seem to have re-
garded her as a useful and agreeable functionary but hardly a major player. As a
result, the bulk of this account centers on the adventures of the Corps as a whole,
and anecdotes specific to Sacagawea are heavily padded with speculation about her
emotional response to the journey. Metaphoric flights of fancy revolving around
the literal translation of her Indian name, Bird Woman ("She had stood on the
shores of the Great Waters, learned how other tribes lived and had the satisfaction
of knowing she had been useful. In other words, she had been given wings") are
condescending and pat. Under this fusty sentimentality, though, is an accessible
narrative of the adventure which, in casting a resourceful teen mother as protago-
nist, may lure some history weary girls to reconsider the Lewis and Clark expedi-
tion as more than just a "guy thing." EB
STEVENS, DANE 
Liza's Star Wish. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
[192p]
ISBN 0-688-15310-0 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
In Liza's Blue Moon (BCCB 3/95) Liza lost a sister; now her family is struggling
along in the wake of the tragedy. Liza has been yanked away from her beloved San
Antonio (and her boyfriend) for the summer to the small Texas town where her
grandmother recuperates from a broken hip under Liza's mother's care. Despite
her grandmother's disapproval of Mexicans and illegal aliens, Liza becomes friends
with the family across the street, particularly Paz and her brother Beto. When her
best friend Chloe (moved away from San Antonio just after Holly's death) arrives
for a long-awaited visit, Liza is at first miserable about the new gap between them
104 
* THE BULLETIN
and then horrified when Chloe's self-absorption in the name of morality results in
trouble for Paz's family. Stevens keeps the diverse strands of narrative coherent
and complementary, as they all reflect on human relationships in the face of change,
but never loses the specifics in the general. Characterization comes deftly from
action rather than description; it's original and thoughtful, particularly with Chloe,
the infuriatingly rigid golden girl beginning to alienate the world, and Jennifer,
the apparently depressingly perfect and actually quite likable girl next door. Life as
a process is a hard thing to convey, but Stevens does it tellingly and engagingly.
DS
TEAGUE, MARK 
Baby Tamer; written and illus. by Mark Teague. 
Scholastic,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-590-67712-8 
$15.95 
R 4-6 yrs
The three Eggmont kids are every babysitter's nightmare-until they meet Amanda
Smeedy. Despite bongo drums, cartwheels, and an Evel Knievel leap over chairs
on a tricycle, Amanda remains unimpressed: "Amanda rubbed her chin and
thought./ 'They're merely trying to test me.'/ So she yawned and said 'Your little
pranks/ really don't distress me."' The Eggmont siblings desperately try to im-
press the unflappable Amanda, as she yawns, ho-hums, and shrugs her way through
acts of daring that would make a circus proud. Teague's flashy acrylics and ener-
getic compositions have a positively shiny finish, and as the three irrepressible
siblings meet the immovable Amanda, the hot colors complement the cool just as
the grimacing expressions of the mischief makers complement Amanda's collected
mien. The text doesn't always scan as well as a reader-aloud would like, but the
illustrations and the concluding punchline go a long way to making up for it.
Amanda gathers up the exhausted children, puts them to bed, tidies up, and re-
laxes in an armchair: 
"As she sat there eating ice cream,/ she smiled, and who
could blame her?/ 'I'm one cool cucumber,' she told herself/ AMANDA SMEEDY,
BABY TAMER."' JMD
WALTON, RICK Pig Pigger Piggest; illus. by Jimmy Holder. 
Gibbs Smith,
1997 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-87905-806-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Pig, Pigger and Piggest live in the castle of their father the king, and, as much as he
loves his "dear, sweet, dirty babies," he wants them to move out. Off they go, with
a hip and hooray, each building a castle, tall-walled and brick-thick, taller-waller
and thicker-bricker, tallest-wallest and thickest-brickest, in a nice muddy spot.
Along come Witch, Witcher, and Witchest: they covet the princely pigs' real
estate but are rebuffed, and in response they call out Huff and Puff, Huffer and
Puffer... Well, you'll catch on, and so will kids, as this fractured "Three Little
Pigs" bounces to its happily wedded conclusion in which pigs and witches are
merrily married. Accompanying Walton's tilted text are Holder's appropriately
tipsy watercolors, in which the architecturally inclined little porkers bounce their
jolly, if muddy, way through a backdrop of silly images and snortingly funny char-
acterizations. Kids will enjoy the "not by the hair on your warty wart wart" re-
sponse of the beleaguered but chronically cheerful pigs even as they are beguiled by
the rotund illustrations. JMD
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
105
WARD, 
HELEN 
The King of the Birds; written and illus. by Helen
Ward. 
Millbrook, 1997 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-0313-8 
$22.90
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7613-0288-3 
$15.95 
R 5-9 yrs
In a departure from the usual fantastical nature of fairy and folktale picture-book
illustration, Ward's naturalistic take on the protagonists of this traditional tale has
a stringent and welcome effect. The story begins "A long, long time ago" when
"some old (but not necessarily wise) birds decided that they should have a king."
But they are not quite sure of how to go about getting one, and everybody has an
opinion. Finally they resolve that the bird to fly highest will be king. It appears
certain to be Eagle, but when Eagle fades, Wren creeps from his neck feathers and
flies the highest of all, and while "having the highest flier for king was one thing,
having the cleverest was even better." Adults may see the moral coming, but young
listeners will be delighted by the scrappy wren, and even more so by Ward's ren-
derings in watercolor and ink. Bright plumaged birds, beaks pointed skyward and
feathers glowing, teem across the pages in crowd scenes and cameos. Ward in-
cludes a "Key to the Birds," identifying the birds in each group and including
some feathered facts-the speed of the roadrunner, an example of flightless birds,
how the spotted guinea fowl uses its feathers for camouflage. The birds are more
ornithological than make-believe, and their lively eyes and intelligently cocked
heads give them all the personality they need. Ward keeps the anthropomorphism
to a minimum, and this tightly composed, austerely written folktale shines through
the flashy feathers quite nicely. A source note would have been greatly appreci-
ated, but variants, for those who want them, won't be difficult to find. JMD
WAUGH, SYLVIA 
Mennyms Alive. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
224p
ISBN 0-688-15201-5 
$16.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Fans of the Mennym saga (see Mennyms Alone, BCCB 11/96, and The Mennyms
Under Siege, BCCB 3/96, etc.) will recall that the previous book involved the
family of cloth dolls losing the power of life that had magically sustained them for
decades. Now they reawaken in the spare room of an antique dealer's shop, and
they have much to do: first, they must find son Soobie, who had been left behind
in the old house; they must rearrange their affairs and find themselves a new legal
residence; and most important of all, they must share space with antique dealer
Daisy Maughan without frightening her with the secret of their true nature. This
last obligation is one of the novel's most charming aspects, with Daisy and the
Mennyms performing a delicate social dance of mutual understanding and tactful
forbearance: she knows they're alive, and they know she knows, but it's best for all
if it's considered to be a mere fancy. Readers will also enjoy the weaving in of
familiar human characters from the previous books, and they'll be happy that the
Mennyms are settled safely in their final home. Flap copy suggests this is the final
Mennym title, and one might have wished to end with the doll family rather than
with their human friends, but perhaps their departure from the book will help fans
adjust to their absence. DS
WESTWOOD, CHRIS 
Virtual World. Viking, 1997 
217p
ISBN 0-670-87546-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Jack North is a serious 'nethead, and like his technomane friends, he's been look-
ing forward to the release of the highly touted new computer game, Silicon Sphere.
106 
* 
THE BULLETIN
When he gets a copy, he's hooked: as far as he can tell, he actually enters the world
of the game, no longer needing to use his mouse to negotiate its obstacles but
simply walking through it-and he finds that half a day has gone by when he
stops. Soon, however, it becomes clear that this is no mere game but a new and
dangerous reality that has already sucked young users in, causing them to disap-
pear from the real world. Aided by a girl he admires who lost a friend to the game,
Jack goes in search of the missing teens and finds a brave but frightening new
world mixing technology with humanity, person by person. Westwood is excel-
lent at depicting the fascination and milieu of cyberculture; his slightly futuristic
universe bumps things ahead just enough to make his inventions and changes
credible but keeps things grounded enough in contemporary reality ("That hotshot
is bigger than God andBill Gates," says one character about a technoentrepreneur)
to remain credible. Unfortunately the plot loses both momentum and compre-
hensibility in the virtual-world faceoff, and the shifts to the viewpoint of the cre-
ator of Silicon Sphere slow things down further. Nor is it clear whether we're
supposed to think the fate of the gaming teens (becoming part computer, able to
plug themselves in) is horrific, wonderful, or a little of both. The buildup is the
best part, but there's still some rewarding exploration of a perennially alluring
topic. DS
WILLNER-PARDO, GINA 
Daphne Eloise Slater, Who's Tallfor HerAge; illus. by Glo
Coalson. 
Clarion, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-395-73080-5 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Daphne Eloise Slater is tall for her age, and rotten Leonard DiMaggio won't let her
forget it. Between his dubbing her "giraffie" and his mother saying she must have
been held back because she's so tall, Daphne isn't very happy. When the abomi-
nable Leo is named her lab partner, her cup of exasperation is full. But Leo reveals
a surprising sensitivity to dissecting the lamb's eye that is their class project-"I
just can't do this," he sighs. Daphne rises to the occasion and covers for him, but
a leonard, er, leopard doesn't change his spots overnight, and neither does Leo.
This is easy fiction with heart and plot, centered around a likable heroine in a
comfortably recognizable class of third graders. While the compositions are occa-
sionally uninspired and the colors a tad washed out, Coalson's watercolor and
pencil illustrations strike just the right note of casual classroom camaraderie, and
are certain to allay the fears of chapter-book-phobic youngsters. JMD
WINTERS, KAY 
The Teeny Tiny Ghost; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. 
HarperCollins,
1997 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-025684-2 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-025479-3 
$14.95 
R* 4-7 yrs
A timid, teeny tiny ghost conquers his teeny tiny anxieties in this take-off on the
familiar folktale. Winters takes that ever-appealing teeny-tiny refrain and plays it
for all it's worth, emphasizing rhythm and eschewing forced rhyme. Winters'
teeny tiny hero has a big brave heart as he stands by his cats, masters his fear (he
scares himself when he booooos), and howls his loudest, being rewarded by the
company of his classmates and his first Halloween haunting, in which "they tapped
on tiny windows, they rapped on tiny doors, while jack-o-lanterns smiled in the
bat-black night." Munsinger takes a giant step away from cute in her watercolor
and ink illustrations: her ghosties have soot-ringed eyes and chronically wrinkled
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
107
sheet extremities, and they exist in an appropriately cobwebby, haunted environ-
ment, while still retaining that inherent cheerful audacity expected from Munsinger's
confidently rendered cartoons. Tucked into this humorously written and illus-
trated tale is the kernel of stout-heartedness that makes young children love the
hero, and that stout-heartedness is revealed when the teeny tiny ghost refuses to
abandon his teeny tiny cats to the scary noises outside their door, saying "Don't be
afraid.... 
I won't run away. I'll keep you safe. We have to be very, very brave."
Get ready for your listeners to give out with boos and whoos, howls and yowls,
because this is one ghost they will enthusiastically cheer. JMD
WOLFF, FERIDA 
A YearforKiko; illus. byJoungUn Kim. 
Houghton, 1997 
26p
ISBN 0-395-77396-2 
$15.00 
R 
2-5 yrs
This gentle romp through the months has an unassuming charm as readers follow
a little girl with coal black hair and shining eyes from January to December. Four
short sentences for each month give seasonal details as the little girl delights in her
changing environment: "Kiko picks June strawberries. One fat berry for the bas-
ket. Many fat berries for Kiko. Inside they become Kikoberries"; and "Red and
gold leaves are falling. Kiko holds a red leaf in one hand. She holds a gold leaf in
the other. Kiko feels like an October tree." Kim's simple, loosely formed shapes
are lightened by short feathery brushstrokes dancing across the gracefully com-
posed, solidly balanced pages in an earthy yet bright palette. While the overly
understated approach of both text and pictures can be lulling, this is one of those
non-flashy titles that is going to have a multitude of uses-as a readaloud, as a
month book, as a first readalone. JMD
108 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Marcus, Leonard, ed. Dear Genius: The Letters ofUrsula Nordstrom. HarperCollins,
1998. ISBN 0-06-023625-6. $22.95. [4 48p] Reviewed from galleys
One of the great influences on twentieth-century children's literature, Ursula
Nordstrom edited a multitude of groundbreaking and classic books: E. B. White's
Charlotte's Web, Maurice Sendak's Where the Wild Things Are, Margaret Wise
Brown's Runaway Bunny, Louise Fitzhugh's Harriet the Spy, John Steptoe's
Stevie ... the list goes on and on. Starting out in the days before casual long-
distance telephone calls, she produced copious amounts of correspondence on her
office typewriter to authors, prospective authors, fellow professionals, complain-
ants, and more. Marcus (who also contributes a useful introduction, though it
dips into misleading dismissiveness of pre-Nordstrom literature) has pulled to-
gether a delicious and well-footnoted assortment that conveys both editorial pro-
cess and a significant portion of literary history. Nordstrom's letters are stylish,
passionate, and humorous, whether it be in discussion with Garth Williams about
the art for Bedtime for Frances ("Garth, badgers only have two arms in their bath-
robes"), concerned epistles to the mother of the young and elusive John Steptoe
("I know he considers himself a grown man and will probably be angry at me for
appealing to his mother for help"), or practiced but thoughtful responses to objec-
tions about book content ("It's good to realize, at least, that what was apparently
acceptable in 1943... is completely unacceptable and very offensive now"). The
web of history and connections is spun through casual mention (Nordstrom ap-
proves of the books that nice Miss McElderry is doing at Harcourt) and through
succinct editorial comment (Marcus notes that the Margaret Warner who acted as
Nordstrom's assistant from 1971 to 1973 went on to be a correspondent on PBS's
Newshour with Jim Lehrer). Most memorable, however, is Nordstrom to her au-
thors, cajoling, encouraging, assisting, teasing out ideas, supporting in every way
possible. It would have been hard to resist producing greatness for her. DS
Sykes, Judith A. Library Centers: Teaching Information Literacy, Skills, and Pro-
cesses: K-6; illus. by Cory Henderson and with photographs. Libraries Unlimited,
1997. Paper ed. ISBN 1-56308-507-0. $30.00. 224p
Using a center-based approach, Sykes has developed a resource tool for teachers
and librarians seeking to integrate the teaching of basic library skills into the cur-
riculum. She succinctly explains the educational philosophy behind this approach
in the preface and introduction and then delivers on her promise of a practical tool
that can be put to immediate use. The general skills chapters include "ABC Bears,"
"Bridge Books," "Junior Authors," "Book Basics," etc.; the more specific curricu-
lum-based chapters include "Victorian Holiday Traditions," "Egypt Old and New,"
"The Titanic," and "Links Across Borders." Each chapter contains adaptable ma-
terials for teaching library research skills in the classroom or library, such as repro-
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
109
ducible sample direction cards, stencils, word searches, pathfinder-like exercises,
and suggestions for research oriented projects. This is an idea book for those
seeking an organized approach to teaching library skills. Sykes' hands-on approach
is refreshingly pragmatic and her center activity ideas are easily adaptable to nearly
any setting or need. The closing chapter is a bulleted list of "Center Tips" to ease
implementation of suggested activities; no index is included. JMD
Annual '97. Fiction; Paper ed. ISBN 1-55858-743-8; 251p. Annual '97: Nonfic-
tion; Paper ed. ISBN 1-55858-744-6; 162p. Each book: Neugebauer/North-
South, 1997. $45.00.
The catalogs of art displayed at this year's Illustrators' Exhibition from the Bolo-
gna Book Fair are available now, and as usual there's a broad collection of work,
much of which is probably unfamiliar to American eyes. The Fiction volume,
which displays a cover by 1996 Hans Christian Andersen medalist Klaus Ensikat
and is arranged alphabetically by artists, runs the stylistic gamut from lively car-
toon to dramatic expressionism to sentimental realism and back again. The repre-
sentatives from the United States are sufficiently unexpected and, well,
nonrepresentative that it makes one wonder what's not appearing from other coun-
tries, but what is appearing is nonetheless well worth examining. The Nonfiction
volume breaks its entries up into "First Lessons," "Nature," "People and Places,"
and "Technical and Historical Reconstruction." One of the advantages of allow-
ing the nonfiction art its own volume is that it makes the broad range of ap-
proaches clearer; in addition to precise and technical renderings there are fluid
interpretations, lush vistas, and light-hearted portraits. Comments from the jury
and vital statistics on the artists (many of whom are as yet unpublished) are in-
cluded in both volumes. DS
110 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Africa: Onyefulu
Africa-folklore: Hamilton
African Americans: Robinson
African Americans-folklore:
Hamilton
African Americans-stories: Smalls
American Indians: St. George
Anatomy: Simon
ANIMAL STORIES: Miranda
Art: Robinson
Art and artists-stories: Maynard
Asian Americans-fiction: Balgassi;
Blakeslee
Babysitters-stories: Teague
BIBLE STORIES: Gerstein
Biology: Simon
Birds-stories: Ward
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Kinsey-Warnock; Mariconda;
Sleator
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Teague
Brothers-fiction: Fox; Jenkins
Bugs-stories: Greenberg
Cats-fiction: Kehret
Cats-stories: Rylant
Central America-fiction: Kushner
Civil War-fiction: Paulsen
Colors: Onyefulu
Computers-fiction: Nix;
Westwood
CONCEPT BOOKS: Onyefulu;
Silverman; Wolff
COUNTING BOOKS: Silverman
Cousins-fiction: Ryden
Cowboys-poetry: Janeczko
Crime and criminals-fiction:
McDonald, J.; Soto
Depression, the-fiction: Porter
Disabilities-fiction: Fox; Ryden
Dogs-fiction: Booth
Ethics and values: Jenkins; Nye;
Pfister; Soto; Stevens
Explorers: Schanzer
FANTASY: Ellis; Gibbons; Pierce;
Pullman; Sleator; Waugh
Farms-fiction: Kinsey-Warnock
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Nye
Fathers and sons-fiction: Kehret
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Davis;
Gerstein; Hamilton; Kherdian;
Lattimore; Pyle; Walton; Ward
Food and eating-stories: Davis;
Jackson
Foster children-stories: Smalls
Friends-fiction: Bonners;
Greenwald; Jenkins; Johnston;
Levin; McDonald, M.; McKay;
Petersen; Porter; Stevens;
Willner-Pardo
FUNNY STORIES: O'Malley
Games-fiction: Westwood
Gangs-fiction: Soto
Ghosts-fiction: McKay
Ghosts-stories: Winters
Grandmothers-fiction:
Mariconda; Stevens
Guns-fiction: McDonald, J.
Halloween-stories: Lattimore;
Silverman; Winters
NOVEMBER 1997 
* 
111
Health: Brown
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Blakeslee; Booth; Buchanan;
Paulsen; Pelgrom; Porter
History, U.S.: Schanzer; St.
George
Holocaust: Gold
Homosexuality-fiction: Jenkins
Horses-fiction: Ryden
Islands-fiction: Levin
Islands-stories: Pfister
Knitting-stories: Christiansen
Latinos-fiction: Soto
Letters and letter-writing-fiction:
Bonners
LOVE STORIES: Nye
Magicians-fiction: Pierce
Mice-stories: Pfister
Mittens-stories: Christiansen
Mothers and daughters-stories:
Kherdian
Nature-poetry: Moore
Orphans-fiction: Buchanan
Pigs-stories: Walton
POETRY: Janeczko; Moore
Reading aloud: Booth; Hamilton;
Moore; Petersen; Willner-Pardo
Reading, beginning: Johnston;
McDonald, M.
Reconstruction-fiction: Paulsen
Refugees-fiction: Kushner
Religion-fiction: Nye
RHYMING STORIES:
Greenberg; Miranda; Silverman;
Siomades; Teague
School-fiction: Balgassi;
Greenwald; Johnston; Petersen;
Willner-Pardo
SCIENCE FICTION: Nix;
Westwood
Seasons-stories: Wolff
Secrets-fiction: Petersen
SHORT STORIES: Ellis;
Gibbons
Slavery-fiction: Paulsen
Spain-fiction: Pelgrom
Storytelling: Davis; Gerstein; Gibbons;
Hamilton; Kherdian; Pyle; Ward
Storytime: Greenberg; Jackson; Lattimore;
Maynard; Miranda; Silverman;
Siomades; Teague; Ward
SUPERNATURAL STORIES: Ellis;
Gibbons
SURVIVAL STORIES: Marsden; Nix
Thanksgiving-stories: Jackson
Toys-stories: Paraskevas
Uncles-fiction: Engel
Urban life: Robinson
Voyages and travel-fiction: Kehret;
Pullman
War-fiction: Marsden
West Indies-folklore: Hamilton
West, the: Schanzer
Winter-stories: Christiansen
Witches-stories: Walton
World War II: Gold
World War II-fiction: Booth
Teaching Rk8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
= 
Every issue of Teaching K-8
provides informative articles on
TpeCh n.iO 
the cutting edge of education.
You'll also tind insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
Dnn't misc nut nn thic vialralhlr
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
Teaching4 8
)x 54808, Boulder, CO 80322-4808
8-8793
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I 
I
*"PURE PLEASURE"*
*"Kellogg 
takes a favorite folk tale and adds his own inventive
touches of character, plot twists, and humor.... Children will
greet Kellogg's latest picture book with eagerness."
-*ALA 
Booklist (starred review)
"Highly defined illustrations complement
the humorous, clever text."
-School Library Journal
"A talent-strewn retelling that only
enhances the original."
-Kirkus Reviews
Ages ) up. 5L pp. 
IK 16.00u/u-O68O-uo/s-u * LE 
8,1.yJ/u-ooo-uo/j-y
Morrow Junior Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc. * 1350 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10019
www.williammorrow.com
4
Introducing DK Ink-Fall 1997
This season marks the start of a new chapter
for DK and for the three of us. We joined
DK to complement its renowned nonfiction
list with a distinctive 
imprint featuring
-I
Richard
Senior
primarily picture books and fiction for 
j( --
children and adults, 
created by authors Melanie
Senior
and illustrators you know and respect as well
as exciting new talents. Enjoy!
September
Nursery Classics
$8.95 each
Grades PreK-
The Little Red Hen
retold by Alan Garner
illustrated by Norman Messenger
LC: 96-44203
ISBN: 0-7894-1171-7
Jack and the Beanstalk
retold by Rosemary Wells
illustrated by Norman Messenger
LC: 96-44201
ISBN: 0-7894-1170-9
Thorndike and Nelson:
A Monster Story
by Jean Jackson
illustrated by Vera Rosenberry
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2452-5
$15.95 Grades PreK-2
Rama and the Demon King:
An Ancient Tale from India
by Jessica Souhami
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2450-9
$14.95* Grades K-3
Sammy's Story
by David Kooharian
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2466-5
$15.95- Grades 1-3
Haunted Castle
by Leo Hartas
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2464-9
$14.95" Grades 1-4
Hob and the Peddler
by William Mayne
illusted by Norman Messenger
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2462-2
$15.95 
Grades 3-6
Chills in the Night
by Jackie Vivelo
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2463-0
$14.95 Grades 4 and up
The Metropolitan
Museum of Art
Masks
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2454-1
$19.95 -All Ages
October
You Smell...and Taste
and Feel and See and Hear
by Mary Murphy
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2471-1
$9.95 -Grades PreK-K
Echoes of the Elders:
The Stories and Paintings
of Chief Lelooska
by ChiefLelooska
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2455-X
$24.95, hardcover with audio
CD
Grades 2-6
/V'_
Neal Porte
Publisher
Getting Used to the Dark:
26 Night Poems
by Susan Marie Swanson
illustrated by Peter Catalanotto
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2468-1
$14.95 Grades 3-6
Lightning Time
by Douglas Rees
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2458-4
$15.95 
Grades 4-8
Radiance Descending
by Paula Fox
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2467-3
$14.95 Grades 5-8
Dancing Through the
Shadows
by Theresa Tomlinson
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2459-2
$14.95 Grades 4 and up
Daughter of the Sea
by Berlie Doherty
LC: Pending
ISBN: 0-7894-2469-X
$14.95 Grades 4 and up
an imprint of DK Publishing, Inc.
95 Madison Avenue New York, NY 10016
Available from your regular supplier,
S or call 1-888-DIAL-DKP
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA
RETURN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
0008-9036(199711)51:3*;1 -K
It 
e 
4
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edulpubofflbccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
SBulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of titles
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1996
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more... updated monthly!
IAIl11
- ·:
