T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
June 2014
Vol. 67   No. 10
P E N N  S T A T E | O N L I N E
P E N N  S T A T E | O N L I N E
 
  Master of Education in Curriculum and Instruction – 
Children’s Literature
 
  Graduate Certificate in Children’s Literature 
Penn State’s College of Education is regularly ranked among the  
nation’s best graduate schools, according to U.S. News & World Report,  
and the online master’s program is taught by the same nationally  
recognized faculty. 
Develop new skills or help advance your career goals, anywhere,  
anytime — online!
Inspire your students while you  
earn a graduate degree online from  
Penn State World Campus
U.Ed.OUT 14-0595/14-WC-1005bjh/smb
worldcampus.psu.edu/cla
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
June 2014
Vol. 67 No. 10
493  the BIg PICture
 
 This One Summer  by Mariko Tamaki; illus. by Jillian Tamaki
494  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
501 •  Great  by Sara Benincasa
523 •  All Different Now: Juneteenth, the First Day of Freedom  by Angela Johnson; 
illus. by E. B. Lewis
525 • Going Over  by Beth Kephart
536 •  Jim Curious: A Voyage to the Heart of the Sea  illus. by Matthias Picard
544 •  Dreams of Gods & Monsters  by Laini Taylor
551  2014 steLLAr serIes
553  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Kim Naples, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $100.00 or electronic $110.00; combined print & electronic $140.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from This One Summer copyright ©2014 by Jillian Tamaki and used by permission of 
First Second/Roaring Brook. 
June 2014 • 493
the BIg PICture
This One Summer
by Mariko Tamaki; illustrated by Jillian Tamaki 
There is a developmental moment that young people don’t always spot when they are 
going through it, but they will often recognize it in retrospect—a specific incident 
or time period that marks the shift from childhood to adolescence. Of course, this 
is a blurred line, and a favorite younger friend might send you back to whooping 
across the beach, or you might have a specific moment of insight that hints at an 
adult level of maturity. This stellar graphic novel explores this crossing-over period 
in depth, examining the ways in which yearning forward and back can shape a 
person, even if she doesn’t perceive it at the time. 
In This One Summer, Rose returns to the family cabin at Awago Beach 
for the summer, and it’s clear things are changing. Rose doesn’t know exactly what 
is wrong, other than that her mother’s desire for a child seems to be causing her 
parents to fight constantly, and that the annual family trip isn’t going nearly as well 
as in years past. Her own move out of childhood is made clear especially by two 
things. First, she’s newly interested in the older teens who live year-round at Awago 
Beach, crushing on an older guy and obsessing over his relationship drama with his 
girlfriend. Second, she’s growing impatient with her younger best friend, Windy, 
with whom she has spent every previous summer blissfully doing kid things; this 
summer, Rose shifts mercurially between enjoying their old shared silliness and 
resenting its appearance just when she wants intensity. Rose is initially pretty short 
on empathy (for her grieving mother, for the teenage local girls who trade sex for 
attention, for her younger friend whose feelings are easily hurt), but she does grow 
significantly over the course of the summer, and indeed, empathy is one of the 
milestones that helps Rose find a way to channel her loneliness into independence 
and self-fulfillment. The story treats all its characters with tenderness and sympathy, 
adroitly paralleling Rose’s mother’s miscarriage (eventually revealed as the source of 
her sadness) with the accidental pregnancy of one of the teenaged girls, bringing 
the two together in a beautiful and redemptive moment.
The illustrations effectively capture the piney smells, screen-door-
slamming sounds, and quotidian details of a summer lake colony, yet they have a 
haunting quality. The art is executed entirely in shades of blue, and the monochro-
matic tones recall the cinematic trope of rendering flashbacks in black and white, 
suggesting something passing or already gone. The design and craftsmanship create 
a remarkable fluency, demonstrating graphic narrative at its best: the silences that 
pervade Rose’s life this summer are present in both the wordless spreads and between 
sharp verbal exchanges. Rose’s turning of her attention away from Windy shoves 
the latter’s speech balloon partly out of the frame, vividly depicting its sidelining; 
494 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
one summer day that is both fleeting and interminable is highlighted in nearly ten 
pages of mostly wordless snapshot illustrations, an evocation through visual pacing 
that text alone could never achieve. 
The book is poignant and melancholy, and it will be swiftly recognizable 
to those who only recently hovered at the cusp of adolescence, unsure sure whether 
they wanted to cross over even while knowing there was really no choice. Fans of 
the first graphic novel by this cousin duo, the similarly quiet, contemplative Skim 
(BCCB 5/08), will find this one to be equally compelling. As in most of life, not a 
lot actually happens, but a significant transformation takes place, one that’s conveyed 
with nuance, sympathy, and beauty. (Publication information appears on p. 544.)
April Spisak, Reviewer
AcAmporA, pAul I Kill the Mockingbird. Roaring Brook, 2014 [176p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-742-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
In an effort to get people to read To Kill a Mockingbird, their late teacher’s favorite 
book, rising high school freshman Lucy and her friends Elena and Michael come 
up with a brilliant plan. They’ll travel to every bookstore and library in a fifty-mile 
radius of their small Connecticut town and pull copies of the book, hiding them 
elsewhere in the store and thereby increasing demand of the book by limiting its 
supply—without technically committing any crimes. Naming their conspiracy 
“I Kill The Mockingbird,” the trio sets up a website and social media campaign, 
and soon the plan goes viral with nerd-king Wil Wheaton tweeting about it and 
pranksters across the nation joining in. The plot is breezily amiable, and it provides 
a lighthearted focal point for an otherwise emotionally challenging summer for 
young Lucy. Besides having the normal anxieties about entering high school, she 
is also confused by her new romantic feelings for her childhood friend Michael, 
and she’s still reeling from her mother’s successful bout with a near-fatal cancer. 
The banter among the three whip-smart friends would make John Green proud, 
and they manage to come off as intelligent but not precocious, witty without being 
unrealistic. Lucy is very much a young fourteen in some ways (a chaste kiss with 
Michael seems awfully daring in her eyes), but her sharp observations regarding 
her Catholic faith, her mother’s mortality, and the shifting dynamics of adolescent 
friendships reveal an age-appropriate wisdom. You won’t have to hide any copies 
of this to create demand—just read the passage in which the kids dub themselves 
literary terrorists and you’ll have a hit.  KQG 
June 2014 • 495
Adderson, cAroline Norman, Speak!; illus. by Qin Leng. Groundwood, 
2014 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-322-3 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-323-0 $14.95  
R* 5-8 yrs
The boy narrator of this cheerful pet tale is thrilled when his family finally goes 
to the shelter and acquires a friendly dog, Norman (“His wag was a hula dance of 
happiness”). Norman’s young master tries some basic dog commands with Norman 
to no avail, until an outing to the dog park reveals the fact that Norman is actually 
very conversant with commands—in Chinese. The family then enthusiastically 
signs up for Chinese class, and while they struggle a little at first, eventually they 
learn enough of the language to communicate with their beloved pet. This is a 
fresh and original take on the new-pet story that provides a gentle little paradigm 
shift along with its slight absurdity; the family’s genial embrace of their new dog’s 
language is both humorous (Adderson has a nice line in family banter) and offhand-
edly heartwarming. There’s a retro feel to the wholesome, easygoing ink and digital 
color illustrations, resembling the work of Marc Rosenthal (I Must Have Bobo!, 
BCCB 2/11) in the trim, humorous drafting; soft tones and generous white space 
keep the book airy and joyful. This would make a solid entry to a multilingual 
sampling, or just a tactful way to make kids consider their pets as something other 
than reflections of their humans.  DS 
Albee, sArAh Bugged!: How Insects Changed History; illus. by Robert Leigh-
ton. Walker, 2014 [167p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3423-5 $22.89
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3422-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-8
Albee takes a humorous but informed look at the “collision of the insect world with 
the human world,” demonstrating that any number of pivotal episodes in world 
history were directly or indirectly influenced by insects acting as serious annoyances 
or disease vectors. She begins with a brush-up on the difference between insects, 
true bugs, and arachnid, and then it’s full speed ahead into the lice-infested history 
of human hygiene and lack thereof, a few positive contributions made by the insect 
community (particularly as protein-rich food), and how fleas and flies and ants 
and beetles and lice have been responsible for such diverse mayhem as the Black 
Plague and the 2007 interruption of a Yankees/Indians baseball game. Albee is a 
gleeful punster, playing with inset boxes labeled “Insect Aside,” and goofy section 
titles such as “The Reign of Spain is Plainly on the Wane,” and “Let Us Spray.” 
Photographs (like the text, in rich purple tones accented with teal) are chosen for 
jokeyness as often as information, and they mingle cheerfully with cartoons and spot 
art. A glossary, endotes, an index, and further reading suggestions are included.  EB
AltebrAndo, tArA The Battle of Darcy Lane. Running Press, 2014 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-4948-4 $14.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-5199-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 4-6
Summer brings a change to the neighborhood for twelve-year-old Julia—arrogant 
Alyssa moves in, and her mean-girl charisma intrigues Julia’s best friend, Taylor. 
496 • The BulleTin
Julia’s not giving Taylor up without a fight, though, and she battles Alyssa’s ascen-
sion with every sulky, competitive weapon she can muster, finally insisting she can 
beat Alyssa at Russia, the complicated game Alyssa introduces to the girls. Julia’s 
old friend Peter, unimpressed with the newcomer, helps coach Julia, but will that 
be enough for Julia to best Alyssa, and will winning a game win Taylor back? Alte-
brando has a keen sense for the way preteen girls struggle for primacy—the graceless 
putdowns, the the desperate disdain, the illogical claims—and Julia is a plausible 
mix of sinned against (Taylor’s repeated desertion of her old friend is resonantly 
hurtful) and sinning (Julia’s braggy aggressiveness is believably unpleasant). There’s 
an underlying message that friends who drift that easily might not be worth fighting 
for (in fact, it turns out that it’s Taylor who’s been harassing Julia’s house with silent 
phone calls), and Julia’s growing friendship with Peter and new day-camp alliance 
with Laney makes it clear that Julia’s not entirely bereft but just reconfiguring her 
friendships. A solid middle-grades friendship story, this will suit readers not quite 
ready for Dowell’s The Secret Language of Girls (BCCB 7/04).  DS
AmAto, mAry 
Missing Monkey!; illus. by Ward Jenkins. 
Egmont, 
2014 121p (Good Crooks)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-396-3 $14.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-509-7 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-403-8 $4.99  
R Gr. 2-4
The progeny of two enthusiastic criminals, narrator Billy Crook and his twin sister, 
Jillian, find themselves with an unfamiliar (and un-familial) desire to do (gasp!) good 
deeds. When their parents turn the twins’ covert volunteer effort at the zoo into a 
monkey-stealing operation (they plan to teach the little guy how to pickpocket), 
Billy and Jillian vow to secretly return “Razzle” to his home. The plan hits a snag 
when Razzle nicks Jillian’s automatic lock-picker invention and frees several of the 
zoo’s residents, after which giraffe-wrangling, elephant poop-scooping, and other 
hijinks ensue. Fortunately, the duo manages to get everybody back in their cages, 
and their activities also help to fertilize the zoo’s flower beds (where Billy stashed the 
droppings of the freed elephants) and trim the greenery (thanks to the loose gazelles 
and giraffes). Zany, lightweight middle-grade series, in which character develop-
ment and believable plotting take a back seat to milk-snorting entertainment, are 
a dime a dozen. However, Amato’s playful, genuinely funny writing (“‘Droppings’ 
is a polite way to describe the doo-doo that elephants will do-do on the sidewalk 
if you let them”) and her keen understanding of the middle-grade audience make 
this a solid winner. Quick pacing, plentiful humor, a large font, and the numer-
ous illustrations will reassure reluctant readers. Jenkins’ lively, monochromatic art 
has a cartoonish flavor that successfully partners with the wackiness of the book’s 
events. Fans of Captain Underpants or Amato’s Riot Brothers series may find the 
Crooks equally satisfying.  JH
Arcos, cArrie There Will Come a Time. Simon, 2014 315p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9585-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9587-6 $10.99  
R Gr. 8-12
Everything changed for seventeen-year-old Mark in May, when he and his twin 
sister, Grace, were hit by a car and she died instantly. Now he’s basically sleep-
walking through senior year, avoiding mention of Grace except with Grace’s best 
June 2014 • 497
friend, Hanna, and resisting his friends’ efforts to involve him more in school and 
life. When he and Hanna look through Grace’s journals, they find that list-loving 
Grace had a five-item bucket list, and they decide to honor her by completing the 
tasks. We’ve seen the bucket-list trope before, but Arcos makes the process realis-
tic (it’s mostly things Grace was afraid of doing, and executing them isn’t in itself 
particularly epiphanic), and it’s really just a small thread in the larger tapestry of 
Mark’s punishing sense of grief and loss. Mark is sensitively characterized through 
his narration as well as description—young Filipino guy with ear plugs and beanie, 
talented bassist with musical ambitions, lover of LA, and “twinless twin” who can’t 
come to grips with his new reality. The book effectively captures him as a person 
who shuts down and gets angry in the face of pain, and a backstory about his 
mother’s departure from the family plausibly amps up Mark’s sense of abandon-
ment. Ultimately, this is a book about surviving a primal level of heartbreak, and as 
such it’s a nuanced but thoroughly effective tearjerker in its exploration of Mark’s 
learning to move forward alone.  DS
Armentrout, Jennifer l. Don’t Look Back. Hyperion, 2014 369p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-7512-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8773-8 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Until Cassie moved to town, Sam was happy to be the privileged but nice tagalong 
to her twin brother, Scott, and his best friend, Carson, whose father worked for 
their family. Under Cassie’s influence, though, Sam became the quintessential 
mean girl, lording her money and social position over everyone in her high school, 
fighting with her mother, disdaining Carson, and dating Del, a boy whose status 
matched her own. Now Sam has resurfaced alone after she and Cassie have been 
missing for four days, and she remembers nothing of her old self and her old life; 
she quickly realizes this memory loss is a blessing, given how despised she was. She 
is also distressed by a series of notes that keep appearing in odd places warning her 
not to remember the details of the night when both girls disappeared and only one 
returned. Meanwhile, she finds herself drawn to Carson, and snatches of memory 
return to remind her that she was beginning to have real feelings for him before 
Cassie worked her transformative magic on Sam’s personality and priorities. While 
Sam sifts through clues and half-formed memories to solve the mystery of her own 
personality conversion as well as Cassie’s disappearance, the posh school setting with 
a serious mean-girl problem provides an entertaining if familiar context. Cassie’s 
brother and his girlfriend stabilize the ground under Sam’s newly insecure social 
feet, narratively speaking, and her growing romance with Carson rounds out the 
genre blend as murder mystery merges with prom fisticuffs, and family tragedy with 
mean-girl melodrama. Recommend this to readers who prefer their soap operas 
set in high school.  KC
Aronson, mArc The Griffin and the Dinosaur: How Adrienne Mayor Discovered a 
Fascinating Link Between Myth and Science; by Marc Aronson with Adrienne Mayor; 
illus. by Chris Muller and with photographs. National Geographic, 2014 48p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-1109-3 $27.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-1108-6 $18.99  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Accompanying her fiancé Josh on his studies in Athens in the 1972, Adrienne Mayor 
took the opportunity to research ancient myths she had always found fascinating, 
498 • The BulleTin
and she noticed that early descriptions of monstrous beasts sounded more lifelike 
than later ones. Particularly intrigued by the depiction of griffins, Mayor pursued 
a personal theory that the classical image may have been based on imaginative 
mental reconstructions of fossilized bones of extinct animals, which would have 
been accessible to ancient storytellers. Largely self-taught in classical languages and 
paleontology, Mayor ultimately connected the griffin with the skeleton of protoc-
eratops, earning scholarly respect and launching her own career as a researcher at 
Stanford University. The theme of tracking the factual underpinnings of folklore 
has much in common with Aronson’s earlier collaboration with Scott Reynolds 
Nelson on Ain’t Nothing but a Man: My Quest to Find the Real John Henry (BCCB 
2/08). This title, however, is somewhat padded, with reminders of Mayor’s shyness, 
prairie roots, and academic outsider status frequently interrupting the flow of her 
research process and discovery. The blend of fantasy-style paintings, color photos 
of artifacts and fossilized remains, and diagrams that re-imagine the beasts from 
reality into mythology give the book crossover appeal to dino and fantasy fans alike. 
An annotated map, combined glossary and index, and suggestions for further print 
an online reading are included.  EB
AthAns, sAndrA K. Secrets of the Sky Caves: Danger and Discovery on Nepal’s 
Mustang Cliffs. Millbrook, 2014 64p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-0016-0 $33.27
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2540-8 $24.95  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Athans, who chronicled the adventures of her mountaineering brother Pete Athans 
in Tales from the Top of the World, returns with the story of his collaboration with 
archaeologists to explore once-inhabited caves in the former kingdom of Mustang, 
on Nepal’s border with Tibet. Following brief chapters on the geography of the 
remote region, the story of the contemporary cave expeditions begins when the 
team arrives with a limited thirty-day permit to explore the caves, though they are 
not allowed to disturb or remove anything found therein. Hoping to find Buddhist 
monuments called kabums, they in fact discover elaborate cave paintings and a 
cache of illuminated paper documents, which obviously call for deeper investiga-
tion. Further expeditions are authorized, each involving more scholarly personnel 
and an expanded brief for removing artifacts and human remains to a more secure 
location for further study. Discussion of caving techniques and the team’s relation-
ship with Nepalese government and religious leaders opens a window to the more 
knotty technical and bureaucratic aspects of archeology. Meanwhile, the informal 
color photographs are particularly effective in conveying the scale of the terrain 
and blend of tradition and modernity throughout the region. Often, though, the 
text is marred by missed opportunities (description of grave gods is unspecific) and 
unexplained incongruities (e.g., few plants are present, but farmers raise wheat and 
barley). Nonetheless, rich end matter comprising glossary, index, timeline, source 
notes, and bibliography, will be a boon to report writers, and the melding of rock 
climbing and archaeology may entice a range of armchair adventurers.  EB
bAldAcchino, christine Morris Micklewhite and the Tangerine Dress; illus. by 
Isabelle Malenfant. Groundwood, 2014 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-347-6 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-350-6 $14.95  
R 6-9 yrs
Morris loves his classroom’s dress-up center, where he can wear the tangerine dress, 
June 2014 • 499
the one that reminds him of his mom’s red hair and that goes “swish, swish, swish 
when he walks and crinkle, crinkle, crinkle when he sits down.” The girls in his 
class, though, say that boys don’t wear dresses, and the other boys agree, barring 
Morris from their pretend spaceship. Morris stays home from school one day to 
recover, where his dreams and subsequent paintings of space-faring elephants give 
him the confidence to return to school with his own spaceship plans. Although the 
text is lengthy, it is poetically whimsical (“Morris Micklewhite had a mom named 
Moira and a cat named Moo”), and it conveys Morris’s emotional vulnerability 
with only the slightest edge of sentimentality. Unlike some more messagey titles 
on the subject, this one provides Morris with a personality beyond his dress-loving 
nature, making him enjoyable literary company. His imagination is captured by 
the Photoshop-assembled illustrations in charcoal, pastel, and watercolor, softly 
outlined images in dreamy colors of round-faced characters and bold cats and tigers. 
The dress itself has an ethereal quality: without outlines, its crayonish bleeding 
into the rest of the pictures gives it—and Morris—a larger-than-life presence.  TA
bArAKivA, michAel One Man Guy. Farrar, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-374-35645-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Alek has spent freshman year struggling to keep his grades up to his Armenian 
parents’ strict standards, and now they have enrolled him in summer school to 
make sure he stays on the Honors track. Summer school leads to adventure, though, 
when Ethan, the out-and-proud skater dude who sits next to him in Algebra, 
whisks him away on a train from their suburb into New York City for a Rufus 
Wainwright concert. Their newfound romance reaches a crescendo when Alek’s 
parents and older brother leave on a family vacation, giving Alek and Ethan free 
rein to play hooky and trash the house, until Alek’s parents walk in on the couple 
in a, erm, disheveled state. The tension between the responsibilities of heritage for 
a second-generation kid and a budding sense of teenage rebellion is expertly mani-
fested in Alek’s wanting to do the right thing. His bewilderment at falling for a guy 
presents a realistic picture of developing sexuality, and the non-event of his coming 
out is eclipsed by a family drama involving the bad blood between Turks (Alek’s 
brother’s girlfriend is half-Turkish) and Armenians. Ethan is perfectly dashing and 
experienced as the quintessential older guy, despite having insecurities of his own, 
and some comic relief comes in the form of Alek’s wisecracking best friend Becky 
(who predictably has an early crush on him). The ending does rely on contrivances 
that are little too perfect, but what feel-good, bubblegum romance doesn’t? Hand 
this one to those who’ve already gone through Levithan’s Boy Meets Boy (BCCB 
9/03) and Kluger’s My Most Excellent Year (BCCB 3/08) and are looking for some 
slightly more mature froth.  TA
bArton, byron My Bus; written and illus. by Byron Barton. Greenwillow, 
2014 34p
ISBN 978-0-06-228736-6 $16.99  
R 2-4 yrs
Like its 2001 counterpart My Car, Barton’s latest opens with a driver introducing 
himself and his vehicle, in this case an orange bus. Joe the bus driver goes around 
town picking up and dropping off cats and dogs, who disembark, in various con-
figurations, to board other forms of transportation: one dog and two cats get on a 
500 • The BulleTin
boat, two dogs and one cat take a train, and one dog and two cats board a plane. 
There’s one dog remaining on the bus, however—it’s Joe’s dog, who accompanies 
Joe back to the bus depot and home at the end of day. Part counting book, part 
number concepts, part transportation book, this simple story offers several potential 
uses, and there is plenty of popular appeal to draw in the toddler/preschool set. The 
digitally illustrations are streamlined and happy, bold planes of gleaming unlined 
color that echo collage, and the radiant contrasting hues will immediately catch 
youngsters’ attention. This would adapt very well to a flannel-board telling, but it 
will get plenty of action shared cover to cover as well.  HM 
bAsKin, norA rAleigh Subway Love. Candlewick, 2014 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6845-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 8-12
A few years ago, Laura’s mom went from being a Jackie Kennedy–like conservative 
to a free-loving flower child, divorcing Laura’s dad and moving the family from 
Brooklyn to Woodstock. The whole peace and love movement seems to have been 
lost on Laura’s mom’s latest boyfriend, though, who beats Laura with an alarming 
regularity. Meanwhile, sixteen-year-old Jonas is dealing with his own family issues, 
having been the one to discover his father’s affair through some scandalous emails. 
The two teenagers are drawn to each other on a New York City subway car, but it’s 
Jonas who realizes their connection transcends time, with Laura existing in 1973 
and Jonas living in modern day NYC. Their romance blooms but it can’t last, and 
Laura ultimately makes the painful decision to end it. This is a quiet, heartfelt love 
story that is not only about two kids falling for each other but also about their heal-
ing from painful events and learning to take charge of their own fate, despite the 
failures of the adults in their lives. Although she’s shadowed by her abuse, Laura’s not 
defined by it, and Baskin paints her as an active and eager partner in her emotional 
and physical relationship with Jonas, not just a girl needing to be saved. A subplot 
involving a subway graffiti artist further contextualizes their romance and leaves 
readers with the message that this love story, like any love story, is both singularly 
important and also just one of many human narratives.  KQG 
bedford, dAvid Two Tough Crocs; illus. by Tom Jellett. Holiday House, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-3048-2 $16.95  
R 5-8 yrs
Crocodiles Sylvester and Arnold each feel like they run the swamp, gnashing 
their teeth and intimidating the smaller animals. When they finally meet, they 
try to scare each other—until an even more enormous crocodile, Betty the Bad, 
boots them right into a muddy pit. The frightened pair decide to sneak off to a 
safer swamp together under the guise of night, and when Betty spots them and 
mistakes them for a two-headed, two-tailed, many-toothed monster, she panics 
and winds up in the swampy hole herself. A reformed Sylvester generously offers 
a helping hand, and the three have learned their lesson about being mean. Grainy 
and mottled panels of swampy colors fill roughly textured but detailed outlines in 
this Australian import, and there’s a pleasing rhythm in the layout, which varies 
between spreads and spot art. The crocodiles similarly blend silly and scary with 
their seriously sharp claws but bug-eyed expressions and approachable outfits, and 
the terrorized marsupials are adorable with boxy builds and simple expressions. 
June 2014 • 501
There’s a gleeful compactness in the setup (“Sylvester was a big, tough croc. So 
was Arnold”) and the story is pleasingly humorous. Although the foes-to-friends 
transformation is a bit abrupt, young audiences might find Betty’s comeuppance 
and subsequent forgiveness appealing; this could be an empathetic pairing with 
Pizzoli’s The Watermelon Seed (BCCB 6/13) or another croc-focused picture book 
for a wonderfully reptilian storytime.  TA
benincAsA, sArA Great. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 263p
ISBN 978-0-06-222269-5 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Ever since Naomi’s mother became a multimedia sensation in the food world, 
Naomi has reluctantly left her middle-class Midwestern roots every summer to 
stay in the Hamptons among the rich, famous, and fake people her mother wishes 
she would cultivate as friends. This summer is different, though. There’s a guy, for 
one thing, but more interestingly, a fascinating girl named Jacinta has rented the 
house next door. Jacinta’s fashion blog and lavish parties have made her approval 
a coveted commodity, but what she really wants is for Naomi to introduce her to 
Delilah Fairweather, girlfriend to a former child actor turned boorish jerk, who is 
friends with Naomi through her mother. As Delilah and Jacinta become more and 
more intimate, Naomi watches with trepidation, sensing Jacinta’s vulnerability as 
she learns disturbing truths about the profound selfishness and detachment of these 
people who only play at relationships with those outside their circle. For readers 
familiar with The Great Gatsby, there are no surprises as to how this ends, but Ben-
incasa’s overlay of contemporary media and social structures onto that source text 
is ingenious, making this a savvy and believable remake alongside Korman’s Jake, 
Reinvented (BCCB 11/03). Even readers who don’t recognize the parallels will be 
drawn into the tragedy of a young woman willing to risk everything to reclaim a 
lost love (like Jay and Daisy, Jacinta and Delilah were childhood friends). Delilah’s 
unworthiness and Jacinta’s need are explored critically but without overly harsh 
judgment, as Naomi’s evolving understanding of her mother expands her capac-
ity for compassion. The guys, though, remain despicably serene in their lack of 
accountability for any wrongdoing, reminding us that the lessons of Gatsby are, 
unfortunately, still current.  KC 
benoit, chArles Cold Calls. Clarion, 2014 278p
ISBN 978-0-544-23950-0 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Eric took a picture he shouldn’t have and failed to delete it from his phone. Fatima 
confessed her doubts about her Muslim faith in the margins of a book that was stolen 
from her locker. Shelly is running from her past, believing herself guilty and forever 
outcast because of a horrible incident for which she can’t forgive herself. They each 
receive anonymous calls, giving them instructions to inflict painful humiliation on 
complete strangers or risk having their secrets exposed; their attempts to carry out 
their assignments get them sentenced to a sensitivity training for bullies program, 
where they realize that they are being harassed by the same caller. Pooling their 
resources, they locate the culprit, but Eric can’t resist going a step too far. While the 
message here is timely and the mystery compulsively readable, the plot details rely 
entirely too much on coincidence, convenience, and the withholding of informa-
tion to be fully satisfying. It’s not clear, for instance, why Fatima is even involved 
in the training, since she didn’t manage to bully anyone, and the blackmailer’s 
502 • The BulleTin
sense of vengeance seems extreme given the slight she suffered. What is interesting, 
however, is the portrait of the three protagonists’ vulnerability to blackmail: Eric’s 
secret is truly despicable by any standards, Fatima’s is only problematic because her 
cultural heritage does not allow her inquiry, and Shelly’s is entirely a work of her 
own imagination; all three situations are believable and would lend themselves to 
productive discussion. Bullying is undeniably a hot topic, and readers interested 
in possible motivations that lead people to act in ways they ordinarily wouldn’t 
might find this instructive.  KC
berK, Josh Say It Ain’t So. Knopf, 2014 279p (Lenny & the Mikes)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97009-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87009-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98737-3 $10.99  
R Gr. 4-7
Lenny, Mike, and Other Mike, fresh from solving an MLB murder mystery (Strike 
Three You’re Dead, BCCB 4/13), are settling into seventh grade, with Mike trying 
out for catcher on the school team, Other Mike obsessing over computer games, 
and Lenny snagging an announcer gig in the newly built booth on the ballfield. 
Lenny’s position allows him to witness the latest team drama, as the thuggish current 
catcher, Davis, is tossed off the team for stealing a cell phone, and Mike slides into 
his vacated position. Other Mike, whose social filters aren’t very reliable, actually 
befriends the disgraced Davis, who swears he’s been framed—and it’s possible he 
has and that Mike is the culprit. There’s even more foul play as it becomes clear that 
somebody has been stealing Mike’s signals, causing his cocky but talented pitcher 
to plummet from superstar to goat. Once again, Lenny’s on the case, and with 
a bit of assistance from the local librarian (who, as in the debut title, gets major 
props for excellent patron service), tracks down the thieves and saves the season. 
The trio is just as endearing this time around, bantering, arguing, forgiving and 
readily forgetting their way through new configurations of seventh-grade life that 
put pressure on their friendship. Lenny’s narrative flights play out as well-crafted 
stand-up comedy routines, making this series as attractive to humor fans as to 
baseball and mystery lovers.  EB
brAdley, John ed Call Me by My Name. Atheneum, 2014 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-9793-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-12
Narrator Rodney looks back upon how racial integration tardily made its way into 
his hidebound Louisiana town from the late 1960s and into the early 1970s, and 
particularly how “Tater,” a gifted black athlete and all ’round great guy, forced 
Rodney and his white family to collectively confront their attitudes toward the new 
social order. Rodney is first across the line, quietly defying naysayers to nurture a 
dedicated friendship with Tater; Mom isn’t far behind, welcoming Tater into the 
family fold and treating him like all the rest of Rodney’s buddies. Dad’s having none 
of it; he takes barbed jabs at the boys’ friendship in the privacy of his own home but 
manages to keep a civil tongue around Tater, absenting himself from his presence 
whenever possible. Rodney’s twin sister, Angie, falls hard for Tater, and although 
at first the couple keeps their romance hidden—a stunning white cheerleader and 
a game-changing black quarterback are just a bit too much for the community to 
accept—they finally come into the open just before tragedy strikes. Yes, tragedy 
June 2014 • 503
does strike, as seems inevitable from the tone of adult Rodney’s pain-laced memory, 
but it’s not the tragedy readers will expect, rendering the bittersweet what-ifs all the 
more complicated and poignant. With its tense but subtle plot trajectory structured 
by Rodney’s progress through high school, the novel adds nuance to the difficult 
American conversation on race with its honest examination of how a white youth, 
who sees himself on the vanguard of racial tolerance, is hit with his own limits when 
it comes to his beloved sister’s interracial romance. This compelling tale will foster 
both engaged group discussion and serious personal reflection.  EB 
brAgg, georgiA How They Choked: Failures, Flops, and Flaws of the Awfully 
Famous; illus. by Kevin O’Malley. Walker, 2014 [192p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3489-1 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3488-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
A scan though the table of contents in this followup to Bragg’s How They Croaked 
(BCCB 3/11) yields names that don’t initially seem to fit together—Montezuma II 
and Thomas Edison, Susan B. Anthony and J. Bruce Ismay—but here the author 
brings some clever outside-the-box thinking to bear on the many ways in which 
high profile careers go up in smoke, or the occasions where big names never saw 
the fruits of their work. Bragg mainly looks for character flaws of Shakespearean 
proportion to explain individual failures: Montezuma couldn’t get past blood-soaked 
ritual to understand the true threat of European invaders; Thomas Edison’s ego put 
him on the losing side of the AC/DC current wars; Isabella of Castile ignored the 
humane tenets of her religion in favor of bigoted zealotry; Vincent Van Gogh was 
just plain loony. This breezy exercise in armchair psychology may actually unearth 
some nuggets of insight, but often Bragg shortchanges historical context for glib 
riposte and judges the behaviors of other centuries and cultures by our contem-
porary standards. There’s no question, though, that she gets off some good lines 
and dredges up some relevant material that more hagiographic treatments often 
miss (e.g., Edison’s experiments with death by electrocution, aimed at smearing 
the reputation of his rival). Combined with O’Malley’s over-the-top caricatures 
and humorous spot art, this joins its predecessor Croaked as an inviting tour of 
history’s wild side. A bibliography, index, and suggestions for further reading are 
included.  EB
broom, Jenny, ad. The Lion and the Mouse; illus. by Nahta Nój. Templar/
Candlewick, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6619-4 $14.99 
 R 3-7 yrs
This adaptation of Aesop’s tale gets new life from a slight change in the original 
storyline and clever paper engineering. Here, when a little mouse attempts to 
scamper up the sleeping lion’s back to reach some tasty berries, the awakened lion 
assists the mouse in obtaining the fruit; the mouse promises a favor in return and 
scampers off. That night, hunters come to the forest and lay a trap for the mighty 
lion; fortunately, the mouse is true to her word and chews through the net, releasing 
her new friend. The altered story makes for a far more compassionate lion, who 
never threatens to eat the mouse and in fact empathizes with her (“I know what it 
feels like to be hungry”). The real draw, though, is the art, wherein die-cut holes 
redeploy illustrative elements (the spot on a butterfly’s wing is later revealed to be the 
504 • The BulleTin
lion’s eye) and a pierced partial-page flap constitutes the net and allows little hands 
to play the role of liberator by lifting the page. The digitally rendered images have 
a collage-like joy in texture and planes of color to enliven their graphic simplicity, 
and the geometric stylings of the images themselves (the mouse’s perfectly triangular 
face, the lion’s boxy jaw) are well designed. The brilliant shades of turquoise, teal, 
magenta, and tangerine, as well as the book’s large, square trim size, will carry well 
in a storytime format. This is a strong addition to the fables shelf that will provide 
plenty of visual and tactile stimulation for young viewers.  HM
bunting, eve Washday; illus. by Brad Sneed. Holiday House, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2868-7 $16.95  
Ad 5-7 yrs
Lizzie’s mother is having a baby, which means Lizzie must forego a tea party with 
her friend to help her grandmother wash clothes. Their frontier life means this is a 
hard day’s work: there is water to haul and to boil, homemade soap to shave, and 
stained clothes to run up and down the washboard before putting them through 
the wringer and hanging them to dry. Fortunately, her grandmother’s affection 
makes the task less tiresome, and there is a cold glass of buttermilk awaiting Lizzie 
at the end, as well as a surprise tea party. Bunting and Sneed temper the tedious 
details of the washday process with quiet prose and gentle pencil and watercolor 
drawings, and the soft lines of the illustrations, hued in blues and greens, make the 
arduousness of the task more palatable. Lizzie’s Blythe-doll eyes, however, render 
her woebegone and even unnerving, and the faces are occasionally strained; the 
story’s pacing verges on the languorous, resulting in a rather unmemorable, though 
not unpleasant, audience experience. Still, the portrayal of frontier life and sweet 
details may fare well among those young audiences on the threshold of Little House 
in the Big Woods and other pioneering tales. AA
butcher, Kristin Cabin Girl. Orca, 2014 [128p] (Orca Currents)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0650-4 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0649-8 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-8
For sixteen-year old Bailey, her summer cleaning cabins at Witch Lake Lodge should 
be about earning spending money for the coming year while getting a needed break 
from her parents. However, after the resort head—and family friend—promotes 
her to dining room waitress, she instead finds herself trying to understand her 
cabinmate’s sudden cold shoulder and malicious pranks, all while puzzling over the 
unnerving arrival of a private investigator. Though standing up to her roommate 
and navigating workplace politics is no campfire sing-along, she’s determined to 
make the best of it—and perhaps even solve a mystery in the process. Appealing 
and approachable, this latest addition to the Canadian hi-lo Orca Currents series 
offers readers a summer story succinctly told, complete with adolescent girl dynam-
ics, first-job jitters, and even a resident ghost. This story of a balanced, relatable 
heroine respects its readers, giving them a novel serious in tone, smartly paced, 
and skillfully executed. Put this in the hands of a girl who could use an exciting 
but manageable journey into both the Canadian wilderness and the thrills of a first 
summer away from home.  AA
June 2014 • 505
cAntor, JilliAn Searching for Sky. Bloomsbury, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-351-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-352-0 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 8-10
The only place Sky has only ever known is Island, the harsh but beautiful island 
where she lived with her mother, their spiritual leader Helmut, and River, Helmut’s 
son. Her mother and Helmut have died, but Sky and River are teens now and able 
to care for themselves, still following the routines, believing that what is around 
them is all that there is. When a boat comes to “rescue” them, Sky resists mightily, 
entirely unaware that there is a whole world beyond Island, a culture that knows 
about Helmut’s former cult and the fact that he used his son, River, to help kill 
them the other cult memebers before going into hiding. Suddenly, Sky is asked 
to go by her infant name, Megan, and to adjust to contemporary Californian so-
ciety. There is, of course, no going back to a time when you didn’t know that the 
man who raised you was the person who killed your father (among others), and 
that life is infinitely bigger than one stretch of a tiny Pacific island. Sky’s absolute 
bewilderment and the concurrent misery are palpable at times, and it makes the 
small victories she achieves all the more relieving. The glimpses of how horrifying 
the world would appear to someone who doesn’t know about school shootings or 
cults are mostly well employed to further sympathy for Sky, and readers will likely 
be firmly on her side from the first moment of terror when she spots the incoming 
boat. Survival fans may wish initially that Sky had stayed on the wild island, but 
they will likely readily admit that this twist on the usual survival scenario demands 
just as much grit, savvy, and determination from her.  AS
cAssidy, sArA Skylark. Orca, 2014 [130p] (Orca Soundings)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0590-3 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0593-4 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
First, Angie’s mom hurt her back and couldn’t work; then Angie’s dad left for On-
tario to find work. Now things have gotten so bad that Angie, her mom, and her 
brother, Clem, have ended up living in their 1982 Buick Skylark. Encouraged by 
a counselor to keep doing the things the family used to, Angie’s mother takes them 
to Spiral Café, a place they frequented as a family in better times. Now, though, it 
becomes a place for Angie to find a lifeline, as she enters the poetry slam competi-
tions they host on Tuesday nights, pouring out her fears and trying to make sense 
of her circumstances through her poetry. She meets with anger and resentment 
from some of the older, more competitive poets, but she also finds that the support 
of the audience, combined with the therapeutic power of the words themselves, 
has the power to carry her through this rough but temporary bad time in her life. 
This slim Canadian import contains a lot of power in a small package; the prose 
is straightforward yet lyrical, without a wasted word. The result is an ultimately 
uplifting treatment of a difficult subject that is both accessible and artful as it 
honors diverse talents: while their parents are barely literate, Angie finds delight 
in words, Clem’s a talented BMX rider, their mother creates a safe, almost cozy 
home out of a car, and their father eventually comes into his own as a bricklayer 
recognized for his strong sense of aesthetic design. Angie’s poetic sensibilities give 
her the through-line she needs to cope with being homeless and enable the book 
506 • The BulleTin
to deliver its message without being messagey; readers needn’t be strongly com-
mitted to poetry to appreciate this, but those that are won’t be disappointed.  KC
cinotto, lAurie The Itty Bitty Kitty Committee; illus. by Edward Miller; illus. 
with photographs by Laurie Cinotto. Roaring Brook, 2014 128p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-937-5 $12.99  
R Gr. 3-7
Through engaging profiles and numerous, adorable photos, kitten fosterer and 
blogger Cinotto introduces readers to many of her feline charges and also gives sug-
gestions to youngsters interested in fostering, covering a range of topics from basic 
cat care to making inexpensive kitten toys to photo-taking tips. This is a cat-loving 
browsers’ paradise, with multi-photo sections such as “Belly Stripes and Spots” and 
“Kittens Grooming” interspersed with the text along with individual shots of kittens 
in full-on cuteness mode. Cinotto writes with obvious affection for her cats, and 
the information is chunked into blocks that make it easy for readers to dip in and 
out of the book. The photos, taken by Cinotto, are generally clear and attractively 
composed, and the three DIY projects included (a fleece cat blanket, a cardboard 
cat playhouse, and a cardboard tube toy) are clearly outlined, kid-friendly crafts 
(although one does require an adult wielding a utility knife). Adults won’t need to 
sell this title to its intended audience—the cherubic quintet of “itty bitty kitties” 
on the cover will ensure cat-lovers’ attention.  JH 
clArK, georgiA Parched. Holiday House, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2949-3 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
In a world of diminishing resources, the haves live in a town named Eden, shielded 
by a protective dome, while the have nots struggle outside. Initially comfy inside 
the dome and unaware of her privilege, Tess ends up outside after her mother dies, 
scraping together every last cent just for enough water to survive. She then heads 
back into Eden as part of a rebel force that hopes to prevent a genocide and wrench 
back some rights for the disempowered. At the core, this is an increasingly familiar 
but still cool concept—what happens when the devastation of the planet through 
natural disasters forces the remaining population, who have not evolved out of 
traditional power structures, into one small area. There is a compelling backstory 
about Tess’ scientist mother, the experiment in artificial intelligence that led to her 
death, and the extreme guilt that propels Tess through her life, as she is unable 
to forget the role she played in her mother’s accidental death. Unfortunately, a 
muddy romance, several overly complex action scenes, and expository interspersed 
flashbacks all mar the tale, undermining its momentum and interfering with en-
gagement with Tess. Nonetheless, fans of Crossan’s Breathe series (Breathe, BCCB 
11/12, etc.) or Rossi’s Under the Never Sky (BCCB 4/12) may find this additional 
look at a relatively cozy life inside walls of safety and the short, brutal life outside 
to be intriguing.  AS
colbert, brAndy Pointe. Putnam, 2014 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16034-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
As the only two black kids in their Chicago suburb, Theodora and Donovan 
were inseparable. Then thirteen-year-old Theo began to date Trent, an older guy, 
June 2014 • 507
and when she and Trent started having sex, Donovan was excluded from their 
relationship. Trent suddenly dropped out of touch, though, and when a couple of 
weeks later Donovan disappeared, Theo was doubly devastated. A talented ballet 
dancer, she developed an eating disorder and went into treatment, but her grief 
over the loss of Trent and Donovan remains the defining center of her life. Now 
it’s four years later, and Donovan has been returned home; he refuses to talk, but 
Theo recognizes his kidnapper as the guy she knew as Trent. Did Trent really love 
her, or was he just using her to get to Donovan, and did Donovan leave with him 
voluntarily? While the plot is a bit raw for the typical ballet-book reader, the vari-
ous elements here guarantee multiple interest points for fans of the problem novel, 
the most interesting being the way Theo ever so slowly comes to understand how 
naïve she was at thirteen, how skewed her ideas of sex and love still are, and how 
the legacy of Trent’s abuse continues to haunt her decision-making. The response 
of the community to Donovan’s reappearance is as real as it is frustrating; because 
he is a boy abducted by a man, and because video surfaces that shows him hap-
pily interacting with other boys his age, there is little sympathy for his ordeal and 
his status as victim is questioned, even when well-meaning teachers attempt to 
explain. The book chooses Theo’s understanding rather than Donovan’s experi-
ence as a culminating moment, but since the story is focused on her recovery, that 
understanding is enough of a spur toward doing the right thing for both ethical 
validity and narrative closure.  KC
cole, henry Big Bug; written and illus. by Henry Cole. Simon, 2014 26p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9897-6 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9899-0 $10.99 
R 3-7 yrs
This concept book opens with an image of a ladybug, so close up that it takes up 
nearly two-thirds of the double-page spread, and the words “Big bug.” The next 
spread shows the same bug, now much smaller atop a large green leaf as the per-
spective zooms out, stating “Little bug. Big leaf.” The sequence continues pulling 
back to dwarf each previously large-seeming object in turn, with the leaf appearing 
smaller next to a flower, then the flower appearing smaller next to a dog, all the way 
up to a “big . . . BIG sky,” at which point it reverses and zooms in again. There 
are a few glitches (the “big tree” isn’t actually bigger than the “little barn,” it’s just 
closer to the viewer), but generally the book is effective in accessibly demonstrating 
a fairly sophisticated concept; Cole’s illustrations provide child-friendly lessons in 
perspective and point of view, and there is plenty to discuss with young viewers. 
The type size helpfully shifts with the descriptions, so smaller type identifies the 
little elements and larger type identifies the big elements, adding further conceptual 
support. The acrylic and colored pencil full-bleed compositions are at their best 
in the intense closeups, with vividly saturated fields of color filling the space and 
brushstrokes adding detail and texture. The simple pastoral setting—white barn, 
red roof, green grass, changing sky—provides a calming backdrop for the tightly 
focused objective. The concept element will serve art teachers well in their instruc-
tion, while the peaceful ending makes this a fine bedtime selection.  HM 
508 • The BulleTin
cooper, ilene A Woman in the House (and Senate): How Women Came to the 
United States Congress, Broke Down Barriers, and Changed the Country; illus. by 
Elizabeth Baddeley and with photographs. Abrams, 2014 134p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1036-0 $24.95  
R Gr. 5-9
Many of the female “firsts” in this collective biography have already stepped into the 
spotlight in children’s nonfiction: first woman representative, Jeannette Rankin; first 
African-American woman representative, Shirley Chisholm; first woman Speaker of 
the House, Nancy Pelosi. Although noting the groundbreaking (or, perhaps, ceiling 
breaking) accomplishments of these individual women, Cooper is far more interested 
in demonstrating the diversity and historical context of the issues championed by 
women politicians and the regional and social correlations to their electability. The 
presentation is divided by clusters of decades, each introduced with an overview of 
the historical zeitgeist, and then focused on individuals emblematic of the period. 
Thus, congresswomen of the 1920s and ’30s cluster shared the likelihood that they 
stepped into an office vacated by the death of a husband or father; another group 
from the ’30s to ’50s had previous high-profile careers of their own right; the ’60s 
through ’70s saw the fruits of the civil rights movement in the election of black 
women to the House. Cooper goes beyond noting the women’s arrivals and offers 
a brief overview of issues, committee work, successes, and disappointments that 
marked their stay. The layout is clear and generally attractive: cameo photographs 
accompany each entry, interspersed with slightly stilted art and set against pages 
bordered with patriotic motifs. Copious end matter includes a crash course on 
federal-level civics and women’s suffrage; a complete list of women in Congress; 
citations, bibliography, and a particularly well-designed and helpful index.  EB
cooper, t Changers: Book One: Drew; by T Cooper and Allison Glock-Coo-
per. Black Sheep, 2014 285p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-61775-195-0 $11.95  
R Gr. 8-12
When Ethan wakes up on the first day of freshman year, he discovers a thin, blonde-
haired fourteen-year-old girl looking back at him in the mirror. His parents tell 
him that he’s a Changer, one of a secretive race of people who spend each of the 
four years of high school in a different body in order to make the world better. 
Ethan, now called Drew, is a bit awkward at first, but she’s able to befriend Audrey, 
a cheerleader on the outskirts of popularity, and finds a kindred spirit (and other 
Changer) in Chase by drumming for a Neo-Emo-Ska band across town. When 
Audrey’s older brother attempts to sexually assault Drew at a party, Chase attacks 
him, causing the Changer Council to forbid Drew and Chase from contacting each 
other. Chase’s rebellion against the Council’s authority leads him to join a radical 
Changer movement that questions the ethics of using self-sacrifice to achieve social 
change, and Drew must figure out her feelings for both Chase and Audrey on her 
own. This novel, a more sci-fi approach to the themes explored in Levithan’s Every 
Day (BCCB 9/12), takes the search for identity central to adolescence to its extreme, 
setting Drew’s quest for her sense of self under layers of full-blown conspiracy. 
The Coopers have a strong ear for teenager-isms, and the exploration of Drew’s 
ups and downs is eminently believable; the chemistry between Drew and Audrey 
is always palpable even as Drew’s figuring out her relationship with Chase. There’s 
not much closure here beyond the end of the school year, but the slow build of a 
June 2014 • 509
strong character—with the lure of something totally new coming up next—will 
leave readers ready for the next Change in this line-up.  TA
cremer, AndreA The Inventor’s Secret. Philomel, 2014 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-399-15962-6 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Forty years after the Brits quashed the American Revolution, Boston is a city-sized 
prison while New York is a mechanized, floating wonder. Descendants of the rebels 
are enslaved and giant robots hunt down any escapees; a small core of free-thinking 
teenagers hides out in the underground Catacombs outside the cities, conspiring 
against the Empire. Sixteen-year-old Charlotte is out on a supply run in the wilder-
ness when she stumbles across an amnesiac boy and brings him back to Resistance 
headquarters. There’s something strange about the boy, though, and Charlotte, 
her brother (the leader of the resistance), and his best friend Jack (and Charlotte’s 
sometime love interest) decide the best course of action is to disguise themselves 
as elite members of society using Jack’s upper-class connections and return the boy 
to the city while they’re meeting up with another resistance faction. The premise 
and the world are intriguing, and there’s a formality to the descriptions of shining 
floating cities, mechanized underwater submarines, and slightly creepy automatons 
that gives the steampunk setting a tarnished grandeur. Unfortunately, once the group 
gets to the city, the story shifts its focus abruptly from the mystery behind the boy 
to Charlotte’s affair with Jack, which at first seems like a sure thing but is then 
jeopardized by both Jack’s high-society fiancée and his handsome more attentive 
older brother. Readers who value romance over plot, however, may nonetheless be 
taken in by Charlotte and Jack’s witty repartee and steamy encounters, and their 
estrangement at the book’s close ensures a sequel.  KQG 
cypess, leAh Death Sworn. Greenwillow, 2014 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222121-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222123-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
Her dwindling powers mean that Ileni is essentially useless as a servant to the 
magical Renegai, so the elders of the powerful group of mages decide to send her 
to teach magic to a bunch of assassins on the other side of the Empire—assassins 
who very likely murdered their two previous instructors. Ileni is determined to 
figure out exactly who is behind the deaths and why, despite the multitude of 
threats she encounters once arriving at the assassins’ den. No one here is quite what 
they seem—neither the cold-hearted master who’s willing to literally toss a student 
over a cliff to make a point but makes impassioned speeches about the betterment 
of the kingdom, nor Sorin, a steely-eyed boy who has meted out his fair share of 
death but remains a sensitive soul under all that calculated malice. The forbidden 
romance that inevitably strikes up between Ileni and Sorin is convincingly sultry, 
and it brings to the forefront the ethical dilemma Ileni is trying to avoid: if she 
could get her powers back through some very dark means, would she if it meant 
that she could help Sorin and his crew overthrow the corrupt Empire? An intrigu-
ing quandary, to be fair, but it would be more effective if the stakes were clearer: 
the building of the world outside of the caves and the history of the Empire is 
sketchy at best, making the war that everyone wants Ileni to lead seem a bit like 
510 • The BulleTin
an overreaction—especially when the Renegai and the assassins are guilty of the 
same crimes. As a start to a trilogy, however, this offers a lot of possibilities, and 
Ileni’s trip to the capital in the book’s final pages could mean further fleshing out 
of the kingdom and its woes in future installments.  KQG
de lA cruz, melissA The Ring and the Crown. Hyperion, 2014 372p
ISBN 978-1-4231-5742-7 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
In this alternative history, the Franco-British Empire dominates the globe, backed 
by the Queen’s Merlin, a formidable magician with a stranglehold on the world’s 
magic. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, however, the small country of 
Prussia makes a move toward rebellion, and the Queen and her Merlin must ar-
range a marriage between the heirs of the two kingdoms for peace. While Eleanor, 
the physically frail but intellectually sharp daughter of the Queen, and Leopold, 
the domineering but charming Prussian prince, are at the center of the deal, they’re 
far from the only ones affected. There’s Isabelle, a French countess and Leo’s lover; 
Wolf, Leo’s younger brother and the reckless “spare heir”; Astor, an American 
heiress who has caught Wolf’s eye; Gill, Eleanor’s childhood companion and true 
love; and most importantly, Aelwyn, the Merlin’s daughter and the one destined 
to protect and serve the throne now the Queen and the Merlin are nearing death. 
Political intrigue is the name of the game here, and as the focus shifts among the 
younger characters and their various schemes to get what they want (Leo wants to 
keep his mistress, Eleanor wants to run away with Gill, Aelwyn wants the crown 
for herself), de la Cruz expertly lays out clues to alert the reader to the fact that for 
all their planning, these youngsters are nonetheless going to fall prey to the larger 
plans of their politically savvy elders. Unfortunately, any authorial restraint falls 
completely apart in the last thirty pages or so, as stunning revelation after stunning 
(and sometimes illogical) revelation is made in a cascade of overkill. Still, secrets, 
sex, and stylish clothes tend to be a winning combination, so hand this to readers 
who like their costume dramas really dramatic.  KQG
derting, Kimberly The Taking. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229360-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229362-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
M Gr. 7-10
A fight with her father leads sixteen-year-old Kyra to get out of the car and walk 
home along a deserted rural road in her small Washington town. A flash of light 
and one serious headache later, Kyra wakes up behind a local gas station—and 
discovers that five years have passed. Her parents are now divorced and her mother 
has another kid, her boyfriend is in college and dating Kyra’s best friend, and her 
dad is now a conspiracy theorist dedicated to finding the source of the light that he 
believes was responsible for Kyra’s five-year absence. Tyler, the formerly annoying 
but now totally hot younger brother of her boyfriend, is the only one that treats 
Kyra with any sense of normalcy, but when agents from the National Security 
Agency show up asking questions about Kyra’s new freakish abilities to see in the 
dark and heal herself instantaneously, Kyra’s pretty sure any hope of a normal life is 
out the window. Despite the appeal of the Rip Van Winkle–like premise, the book 
gets off to an agonizingly slow start, one that underscores both Kyra’s penchant for 
navel-gazing whininess and the illogicality behind several of the character’s actions: 
June 2014 • 511
neither of Kyra’s parents, for example, seems concerned with figuring out where 
she has been for five years. The pace picks up when the NSA men in black show 
up and the mystery behind Kyra’s abilities deepens, but the slog to an ending that 
only promises another installment makes this ultimately unsatisfying to readers who 
would be better served by Castellucci’s First Day on Earth (BCCB 11/11).  KQG 
dillon, pAtricK The Story of Buildings From the Pyramids to the Sydney Opera 
House and Beyond; illus. by Stephen Biesty. Candlewick, 2014 95p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6990-4 $19.99 
 Ad Gr. 4-8
In this ambitious overview of architectural history, Dillon discusses in chronological 
order dozens of significant buildings, from Imhotep’s design for the pyramid of the 
pharaoh Djoser in the third millennium BCE, to the environmentally ingenious 
straw-bale house of Sarah Wigglesworth and Jeremy Till in 2001 London. Although 
some brief attention is given to non-Western cultures, coverage is heavily slanted 
toward European developments. Dillon’s text shines brightest when he focuses 
narrowly on architectural innovations and architects’ quirks—how the system of 
domes and half domes distributes weight in the Hagia Sophia and how the rivalry 
between Lorenzo Bernini and Francesco Borromini is immortalized in the former’s 
sculpture cringing in horror in front of the latter’s looming church. Too often, 
though, swaths of text commenting on world events bog the narrative down, and 
they seem less interested in providing context than in hustling readers abruptly from 
one architectural style to the next. Stephen Biesty supplies his signature cutaways 
for sixteen of the buildings, and these details, together with truly informative insets, 
are likely to captivate reader attention. Although many architectural elements are 
defined within the illustrations and annotations, a thorough glossary of terms is sadly 
missing, leaving readers who can’t tell a nave from an apse or a batten from a piano 
nobile  to fend for themselves. An index and timeline provide some navigational 
assistance, but expect illustration to trump text for most readers.  EB
donnelly, Jennifer Deep Blue. Disney Hyperion, 2014 [336p] (Waterfire 
Saga)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-3316-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-0185 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
As the heir to the underwater kingdom of Miromara, mermaid Serafina prepares for 
the ceremonial testing that will prove her fitness as a ruler and ensure her betrothal 
to the crown prince of a neighboring realm. Unfortunately, just as the successful 
ceremony comes to an end, Serafina and her people are attacked, her mother and 
father are killed, and Serafina and her childhood friend Neela are forced to flee. 
The girls realize then that they’ve both been having prophetic dreams of a great evil 
disrupting the underwater world, and they follow the instructions in their vision 
to search for four other young mermaids who may hold the keys to defeating this 
new threat. A skilled hand in historical fiction, Donnelly (author of Revolution, 
BCCB 11/10 and A Northern Light, BCCB 7/03) incorporates elements of classic 
history and the myth of Atlantis into her construction of this fantasy under the 
sea, but she also makes room for modern touches, especially in the details of Se-
rafina’s daily life. The plot, however, is overly stuffed, with the girls facing off not 
only with several villainous creatures but also traveling through an alternate mirror 
512 • The BulleTin
world that is discordant with the rest of the underwater mythology; an increasingly 
unwieldy cast of characters also makes it difficult to determine who’s a significant 
player and who’s just emotional bait to add drama. Still, the relationship between 
the two friends is often touching, and their banter has a cozy intimacy that will 
likely resonate with young girls and their BFFs. Hand this to middle-graders who 
have outgrown Disney’s The Little Mermaid but who aren’t ready for the darkness 
of Porter’s Lost Voices (BCCB 9/11).  KQG
downey, Jen swAnn The Ninja Librarians: The Accidental Keyhand. Source-
books, 2014 [384p] (The Ninja Librarians)
ISBN 978-1-4022-8770-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
A comfortable life in a quiet suburb of New Jersey has afforded twelve-year-old 
Dorrie very little opportunity to put her fencing skills (or, really her theatrical skills 
at pretend fencing) to the test against a true villain. All that changes, however, 
when she and her older brother Marcus stumble through a portal in the janitor’s 
closet of their local library that leads them to Petrarch’s Library, the headquarters 
of the Lybrariad, a group of Lybrarians dedicated to the protection of ideas and 
intellect throughout the world and history. These Lybrarians are as skilled in the 
art of subterfuge as they are in cataloging, can easily wield a ninja star or a sword 
as well as a card catalog, and use both their information and weaponry skills as 
they travel to different times in history to root out censorship and oppression, and 
Dorrie and Marcus yearn to join them as apprentices. Unfortunately, Dorrie and 
Marcus’ sudden presence means something is terribly wrong with the Lybrariad’s 
functioning and that the group’s arch-nemesis, the Foundation, may have found 
a way in. The delightful premise will be an obvious hit with librarians and their 
fans, and the very specific library humor and inside jokes are perhaps most suited 
for those kids who spend their lunch hour hanging around the reference desk or 
shelving books for fun. The plot meanders down a few too many blind alleys, 
however, and several subplots, including Dorrie’s rivalry with not one but two mean 
girls, detract from the main storyline. A host of memorable characters—especially a 
bitingly snarky Cyrano de Bergerac cast as Dorrie’s mentor—compensate, though, 
and the multiple allusions to history’s unsung heroes of intellectual freedom will 
likely send a few readers to the 900s.  KQG
duncAn, AlexAndrA Salvage. Greenwillow, 2014 520p
ISBN 978-0-06-222014-1 $17.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Ava has only ever known life inside of the intensely patriarchal society on a deep-
space merchant ship, so when she’s caught in a transgression and must undertake 
a risky escape, she’s hopelessly unprepared for her new life on Earth. Thankfully, 
there are plenty of places where, once she gets used to gravity and catches up on 
the seemingly endless number of things she was never taught, Ava can thrive, 
especially when she’s helped by local women, who, unlike her, were not raised to 
consider themselves useful only as procreative stock. In spite of the almost constantly 
dire circumstances, the novel has a meandering tone that perfectly highlights the 
weariness and numbness that can accompany a life lived constantly on the edge of 
disaster. Ava’s sometimes overwhelming innocence is tempered by her innate fierce 
grit—she quickly adapts to the idea that she can be an active participant in her 
June 2014 • 513
own destiny. The final breathtaking scene, a sharp exemplification of just how far 
Ava has come in making choices that sustain rather than oppress her, is an effective 
finale to her long physical and emotional journeys.  AS
ellis, sArAh Outside In. Groundwood, 2014 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-367-4 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-369-8 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Raised by a mercurial New-Agey mother, teenaged Lynn thinks she’s seen all of 
the alternative lifestyles out there. She has her eyes opened, however, when she 
meets Blossom, a poised and interesting girl who lives with an assembled family 
in a forgotten area under the reservoir in a local park. With Lynn’s best friends 
away on a choir trip, she soon bonds with Blossom and immerses herself in the 
girl’s off-the-grid world, where the “Underlanders” survive by using the castoffs of 
“Citizens” like Lynn. As Lynn spends more time at odd hours with Blossom, she 
must explain to her mother where she’s been; her mother then heedlessly blurts out 
the Underlanders’ secret to the media during a local protest, shattering the lives of 
the people Lynn sought to protect. Ellis is simultaneously a knotty and substantive 
writer and one with a light, conversational style, so the third-person narration makes 
Lynn a relatable protagonist even amid a highly unusual situation. The Underlander 
life is ingenious and fascinating, verging on the fantastical (it’s rightfully compared 
within the book to The Borrowers), and Blossom and her family are deeply engaging. 
The book nonetheless remains aware of its real-life issues, with Lynn consciously 
squelching some of her reservations about Blossom’s lifestyle (her lack of schooling, 
her unorthodox entry into the family as an abandoned baby) even as she loves the 
romantic creativity of the Underlanders’ world. As a result, this will be an excellent 
book for discussion, eliciting lively partisanship on the question of what’s right and 
wrong here; readers’ take on the ethics will determine just how happily ever after 
they think the characters end up living.  DS
ering, timothy bAsil The Almost Fearless Hamilton Squidlegger; written and 
illus. by Timothy Basil Ering. Candlewick, 2014 [44p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-2357-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
Hamilton, during the day, is the “rippingest, roaringest” swashbuckling Squidlegger 
(a froggish sort of creature) out there, but when bedtime rolls around, the chance 
that a bracklesneed might be around sends him into his parents’ bed. He’s almost 
convinced himself that he can spend a night alone when a lightning monster shows 
up, on the giggling run from Hamilton’s dad with whom he’s in a food fight; as 
they pass, a flood of pink lemonade lands Hamilton aboard a ship alongside the 
formerly frightful bracklesneed. The ship takes off into the sky, and the resulting 
sailing and soaring leads Hamilton to face his fears. This is definitely prose, but the 
book’s poetic use of gently scary nonsense evokes “Jabberwocky,” while its dreamy, 
lullaby qualities are reminiscent of “Wynken, Blynken, and Nod.” The vivid acrylic 
illustrations in immersive full-bleeds counterpoint the ethereal whimsy with wobbly 
and thin pen and charcoal outlines, splotchy and textured paint, and a subdued 
and earthy color scheme. While twilight hues make a few scenes murky, the art is 
particularly effective while Hamilton and the crew are sailing through the sky in 
514 • The BulleTin
a breathtaking foldout double-page spread. The often-gorgeous artwork and feel-
good ending may make this an attractive bedtime story for parents willing to add 
a bit of quirkiness to the evening.  TA
escoffier, michAël The Day I Lost My Superpowers; written and illus. by Michaël 
Escoffier and Kris Di Giacomo; tr. from the French by Claudia Bedrick and Kris 
Di Giacomo. Enchanted Lion, 2014 26p
ISBN 978-1-59270-144-5 $16.95 
 R 5-8 yrs
When the narrator of this tale, a masked and caped young maiden of mystery, is 
first launched into the air by an obliging adult, she discovers that she can “fly.” 
What follows is a chain of superpowers that she discovers, from walking on the 
ceiling (doing a headstand) to making things disappear (eating the cupcake on the 
table). A dog-assisted flight through the backyard (via a pulley in the tree) causes a 
crash, though, and she’s convinced that she’s lost all of her superpowers; her mom 
rushes in with the superpowers of a hug and kiss, however, making the young girl 
feel much better. While its brevity and relatively simple vocabulary would sug-
gest a younger audience, the joy here is in recognizing the understated mismatch 
between the girl’s narration and the accompanying illustrations, a process that 
requires a bit more sophistication. The scrawled earthtoned illustrations, with a 
crayony graininess that ranges from saturated planes of color to scribbly linework, 
effectively carry the spunk of the tale, and the heroine is breezily depicted with 
pigtails and an oversized expressive face. Kids will get a giggle from the picture 
of her underwater-breathing power (bottoms-up—literally—in the bathtub with 
a snorkel), and the blob-shaped background details increase the humor for close 
lookers. Though a superhero-themed storytime would be an obvious use, this might 
also be an interesting way to introduce kids in the classroom to the concept of the 
unreliable narrator.  TA
ewell, KAtherine Dear Killer. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2014 359p
ISBN 978-0-06-225780-2 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Kit’s mother began training Kit to be an assassin when she was only nine years old; 
now, at sixteen, she is known as the Perfect Killer, the most feared serial killer in 
London since Jack the Ripper. Unlike most serial killers, though, Kit murders for 
hire, collecting requests and fees through a secret mailbox that some dismiss as the 
stuff of urban legend, but others use to convey their desire to have those who have 
hurt them eliminated. The moral nihilism that her mother has ingrained in her 
protects her from any pangs of conscience and her careful precision protects her 
from the law, but both these protections begin to unravel as she accepts a job too 
close to home and befriends a handsome young police officer who is investigating 
the Perfect Killer. While the teenaged author’s writing is occasionally amateurish, 
the premise and the working out of Kit’s wavering commitment to her unusual 
upbringing are grimly fascinating as they probe deeply into profound questions 
of moral relativism and human value. Kit is believably caught between a desire 
to please her mother and believe in the rightness of the teachings of her child-
hood, and a growing awareness that she can no longer psychologically bear her 
occupation. The reasons people want other people dead are unexpectedly banal, 
but Kit doesn’t seem to pass judgment, and that becomes part of a consistency in 
her motivations that readers will need to tease out: she kills because other people 
June 2014 • 515
want her to, first her mother, and then the letter-writers, but that simplicity begins 
to fray as she starts to want things for herself and question her place in the larger 
world. Underneath the dark sensationalism thus lurks a complex framing of moral 
questions that thoughtful teens will want to grapple with.  KC
fAntAsKey, beth Buzz Kill. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 360p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-547-39310-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-544-30185-6 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Coach “Hollerin’ Hank” Kildare has no shortage of enemies at Honeywell High, so 
when he turns up bludgeoned to death underneath the bleachers, the suspect list 
is long. Practical-minded (read: lazy and mostly self-involved) Millie Ostermeyer 
would normally stay out of a school matter, but the number one suspect appears 
to be the assistant head coach, who also happens to be her father. Drawing on her 
childhood memories of Nancy Drew, Millie begins her investigations to clear her 
dad’s name and soon finds herself entangled with Chase Albright, the rock-star 
quarterback with a bookworm personality whose past is shrouded in mystery. 
Chase was close to Coach and wants to help, so Millie and Chase hunt down leads, 
interrogate suspects, and put the pieces together, all while flirting, fighting, and 
flirting some more like the heroes of the old movies that they both adore. This 
resembles Hale’s No One Else Can Have You (BCCB 1/14) in its pleasing blend of 
humor, mystery, and romance with a heavy side of snark. Although at times Millie 
seems almost precious with adorkability, her narration reveals some of the neuroses 
behind the quirky façade, and she’s utterly believable as a weird kid who’d like to be 
less weird if she could only figure out how. Chase makes a swoonworthy romantic 
counterpart, and the revelation of his past mistakes give him a depth not often seen 
in the genre—readers will argue whether that past makes him more sympathetic or 
completely undateable. Fans looking for a less prim and proper Nancy Drew (and 
a few more lustful kisses) will find her here.  KQG
fAulconer, mAriA A Mom for Umande; illus. by Susan Kathleen Hartung. Dial, 
2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3762-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
When baby gorilla Umande is born in the Cheyenne Mountain Zoo, his mother 
doesn’t know how to care for him. It’s therefore up to the zookeepers not only to 
feed him and nurture him but also to teach him gorilla behavior such as groom-
ing, climbing, and gorilla manners (the keeper “makes happy grumbles” for good 
behavior and coughs in the youngster’s face when he gets too aggressive). After 
a bit more human care and some careful introductions, Umande is adopted by 
an experienced mama gorilla, Lulu, at the Columbus Zoo, and the two bond as 
mother and baby. Based on a real situation that occurred at these zoos, the story is 
compelling in its portrayal of zookeeping and gorilla habits as well as the mother-
child focus that shapes its emotional core. Faulconer’s text is direct but often 
touching: “He wiggles in a mound of sweet hay, smelling the musky odor of the 
other gorillas, waiting for someone to pick him up. But nobody does.” Faces in the 
art are somewhat bland and generic, but her technique of rubbing, blotting, and 
scratching oil glazes onto sealed paper adds some needed texture and substance to 
the pictures, giving the gorilla-only scenes particular depth and aesthetic appeal. 
516 • The BulleTin
Wannabe zookeepers, primate fans, and maybe even families with human adoption 
or foster situations will find Umande’s experiences rewarding. A note gives more 
facts about Umande and Lulu.  JH 
fAulKner, mAtt Gaijin: American Prisoner of War; written and illus. by Matt 
Faulkner. Disney Hyperion, 2014 144p
ISBN 978-1-4231-3735-1 $19.99  
R Gr. 4-6
In this graphic work of historical fiction, Koji Miyamoto turns thirteen the day the 
Japanese attack Pearl Harbor, and the San Francisco teen finds his life spinning out 
of control. His Japanese-born father is overseas visiting family at the time, leaving 
Koji and his European-American mom to navigate the social backlash within their 
community and the directives regarding relocation of citizens of Japanese ancestry. 
Koji is mandated to relocate, and his mother isn’t letting him go alone, so the two 
are assigned to the Alameda Downs Assembly Center, a converted racetrack. There 
he’s plagued at night by continuing dreams in which his father is a fighter pilot for 
Japan, bullied by day for his outsider status as a gaijin (foreigner), and he’s suspicious 
that his mother might be exchanging sex for favors from the camp administrators 
and guards. Thus, in a few short weeks, a Lone Ranger–loving adolescent turns into 
a confused and angry young man. Frames are laid out with all the orderly crispness 
of a cleanly deployed executive order but are densely filled with figures that roil with 
emotion and colors that change to lurid red-streaked hues when Koji’s nightmares 
and fears hold sway. The particular trials of a biracial internee add a fresh dimen-
sion to the canon of relocation-camp fiction, and an endnote offers background 
on the Faulkner family history that inspired this title.  EB
feutl, ritA Bike Thief. Orca, 2014 [136p] (Orca Soundings)
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0570-5 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0569-9 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0572-9 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-9
Katie’s innate clumsiness has resulted in some domestic damage, and her brother, 
narrator Nick, is afraid that their foster parents—one of the rare families willing to 
take on a pair of siblings—will ask for the siblings’ reassignment. Therefore, Nick 
makes a quick deal with a shady dealer, Dwayne, to replace a broken TV, on the 
condition that Nick pays him back in service. The favor, it turns out, is to recruit 
and direct “runts,” underage kids with no criminal record, to steal high-end bicycles 
and help rebuild them at the chop shop Dwayne supervises. Naïve and desperate, 
Nick complies, using his love of fixed-up bikes to spot prime merchandise. It quickly 
becomes evident, though, that the chop shop is merely a front for a serious drug 
ring, and when another recruiter like Nick is beaten and kidnapped, Nick must 
decide whether to expose his own crimes to save the boy’s life. The compressed 
time frame of the episode fits well into the Orca Soundings hi-lo format, and the 
plot boasts notable authenticity in taking inspiration from a real-life Edmonton 
workspace that, according to the acknowledgments, helps kids “build and maintain 
their own bikes.” Details of the thieves’ m.o. are less likely to serve as instructions 
in larceny than as a warning to protect your own property from crimes of oppor-
tunity. This title will serve not only the hi-lo crowd but any YA reader looking for 
a lightning-paced super-quick pick.  EB
June 2014 • 517
finKelstein, normAn h. Schools of Hope: How Julius Rosenwald Helped Change 
African American Education. Calkins Creek, 2014 80p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59078-841-7 $16.95  
R Gr. 5-8
Inspired by the teaching of Rabbi Emil Hirsch, Sears, Roebuck president Julius 
Rosenwald developed a personal philosophy of philanthropy and expanded on his 
early career goal of making $15,000 a year—keeping a third for living expenses, 
saving a third for the future, and giving a third to charity. A successful business-
man at the dawn of the twentieth century, he looked for worthy causes and found 
an ideal collaboration with Booker T. Washington, whose philosophy of self-help 
leading to social advancement meshed well with his own. Working at first through 
Washington’s Tuskegee Institute and later through his own foundation, Rosenwald 
established schools for black children throughout the South, setting strict expecta-
tions for matching funds and long-term management through the extant public 
school systems. Finkelstein examines the philanthropic activities of the man read-
ers may have met in Carole Boston Weatherford’s fictional Dear Mr. Rosenwald 
(BCCB 10/06). This work delves more deeply into Rosenwald’s other charitable 
work and ably contextualizes the school-building program within the “separate but 
equal” social mandate that was then the law of the land. Plenty of black and white 
photos and architectural plans provide a vivid picture of the before-and-after state 
of post–Civil War black schools, and they also bring readers up to date on current 
preservation efforts. Index, citations, and print and online sources are included.  EB
floriAn, douglAs Poem Depot: Aisles of Smiles; written and illus. by Douglas 
Florian. Dial, 2014 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4042-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-6
The estimable poet Douglas Florian returns here in a collection reminiscent of 
his classic Bing Bang Boing (BCCB 11/94), containing well over 100 short poems 
partnered with his sturdily eccentric line drawings. The poetic subjects range from 
the kid-focused (sibling rivalry, nose-picking, cleaning rooms) to the absurd (a 
sweater for an alien) to the comically tragic (the narrator swallowed by an alligator), 
and the verses are bright and bouncy and goofy in their short-lined rhymes and 
compact nature that make them particularly suitable for selective reading aloud. 
The quality is more variable here than in most of Florian’s collections, though, with 
stronger entries intermingling with poems where the scansion struggles or the payoff 
is flat, and there’s some recycling of gags (two poems make jokes about butterflies 
not having butter, for instance). The collection’s division into eleven sections (or 
“Aisles”) is also a little odd since the sections are generically titled (“Jests and Jives,” 
“Willy-Nilly Sillies,” etc.), and all contain pretty much the same kind of humorous 
material. There are still quite a few pithy and amusing verses here, though, and 
Florian’s Learesque delight in wordplay and catastrophe (and Learesque drawings) 
can still bring poetic pleasure to even poetry-averse readers. The bound book will 
include an index of poem titles.  DS
518 • The BulleTin
gebhArt, ryAn There Will Be Bears. Candlewick, 2014 217p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6521-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-7
For Tyson, the highlight of turning thirteen was to be the long-promised opportunity 
to shoot and field-dress his first elk on a trip to Bridger-Teton National Forest with 
Gramps. What Tyson gets instead is the news that Gramps is experiencing kidney 
failure and is moving to a nursing home where he can get affordable dialysis—oh, 
and Gramps isn’t really Tyson’s blood relative, but his dad’s stepfather. That all 
this is revealed in a tardy, roundabout fashion leaves Tyson feeling betrayed: “It’s 
one thing for Mom and Dad to treat me like a kid—they’re stupid. But Gramps 
couldn’t tell me?” His love for Gramps, however, is enduring and his desire to go 
through with the trip unshakeable, so the pair plots a way to sneak off between 
treatments for a brief stint in the mountains. It’s a pretty insane idea, fraught not 
only with danger to Gramps’ fragile health but also with the very real threat from 
a rogue grizzly that has mauled tourists and hunters over the past few weeks. The 
book is strongly written, and Tyson’s emotional turmoil, which he glibly covers 
with barbed observations and self-deprecating humor, is painfully real. The gorily 
precise details of the elk kill and butchering also add compelling dimension to a 
familiar story of coming to terms with the debility of a beloved grandparent. Fam-
ily stories and adventure tales are often relegated to separate pigeonholes, and this 
title offers fresh crossover appeal.  EB
giles, gAil Girls Like Us. Candlewick, 2014 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6267-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Special Ed has been no picnic for classmates Biddy, who was born “moderately 
retarded,” and Quincy (short for Sequentia), who suffered a childhood brain injury 
at the hands of her mother’s boyfriend. Going out into the world doesn’t look like 
it’ll be any easier, but both girls are placed after graduation in the house of a local 
woman, Elizabeth, who needs home help as she deals with vertigo. There each 
girl begins to thrive in her own way, with warm-hearted Biddy blossoming under 
Elizabeth’s kind attention, and cynical Quincy relishing the respect she earns for 
her cooking skills and work ethic; they also grow closer, seeing past each other’s 
defenses. The narration alternates between Biddy and Quincy, with Biddy’s soft, 
eager credulity an effective complement to Quincy’s wry jadedness (“Leastwise,” 
says Quincy initially about living with Biddy, “if I live with her, I finally be the 
smartest person in the house”). The brief chapters allow plenty of time for thought 
on the part of the readers as they’re steeped into the daily challenges and thoughts 
of differently abled people. Ultimately, though, this tips too far into rescue fantasy 
territory, with everything in the girls’ world terrible until their move to Elizabeth’s 
allows them to suddenly blossom, and Quincy’s savage rape and mutilation merely 
one more thing for their new lives to redeem them from; a subplot about the baby 
Biddy gave up for adoption requires maximum contrivance at several steps. Intel-
lectually disabled young people don’t receive a lot of attention in literature, though, 
especially when it comes to the difficult transition to adult living; readers with their 
own launch concerns may find this particularly rewarding.  DS
June 2014 • 519
goldsmith, connie Bombs over Bikini: The World’s First Nuclear Disaster. Twen-
ty-First Century, 2014 88p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1612-3 $34.60
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2545-3 $25.95 
 R Gr. 7-12
The Marshall Islands region—remotely located, sparsely populated, supportive of 
America—seemed the ideal location for the U.S. to continue testing its augmented 
arsenal of warheads in the aftermath of World War II. Thus began a tale of social and 
environmental tragedy whose chapters continue to unfold—albeit in very hushed 
tones—in Congress and the courts. Goldsmith’s excellently organized presentation 
focuses on three bomb tests: Able, for which the Bikini islanders were removed 
“temporarily” to the smaller, less productive Rongerik Atoll with a month’s worth 
of supplies; Baker, an underwater detonation which military personnel attempted to 
clean up with little to no radiation protection; and Bravo, the first hydrogen bomb 
detonation, in which islanders on a direct path of known radiation hazard were 
never evacuated. Details of the explosions are harrowing, and careful follow-ups are 
provided regarding the ongoing fate of the refugees who were moved from island 
to island, promised compensation that never materialized, and bombarded with 
contradictory assessments concerning the safety of their persons and homeland. 
Goldsmith employs a reasoned tone, setting events within the context of realistic 
Cold War apprehensions, but allowing facts to speak eloquently for themselves. 
The text is supplemented by such well chosen photographs as stunningly beautiful 
mushroom clouds, PR pictures of smiling seamen mopping radioactive dust from 
ship decks, and a dying, double-amputee veteran who appears one page turn before 
an admiral and his floridly chapeaued wife cutting a celebratory mushroom-cloud-
shaped cake. Brief enough to be read in one consciousness-raising sitting, this title 
also offers further research possibilities through text citation, glossary, lists of youth 
and adult resources, and an index.  EB
green, s. e. Killer Instinct. Simon, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-4814-0285-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
Lane is a bright, focused sixteen-year-old with plans to go to UVA and major in 
biology. She has neither the time nor the talent for emotional entanglements, but 
that doesn’t mean she doesn’t have mischievous, perhaps even unnatural, desires. 
Since she was ten, she’s been keeping a serial killer scrapbook, and she knows it’s 
just a matter of time before the pressure to act out her own violent fantasies over-
takes her. She has decided that her targets must be people who deserve but have 
escaped retributive justice under the law, and she starts a career as an avenging angel, 
torturing but stopping short of killing her victims. When a decapitated head is 
discovered that may be linked to one of the serial killers she’s been following, Lane 
garners details about the case via her mother and stepfather (who work for the FBI), 
but she’s taken by surprise when the killer contacts her directly. Meanwhile, there 
is a boy who finds her quirky directness attractive, and she finds him fascinating 
enough to get the whole virginity thing over with. Lane is appealing in her way, 
with her refusal to play popularity games and her no-nonsense approach to getting 
the job done, even when that job is gruesome and questionable. Her screwups as 
she attempts to subdue her victims remind readers as well as herself that she isn’t as 
smoothly competent or psychotically unfeeling as a polished adult serial killer, and 
520 • The BulleTin
the novel’s ultimate reveal validates the empathy she has evoked all along. Readers 
who relish a darkly twisted crime drama with a well-managed surprise ending will 
enjoy curling up with this one.  KC 
hAsiuK, brendA Your Constant Star. Orca, 2014 [248p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0368-8 $12.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0370-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
When her old neighbor Bev contacts her from out of the blue to share the news of 
her pregnancy and ask her help, teenaged Faye acquiesces without knowing why, 
much as she did when the two were children. Struggling to reconcile her identity 
as a Chinese-Canadian adoptee—and the compliant, overachieving image that 
accompanies it—with her resentment toward her well-meaning parents, Faye has 
her own complicated reasons for going along with pushy, daring Bev. As they spend 
more time together, with Faye accompanying Bev on visits to potential adoptive 
parents and finding herself inexplicably drawn to Bev’s perpetually stoned, joyriding 
boyfriend, Mannie, it becomes clear that they’re all using each other for something, 
though they don’t know what. Taking on the voice of each of these three teens as 
they push for more from themselves and their lives, Hasiuk skillfully creates complex 
and believable characters, who are by turns cruel and compassionate, alienating 
and sympathetic. She understands the blind groping of adolescence, along with its 
mixing of affection and contempt toward loved ones and occasionally crippling, 
occasionally empowering uncertainties, and examines this fumbling (and its po-
tential for disaster) in an insightful but unsentimental light. With its restrained but 
uncondescending portrayal of teen pregnancy, drug use, and mental illness alongside 
small interpersonal cruelties and baffling but resonant adolescent behavior, this 
will appeal to teens looking for other souls asking questions without answers.  AA
hAydu, corey Ann Life by Committee. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229405-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229407-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
Change has been tough for sixteen-year-old Tabitha: her newly curvy figure and 
interest in boys have estranged her from her nerdy friends, and her young hippie 
parents, who had her when they were sixteen, are expecting a new baby. She’s now 
diving deep into late-night online chats and occasional secret makeout sessions with 
Joe Donavetti, who is publicly very much coupled with another girl; rumors of this 
extracurricular activity are enhancing Tabitha’s promiscuous reputation at school. 
At a website called Life by Committee, she finds a group of pseudonymous people 
who share secrets and in return receive an assignment to take a risk connected with 
that secret. Tabitha’s initially exhilarated by the leaps the group encourages her to 
take, until she begins to question the romantic risk-taking narrative when she starts 
facing its consequences. Haydu (author of OCD Love Story, BCCB 9/13) captures 
in deft strokes the teenaged girl who’s being slut-shamed mostly for becoming 
sexually attractive, and who struggles to negotiate her resentment at the unfair 
characterization (Tabitha’s actually a virgin whose main joy is reading old books) 
with her interest in male attention. Her engagement with the website is utterly 
plausible for a girl with her love of a good story, and the book effectively sets up 
June 2014 • 521
both the site’s appeal and its manipulative nature. Ultimately, though, the book’s 
target is secrets and their power, and it understands both the thrilling ability to 
have something to yourself and the way we hide and disguise our realities. This 
would therefore make an excellent partner with an exploration of the PostSecret 
project (Warren, My Secret: A PostSecret Book, BCCB 1/07), as well as a thoughtful 
standalone with much insight about perception and truth.  DS
hills, tAd Duck & Goose Go to the Beach; written and illus. by Tad 
Hills. Schwartz & Wade, 2014 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37237-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37235-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37236-7 $10.99  
R 3-6 yrs
A contented Goose comments on the loveliness of the here and now moment in the 
meadow just as good friend Duck conceives of the idea to set off on an adventure 
(“‘Let’s go away!’ ‘A-WHAT?!’ Goose honked”). Goose joins him despite being 
largely unimpressed with the plan, but upon arriving at the sandy shore, there is 
a sudden shift in opinions: Duck is put off by the noise, the water, and the sand, 
while Goose is positively thrilled by their new environs. Goose’s delight continues 
through a myriad of seaside activities, while Duck begrudgingly goes through the 
motions, until day’s end when both birds concede their eagerness to return to the 
meadow. The familiar dynamic of Duck and Goose (What’s Up, Duck?: A Book of 
Opposites, BCCB 4/08, etc.) effectively drives this celebration of friendship and 
adventure. The playful language and birdy banter adds humor to the day-in-the-life 
plotline, while the switching perspectives contribute interest to what could otherwise 
present itself as a list of activities. Duck and Goose’s faces are remarkably expressive, 
especially considering that they are all eyes and beak and the beaks don’t change at 
all. The clean design keeps the two birds and the dynamic of the moment at the 
center of the action, and the peaceful palette of pale green field, turquoise water, 
and periwinkle sky provides a serene backdrop. Lessons about trying new things 
and supporting your friends offer good talking points for this delightful picture 
book selection.  HM
hymAn, zAchAry The Bambino and Me; illus. by Zachary Pullen. Tundra, 
2014 48p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-77049-627-9 $17.99 
 R 6-9 yrs
Summer, 1927. George’s best birthday present ever: tickets to see Babe Ruth wal-
lop the Red Sox. His worst birthday present ever: a Red Sox jersey and cap from 
a well-meaning but clueless uncle. Ma insists that George wear the humiliating 
get-up to the game and the experience is as bad as he expects, with his bright red 
cap amid a sea of Yankee blue a magnet for catcalls and ridicule. It also catches 
the eye of the Babe just before he belts one out of the park, however, and George’s 
surrounding enthusiasts realize from the boy’s cheering just whose side he’s really 
on. There’s still some anxiety when two “big palookas” escort George and his fa-
ther into the bowels of the stadium, where they meet the great one himself, who 
rightly guesses, “You’re not really a Red Sox fan, are you, kid?” The Bambino then 
promptly signs George’s baseball card, gears him up with proper Yankee garb, and 
offers a few parting words of wisdom. Pullen joins a league of other illustrators who 
have a ton of fun caricaturing the Babe, but he does full comic justice to the rest 
522 • The BulleTin
of the cast as well, exaggerating George’s drama-prince reactions to the whirlwind 
events. The illustrations also incorporate in a monumental double-page spread 
an unmistakable eyelock and finger-point to outfield (which may or may not be 
directed at George), in a slyly prophetic reference to Ruth’s much-debated gesture 
in the 1932 World Series. Hyman offers some closing thoughts on George Her-
man Ruth in a closing note, commenting on his 1927 season and on his renowned 
geniality toward kids. And since every fan appreciates a ballpark giveaway, an audio 
CD of the text is included.  EB
JAcKson, donnA m. Every Body’s Talking: What We Say Without Words; by Donna 
M. Jackson with Carol Kinsey Goman. Twenty-First Century, 2014 64p il-
lus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-0858-6 $30.60
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1120-3 $22.95 
 R Gr. 5-9
Children’s science writer Jackson offers a breezy but substantive introduction to 
unspoken communication, with particular attention to facial expression, body 
postures and positions, signs of lying, and cross-cultural differences. Picture-book 
trim size, wide leading, and generous font size may initially suggest a younger au-
dience, but the vocabulary is appropriately challenging for middle-schoolers and 
beyond, while both illustrations and situations of teen communication are used 
to highlight various points. Moreover, Jackson never overstates her case, and she 
frequently cautions readers that context and individual quirks impact interpersonal 
transactions in ways that preclude applying these generalizations universally. The 
take-home messages, then, are admirably realistic: careful observation will make 
you a better interpreter of tacit communication, and practiced control over your 
own tells can increase your confidence in such uncomfortable situations as public 
speaking and meeting new people. Count on readers sharing this book with friends 
and postulating exactly who among their acquaintance “always does that.” Source 
notes, selected bibliography, glossary, and index are appended.  EB 
JAvAherbin, minA Soccer Star; illus. by Renato Alarcão. Candlewick, 2014 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6056-7 $16.99  
Ad 5-8 yrs
Narrator Paulo Marcelo Feliciano and his Brazilian crew are soccer crazy, but prac-
tice has to wait until after the young boys’ work is done for the day. Paulo spends 
his days helping on a fishing boat, while his friends help support their families by 
shining shoes, diving to amuse tourists, painting carnival floats, harvesting coco-
nuts. At night, though, it’s soccer on the beach, and a collective dream to advance 
to the pros. Javaherbin’s opening note states, “My story is an homage to all soccer 
stars who have risen and continue to rise up from poverty,” and although fictional 
Paulo’s tale is certainly purposive, it’s not heavy-handed. Indeed, if this portrayal of 
his experience is to be faulted, it’s for the softened details of poverty in which the 
children arrive clean and healthy and energetic at their soccer match after smiling 
through their long day’s work. Picture-book brevity also does not accommodate 
development of a subplot involving Paulo’s sister’s aspiration to play along with the 
boys. Despite these cavils, though, Javaherbin and Alarcao offer young soccer fans 
a thoughtful and engaging look at a lively team of dreamers.  EB
June 2014 • 523
Johnson, AngelA All Different Now: Juneteenth, the First Day of Freedom; illus. 
by E. B. Lewis. Simon, 2014 [36p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-689-87376-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0647-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
On a Texas plantation, dawn comes to a girl and the rest of the enslaved workers 
as usual, and “nobody knew . . . that soon it would all be different.” Later that 
day, however, the word comes about the Union general’s proclamation enforcing 
the emancipation of the slaves, and the news transforms the girl’s existence. People 
cheer, and whisper, and pray, and they “told stories as free people/ on/ into/ the 
night”; the girl goes to bed knowing that the next dawn brings a time “that will be 
for all of us,/ all different now.” Although the end matter is plenty informative, the 
main text isn’t so much about relaying facts as it is about depicting the emotion 
of a life-transforming, generations-transforming, epoch-transforming moment; 
Johnson’s quiet ragged-right prose has a credible breathlessness as it conveys the 
mixture of stunned amazement and sheer joy. Lewis’ limpid watercolors are low-
key, his usual chiaroscuro effectively illuminating the diurnal progress of the text 
as well as the emotional shades of the story; the blinding bleached tones of the 
cotton field under the Texas sun contrast with the sweet blue night of jubilation. 
This is an emotive and effective way to take emancipation from a historic date to 
the experience of people whose lives changed, and it’ll open kids’ eyes to the impact 
of the transition. Moving notes from Johnson and from Lewis (who talks about 
his use of models and his artistic choices as well as his personal relationship with 
the story), a timeline, an explanation of Juneteenth, a glossary, and a list of online 
sources are appended.  DS
Jones, KAri So Much for Democracy. Orca, 2014 170p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0481-4 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0483-8 $9.95 
 Ad Gr. 4-7
It’s 1979, and twelve-year-old Astrid and her family have recently moved from 
Canada to Ghana, where her father is helping with the upcoming elections and 
the government’s shift to democracy. Just weeks before the election, there is an 
attempted coup on the government, and the city of Accra is thrown into turmoil. 
Astrid, confused by all that is happening and frustrated that no one will tell her 
what is going on, has her own issues to deal with: her mother is overprotective to 
the point of hysteria, her younger brother Gordo contracts malaria, and her home 
is invaded by a soldier who holds the gardener Thomas at gunpoint and steals her 
mother’s purse. The social backdrop of the story provides an interesting counterpoint 
to this coming-of-age story; unfortunately, Astrid herself is selfish and unreasonable, 
making her a less than compassionate protagonist (in the midst of her brother’s 
raging fever, she asks “How come no one’s thinking about what I need?”). Likewise, 
Astrid’s mother’s overprotectiveness is overdramatized to the point of caricature, 
and its resolution is abrupt and ungrounded. The grand draw here is the setting; 
the sights and sounds of the city are vividly conveyed and the expatriate experience 
is thoughtfully rendered; the author’s biography suggests that there may be an ele-
ment of memoir, as she spent some of her teen years in Ghana. An historical note 
provides detailed information about the political events of the summer of 1979, 
offering further context for history buffs keen to understand Astrid’s world.  HM
524 • The BulleTin
Jones, noAh z. Princess Pink and the Land of Fake-Believe: Moldylocks and the Three 
Beards; written and illus. by Noah Z. Jones. Scholastic, 2014 72p (Branches)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63840-1 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63839-5 $4.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63892-0 $4.99  
Ad Gr. 1-3
Princess Pink may be literally our heroine’s name, but she is not a princess and she 
hates the color pink, being a rough-and-tumble girl who loves dirty sneakers and 
monster trucks. Her adventurous spirit is put to good use when she sneaks to the 
kitchen for a midnight snack and finds the refrigerator door opens up into the Land 
of Fake-Believe, where Mother Moose (himself a victim of unsuitable naming) lends 
her a hand navigating this new world. She soon encounters the titular Moldylocks, 
whose green hair and sodden dress evoke the sights and smells of a swamp. When 
her new friend leads her to the home of the Three Beards, the requisite sampling 
of food (chili subs for porridge here), chairs, and beds and subsequent nap lead to 
Moldylock’s capture, and Princess must use her brains and boldness to save her pal. 
Author and illustrator (and animator) Jones knows what will give his audience the 
giggles, and he doesn’t hesitate to go for gross in going for laughs. The story itself 
is pretty superficial, with the prose sacrificing sustained wit in favor of the easy, 
smelly joke. However its accessibility and accompanying cartoonish art (which 
makes the dark-skinned Princess Pink’s pink hair into a punky, piquant statement) 
will have kids guffawing with the silly puns and cheering for the ingenious Princess 
Pink in this subverted version of the more traditional tale. A question guide at the 
back prompting readers to articulate the differences between the two stories seems 
out of place after an otherwise decidedly un-academic romp; hopefully this bit 
of window dressing will disappear by the next installment of the series, allowing 
readers who want grossout comedy, pink-haired heroines, or alternative fairy tales 
to enjoy their sillies in peace.  AA
Judge, litA Flight School; written and illus. by Lita Judge. Atheneum, 
2014 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8177-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8178-7 $10.99  
R* 4-6 yrs
Little Penguin believes he was born to fly, so he ditches Antarctica for a further-
north avian flight school run by a heron-like teacher; unfortunately, even after 
weeks of lessons, he’s still a lead balloon when it comes to getting airborne. His 
flight school pals have an idea, though, and wrap his wings with feathers attached 
with some fishing line. Penguin flaps and sure enough, he takes flight—with the 
help of a flamingo, who has grabbed the fishing line and is towing the overjoyed 
Penguin through the air (“Penguin was right. He did have the soul of an eagle. 
He’d just needed help with the technical parts”). Penguin leaves content and soon 
returns—with an ostrich who also wants to fly. Judge writes with a simple clarity 
that avoids any preachiness, and the streamlined emotion will resonate with young 
listeners: “Penguin was too brokenhearted to even wave good-bye. His teachers 
didn’t know what to do.” The watercolor and pencil illustrations are warm, robust, 
and thoughtfully composed, many positioned against a simple sunlit backdrop, 
with the tall flamingo frequently only partially seen due to its height. Penguin is a 
charmingly tubby and stout guy, and the skillful positioning of his red flight goggles 
visually convey his emotions: when he’s happy, the earpieces flip up jauntily, and 
June 2014 • 525
when he’s sad, they dejectedly droop. This could be a useful tool for many kinds of 
discussions—from the adaptations that some kids need in a classroom, to creative 
problem solving, to perseverance—or a cheerful addition to a unit or story hour 
about birds or penguins.  JH
Jury, wAlter Scan; by Walter Jury and S. E. Fine. Putnam, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16065-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Tate has battled with his strict, demanding father his whole life, certain that whatever 
secrets his dad is keeping in his cool high-tech lab are not going to change Tate’s 
opinion of him. After his father dies heroically, however, the truth begins to come 
out: very little of the human population is actually human anymore (a small alien 
invasion, the H2s, has grown exponentially in the past 400 years), and the physical 
and mental training his father put Tate through was to help him defend the hu-
man survivors. Complicating things is his realization that his beloved girlfriend is 
an alien, and that the other “good guys” might find her as disposable as any other 
H2. Both readers and Tate are playing catch-up from the start, with Tate learning 
most of the story in one urgent telling from his dying father and then having no 
one that he is certain he can trust; readers will also spot inconsistencies and careful 
not-quite-truths in those he meets. This is one of those enormously satisfying books 
where everyone has such complex, layered motivations that few emerge as truly 
admirable or evil. Add in the fact that there is perhaps a third group, a terrifying 
reason why the H2s came to Earth in the first place, that may play some role in a 
sequel, and the resulting thoughtful yet exciting adventure will satisfy both action 
and science fiction fans.  AS
KephArt, beth Going Over. Chronicle, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-4521-2457-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
The Berlin Wall divides fifteen-year-old Ada Piekarz from her boyfriend, Stefan, 
in 1980s Germany, and vibrant, rebellious Ada, “Professor of Escape,” desperately 
wants Stefan to make the dangerous trek over the wall to freedom and to her. In 
West Berlin, Ada lives with her depressed mother and worried grandmother in 
a squatter’s co-op, working in a day care for the children of immigrant Turkish 
laborers, and, by night, illegally creating spray-paint murals on the Berlin Wall to 
celebrate those who have safely escaped from the Communist-controlled East. She’s 
determined to see herself as the person who can take care of herself and everybody 
else, but her inability to fight the world is tearing at her and making her push Stefan; 
her pressure becomes stronger as she deals with the aftermath of her own rape and 
seeks to rescue one of her beloved young charges, who disappears after indications 
of dangerous domestic violence in his family. Brave and heartfelt Ada is an arresting 
character, appealing as a committed activist, a punky urban artist, and a young girl 
in love (she and Stefan, whose grandmothers were girlhood friends, grew up know-
ing each other). Stefan’s yearning for her, expressed in chapters addressed entirely 
to her in the second person, seems utterly justified even as it’s clearly tied into his 
yearning for all kinds of change and liberation. Kephart’s crystalline, resilient prose 
vividly evokes 1980s Berlin, with elders still deeply marked by World War II, the 
gulf between East and West tantalizingly narrow (Stefan can sometimes see Ada 
526 • The BulleTin
from his balcony), and the economy running on an ill-paid foreign underclass. Sure, 
there’s plenty of political extrapolation to current events and issues, but it’s also a 
keenly intimate story of human love made epic by circumstances.  DS
Keplinger, Kody The Swift Boys & Me. Scholastic, 2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56200-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56202-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
“All three of the Swift boys were my best friends, but Canaan was my best-best 
friend.” So says twelve-year-old Nola about the boys on the other side of her duplex 
wall, who’ve been her inseparable pals for years, with age-mate Canaan her auto-
matic partner, buddy, and protector at school. Now Mr. Swift has left the family 
and the Swift boys’ world is crashing down around them, taking Nola’s with it. 
Oldest brother Brian leaves the house, little Kevin hangs desperately around Nola’s, 
and Canaan takes up with the boys he’s always derided as bullies; meanwhile, 
Nola struggles to define a summer without her usual companions and finds better 
friendships than she expected in Felicia and in Teddy, who has awkwardly liked 
Nola but was afraid of Canaan. Keplinger’s first middle-grades novel is sweet and 
smooth, and sharp readers will realize that it’s as much about change in general as 
Nola’s drift from the Swift boys. Nola, for instance, ends up getting closer to her 
grumpy grandmother as a result of her desire to find Mr. Swift, and she adjusts to 
her family’s planned move out of her beloved duplex. Nola’s small Kentucky town, 
with kids pelting indiscriminately from yard to yard under the gently watchful eye 
of all the neighborhood adults, seems an old-fashioned idyll, but the multiracial 
cast, contemporary technology, and occasional helicopter parent put it firmly in 
the present day. This is the sort of solid, amiable preteen summer story there used 
to be a lot of; let’s hope this heralds a revival.  DS
KozlowsKy, m. p. The Dyerville Tales; illus. by Brian Thompson. Walden Pond/
HarperCollins, 2014 330p
ISBN 978-0-06-199871-3 $16.99  
R* Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year old Vince Elgin is a weaver of tales, captivating his fellow orphans as 
they crawl into bed every night with stories of fire and dragons, brave fathers and 
loving mothers. When his only living relative, his grandfather and namesake, dies 
at a faraway nursing home, Vince receives a handwritten book documenting the 
fantastical adventures of the elder Vincent’s life, as well as the sad news that he 
won’t be able to attend the funeral in the titular Dyerville. Certain his father, of 
whom no trace was discovered after the house fire that took his mother’s life, will 
be there, Vince makes a dangerous escape followed by a fraught journey, with the 
orphanage headmistress in hot pursuit and the murderous, bank-robbing Byron clan 
on the loose. All the while he reads his grandfather’s spellbinding book, filled with 
stories of giants, witches, talking horses, and ever-present peril. Readers will enjoy 
experiencing the adventures of both Vincents, which prove equally engrossing as the 
novel moves between the harrowing journey of the younger and the otherworldly 
odyssey of the elder. Kozlowsky deftly intertwines imagination and adventure with 
sobering realities; while the story arc itself engrosses and the grandfather’s fairytale-
like quest enchants, he underpins the novel with an unceasing melancholy that 
remembers the human heart, its pain, and its need for hope. This will fill the bill 
June 2014 • 527
for those readers looking for adventure, certainly, but it will pack an even greater 
punch for those learning the difference between fact and truth.  AA 
Kulling, monicA The Tweedles Go Electric; illus. by Marie Lafrance. Ground-
wood, 2014 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-167-0 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-478-7 $14.95 
 R 4-7 yrs
It’s 1903 and Mr. Tweedle has decided to roll with the times, purchasing a brand new 
automobile for his bicycle-riding family. But a noisy, gasoline-powered contraption 
doesn’t suit this freethinking crew; instead, they roll through town in their electric 
car, excitedly proclaiming its virtues (“It’s green!”; “It’s smart!”) to their fellow 
motorists. At least, Papa, Mama, and eight-year-old Frankie do, though twelve-
year-old Frances barely glances from her books to acknowledge the car “with an 
electric heart.” When an emergency forces her into the driver’s seat, quite literally, 
Frances finds that not only can she operate the car, but she loves doing so—and 
doesn’t even get a nosebleed speeding along at ten miles per hour. This charming 
portrayal of the eccentric, unselfconscious Tweedles winks at its audience through 
both its sly text and playful pictures, where Lafrance’s graphite and mixed-media 
drawings in a fitting palette of greens and yellows capture the family’s quaint but 
rapidly expanding world. The characters’ expressive features and body language, 
coupled with the authentic-feeling language and dialogue, make this perfect for 
a classroom readaloud, where the Tweedles can demonstrate not only the merits 
of environmental stewardship but also the beauty of daring to be different.  AA
lester, helen The Loch Mess Monster; illus. by Lynn Munsinger. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-544-09990-6 $16.99  
R 4-7 years
Wee Angus is the smallest—and messiest—of a trio of monsters living at the 
bottom of Scotland’s Loch Ness. His parents, tiring of the vast accumulation of 
“skirpy dishes,” “puggy-nit shells,” and empty “tattie-in-a-can” cans that threaten 
to overtake their living areas, restrict Angus to his room until he can follow Basic 
Monster Rule #2: “Always pick up after yourself.” Angus is quite content to stay 
in his room until his mess rises like a mountain, pushing him above the waterline 
of the loch and putting him within view of three monster-watchers, a duck, a goat, 
and a “Heeland coo” (Highland cow, for those not versed in Scots). The sight of 
the three unfamiliar land critters shocks poor Angus into a cleaning binge. While 
his amazed parents initially think he must be ill (“Are ye peelie-wallie, laddie?”), 
they happily accept the transformation, although Angus occasionally makes “a 
very wee mess” just to prove he’s not perfect. Lester and Munsinger are masters of 
conveying useful messages in a funny and non-didactic way, and Angus’s tale is no 
exception. The lively dialect and comic storyline couches the clean-up lesson in 
giggle-inducing humor, and a Scottish glossary is helpfully provided up front (no 
pronunciations are given, but most of the terms are fairly decodable). Munsinger’s 
familiar line and watercolor art retains its usual humor: blue-haired, bulgy-eyed, 
dragon-like monsters have animated, emotive faces, and clever illustrative details 
(such as a family portrait, labeled “Grandpa,” of a serpentine shape coming out 
of the lake, and Angus’ and his dad’s plaid tam o’ shanters) add to the fun. This 
would make a diverting counterpoint to a more straightforward title on the Loch 
528 • The BulleTin
Ness monster myth, or a droll and gentle nudge to encourage youngsters to do 
some tidying.  JH
light, steve Have You Seen My Dragon?; written and illus. by Steve Light. Can-
dlewick, 2014 [46p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-6648-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R 3-7 yrs
The young protagonist of this counting book has lost his dragon and treks all 
over the city, down by the harbor (“It’s possible he went for a swim”), through the 
zoo (“Has my dragon been here to visit the monkeys?”), until finally finding the 
creature at a temple in Chinatown (“There he is! Right where I left him”). Along 
the way, the boy counts important parts of the landscape (three buses, four sail-
boats) from one to twenty. The simple journey and even the counting are merely 
excuses, however, to take in the lavish cityscapes of the pen and ink illustrations: 
each spread features detailed black and white drawings using thick and thin nib 
techniques to achieve a calligraphic effect. The countable elements are washed 
over with a single colorful pigment, setting them apart for easy picking out. The 
boy’s bland cartoonishness contrasts strikingly with the whimsical sharp angles and 
fascinating use of perspective (as with a vertical cutaway of an apartment building 
where deliverymen have seven boxes or a street view that angles from birds-eye to 
head-on for eight fire hydrants). The intricate penwork will get lost in busyness 
if shared with an audience; this is one for poring over, so that youngsters can not 
only count the color-coded hot dogs, balloons, and subway cars but also spot the 
dragon sneakily hiding just out of our narrator’s view each step of the way.  TA
linKA, cAtherine A Girl Called Fearless. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2014 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-03929-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-03930-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
In this dystopian novel, careless tampering with chemicals in meat and unchecked 
greed has led to the death of almost all women (barring mostly vegetarians and 
girls who were very young at the time). Avie grew up in this reeling, shell-shocked 
world of men who have placed iron restrictions on the remaining girls, marrying 
them off at increasingly young ages to the lucky few wealthy or powerful enough 
to buy them. Despite her belief that her her father is too kind to sell her off, the 
fifty million bucks she’s worth proves too much temptation, and before she knows 
it, Avie is forced to choose between marrying an almost cartoonishly evil political 
candidate who wants her to be exactly like his dead mother (right down to the 
headbands) or running away to seek asylum in Canada. Mixed into all of this is a 
blooming romance with Yates, an old friend with whom Avie has always secretly 
kept in touch, and for whom she has always harbored strong feelings. The concept 
of a nation mourning multiple generations of women (other countries had long 
since banned American meat) is gripping, and the action flows at a steady and sat-
isfying pace, propelling readers through to the cliffhanger ending. Unfortunately, 
the romance is contrived from the start, and it’s uncomfortable in that Avie really 
only knows one boy; additionally, the success of the elaborate underground net-
works offers so many convenient chances to buck the system that the ostensibly 
all-encompassing dominance over women seems pretty subvertible. Even so, there 
June 2014 • 529
is something achingly vulnerable in this novel where almost everyone seems to 
search in vain that will likely linger with readers.  AS
lloyd-Jones, sAlly Poor Doreen: A Fishy Tale; illus. by Alexandra Boiger. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2014 [36p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96918-8 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86918-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98786-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R 6-8 yrs
Miss Doreen Randolph-Potts, an “Ample Roundy Fish,” is on her way to visit her 
cousin when she is caught by a fisherman. One would think Doreen would be 
terrified, but she is buoyantly clueless about the dangers that face her: she thinks 
the dragonfly lure is real and that she is “a remarkable swimmer” as the fisherman 
speedily reels her in. When he gives the final yank that sends her flying toward him 
through the air, she cries “Yippee! I’m going on an outing!” to which the unseen 
narrator responds, “Oh dear, Doreen. No. You’re not.” A blithe disregard for reality 
carries the unflappable Doreen through her experiences of being unhooked and 
put in a pail of water, being stolen from said bucket by a great blue heron, and, 
finally, being dropped from a great height back into the water by the bird. It all 
makes for an exciting and cheerful story that Doreen then relays to her cousin. The 
cautionary narrative asides, sonorous language (“Through the glittering water she 
spies a dragonfly, darting, dancing deliciously above her”), and Doreen’s complete 
(but enthusiastic) misunderstanding of her situation make this a boatload of fun 
to read aloud. Boiger’s watercolor, gouache, pencil, and colored pencil illustrations 
are pleasantly watery, but some of the paler tones and contrasts might not translate 
well to larger crowds. Still, one can’t help but like the oblivious and rotund Doreen 
in her jaunty red headscarf and inexplicably toting a red umbrella, and her tale will 
likely make a splash, either as the silly story it is or as a lesson in perspective.  JH
locKhArt, e. We Were Liars. Delacorte, 2014 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98994-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74126-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98440-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
The eldest granddaughter in an obscenely wealthy New England family, Cadence 
Sinclair spends summers on their private island. There she’s fascinated by, and later 
in love with, a boy named Gat Patil, the nephew of her aunt’s dark-skinned Indian 
boyfriend who joins the cousins for the summer holidays. Cadence is incensed 
to learn that her grandfather is firmly prejudiced against both Gat and his uncle 
in ways that will affect the dispersal of the family fortune; meanwhile, Cadence’s 
mother and her aunts, all vying for the inheritance, shamelessly attempt to use their 
children to sway their father’s decision and propel the family toward the tragedy at 
the heart of the book. With Cadence as a fully unreliable and sometimes distancing 
narrator who has suffered a trauma that she can’t remember, Lockhart weaves a solid 
tragic story; the events leading to an irreparable and deeply sad event are spooled 
out in poetic prose interspersed with dark fairy-tale insets that bitterly explore the 
festering stink of old money, simmering sibling rivalry, and impossible mixed-class 
romance. The YA twist here is the currently popular device of lost memory and 
530 • The BulleTin
mental breakdown in the aftermath of a horrific event, and while savvy readers will 
figure out the main trick long before the reveal, the details are still engaging and 
the inciting problems worth consideration. Given the subject matter, this will pair 
well with the usual high school canon fodder; readers may not relate to Cadence 
any more than they do to Gatsby’s Daisy, but the distance imposed by her self-
consciously artful storytelling allows for sustained reflection.  KC
lord, emery Open Road Summer. Walker, 2014 342p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3610-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3611-6 $12.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Rising country star Lilah Montgomery is as sweet as it gets. Her best friend, Reagan, 
however, has some seriously sharp edges that have led to several run-ins with the 
law. When Reagan suffers the consequences of one more bad decision, Lilah invites 
Reagan along on her summer solo tour, hoping her friend will help her survive 
the stress of the tour. Some scandalous and unfair press sends Lilah reeling, and 
damage control takes the form of a new opening act featuring a wholesome guy 
named Matt who will stand in as Lilah’s fake boyfriend for press purposes—but the 
feelings that develop between Reagan and Matt are far from fake. The erudition of 
Reagan’s narration is initially suspicious for such a hard-partying character, but it 
both hints at depths in her character that unfold as the novel progresses and makes 
what could be a sappy romance for the celebrity-obsessed into a smartly realized, 
engrossing love, friendship, and redemption story. There are moments that read 
like a Southern-fried Hollywood rom-com, with Matt as a thinly veiled version of 
Matthew McConaughey (oh, those dimples!) and Lilah channeling Taylor Swift, 
but there is also real emotion here, keyed to contemporary teen concerns about 
coming back after overexposure and lost reputation, deserved or not.  KC
mAclAchlAn, pAtriciA Fly Away. McElderry, 2014 108p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6008-9 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6010-2 $10.99 
 R* Gr. 2-4
An anomaly in her musical family, Lucy can’t hold a pitch, despite her deepest 
longings, and thus refuses to sing out loud. Her baby brother Teddy, however, 
can barely talk but can sing any melody, a secret known only to Lucy, who shares 
a bedtime ritual with him each evening (“Teddy has music but no words. I have 
words but no music. We are a strange pair”). Lucy and Teddy, along with their 
sister Gracie and their parents, have traveled to North Dakota to help out at their 
aunt Frankie’s ranch. Flood season there opens with a vengeance right after they 
arrive, and Teddy goes missing; Lucy, unabashedly singing their shared song and 
listening for his response, is the one who manages to find him. There is nothing 
flashy or overt here; in fact, most of the relationship development is quietly inferred 
through shared secrets—Teddy and Lucy share music, Lucy and her father share 
poetry, Frankie and Lucy share the secret of other secrets. The plot trajectory is 
perfectly paced, investing readers in Teddy and his fate. The large, approachable 
font and copious spacing make this an excellent selection for early chapter book 
readers, particularly those drawn to strong characters and nuanced storytelling. 
Quiet and tender, this is a story that audiences will wish took longer to read.  HM 
June 2014 • 531
mArentette, meghAn The Stowaways; illus. by Dean Griffiths. Pajama, 
2014 235p
ISBN 978-1-927485-33-0 $19.95 
 Ad Gr. 4-6
The Stowaway family of mice has a history of adventuring, but that came to a stop 
after Gramps went missing back when twins Rory and Morgan were babies. When 
Rory learns that Grampa may be alive, he and his grandmother secretly team up 
to try to rescue Gramps from the laboratory where they believe him to be captive. 
Meanwhile, Morgan discovers Grampa’s true location—in the home of a little girl 
who lives nearby—and heads off alone to try and free him. The mice eventually 
converge in a reunion with Grampa, but the poor old mouse soon dies. Upon 
returning home, the Stowaways discover a hurricane threatening to destroy their 
house, so the newly bonded family takes off adventuring again, looking forward 
to a fresh start together. While the plot moves along at a nice clip, there’s minimal 
character development here, and the writing is sometimes flat. The details of the 
mice’s environment (Morgan constructs a bicycle from bits and bobs after riding a 
dollhouse version, for example) may nonetheless capture the imaginations of kids 
with a love for miniature worlds, especially readers who enjoyed Richard Peck’s 
Secrets at Sea (BCCB 12/11). Griffiths’ occasional, naturalistic illustrations in mono-
chromatic tones have an endearing warmth, although the mice tend to be more 
skillfully depicted than the humans. While not in the same class with O’Brien’s Mrs. 
Frisby and the Rats of NIMH (BCCB 10/71) or Avi’s Poppy series (Poppy, BCCB 
1/96, etc.), fans of those books may enjoy the Stowaways’ escapades as well.  JH 
mArino, Andy The Door. Scholastic, 2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55137-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-55139-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7 
Hannah’s world is pretty much limited to the lighthouse where she lives, the voices 
inside her head, and her overprotective mother. It turns out her mother was right 
to be cautious, as twelve-year-old Hannah is a very important person—one of very 
few guardians who keep watch over a doorway to the afterlife and make sure that it 
stays closed to those seeking to get in or out. After Hannah’s mother dies, Hannah 
enters through the door, determined to find her and bring her back to the living. 
Once in the afterlife Hannah quickly acclimates to the strange, fascinating world 
she finds on the other side, where dead people try their hands at various tasks, 
all designed to help them reach enlightenment and reach Ascension, a promised, 
happier fate beyond the city of the dead. The fogginess that creeps in on everyone 
in the world of the dead is introduced to splendid effect, as Hannah doesn’t even 
realize the pieces she is forgetting until they are gone or nearly so; the agonized 
reader will spot this coming and be forced to watch helplessly, just as the residents 
who’ve learned this happens must do. Thoughtful readers who have stuck through 
the twisty plot and fairly sophisticated otherworld concept will likely adjust well to 
the uncertain ending, even while they may wish for more clarity about Hannah’s fate. 
Not since the equally haunting and engrossing Half World by Hiromi Goto (BCCB 
9/10) has there been such an intriguing look at a limbo world that awaits the dead, 
and what happens to a mortal girl who dares to find her own fate within it.  AS
532 • The BulleTin
mAss, wendy Space Taxi: Archie Takes Flight; by Wendy Mass and Michael Brawer; 
illus. by Elise Gravel. Little, 2014 [112p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24319-3 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24321-6 $5.99 
 Ad Gr. 2-3
Archie has been waiting all eight years, eight months, and eight days for this night, 
when he can finally accompany his dad on his second-shift taxi route for Take Your 
Kid to Work Day. As they pull away, though, the taxi takes off into outer space, and 
Archie’s dad reveals that he’s actually a space taxi driver. Their first fare unfortunately 
turns out to be a notorious intergalactic criminal, a fact they find out by witness-
ing Pockets, a stowaway talking cat agent of the Intergalactic Security Force, take 
him down. Seeing a strategic opportunity, the ISF then invites them to use their 
space taxi skills as the Force’s agents under the guidance of Pockets, who comes to 
live on Earth in their home. While these extra–solar system adventures will garner 
enthusiasm, the plot’s pretty thin to sustain even this slight length, and Archie’s 
adjustment to intergalactic norms and his dad’s agreement to an out-of-this-world 
homeschooling program are implausibly sudden and contrived. The short chapters, 
large print, and plenty of blocky, simple spot art enhance the readability factor, 
though, and a brief afterward accessibly explains the concepts of gravity, wormholes, 
and exoplanets for budding scientists. Even with its shortcomings, most kids will be 
fans of the idea of dropping out of school and having a pet alien-police-cat, so while 
O’Ryan’s Hello, Nebulon! (BCCB 7/8/13) may be a stronger interplanetary early 
reader, this is going to have appeal for readers ready to take off on their own.  TA
mAtA, Julie Kate Walden Directs: Night of the Zombie Chickens. Disney Hy-
perion, 2014 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-9459-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Kate is making the most of her family’s new home in the country, using her 
mother’s organically raised chickens as the titular zombies in her first movie while 
her longtime best friend, Alyssa, screams bloody murder in the starring role. Soon, 
though, Alyssa and popular girl Lydia bond, and when Alyssa readily joins Lydia 
in ridiculing Kate, Kate finds herself ostracized by all but the dorkiest kids in her 
seventh-grade class. Intent on making Alyssa experience the same pain and humilia-
tion she feels, Kate sets out to teach her a lesson, ignoring her own better judgment 
and the advice of her mother and newfound friends. Mata takes shopworn plot 
elements—middle-school social politics, tension between tweens and parents—and 
subtly but powerfully illuminates them with Kate’s movie-making, transforming 
a potentially minor subplot ultimately into an object lesson in the sustaining and 
enriching power of personal projects. Readers struggling to maintain their sense of 
self when faced with the consuming dramas of middle school could benefit from 
spending time with Kate, who continues work on her film despite the teasing of 
her classmates and absence of her leading lady, not to mention the self-doubt that 
often plagues artists. The book also encourages empathy as Kate struggles to better 
understand those around her, including popular, careless Lydia, who is presented 
here without caricature. Similarly, Kate’s struggles to support her mother’s organic 
farming dream mirror many a twelve-year-old girl’s battle to overcome her baser 
emotions with more magnanimous thinking. Girls struggling to be their best selves 
will find Kate a relatable, enjoyable, and admirable companion on their journey.  AA
June 2014 • 533
mAtson, lynne Nil. Holt, 2014 374p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9771-9 $17.99  
R Gr. 9-12
In the abstract, a year can seem like a long time, but it doesn’t feel that way when 
you’re a teen sucked through a portal onto a mysterious island where you will die 
if you haven’t found a way off in 365 days. Fortunately, Charley quickly gets over 
the initial shock of waking naked in a tropical location after last being in a parking 
lot, soon learns the mysterious rules (mostly guessed at and passed from similarly 
transported teen to teen over the years), and speedily adapts to the makeshift com-
munity most residents choose to join. Her ease is helped by the instant connection 
she makes with Thad, a teen who is all too quickly approaching the end of his year. 
Their romance is fiery and desperate, befitting the dire situation in which they 
find themselves, and the urgency with which Charley commits herself to Thad’s 
escape is believable (if a little exasperatingly self-sacrificing). There is much left 
unexplained about what the island actually is (although there are intriguing hints 
sprinkled throughout), but it doesn’t really matter—the reader is swept along with 
the characters in just rooting for survival in a setting where taking too long to 
ponder answers could mean you don’t live long enough to do anything with your 
newfound revelations. The range of characters (including the rogue teens who don’t 
join the community) is effectively diverse—nearly every reader will spot a response 
that might mirror their own if thrown into this scenario.  AS
mAy, elizAbeth The Falconer. Chronicle, 2014 [384p] (The Falconer)
ISBN 978-1-4521-1423-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In 1844, Scottish society expects girls of Lady Aileana’s stature to focus on hunting 
for a husband once they’ve debuted, but Aileana has her eyes set on different prey. 
In the year since her mother’s brutal murder at the hands of a vicious faerie, Aileana 
has become a stealthy assassin, hunting and killing as many the members of the 
sithichean race as she can find in her quest for vengeance—all while playing the 
part of stylish debutante for the rest of Edinburgh. Just as Aileana’s closing in on 
the creature who took her mother’s life, however, Kiaran, her devilishly handsome 
partner in crime, explains Aileana’s true identity: she is actually a Falconer, one of 
the last guardians of the human race. This means that her vengeance quest has to 
wait, since one of the baddest faeries around is whipping up an army to cross into 
the human world and destroy it. Lady Aileana is basically Buffy in a corset and 
wielding a crossbow, and May offers a pleasing blend of witty dialogue, nonstop 
action, and campy humor in this supernatural romp through steampunk Scotland 
and its faerie folklore. The fight sequences are as pulse-pounding as the will-they/
won’t-they romance between Aileana and Kiaran; May wisely resists the impulse to 
create a love triangle with one of Aileana’s childhood friends, instead using the pal 
to represent the life that Aileana could have had if it weren’t for the soul-sucking 
creatures that have invaded her life. Readers won’t join her laments over her loss, 
though; they’ll prefer her chucking knives at drooling hellhounds and pulling Kiaran 
in for a lusty kiss. More, please.  KQG 
534 • The BulleTin
mccune, JoshuA Talker 25. Greenwillow, 2014 424p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212191-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-212192-9 $9.99 
 R Gr. 9-12
In this grim novel, dragons appeared in the world fifteen years ago, and now people 
have finally cobbled together enough attack strategies to do away with them. Melissa 
knows all too well how dangerous dragons are, as her own mother was killed by 
one, but there’s much about dragons she doesn’t understand. This becomes clear 
after she is kidnapped (or rescued, depending on who you ask), first by resistance 
forces who want her to help save the dragons, and then by a military operation that 
threatens her family unless she uses her telepathic connection to help them locate 
the creatures. The book treats the situation with satisfying complexity—it is obvious 
why there is so much fear in this society, and how people’s safety strategies might 
wear on them nearly as much as the risk of becoming dragon fodder. There’s some 
startling viciousness here, and readers expecting noble dragons (or noble humanity) 
will be quickly disabused of those notions as the dragons snap up children for a 
snack and people retaliate by utilizing extended torture tactics, only loosely under 
the guise of trying to get information. A slightly too sharp social comment about 
reality television and how it is used to exploit individuals wears thin, but this is a 
minor concern in what is overall an edgy, dark glimpse into a world that decides 
the best way to handle terrorists is terrorism.  AS
newmAn, pAtriciA Plastic, Ahoy!: Investigating the Great Pacific Garbage Patch; 
illus. with photographs by Annie Crawley. Millbrook, 2014 48p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1283-5 $30.60
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2541-5 $22.95  
Ad Gr. 4-6
In 2009 three graduate students boarded the New Horizon with the Scripps 
Environmental Accumulation of Plastic Expedition to study the now infamous 
garbage-riddled gyre in the Pacific Ocean. Each student had a particular mission. 
Miriam wanted to know whether the marine insect Halobates, which thrives while 
drifting around on plastic bits, deprives other organisms of food. Darcy focused on 
the relative populations of phytoplankton near the shore and in the gyre. Chelsea, 
a chemist, gathered information on leeching and absorption of chemicals as the 
plastic breaks down at sea. The spotlight on how these three scientists-in-training 
go about constructing their experiments and gathering data is similar to that of the 
Scientists in the Field series, only pitched here for a slightly younger audience. This 
title lacks the allure of the rubber ducky and sneaker flotsam (not to mention the 
effervescent personality of its oceanographer subject) in Loree Griffin Burns’ Track-
ing Trash (BCCB 5/07), but Newman does a solid job of walking readers through 
the trio of studies in an orderly fashion, and plenty of color photographs convey 
a sense of ship life for readers more drawn to the adventure than the science. Too 
much truly useful information is tucked into sidebars and lengthy picture captions, 
though, forcing readers into a dilemma of whether to lose the narrative flow to 
catch the background, or stick with the story and backtrack later for the missing 
pieces. Source notes and an index are included, as well as a handful of books and 
a brief but well selected list of websites for further research.  EB 
June 2014 • 535
pAss, emmA ACID. Delacorte, 2014 382p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99134-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74387-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37241-1 $10.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Jenna thought that at seventeen, she had figured out her rule for what remained of 
her life—be merciless to anyone who tries to mess with her in the maximum-security 
prison where she is one of few female inmates, after having been tried and sentenced 
as an adult for murdering her parents. She doesn’t expect that people are going to 
risk their lives to help her escape, but that’s exactly what happens, and suddenly 
Jenna’s mixed up in a large-scale plot to take down ACID, the brutal police force 
that has been in power since the British government handed over control in the 
mid-twenty-second century. Although she struggles mightily against being used by 
anyone, good or bad, Jenna is essentially a pawn, first being renamed by the good 
guys and then receiving an actual brain adjustment from the bad. The concept—
the layering of the protagonist as she first claims a new identity and then has her 
memory adjusted—is admirably intriguing, but ultimately four versions (there’s yet 
another forcible memory shift in her past that she doesn’t learn about until later) 
of the same character makes for a muddled narrative. In addition, the resistance 
force is poorly described, and it’s led by a character so one-sided that his evil is 
uninspiring rather than threatening. Nevertheless, a tough chick who can protect 
herself admirably, especially one who turns out to be way more sympathetic than 
she first appears, may still find a ready audience in character-driven YA readers.  AS
pAuley, Kimberly Ask Me. Soho Teen, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-1-61695-383-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
As a descendent of the Greek Sibyls in modern times, Aria faces the challenge of 
being an oracle, who must any questions she hears (in school, in the grocery store, 
from the TV) with the truth. Most of the time her responses are nonsense riddles, 
made obvious only after some event has some transpired—well, except for the 
crystal-clear answer she gave her mother about her cheating husband, which is also 
why Aria now finds herself in a rundown town living with her ailing grandparents. 
After a girl goes missing, the questions being asked around town mean that Aria 
knows where the body is, how the girl died, and that one of the two boys the girl 
was seeing was responsible. Aria finds herself being drawn to both boys—Alex, the 
gruff, clearly hurting football player, and Will, the loyal, sweet golden boy—but her 
prophecies also seem to point to both. Readers who have picked up on the pattern 
of Aria’s prophecies won’t be taken at all by surprise when the bad guy is revealed, 
but the story is less about the crime than Aria’s coming to terms with herself, her 
gift, and its ability to both harm and hurt. Contrivances add up, though, from both 
of the boys showing sudden interest in Aria to her gran’s presentation of a helpful 
guidebook with the Sibyls’ history (why this wasn’t mentioned before when Aria 
was struggling with her gift is glossed over). Still, the final scene is cinema-worthy 
both in atmosphere and pacing, so readers who have persevered despite the book’s 
flaws will feel well rewarded.  KQG
536 • The BulleTin
peArson, susAn Arlo Rolled; illus. by Jeff Ebbeler. Two Lions, 2014 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-4721-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-9721-8 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R 3-5 yrs
“Stir-fries and soup are no life for me!/ I want to grow up and find out what I’ll 
be.” So says Arlo, the bespectacled pea who rolls away from his home pod to find 
his destiny. Adventure ensues, with slugs and stinkbugs eager to make lunch out 
of Arlo, who only rolls faster as he repeats his mantra of self-actualization. After all 
that rolling, and thanks to a careless kick from a digging dog, Arlo finds himself far 
from where he began; burrowing into the ground for a nap, he sleeps and sleeps, 
eventually waking to find he has grown into the plant he was meant to be. This 
lighthearted destiny quest charms with its playful rhymes and zesty acrylics depicting 
Arlo’s journey in the bold, playful colors of a lush garden. Full-bleed double-page 
spreads capture the immensity of the landscape compared to a single pea while 
conveying the sense of boundless possibility that keeps Arlo moving. With plenty 
of action, accessible and engaging rhymes, and a winning pea-sized protagonist, 
this rollicking readaloud makes a perfect companion to an introductory unit on 
plants or gardening—or just a warm day when summer produce abounds.  AA
picArd, mAtthiAs, illus. Jim Curious: A Voyage to the Heart of the Sea; illus. by 
Matthias Picard. Abrams, 2014 48p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1043-8 $19.95 
 R* Gr. K-5
Here’s a masterful triple threat—wordless book, comics-style book, 3-D book—
that successfully parries all charges of gimmickry. Titular Jim, garbed in a bulky, 
helmeted diving suit, lumbers out of his seaside cottage and lowers himself down 
the seawall ladder onto a shallow shelf littered with debris. A few steps later he’s 
tumbling lower and lower into the depths, and his adventure begins. In oversized 
panels and fractured frames we share his explorations as he delights in the shifting 
forms of marine life, is stalked by a shark, comes upon a sunken fighter plane and 
a glowing treasure chest in a pirate ship, sights the ruins of Atlantis, survives the 
effluence of deep sea vents, and finally lands on the ocean floor, where a wooden 
hatch tests the limits of courage and curiosity. He opens the hatch, and . . . sorry, 
no spoilers allowed, but it’s an awesome twist and a mind-boggling conclusion. 
The cardboard 3-D glasses (two sets provided, the extra as a spare or to share) en-
able viewers to accompany Jim viscerally on his freefall, and the comic-book-styled 
layout tacitly directs attention around the undersea wonderland while orchestrating 
well-timed moments of surprise along the way. Artwork is intricate and playful 
and satisfyingly creepy, and the Everyman dot eyes, hook nose, and mouth slash 
of Jim’s face through his mask allow the audience to project themselves right into 
his diving gear. If the oversized format and heist-ability of the 3-D glasses argue 
against adding this to a library collection, this should nonetheless top the list of 
recommendations for gift books for both art and adventure lovers.  EB
June 2014 • 537
preus, mArgi West of the Moon; illus. by Lilli Carré. Amulet/Abrams, 
2014 213p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0896-1 $16.95  
R Gr. 6-9
In the fairy tale young Astri adores, a white bear whisks a pretty girl off for an 
adventure. Astri’s own story is quite different: a decrepit old goatherd buys her 
from her conniving aunt and Astri is forced to labor on his farm, enduring threats 
of physical and sexual violence. Well aware there’s no prince waiting in the wings 
to save her, Astri manages to steal a pile of coins from the goatherd and takes off, 
rescuing her little sister from her aunt in the process. Astri’s intent on making it to 
America, the last place her father was known to be alive, and so she schemes, tricks, 
and lies, eventually gaining passage for both she and her sister. Once on board, 
her sister falls ill and Astri is forced to make a bargain with an even more skilled 
trickster than herself—Death. Elements of familiar folktales, such “The Billy Goat’s 
Gruff” and, obviously, “East of the Sun, West of the Moon,” blend seamlessly with 
historical fact; an author’s note details the family history of immigrant siblings that 
inspired the story and explains historical and folkloric details. It’s Astri’s voice, 
however, that is most appealing: her direct, no-nonsense narration has a sharp bite, 
yet it also reveals the vulnerable young girl who’s willing to continue to fight but is 
nonetheless exhausted by the weight of her struggle. The chapters have an episodic 
structure that makes this an ideal choice for readaloud or storytelling adaptations, 
while the mix of folklore, fact, and fantasy will please fans of Edith Patou’s East 
(BCCB 10/03). A glossary and a bibliography are appended.  KQG
prins, mArcel Hidden Like Anne Frank: Fourteen True Stories of Survival; by 
Marcel Prins and Peter Henk Steenhuis; tr. from the Dutch by Laura Watkin-
son. Levine/Scholastic, 2014 211p illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54362-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54363-7 $16.99  
R Gr. 6-10
Fourteen Dutch Holocaust survivors, who were hidden by neighbors and strang-
ers throughout World War II, recount their earliest memories of days before the 
war; the subsequent years of tenuous safety, Nazi threat, and abrupt relocations; 
and their lives as survivors. Since all fourteen hail from the same general region, 
overlapping experiences and first-person narration help readers envision the set-
tings in Amsterdam and its environs, the bicycle transport that brought many of 
the children to safe houses, the converted theater from which so many were sent 
eastward to labor or death, the kindergarten across from the theater, through which 
many babies and youngsters were spirited away from desperate parents. Readers 
who expect happy endings to counter Anne Frank’s tragedy will find that survival 
did not assure a rosy future. Most of the accounts conclude with an observation 
that the elation of liberation quickly gave way to darker domestic chapters, as 
news of family deaths filtered to the survivors, and parents and children reunited 
as strangers after years of separation. Many young adult readers will sweep through 
these entries like chapters in a novel, but history educators will find them to be 
perfectly sized for classroom reading as well. While there’s no information on how 
these interviews were obtained, end matter does include a glossary, photos of the 
subjects, and an introduction and acknowledgment that point readers to a website 
for more stories and information.  EB
538 • The BulleTin
reinhArdt, dAnA We Are the Goldens. Lamb, 2014 [208p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99065-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74257-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97581-2 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
There may be two Golden sisters, but Nell has always felt like part of her beloved 
older sister, Layla; it’s logical to freshman Nell that her soccer jersey is labeled “N. 
Golden” while senior Layla’s just reads “Golden” (“We both know,” says Nell, 
“that you are the Original Golden”). When Layla’s behavior becomes secretive and 
deceptive, though, and gossip about Layla and a teacher circulates around school, 
Nell begins to realize that her idol is actually a flawed human, and that she may 
need to break Layla’s trust in order to help her. Reinhardt astutely structures Nell’s 
narration as being directed entirely toward Layla, the second-person address un-
derscoring the centrality of the older girl in her sister’s life. Nell’s voice is fluid yet 
authentic as she puzzles out Layla’s changing behavior and moves to define herself 
with the boy she’s adored from afar and the boy who’s long been her friend. Other 
elements are less effective, unfortunately: Nell’s obsession with teenaged brothers 
who died within a few months of each other is narratively distracting despite its 
thematic relevance; while Nell’s separation from Layla is important, the emphasis 
on her telling Layla’s secret is overdramatized, with an abrupt cliffhanger ending. 
Nonetheless, it’s an eloquent and concise story, and younger siblings may recognize 
Nell’s transformation from wide-eyed fan to clear-eyed sister.  DS
reynolds, AAron Here Comes Destructosaurus!; illus. by Jeremy Tankard. Chron-
icle, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-4521-2454-4 $16.99  
R 3-5 yrs
Destructosaurus is a force to be reckoned with: he smashes into skyscrapers, tracks 
mud and seaweed all over the city, shoots flames with his enormous belches, and 
tosses buildings and bridges aside, all while an adult voice calls on him to pull it 
together (“Watch what you’re doing, Destructosaurus!”). It turns out that Destruc-
tosaurus is just trying to locate his lost teddy bear, though, so the adult apologizes 
for the harsh tone (“You could have used your words. But, still. Sorry I yelled”) 
and Destructosaurus heads back to the sea . . . without cleaning up his mess. Even 
kids who don’t recognize Destructosaurus as a tantruming child can appreciate the 
book’s graphic appeal and superlative destruction. The digitally rendered illustrations 
by Tankard (Grumpy Bird, BCCB 3/07) offer playful perspectives on the monster-
movie feel (the image of Destructosaurus reflected in the glass of a skyscraper is 
particularly clever). Destructosaurus is pictured from myriad angles—down below, 
up above, through an open window—and each take capitalizes on the size and 
scale of the monster. The artwork has the rich translucency of ink, with thick black 
outlines suggesting brushwork. This will certainly appeal to the preschoolers, who 
are likely to recognize the adult protestations as readily as the adults recognize the 
path of destruction that follows the tantruming dinosaur.  HM
June 2014 • 539
rocco, John Swim That Rock; by John Rocco and Jay Primiano; illus. by John 
Rocco. Candlewick, 2014 293p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6905-8 $16.99 
 R Gr. 6-9
With his father missing and presumed dead, and his mother shouldering the huge 
debt on their diner, it seems likely that twelve-year-old Jake will be forced to move 
from his Rhode Island fishing community to his grandparents’ home in Arizona. 
Two men have stepped up, though, with strategies for helping Jake dig his family out 
of the financial hole before the debt comes due. Gene, best friend to Jake’s father, 
takes the straight and narrow road, offering extra work on his quahogging boat 
and teaching him the art of commercial clamming. A more mysterious newcomer, 
whom Jake simply dubs “the Pirate,” whisks Jake off on midnight money-making 
jaunts of more lucrative but illicit nature. The money’s trickling in, but foreclosure 
is coming up even faster, and Jake puts it all on the line by taking Gene’s boat on a 
solo run to make one huge, decisive haul. Landlubbers who think they won’t give 
a rip for a novel about clamming have another think coming. Jake’s efforts make 
for a dangerous business, even without loan sharks closing in, and the grab-a-buck 
antics of the Pirate add yet another layer of suspense to an already tightly plotted 
tale. There’s a happy ending—perhaps a tad too tidy for the murky buildup—but 
it’s honestly won, and, like all good maritime novels, this one will have landlocked 
kids pining for a strong gust of salt spray.  EB
russo, mArisAbinA Sophie Sleeps Over; written and illus. by Marisabina Rus-
so. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-933-7 $16.99  
R 5-7 yrs
Young bunny Sophie is excited to spend the night at her BFF Olive’s house, but she 
is shocked to find an unknown bunny answering Olive’s door: “‘I’m Penelope,’ said 
the bunny. ‘I’m Olive’s best friend.’ ‘No, I’m her best friend,’ said Sophie, but all 
of a sudden she wasn’t so sure.” Unlike Olive, neither Penelope nor Sophie think 
it’s possible to have two best friends, and the evening is up and down for Sophie 
as Olive takes alternate sides over such things as favorite cupcake flavors and the 
fairness of a party game. When bedtime comes, Sophie can’t sleep, but neither can 
Penelope, and the two bunnies discover some common ground, deciding that the 
concept of multiple best friends might have merit after all before finally settling 
down to slumber. Plenty of primary-graders will sympathize with Sophie’s unease 
with both her friendship status with Olive and with spending the night away from 
home. Russo treats her subject with respect and emotional authenticity as Sophie 
wavers between enjoying herself and wanting to go home, and while the ending is 
a tad convenient, the reconciliation provides a possible model for nervous young-
sters. The colorful patterns and warm tones of the gouache illustrations provide a 
cozy feeling of security that helps mitigate the anxiety of Sophie’s situation, and the 
bunnies themselves are pretty darn adorable; light brown Sophie, with her gentle 
expression, ever-present tiara, and slightly floppy ears is particularly winning. This 
might be a useful introduction to sleepovers for first-timers, or a helpful springboard 
for discussions about friendship struggles.  JH
540 • The BulleTin
sAntAt, dAn Beekle: The Unimaginary Friend; written and illus. by Dan San-
tat. Little, 2014 [38p]
ISBN 978-0-316-19998-8 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
 R 5-8 yrs
On “an island far away,” an imaginary friend—a pint-sized, marshmallowy guy 
sporting a golden crown—longs for the day when a child will “imagine” him, 
and thus choose and name him. As the days pass and he remains unchosen, the 
intrepid fellow goes in search of his intended child, leaving his imaginary home 
for the real world, “a strange place. No kids were eating cake. No one stopped to 
hear the music. And everyone needed naptime.” Even the seemingly rich pickings 
of a playground yield no result, until finally a girl named Alice chooses him; once 
she dubs him “Beekle” a bond is formed, and the two go on to have adventures, 
both real and imaginary, together. Pithy writing combines with the rich, slightly 
stylized illustrations (in pencil, crayon, watercolor, ink, and Photoshop on matte 
pages) to give an elegant edge to the storytelling. Pudgy white Beekle is a lovable 
toylike figure (kids will particularly giggle at his “rear” view, in which butt cheeks are 
subtly indicated), and the visual contrasts between the bright-hued, multi-patterned 
imaginary world and the darker, drabber real world are striking (especially lovely 
is the rainbow-scaled sea serpent he encounters). This tale could enhance multiple 
educational or storytime themes—friendship, imagination, journeys—and could 
be used to spark some imaginative writing or art activities; it might also inspire the 
development of some new imaginary friends.  JH
schneider, Josh Princess Sparkle-Heart Gets a Makeover; written and illus. by 
Josh Schneider. Clarion, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-544-14228-2 $16.99  
R 4-7 yrs
Amelia does almost everything with her beloved pink-and-lavender rag doll, Princess 
Sparkle-Heart, but while Amelia bathes, the cloth-bodied doll has to wait outside 
the bathroom. Amelia’s perpetually growling cocker spaniel, who clearly has it in 
for the doll, chooses that moment to attack and reduces poor Princess Sparkle-
Heart to tatters. Amelia’s mom comes to the rescue, however, patching up the doll 
with plenty of input from Amelia, including “Give her some good teeth.” The 
revamped Princess Sparkle-Heart is hidden from view until the final pages reveal 
the bulked-up, now-patchwork doll bedecked not only with a frilly pink heart on 
her chest but also large white fangs, crazy red yarn hair, and a superhero cape—all 
in all, a figure that strikes fear in the heart of that feisty cocker spaniel. Schneider’s 
clear, concise writing is punctuated by amusing understatement (the caption for the 
attack scene is “But one day Princess Sparkle-Heart had an accident”), but it also 
conveys genuine sympathy for Amelia. The tidy line and watercolor illustrations 
are uncomplicated and vibrant against an abundance of clean white space. Amelia, 
with her wild shock of scarlet hair, Orphan Annie eyes, denim romper, and droopy 
socks, is an expressive heroine, and small touches, such as a paper-crown wearing 
stuffed penguin (who averts his eyes during the disaster) add humor and warmth 
as well. Use as an inspiration for a similar toy transformation or just a counter to 
tales of overprotective toy lovers.  JH
June 2014 • 541
shinodA, AnnA Learning Not to Drown. Atheneum, 2014 338p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9393-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9668-2 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Clare’s family has an open secret: her older brother is a violent addict who has 
been in and out of jail since Clare was five. Clare has compensated by being as 
perfect as possible, getting good grades, knitting blankets for the homeless, saving 
for college, and rarely breaking her mother’s strict rules, and she’s determined to 
remember her brother as a good guy who was in the wrong place at the wrong 
time. However, when her brother comes home this time, she starts to see him with 
new eyes, particularly when he gets in trouble again and her mother tries to protect 
him at Clare’s expense. A dramatic partial memory opens the book, immediately 
followed by Clare’s description of the skeleton that appears before her in times of 
stress; what unfolds, however, is not the horror story these tropes suggest but a 
searching tale of a family torn apart by the addictions and criminal activities of one 
member. The mother and father are psychologically if maddeningly credible in their 
denial of the extent of their son’s problems, and Clare’s dawning understanding 
of how their cover-ups have allowed many people, including herself and her other 
brother, to be hurt is painful to read. Ultimately, Clare has to come to terms with 
the fact that no amount of compassion and forgiveness on her part can change her 
brother, and that her responsibility must be to herself first; that she gradually realizes 
this through experience rather than through adult supports and guidance relieves 
the book of any message-y pretense. Instead, there is a subtle coming-of-age arc 
where she offers to a young boy the kind of tacit compassion that she wishes she 
had received from her own family, paying forward the good her brother showed 
her before he went bad.  KC
smith, Alex t. Claude at the Beach; written and illus. by Alex T. Smith. Peachtree, 
2014 95p
ISBN 978-1-56145-703-8 $12.95 
 Ad Gr. 2-3
When Mr. and Mrs. Shinyshoes go off to work, their dog Claude decides it’s time 
for a vacation and heads to the beach with his best pal, Sir Bobblysock (a sock), and 
a suitcase full of “all sorts of useful and interesting things.” At the beach, Claude 
uses a pair of Mr. Shinyshoes’ underpants for a swimsuit (adapted with sticky tape 
for the diminutive Claude) and spends his time there rescuing a swimmer from 
a shark (Claude offers the shark a bone baguette instead), building sandcastles 
with Sir Bobblysock, and setting sail with some pirates to look for treasure. The 
treasure’s fearsome owner, pirate captain Naughty Nora, is loath to part with it, 
though, until she spies Claude’s suitcase and its cargo; a trade is made and Claude 
and Sir Bobblysock return home with a goodly portion of the booty. Smith’s brief 
text is printed in an approachably large type, though the occasional challenging 
vocabulary (e.g. “baguette,” “utterly perplexed”) might stretch the abilities of 
some early readers. There’s a pleasant, cozy humor to the escapades, but the events 
are so randomly silly and the solutions to problems so overly convenient that the 
resulting narrative feels more piecemeal than satisfying. Still, Smith’s digitally cre-
ated art—done in grays, black, and white, with pink and red highlights—has a 
similarly wacky feel with slightly exaggerated figures and humorous details, such as 
Sir Bobblysock’s vintage-looking wing-tipped sunglasses. Kids will be particularly 
542 • The BulleTin
tickled by Claude’s polka-dotted underpants/swimsuit, and those who enjoy this 
title may want to back up and read Claude’s previous two adventures as well.  JH
smith-reAdy, Jeri This Side of Salvation. Simon, 2014 368p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3948-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3950-4 $10.99  
R* Gr. 7-10
After his older brother is killed, David responds initially by raging against God, 
but he then finds compassion, forgiveness, and salvation at his new church and 
begins to get his life back on track. His parents, however, are not able to get past 
their grief, and their commitment to church becomes an unhealthy attachment to 
a fringe group of believers preparing for the end of the world. His father replaces 
his alcohol addiction with an addiction to speaking only in Bible verses, and his 
mother takes David and his sister, Mara, out of school; then they ask David and 
Mara to sacrifice their attachment to all worldly pleasures in preparation for the end. 
David makes a bargain: he will comply if they agree that, if the end doesn’t come 
as predicted, his father will get professional help. When their parents disappear, 
David and Mara must make a last-ditch effort to save their family and themselves. 
Through the use of flashbacks that alternate with the present, the story of the 
four years between his brother’s death and his parents’ disappearance unfolds with 
remarkable grace and sensitivity. David’s sincere belief is balanced by his girlfriend 
Bailey’s skepticism, with their love (and, frankly, their steamy sexual desire) for each 
other forcing them to talk honestly and with respect about their differences. As in 
Brian Meehl’s You Don’t Know about Me (BCCB 6/11), reductive applications of 
scripture are challenged and thoughtfully evaluated, especially with regard to David’s 
best friend’s sexuality, but also with respect to forgiveness and end-times prophecy. 
David’s approach to problem-solving is shot through with wisdom he has learned 
through baseball; indeed, his multi-dimensionality, as a baseball player, a devoted 
son, a strong Christian, an anxious boyfriend, and a sometimes impulsive little 
brother make him a standout character with unexpected depths in this unusual 
and insightful family story.  KC
somper, Justin Allies & Assassins. Little, 2014 [496p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25393-2 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25394-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Since he’s only sixteen, Jared thought he would have decades before he would have 
to worry about ruling the country, but the assassination of his brother means that 
Jared has suddenly become the prince. He has a large council and a formidable 
mother to help, but Jared is woefully inexperienced. When further attacks ensue 
(the dead prince’s wife and his illicit lover are both assaulted, the former’s death 
particularly tragic given her pregnancy), Jared and the young, fiery-haired appren-
tice of a member of his council, Asta, decide to pursue their own investigation, 
and what emerges is a complex mix of infidelity, betrayals, political intrigue, and a 
hint of romance between the protagonists themselves. Jared and Asta are effective 
foils for one another, both motivated toward justice and fairness but from such 
different backgrounds, experiences, and perspectives that they often seem at odds; 
both grow considerably from knowing the other. The mystery isn’t the real draw 
June 2014 • 543
here (in fact, Jared and Asta aren’t much as sleuths); it’s the period atmosphere and 
adventure that provide Game of Thrones–inspired drama that will draw medieval 
buffs and fantasy fans.  AS
strAnd, Jeff I Have a Bad Feeling About This. Sourcebooks, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-4022-8455-7 $8.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Henry’s dad is concerned about his son’s constant video gaming and fear of, well, just 
about everything, so he decides to ship sixteen-year-old Henry off to Strongwoods 
Survival Camp, where he’ll spend two weeks learning skills like archery and shelter 
construction, capped with a faux Hunger Games-esque wilderness brawl. Henry and 
the other four geeky campers—including Henry’ best friend, Randy—hilariously 
fail every task, but things change dramatically when mafia goons coming to collect 
money they’re owed and shoot and kill the camp’s counselor. Henry witnesses the 
murder, and the Games suddenly turn into a very real life-or-death situation for 
the inept campers as they try to stay one step ahead of coldblooded killers in the 
woods. While the action is high-stakes, the tone here resides in humor more than 
horror with slapstick events and a tongue-in-cheek narrator, but unfortunately, the 
comic relief is often stiff and rehearsed, making this feel like a stand-up routine 
gone awry. The story’s focus is also undermined by awkward foreshadowing and a 
running gag in an overlay that places readers in the opening night of a film based 
on the book, throwing audiences out of the story. The level of gore and crude 
humor is surprisingly light for what would seem to be the target age group, which 
might disappoint some looking for a full-blown campy thriller, but would make 
this a nice choice for kids not quite ready for something like Beaudoin’s The Infects 
(BCCB 10/12).  TA
strohmeyer, sArAh The Secrets of Lily Graves. Balzer + Bray, 2014 [304p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-225960-8 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-225961-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
The daughter of a family of morticians, Lily embraces being an outcast: she dresses 
in black lace and Doc Martens, reads books on anatomy, and knows more than a 
thing or two about the tricks of prepping dead bodies for public display. Her best 
and only friend, a Russian orphan named Sara who was adopted by a very religious 
family, joins her in her snide rejection of the “Tragically Normal” girls in their 
town, even though Sara’s beauty and wealth make her a better fit with the TNs. 
When Erin, one of the TNs, is found in her bathtub with her wrists expertly slit, 
Lily’s privileged access to death records and police reports informs her that it was 
no suicide, and her knowledge of anatomy as well as her ambiguous relationship 
with Matt, Erin’s boyfriend, make both her and Matt suspects. Characterization 
here is wafer-thin and based largely on clichés, making actions and conversations 
hard to credit, but this flatness actually facilitates a plot twist that on the one hand 
comes out of nowhere, and on the other fits with popular contemporary stereotypes 
of darkness lurking behind suburban placidity and overt religious display. Readers 
who enjoy TV murder mysteries, that is, those that depend on far-fetched plots 
drawn around stock characters, will find this to their liking.  KC
544 • The BulleTin
struyK-bonn, chris Whisper. Orca, 2014 [352p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0475-3 $12.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0477-7 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 9-12
Despite being shunned for her physical differences (congenital issues including 
a cleft palate), Whisper appreciates her life amid a small, loving group of other 
rejected folks living in the forest. That’s lost to her, though, when her mother dies 
and her cruel father comes for her from his village, insisting she now take over 
running the household. When Whisper is sent to earn money for her father in the 
city, a polluted, harsh world that is even less familiar than the small village of her 
family, she is overwhelmed by the horrors that confront her, but she also glimpses 
her first hints that there are kindnesses possible among strangers as well. In the 
next months, her musical talent is noticed, she is reunited with some of her for-
est friends, and she learns that not everyone responds to physical disfigurement 
with superstitious, nightmarish rejection. This is a complex novel, and Whisper’s 
trajectory from forest to village to city is intense and often anguishing; readers 
will likely be so sympathetic to the protagonist that they will be more than willing 
to endure her painful life lessons right along with her. The innate musical talent 
is more romantic than plausible, but Whisper is clearly brimming with passions 
that could, perhaps, lead to her being able to write extraordinary pieces with no 
training or musical context. Offer this to character-driven dystopia fans who will 
likely relish this glimpse into a multi-layered society that as well-developed and 
plausible as it is troubling.  AS
tAmAKi, mAriKo This One Summer; illus. by Jillian Tamaki. First Second/
Roaring Brook, 2014 320p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-094-7 $21.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-774-6 $17.99  
R* Gr. 7-10 
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 493, for review.
tAylor, lAini Dreams of Gods & Monsters. Little, 2014 613p (Daughter 
of Smoke & Bone)
ISBN 978-0-316-13407-1 $19.00 
 R* Gr. 7-10
Ugh! Will Akiva (the angel) and Karou (the chimaera) ever find happiness when 
trouble in two worlds continues to conspire against them and their own histories 
seem too much to bear? Akiva’s treacherous uncle has stunned the human world 
by leading his battalions of Dominion soldiers to Rome, where they hope to ob-
tain human weapons of mass destruction to wage total war in Eretz. The severely 
diminished and war-weary ranks of not quite 300 Misbegotten, 87 chimaera, and 
Karou’s two human friends are the only ones who can stop them, and this only if 
Akiva and Karou can convince these longstanding enemies to fight side by side. 
Taylor spools out nail-biting suspense and wail-inducing setbacks in prose of crystal-
line beauty, as clear and pristine as it is sharply brittle. Moving effortlessly between 
expressions of deep and anguished emotion and light bursts of humor, she integrates 
new characters and develops old ones in deeply satisfying ways while completing 
the fully imagined cosmological history that opened the portals between Earth and 
Eretz in the first place. Dynamic pacing keeps readers on a razor’s edge of suspense, 
June 2014 • 545
with the desire to dwell in a richly articulated moment competing with the need to 
know what’s happening next (or at the same time on the other side of the portal). 
Though readers will be loath to leave this world behind, the trilogy ends with a 
sweet buffet of just deserts; the best balm for the bereft may be to start the series 
again from the beginning.  KC
trevAyne, emmA Flights and Chimes and Mysterious Times; illus. by Glenn 
Thomas. Simon, 2014 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9877-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9880-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
The Lady of Londinium wants a new human son to coddle, spoil, and adore for a 
few years (until he gets too big), and when the Lady wants something, she gets it. 
The child in question this time is Jack, a bored British ten-year-old who willingly 
follows Lorcan, the Lady’s most dutiful assistant, into a parallel world, the Lady’s 
own painstakingly created version of London. Soon the novelty of clockwork drag-
ons and a metal world that almost looks like his own wears off, though, and Jack 
begins to see that this town suffers under the rule of the (negligent at best, sadistic 
at worst) woman who insists he call her Mother and that he may never be able to 
escape back to his own real parents. Jack is interesting rather than likable—he is 
spoiled and demanding from the start, and he knowingly commits actions that lead 
to executions of the innocent—but his character adds edge to the folkloresque plot. 
Additionally, Trevayne surrounds Jack with deeply sympathetic characters on both 
sides of the good/evil spectrum, with even the reprehensible Lorcan, who has done 
horrific things for his beloved Lady, clearly motivated by desperate love. Steampunk 
novels for the young set are fairly uncommon, and this creaking, smoky, dangerous 
world fits the bill elegantly.  AS
underwood, deborAh Bad Bye, Good Bye; illus. by Jonathan Bean. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-92852-4 $16.99  
R 3-6 yrs
The spare rhyming text of this thoughtful picture book showcases the gamut of 
emotions experienced by a young child in the midst of a cross-country move. Anger 
and tears accompany the early lines (“Bad day/ Bad box/ Bad mop/ Bad blocks/ 
Bad truck/ Bad guy/ Bad wave/ Bad bye”); as the family ventures out onto the 
open road, some whimsical road trip details soften the anger (who doesn’t love a 
roadside restaurant named “Dinah’s Dina”?), and the discovery of a similarly aged 
boy living next door at the new house (and fireflies!) serves to turn the tide. Under-
wood (author of The Quiet Book, BCCB 5/10) is careful with her word selection; 
with only a handful sprinkled on each page, each carries considerable emotional 
weight. There is a definite forward momentum to the pacing that matches the 
topical trip as well as the movement of the boy’s emotions, from angry to neutral 
to content. The illustrations (ink and colored pencil with crisp layering suggesting 
digital assembly) resonate with the same sense of progression, with the early spreads 
perfectly matching the child’s inner raincloud while the later illustrations offer a 
glimmer of possibility. Layered washes, shadowy effects, and photographic blurs 
create an atmospheric chiaroscuro and metaphorically convey the passage of car and 
time; scratchy line details and pencil layers add texture. Many compositions have 
546 • The BulleTin
a child’s-eye perspective, with portions of the top cut off as if seen from the point 
of view of someone small, and the palette achieves a careful balance between vivid 
and muted, depending on the mood of the moment. This is a lovely portrayal of a 
child experiencing change as well as a graceful example of spare storytelling.  HM
vAn wAgenen, mAyA Popular: Vintage Wisdom for a Modern Geek. Dutton, 
2014 [272p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-525-42681-3 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
What can you do when you’re a social outcast in eighth grade, with glasses, braces, 
and blotchy skin? Real-life teen Maya Van Wagenen gives her answer in this au-
tobiographical title of an experimental year: reinvent yourself according to Betty 
Cornell’s Teenage Popularity Guide, originally published by a teen model in 1951 
and picked up by your geeky dad in a used bookstore. Focusing on one or two 
topics per month, and ignoring the open-mouthed exasperation of her best friend, 
Maya changed her diet, grooming, and posture, donned a girdle and pearls, forsook 
dungarees for smart cardigans, and went out of her way to overcome her shyness 
in response to Cornell’s crisp admonitions. The results of her makeover, adorned 
with photos and related in a style replete with dry humor and deadpan observa-
tions, are a complete hoot. The comments students make on her retro-inspired 
hair and outfit experiments might be read as mean-spirited, but her delivery is 
matter-of-fact, as if she herself is determined to treat their responses as data in an 
ongoing experiment with an uncertain outcome. The reputation she earns over the 
course of her year has her rethinking what it means to be popular; from her point 
of view, the walls she breaks down in the social landscape of her school are worth 
the strange and sometimes pitying looks she endures. Her early years as a socially 
abused nerd seem to have strengthened her skills of critical observation and rendered 
her fearless in the face of ridicule, but it may be her unwavering ambition to be a 
writer that carries her through her year with the admirable tenacity of a budding 
social researcher; clearly, this fifteen-year-old author is a talent to watch. Between 
an intro by Betty Cornell herself, a notice that her guide is being republished, and 
the success of Maya’s transformation, junior high may begin to take on a whole 
new (old) look.  KC
wesselhoeft, conrAd Dirt Bikes, Drones, and Other Ways to Fly. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 341p
ISBN 978-0-544-23269-3 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Ever since his mother’s recent death, Arlo Santiago’s enthusiasm for off-roading on 
his Yamaha and playing Drone Pilot has morphed into an obsession. His rise to first 
place among DP gamers has caught the attention of the military, who have invited 
him to test for an actual position at the White Sands Missile Range. Arlo scores 
off the boards on both simulations and actual drone operation but, leery of the 
military, he agrees on the condition that he will only be involved in reconnaissance. 
With a source of income for his financially strapped father, health care support for 
his sister suffering from Huntington’s disease, a new girlfriend in the wings, and 
all the daredevil riding he can handle on his old wheels and his new perk from the 
feds, life is looking up. Then comes the day when his boss at White Sands corners 
him into taking the lead on a drone mission to assassinate a bin Laden–esque ter-
June 2014 • 547
rorist in Afghanistan’s Swat Valley, and Arlo, who is more than willing to risk his 
own life but not that of others, must find a way to wriggle out of his commitment 
while covering his family’s debts. Wesselhoeft takes the ethical implications of both 
the drone program and stunt riding seriously, and Arlo’s introspective musing on 
why he takes risks and where he sets his limits are a thoughtful contribution to 
an otherwise programmatic action/adventure story. While the motorcycle story 
sometimes intrudes on the more interesting drone plot, Wesselhoeft successfully 
manages to bring a ripped-from-the-headlines issue to the attention of teens who 
may not pay much heed to the news but are up for a fast-paced novel.  EB
whAley, John corey Noggin. Atheneum, 2014 340p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5872-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5874-1 $10.99  
M Gr. 7-10
After fighting an increasingly hopeless battle with leukemia, sixteen-year-old Tra-
vis makes a radical decision to have his head cryogenically preserved in hope that 
technology will eventually allow him a new life with a disease-free body. A mere 
five years after his procedure, Travis is again awake and fully functional, attached 
to the body of a well-built sixteen-year-old body donor. Although to Travis the 
interlude feels like a brief sleep, his friends and family have come to terms with his 
absence and moved on with their lives; his best friend, Kyle, despite confessing to 
his dying friend that he was gay, has a girlfriend, and Travis’ own girlfriend, Cate, is 
happily engaged. Travis is resolute: he will confront Kyle about living a lie, and he 
will win Cate back. Even in a book more focused on the emotional repercussions 
than the physical, the complete lack of attention to the physical readjustments of 
Travis’ full-body transplant is odd and unimaginative, and Travis’ celebrity is also 
unrealistically downplayed. However, it is the single-mindedness and implausibil-
ity of Travis’s quest to force Kyle and Cate into acceding to his wishes that renders 
him oddly unsympathetic and the plot disappointing. Ultimately, the book fails 
to craft the conditions necessarily for reader empathy, and those interested in the 
possibilities of the topic should turn instead to Dickinson’s Eva (BCCB 5/89) or 
even Meg Cabot’s more recent Airhead (BCCB 9/08).  KC 
willems, mo The Pigeon Needs a Bath!; written and illus. by Mo Willems. Hy-
perion, 2014 34p
ISBN 978-1-4231-9087-5 $16.99  
R 4-7 yrs
Throughout all of his previous adventures, the Pigeon has shown a remarkable 
ability to keep his blue feathers pristine and unsullied. Not so here: the Pigeon ap-
pears on the cover smudged with dark brown stains of an unspecified origin (now 
there’s a pre-reading question in the making—how did our friend get so dirty?—a 
question answered in the endpapers, of course). The bus driver, wearing Knuffle 
Bunny slippers and obviously prepped for a bath of his own, solicits the help of the 
audience to convince the reluctant pigeon to bathe, and it’s game on. Deploying 
his formidable skills of argumentation, the pigeon offers up a number of reasons 
why he should not have to take a bath, but when even the flies buzzing around him 
are put off by his stench, he gives in. After getting the water juuuuuust right (oh, 
those endless delaying tactics all too familiar to the parent of the bath-averse!), he 
realizes that he loves taking a bath, especially when his friend, the duckling, stays 
close by. The comic pleasures of hyperbole abound here as they have in previous 
548 • The BulleTin
Pigeon plots; the bird’s rhetorical inventiveness seems to know no limit (in fact, 
the vocabulary here is somewhat more advanced than in previous Pigeon titles). 
The familiar creamy-smooth backgrounds impart a simple reinforcement of the 
dirt motif by being more earthy than usual, while the smears of dirt on our hero 
have a textured, uneven quality that unerringly evokes a more visceral, lip-curling 
eeeuw; close viewers will surely find a favorite panel. If only it came in a waterproof 
edition . . .  KC
williAms, mArciA, ad. Lizzy Bennet’s Diary: 1811–1812 Discovered by Marcia 
Williams; written and illus. by Marcia Williams. Candlewick, 2014 112p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7030-6 $16.99  
R* Gr. 4-6
The enduring appeal of Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice lies at least in part in 
Elizabeth Bennet’s piquant observations about her sisters and her neighbors. These 
take center stage in this smartly conceived abridgement of the novel for a young 
audience, fashioned as a diary given to “Lizzy” by her father. In her diary, Lizzy 
offers up witty commentary on the events that transpire from the time the sisters 
get word of a wealthy, unattached gentleman taking up residence at nearby Neth-
erfield to her own installment at Pemberley as the newlywed Lizzy Darcy. With 
endpapers that feature “personal views” of Longbourn and Pemberley, the book 
features (photographed) bits of material and embellishments chosen for dresses and 
hats, dried flowers, locks of hair, and feathers, as well as tiny drawings, silhouettes 
and pasted-in ball invitations, calling and dance cards, and letters. These bits and 
bobs supplement the dated entries to give a feel for everyday life in 1811, while the 
color portraits combine authentic period detail with comic caricature to convey how 
Lizzy feels about each character. Lizzy doesn’t spare herself from comic treatment 
either; when she realizes her true feelings for Mr. Darcy, she includes a series of tiny 
pictures of herself in various states of highly mercurial and antic emotion. This wry 
sense of humor animates the text throughout and makes the perennially popular 
love story not only accessible but thoroughly absorbing for young readers, who 
will surely be captivated by some aspect of Lizzy’s tale; after all, who doesn’t have 
an embarrassing family, or wish for true love, or find snooty people tiresome, etc., 
etc.? Jane Austen’s early critics called her sunshine; Marcia Williams has managed 
to capture that feeling of light and warmth for a new generation of readers.  KC
wilson, n. d. Boys of Blur. Random House, 2014 195p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81674-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81673-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81675-2 $10.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Charlie Reynolds first meets his cousin Cotton at a funeral in a Florida town 
near Lake Okeechobee. They aren’t blood relatives—Charlie’s white and Cotton’s 
black—but as Cotton points out, Charlie’s stepfather is Cotton’s father’s cousin, 
and “cousins is cousins.” Cotton introduces twelve-year-old Charlie to some of the 
darker mysteries on the swampy edge of sugar cane country, and although Charlie’s 
intrigued, he’s also oppressed by memories of how he and his mom once fled from 
his father in this very region, years ago before she remarried and life settled into 
loving security. There are things in the swamp more horrifying than an abusive 
father, however, and when a helmeted, sword-wielding grave-robber is one of the 
good guys in the neighborhood, it’s clear that things will only be going from perilous 
June 2014 • 549
to dire. The author crafts a tale laced with literary influences, on the order of his 
Leepike Ridge (BCCB 7/07), but this time the inspiration is Beowulf.  The book’s 
zombie-like Gren do the bidding of their evil “mother,” who lives in an underwater 
cave in the swamp, where the hero Charlie must slay her with a magical weapon 
from her own collection. Wilson orchestrates the menace with a sure hand, teasing 
readers with the uncertainty of whether mortal or otherworldly creatures are the 
greater threat. Pair this with James Rumford’s age-appropriate retelling of Beowulf 
(BCCB 11/07) for an even more powerful experience.  EB
winsteAd, rosie Sprout Helps Out; written and illus. by Rosie Winstead. Dial, 
2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3072-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Little girl Sprout may be pint-sized but she’s “a BIG help.” Or is she? While the 
text portrays Sprout as her mother’s competent helper, the illustrations suggest 
otherwise. She brushes her own teeth without being told, yes, but also brushes the 
dog’s teeth—with her mother’s toothbrush. She uses band-aids to fix a lamp she 
broke and manages to flood the sink while doing dishes (requiring Mom to do a 
mop-up afterwards). In addition, the family cat almost takes a ride in the washing 
machine when Sprout tosses in the dirty laundry (under which the cat is hiding), 
and the put-upon feline narrowly escapes getting sucked up by the vacuum wielded 
by Sprout. Despite the chaos that spreads in her wake, though, “Sprout’s family 
is very lucky to have her, and they know it.” It’s hard to believe that many real 
mothers would be quite as cheerful and understanding about Sprout’s antics as her 
mother appears to be, but Sprout’s good intentions and clueless mischief make her a 
winning heroine nonetheless. Illustrative details are comical and genuine—the dog 
drinks from the baby’s discarded bottle, Sprout tosses a donut in the fish bowl for 
the goldfish’s “snack,” to the goldfish’s terror. The pencil, gouache, and watercolor 
paint pictures are thoughtfully composed but possess a casual, collage-like looseness 
that suits the storyline. There’s a slightly retro look to the frilly socks and Mary 
Janes that Sprout sports and to her comma-shaped eyes and whimsical hair, while 
other details (such as the juice pouches) provide modernity. Since literature is a 
great way of finding perspective on one’s own challenges, families with their own 
mess-prone “Sprouts” are a likely audience here.  JH 
ziegler, Jennifer Revenge of the Flower Girls. Scholastic, 2014 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56141-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-56143-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 4-6
When their grown sister arrives home with the news of her engagement, eleven-year-
old triplets Darby, Delaney, and Dawn are anything but thrilled at the upcoming 
wedding. The three tomboys would be willing to put up with all the fancy dresses 
and bows as flower girls if Lily were marrying the right guy, but sneezy, uptight 
Burton Caldwell is a “nincompoop,” especially in comparison to Lily’s ex, the dreamy 
Alex. The triplets aren’t entirely sure why Lily and Alex broke up last summer, but 
they’re certain that Burton isn’t going to make Lily happy, so they attempt to upset 
the wedding plans while trying to bring Alex and Lily back together. Although it 
bills itself as the a middle-school Bridesmaids, this breezy family comedy has more 
550 • The BulleTin
in common with the zany hijinks of old-school rom-coms like The Parent Trap. The 
triplets take turns narrating, and while their voices are pretty much indistinguish-
able, their affection for their sister is clear—as is their conviction that their efforts 
to rescue her from her own bad choices are entirely justified. A parade of charming 
secondary small-town characters, including the triplets’ divorced parents, rounds 
out the cast, and a beastly busybody of a future mother-in-law makes an imposing 
villain for the triplets to square off against. There’s not much depth here, but there’s 
plenty of warmth and humor with a happy ending that sees the right people paired 
up and the triplets enjoying a well deserved feast of leftover hors d’oeuvre—or 
“horse doves,” as Darby likes to refer to them.  KQG
June 2014 • 551
When our series list was originally conceived a few years back, we limited ourselves 
to looking at fiction books that completed a full, preplanned story arc. In light of 
some of the stellar stuff we’re seeing in series that aren’t so constrained, however, 
we’ve expanded our reach to include other excellent single-author sequences that 
follow the same characters, whether there’s an arc or not. The aim of the list is 
to bring attention to completed or ongoing series with the message to librarians 
that these sets of books, taken as a whole, are well worth the investment and offer 
a valuable reading experience; their multiple volumes achieve a standard of high 
quality, and an overall merit that is more than the sum of their parts. This year, 
stories about everyday experiences in school, camp, and peer interactions consti-
tute much of the list, but we’ve still got a notable fantasy entry to round out the 
selection. Happy reading! 
 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor
dowell, frAnces o’roArK. The Secret Language of Girls. Atheneum, 2004. Gr. 
5-7 (BCCB 7/04)
–––––. The Kind of Friends We Used to Be. Atheneum, 2009. Gr. 5-7 (BCCB 5/09)
–––––. The Sound of Your Voice, Only Really Far Away. Atheneum, 2013. Gr. 5-7 
(BCCB 9/13)
Dowell offers a nuanced and honest exploration of middle-school dynamics in this 
compelling series that follows friends Kate and Marylin as they negotiate new and 
changing relationships and the expectations that accompany adolescence. 
mcKAy, hilAry. Lulu and the Duck in the Park; illus. by Priscilla Lamont. Whit-
man, 2012. Gr. 2-3 (BCCB 10/12)
–––––. Lulu and the Dog from the Sea; illus. by Priscilla Lamont. Whitman, 2013. 
Gr. 2-3 (BCCB 5/13)
–––––. Lulu and the Cat in the Bag; illus. by Priscilla Lamont. Whitman, 2013. 
Gr. 2-3 (not reviewed)
–––––. Lulu and the Rabbit Next Door; illus. by Priscilla Lamont. Whitman, 2014. 
Gr. 2-3 (BCCB 5/14)
This early chapter series not only hits all the right kid-friendly notes with its high-
spirited heroine and breezy sentence structure, but it also manages to create new 
and fresh plots with each installment while keeping the focus squarely on Lulu 
and her animal pals’ antics. 
sternberg, Julie. Like Pickle Juice on a Cookie; illus. by Matthew Cordell. Abrams, 
2011. Gr. 2-3 (BCCB 3/11)
2014 steLLAr serIes
552 • The BulleTin
–––––. Like Bug Juice on a Burger; illus. by Matthew Cordell. Abrams, 2013. Gr. 
2-3 (BCCB 5/13)
–––––. Like Carrot Juice on a Cupcake; illus. by Matthew Cordell. Abrams, 2014. 
Gr. 2-3 (BCCB 5/14)
Author Sternberg shows over the course of this series she has a knack for creating 
heartfelt, perceptive stories out of everyday kid experiences as she chronicles young 
Eleanor’s struggles with friends, family, and school dynamics. 
tAylor, lAini. Daughter of Smoke and Bone. Little, 2011. Gr. 9-12 (BCCB 9/11)
–––––. Days of Blood and Starlight. Little, 2012. Gr. 9-12 (BCCB 11/12)
–––––. Dreams of Gods and Monsters. Little, 2014. Gr. 9-12 (BCCB 6/14)
What begins as a simple love story between a blue-haired girl and a rogue angel 
turns into an epic fantasy that contemplates the natures of love and war and the 
notions of humanity and divinity. A large cast of endearing characters, stunning 
settings both in this world and another, and a complicated but ultimately satisfying 
romance at the center of it all makes this a must-read for fans of the supernatural 
or, really, anyone who enjoys a good story. 
June 2014 • 553
Addiction–fiction: Shinoda
Adoption–fiction: Hasiuk
Adventure: downey; duncan; 
Gebhart; Jury; Kozlowsky; Mar-
entette; May; Strand; Wesselhoeft; 
Wilson 
African Americans: Finkelstein 
African Americans–fiction: Colbert; 
Giles
African Americans–stories: Johnson
Afterlife–fiction: Marino
Aliens–fiction: Jury
AlternAtive HiStory: Cremer
Angels–fiction: taylor
Appearance: van Wagenen
Appearance–fiction: Haydu; Struyk-
Bonn
Appearance–stories: Baldacchino; 
Schneider
Archeology: Aronson; Athans
Architecture: dillon
Baseball–fiction: Berk; Hyman
Baths–stories: Willems
BedtiMe StorieS: Cole; ering 
Behavior–stories: Bedford; lester; 
Winstead 
Berlin–fiction: Kephart
BioGrAPHieS: Aronson; Cooper, 
i.; Finkelstein; van Wagenen
Birds–stories: Hills
Body language: Jackson 
Books and reading–fiction: Acam-
pora
Brazil–stories: Javaherbin
Brothers–fiction: Keplinger
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Mac-
lachlan; Sheinmel; Shinoda
Brothers and sisters–stories: Java-
herbin
Building: dillon 
Bullying–fiction: Benoit
Camping–fiction: Gebhart; Strand
Cars–stories: Kulling
Cats: Cinotto
Chinese Canadians–fiction: Hasiuk
Cities–stories: light
Class–fiction: lockhart
Cold War, the: Kephart
Communication: Jackson
Communication–stories: Adderson 
ConCePt BooKS: Barton; Cole; 
Barton; light
Crime and criminals–fiction: Amato; 
Benoit; Cantor; Colbert; ewell; 
Feutl; Green; Pass; Pauley; Plum; 
Shinoda; Somper; Strand; Stroh-
meyer
Crocodiles–stories: Bedford
Cults–fiction: Cantor
dance and dancers–fiction: Colbert
death–fiction: Arcos; Marino; Preus
dinosaurs: Armentrout
dinosaurs–stories: reynolds
disabilities–fiction: Giles
dogs–fiction: Smith
dogs–stories: Adderson
dragons–fiction: McCune
dragons–stories: light 
drug abuse–fiction: Sheinmel
dystopias–fiction: Clark; linka; 
Matson; McCune; Pass
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
554 • The BulleTin
education: Finkelstein
emancipation–stories: Johnson
emotions–stories: underwood
Environmental studies: newman 
Ethics and values: Benincasa; Clark; 
duncan; ellis; ewell; lockhart; 
Smith-ready; van Wagenen; Wes-
selhoeft; Whaley
FABleS: Broom
Fairies–fiction: May
Faith–fiction: Acampora; Smith-ready
Fame–fiction: lord
Families–fiction: Acampora; Baskin; 
Cassidy; derting; Haydu; lock-
hart; Marentette; Mata; rocco; 
Schumacher; Shinoda; Smith-
ready; tamaki; Williams; Wilson
Families–stories: Kulling
FAntASy: Baskin; Cypess; donnelly; 
downey; Kozlowsky; Marino; Mc-
Cune; Picard; taylor; trevayne
Farms–stories: Cole
Fathers–fiction: Mass 
Fear–stories: Bedford; ering
Fish–stories: lloyd-Jones
FolKtAleS And FAiry tAleS: 
Broom; Jones, n.; Preus
Food and eating–stories: Pearson
Foster children–fiction: Feutl
Friends–fiction: Altebrando; Armen-
trout; Berk; Colbert; donnelly; 
ellis; Giles; Hasiuk; Keplinger; 
Mata; tamaki
Friends–stories: Hills; russo; Santat
Frontier life–stories: Bunting
Gays and lesbians–fiction: Benincasa
Gender–fiction: Cooper, t; linka
Gender–stories: Baldacchino
Ghana–fiction: Jones, K.
GlBt people–fiction: Barakiva 
Gorillas: Faulconer
Government: Cooper, i.
Grandparents–fiction: Gebhart; Ko-
zlowsky
Grandparents–stories: Bunting
GrAPHiC novelS: Faulkner; 
tamaki
Grief–fiction: Arcos
HiStoriCAl FiCtion: Bradley; 
Bunting; Faulkner; Hyman; Jones, 
K.; Kephart; Kulling; Somper
History, European: Prins
History, U.S.: Cooper, i.; Finkelstein; 
Goldsmith 
History, world: Albee; Bragg; dillon
Holocaust: Prins
Homelessness–fiction: Cassidy; ellis
HuMor: Amato; Bedford; Berk; 
Bragg; escoffier; Florian; Jones, n.; 
Judge; lester; lloyd-Jones; Mass; 
Pearson; reynolds; Santat; Schnei-
der; Smith; Strand; van Wagenen; 
Willems; Winstead; Ziegler
identity–fiction: Cooper, t; Giles; 
Haydu 
identity–stories: Judge
imagination–stories: Baldacchino; er-
ing; escoffier; Santat
indian Americans–fiction: lockhart
insects: Albee
Japanese Americans–fiction: Faulkner 
Jealousy–stories: russo 
Jews: Prins
Jobs–fiction: Butcher
Journals–fiction: Williams
Juneteenth–stories: Johnson
Kidnapping–fiction: Colbert
libraries and librarians–fiction: 
downey
lions–stories: Broom
Literature, American: Benincasa
Literature, children’s: Sheinmel
Literature, English: Williams
Literature, world: Wilson
Magic–fiction: Cypess; de la Cruz; 
Marine biology: newman
Memory–fiction: Quinn
Mermaids–fiction: donnelly
Mice–fiction: Marentette
Mice–stories: Broom
Money–fiction: rocco
Monsters–stories: lester 
Mothers: Faulconer
Mothers–fiction: Benincasa; ellis; 
ewell; Marino; Winstead
Mountaineering: Athans
June 2014 • 555
Movies–fiction: Mata
Moving–stories: underwood
Music and musicians–fiction: lord; 
Maclachlan; Struyk-Bonn
MySterieS: Armentrout; Berk; 
Butcher; derting; Fantaskey; 
Green; Pauley; Somper; Strohmeyer
Nature study: Albee
nepal: Athans
new york City–fiction: Baskin
nuclear weapons: Goldsmith 
oceans–fiction: Picard
organ donation–fiction: Whaley
orphans–fiction: Kozlowsky
Paleontology: Aronson
Penguins–stories: Judge
Pets: Cinotto
Pets–stories: Adderson
Pirates–fiction: rocco 
Poetry: Florian
Poets and poetry–fiction: Cassidy
Politics: Cooper, i.
Politics–fiction: de la Cruz
Pollution: newman 
Pregnancy–fiction: Hasiuk
Prejudice–fiction: Bradley; lockhart; 
Struyk-Bonn
Prison–fiction: Pass
Prophecies–fiction: Schumacher
rabbits–stories: russo
race–fiction: Bradley
Reading aloud: Florian; Maclachlan; 
Preus
Reading, easy: Jones, n.; Maclach-
lan; Smith
Reading, reluctant: Amato; Butcher; 
Cassidy; Cinotto; Feutl 
relationships–fiction: Altebrando; 
Arcos; Barakiva; Colbert; Kephart; 
reinhardt; Strohmeyer; Whaley
revenge–fiction: Benoit
rHyMinG StorieS: Pearson; 
underwood
romance–fiction: Barakiva; Baskin; 
Benincasa; Cremer; Cypess; 
Fantaskey; Kephart; lord; taylor; 
Williams
royalty–fiction: de la Cruz; Somper
School: Finkelstein
School–fiction: Armentrout; Fantaskey
Science: Goldsmith
SCienCe FiCtion: Clark; Cooper, 
t; derting; duncan; Jury; linka; 
Mass; Matson; Pass; Whaley
Scotland–fiction: May
Secrets–fiction: Fantaskey; Haydu; 
reinhardt 
Serial killers–fiction: Green
Sisters–fiction: reinhardt; Ziegler
Slavery–stories: Johnson
Soccer–stories: Javaherbin
Soldiers–fiction: Wesselhoeft
Space travel–fiction: Mass 
Sports–fiction: Bradley
Sports–stories: Hyman; Javaherbin
SteAMPunK: Cremer; trevayne
Storytelling: Preus
Storytime: Broom; Willems
Summer–fiction: Altebrando; Butcher; 
Keplinger; tamaki
Superheroes–stories: escoffier 
SuPernAturAl StorieS: May; 
Pauley
Surfing–fiction: Sheinmel
SurvivAl StorieS: Cantor; dun-
can; Matson
tantrums–stories: reynolds
terrorism–fiction: McCune
time travel–fiction: Baskin
toddler BooKS: Barton
toys–stories: Schneider
transgender people–fiction: Cooper, t
Transportation: Barton
tricksters–fiction: Preus
triplets–fiction: Ziegler
truth–fiction: Pauley
twins–fiction: Amato; Arcos 
video games–fiction: Wesselhoeft 
voyages and travel: Athans
voyages and travel–fiction: Jones, 
K.; Jones, n.; Kozlowsky; lord; 
Marino; Picard
voyages and travel–stories: Hills; 
lloyd-Jones 
War–fiction: Faulkner; taylor
Weddings–fiction: Ziegler
556 • The BulleTin
Women’s studies: Cooper, i. 
WordleSS BooKS: Picard
World cultures: Jones, K.
World War ii: Prins
World War ii–fiction: Faulkner
Zoos: Faulconer
Zoos–fiction: Amato 
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Claudia Nelson, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 67 (2014).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $60.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$100.00 (print); $110.00 (online);  
$140.00 (print & online)
