H,
ILLINOI S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
-ric PA
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
7·~~
U
" 
"The 41 rhymes range from the most familiar ... 
to a few that may be new
to readers .... It is the smart, digitally manipulated photographic compositions
that give this book its snap.... a fresh and welcome contribution."
-Starred 
Review / School Libary ournal
- "This gathering of common and not-so-common rhymes will be a hit with
young readers and pre-readers in any setting, urban or otherwise."
-Starred 
Review/ Krks Rleiew
S"Preschoolers will enjoy seeing kids like themselves in pictures that make
the familiar rhymes part of imaginative fun on the city sidewalk."
-Starred Review/ Boolt
S"Provides a freshness without being overtly contemporary."
-Starred 
Review/ Pu6lber Weekly 
g 
0-0351573-2 
u5. 
99
Lb 0-0-051574-0 $16.9 ($23.89)
Lb 0-06-051574.0 $16.89 ($25.89)
*A A
~-3~arM·
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
September 2004
Vol. 58 No. 1
A LOOK INSIDE
3 
THE BIG PICTURE
The Big Ugly Monster and the Little Stone Rabbit written and illus. by
Chris Wormell
4 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
26 
* Bfor Buster by Iain Lawrence
29 
* Indigo's Star by Hilary McKay
35 
* Jackson Jones and Mission Greentop by Mary Quattlebaum
36 
* The Best Halloween Ever by Barbara Robinson
45 
* September Roses written and illus. by Jeanette Winter
50 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
51 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
__
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Janice M. Del Negro, Reviewer (JMD)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Molly Dolan
Krista Hutley
Hope Morrison
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2004 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Chris Wormell from The Big Ugly Monster and the Little Stone Rabbit ©2004.
Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 3
THE BIG PICTURE
The Big Ugly Monster and the Little Stone Rabbit
written and illus. by Chris Wormell
There are a lot of picture books that try to tug at hearts and perhaps even elicit a
cathartic tear or two. Most such, however, find it hard to resist obvious sentimen-
tality or cliched elements (pets arriving at the end of their lives being a particularly
popular device), and as for humor, you'll just have to look elsewhere. Yet the
stories that turn out to be most moving and memorable reject the formulas and
make their own way, and so it is with The Big Ugly Monster and the Little Stone
Rabbit.
If you think your life is tough, consider the big ugly monster, who is "so
ugly that all the animals and birds ran and flew away as soon as they saw him" (in
fact, his ugliness is such that "if he stepped into a pond for a swim, it would
instantly dry up, with a hiss of steam"). Big Ugly is, as a consequence, understand-
ably lonely, but even his attempts to create his own friends out of stone are doomed
by his fearsome physique (" . . . when he smiled, the stone animals cracked and
shattered and he was left with a pile of rubble"). Fortunately, he finds an excep-
tion in the stone rabbit, who becomes the monster's silent and constant compan-
ion to the end of the monster's days.
This is at heart a remarkably poignant little tale, and tenderhearted kids
will likely grieve for the poor monster and consider that he deserves better than his
inanimate if staunch companion. Wormell lifts the story with an appealing narra-
tive voice that combines direct address with witty, age-appropriate, and sometimes
rueful humor (the monster's sculpting of animal heads isn't very good, but "the
back ends were better; that was the bit he usually saw as the animals ran away")
and clever self-awareness ("Of course, this is only a picture, so you're not getting
the whole effect. You're not getting the ugliness at full strength"). The "he's so
ugly" routine will strike a chord of playground-savvy recognition, while the repeti-
tion of the ugliness jokes and of the monster's eventual satisfaction ("He was happy
nonetheless") adds a satisfying oral lilt to the story. Audiences may not automati-
cally know what to make of the end, wherein the stony desolate ground blooms
into loveliness around the stone rabbit after the ogre's death. Cynics will likely
consider the landscaping boom to be a response to the ogre's absence, while gen-
tler souls will likely plump for a locale made beautiful by an unusual friendship;
either way, it'll make an interesting talking point as well as an aesthetically agree-
able resolution.
In a story this visual, it's the illustrations that are key, and Wormell has
departed from his familiar woodblock-print style to create an ugly watercolor
monster of gratifyingly repellent aspect. All bristling hairs, grooved skin, and pointy
nails, he's nonetheless a figure that elicits considerable empathy: the drooping of
4 
* 
THE BULLETIN
those triangular ears conveys a truly pitiable sadness, his gleeful gambols with-or
sort of with-his rabbit pal look hugely enjoyable, and his pinky-brown tones
make him a most pettable monstrosity. Next to the ogre's overactive visuals, the
stone rabbit seems quietly serene rather than blankly inanimate, and he's credible
both as a construction and a longtime companion.
In its low-key homeliness, the story recalls near-fables of attachment such
as The Red Balloon. And while some listeners may wish for a more overt transfor-
mation, a la The Velveteen Rabbit, of inanimate bunny into flesh-and-blood friend,
others will appreciate the tacit acknowledgment of the comradeship even the ap-
parently undemonstrative can provide. Strange, touching, and strangely touch-
ing, this will engage viewers' considerable sympathy as well as encouraging them to
treasure their own friendships, of all kinds. (Imprint information appears on p.
47.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AHLBERG, ALLAN 
Halfa Pig; illus. by Jessica Ahlberg. 
Candlewick, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-7636-2373-3 
$16.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Ahlberg frames this tale of pignapping with an introduction and conclusion about
the process of storytelling. In direct address to the reader, he includes a list of
words, some illustrated, that might appear in the story as well as a list of characters,
all divided according to type. The story proper then proceeds apace, with a bad
guy, Mr. Harbottle, who has gotten half a pig in a divorce settlement, aiming to
collect in order to satisfy his love for sausages. Mrs. Harbottle, however, loves the
pig, Esmeralda, for her personality rather than her flavor, and refuses to let him
have her. When the Swiggins Brothers (and Sisters) kidnap the unfortunate
Esmeralda, a chase ensues, with neighbors Rose and Billy following the pignappers
on their bikes, and overhearing their nefarious plot to mince the poor porker in
order to divvy her up. Esmeralda escapes, and all comes right in the end after a
reasonable amount of characteristic Ahlberg chaos. Meanwhile, both storyteller
Allan and daughter Jessica Ahlberg, the illustrator, have quite a bit of fun with
language play. Jessica alternates between literal depictions of words, schematic
illustrations of potential action and weather changes, and a more straightforward
illustration of the action. Her pin-dot eyes and thinly outlined watercolor carica-
tures have a familiar quality to them, a family resemblance, as it were, that Ahlberg
fans will welcome. Ahlberg senior intrudes in the narrative to point out the vari-
ous uses of the word "pen," for instance, and the ways in which sticking to the
truth sometimes interferes with a good joke. Finally, he apologizes for not using
all of the words he promised to use and issues a challenge for readers to use them in
their own stories. Though some may not find such play to their taste, the text,
illustrations, and metatextual elements offer rich humor for readers who appreci-
ate the ironic treatment of story and the concrete nature of language itself. KC
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 5
ANDERSON, M. T. 
The Game ofSunken Places. Scholastic, 2004 
26 0p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-439-41660-4 
$16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-439-41661-2 
$5.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
A trip up to the wilds of Vermont to visit an eccentric not-quite-uncle sounds like
adventure enough to Gregory and his best friend, Brian, but once the boys arrive
they find that's only the beginning. Not only does Uncle Max insist on fidelity to
turn-of-the-century costume and mores (and, often enough, diction), there's a
mysterious old board game, The Game of Sunken Places, that captures their inter-
est, and when they embark on a round, they discover it becomes a real-life experi-
ence. This isn't just Jumanji, however: aside from the drama of the boys' negotiation
of their way past trolls and giants, there's a greater stake here, since the game's
outcome determines the return of the exiled People of Norumbega to the realm
overtaken by the Thusser Hordes (or the continued sway of the Thusser over the
land). The atmosphere suggests H. Rider Haggard period adventure (a style re-
flected in the Ripping Yarns cover and even the old-fashioned font) while the
plotting recalls the narrative computer games of the 1980s such as Zork, with
dramatic episodes strung together, requiring occasional returns to earlier stages to
acquire pieces of equipment that have suddenly proven vital. Anderson's trade-
mark wit flashes through the narrative and, more especially, the dialogue, and
there are some divertingly quirky characters (the obliging and companionable troll-
"You want any squirrel in the cider?" he asks the boys hospitably. "Just one?
Gray?"-is the best of the lot). What's missing is a sense of a driving narrative
force, since most of the game's steps could be played in any order and function as
effectively within the plot, or an involving character, since Gregory and Brian are
little more than functionaries (despite Brian's modest development of an indi-
vidual will). The novel therefore offers more of the intellectual, pragmatic plea-
sures of the computer game than the literary pleasures ofAnderson's previous novels
(Feed, BCCB 11/02, etc.), but lovers of games and of adventure for its own sake
will probably wish to take a turn. DS
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER, ed. 
What a Song Can Do: 12 Riffi on the Power of
Music. Knopf, 2004 
200p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92499-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82499-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
In this anthology, music provides a backdrop for stories about the Palestinian con-
flict, the Cuban Missile Crisis, the rounding up of Gypsies in Nazi Germany, and
the American Civil War; it provides an occasion for domestic stories about a boy's
responsibility to his sick mother, another boy's need to forgive his alcoholic father
and accept his Native heritage, a girl's experience of synesthesia, and various de-
grees of sibling tension. Readers encounter a boy's longing for another boy who
will love him and his music, the various personality types that make up a high-
school band, and a girl's desire to succeed through arduous practice against her
rivals' throwaway attitudes toward their superior talent. For the most part, the
writers adopt a tell-don't-show approach to the music itself-there is little sense of
the immediacy of song in the rhythms of the prose, and the descriptions of the
music and how it moves the characters are disappointingly pedestrian and dispas-
sionate (Bruchac's piece proving an exception here). Authors' notes reveal that
very few of the writers are themselves practicing musicians, which perhaps ac-
counts for the fact that the music itself is backgrounded, rather than foregrounded,
6 
* 
THE BULLETIN
in many of the stories. Rock 'n' roll gets short shrift, and there are no nods at all
toward the kinds of music that speak to so many contemporary teens-punk, rap,
freestyles, or even just the popular top-forty that sees young people through date-
less Saturday nights. This will likely limit audience appeal to seriously engaged
band and orchestra performers and to well-meaning adults who want kids to con-
sider "other" kinds of music than that toward which they naturally gravitate; still,
the format might encourage students to explore the power of music in their own
lives. KC
ARNOLD, TEDD, ad. 
Catalina Magdalena Hoopensteiner Wallendiner Hogan Lo-
gan Bogan Was Her Name; ad. and illus. by Tedd Arnold. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic,
2004 
33p
ISBN 0-590-10994-4 
$10.95 
R 6-9 yrs
Arnold adapts a popular camp song into a silly tale of the enormously named
Catalina. The lyric tells of Catalina's odd appearance ("She had two eyes that were
quite a sight;/ One looked left and the other looked right"), her unusual abilities
("She had two holes in the bottom of her nose-/ One for her fingers... //... and
one for her toes"), and her particular aroma ("Some folks say her breath smells
sweet;/ But me, I'd rather smell her feet"). Each stanza concludes with the refrain
"Catalina Magdalena Hoopensteiner Wallendiner/ Hogan Logan Bogan Was Her
Name," providing participatory possibilities. The song itself is a bawling paean to
the exaggerated physical characteristics of the title character, but Arnold's visuals
turn each oddity into an advantage: unusual teeth make dental history, big feet are
particularly good for dancing, etc. An energetic enthusiasm is reflected in the
popeyed, cartoony characters with their elastic limbs, as well as in the oddly turned
perspectives and freewheeling compositions. (Alert viewers will enjoy finding
Catalina's dad taking photos of his favorite daughter throughout.) For those with-
out a camp history with this particular song, Arnold includes a page with variations
on the name, along with musical notation and chording. JMD
ARONSON, 
MARC 
John Winthrop, Oliver Cromwell, and the Land of
Promise. Clarion, 2004 
205p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-18177-6 
$20.00 
SpR Gr. 8-12
"Older history books claim that religious tolerance was a founding theme ofAmerica.
It would be more accurate to say that religious toleration was an idea that arose
from the same forces that led to the creation of some of the American colonies."
Here Aronson examines how the "hot Protestantism" of sixteenth-century Britain
provided the impulse for both Puritan migration to the New World and civil war
in the Old, and opened the floodgates for a plethora of radical ideas-from reli-
gious tolerance to governance "from the bottom up"- 
that would shape the views
of America's founders two centuries later. Although this title is promoted as sec-
ond in a trilogy that began with Sir Walter Ralegh and the Quest for El Dorado
(BCCB 7/00), this is presented as a discourse on impassioned ideas rather than
hope-filled exploration, and Aronson calls on readers to suspend contemporary
cynicism and view history through the eyes of men and women who fervently
believed the end time was close at hand. The carefully balanced, dual focus on
religious leader John Winthrop in the colonies and military cum political leader
Oliver Cromwell in England puts human faces on the issues and demonstrates
that, at this period, Protestant dissidents on both sides of the ocean embraced the
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
7
common cause of perfecting their world for the Second Coming. Aronson delivers
his arguments in the style of a demanding but entertaining teacher, peppering his
text with flashes of humor, apt analogies drawn from the sweep of U.S. history,
scrupulous references to interpretations in and out of current fashion, and even a
thumping good battle scene. Although teen demand for intellectual history may
be neither broad nor clamorous, readers of a particularly thoughtful bent (as well
as those preparing for AP history tests) will find Aronson to be an engaging and
enthusiastic guide through the early colonial period. EB
BATH, K. P. 
The Secret ofCastle Cant: Being an Account ofthe Remarkable Adven-
tures ofLucy Wickwright, Maidservant and Spy; illus. by David Christiana. 
Little,
2004 
[3 0 4p]
ISBN 0-316-10848-0 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 6-8
Lucy Wickwright, illegitimate daughter of the Baron of Cant, works as a servant in
the castle where her father rules. Since she is ignorant of her true identity and
birthright (Cantish law decrees that all heirs are equal, whether their parents were
married or not), Lucy serves cheerfully, looking after the Baron's legitimate younger
daughter, Pauline. On his deathbed, the Baron calls both girls to him and reveals
his secret to them but dies before he can dictate a statement in front of witnesses.
Unfortunately for Lucy, the Baron's surreptitious behavior has placed her squarely
in the political spotlight, and she finds herself in danger of cooptation by rebels
and imprisonment by loyalists. The story, which begins with a rather deceptively
lighthearted hurling of underwear from the battlements and includes characters
named Sauersop, Stomata, Retsch, and Lemonjello, gradually deepens into a full-
blown tale of murder, mystery, and intrigue involving nicely developed characters
of all ages but never faltering from Lucy's preteen perspective. A spurious author's
note and acknowledgments page assert that the Barony of Cant indeed exists and
that this account is merely an historical chronicle thereof, and that it is under no
circumstances to be derogatorily referred to as "a novel." This and other marks of
spoofery (including occasional puns and facetious footnotes) belie the rounded
nature of the narrative but serve to prepare readers for the unusual ending. A map
and an appendix explaining the basics of heraldry are included. TC
BODE, N. E. 
The Anybodies; illus. by Peter Ferguson. 
HarperCollins,
2004 
27 6p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-055736-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-055735-4 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Fern knows that she is a disappointment to her dull parents, the Drudgers, so it is
with some relief that she discovers that, due to an inadvertent baby switch at the
hospital, she's not their daughter at all. She is the daughter of the Bone, a profes-
sional Anybody who can not only be anybody (or anything, apparently), but who
can also help others "become better versions of themselves." Fern adapts with
remarkable swiftness to life with the Bone, and while the discovery that her real
mother, an Anybody of great talent, is dead, grieves the girl, she recovers to engi-
neer the scheme that will reconcile her father with his great enemy, the Miser. The
search for her mother's lost book, The Art ofBeing Anybody, leads Fern and her
father to the home of her book-obsessed maternal grandmother, who helps Fern
realize her magical literary potential (Fern has a talent for shaking characters and
8 
* 
THE BULLETIN
other things from between the pages of books). The plotting is both convenient
and convoluted, but the characters, especially Fern, offer considerable compensa-
tion. The girl's yearning for a place to belong is palpable, and her easy acceptance
of the magical events that pepper her life has a matter-of-fact pragmatism that
makes it easy for readers to accept those events as well. Unfortunately, frequent
and often lengthy authorial asides tip the prose into the precious with clockwork
regularity, and the self-conscious reliance on literary allusions is often offputting.
Still, there is a piquant charm to Fern's quest for love and home, and patient
readers will willingly follow her down that emotional road. Ferguson's sleek black-
and-white illustrations have a fizzy humor that infuses the pages with energy. JMD
BOLDEN, TONYA 
Wake Up Our Souls: A Celebration of Black American
Artists. 
Abrams, 2004 
128p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8109-4527-4 
$24.95 
R Gr. 7-12
While many young readers will be familiar with some of the names (Faith Ringgold,
Romare Bearden) in this overview of African-American art history, there is bound
to be a plethora of revelations both about individual artists and about artistic heri-
tage and tradition. Bolden breaks her examination into three sections, the first
dealing with the era prior to the twentieth century, the second addressing the
artistic developments through World War II, and the third describing the work of
postwar and contemporary artists. The text is sometimes uneven: it would be
useful to have a bit more explanation of the context of some artists' experience
(since it's not always clear whether negative response was due to racial bigotry or
artistic innovation), and there's a considerable contrast in density between the
erudite captions, which will prove hard going for some readers, and the more ac-
cessible main text. Artists are well chosen, however, and many readers will revel in
finding new visual pleasures, such as Henry Ossawa Tanner's haunting biblical
studies or Alma Thomas' vibrantly colored contemporary abstracts (Bolden also
includes several naive and folk artists in her discussion, which makes for a refresh-
ingly large artistic tent). She also provides some eye-opening discussion of the
influences and sponsorship within the African-American art community, which
subtly underlines the importance of trailblazers, sponsors, and mentors. Repro-
ductions vary in quality, most probably due to difficulties of access to the original,
and there are a few images hampered by the challenge of the gutter or compression
to page size; most, however, are shown to good advantage and counterpointed
with well-chosen photographs of their creators. Even readers unwilling to page
through the text will find plenty of images worth browsing here, and those who do
pursue the narrative will find their artistic and historical understanding enriched
both visually and conceptually. Extensive end matter includes a glossary, end-
notes, a bibliography (of adult books) and list of further suggested reading (works
for young readers), and an index. DS
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH Jim Thorpe's Bright Path; illus. by S. D. Nelson. 
Lee & Low,
2004 
4 0p
ISBN 1-58430-166-X 
$17.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Bruchac supplies the backstory to one of America's great all 'round athletes, who
began most inauspiciously as a poor student and a boarding-school runaway. Ex-
plaining to his six-year-old sons that "you need white man's knowledge to sur-
vive," Jim's father (of the Sac and Fox nations) sent Jim and his twin brother,
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 9
Charlie, to the Indian Agency reservation boarding school, where less athletic Charlie
for the first time took the lead in academics. Charlie's death and subsequent fam-
ily crises undermined Jim's tenure at two more schools, but his track skills at Haskell
Institute eventually brought Jim to the attention of recruiters from the Carlisle
Indian School where, under coach Pop Warner, the young man excelled at track
and football ("He was carrying not just a football, but the hopes and dreams of his
family, his people, and all the Indians who had been told they could never com-
pete with the white man"). In this account, Thorpe's "bright path" dead-ends at
Carlisle, and just beyond the main text lie two pages of double-columned end-
notes that detail Thorpe's athletic accomplishments, particularly his 1912 Olym-
pic medals and their revocation, Thorpe's professional baseball career, the
posthumous reawarding of his Olympic medals-in short, all the highlights that
probably led the audience to this title in the first place. Small inset action shots
and family photos that appear throughout the notes and the appended timeline are
more involving than Nelson's stiff and ungainly acrylic paintings that lock charac-
ters in mannered poses at epic moments of triumph and pathos. Young sports fans
intrigued by the handsome sprinter on the back cover will probably urge adult
readers to skip right to the end matter. EB
CAREY, JANET LEE 
The Double Life ofZoe Flynn. Atheneum, 2004 
234p
ISBN 0-689-85604-0 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-7
Like many others, Zoe's dad has lost his job at the university. He can't get work in
town that will support his family, and the landlord has decided to sell their house.
The family's only option is to store their furniture with a friend and drive in their
van up the coast to Oregon, where Zoe's dad finds a teaching job, then live out of
the van until they can save enough to rent a home. Though the strain of living for
six months in an old van with parents and little brother would make anyone's life
a misery, it's the loss of her identity, formed through her relationships with friends
and places, that Zoe minds the most. In Oregon, she has become the outsider, the
weirdo whose mom scrubs the neighbors' floors. In an ironic twist, her lack of a
house threatens her growing friendship with Aliya, a second-generation Pakistani-
American, since Zoe refuses to invite her to visit Zoe's (nonexistent) house, and
Aliya views that exclusion as rejection based on her Muslim religion. Unobtrusive
foils are provided by Aliya's immigrant grandmother and Aliya's own reminis-
cences about Julia, a recently deceased local girl; the grandmother's pining for the
land of her nativity mirrors Zoe's homesickness, and Julia's death underscores the
transitory beauty of life in the here and now. Zoe's use of her rich imagination and
unstoppable internal drive to overcome the pressure generated by the danger and
shame of homelessness will entice readers into turning pages long after bedtime,
while the author's startling, provocative imagery galvanizes the text and crafts the
description of Zoe's challenges and growth into an intimate personal experience
for the reader. TC
CHEN, CHIH-YUAN 
Guji Guji; written and illus. by Chih-Yuan Chen. 
Kane/
Miller, 2004 
32p
ISBN 1-929132-67-0 
$15.95 
R 
4 -7yrs
Mother Duck doesn't notice that a very unducklike egg has rolled itself into her
carefully laid clutch, and when all four eggs hatch, she loves Guji Guji, the inter-
loping egg's former inhabitant, the same as her other three ducklings. Viewers will
doubtless notice that Guji Guji is in fact a crocodile, but Mother Duck simply
10 
* THE BULLETIN
rejoices in her offspring's strength and size (and "no matter how quick they were,
or what they looked like, Mother Duck loved all her ducklings the same"). When
a trio of bad crocodiles breaks the news to Guji-not only is he not a duck, his
species eats ducks-and tries to get him to lead his family into their reptilian jaws,
Guji Guji turns trickster to defend his family. Flap copy on this import from
Taiwan suggests that the story is inspired by the challenges of interracial adoption;
the correlation founders somewhat (since birth relatives rarely attempt to eat adoptive
families) and the ending flags a little, but the plot successfully makes its own inde-
pendent point about loyalty and influence. The writing relies on simple, declara-
tive sentences imbued with dry humor ("I am not a bad crocodile," Guji Guji
concludes. "Of course, I'm not exactly a duck either"), and folklorically inspired
structures-including Guji Guji's deliciously repetitive name-provide narrative
shaping. Chen's inventive art takes what could have been a drab palette-a twi-
light world of slate and dove gray, pale cocoa, and deep black-brown, with occa-
sional touches of teal and orange-and makes it into a subtle and comic, if
occasionally slightly menacing, world. Rumply penciled textures add a homey
touch, while the "crocoduck's" benevolent snaggletoothed mien anchors each spread
and provides a contrast to the cunning and cunningly portrayed reptilian preda-
tors with their narrow yellow eyes and tendency to abuse toys and bite trees in half.
Whether he's a crocodile or duck won't really matter to audiences-they'll just
relish this story of a little kid who cleverly saves the day. DS
CHILD, LAUREN 
IAm Too Absolutely Smallfor School; written and illus. by Lauren
Child. 
Candlewick, 2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7636-2403-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4 -6 yrs
Charlie and Lola (from I Will Never Not Ever Eat a Tomato) are now facing the
first day of school, as Lola, who is "still really quite small," advances all kinds of
arguments why school is unnecessary for her ("I don't need to learn up to one
hundred. I already know up to ten, and that is plenty"), while older brother Charlie
attempts to convince her otherwise ("But Lola, . . . what if eleven eager elephants
all wanted a treat? How would you count up how many treats that would be?").
Charlie's reasoning shakes Lola from each of her hard-line stands (the best is when
he suggests that Santa Claus might bring her nothing but an old sock if she can't
write a Christmas letter), and even persuades her to take pity on her imaginary
friend, Soren Lorenson, who is afraid to go to school alone. Personality radiates
from the jumbled fonts and mixed-media illustrations; the children's innocent yet
devious characters are reflected in their untidy outlines, heart-shaped faces, and sly
glances as each tries to outsmart the other. Argument proofs are presented with
underhanded humor, slipping in private jokes and irony to supplement the narra-
tive line. Watch for the quasi-invisible Soren Lorenson, outlined in spot lamina-
tion throughout the last pages of the book, and snicker with Lola as she explains in
complete seriousness to the mystified Charlie that "I was not worried. It was
Soren Lorenson who was nervous, not me. I was fine." TC
COLFER, EOIN 
The Supernaturalist. Miramax/Hyperion, 2004 
267p
ISBN 0-7868-5148-1 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 6-9
Cosmo Hill, fourteen-year-old orphan, escapes from the Clarissa Frayne Institute
for Parentally Challenged Boys when a bus crash frees him from a sadistic guard.
SEPTEMBER2004 
* 
11
The boy is rescued by a strange trio-Stefan, Mona, and Ditto-who take Cosmo
in after realizing that he is a Spotter, one of few who can see the blue Parasites that
suck the life force from injured humans. Led by the enigmatic Stefan, the small
band of self-named Supernaturalists roam Satellite City looking for Parasites in
order to destroy them. Colfer (author of the Artemis Fowl series, BCCB 7/01,
etc.) tries his hand here at some futuristic science fiction, creating a world in which
orphans are used as experimental lab rats and corporations gain profit by any means
necessary. Colfer's decaying urban streets glitter with Gotham City-like allure,
and the pseudo-militaristic action will certainly appeal to hardware-focused read-
ers. Characterizations are paper-thin, however, and the backstory just doesn't hold
up to even the most cursory scrutiny. The plot careens out of control early and
subsequently relies on labored convenience and far-fetched (even for science fic-
tion) chase-and-escape sequences to move the characters toward the final, anticli-
mactic revelation. Those seeking the nuanced thrill of fictional science should
look to classic Card or newly minted Anderson (Feed, BCCB 11/02). JMD
COOPER, MICHAEL L. 
Dust to Eat: Drought and Depression in the 1930s. Clarion,
2004 
81p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-15449-3 
$15.00 
R Gr. 6-9
Although the Dust Bowl and the Great Depression are often presented or studied
as separate disasters, Cooper focuses on their interrelationship. He opens well into
the dual crises with the "Okies" flocking to California and being greeted by the
"bum blockades" of a state already suffering from high unemployment, and then
backtracks to the causes of the dust storms of 1935 and the deplorable timing of
nature's attack amid the worst years following the stock market crash of 1929.
Cooper is particularly adept at balancing the miseries of the displaced with the
broad social and economic forces that drove them from their farms and small
towns to seek employment as migrant laborers, and although California appears as
a hotbed of prejudice and paranoia in this drama, the reasons for the inhospitable
reaction to the newcomers are clearly laid out. John Steinbeck, Woody Guthrie,
and tenacious farmer Caroline Henderson are frequently quoted, opening win-
dows to a variety of experiences, and each page turn brings a well-chosen period
photograph (many by Dorothea Lange), historic poster, or map. Cooper provides
source notes for his own research, a list of books and other media of interest to
readers, and an index. Even a casual flip through the illustrations should pique
adolescents' curiosity about this bleak period, and stop adults from grousing about
their Social Security deductions. EB
CRILLEY, MARK 
Billy Clikk: Creatch Battler; written and illus. by Mark
Crilley. 
Delacorte, 2004 
246p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90136-4 
$12.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73111-6 
$10.95 
Ad Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Billy Clikk's workaholic parents are the founders of the most suc-
cessful insect-extermination service in Piffling, Indiana-or so Billy thinks. Then
one night while his parents are away, Billy sees them on late-night television in a
parade in the Philippines. Stunned, Billy searches the house and finds foreign-
language books between the covers of his mother's romance novels and receipts
from places like Alaska in their garbage can. When he finds a high-tech business
card for a company called AFMEC, however, he knows what to do: he calls the 1-
12 
* 
THE BULLETIN
800 number and impersonates his father. AFMEC turns out to be the Allied
Forces for the Management of Extraterritorial Creatches, Billy's parents turn out
to be secret agents who battle creatches (i.e., monsters), and Billy turns out to be in
big, big trouble. Luckily, rather than being arrested, Billy is allowed to accompany
his parents on their next mission, thus starting him off on a wild career path.
Crilley has tapped into a popular fantasy life for young readers, and Billy is a
realistic and appropriately flawed hero. Unfortunately, the writing, with its pre-
ponderance of ellipses and overstatement of the obvious, lacks tension, while Billy's
efforts to prove himself (and drive the plot forward) are sometimes unbelievably
foolish. Though Crilley is following trails well-worn by others-AFMEC's opera-
tions and alternative world history (a history that includes things like the World
Creatch Accord) recall Men in Black, while Billy's discoveries suggest Spy Kids-
there is enough novelty in the futuristic, high-tech world of AFMEC and enough
grossness in the details of various creatches to capture most kids who enjoy action
and danger or just plain wish their parents were cooler underneath. KH
DATLOW, ELLEN, ed. 
The Faery Reel: Tales from the Twilight Realm; ed. by Ellen
Datlow and Terri Windling; illus. by Charles Vess. 
Viking, 2004 
[54 4 p]
ISBN 0-670-05914-5 
$19.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
The latest collection by Datlow and Windling gathers together seventeen stories
and three poems (only one of which was previously published) that explore the
seductive, slippery, savage world of faery. Lest you think faeries are all tiny females
with shimmering wings living in tulips, the authors in this anthology have news
for you: faeries manifest themselves differently in the folklore of every culture, and
they aren't all like Tinkerbell. All the vagaries of faery are represented here, from
the hungry, horrible tengu in Japan to the innocent, shell-shocked sprite of an oak
tree in war-torn France to the insect-like, parasitic faeries that prey on human
dreams. The settings range all over, from Brazil to Boston to Australia to L.A., and
while a few stories take a more traditional approach, many divorce faeries from
their natural element to show how well, or how poorly, they've adapted to this
overpopulated, technologically advanced, environmentally unstable world. In many
of these stories, the faery world exists as a poignant statement about how much
we've changed: in Patricia A. McKillip's "Undine," a water faery attempts to cap-
ture her first human male only to wind up beached on a polluted lake; in Emma
Bull's "De La Tierra," the L.A. faeries would rather kill their rural brethren, who
are streaming into the city after the destruction of their natural homes, rather than
share resources. If, however, you miss Tinkerbell amid the unfamiliar faery hordes,
look no further than Bruce Glassco's "Never Never," the existential retelling of
Captain Hook and his crew, doomed by faery magic to forever lose to Peter Pan
even as the possibility of winning appears endlessly on the horizon. Consistently
strong writing, imaginative creations, and relevant themes mark all of the stories
and poems in this collection, and with the addition of a fascinating, in-depth essay
on the historical background of faery and a section on further reading, Datlow and
Windling have put together another must-have anthology. KH
DAVIDSON, DANA 
Jason &Kyra. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion, 2004 
330p
ISBN 0-7868-1851-4 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Kyra Evans is none too pleased when she has to team up with jock Jason Vincent
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
13
to work on an AP English project. Far from carrying him on the assignment,
however, she realizes that, besides being poetry on a basketball court, he also has
quite a bit of poetry in his soul. Their relationship develops slowly and carefully,
despite their separately growing physical and emotional attraction to each other,
because Jason has a girlfriend and Kyra can't imagine being desired by such an
extremely fine and popular boy. Finally, a kiss forces a breakup for Jason and
confessions for Kyra, and the two begin an almost impossibly touching romance of
shared secrets (Jason's father is emotionally abusive) and mutual support (Kyra
learns about basketball and Jason tries to understand Kyra's award-winning sci-
ence project). Alas, the course of true love never did run smoothly; Jason's old
girlfriend does not disappear gracefully, and Kyra's inexperience with relationships
of the heart threatens to sabotage their idyll. Davidson's rather stiff and overly
formal prose threatens this relationship almost as much, but it does have the effect
of measuring what might otherwise have been entirely too syrupy sweet. Davidson
lingers over minute details of feeling and conversation, changing focalizers some-
times even in mid-paragraph to make sure every nuance of each character's per-
spective is clear to readers. The real value of this somewhat ordinary tale of first
love's bliss and angst is that it offers us characters we haven't met very often-the
very wealthy, very smart, very privileged black students at a school modeled after
Cass Tech in Detroit. Sure to have regional appeal, the book will also provide an
alternative to those who are tired of the narrow stereotypical boxes of anger, pov-
erty, and oppression into which black teen experience is too often placed. KC
DAVIS, MICHELE IVY 
Evangeline Brown and the Cadillac Motel. Dutton,
2004 
181p
ISBN 0-525-47221-5 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Evangeline, better known as Eddie, is deeply embarrassed by living in a motel with
a huge pink Cadillac butt sticking out of the wall (it'll draw customers, Pa figures),
but she's even more embarrassed by Pa's drinking, which starts every afternoon
when Pa's old friend Jesse shows up. Eddie helps Ruby, the housekeeper, clean the
rooms, and she buries herself in books until she finally meets Farrell, Jesse's son.
Farrell is full of secrets about his past in and out of foster homes, which he eventu-
ally shares with Eddie. When their teacher starts making home visits and decides
that Social Services needs to intervene in their family situations, Eddie and Farrell
hatch a plot to run away, since Farrell has vowed never to be placed in foster care
again. Eddie, however, decides that she can't be a quitter, and her example leads
Farrell back to his dad, who agrees to join Eddie's dad in rehab. This is rather
frequently traversed territory in children's fiction, with its pair of dead mothers
and its stock characters including Ruby, the overweight housekeeper, Angelique,
the heavily made-up woman who lives at the hotel and just wants a shot at being a
cosmetologist, and Miss Rose, the beautiful, crusading teacher. Eddie is character-
istically spunky and self-assured, and Davis keeps us firmly within her naive per-
spective on events while allowing a knowing reader to fill in the gaps-of, for
instance, Angelique's nocturnal profession as an exotic dancer, of Ruby's "acciden-
tally" showing up when Miss Rose comes for her home visit to cover for Pa who is
dead drunk, and finally, of Eddie's own giftedness in academics and in music, of
which she is unaware. Though not innovative, all of these elements put the reader
on solidly familiar ground, and the message of hope among the imperfect rings
true. KC
14 
* THE BULLETIN
DE LA CRUZ, MELISSA 
TheAu Pairs. Simon, 2004 
2 94 p
ISBN 0-689-87066-3 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 10-12
If there is such a thing as chicken soup for the teenage soul, this novel is definitely
cotton candy. Three girls-a dispossessed Manhattanite whose father has run afoul
of some tax law or other, a homey girl from Sturbridge trying to earn money for
college and a used Camry, and a lovesick Brazilian in search of a boy she met at
home with only the clue that he summers in the Hamptons (guess what? She finds
him on her first night out!)-answer an ad for au pairs with a fabulously wealthy
family on holiday in the Hamptons. Of course, all three girls are fabulously leggy
and flawless (as in the Abercrombie and Fitch-like cover art), which aids in their
real quest for men and mayhem among the rich and famous. Garnering coveted
invitations to parties where people like Brad and Jen are on the guest list, the girls
drink, tan, and date their way through the summer, while managing, not too evenly,
to care for the children, find true love, and become best friends along the way.
Sound frothy? It is, but it's also witty, knowing, and oh so chic. Each girl even
learns an Important Lesson about Love along the way: for Eliza, it doesn't pay to
be a snob when the gardener is a total hottie, for Mara, the heir to the manor really
can fall for the help if she becomes a Hampton It girl, and for Jacqui, perhaps the
Brazilian saying that "the best way to get over somebody is to get under someone
else" might not be the wisest course of action. Oh, well, it's summertime and the
reading is sleazy-expect this to come back with sand and sunscreen between the
pages. KC
EHRLICH, FRED 
Does a Duck Have a Daddy?; illus. by Emily Bolam. 
Blue Apple/
Handprint, 2004 
32p 
(Early Experiences)
ISBN 1-59354-032-9 
$10.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
Does a Mouse Have a Mommy?; illus. by Emily Bolam. 
Blue Apple/Hand-
print, 2004 
32p 
(Early Experiences)
ISBN 1-59354-034-5 
$10.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
Traditional toddler questions ("Does a butterfly have a daddy? Does a bug?") launch
the listener into detailed yet brief explanations of how certain animals deal with the
everyday challenges of life. Examples begin with those animals whose habits are
least like ours and progress to the primates and then to us, pointing out the fact
that human children enjoy adult care for a comparatively long time. Each infor-
mational nugget is carefully sized for its audience, the course of the total narration
guided smoothly from the familiar to the new and back again, a strategy which
allows the author to matter-of-factly represent the dispassionate details of animal
behaviors and then all-out celebrate the unique aspects of human practice.
Paintbrushed portraits of human and animal families pretty up the pages, their
familiar groupings intensifying the comparison between the viewer's lived experi-
ence and the often dissimilar lives of nonhumans. Bubble-gum pinks and pale
aquas set off the butterscotch yellows and soft whites of the title animals, which
gaze earnestly from each front cover and scamper engagingly through the endpa-
pers, wrapping the books in a visual sugar coating consistent with the tiny-tot bits
of brain candy inside. These will provide preschoolers an eye-opening glimpse of
life in the animal world, where parenting is a short-term job and tooth-brushing is
unknown. TC
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 15
EMBERLEY, MICHAEL 
Ruby and the Sniffs; written and illus. by Michael
Emberley. 
Little, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-316-23664-0 
$15.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
In this nod to "Goldilocks and the Three Bears," Ruby, a spunky little mouse in
red overalls and a green cap, hears thumps and bumps in the apartment upstairs,
which can mean only one thing-burglars. Outwitting her canine babysitter, Ruby
sneaks upstairs, only to find that the majority of the bumps and thumps are com-
ing from a loutish family of pigs who are moving in to the apartment. Ruby is
appalled, especially since they insist that she is, variously, a gerbil, a rat, and a boy,
but it turns out she was right about one thing: there is a burglar. As the pigs sit
down to dinner, they notice that someone has been eating their pickled potato
peels, slippery gristle, and sticky fish heads. Ruby unwittingly opens the closet
door to reveal the cat burglar, and chaos threatens until Mrs. Mastiff, Ruby's
babysitter, turns up to save the day. Porcine puns and gastronomical grotesqueries
enliven the prose while the cartooned menagerie generates its own guffaws. The
pigs are Bubbafied buffoons, while Mrs. Mastiff maintains an air of genteel dignity
even when she is unceremoniously buried under a cat burglar. Ruby herself re-
mains at center stage, with Emberley's serial treatment of her progress seeming
nearly animated-one can imagine eyebrows, whiskers, and tail all twitching alter-
nately with fear, indignation, and orneriness, depending on her mood. Those who
remember Ruby from her initial adventure, Ruby, will be glad to see her back-it's
been too long. KC
FINDLAY, JAMIESON 
The Blue Roan Child. Chicken House/Scholastic,
2004 2 52p
ISBN 0-439-62752-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Syeira has worked in the king's stables in Haysele, "land of horses," since she can
remember. Though she has vague memories of her mother, Syeira's family has
long been the horses she tends to as a stable orphan; her respect for horses helps her
get close to them where force has failed others. Her favorites are the regal Arva
horses, a mare and her two colts, captured wild by the king's handlers but resistant
to taming. When Lord Ran of Stormsythe, ruler of a northern empire and subject
of many horror stories, takes the two Arva colts along with his yearly purchase of
horses, Syeira is determined to reunite them with their mother. Syeira and the
mare Arwin set off for Stormsythe with nothing except each other and a vague
notion of rescue and revenge. The journey, though begun with haste, seems to
founder in place rather than race forward as Syeira spends too much time learning
the elaborate life stories of the strange characters met on the way; however, once
they arrive in Stormsythe, the pace quickens considerably, galloping with mad
energy until the final gasping breaths of the finale. Syeira is an understandably
naive but instinctive hero, and her bond with Arwin, based on the mutual need for
freedom, is realistically hard won. Findlay's silvery prose suits his myth-laden land
of legendary horses and haunted people, and his attention to the way horses com-
municate-through scent and breath-creates a rich sensory experience. Findlay's
horses are not familiar friends or willing servants, but fierce, primal beasts that
accept only those who they deem worthy-and trample the rest. Recommend this
to fantasy and horse lovers who will appreciate this antidote to Disneyesque an-
thropomorphism. KH
16 
* THE BULLETIN
FRANCO, BETSY 
Counting Our Way to the 100th Day!; illus. by Steven
Salerno. 
McElderry, 2004 
48p
ISBN 0-689-84793-9 
$15.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Columbus Day, Presidents Day, Veterans Day may all require some explaining,
but every primary-grader instinctively understands what 100th Day means: that
we've been in school for a heckuva long time already this year. Teachers who
budget a poem a day from Franco's collection into their lesson plans can keep
students focused on the upcoming milestone and cull ideas for a host of activities
as well. While Calliope was probably asleep at her job for some of the clunkier
entries ("You can make 100/ by yourself,/ or get your friends to help./ When it's
time to throw the snowballs,/ you can scream and run and yelp"), the range of
100-related concepts is truly inspirational. Many are, of course, mathematically
oriented-grouping five-lettered student names to make 100, counting backwards
by 10s, performing an easy subtraction word problem, balancing various weights
against 100 pennies, estimating what a hundred of different monetary denomina-
tions would buy (realistically allowing for inflation). Franco also approaches 100
from other avenues as well, offering mnemonic devices for learning coin values, a
recipe for a gorp-type snack, a suggestion for nibbling pretzels into number shapes,
a word puzzle, and even an observation of words derived from the root "cent."
Salerno supplies a gouache vignette for each poem, and the supple-wristed energy
in his dashing brushstrokes (don't neglect to count all hundred hounds in the
stretch limo on day fifteen) should make the picture of the day as welcome as its
literary companion. EB
FRIEDMAN, LAURIE 
Back to School, Mallory; illus. by Tamar Schmitz. 
Carolrhoda,
2004 
175p
Library ed. ISBN 1-57505-658-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Mallory McDonald, age eight and three-quarters, has a crisis on her hands: she's
about to start third grade at a new school, and her mom is the new music teacher.
The first months at Fern Falls Elementary are punctuated with a variety of dilem-
mas, from the appearance of "purple glitter pox" when Mallory falls asleep with
wet fingernail polish to her getting cast as the eggplant in the third-grade musical,
not to mention dealing with the embarrassment of having your mom at school
every day. The in-your-face first-person narration of this amusing tale is Ramona-
esque in its overdramatization; Mallory has a similar flair for explanatory speeches
as well as a bent towards getting herself into mischief, and readers will laugh out
loud as they watch her fall deeply in and squirm successfully out of quandary after
quandary. Subtly woven into the tale is the frustration Mallory feels with having
to share her mom, climaxing in Mallory's intentionally ruining the musical and
resolving in a warm fuzzy makeup lunch at-where else for a young McDonald?-
McDonald's. Though the humor is more successful than the serious moments,
readers are likely to forgive occasional lapses for sake of the laughs present throughout
the narrative. Schmitz's comics-like black-and-white illustrations offer a perfect
counterpoint to the text, both illustrating the story and capturing images of Mallory's
internal thoughts, and the faces are remarkably expressive in their simple line com-
position. The comedy and tragedy of third grade narrated herein are well suited to
an audience of students just beginning to tackle chapter books. HM
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
17
GASKINS, PEARL 
I Believe In ... : Christian, Jewish, and Muslim Young People
Speak about Their Faith. Cricket, 2004 
207p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8126-2713-X 
$18.95 
R Gr. 6-12
It's one thing to inquire about a person's religious denomination (or lack thereof),
but quite another matter to probe what they actually believe. Gaskins follows her
notable collection of interviews with mixed-race teens (What Are You?, BCCB
10/99) with this foray into an equally sensitive theme, and again she elicits re-
sponses that are heartfelt, candid, and articulate. Scope may be limited to the
three major religions within the United States, which "share many of the same
sacred texts and stories," but since most interviewees discuss the nature of their
experience rather than specific doctrinal tenets, most readers of faith-as well as
those whose faith has lapsed-will glimpse at least their own partial reflection
somewhere among these testimonies of certainty and doubt. Moreover, since
Gaskins is generously inclusive in her editing, there's enough raw outspokenness
to unsettle the most contented souls and keep the reading lively: "You don't desire
to do good until you become a Christian"; "If Israel kicked the Palestinians out,
who's going to take them? Nobody wants them"; "They [my parish] don't deal
with any of that crap-like doctrines of the church. So it's not one of the cardinal's
favorite churches in Chicago." Although the interviews are divided into seven
broadly themed chapters, Gaskins often prefers to let the interviews unfold as a
dialogue rather than an exhaustive exploration of a spiritual topic. One young
man observes, "In the world today, religion is such a roll-your-eyes type thing."
Clearly, the one trait this diverse group of young adults shares is acuity of vision.
EB
GIBBONS, GAIL 
Mummies, Pyramids, and Pharaohs: A Book aboutAncient Egypt;
written and illus. by Gail Gibbons. 
Little, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-316-30928-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Aliki's Mummies Made in Egypt (BCCB 2/80) would probably be voted Most Likely
Suggestion for Primary Grade Egyptophiles, and now Gibbons offers not a re-
placement but a complement to that trusty workhorse. Aliki delves more deeply
into Egyptian preparations for the afterlife, but Gibbons focuses half her work on
the concerns of earthly life, touching (albeit very briefly) on social organization,
types of labor, housing, clothing, medicine, and religious belief and rituals, distin-
guishing frequently between royal and common classes. Whereas Aliki's descrip-
tion of interment revolves around a mastaba burial, Gibbons lays her unnamed
pharaoh to rest within the core of a pyramid, ia la Khufu at Giza. Gibbon's text is
often clipped, even terse ("Ancient Egyptians used picture writing. The inscrip-
tions they made on temples and tombs are now known as hieroglyphs"), and re-
gard for chronology and terminology can be casual, to say the least. An Old
Kingdom-styled pyramid, for example, is here associated with New Kingdom-
styled canopic jars, and the observation that "MONARCHS were in charge of
different regions of Egypt" should more precisely refer to nomarchs. Still, most
children who cruise through picture-book nonfiction have come to know that
Gibbons, with her plainspoken narrative and literal (and somewhat lighthearted)
line-and-watercolor illustrations will take them places they want to go, and this
tour of Egypt calls at several ports Aliki doesn't visit. EB
18 
* 
THE BULLETIN
GREENE, CAROL 
The Story ofHalloween; illus. by Linda Bronson. 
HarperCollins,
2004 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029560-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027946-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-4
Yes, the topic's been done to death, but Greene resurrects it one more time in a
smoothly written presentation that focuses narrowly on the evolution of the holi-
day and targets an audience at the peak of trick-or-treating enthusiasm. She be-
gins with the Celtic observation of Samhain, or summer's end, and the role of
bonfires in protecting householders from the fey world. She then introduces the
Roman harvest feast of Pomona, with its offerings of apples and nuts. Finally, she
discusses the advent of Christianity and how persistent folk beliefs and traditions
manifest themselves in rituals which would be brought by immigrants to the United
States and gradually morph into present-day customs. Greene gracefully melds
her information into such a seamless continuum that her abrupt observation "it
was no longer safe for young children to go trick-or-treating" will certainly come
as a surprise to kids who still confidently do the door-to-door thing. Still, she does
bring practices up to date with the inclusion of UNICEF money collections, school-
and community-sponsored parties and parades, costume competitions, and store-
window-painting contests. Since folkways dominate this title, Bronson appropri-
ately dispenses with orange and black spooky motifs and offers instead stylized
acrylic scenes of spare-shaped villagers performing their autumnal rites in tipsily
skewed perspectives that underscore a world thrown temporarily out of equilib-
rium. EB
HAMILTON, VIRGINIA 
Wee Winnie Witch's Skinny: An Original African American
Scare Tale; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-590-28880-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Hamilton, an acknowledged master reteller of folktales, here puts her knowledge
of traditional form and motifs to work in the creation of an original spooky tale (a
version of which, "The Witch's Skinny," can be found in The Dark Way: Stories
from the Spirit World, BCCB 12/90). James Lee tells his brother, Will, "I know a
lot about witches. I do!", and good thing, too, because the boys' Uncle Big An-
thony is in some deep witchy trouble. A "Wee Winnie" (a name James Lee's
Mama Jo uses to make witches sound small) is using Uncle Big Anthony to take
nighttime rides across the sky, and Uncle Big Anthony is slowly turning into Uncle
Shrunken Anthony right before his nephews' eyes. The arrival of the indomitable
Mama Granny puts a permanent stop to Wee Winnie's shenanigans, but not be-
fore James Lee gets himself a moonlit ride above the "sassy trees." The image of
the witch who takes off her "skinny" and rides an unfortunate victim like a horse is
a common motif in folktales, and Hamilton uses it to spooky effect. The conver-
sational tone evokes both James Lee's fear and the thrill of his supernatural experi-
ences, making the events just scary enough to be delicious. Moser's colored wood
engravings are evocatively shadowed, the compositions tight, and the menace pal-
pable. The book design is crisply spare, with cream-colored blocks of text opposite
full-page images, all bordered with sleek black lines. The simple yet creepy image
of the wicked jack-o'-lantern's visage flaming from a black background will stay
with readers long after the book is closed. Hamilton has left us with a tale that
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
19
does triple duty: for storytelling, reading aloud, or reading alone, this is a "wee
winn-ing" tour de force. JMD
HARRIS, MONICA A. 
Wake the Dead; illus. by Susan Estelle Kwas. 
Walker,
2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8923-4 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8922-6 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Obstreperous young Henry is having a very loud day, leading his family to admon-
ish him to quiet down lest he wake the dead. Too late: "The dead rose from their
graves. They emerged from their coffins. They pushed open their mausoleum
doors," and they're not happy about the din. They wander through town in search
of its source, pausing to push up some daisies in the park, do a dead-man's float in
the community pool, and engage in various other stops that elicit a continuous
stream of grave figures of speech (the beautician says they look like death warmed
over, the librarian expects dead silence, the postal clerk asks if they're looking for
the dead-letter office). When they find Henry, he helpfully attempts to get them
back to sleep, throwing them a party ("Dead Folks Sleep Over") to tucker them
out until they finally nod off to the gentle readaloud strains of Goodnight, Goon.
While some of the deathly expressions will be more familiar to adults than to kids,
the youngsters will quickly get the punny idea in addition to enjoying the Night of
the Insomniac Dead plot. Kwas has a sharp, snappy approach to her watercolor
visuals, giving them an urnload of graphic impact with lots of precise hatching and
an emphasis on funereal black in the corpses' long coats; she de-emphasizes the
horror by making the skulls on the walking dead into nonthreatening marshmal-
lowy shapes that suggest the candy figures from Dia de los Muertos and carefully
balancing the black with punchy autumnal oranges and reds. In addition to the
obvious humorous Halloween reading, you could also use this to jumpstart some
language-arts exercises that'd make them die laughing. DS
HAVILL, JUANITA 
Eyes Like Willy's; illus. by David Johnson. 
HarperCollins,
2004 
138p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-13673-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-13672-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Parisian siblings Guy and Sarah meet Viennese boy Willy Schiller on holiday at
Lake Constance in the summer of 1906. The trio forms a fast friendship, and
although their parents consider them too young to travel to each other's homes
throughout the year, they meet regularly each summer at the lake. The boys pur-
sue mutual interests in model boats and working gliders, and Sarah is welcome to
tag along. As the boys mature and sneak off to meet local girls, a left-behind Sarah
falls prey to understandable jealousy. The annual meetings are interrupted by the
death of Willy's mother, but when they resume the now-teenage friends are as
close as ever. The arrival of World War I, Guy's enlistment in the army, and
Willy's sudden epistolary silence seems to drive a wedge between the boys, but
Sarah never loses faith in their friend. Guy returns home to recover from an injury
(he is wounded saving a German soldier who reminded him of his old friend);
Willy, also injured, manages to track his old friends down and, in the closing half
page, becomes engaged to Sarah: "Speechless with joy, Guy stood for a moment
looking at Willy and Sarah. Then he said, 'Now we will be brothers.'" Havill
20 
* 
THE BULLETIN
describes the blossoming friendship, and even Guy's war involvement, with cool,
almost impersonal precision and jolts to an abrupt ending that rings with "and the
moral is" rather than "and they lived happily ever after." Readers comfortable
with keeping the protagonists at emotional arm's length may, however, accept
Havill's slim novel as an extended fable about the triumph of friendship over war.
EB
HEST, AMY 
Mr. George Baker; illus. byJonJ Muth. 
Candlewick, 2004 
[24p]
ISBN 0-7636-1233-2 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Most beginning readers have to trot off to school on their own, but not Harry. His
neighbor, Mr. George Baker, goes to school too, even though "he's a hundred
years old, no kidding." Having never learned to read, the professional drummer
now attends the elementary school with Harry, the other kids, and "the grownups
in room 7," leading the way down the learning trail with effervescent humor and
the constant "tappidy boom. Tappidy boom. Tappidy-boom-boom-tap" of his drum-
ming fingers and his drums. The text echoes Mr. Baker's drumbeat throughout,
extending and varying the rhythm without hindering the flow of words or com-
promising the conversational tone. Harry as narrator communicates to the audi-
ence his delight and pride in his friend's uniqueness and determination to better
himself, intimating that everyone so determined shares in the esteem due his en-
thusiastic elder. Watercolor illustrations in a palette of browns, creams, and muted
blues establish Mr. Baker as an integral part of Harry's landscape, the lines of his
frame and the hues of his clothing repeated in the houses and foliage of the neigh-
borhood. Mr. Baker's own warmly smiling face, his spontaneous dancing with his
wife, his fame as a drummer, and his generous acceptance of Harry's friendship
make him a delightful off-to-school companion. The wary may wonder if a pic-
ture book about a friendship between an adoring white boy and a kindly black
gentleman can possibly escape sentimentality; this book retains its emotional hon-
esty by focusing more on Mr. Baker as an admirable person than on Harry as the
beneficiary of the relationship. Preliterate youngsters and adults who lack local
exemplars will find Mr. George Baker a gentle and encouraging kindred spirit.
TC
HOOPER, MARY 
Petals in the Ashes. 
Bloomsbury, 2004 
192p
ISBN 1-58234-936-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Hannah and Sarah, sisters who were driven from their modest but thriving Lon-
don confectioners' shop by the plague (At the Sign of the Sugared Plum, BCCB
10/03), have safely delivered the baby in their charge to its surviving relatives in
the countryside, but before they can leave they face forty days confinement in a
pesthouse to ensure they are not infectious. After a brief visit at their family home
at Chertsey, Hannah and younger sister Anne return to the city to rebuild the
business. The shop is quickly up and running, but Hannah soon learns that her
sweetheart, Tom, has died in the plague. She thinks she spies him at a magician's
performance and finally finds him very much alive in a sideshow at St.
Bartholomew's Fair. They scarcely have time to declare their mutual affection
when the great London fire of 1666 breaks out and threatens to separate them
once more. Hooper's previous novel wrested so much tension from the approach-
ing plague, which never actually touched the girls, that this second historical disas-
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 21
ter, which does indeed burn out the shop, is a relative disappointment. Fully two
thirds of the book passes before sparks begin to fly-between the lovers and around
the city-and then Hannah spends considerable time observing the flames from a
distance and reporting what readers will suspect to be highlights of Hooper's re-
search. Hooper admits to taking dramatic liberty with St. Bartholomew's Fair
(which wasn't held in 1666), and since much of the plotting revolves around that
event, this is hardly a negligible concern. Still, Hannah is determined to build a
business and a life with Tom, and readers who are now emotionally invested in her
success can expect that London's decimation is just a temporary setback that will
be remedied in a coming installment. EB
HOROWITZ, DAVE 
A Monkey among Us; written and illus. by Dave
Horowitz. 
HarperFestival, 2004 
36p
ISBN 0-06-054335-3 
$14.99 
R 2-5 yrs
Think there's no rhyme for hippopotamus? Think again, as a blue hippopotamus
"hops a bus . . . all the way to Hippotropolis." Horowitz plays similarly with
phrased near-rhymes for monkey, giraffe ("Well ... half a giraffe"), and monster
in this short and simple offering. The spaghetti-armed (and tailed) monkey gam-
bols and frolics in exaggerated poses drawn in sepia lines on sunny yellow endpa-
pers, inviting viewers into the adventure. The collage art within the book is
straightforwardly funny and cleanly composed, featuring the various animals nim-
bly teasing a moustached fellow in a derby hat. Despite the paucity of text, a spare
yet gleeful story manages to develop and conclude, making this a good choice for
the fidgety whose patience for laptime reading is limited. Burgeoning wordsmiths
will likely come up with their own impossible rhymes to continue the fun. KC
HUTCHINS, HAZEL 
The Sidewalk Rescue; illus. by Ruth Ohi. 
Annick/Firefly,
2004 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 1-55037-831-7 
$19.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55037-830-9 
$7.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
It all starts out innocently enough: Morgan's little sister, Josie, draws a lovely
sidewalk picture and jumps inside it to pick the flowers. Morgan is distressed to
see unexpected danger lurking, though ("A huge, gigantic, mean and nasty lion
had leapt from the grasses and was chasing Josie toward the river"), and she raises
the alarm; fortunately, the girls' mother intervenes by drawing a boat that allows
Josie to cast off into the river and away from the lion. When Josie's headed to-
wards another disaster (Josie's boat is drifting towards the waterfall), Morgan finds
aid again, and the sequence repeats itself in peril after peril until finally clever
Morgan draws an exit for her little sister. The Mary Poppins-esque idea of slipping
into the chalk sidewalk picture retains its traditional allure, and there's an addi-
tional narrative charm in the ever-lengthening sequence of adults called in to help.
This isn't, however, going to make Harold and the Purple Crayon look to its laurels:
the repetition and kid-resonant descriptions of the first travails give way to more
bland and straightforward recitals, and the cumulative possibilities of the series of
adventures and participants are left untapped. The illustrations are a bit on the
bland side as well, and the page layouts are somewhat staid in their repeated reli-
ance on three-quarter spread images; the springlike palette of Josie's adventures
helps keep real fears at bay, however, and the gently cartoonish nature of the drafts-
22 
* 
THE BULLETIN
manship adds a touch of comedy to the Perils of Pauline (jeopardies of Josie?)
drama. Youngsters who've already discovered the joys of sidewalk artistry will
appreciate this exploration of their pastime's possibilities; those unfamiliar with
the medium may be inspired to break out the chalk, especially in light of the
appealing possibility of losing, even only temporarily, a younger sibling within
one's creations. DS
IBBOTSON, EVA 
The Haunting ofGranite Falls; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Dutton,
2004 
216p
ISBN 0-525-47192-8 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
No longer able to afford the upkeep of a six-hundred-year-old dwelling, Alex
MacBuff puts his beloved Scottish castle on the market. Hiram C. Hopgood,
American millionaire, thinks the castle will be just the thing to cheer his ailing
daughter, so long as there are no ghosts about the place to startle her. This proviso
presents a problem, as the orphaned Alex has been reared by a pack of ghouls that
includes a lusty Viking, an aging vampire, a waterlogged governess, a naughty five-
year-old poltergeist, and a retired hellhound. Alex attempts to relocate his ghostly
family, but they can't seem to adjust to their new digs, and they return home to
find that Hopgood is loading the entire castle onto the Queen Anne to be reas-
sembled in the small Texas town where he lives. Ghosts and Alex end up in Texas,
unbeknownst to each other, where they uncover and eventually thwart a fiendish
plot to kidnap the delicate Miss Hopgood. Once again, Ibbotson fans will delight
in the colorful cast of comic stereotypes and their humorous antics (also enjoyably
rendered in Kevin Hawkes' characteristic crosshatched pen-and-inks), but this some-
what slender tale, originally published in 1987 in Britain, seems to be a prototype
of Ibbotson's more polished later works such as Dial-a-Ghost (BCCB 9/01). The
darker moments and elements (such as the villainess' obsession with Adolf Hitler)
often jar with the lighthearted comic sense of the novel, and the several plot lines
pull the reader in too many directions. Though these flaws mar the lively plot,
young Ibbotson fans may nonetheless wish to explore the popular author's early
offering. KC
JAMES, BETSY 
My Chair; illus. by Mary Newell DePalma. 
Levine/Scholastic,
2004 
40p
ISBN 0-439-44421-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Most kids have a special sitting spot in their lives, and a group of children here
describe the wonders of their favorite furniture. One kid likes his chair because "it
keeps my ice cream higher than the dog"; another talks about her chair's nice
smell; a girl remarks on her squishy chair's tendency to eat stuff; a boy describes
the zooming capability of his wheelchair, and so on. While there's not much
payoff here, James captures the freewheeling nature of youthful imagination in her
protagonists' approach to seating, and her reliance on snug, specific details will
speak to young audiences. DePalma's acrylic illustrations gather steam as the pages
progress and more kids and chairs collect; her playfully drafted, big-eyed figures
stand out in sharp relief against the white backgrounds. A framed image gives
visual expression to the fantasy behind each speaker's more prosaic experience,
with one boy sitting proudly in a howdah atop an elephant, and a boy in a tire
swing fancying himself a trapeze artist. The correlations between the framed scene
and the real action aren't all so successful or clearly delineated, however, and the
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 23
gathering energy of the activity doesn't find a satisfying conclusion in the eventual
appearance of a baby in a baby seat; more confusingly, it's difficult in many spreads
to identify the speaker of the text and therefore the actual nature of the chair being
discussed. Williams' A ChairforMy Mother will still be the preferred seat, but this
might work to pique youthful imaginations and elicit lively discussions of people's
favorite spots to hang out. DS
JENKINS, EMILY My Favorite Thing (According to Alberta); illus. by AnnaLaura
Cantone. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-689-84975-3 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
As the text announces right up front, Alberta "is a girl of particular tastes," and she
helpfully itemizes these for the audience: dogs are all right as long as they're smaller
than her knee, fish are all right in the ocean but not on her plate, boats are good,
cartoons are bad, stuffed owls are better than baby dolls, etc. None of these de-
scribed pleasures is her favorite thing, however, which turns out to be Alberta
herself. The text doesn't really go anywhere, since there's no particular tension in
the list of assessments and no particular score in the final "favorite thing" revela-
tion. Alberta's authoritative pronouncements are both humorous and authentic,
however ("'Grapefruits are definitely not my favorite,' she confides. 'The juice is
bitter. Why would I like bitter juice? I just don't understand it'"), and the implied
interview adds extra comic dignity to Alberta's roll call of opinions. Cantone's
illustrations have the pop eyes, oversized heads, and narrowly lined features of
artistic Euro-cartooning; her deliberate but slightly scrabbly lines give a childlike
edge to her figures while collage elements such as cotton puffs, sweeps of back-
ground cloth, and beads transform readily into the everyday objects of Alberta's
existence. Fantastical compositions give the visuals their own strange elements (a
rabbit drives a carrot van through the spread noting that Alberta's favorite color is
orange; a cat sits reading on the toilet while Alberta soaks in the tub). The wild
artistic world makes this most suitable for close contemplation, but all audiences
will be encouraged to contribute a detailed recitation of their own favorite things.
DS
JOHNSTON, TONY 
The Worm Family; illus. by Stacy Innerst. 
Harcourt, 2004
32p
ISBN 0-15-205011-6 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Family pride is the cornerstone of the Worm family (that's Mother and Father and
Albert and Evangeline and Blanche and tiny Rosa and Uncle Herm), who greet
one another with exclamations of joy about being Worms. Looking for a nice
place to settle down, the family unfortunately keeps running into unwelcoming
neighbors who, finding that the Worms aren't effectively taunted with their own
name ("We're Worms for sure!" the Worms respond with pleased affirmation),
resort to throwing things at the interlopers. Finally the Worms discover neighbors
who appreciate that Worm is "an utterly Glorious Thing" and who rejoice in the
neighborhood's diversity. The message is clear ("Rejoice in who you are! Rejoice
in who everyone else is!" directs the epigraph), but the story's ebullient absurdity
ensures the point never becomes preachy. Johnston, long a skilled crafter of pic-
ture-book texts, excels here with prose decorated with internal rhyme, cadenced
with bouncing rhythms ("The neighbors were glossy and bossy and striped like
mints. They stared at the Worms and winced"), and energized by dorky wormy
24 
* THE BULLETIN
jokes (when Mother instructs her daunted family to show their spines, Evangeline
points out, "We don't have spines"), and kids will be gleefully singing along with
the Worm family refrain ("We are Worms and we are proud!/ We are long and we
are LOUD!") when they're not rolling in the aisles. Innerst's illustrations create a
superbly surreal milieu; relying on, of course, earth tones, with warm ochres and
rich browns predominating, they translate an Egielskiesque solidity into tactile
three-dimensionality that gives the proceedings the lunatic reality of dreams. Com-
positions make the most of the Worms' strong linearity but offer inventive con-
trasts to it as well (an overhead shot of the family peeking out of their car and
polished aluminum trailer suggests some strange seven-legged insect), and con-
crete details of face and accessories recall Mr. Potato Head in their wonderful
plasticity. The effervescent offbeatness will appeal to readers who relished Cronin's
Diary of a Worm (BCCB 10/03), and the quirky expression of affirmation will
ensure a happily wiggly welcome from readaloud audiences. DS
KATZ, SUSAN 
A Revolutionary Field Trip: Poems of ColonialAmerica; illus. by R.
W. Alley. 
Simon, 2004 
37p
ISBN 0-689-84004-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
With her fuzzy red hair and penchant for thematic attire, Mrs. Brown may have
graduated from the same teachers college as Miss Frizzle. Mrs. Brown has a more
narrowly defined interest, however, and only takes her class on field trips to a
living museum where the students can try out colonial crafts like candle dipping
and butter churning, maneuver a quill pen, observe iron smithery and sheep shear-
ing, twist hemp and weave dreamcatchers, and savor centuries-old recipes which
they are allowed to select by name alone. Each experience gets its own poem and
a detailed scene and/or vignette that offers insight into colonial life-and into
elementary-grade field trips as well. Poesy takes a back seat to narration, with only
a few entries that muster anything close to rhyme, rhythm, or imagery. Moreover,
the lack of specificity regarding Native Americans represented in the museum's
crafts and "powwow" ("from Tuscarora to Navajo") makes it difficult for fictional
visitors and real-life readers alike to correlate native peoples with white settlers
along the Eastern seaboard shown on the endpaper maps. Alley's cartoony cast of
boisterous tykes who want to be everywhere and do everything at once are undeni-
ably infectious in their enthusiasm, but Kate Waters' trusty photo excursions to
Plimoth Plantation and Williamsburg (e.g., Tapenum's Day, BCCB 3/96, Mary
Geddy's Day) still offer a better focused view of everyday life in the colonies and
clearer insight into historical reenactments and living museums. EB
KOPONEN, LIBBY 
Blow Out theMoon. Tingley/Little, 2004 
209p 
illus. with
photographs
ISBN 0-316-61443-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Her father's temporary business transfer to London uproots eight-year-old Libby
and her siblings who, though excited to voyage overseas, face the realities of schooling
in an unfamiliar environment. Libby's initial sojourn at St. Vincent's School isn't
a success; the children tease her about her odd American ways and even her reason-
ably stalwart attitude doesn't inoculate her from hurt. Her father discovers a school
that's a better fit-the boarding school Sibton Park-and here Libby revels in all
the girly bliss that her previous anglophilic reading has promised. Readers follow
Libby's gentle adventures as she masters the etiquette of managing knife and fork
SEPTEMBER2004 
* 25
English style, takes her first riding lessons, puts on a play with friends in the "night
nursery," and delights in the birthday ritual of a gift sack. An older Libby narrates
these loosely cobbled episodes with considerable zest, but her school experience
lacks the spice or kick that, let's say, Roald Dahl's schooldays memoirs pack, and
readers who know firsthand that education is fraught with social obstacles may
wonder where the other half of this story is hiding. A standard opening disclaimer
insists these proceedings and characters are fictitious, but Koponen's note at the
end suggest the opposite, and she even supplies photos throughout that testify to
narrator Libby's veracity. Either way, children who can't get enough of the kids-
away-from-home genre, and able young readers in search of a pleasant venture
abroad, may want to peek through the gates of Sibton Park. EB
LAFAYE, A. 
Worth. 
Simon, 2004 
14 4p
ISBN 0-689-85730-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Nathaniel Peale's leg has been mangled in a haying accident, and his physical pain
is compounded by the knowledge he'll never make a full recovery and by the jeal-
ousy he suffers watching his father build a close relationship with John Worth, an
Orphan Train boy they've taken in to help with tasks around the farm. Nathaniel's
mother encourages her son's resentments with her own insistence that John be
treated as a hireling, and as an inexperienced city boy, John struggles not only with
farm labor, but also with memories of the fire that claimed his family's lives. Hos-
tilities between farmers and ranchers on the Nebraska plains erupt into a series of
local fence-cuttings and agricultural sabotage, and when Nathaniel and John are
inadvertently thrown into a cooperative effort to identify the perpetrators, the
boys turn their awkward horseback adventure into an opportunity to form a more
brotherly bond. The strained family dynamic is incisively realized, and Nathaniel's
narration-more acerbic than whiny-cajoles readers to take his side against John
Worth, even as they realize the orphan's tale needs to be weighed as well. Middle-
schoolers who enjoyed Peggy Brooke'sJake's Orphan (BCCB 4/00) should appre-
ciate this drama, and brisk pacing and plenty of convincingly clipped dialogue
should bring the title within the grasp of younger able readers as well. EB
LANGRISH, KATHERINE 
TrollFell. HarperCollins, 2004 
26 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-058305-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-058304-5 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-8
At his father's funeral, Peer Ulfsson is surprised to learn that his twin uncles, Baldur
and Grim, long estranged from his father, are taking him in. It doesn't take long
for the boy to discover that his miller uncles are greedy and cruel, and that their
greed extends to taking his meager inheritance and then working him hard while
practically starving him. Peer is without ally until he meets Hilde, the eldest daughter
of a local family long at odds with Baldur and Grim. A meeting with a house Nis
(sort of a brownie) reveals to Peer that his uncles-no surprise-are up to no good:
they have taken him in order to give him to the sinister inhabitants of the Troll
Fell as a wedding present for the daughter of the local troll king in exchange for
troll treasure. Peer is an innocent soul with a generous spirit (which helps him
with the house Nis) and good manners (which save him from the Granny Green-
teeth that lives in the mill pond). It is Peer's good heart that causes the boy to
accompany Hilde into the troll's lair to save her younger brother and sister when
they are kidnapped by Peer's wicked uncles. Langrish scatters references to Scan-
26 
* THE BULLETIN
dinavian myth and lore throughout this hardy and believable fantasy. Characters
are nimbly developed, and even minor figures have precisely identifying elements
that make them memorable; the depiction of the trolls, dangerous as they are, has
a sly humor that makes them more than just archetypal villains. The challenging
terrain is overlaid with a sense of natural beauty infused with folkloric magic that
makes the physical atmosphere of the uncles' mountain town a strong presence
throughout. This first novel has a rustic, domestic magic that may appeal to read-
ers of historical fiction as well as to fantasy fans. JMD
LAWRENCE, IAIN 
Bfor Buster. 
Delacorte, 2004 
321p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90108-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73086-1 
$15.95 
R* Gr. 6-10
Dreams of daring aerial feats and patriotic heroics lure underage Kak into the
Canadian Air Force, but his first bombing mission over Germany, in which he
serves as wireless operator aboard the patched old crate Bfor Buster, plunges him
into the realization that an airman's life is one of silent, internalized dread and
outright, quaking terror. Chances are it will be a short life, too: "I wasn't a whiz
at math, but I knew the odds. . .. If I lived as long as twenty-one ops, I was
breaking all the laws of average, all the rules of numbers, that I would ever get
home to Canada." The base pigeon keeper-himself a demoted and disgraced
airman-provides Kak with some degree of hope by assigning him a peculiarly
swift bird that will carry home a message of the plane's fate should the craft go
down. The homing pigeon, Percy, becomes Kak's good-luck talisman, and al-
though both odds and omens point to a fiery end for Bfor Buster and her crew,
Kak clings to the notion that Percy will somehow pull them through. Lawrence
patiently and masterfully spins cycles of anxiety-filled inertia, explosively detailed
bombing missions, and increasingly briefer periods of dread between flights, until
the final mission in which Percy and Kak are parted over Berlin. (Sorry, I'm not
telling.) Readers are apt to forget that Lawrence is the wizard behind the curtain
on each flight, as they become caught up in the airmen's good-luck rituals and
superstitions of doom which point to different outcomes, drawing the plot line
unnervingly taut. Send this straight to the top of the war-story aficionados' list.
EB
LIEBERG, CAROLYN 
West with Hopeless. 
Dutton, 2004 
[192p]
ISBN 0-525-47194-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Carin only remembers the bad things about her older half-sister, Hope: her
undependability, her selfishness, her occasional offhanded cruelty. This summer,
Hope has a job interview in Reno, and that makes her Carin's ride to Nevada for
her annual visit with their divorced dad. Though she tries to resign herself to
circumstances she can't change, Carin can't squash her fear that Hope will absent-
mindedly abandon her along the way. In order to maintain a sense of control over
the drive, Carin counts off mile after highway mile, anxious to arrive in Reno,
where Hope's vagaries will no longer affect her. In fact, the trip doesn't go at all as
Carin has planned, to her benefit: through a series of minor adventures, Carin's
perception of Hope changes radically during their journey. Action develops the
characters of the sisters with the aid of a few well-chosen flashbacks told as memo-
ries-even Carin comes to understand that her younger self is not a reliable narra-
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 27
tor when it comes to depicting Hope as she was or predicting how she will behave
in future. Carin's toy clothesline of souvenirs (including a rotting apple core) and
handmade topographical map of already-been-chewed gum solidify her age (thir-
teen) and the stages of the trip for the reader, while her constant route-checking
underscores her need for security without resorting to counterfeit emotion. The
diction reflects a teenager's vocabulary without sacrificing narrative power to
trendiness or oversharing; as a result, this novel will remain readable and pertinent
for years. TC
LYON, GEORGE ELLA 
Sonny's House ofSpies. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2004 
298p
ISBN 0-689-85168-5 
$16.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Sonny's daddy was often gone for days and sometimes weeks from their home in
Mozier, Alabama. One night, Daddy leaves for good, and Sonny has to negotiate
the task of growing up among a cast of aunts and uncles who talk a lot but say
nothing that matters to Sonny. Uncle Marty, who's not really an uncle at all,
becomes a fixture around the house and eventually gives Sonny a job at the Circle
of Life donut shop, where Uncle Marty dispenses lard-laden fare along with scrip-
ture to the locals. Here Sonny begins to find some answers, including some he
isn't quite ready for, like Uncle Marty's lifelong love for his father, and his father's
reasons for abandoning his family--the love of a man in New Orleans. Lyon
manages Sonny's coming-of-age in the 1950s with a light touch despite the serious
events that spur him to understanding, including Uncle Marty's suicide and Sonny's
growing understanding of the racial divide between him and Mamby, the black
housekeeper whom he loves. Sonny's first-person narration is insightful and some-
times poetic, and his sister Loretta is always ready with an apt and often angry quip
to introduce a bit of sardonic humor that offsets and disarms Sonny's intensity.
Though there is little foreshadowing, the truth about his father dawns on him
slowly enough for his acceptance to ring true; Uncle Marty's suicide is unexpected,
but there has been enough suspicion and distance in their relationship for Sonny
(and the reader) not to be undone by it. An unusual topic for a tale of growing up
in the 1950s, the story is delicately handled and well made. KC
MACLACHLAN, PATRICIA 
Bittle; by Patricia and Emily MacLachlan; illus. by Dan
Yaccarino. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2004 
40p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000962-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000961-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Julia the dog and Nigel the cat are puzzled by the changes in their household, and
they're not happy when those alterations turn out to be in service of a new baby.
Bittle, as the animal pair calls the new arrival, has a tendency towards midnight
cries and wakefulness and a taste for throwing her items out of the crib, and the pet
pair patiently attends to her as best as they can. Eventually she grows, and she also
grows on Julia and Nigel, who approve of her warm cuddly companionship for
naps, her interest in the toilet, and her tendency to drop edible tidbits ("I like
Bittle . . . she shares"). This doesn't have the nippy edge of Rosen's similarly
themed Howler (BCCB 5/04), and the wishful thinking of easily resolved dethrone-
ment anxiety is more evident here. Even youngsters who think the pooch and puss
softened too quickly on the new kid will find it hard to resist a household where
the pets take the lion's share ofcaretaking, though, and the matter-of-fact dialogue
between the pets will make for comic reading aloud. Yaccarino's traditionally
28 
* THE BULLETIN
rounded figures, with their heavy shading, make the cat and dog three-dimen-
sional figures despite their cartoonish interpretation; the rest of the household,
including Bittle, tends to be flat, and the designerly compositions, with their styl-
ish retro palette, are sometimes attractive at the expense of furthering focus and
story. Kids will nonetheless relish the authoritative structure of this household,
and particularly cunning ones may parlay it into an unusually framed request for a
pet. DS
MASON, JANE B. 
The Princess School: Ifthe Shoe Fits; by Jane B. Mason and Sarah
Hines Stephens. 
Scholastic, 2004 
137p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-439-54532-3 
$4.99 
R 
Gr. 2-5
This first entry in a planned paperback series introduces readers to the preadoles-
cent personas of four famed fairy-tale princesses- 
namely Snow White, Cinderella,
Rapunzel, and Sleeping Beauty. It is the beginning of their first year at Princess
School, and each gal brings to it her own set of issues, grounded firmly in the
familiar lore. Ella can't seem to escape the abuse of her evil stepsisters, tomboyish
Rapunzel has little tolerance for "fancy-pants princesses," overprotected Rose (Sleep-
ing Beauty) is living under the famed curse that promises to strike should she draw
blood, and daft and overly optimistic Snow White-well, she doesn't have any
issues, she's just delightfully clueless and often late as she has to pack seven lunches
each morning. The girls quickly become a foursome in this amusing story that
balances each girl's fairy-tale attributes with typical adolescent cares and concerns,
a balance that is sure to be hugely appealing to tweens. The description of Princess
School is Hogwarts-esque, with its caricatured instructors and fantastical course
offerings, and the development of the girls' friendship, solidified by the common
goal of getting even with Ella's steps, is believable in its simplicity. Expect this slim
volume to circulate among similar clusters of best buddies-after all, who needs a
fairy godmother when you've got friends? HM
MCDONALD, JOYCE 
Devil on My Heels. Delacorte, 2004 
263p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90133-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73107-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
With "Stagger Lee" playing on the jukebox, Some Like It Hot at the movie theater,
and haircuts that evoke Audrey Hepburn in Sabrina, McDonald creates a fully
realized timescape in which to set a tense story of racial and class hatred mingled
with hope. Dove grew up in Benevolence, Florida, playing in her daddy's orange
groves with Chase, whose daddy owned the groves next door, and Gator, a black
boy who hung around the pickers until he was old enough to become one. Then
their inappropriate friendship drops behind the scenes, but their loyalty to one
another persists as they grow older and become conscious of the injustices that
surround the relationships between blacks and whites, and between pickers and
crew bosses. As Gator seeks to organize the pickers into a slowdown to protest
crew boss Travis Waite's exploitation of the Mexican migrant workers that he has
brought across the border, Dove learns that her father is not only a member of the
Klan but that he has long secretly known who killed the husband of Dove's be-
loved surrogate mother, their housekeeper, Delia. Reeling from the layers of be-
trayal and remorse, Dove seeks to find ways to make things right, setting off an
explosive chain of events that leads to a tense truce and a tenuous sense of redemp-
tion. McDonald's language is at times as intoxicating as the scent of the orange
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 29
groves she depicts, her characters are rich and fully developed, and her plot pacing
flawlessly matches the events she's narrating. This is a meaty read highlighting the
fireworks that explode when the laser-like moral inflexibility of a young teen en-
counters the nuanced complexity of systemic hatred. Further, it showcases the fact
that if enough people work collectively and on their own to do the right thing, the
bullies don't always have to win. KC
McGHEE, ALISON 
Mrs. Watson Wants Your Teeth; illus. by Harry Bliss. 
Harcourt,
2004 
36p
ISBN 0-15-204931-2 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
So, McGhee's little ebony-haired worrywart from Countdown to Kindergarten
(BCCB 10/02) survived her school debut. Okay, it really wasn't so bad. Well,
actually it was pretty darn good. But this year really is going to be nasty because
she has Mrs. Watson for first grade and Mrs. Watson is an alien who wears bone
jewelry and who steals little kids' baby teeth and who keeps an insidious "treat
box" and it's all really true because there's a girl on the bus who told her so and she
had Mrs. Watson last year so it must be true. The only thing our narrator can do
is keep her mouth closed at all times-even when she wants to sing, even when she
knows the right answer, even when it's snack time. The moment of truth arrives
when Mrs. Watson brings out the infamous treat box and inquires whether any
child has a loose tooth; our heroine can restrain herself no longer and howls,
"AAAAAAAHH!" at which point her tooth flies out and she is promptly awarded
the first treat of the year-a perfectly ordinary and quite delicious sucker from a
kind teacher with a pearl necklace. Live and learn. Listeners who accompanied
her to kindergarten in the previous title and know her anxieties are for naught
won't find as much tension in this outing, but the gentle lesson on ignoring gossip,
delivered with a light touch, will be appreciated nonetheless. Again Harry Bliss
crafts a school full of kids worth meeting (from the child who alights from the bus
in his p.j.s, to the guy with his finger up his nose) and wall art worth examining
("Mrs. Watson's Lost Tooth Gallery, 1990- "; the book-fair poster selection Harry
Potter and the Huge Cavity). As long as there's opening-day dread, there's room for
one more funny book to assuage it. EB
McKAY, HILARY 
Indigo's Star. McElderry, 2004 
[272p]
ISBN 0-689-86563-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
The Casson family (from Saff's Angel, BCCB 5/02) is back, and their life hasn't
gotten any more organized or orthodox; this outsiderhood is now taking its toll on
twelve-year-old Indigo, who's become the target of bullies at school. The attempts
at intimidation bounce him into an unexpected friendship with Tom, a disaf-
fected American who's also bully-bait, and who gradually becomes part of the
unofficial family circle of the Cassons. Tom's biggest Casson fan is actually Indigo's
youngest sister, Rose, who's fiercely protective of the two older boys, and who, as
an artist herself, reveres Tom's musical ability; it also seems likely that she's deter-
mined to hang onto every relationship she can in the face of her father's increasing
distance from the family. McKay writes ensemble drama like nobody else can,
operating in the Nesbit tradition but employing her own beatifically eccentric take
on the collective. She's here tackled the challenge of depicting her usual amiably
pell-mell family as it undergoes, without acknowledgment, a hard transition when
30 
* 
THE BULLETIN
the Casson parents' separation becomes more than merely residential (Rose takes
to writing her father letters describing events as horribly as possible, in the hope
that he will "come storming to the rescue"), and the result is more realistic than
many family dramas wherein the altered family state is carefully explained to all
family members. The book's portrait of the bullies and the bullied is also original
and perceptive, and the resolution-the increasingly leader-resentful bullies nobly
withstand a furious attack from an enraged Rose-has psychological fidelity as
well as humor. Even readers new to the Casson family will embrace this rich and
affectionate narrative, and Saff's Angel fans will be lining up for another family
visit. DS
MCMULLAN, KATE 
Pearland Wagner: Three Secrets; illus. by R. W. Alley. 
Dial,
2004 
4 8p 
(Dial Easy-to-Read)
ISBN 0-8037-2574-4 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 1-2
Against his wishes and better judgment, Wagner learns a secret from Lulu. While
the reader and the rest of their class learn about the process of making ice cream on
a school field trip, Pearl and Wagner miss all the good bits: their minds are on the
pains of keeping a secret from your best friend, as Pearl tries to wheedle the secret
out of him and Wagner tries to remain strong. In the two subsequent chapters,
both Pearl and Wagner learn that some secrets are for sharing with your best friend.
Afraid of roller coasters, Wagner doesn't want to go to Lulu's party, so Pearl takes
him through a series of desensitizing exercises until he feels like he "rules the roller
coaster." Pearl's secret fear doesn't become evident, even to her, until they are on
approach to the ride, and Wagner returns her favor of moral support. The action
is just right for a beginning reader-the repetition of words and phrases is unob-
trusive but still evident enough for reinforcement, and the stories are compelling
and relevant for the age level. Alley gives his watercolor child-animals (Pearl is a
no-nonsense rabbit with a penchant for rather loud socks, and Wagner is a sensi-
tive-looking mouse who prefers his shirts striped) remarkable emotional range and
complexity. 
They are by turns fretful, angry, conspiratorial, hurt, bewildered,
eager; moreover, they are snappy dressers in a kind of chunky kid-chic sort of way.
Their textures and expressions animate and complement this warmly wise tale of
friendship and support-oh, to have a friendship like this! Fans of Pearl and
Wagner will welcome this installment, and those new to the pair will be charmed.
KC
MEAD, ALICE Madame Squidley and Beanie. Farrar, 2004 
138p
ISBN 0-374-34688-7 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Beanie is a worrier by nature, so when her mother starts showing strange symp-
toms-intermittent fevers, constant fatigue, forgetfulness, muscle failure, etc.-
Beanie assumes the worst. Mrs. Kingsley's doctor diagnoses Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome and says there is little he can do. Mrs. Kingsley tries to calm Beanie's
fears with humor, occasionally adopting the persona of Madame Squigley, a
fortuneteller, but living with an unwell parent means Beanie has a lot more re-
sponsibility than her friends, and she takes her anger and frustration out on every-
one, including her best friend, Charles, who has problems of his own. A victim of
scoliosis and constantly arguing parents, Charles must negotiate between his mom,
who wants him to wear his brace all the time, and his dad, who wants him to
strengthen his back through playing sports. Beanie just wants a normal life-one
that includes sleepovers with the Snob Squad rather than being saddled with a sick
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
31
mom and a friend with physical issues as well. In the end, she realizes that her
mom and Charles are doing the best that they can, but they need her support.
Though the message is certainly well meaning, the book's intentions tend to run
too close to the surface, rendering the denouement psychologically abrupt, and
Beanie's and Charles' resolution to tackle their problems head-on seem a bit too
much like didactic bravado. The truncated conclusion leaves the reader to assume
the success of their efforts. Still, Mead offers an insightful and realistic portrait of
a young girl emotionally conflicted over her deep love for her mother and her
desire for her to be someone different-healthy, able, and more like her friends'
moms. Many readers will see their own thought patterns replicated in Beanie's
obsessing over things she can't control, and thus Beanie's epiphany may help guide
them toward their own. KC
MEISTER, CARI 
Luther's Halloween; illus. byValeria Petrone. 
Viking, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-670-03555-6 
$15.99 
R 
3-5 yrs
Luther may be a triceratops, but that doesn't mean he's not a scaredy-cat when it
comes to Halloween. His young owner insists that he go out in costume, however,
and join the other trick-or-treaters as they canvass the neighborhood. When Luther's
boy learns that one dastardly Dracula is pulling tricks by stealing the other kids'
treats, he grabs Luther and races to the rescue. The thieving kid is unimpressed
until Luther takes off his costume and reveals his true identity. Since "nobody
messes with a dinosaur," Luther manages to save the day, as Meister manages to
tame the fears of Halloween with this kid-friendly fantasy. Luther cuts a dashing
chartreuse figure in his swashbuckling pirate outfit, and the other would-be ghouls
have a goggle-eyed charm in their guises as mummies, witches, frogs, lobsters, and
even a ham. Petrone brushes thick, chunky opaque colors over a red background,
leaving tiny streaks that unite landscapes and figures in the moonlit scenes and
create an autumnal feeling. Drac is both gangly and goofy enough to be a convinc-
ing kid-sized thug, and Luther, our hero, never quite loses his winsome vulnerabil-
ity, even when forcing Dracula to give up his booty. The brave boy bolstering his
fearful dinosaur is a nice twist on a familiar theme; tykes who are still a bit weirded
out by the whole Halloween thing will appreciate this chance to experience some
vicarious bravado. KC
MEYER, L. A. 
The Curse ofthe Blue Tattoo: Being an Account ofthe Misadventures
ofjacky Faber, Midshipman and Fine Lady. 
Harcourt, 2004 
488p
ISBN 0-15-205115-5 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
In light of her triumphant, if brief, career in the British Navy (Bloody Jack, BCCB
12/02), Jacky has reason to resent being deprived of her hard-won midshipman
status (due to the trifling matter of gender) and marooned in Boston's Lawson
Peabody School for Young Girls. Jacky is game to undertake any course of educa-
tion that could elevate her to the more genteel rank of her beloved Jaimy, though,
and she makes notable progress in music (delighting the music master with salty
chanties), French (she did fight against Napoleon's forces, after all), and eques-
trian skills (no horse will get the better of Jacky Faber). Social skills are quite a
different matter; soon she's arrested for lewd public behavior and "busted back" to
work as a maid. The demotion is a blessing in disguise, since now she can sneak
away to sing in the bars and earn money to buy passage home to England and be
reunited with her love. Meyer has obviously been inspired with a trove of possible
32 
* 
THE BULLETIN
adventures for his fetching heroine and seems loathe to let a single one go to waste.
One would expect that shifting scrappy Jacky from deck to desk should provide
ample scope for a sequel, but relatively little happens within the school setting
itself. Instead, Jacky flits her ways through a disjointed set of misadventures rang-
ing from winning a horse race (she masquerades as a jockey) to resisting attempts
by a deranged descendant of Cotton Mather to claim her as legal ward. And, in
sad news for readers of a romantic turn, the exchange of misdirected letters be-
tween Jacky and Jaimy is but cool compensation for the steam they once generated
in their shipboard hammock. The adventure, however, is not over yet, and fans
can hope for better days ahead with Jacky aboard a whaler. EB
MILLER, WILLIAM 
Joe Louis, My Champion; illus. by Rodney S. Pate. 
Lee &
Low, 2004 
32p
ISBN 1-58430-161-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Narrator Sammy looks back to 1937, the year in which his boyhood dream was to
be as great a boxer as Joe Louis. Lessons from his friend Ernie don't seem to help,
so his father and a local shopkeeper encourage him to look beyond Louis's boxing
skills to his even greater significance within their African-American community:
"Joe's shown the world a colored person is as good as anyone. He can be the best
at anything he wants to be." Louis's triumph over James J. Braddock makes Sammy
even more determined to be a fighter, though, and it takes some gentle but firm
advice from Ernie and his father and a good measure of soul-searching before the
boy admits, "Maybe I'd never be a boxer, but I could be good at something else."
Miller offers few enticing details concerning the Brown Bomber's career or his
championship bout with Braddock, and those are thoroughly pummeled by the
lead-fisted message on pride and personal accomplishment. Dialogue is often
preachy and forced ("'Sammy, do you know what prejudice is?' 'Sure, Mr. Jake,' I
said. 'It's when some people don't think other people are as good as them'"), and
Sammy's pouty introspection and abrupt epiphany are unlikely to rivet young
listeners. Pate's slightly out of focus oil paintings lend minimal visual interest,
with too many scenes of heart-to-heart conversations and far too little attention to
Joe Louis in the ring. For stories of athletes who overcome adversity, Krull's Wilma
Unlimited (BCCB 4/96) or Cline-Ransome's Major Taylor (BCCB 3/2004) pack
a stronger punch. EB
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
USS Constellation: Pride oftheAmerican Navy. 
Holiday
House, 2004 
[86p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1816-2 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
One would hardly suspect that the triple-masted sloop Constellation has, like a cat,
enjoyed a multiplicity of lives. Myers traces the illustrious history of the last all-sail
ship built for the United States Navy from her 1797 birth in a Baltimore shipyard
to her tranquil retirement years as a tourist attraction in a Baltimore harbor. Open-
ing chapters describe her first missions-as a frigate fighting pirates (and recalci-
trant Frenchmen) in the Mediterranean and as a "repaired" (actually, rebuilt) sloop
intercepting illegal slave traders off the African coast. Myers then pauses to con-
sider life aboard the Constellation, paying special attention to the role of young
boys who served as "powder monkeys" on the warship. Then it's on to the Civil
War, where wooden sailing vessels were decisively outclassed by newfangled iron-
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
33
clad steamships and Constellation was relegated to a patrol ship and training vessel.
Finally Myers discusses two major restoration efforts-one which halfheartedly
transformed her back into a frigate, and the second, current reconstruction that
lovingly rebuilt Constellation into her 1854 sloop iteration. Readers interested in
ship building or naval engineering won't find many details here, and even those
who incline toward military history may become a bit impatient with Myers' lengthy
excursion into the arcana of the ship's magazine (quoted from a training manual)
and the relative paucity of rousing naval engagements. Those who share Myers'
enthusiasm, however, will appreciate his inclusion of a timeline, nautical glossary,
and reading lists, as well as quirkier offerings such as ballad lyrics and a Will Eisner
cartoon (unsourced). EB
NEWMAN, LESLrA 
A Fire Engine for Ruthie; illus. by Cyd Moore. 
Clarion,
2004 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-618-15989-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Ruthie is visiting her grandmother, and every day they do something special: buy
Ruthie's favorite foods, get her favorite books from the library, play on her favorite
swing set. Every afternoon, Ruthie sees Brian, the boy next door, playing with his
toys and wishes Nana had a fire truck, a motorcycle, and a train for her. As the
week passes, Ruthie's envy increases, as does her dismay with the more traditional
activities Nana has planned-tea parties, dress up, painting-until she finally asks
if she can play at Brian's house. Initially saddened by Ruthie's rejection, Nana
eventually joins Brian and Ruthie, and the three have a rollicking good time play-
ing with Brian's toy vehicles. Although the positive depiction of imaginative play
(Ruthie pretends a cardboard box is a train, a line of chairs a locomotive) is some-
what lost in the ending, wherein Nana takes Ruthie to purchase duplicates of all of
Brian's toys, the real message of this somewhat lengthy text seems to be that Nana
is willing to abandon her activities and instead listen to Ruthie's input. Nana is, in
fact, exemplary: kindhearted, enthusiastic, and, ultimately, flexible. Ruthie, while
admirable for her rambunctious energy, is somewhat selfish in her disregard for
Nana's efforts, and listeners may find themselves feeling a little bit bad for the
devoted grandma. Moore's illustrations are full of homey details that provide a
chaotic realism to the various play stations, where clothes are strewn across the
living room and dolls thrown about, and the subtly detailed watercolor composi-
tions, simultaneously bright and soft, effectively draw attention to the toys them-
selves. The onomatopoeic elements used in describing each of Brian's toys (the
motorcycle "goes vroom! vroom!", the train "goes chucka-chucka," etc.) provide
good material for the reader aloud, and many young listeners will relate to Ruthie's
preference for noisy playthings. HM
NIMMO, JENNY 
Charlie Bone and the Invisible Boy. 
Orchard/Scholastic,
2004 
408p
ISBN 0-439-54526-9 
$9.95 
M 
Gr. 4-7
Charlie Bone (of Midnight for Charlie Bone, BCCB 5/03, and Charlie Bone and the
Time Twister, 12/03) returns in this third title in the Children of the Red King
series. Charlie, a nascent sorcerer of sorts, discovers that Mr. Boldova (sympa-
thetic art teacher at Bloor Academy for the magically gifted) secretly searches for
his younger brother, who has been made invisible by a magical snake. Mr. Boldova
34 
* THE BULLETIN
isn't the only person in disguise: a new student, blonde, strange-eyed, and deadly,
is really the witch Yolanda come to finish off Charlie's uncle Paton and maybe
Charlie himself as well. Nimmo has abandoned her usually clear storytelling for a
confusing mix of characters and action as convoluted as a cobra's coils that unfor-
tunately never quite synthesizes into a cohesive narrative. Familiarity with the
previous titles in the series is a must, since there is little character development and
less explanation of new characters; the presence of the invisibility-inducing cobra
is artificially limned in a prologue instead of rising naturally from already estab-
lished literary logic. Previous books presented a well-constructed and believable
fantasy world, but here the author seems to have lost control of the logistics of her
own creation and appears uncertain of where the series is headed. Fans of the
previous two titles will be looking for this one, however, and able readers will
perhaps be willing to fill in the expositional blanks. JMD
PERKINS, MITALI 
Monsoon Summer. 
Delacorte, 2004 
[27 2 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90147-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73123-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Jasmine's mother Sarah was adopted from the Asha Bari orphanage in Pune, India,
when she was four years old. Now involved in various Bay Area social-service
agencies, Sarah has secured a grant to return to the orphanage and open a clinic for
pregnant women, and she's bringing the family along for the summer. Fifteen-
year-old Jasmine (known as Jazz) is reluctant to leave the business she and her
friend Steve started the previous year-and even more reluctant to leave Steve, for
whom she has been secretly pining for many months. Further, Jazz refuses to get
involved in her mother's service projects and wants no part of Asha Bari despite
her father and brother's willingness to contribute. Jazz is an overwhelmingly lik-
able and understandable teen; the real treat here is that the reader realizes it long
before she herself does, and it is wholly satisfying to watch her develop the aware-
ness that she has a great deal to offer. The story provides an intriguing demonstra-
tion of the concept of getting through giving; despite her reluctance to get to know
Danita, the young Indian girl who cooks for the family, Jazz finds a true friend and
ally as a result of their developing friendship. The correspondence between Jazz
and Steve over the summer months offers a romantically fulfilling element to the
story as well as providing a narrative tool for recording how Jazz is responding to
the experience of being in India for the first time. Offer this to fans of Brashares'
Traveling Pants books (BCCB 12/01, 5/03) for a similarly enjoyable take on un-
expected summer adventures. HM
PIKE, CHRISTOPHER 
Alosha. Tor, 2004 
[304p]
ISBN 0-765-31098-8 
$24.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Thirteen-year-old Ali Warner wants to save the world, but she'd be content with
saving the trees that line the mountains behind her Southern California home.
Though she is past the age where she thinks she can stop the loggers from their
work, she still intends to make them feel guilty. On her hike up the mountain,
however, she finds the forest is populated by much more dangerous things than
loggers. Chased by creatures she thinks are trolls, Ali is buried by a rock avalanche;
when she escapes, she unknowingly begins the journey that will lead her all the
way up the mountain, to treacherous Pete's Peak and to her forgotten power as
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 35
Alosha, Queen of the Fairies. Elementals, angry with humans for their environ-
mental crimes, intend to wipe out humanity, and if Ali can stop the mystical gate
called the Yanti from opening, she can save the world for real. The problem is-
who should she save it for? Pike leaves horror behind with this fantasy series that
will undoubtedly entertain in spite of its conventional nature. Ali is a multilayered
character, believably working through her flaws and false assumptions to develop
into the fairy queen, but her companions are little more than foils for Ali's growth,
and thin ones at that. Furthermore, the elementals she takes with her are uninter-
estingly pedestrian stereotypes (the gold-obsessed, pipe-smoking, whiskey-drink-
ing, green-skinned leprechaun Paddy O'Connell, for example). 
However, the
backstory is compelling, the action is fast paced, the danger is real, and with some
magical time- and plot-twisting, the story gains complexity and a much-needed
surprise. While not breaking new ground, Pike traverses the fantasy terrain well,
and the end result is sure to be a blockbuster. KH
PRUE, SALLY 
The Devil's Toenail. Scholastic, 2004 
204p
ISBN 0-439-48634-3 
$16.95 
Ad Gr. 7-10
Ever since bullies at his old school poured kerosene over him and set him on fire,
scarring his skin and soul, Stevie wants to be safe more than anything. The best
way he can see to prevent being wounded terribly again is to make others afraid of
him, so he cultivates the friendship of Daniel, the most feared and respected boy at
his new school. Daniel's gang nicks things from stores and tags buildings-small-
scale stuff, but even so, Stevie feels inadequate to the task of gaining their respect.
A devil's toenail (a type of fossilized shellfish) found at the beach instigates a new
chapter in Stevie's life, one in which he imagines himself in league with the devil
and, intoxicated with his new power, steals cars, sets houses on fire, and finally (in
spite of his inclination to do otherwise) saves his sister's life. The fact that the
toenail is indeed possessed by an evil being lends drama, especially since Stevie's
first-person narration is intercut with comments from the incubus (which Stevie
can't hear outright but responds to) that make its intention plain: Stevie is to be
corrupted and then killed, like countless others. This reverse-Screwtape technique
is at first intriguing but then irksome, as Stevie's innate decency extends the story
past the 150-page mark before he's seriously tempted to do real harm; young read-
ers will tire of the demon's gloating and Stevie's waffling long before that point.
However, Stevie's long downward curve into depravity (and eventual upswing into
self-directed positive choices) does allow for a realistic exploration of the nuances
of the bully-bullied relationship, making this a likely choice for reading assign-
ments and booklists. TC
QUATTLEBAUM, 
MARY Jackson Jones and Mission Greentop. Delacorte,
2004 
[112p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90139-9 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73114-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-7
Ten-year-old Jackson Jones (from Jackson Jones and the Puddle of Thorns, BCCB
3/94) has not only survived his first summer as a gardener at his Mom-given plot
in the community garden, he's actually found himself enjoying the experience.
He's withstood the taunting of the local bully, the onslaught of late summer zuc-
chini, and his mother's plans to return to school, but he may not be a match for
developers' plans to pave over the community plots and erect an apartment build-
36 
* THE BULLETIN
ing. The plot development will be more readily foreseen by readers than the actual
development is by Jackson, but this is still a spirited tale; though there's never any
real doubt that Jackson and his friends will stave off the threat of garden eradica-
tion, there's more homely reality to their attempts (a candlelight vigil that gets
rained out, a bully's interference in their protest) than in many stories of youthful
activism. Mostly, though, readers will relish the narrator's easygoing, everykid
voice and his concise, humorous evocation of interpersonal dynamics, whether
between him and his friends or him and his affectionate, hardworking mother
("Mama and I slapped skin. She didn't do it right. But she tried"). The lively
accessibility will also make this a good pick for advanced primary-grades readers or
a candidate for reading aloud, and any kid who enjoys gardening or has been
dragged into a parent's gardening habit will appreciate Jackson's and his garden's
continued growth. DS
ROBERTS, WILLO DAVIS 
Bloodon His Hands. Jackson/Atheneum, 2004 
188p
ISBN 0-689-85074-3 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Ever since his little sister died of leukemia two years ago, Marc has stopped praying
to God and quit expecting affection from his grieving parents, whose marriage has
disintegrated. His mom's new boyfriend, Floyd, has manipulated her into send-
ing Marc to a wilderness camp for troubled boys under the care of Stoner, a mili-
tant disciplinarian. Before Marc's dad can get him discharged, a camp resident is
dead as a result of Stoner's "discipline," and Marc is on the run, certain that his
own frantic attempt at self-defense has killed the counselor. As he hitchhikes to
Seattle to find his dad, Marc recalls piece by piece the unhappy accidents and
unwise decisions that brought him to his current situation, and he eventually finds
reasons to begin to pray again. Since these events have arisen more as a result of
others' actions than of his own, Marc as a character has little chance to develop,
and the motivation behind his renewed interest in prayer remains unclear through-
out the scattered story. Still, the exploration of an experience alien to many chil-
dren and uncomfortably familiar to others provides its own draw, and readers
seeking faith-affirming literature with real-world overtones will appreciate this
addition to the library. TC
ROBINSON, BARBARA 
The Best Halloween Ever. Cotler/HarperCollins,
2004 
117p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027863-3 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027862-5 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Readers who've empathetically suffered along with the "normal" kids at Robinson's
Woodrow Wilson School (most recently in The Best School Year Ever, BCCB 10/94)
might wonder whether the pairing of Herdmans and Halloween is overkill, given
that any occasion suggests grotesque pranksterism to that family of irrepressible
brats. Rest easy, though, because Robinson retains her deft touch in following
narrator Beth Bradley as she explains the setup (Principal Crabtree convinces the
community to ban trick-or-treating and offers a school-sponsored party in its stead),
injects the threat of Herdman chaos (they declare that they won't attend so lame
an event ... as if!), and then watches the adults' elaborate plans unravel to the
students' collective delight. This outing's elements include years' worth of
Herdman-pilfered Halloween candy, a missing playground slide, the mysteries of
the faculty lounge, the humiliating presence of costumed parent chaperones, and
insufferable Alice Wendleken's electrical wardrobe malfunction, all of which tie
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
37
together neatly in a frenetic conclusion in which the Herdmans are, once again,
almost exonerated and Halloween-bashing adults are most satisfyingly confounded.
For the shortest, most effective booktalk on record, one need only announce, "The
Herdmans are back." EB
ROSOFF, MEG 
How ILive Now. 
Lamb, 2004 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90908-X 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74677-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 9-12
After a series of terrorist strikes around the world, protagonist Daisy, a New Yorker
who has been sent to England by her father to live with her late mother's relatives,
is left alone with her four cousins on their farm. With British peacekeeping forces
deployed around the world, enemy forces invade England and settle into an un-
easy ceasefire with the British military reserves. Newly engaged in her first sexual
relationship (with her cigarette-smoking, Jeep-driving, mind-reading cousin
Edmond), Daisy frankly adores the bucolic beauty of Life without Father, until
the military reserves take over the property and split up the children. Getting her
nine-year-old cousin Piper back to the deserted family farm takes Daisy a couple of
months; getting herself back to England after her father has her forcibly removed
to the States takes Daisy six more years; finding a way to reconnect with a trauma-
tized Edmond, whose extraordinary sensitivity and caring left him unable to dis-
engage from the wanton destruction of war, takes all the courage and brash New
York stubbornness she has. The first three-quarters of Daisy's unapologetic narra-
tion is a shockingly funny, disturbingly poignant series of observations in one-
sentence, run-on paragraphs involving a believably frequent use of Capital Letters
and complete disregard for the conventions of punctuation. Jumping the six years
of waiting for the reestablishment of international relations, Daisy picks up the
tale upon her return to England, this time using starkly perfect modern prose, a
technique which heightens the sense of desperation held firmly in check. Through-
out, the paradisiacal setting of the English countryside and the wretched, some-
times horrifyingly violent lives of the embattled people who live there are presented
with such luxurious, terrible realism that readers will remain absorbed to the very
end by this unforgettable and original story. TC
SAENZ, 
BENJAMIN ALIRE 
Sammy & Juliana in Hollywood. Cinco Puntos,
2004 
[2 9 4p]
ISBN 0-938317-81-4 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 9-12
Sammy Santos is a warmhearted and thoughtful young man who willingly em-
braces his dad in front of friends, misses his dead mother, and reads bedtime sto-
ries to his little sister. However, Sammy also sees his girlfriend Juliana murdered
by her father, and he struggles to survive as friends from his New Mexico neigh-
borhood (ironically named Hollywood) are killed in Viet Nam, viciously beaten
by a homophobic gang, and destroyed by a drug overdose. Juliana provides a focal
point for Sammy's mourning for the individual people he's lost and also for the
continual crushing of all Mexicana. Sammy's first-person narration, observant
and self-aware, affords a window into a world of quiet despair and stubborn hope,
set appropriately against the backdrop of late-1960s social ferment. Agile
transitioning between Spanish and English eases readers into Sammy's own hy-
phenated world, where rights, wrongs, and individuals cannot be easily lumped
38 
* 
THE BULLETIN
into discrete black and white. A few triumphs lighten the gloom-Sammy orga-
nizes a successful campaign to elect a Hispanic to the student council, leads a
student strike that changes the dress code, and gets accepted to all eight of the
universities to which he applies. His message is one of victory through endurance
rather than escape, as Sammy finds ways to define himself and maintain his loyal-
ties while circumstances prevent him from leaving the barrio. Even readers far
removed from the poverty and prejudice that define his world will see this facet of
the Mexican-American experience with empathy through Sammy's eyes. TC
SEIDLER, TOR 
Toes; illus. by Eric Beddows. 
Geringer/HarperCollins,
2004 
16 4p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-054100-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-054099-0 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
One of the kittens in Fatima's litter has seven toes on each paw, thus earning the
name Toes from his human family, the McDonahues. Fatima dies soon after, and
in her wake, Toes becomes a special favorite with the McDonahues, who quickly
discover that he is unusually intelligent as well. Though his siblings shun him for
being different, Toes watches television, listens to classical music, and eats dinner
with the family. However, one night the kittens play a cruel prank on Toes, and
he runs from the house in a panic, only to find that he is lost. He crawls into an
unfamiliar basement window to escape the cold, and in that house he starts his
new life with Sebastian, a young musician struggling with depression. Toes gives
Sebastian someone to care for and care about; meanwhile, he encourages Sebastian
to believe in himself, manipulates circumstances so that he can fulfill his dream of
playing with the Philharmonic, and improves his quality of life. Though the plot
lacks dramatic tension, it is a gently moving assessment of how animals can look
after their human companions. A book that starts and ends with the death of a
beloved cat (Toes dies once he knows that Sebastian is well off) could become
overly grim, but Seidler softens Toes' death with obvious foreshadowing and a
hefty dose of sentimentality. Toes is an ingenious and likable character, but his
voice is too human to be wholly believable, as if Seidler occasionally moved his
kitty narrator aside to tell readers the human things Toes couldn't possibly under-
stand; the mixture of the two is subtle at best, jarring at worst. For those who
demand a little more authenticity to their animal fiction, recommend I Jack (BCCB
4/04) instead, but those who enjoy reading about unique animals with special lives
may want to curl up on the sofa with Toes. KH
SIEGELSON, KIM L. 
Trembling Earth. Philomel, 2004 
152p
ISBN 0-399-24021-7 
$17.99 
R Gr. 5-8
As swampers, Hamp and his family couldn't care less about the issue of slavery,
but they heartily resent the North's thinking they can tell the South what to do, so
Pap goes to war. The war takes Pap away from Hamp in more ways than one, as
Pap returns a changed man. He's lost a leg, but he's also lost a great deal of his will
to provide for his family, leaving Hamp to do what he can. When he hears of a
bounty for Duff, a runaway slave who has killed his master, Hamp angrily leaves
his father on the porch singing sad songs and takes off into the swamp to claim the
reward. Duff, however, proves more resourceful than Hamp figured and soon has
Hamp in his custody, rather than the other way around. Duffwants Hamp to lead
him through the swamp to Florida, but Hamp figures that he'll "lead Duff in
harm's way and let the Okefenokee do what it wanted with him." The tide turns,
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
39
however, as Duff saves Hamp's life and Hamp begins to see connections between
what his father was fighting for and what Duff is hoping to find. Siegelson's prose
thrums and pulses with the cadences of the swamp itself; the landscapes are as vivid
as the conflicting emotions that thicken the characterizations. Eschewing senti-
mentality, she uses carefully chosen detail to render her characters' humanity, slowly
breaching the wary lines of distrust that separate them as Hamp begins to emerge
as a wise, compassionate young man still limned with and agitated by the angry
boy inside. Hamp's position with respect to the issues of the Civil War opens up
multiple ways of conceiving that conflict, and Siegelson refuses to simplify issues
that are complex and contradictory. Shades of Hatchet can be felt in the perils of
the swamp adventure, and Hamp's decision to help Duff and others and to re-
claim his relationship with his father make this a humane and satisfying story. KC
SIERRA, JUDY 
Wild about Books; illus. by Marc Brown. 
Random House,
2004 
[4 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92538-4 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82538-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
"It started the summer of2002,/ When the Springfield librarian, Molly McGrew,/
By mistake drove her bookmobile into the zoo." So begins the latest poetic ven-
ture from folklorist and storyteller Judy Sierra. This uninhibited promotion of the
joys of reading recalls, in galloping rhymed couplets, what happens when the zoo
animals discover books for the first time, progressing from distant interest, as they
listen to Molly reading from The Cat in the Hat, to stampeding curiosity, racing to
the bookmobile "to learn all about this new something called reading." Though
the literary references are aimed more at adults than at the youthful audience, this
is well suited to that first story hour, when new nervous faces are assembled, wait-
ing to hear what the librarian has to say. Both verbal and visual humor are thickly
interwoven into the story, where hyenas read joke books and raccoons skim through
Garbage Tips. What's more, the values sneaked into Sierra's tribute are very, well,
valuable-that there is a book suited to each and every animal, that books must be
well treated (the bunnies have "mucked up Goodnight Moon," "the termites de-
voured The Wizard ofOz"), that reading crosses over to writing (the insect haiku
being subject to the scathing treatment of the scorpion reviewer). Marc Brown
contributes wildly spirited and carefully detailed paintings to the story, capturing
the assorted cast of zoo animals in a richly vibrant habitat. With a thick hand, he
fills each spread to the edges with creatures furry and scaly, using a wide range of
colors and textured applications and varying the time of day so as to slightly alter
the backdrop. Young listeners will definitely want to have a closer look after story-
time is over. HM
SOBOL, RICHARD An Elephant in the Backyard; written and illus. with photo-
graphs by Richard Sobol. 
Dutton, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-525-47288-6 
$17.99 
R 
6-9 yrs
In the rural Thai village ofTha Klang, "domesticated elephants roam freely, com-
ing and going as they please." This story introduces readers to Wan Pen, a four-
year-old Asian elephant born and raised in the village. Sobol, a photojournalist
who covers wildlife conservation issues in Thailand, is himself a frequent visitor to
Tha Klang, and this first-person angle contributes enormously to the narrative
tone of the telling. In comfortably informative language, he shares facts about
40 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Wan Pen's diet (she eats almost four hundred pounds of food a day), training
(learning to balance, dance, and "shake her butt"), and livelihood (soccer is her
favorite sport). In the past, Tha Klang's elephants were raised for lumbering; due
to recent deforestation, most Thai elephants are now trained to perform for tour-
ists and "help earn a living for their families." To this end, Wan Pen spends her
days under the tutelage of a mahout, or elephant trainer, learning acrobatics for her
career on the stage. Scenes from Wan Pen's life are vividly captured in large color
photographs, cleanly arranged on each page to narrate episodes in the village. Sobol's
book offers a strong example of good picture-book nonfiction and provides factual
information on a seldom-covered topic in a clear and visually captivating format.
Further, it touches on a range of themes, from environmental education to animal
behavior to cross-cultural understanding. Effective as a readaloud or readalone,
this is certain to garner the attention of both animal fans and browsers drawn to
the cover photograph of children on board Wan Pen for a walk through town. A
list of elephant facts is included. HM
STEWART, PAUL 
The Edge Chronicles: Beyond the Deepwoods; written and illus. by
Paul Stewart and Chris Riddell. 
Fickling, 2004 
278p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75069-2 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75068-4 
$12.95 
M 
Gr. 5-7
The Edge Chronicles: Stormchaser; written and illus. by Paul Stewart and
Chris Riddell. 
Fickling, 2004 
38 6p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75071-4 
$14.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75070-6 
$12.95 
M 
Gr. 5-7
In the world of the Edge Chronicles, foundling Twig roams from quirky to quirkier
bands of indigenous folk in search of his true home. Leeches that fly, bears that
speak, and feminists that drink blood dog his path as he wanders through the
Deepwoods. Then lawless racketeers and academics threaten the well-being of a
city that only Twig can save. Unfortunately, while superficial forays into foreign
cultures and compact capsules of life-threatening action abound, depth of charac-
ter and emotional integrity within the narrative aren't to be had for love or money.
Of course Twig discovers that his father is the famed sky-pirate, the Cloud Wolf,
and that his own destiny is to complete Dad's quest to rescue the city of Sanctaphrax
and thereby restore the family honor. Less clear is the reason behind Twig's rever-
ence of dear old Dad, since the old coot twice deliberately abandons Twig to prob-
able death in the perilous Deepwoods, first ditching his newborn son at the base of
a tree, and later, after discovering that the precocious young man who has helped
him fix his skyship is indeed his long-lost child, sneaking off in the middle of the
night. These unintentional but central motifs of foundationless adulation and
phony emotional intimacy are thoroughly explored in the first volume and revis-
ited with a vengeance in the second, defusing the magnetic power of the fantasy
world's originality and the potential for reader involvement in Twig's varied ad-
ventures. Ever-hungry middle-grade fantasy devotees would be better served by
turning to reliable stalwarts such as Vivian Vande Velde. TC
STRETE, CRAIG KEE 
The Rattlesnake Who Went to School; illus. by Lynne
Cravath. 
Putnam, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23572-8 
$15.99 
R 
4-6yrs
Crowboy turns his first-day-of-school nervousness into aggression by imagining
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
41
himself a rattlesnake; after all, rattlesnakes make their own safety by being so scary
that everyone else stays away. Unfortunately for Crowboy, nobody's scared of
him, but there is one person who understands his vision: a girl who brings him "a
squirmy mass of wriggling worms and big-eyed bugs" to eat for lunch the next day
instead of the school-provided hot dog. The richly shaded illustrations flash scenes
of everyday activities in dynamic compositions, such as the whirling vortex of school
bus, teacher, computer, and other objects of anxiety superimposed over a sketch of
Crowboy cowering in bed, or the dangerously angular shots of a menacing rattle-
snake slithering down the stairs and grinning savagely at his toothy reflection in
the bathroom mirror. Pastels in acrylic medium blur and streak the pages in an
appealing mix of impressionist and representational techniques, deep color blocks
lending structure and depth to the pages while light smudges halo the characters,
resulting in a humorous merging of the imaginary with the real. The text main-
tains that humorous tension by constantly contrasting Crowboy's innovative ap-
proach to the dangers of school and the ironic twist to the requisite friend-finding
moment (Crowboy can't bear to eat the bugs the girl offers and instead suggests
that they both be "the kind of rattlesnakes that only eat hot dogs"). Boys and girls
who prefer this sinister snake to the timid characters of many school-jitters books
will claim Crowboy as an ally and a role model-be ready with a snack sack of
squirmy bugs in case of a rattlesnake invasion on your school's first day. TC
TASHJIAN, JANET 
Vote for Larry. Holt, 2004 
224 p
ISBN 0-8050-7201-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Having staged his own death after becoming a cult figure (as documented in The
Gospel According to Larry, BCCB 1/02), Josh "Larry" Swensen has been living a
rootless life under various fake identities. After two years, he's found and yanked
back into mainstream protest by his old friend, Beth, and her boyfriend, Simon,
and a revitalized Josh decides to focus his energies on one audacious move: run-
ning for President of the United States. The Larry/Beth ticket, founded as an
attempt to get issues heard rather than any real challenge to the incumbent and his
Democratic challenger, gains steam and sufficient constitutional amendment to
become a genuine and possible candidacy for the office-if internal sabotage doesn't
take Josh out of the race first. There's clearly a deeply felt message behind this
book, emphasized by the collections of depressing facts and occasional inspiring
quotations interleaved with the novel. Unfortunately, the ethical view is mostly a
good/evil binary, with the Powers that Be tidily and facilely villainous, even to the
point of a murder attempt on Josh; the plotting also fails on the antagonistic threads,
with the murder attempt (unlike Josh himself) neatly dispatched and the internal
saboteur possessing a red flag that should have alerted the protagonists early on.
As an exhortation to participate in the process, however, this is pretty heady stuff;
the fact that the success is the book's fantasy doesn't preclude it (or at least the
voter-turnout and active-youth portions) from becoming reality. The civics les-
sons are delivered painlessly, and the story about Josh's romantic troubles-he's
been long in love with Beth, but there's another girl who may win his heart along
with helping him win votes-adds some enjoyable personal drama. Readers who've
moved up from Dan Gutman's The Kid Who Ran for President (BCCB 11/96) may
find this a congenial as well as a provocative read despite its flaws, and perhaps it'll
encourage them to become involved in the upcoming elections. Some suggestions
(slightly perplexing in format) for web searches on the issues discussed are ap-
pended. DS
42 
* THE BULLETIN
THOMAS, JOYCE CAROL 
The Skull Talks Back and Other Haunting Tales; illus. by
Leonard Jenkins. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
[56p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000634-X 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000631-5 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
This collection of six tales, adapted from those recorded by Zora Neale Hurston,
feature classic motifs such as talking animals ("Bill, the Talking Mule"), haunted
houses ("The Haunted House"), and challenges to the Devil ("Big, Bad Sixteen").
What they don't feature are polished beginnings, conclusive endings, setting de-
scriptions, or developed characters. Occasional references to blood, bones, and
the Devil give some support to the titular adjective, but the single-sentence para-
graphs serve mostly to provide a bare-bones outline of a story waiting for a teller to
flesh it out. Wraithlike paintings do supply an eerie ambience: stark blacks, grays,
and sepias depict jumbled skeletons, frightened farmers, and plumb tired-out don-
keys, textured for depth and morphed into startling perspectives. Readers seeking
recreational thrills will be better off with collections such as Hamilton's The Dark
Way (BCCB 12/90), but this is at least an accessible introduction that may serve as
a resource for students interested in learning to tell folktales. An adapter's note is
included. TC
TOWNLEY, RODERICK 
Sky. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2004 
26 6p
ISBN 0-689-85712-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Sky is a teenager in the late 1950s whose father, Quinn, doesn't understand him,
hates his music, doesn't think highly of his friends, and is prone to grounding him
and then knowing when he sneaks out anyhow. Quinn, who is raising Sky alone,
is convinced that his son's preoccupation with the piano and his jazz combo are
interfering with school and undermining his future, so he first forbids Sky from
playing with the band, and when that doesn't work, gets rid of the piano. Sky
rebels by running away and crashing with his jazz hero, crotchety Art Olmedo,
who takes the boy in and teaches him how to listen creatively and find his own
style. Quinn tracks his son down in due time and, tacitly acknowledging love
that's stronger than their differences, the father and son reconcile; the piano makes
a reappearance (Quinn only put it in storage), and Sky is on track to high-school
success and probable jazz triumph. Townley tosses in enough technical jazz jargon
and drops enough Beat Generation names to confound or weary younger readers
with insufficient background or interest in the style or period. Moreover, Olmedo,
though an endearing curmudgeon, is essentially a stock character. Still, Townley
injects enough wry humor into his depiction of Sky's all-too-common predica-
ments to entertain readers not quite ready for Going's musical marvel Fat Kid
Rules the World (BCCB 6/03). EB
TURNER, ANN 
Pumpkin Cat; illus. by Amy June Bates. 
Hyperion, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0494-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When an exhausted stray cat finds shelter in the library's book-return box, she
lucks out: kind librarians take her in and feed her up, dub her "Pumpkin Cat,"
and give her free run of the library. Pumpkin Cat appreciates the warmth and
shelter and begins to find enjoyment in the young patrons' attentions, but she still
feels an absence in her life; when a little black kitten is abandoned at the library,
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 43
Pumpkin Cat adopts the young newcomer, finding fulfillment in making a place
for someone else. This story lacks the spare eloquence that Turner has displayed in
some of her other works; the description mostly pads the slender plot, and the
chronology is somewhat confusing (was Pumpkin Cat, who arrived shortly before
Halloween, at the library only a few days when little Halloween Cat arrived, or did
Halloween Cat's arrival occur in a subsequent year?). The text does usually opt for
evocative specifics rather than sentimentalizing, however, while retaining the in-
eradicable charm of the library-pet idea. The illustrative emphasis on Pumpkin
Cat's limpid eyes and smiling or frowning expression somewhat oversweetens the
Pumpkin Cat pie, but there are some interestingly grainy elements and unexpect-
edly textured washes in the art that enrich its effects. While this will be an easy
readaloud sell, libraries without cats are just asking for cat-leaving trouble by using
this for a Halloween storytime; those gifted with resident felines, however, can
take this opportunity for self-congratulation and the relating of their own library-
cat tales. DS
VIZZINI, NED 
Be More Chill. Miramax/Hyperion, 2004 
287p
ISBN 0-7868-0995-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 8-10
High-school loser Jeremy Heere and his only friend, Michael, bemoan their lack
of social status (read: girls), but no solution presents itself until the Halloween
Dance, which Jeremy uncharacteristically attends in hopes of getting closer to his
dream girl, Christine. A former tormenter tells the longing and hopelessly inept
Jeremy about squips, miniaturized supercomputers that, once ingested, provide
directions on how to be cool. After parlaying some stolen Beanie Babies into cash
on eBay, Jeremy buys a squip, and sure enough, things change for him: the right
clothes, the right body (he buffs up in two weeks), and a squip to keep him from
saying something terminally stupid mean status, easy access to recreational drugs,
and girls (and almost sex, several times). Still, the squip is not infallible, and
following its advice brings Jeremy neither ultimate happiness nor Christine. Jer-
emy is an aware and self-aware narrator who keeps his eye on not only his own
activities but the activities of his peers, and his jaundiced analysis of the social
hierarchy is sometimes scathingly funny. Unfortunately, the characterizations are
see-through shallow, with little emotional feeling beneath the properly outfitted
surfaces. Female characters especially suffer from glossy underdevelopment that
gives them little beyond trendy prettiness and sexual availability. The squip is a
scarily believable premise, however, and the main character's burning desire to
acquire one to alter his life for the better is, sadly, all too understandable. Contem-
porary young adult readers with a penchant for technology and social science fic-
tion will appreciate not only Jeremy's desire to have a coolness arbiter sitting in his
frontal lobe, but also his dryly clueless commentary on the image-conscious world
many adolescents inhabit. JMD
WAHL, JAN 
Knock!Knock!; illus. by Mary Newell DePalma. 
Holt, 2004 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8050-6280-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Witch Ella La Grimble "wished for company," and boy, did she get it. Feet, legs,
knees, hips, waist, shoulders, arms, hands, neck, and finally a dour-faced head
"Knock! Knock!" at her door and then assemble themselves, piece by piece, into a
rather intimidating character who-thank goodness-reveals that he has come to
44 
* 
THE BULLETIN
visit Witch Ella in response to her wish. Mixed-media illustrations in soft blues,
tans, and greens establish Ella's cottage as a peaceful, safe place, crisscrossed with
almost-touchable brush strokes and splashed with wry shadows in witch shapes
(much more traditionally witchy than gentle Ella herself). The cumulative nature
of this tale (a variant ofJacobs' "The Visitor," though source notes are absent) does
build suspense, and the repetitive style of the text encourages listener participa-
tion. Unfortunately, the denouement, with its lessening of the traditional version's
punch and its hasty resolution (one illustration of Ella and the visitor smiling
peacefully at each other over a steaming cuppa), is a letdown. Creative readers-
aloud, however, may still get Halloween mileage out of the lively witchy tale. TC
WEEKS, SARAH 
So B. It. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2004 
245p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623623-1 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623622-3 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Heidi's mother only knows twenty-three words. Most of them are ordinary, like
"done," "tea," "out," and "more," but one is mysterious-"soof"-and it is this
word that sends Heidi off on a quest to find out who her mother is, and who Heidi
is along the way. Twelve years earlier, Heidi's mother had showed up on Bernadette's
doorstep with a crying baby. Conveniently, Bernadette is agoraphobic (and she's
remarkably uncurious about where the two came from and how they are sup-
ported), and she finds an unused doorway that connects Heidi's mom's apartment
with her own. Bernadette is committed to Heidi and her mother, whom she
names So B. It, since that is one of her words, and their life is quiet and uneventful
until Heidi finds an undeveloped roll of film in her mother's closet. The pictures
set off a storm of questions, and Heidi travels from Reno to New York by herself to
find the meaning of Mama's word and the key to her own history (both So B. It
and "soof" turn out to be mispronunciations of Heidi's mother's name, Sophia).
The plot premise, as well as Heidi's solitary cross-country trek, is a bit implausible
in these days of Amber Alerts and invasive social services, but Weeks manages to
give enough reality to Heidi's voice and enough pace to the plot to help a reader
suspend disbelief, or at least damp it down enough to become involved in Heidi's
mystery. Heidi herself is doggedly determined, and, despite moments of fear and
despair, as obsessional in her way as the women who reared her. Neither plot,
character, nor ethos is as fully developed as in Holt's My Louisiana Sky (BCCB
6/98), but this is a quick and satisfying tale of love, determination, and the kind-
ness of strangers. KC
WHEELER, LISA 
Fitch & Chip: Who's Afraid of Granny Wolf; illus. by Frank
Ansley. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2004 
48p 
(Ready-to-Read)
ISBN 0-689-84952-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 1-2
The unlikely pairing of good friends Fitch (a wolf) and Chip (a pig) continues in
this third entry in the Fitch and Chip series (New Pig in Town, BCCB 12/03,
When Pigs Fly). Here, Fitch has invited Chip over to meet his grandmother, and
while Chip is confident in his friendship with Fitch, he is a little concerned about
what a wolf granny might serve up for dinner ("My granny will love you!" "Baked
or boiled?"). The humor centers on Granny's false teeth and subsequent bent
towards mispronunciation ("'I am pleased to eat you,' she said with her wiggly
teeth. 'Eat me?' cried Chip"), and the phonetic puns are perfectly suited to the
ready-to-read set. The theme of exploring differences continues in this story as
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 45
Chip examines Granny's house for things different from his own (such as a maga-
zine rack in the bathroom and magnets on the fridge) and ultimately concludes
that he and Granny aren't that different after all (much to the delight of Fitch
who, in a thought bubble, imagines his beloved Granny hugging his best bud).
The fairy-tale jokes woven throughout the text are hilariously subtle ("'I have been
in three kinds of houses,' Chip said. 'Straw, wood, and brick'"), and the vocabu-
lary used is well suited to the intended readership. Ansley's cheerfully fluid line-
and-watercolor illustrations feature carefully caricatured facial expressions,
highlighting the childlike Fitch and Chip and the pointy-nosed Granny in her
sleeping cap. Chip's cheeks, true to the text, grow increasingly flushed upon meet-
ing Granny, perfectly matching his nervous stutter, and the domestic detailing of
Granny's wolf house provides extensive visual clues to help young readers work
through the tale. Those following Fitch and Chip will definitely want to check out
their latest adventures, but those new to the series will also find a good deal to like
in this entertaining tale of bringing a friend home for the first time. HM
WILLETT, EDWARD 
J. R. R. Tolkien: Master of Imaginary Worlds. 
Enslow,
2004 
128p 
illus. with photographs 
(Authors Teens Love)
Library ed. ISBN 0-7660-2246-3 
$26.60 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Beginning with the introduction, which focuses on how "two young people" pro-
vided the catalysts for the creation and the publication of Tolkien's literary clas-
sics, The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings, this short but dense biography sets its
sights on involving youthful readers. Text blurbs, black-and-white photographs,
and sidebars dot the pages, providing visual interest and facilitating browsing-an
excellent editorial decision, since no account of Tolkien's quiet life can be de-
scribed as electrifying reading, and young people drawn to this book by the action-
crammed New Line films will appreciate this mark of consideration. However,
this isn't a fluffy biography but a thorough examination of the influences and
opportunities which prepared Tolkien to write his masterworks. With the inclu-
sion of brief appendices of Tolkien's interview quotes, a timeline of his life, time-
lines of his major works and selected additional works, a glossary, extensive chapter
notes, a short list of titles for further reading, and an index, this volume is a useful
introduction to Tolkien's further works, to the processes behind his creative en-
deavor, and to the standards of good research scholarship. TC
WINTER, JEANETTE 
September Roses; written and illus. byJeanette Winter. 
Foster/
Farrar, 2004 
34p
ISBN 0-374-36736-1 
$14.00 
R 
6-9 yrs
In time for the third anniversary of the September 11 th tragedy, Winter presents
as a memorial the story of a memorial created at the time. A pair of South African
sisters, rose growers by profession, traveled to New York with 2,400 roses for a
flower show; when the airports were closed, they were stranded with no place to go
and no purpose for their roses (a note explains the flower show had been canceled).
A kind stranger offered them a place to stay, and the sisters used their roses to
create a floral tribute to the towers, arranging the blooms in the shape of the fallen
buildings for all to view in Union Square. The authorial involvement sometimes
detracts from the focused detail of the story, but the account is nonetheless a mov-
ing one. The quietly declarative sentences generally resist sentimentality, and the
account is a subtle reminder of how many lives, even of people just passing through,
46 
* THE BULLETIN
were touched by the ripples of the tragedy. Winter's controlled line-and-water-
color illustrations gain additional order from careful uses of patterning in unex-
pected places, giving the visuals a dignified restraint; her palette slips to monochrome
at the towers' destruction and then gradually returns to color in the elements of
tribute, such as the lit candles and the roses themselves, without completely re-
moving the gray pall from the city scenes. This doesn't have the engagement and
impact of Maira Kalman's Fireboat (BCCB 10/02), but it's a modest and tender
account of short-lived memorial that will last long in memory. DS
WINTERS, KAY 
The Teeny Tiny Ghost and the Monster; illus. by Lynn
Munsinger. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028885-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028884-1 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-6 yrs
Whoooo can win the Make a Monster contest at the teeny tiny school? The Teeny
Tiny Ghost can, in spite of his dread of all things scary. Cocksure bullies hassle
and boo him, but with the help of his two remarkably prescient black cats, the
Teeny Tiny Ghost constructs a friendly monster out of parts from the dump and
wins the blue ribbon. Watercolor paintings curl and streak between the text blocks,
lending dynamic impetus and narrative tension, while fibrous accent lines provide
body and grain to ghostly forms. Unfortunately, the rhyme suffers from serious
scansion impairment, and it's further laden with excessive amounts of cuteness.
Nonetheless, creepy design details such as the ghosts' irregular teeth and crabbed
mouths keep the mood sufficiently eerie to hold listeners until the Teeny Tiny
Ghost and his two black cats celebrate their victory. TC
WOODING, CHRIS 
The Haunting of Alaizabel Cray. 
Orchard/Scholastic,
2004 
29 2p
ISBN 0-439-54656-7 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 8-12
The Old Quarter of London is not safe at night, and the danger that was once
confined there is spreading. Skulking amid the muted glow of gaslights on foggy
nights, in narrow, crooked alleys and squalid streets, there are myriad death-dealers:
a plague of perverse wych-kin, who kill, infect, or possess in a thousand different
ways; an all-too-human serial killer named Stitch-face, offering rides to unfortunates
in his death carriage; and an underground cult known as the Fraternity, with
powerful high-society members bent on fulfilling an unholy ritual. Walking the
same beat are the wych-hunters, people dedicated to ridding the world of wych-
kin; Thaniel Fox, at seventeen, is already one of the most renowned of his kind.
Still, he is unprepared for the depths of evil he unearths when he meets Alaizabel
Cray, an amnesiac girl who appears to be possessed. Alaizabel, he discovers, is the
key to the Fraternity's success and to the wych-kin's domination, and he and his
few friends are the only ones who can stop them from unlocking the door to hell
itself. Wooding has written a haunting and atmospheric horror story that seems,
with its breakneck action, cinematic scenes, disquieting dread, and shuddering
scares, like the best movie you've ever read. Though the prose occasionally becomes
grandiloquent enough to make readers aware of its costuming, its old-fashioned
gothic formalwear suits the alternative-Victorian London locale and the darkly
intelligent plot. Wooding's characterizations are done in moody, descriptive passages
that create people with strong psychological presence instead of well-rounded
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 47
definition; they come off as somewhat shallow, but that's appropriate in a book
more about semblance and setting than people. Recommend this to those who
enjoy feeling like they're reading at night by flashlight, even when they aren't. KH
WOODS, BRENDA 
Emako Blue. Putnam, 2004 
124p
ISBN 0-399-24006-3 
$15.99 
Ad Gr. 7-10
The story of Emako Blue begins where it ends-with Emako's funeral. A group of
friends there reflect variously on their relationship with Emako, who came into
their lives as a new girl in their school and chorus with an amazing voice ("better
than Whitney"), a beautiful face, and the legacy of South Central L.A. from which
she just couldn't manage to escape. Despite the fact that we know from the start
that Emako is dead, her murder in a drive-by shooting aimed at her elder brother
comes as a surprise on an otherwise uneventful day, capturing a bit of the random-
ness and lack of preparation that a group of friends might feel upon losing one of
their own. The friends-Monterey, Jamal, Eddie, and Savannah-all hail from a
less scary section of town, and they have different reactions to Emako that are
developed through memories each shares in first-person narration, but, with the
exception of Savannah, the characterizations don't quite gel into memorable por-
traits. Because of the succession of narrators and the blending of memory with the
present, it's sometimes difficult to follow the path of the story and who's telling it,
but Emako's distinctiveness as a friend and her star qualities are well developed.
As a result, readers are left with the sense that Emako's death is tragic because she
was special, not simply because she was an innocent victim of gang violence. The
limited perspectives of the characters allow Woods to scapegoat both Emako's and
Eddie's elder brothers, whose gang activities are vilified as the source of all the
trouble the characters face, but who also provide the motivation for Emako and
Eddie to pursue their big dreams so as not to become like them. More complex
and honest portrayals of similar situations can be found in Walter Dean Myers'
Scorpions (BCCB 7/88) and The Beast (1/04); this offering is a rather "lite" version,
both morally and consequentially, of similar circumstances. KC
WORMELL, CHRIS 
The Big Ugly Monster and the Little Stone Rabbit; written and
illus. by Chris Wormell. 
Knopf, 2004 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92891-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82891-5 
$15.95 
R* 4-7 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
WORMELL, CHRISTOPHER 
Teeth, Tails, & Tentacles: An Animal Counting Book;
written and illus. by Christopher Wormell. 
Running Press Kids, 2004 
64p
ISBN 0-7624-2100-2 
$18.95 
R 
2-4 yrs
Beginning counters will find memory aids aplenty in this picture book of color
linoleum-block animal prints introducing numbers one through twenty. Stocky
chunks of concise text ("2 two camel humps") mirror the heavy black lines of
illustrations executed in an iconic period style reminiscent of the woodblocks in C.
B. Falls' historic ABC Book (1923). Within the art, limpid colors melt into single-
hue light-to-dark continuums or flash in arresting contrast, while surprising shifts
in perspective and shadow create an almost tangible visual texture and depth which
invite repeated viewing. With the last print, the narrative returns to the number
48 
* THE BULLETIN
one ("twenty barnacle shells on ... one humpback whale"), implying that such
adventures in counting need never end. Miniature repetitions of the illustrations
fill the endpapers, and an appendix of"Specific Animals Featured in This Book"
gives short paragraphs of information about each animal. TC
YOUME 
Silavi, That Is Life: A Haitian Story of Hope; written and illus. by
Youme. 
Cinco Puntos, 2004 
[40p]
ISBN 0-938317-84-9 
$17.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
In the war-ravaged cities of Haiti, street children live in deprivation and persecu-
tion. One child, named Selavi-"that is life," in the Haitian language of Kreyol-
is orphaned by "people with guns" before being adopted by other street children.
Selavi eventually instigates the building of the shelter Lafanmi Selavi-"the family
is life," or "Selavi's family"-and participates in the development ofRadyo Timoun,
a radio station run by street children. The children who adopt Selavi are each
given half a page to describe their lives, offering the reader individual voices with
which to sympathize. The children's attempts to create stability for themselves are
shown in watercolor mural-style illustrations with hieroglyphic borders, the deep
hues and intricate patterns reminiscent of Caribbean fabric prints. Individuals are
shown running from men with guns, weeping in despair, reaching helpful hands
toward others in need, and working together to build a place of asylum. Tragedies
past are portrayed in shaded monotones of gray-blue, emphasizing the courage of
the survivors. The main text is richer in exhortation and emotional description
than in specific information, so kids will have to rely on denser end matter or
additional information to fill in the picture and answer their questions. Though
SClavi's story is referred to multiple times as "true," and the shelter and radio sta-
tion are real, the extensive addenda (an author's note, black-and-white photo-
graphs of the children of Lafanmi Selavi with descriptions of their daily life, and a
three-page open letter from Haitian author Edwidge Danticat) suggest that Selavi
is probably an amalgam of many children. The children who read or look at this
book may not care ifSelavi himself is real, since the story is made meaningful by its
overall veracity and by the urban mural character of the illustrations, which bring
home the real-world impact of far-off political turmoil. The text lends itself to
being read aloud, but the book topic and the length of the addenda-and the news
that Radyo Timoun was destroyed in an attempted coup in March 2004-will be
better absorbed by children old enough to read the book for themselves. TC
YOUNG, STEVE 
Winchell Mink: The Misadventure Begins. 
HarperCollins,
2004 
135p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-053500-8 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-053499-0 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
When your last name is Mink, and your parents saddle you with Winchell for a
first name, you're going to get teased, chased by bullies, and occasionally even
beaten up. What you might not expect, however, is that things could get worse.
You might, for instance, fall off "THAT CLIFF" (always referred to in an over-
sized comic font accompanied by musical notes), or exchange bodies with your pet
turtle, or go back in time and become a baseball-playing brontosaurus whose field-
ing error could lead to the extinction of his species. Then again, you might have
an opportunity to change someone's life, or your own, if you can just figure out
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
49
the point of the story Abe Lincoln has just told you about the invention of the
Gratchkea. Such is the fate of Winchell Mink, whose high-spirited adventures are
cast in an offbeat narrative style that challenges and bends conventional storytell-
ing. His tale is peppered with font changes to highlight various sound effects, and
it features one-sentence chapters, a commercial for bottled air, and witty authorial
asides and commentary that will keep even the most reluctant readers turning the
page to see what outrageous and out of context thing might happen next. The
general silliness offers a clever alternative to more didactic treatments of the timid
soul's triumphant emergence in the face of bullying peers. Winchell's effervescent
first-person narration with its deadpan humor and hyperbolic content will make
for a romp of a readaloud; practice first to maximize the comic timing of your
delivery. KC
50 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
SILVEY, ANITA 
100 Best Books for Children. Tenenbaum/Houghton,
2004 
192p
ISBN 0-618-27889-3 
$20.00
In the belief that "every child should know specific children's books" as part of his
or her "literary heritage," children's literature expert Anita Silvey has compiled her
personal list of the all-time best in publishing for children with a special emphasis
on kids preschool to age twelve. The process of selection, as described in the
introduction, included conversations with hundreds of individuals about the books
they remember, consultation with published lists of best books, and months of
reading and rereading; it is a project of inescapable subjectivity but seemingly sin-
cere in its planning. Silvey has taken this extended annotated bibliography a step
beyond the more encyclopedic examples by including not only summaries and
suggested uses for each entry but also "the story behind the story," whether it be a
glimpse into the book's little-known publication history, the relationship of the
writer and illustrator, or details about the process of its creation. This is actually
an entertaining collection of factoids about favorite books (did you know Curious
George was called Fifi in the original French version? Or that A Wrinkle in Time
was rejected twenty-six times before Farrar picked it up?), and librarians and teachers
will find plenty of fascinating tidbits to share with their students. The text reads
more like a narrative than a reference source, and children's literature enthusiasts
will find it an enjoyable read in and of itself. The entries are organized by age
group; a more extensive listing ("Beyond the 100 Best"), which recognizes hun-
dreds more titles, is organized both by age and, within the age groupings, by genre.
An extensive bibliography is included, as is a "Reading Journal," intended for families
to use in jotting down the experience of reading each title. HM
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
51
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Activism-fiction: Quattlebaum;
Tashjian
Adoption-stories: Chen
ADVENTURE: Anderson; Bath;
Colfer; Crilley; Hutchins;
Langrish; Meyer; Pike; Roberts;
Stewart; Wooding
African Americans: Bolden; Miller
African Americans-fiction:
Davidson; Quattlebaum; Woods
Airplanes-fiction: Lawrence
Alcoholism-fiction: Davis
Animals: Ehrlich; Sobol; Wormell
Teeth
Animals-stories: Horowitz
ANTHOLOGIES: Armstrong;
Datlow; Thomas
Art: Bolden
Art and artists-stories: Hutchins
Babies-stories: MacLachlan
BIOGRAPHIES: Bruchac; Miller;
Willett
Birds-fiction: Lawrence
Books and reading-stories: Hest;
Sierra
Brothers and sisters-fiction: McKay
Bullies-fiction: McKay; Prue;
Young
Bullies-stories: Meister
Cats-fiction: Seidler
Cats-stories: Turner; Winters
Chairs-stories: James
Civics: Tashjian
Civil War: Myers
Civil War-fiction: Siegelson
Colonial life: Katz
Computers-fiction: Vizzini
Contests-stories: Winters
COUNTING BOOKS: Wormell
Teeth
Cousins-fiction: Rosoff
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Woods
Crime and criminals-stories:
Emberley
Cultural studies: Perkins
Current events: Youme
Death-fiction: Roberts; Woods
Depression, the: Cooper
Dinosaurs-stories: Meister
Disasters: Winter
Disasters-fiction: Hooper
Ducks-stories: Chen
Ethics and values: Havill; Hest;
Roberts; Siegelson; Tashjian;
Vizzini; Youme
Ecology: Sobol
Ecology-fiction: Pike
Egypt: Gibbons
Elections-fiction: Tashjian
Elephants: Sobol
Faith: Gaskins
Faith-fiction: Roberts
Families-stories: Chen; Johnston;
McKay
FANTASY: Bode; Colfer; Crilley;
Langrish; Nimmo; Pike; Prue;
Stewart; Wooding
Farm life-fiction: LaFaye
Fathers: Ehrlich Does a Duck
Fathers-fiction: Davis; Lyon;
Townley
Fears-stories: Child; McGhee;
Strete
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Mason; Thomas; Wahl; Wheeler
52 
* THE BULLETIN
Foster care-fiction: Davis
Friends-fiction: Havill; McMullan;
Mead; Wheeler
Friends-stories: Hest; Wormell Big
Games-fiction: Anderson
Gangs-fiction: Woods
Gardens and gardening-fiction:
Quattlebaum
Gays and lesbians-fiction: Lyon
Ghosts-fiction: Ibbotson
Ghosts-stories: Winters
GOTHIC FICTION: Wooding
Government, U.S.: Tashjian
Grandmothers-fiction: Wheeler
Grandmothers-stories: Newman
Grief: Winter
Halloween: Greene; Harris; Winters
Halloween-fiction: Robinson
Halloween-stories: Meister; Turner
HISTORICAL FICTION: Havill;
Hooper; LaFaye; Lawrence; Lyon;
McDonald; Meyer; Saenz;
Townley; Wooding
History, British: Aronson
History, U.S.: Aronson; Cooper;
Katz; Myers
History, world: Gibbons
Homelessness-fiction: Carey
Horses-fiction: Findlay
HUMOR: Ahlberg; Arnold; Bath;
Harris; Horowitz; Ibbotson;
Johnston; Mason; McKay;
Quattlebaum; Robinson;
Wheeler; Young
Illness-fiction: Mead
Imagination-stories: James
Intercultural understanding:
Perkins
Kidnapping-fiction: Ahlberg
Labor-fiction: McDonald
Language arts: Ahlberg; Harris;
Horowitz
Latinos-fiction: Saienz
Libraries-stories: Turner
Literature, children's: Willett
Literature, English: Willett
Magic-fiction: Bode; Nimmo; Prue
Mice-stories: Emberley
Migrants: Cooper
Monsters-fiction: Crilley
Monsters-stories: Wormell Big
Mothers: Ehrlich Does a Mouse
Mothers-fiction: Friedman; Mead;
Weeks
Mummies: Gibbons
Music and musicians-fiction:
Armstrong; Seidler; Townley
MYSTERIES: LaFaye
Native Americans: Bruchac
Orphans-fiction: Bath; Colfer;
Langrish
Parents-fiction: Bode; Roberts
Parties-fiction: Robinson
Pets-stories: MacLachlan
Pigs-fiction: Ahlberg
Pigs-stories: Emberley
POETRY: Franco
Politics-fiction: Tashjian
Popularity-fiction: Vizzini
Prejudice-fiction: Carey
Prejudice-stories: Johnston
Princesses-fiction: Mason
Racism-fiction: McDonald
Reading aloud: Hamilton;
Quattlebaum; Robinson; Young
Reading, advanced: Mason; McKay
Reading, beginning: McMullan;
Wheeler
Reading, easy: Friedman; Mason;
Quattlebaum
Reading, reluctant: Mason; Young
Relationships-fiction: Davidson; De
La Cruz; Rosoff
Religious education: Aronson;
Gaskins
RHYMING STORIES: Arnold;
Sierra
Romance-fiction: Davidson
SCARY STORIES: Hamilton;
Thomas
School-fiction: Friedman;
Koponen; Meyer
School-poetry: Franco
School-stories: Child; McGhee;
Strete
SCIENCE FICTION: Colfer
Secrets-fiction: Crilley; McMullan
Self-esteem-stories: Jenkins
Ships and sailing: Myers
Ships and sailing-fiction: Meyer
SEPTEMBER 2004 
* 
53
SHORT STORIES: Armstrong;
Datlow
Sisters-fiction: Hooper; Lieberg
Sisters-stories: Hutchins
Slavery-fiction: Siegelson
Snakes-fiction: Nimmo
Snakes-stories: Strete
SONGS: Arnold
South, the-fiction: Lyon;
McDonald; Siegelson
SPECULATIVE FICTION: Rosoff
SPORTS STORIES: Bruchac;
Miller
Storytelling: Hamilton; Thomas
Storytime: Chen; Emberley;
Jenkins; MacLachlan; Meister;
Sierra; Turner; Winters; Wormell
Big
Summer-fiction: De La Cruz;
Perkins
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Hamilton
Technology-fiction: Vizzini
Teeth-stories: McGhee
Terrorism-fiction: Rosoff
TODDLER BOOKS: Ehrlich
Toys-stories: Newman; Wormell
Big
Trolls-fiction: Langrish
Uncles-fiction: Anderson; Langrish
Voyages and travel-fiction: Findlay;
Koponen; Lieberg; Perkins;
Stewart; Weeks
War: Youme
War-fiction: Havill; Rosoff
Wishes-stories: Wahl
Witches-fiction: Hamilton; Nimmo
Witches-stories: Wahl
World War I-fiction: Havill
World War II-fiction: Lawrence
Worms-stories: Johnston
TKAIN STlO1X 
,IL 
CHXP I 
I 
OO
FOK YOUNG KEADEAP 
WITH 
'
st
r
Rocket Man:The Mercury
S7-10
lacity
n the
or.
PUBLISHERS
ATANTA. GA 30318-2112
u 800-87909 or 40M-875.2578
Hlne.com
ZL'Is 
v1.. 
LVJi1i13 .i 
JL., dvlwY..*
FREE
TRIAL ISSUE
of an award-winning
publication!
Visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Click on
FREE TRIAL ISSUE
Teaching K-8 is 
filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges
to their students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
= 
~To 
receive your
" 
FREE TRIAL ISSUE visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
-
-
Teaching K-8 Magazine
40 Richards Avenue * Norwalk, CT 06854
THE
PROFESSIONAL
FORMAGAZINE
OF ' ' " N"
T C i S
Gi IN
EACHERS
STORY: FROM IREPLACE T CT S 
B 
PACE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 39
th Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their development
ISBN 0-87845-105-6; 
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
Number 39; 143 pages; 
ture-and information in all forms.
paper; $21.95*
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSOI
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin StorytellingReview contains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use 
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
^^^Available 
' frow The 
I^^^^^
Wnnniinl~S^Wmin&filsfnrmMJion^^Wml^c
^^^^*^^^^^^^*^^^^^ 
Pitb*^^^*^^ications 
^^^^^^----^^*Yf---i-ce^
ng te perrect DOOKS 
~ 
or your
favorite youngsters can be daunt-
ing. Let the expert staff of The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books help you navigate the book-
store wilderness full of shiny new children's
books.
Updated and expanded from last year's edi-
tion, the Guide Book to Gift Books contains
annotations for over 225 of the best books
for giving (and receiving) and is available as a
downloadable PDF file that you can print out
and use for every holiday, birthday, or other
gift-giving occasiononon your calendar this
year.
Listed books have all been recommended in
full Bulletin reviews from the last three years
and are verified as currently in print. Entries
are divided into age groups and include au-
thor, title, publisher, and the current list price.
To purchase, go to:
www.lis.uiuc.edulgiftbooks/
--- 
I
vnivera;
1325 So
Champa
U.SIA.
ADDRESS
Univerai
1325 So
Champa
U.SIA.
ADDRESS
University of Illinoi Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA.
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
PEM1ODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAA4PAjGN, IL.
5-i-:- 
·r
Ali
tyvo 
1
inyoisPrnss 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
PS
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.SA 
I
CHAMPAIGN, I.
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
You may now
and password
~The 
Bullt~tin O
1998-2003 vc
The online vet
database by at
To access The
i. Gotohtr
2 
Whenact
scriber nu
mailing lat
word. Thi
number b
3. Afterlogg
password
case sensi
password
scriber nu
Remember, TI
vidual print su
access, so plez
expand The &
electronic sub
Non-subscribr
Childr~n's 
Book
Please e-mail;
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2003 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http:llwww.prairienet.org/ccbl
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corer of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at http:/www.lis.uiuc.edu/pubofflbccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
0008-9036(200409)58:1; 1-U
ALS
~Nll.
dualized username
-s, and includes the
ley are published.
sue or the entire
04 
oeth sb
