ILLINOI S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
" 
"
t
;-:: :
ý O-
'~r~F; 
"
~ 
ii 
I '
~i3C:
J%
A.vibrant, 
dramatic free vpersoe story
Julius Lester
Let's Talk:
AbOut RacE
Illustrated by Kjaren Barbour
"3L 
This stunning picture book introduces race
as just one of many chapters in a person's story. ...
Letr's engaging tone is just ~gt .... [This] should
be a first choice for all collections and is stogly
recommended as a sprngboar for discussions
about differences."
--Starred Revie I School Library Journral
Tr 0-4.26966 
$15.99 ($2.993) Lb 0.6085982 
$16.69(23.89)
* HrperollinsChilrnalo 
Amistad
wwiarecilrn.com 
. www.harperteacher.co
THE
BUvL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
June 2005
Vol. 58 No. 10
A LOOK INSIDE
423 
THE BIG PICTURE
Permanent Rose by Hilary McKay
424 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
427 * Hitler Youth: Growing Up in Hitler's Shadow by Susan Campbell
Bartoletti
436 * Let It Begin Here!: Lexington 6& Concord: First Battles of the American
Revolution by Dennis Brindell Fradin; illus. by Larry Day
453 * 47 by Walter Mosley
466 * Secrets ofa Civil War Submarine: Solving the Mysteries of the H. L.
Hunley by Sally M. Walker
468 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
469 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
____ _ 
___~~
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Hope Morrison, Assistant Editor (HM)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Krista Hutley
Maggie Hommel
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2005 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra BolgIa. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Polly Kanevsky and Thierry Dosogne/Getty Images from Permanent Rose
©2005. Used by permission of Margaret K. McElderry Books.
JUNE 2005 * 423
THE BIG PICTURE
Permanent Rose
by Hilary McKay
The willingness of recent children's literature to address difficult truths about life's
challenges has been a healthy direction, and there have been some classic, hard-
hitting novels as a result of that willingness. Sometimes, though, it seems as though
the embrace of hard truths has left little room for gentler ones, that these days
affectionate family stories must either be sentimental novels of didactic sweetness,
stories of tough times, or titles aimed at younger readers not yet ready for grittier
subjects; sometimes, that is, until you get to Hilary McKay.
British author McKay displayed her gifts for humorous domestic par-
ticularity, sparkling prose, and perceptive explorations of individual and group
relations back with her American debut The Exiles (BCCB 12/92), and she's never
looked back, producing novel after spirited novel about kids, families, and daily
lives. She's come to special prominence, however, with her books about the Casson
family, beginning with Saffy's Angel (BCCB 5/02), wherein Saffy's wonderings
about her place in the family (she's an adopted Casson) led her to connect with
elements of her past. Then, in Indigo's Star (BCCB 9/04), teenaged Indigo Casson
and his eight-year-old sister Rose made friends with American Tom, defused the
bullying that had plagued Indigo, and then bade Tom farewell when he returned
to the States, and the family finally acknowledged that Mr. Casson had in fact
separated from Mrs. Casson and acquired a new girlfriend to boot. Now, in Per-
manentRose, Rose is bitterly missing Tom, who's yet to be heard from, and finding
David, the yearningly friendly former bully, a despicable substitute; oldest sister
Caddy is starting to have doubts about her engagement; and sister Saffy and her
inseparable friend, Sarah, are looking to uncover the identity of Saffy's birth fa-
ther.
It's McKay's genius that those various storylines of Permanent Rose are
all perfectly turned, with their own independent logic and justification, yet they all
read effectively as familial response to the departure of Mr. Casson, particularly
Rose's despair at her apparent abandonment by Tom and her implacability toward
David ("She really could not understand Indigo's willingness to forgive David.
She herself would happily have detested him forever and ever and ever"). It's also
McKay's brilliance that there's manifest silence about this connection-just like
families who don't live in books, the Cassons undergo their believable individual
and collective anxieties not because those anxieties are meaningful but just because
they occur, and it's up to somebody with perspective, possibly the reader, to see
the larger patterns. The book resolutely insists on being about its people, not their
problems.
424 
* 
THE BULLETIN
And for all her comedic gifts, McKay treats those people with an abiding
generosity and tenderness. It's fitting that, in Permanent Rose, characters' standing
largely depends on their treatment of Rose: David's transformation from awk-
ward bully is complete when he becomes, unbeknownst to Rose, what he most
wants to be-the hero who enables her reunion with Tom; for all his flaws and
limitations (and his sometimes understandable frustration at his family's helter-
skelter ways), Mr. Casson loves his daughter and bumblingly escorts her to New
York and Tom; Caddy's fiance, noting Rose's lonely daily vigil for mail from Tom,
brings her a rose every morning so she doesn't have to return from the mailbox
empty-handed. Yet Rose is no saintly symbol but a believable little girl, capable of
thievery (she indulges in a streak of mad-at-the-world shoplifting), anger ("Rose
had recently taken to wishing people were dead"), mess, and willfulness, but still
credibly "darling, brave, loyal Rose," a person in her own right as well as a highly
active player in the ensemble drama.
This is therefore a lively family story, where McKay's warm confidence
in her characters allows the Cassons to remain credible as a happy family that
encounters occasional curves in the road-and there's a really big one about Saffy's
parentage revealed here-rather than a character set defined by their struggle. The
Casson saga freely acknowledges the mistakes that get made along the way but
focuses on the making of the journey, individually and together, and celebrates the
joyful possibilities of human connectedness. The Cassons are brave, humorous,
determined, and loving, and this story of their life is the same. (Imprint informa-
tion appears on p. 450.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALDRIN, Buzz Reaching for the Moon; illus. by Wendell Minor. 
HarperCollins,
2005 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-055446-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-055445-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
HILLIARD, RICHARD 
Neil, Buzz, and Mike Go to the Moon; written and illus. by
Richard Hilliard. 
Boyds Mills, 2005 
32p
ISBN 1-59078-293-3 
$16.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
To judge the books solely by their covers, these titles might be interchangeable,
each featuring space-suited Buzz Aldrin posing with the American flag on the rocky
gray lunar surface. Each, however, offers a different perspective on the Apollo 11
moon landing. Hilliard divides his spreads into a main text that recaps the Mer-
cury and Gemini projects and the highlights of the Apollo 11 mission in language
accessible to younger listeners, interspersed with sidebars that supply more sophis-
JUNE 2005 * 425
ticated technical information for a slightly older crowd. The brawny acrylic double-
page spreads are particularly well suited to sharing with a group, making this an
excellent choice for classroom use. Aldrin's offering has the advantage of an up-
close-and-personal view of the mission. He discusses his childhood interest in flight,
his military training and academic preparation for a career as an astronaut, and, of
course, his pride and excitement in both his Gemini 12 extravehicular activity and
his moon walk. Although he writes with grace ("But the speed [17,500 miles per
hour] didn't seem real to me. I felt as if I were gently floating while the Earth spun
beneath me"), he occasionally strays from details of his space experience into mini-
homiletics on character ("I played every game hard, because I wanted to win. I
loved being part of a team, working together to fight for victory"). Minor's paint-
ings are serviceable, but they're somewhat softer and more romanticized than
Hilliard's work. Both titles will rendezvous successfully with Don Brown's One
Giant Leap (BCCB 12/98) on the picture-book shelves. EB
ASHMAN, LINDA 
To the Beach!; illus. by Nadine Bernard Westcott. 
Harcourt,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-15-216490-1 
$16.00 
R 
4-7 yrs
It's that time of year again, when families pack up their cars and head off to claim
their share of sand and surf, and books appear to celebrate their stress-filled exo-
dus. Ashman uses simple, jaunty rhyme to relate what turns out to be a vacation
bust-after multiple trips back to the house to retrieve forgotten items, the family
runs into a particularly nasty storm, pictured with no fewer than seven simulta-
neous lightning bolts and disturbingly large raindrops. Back home, the sun re-
turns (of course), and the family happily sets up beach in the backyard. Crowded
watercolors run toward the predictable in their visual zaniness and overdone frenzy,
in the midst of which spindly black outlines pick out the range of overwrought
emotions in the pin-dot-eyed and noodly-limbed family. Easy-on-the-tongue
rhymes, the list of must-have items for a day at the beach, and the family's genial
flexibility when things go awry, however, make this useful for vacation-prep story
hours. KC
AUCH, MJ 
Wing Nut. Holt, 2005 
231p
ISBN 0-8050-7531-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Grady and his mom, Lila, have been on the road since his dad died several years
before, and though his mom always finds them food and shelter, sometimes the
journey is pretty rough. When a car breakdown lands them in a tiny Pennsylvania
town, Lila takes a job cooking for Charlie, a crusty widower who only hires her to
keep his interfering, fusspot son off his back. Eventually, Charlie's dedication to
caring for a flock of purple martins that nest in his yard garners Grady's interest,
and Charlie's careful overtures of friendship-from arranging for Grady's
homeschooling to buying a clunker car to rebuild with Grady--win Grady's trust.
When a misstep of Grady's kills the bird that has comforted Charlie since the
death of his wife and endangers the rest of the flock, their relationship is devas-
tated. As a seventh grader, Grady is just beginning to have some influence on his
somewhat undependable (but well-meaning) parent, and his protectiveness of his
pretty, uneducated mother and his suspicion of strangers ring true. Charlie's char-
acter, the rough-hewn but honorable farmer, fills to perfection a surrogate grandpa
role, allowing Grady to put down roots without worrying about anyone making a
426 * THE BULLETIN
move on his mother. The information about purple martins scattered throughout
verges on encyclopedic, but Charlie's thorough explanations of the birds' habits
are framed in enough groaning from Grady that an acceptable balance is reached.
This is a spirited, fresh treatment of the familiar plot of a homeless but self-reliant
family finding permanence. TC
Avi 
The Book without Words: A Fable of Medieval Magic. Hyperion,
2005 
[2 0 8p]
ISBN 0-7868-0829-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Interrupted by a potential heart attack in the middle of a spell for eternal life, the
alchemist Thorston lies, apparently dead, in his bed in an abandoned house. His
servant, thirteen-year-old Sybil, and his talking raven, Odo, quarrel over what to
do with the three green stones left over from the spell and how to read the myste-
rious Book Without Words, which contains the instructions for making gold. Joined
by a street waif named Alfric and a runaway apprentice called Damian, Sybil and
Odo labor to find the secret of making gold before the city reeve, Bashcroft, forces
his way into the house and claims the book for himself. In the meantime, a skeletal
monk known as Brother Wilfrid confronts Sybil with pleading and warnings every
time she sneaks out to get water, attempting to persuade her to give him the book.
Sybil's confusion and sometimes ill-advised actions speak convincingly of her youth,
ignorance, and illiteracy without damning her in the reader's eyes; Alfric's utter
dependence on Sybil, like Odo's misplaced belief in his master's promises of free-
dom and wealth, makes poignant the effects of deceitful and selfish acts on inno-
cent victims. The growing friendship between Sybil, Odo, and Alfric (Damian is
a prig) infuses the tale with themes of loyalty and trust, while the gruesome details
of Thorston's death and repeated reanimation after burial, as well as the revelation
of his intention to steal the lives of both Sybil and Odo to save his own, add the
thrill of the macabre. This lively quest story, though shorter than Alexander's The
Rope Trick (BCCB 1/03), incorporates a similarly touching mixture of humor and
melancholy that will please fans of that vibrant fable. TC
BARRETT, TRACY 
On Etruscan Time. 
Holt, 2005 
[176p]
ISBN 0-8050-7569-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Hector has little interest in accompanying his mother on her appointment as trans-
lator on an Italian archaeological excavation, but with no one willing to watch him
at home, he has no choice. Things quickly take a promising turn when human
bones are discovered at one of the sites, and murmurs of Etruscan human sacrifice
begin to circulate tentatively among the crew. Hector, who has been allowed to
excavate a small corner of a pit, discovers a glowing eyeball-like object and, true to
form in kids' novels, neglects to tell any adult about it. Hector then begins to
experience spells in which an Etruscan boy enlists the modern youth's help, hoping
to evade a jealous uncle who is plotting to frame him for temple theft and to have
him executed as a human sacrifice. The plot unfolds in workmanlike fashion, with
ever-lengthening trips back in time, contemporary adults who misread the evi-
dence in front of them, and a rescue maneuver that is disappointingly tame, given
the enticing possibilities of gory death or hair's-breadth escape offered by the premise.
JUNE 2005 
* 427
Hector's summer may not be quite as gripping as readers might wish, but his
adventure could be a welcome diversion as their own summer days stretch on. EB
BARTOLETTI, 
SUSAN CAMPBELL 
Hitler Youth: Growing Up in Hitler's
Shadow. Scholastic, 2005 
176p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-35379-3 
$19.95 
R* Gr. 8-12
Between the years of 1926 and 1945, more than seven million young people joined
Hitlerugend, or Hitler Youth, the official youth group of the Nazi party. Drawn
by Hitler's promises of a better, stronger Germany for future generations, these
young men and women played an extraordinary role in the machinations of the
National Socialist Party during the twelve years of the Third Reich. This carefully
researched and powerfully narrated examination of the Hitler Youth follows the
lives of an assortment of young people on all sides of the story through these years,
drawing on historical research, memoir, interviews, quoted materials, and exten-
sive photographs. The story is at times horrific: the youth of Germany, drawn by
accessible notions of spirit and patriotism, were systematically indoctrinated "to
become a part of the machinery of murder," despite their general ignorance of the
scale and gross inhumanity of the murders to come. This well-contextualized
narrative allows readers largely unfamiliar with the history to gain a solid under-
standing not only of Hitler and his legions of youth but of the deeper connections
back to the first World War, the Treaty of Versailles, and the anti-Semitism of the
nation, and the abundant details effectively function to broaden understanding
rather than dragging the plotline down. Consideration of multiple perspectives
allows readers to examine the organization from various angles: converted believ-
ers, persecuted Jews, underground resisters. A clean layout and an abundance of
archival photos further support the storytelling. This solid offering deserves wide
readership by today's young people, and it is certain to promote extensive discus-
sion. A timeline, author's note, note about the photographs, list of sources, bibli-
ography, and index are included. HM
BAUER, JOAN 
Best Foot Forward. Putnam, 2005 
[192p]
ISBN 0-399-23474-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Returning from her triumph in The Rules of the Road (BCCB 2/98), Jenna's back
at the shoe store and her loyal work for Mrs. Gladstone, scion of the Gladstone
Shoes company who's trying to fight off corporate mediocrity spearheaded by her
son. Jenna is finding that Al-Anon helps in dealing with her guilt about her alco-
holic father, and her new embrace of boundaries and limits makes her question
Mrs. Gladstone's decision to hire Tanner Cobb, a teen who first comes to the
store's attention when he tries to steal shoes. She's also starting to worry about the
shoes themselves-she could swear that the new shipments of Gladstone's best
walking shoe are substandard in quality, and she warily joins with Tanner in an
effort to untangle the mystery of their manufacture. This sequel doesn't manage
to recapture the high-spirited energy of its predecessor: the fighting-big-bad-shoe-
business plot feels like a rerun, and the threads about Jenna's issues with her father,
Mrs. Gladstone's issues with her son, Tanner's gradual rehabilitation, and Jenna's
incipient romance with another young achiever don't really cohere. Jenna is still
an appealing heroine, though; her business acumen and devotion to her craft make
her a refreshing original in a literature more frequently focused on consumption,
428 
* 
THE BULLETIN
and it's particularly nice to see her finally getting a chance to have some fun. Fans
of the first book may therefore enjoy following in her Gladstone-shod footsteps in
this return engagement. DS
BAUER, MARION DANE 
A Bear Named Trouble. 
Clarion, 2005 
[144p]
ISBN 0-618-51738-3 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Ten-year-old Jonathan lives with his dad in Anchorage while his mom and little
sister wait out his mother's teaching appointment in Minnesota. When an injured
young brown bear, soon nicknamed Trouble, visits Jon's back porch a few times
before beginning to hang around the bear cage at the zoo, animal-loving Jon can't
resist. He attracts Trouble to his porch with a loaf of bread, then follows the bear
to the zoo, arriving just in time to see Trouble smack and kill a beloved zoo resi-
dent, Mama Goose, with one powerful paw. Horrified, Jon calls the local authori-
ties and reports Trouble as a killer; then, when he finally realizes that killing Trouble
won't bring back Mama Goose, Jon rushes to Trouble's defense. The stories of
the boy (who is fictitious) and the bear (whose exploits are based on those of a real
bear), given in counterpoint, compare the loneliness and longings of both young-
sters and paint their encounters in sympathetic tones. Jon's habit of imagining
himself as the animals he meets draws the reader into his world and prepares a
foundation for his reversal of feeling regarding the besieged bear. The real bear's
subsequent adoption by the Lake Superior Zoo (described in an epilogue) is incor-
porated into the story with resounding success; even the celebratory number
("Trouble," from The Music Man) played by a band upon the bear's arrival in
Duluth functions to produce a remarkably unified-and blissful-ending. Con-
sider pairing this with Broome's equally appealing treatment of a child's rescue of
an at-risk animal, The Judas Donkey (BCCB 1/04). TC
BENCHLEY, PETER 
Shark Life: True Stories about Sharks 6 the Sea; ad. by Karen
Wojtyla. 
Delacorte, 2005 
193p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90135-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73109-4 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
"[M]otor vehicle deaths are over a thousand times more common than shark at-
tacks. As for shark-attack fatalities, well, they're so rare that they're not even on
the scale." After these de rigueur words of comfort, Benchley gleefully knuckles
down to what his readers really want-cool stories of near-misses with menacing
jaws full of serrated choppers. The presentation is divided into three sections, and
the first revolves tightly around Benchley's own life-threatening experience in a
shark-proof cage while making a documentary film on sharks immediately follow-
ing his success withJaws (book and movie). The following sections are an organi-
zational free-for-all, leaping wildly among descriptions of the most dangerous sharks,
advice on how to swim safely in the ocean, thoughts on how the media misrepre-
sents shark attacks, observations on other nasty forms of marine life, and best of
all, more personal tales of Benchley's own close encounters of the carnivorous
kind. Benchley ingenuously acknowledges his own lack of academic credentials,
but this cavalier regard for scholarly authority and his strong sense of humor make
him a comfortable, unintimidating companion for kids' undersea adventures: "Their
scientific name is Architeuthis, which translates from the Greek (roughly) as 'first
JUNE 2005 
* 
429
among squids'... or, in today's language, 'Man, you de squiiid. '" Curl up with
this at the beach-but about fifty yards back from the surf. EB
BLACKMAN, MALORIE 
Naughts & Crosses. 
Simon, 2005 
[400p]
ISBN 1-4169-0016-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Teenagers Callum and Sephy have been best friends since childhood, when Callum's
family members were servants in Sephy's household. After a brutal falling out,
however, their families have been trying to keep them apart for years. The prob-
lem? Sephy is a Cross, a member of the ruling class by benefit of her black skin,
and Callum is a naught, his whiteness considered to be politically and socially
"blank." Their two families are torn apart as Callum and Sephy fight to stay
together, even as the racial tension escalates and they are forced to choose sides.
This pressing societal conflict is focalized through Sephy and Callum in alternat-
ing first-person chapters; they are both nuanced, significant characters whose driv-
ing need to be with each other while staying true to their families is entirely
believable, and readers will come to understand and sympathize with both. Though
Blackman leaves the place and time undetermined, the racial inequality in this
British import is so overtly a parallel to the American civil rights movement that
the science-fiction element seems merely an afterthought to add a clever twist to a
conventional story of interracial romance. However, this does not diminish the
strongly emotional impact of doomed love, and there is no denying that the book
is a powerful and moving exploration of the complex facets and conflicted loyalties
of racial injustice in worlds imagined or real. KH
BROACH, ELISE 
Shakespeare's Secret. Holt, 2005 
250p
ISBN 0-8050-7387-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-7
Starting sixth grade in a new school is even more intimidating for Hero than it
would be for most children, as she knows her name will bring her months of
teasing and exclusion while her eighth-grade sister, Triss, will be immediately ac-
cepted. Sure enough, due to an unthinking remark on the part of a classmate,
Hero is labeled as the girl with a dog's name the very first day, pushing her into her
usual role of victim. Her ensuing harassment by other students is made bearable
only by Hero's friendship with Miriam, the older lady next door, who knew the
previous owners of Hero's house and who reveals an exciting secret: a seventeen-
carat diamond, hundreds of years old, was claimed stolen by the previous tenants
but is rumored to still be hidden somewhere in the house. Aided by another of
Miriam's friends, a hunky and charming eighth grader named Danny, Hero be-
gins a search for the missing jewel that involves not only solving local mysteries but
even finding proof of the true identity of the Bard of Avon. Hero is a sympathetic,
pragmatic heroine with little patience for rumors of romance between herself and
the much-fawned-over Danny; instead, she must work through fears of betrayal by
both Miriam and Danny as their search for the diamond progresses. The novel
features what is for the most part a refreshingly unified interweaving of theme and
motif, its various threads serving to enhance the emotional import of the main
story rather than drawing away reader interest. A subplot in which Miriam and
Danny discover they share a familial connection relies overmuch on coincidence
and threatens the ending pages with a schmaltz overload; however, the strength of
430 * THE BULLETIN
the preceding plotlines and the characters developed within them carry the story
through to a satisfying ending. TC
BROACH, ELISE 
What the No-Good Baby Is Good For; illus. by Abby
Carter. 
Putnam, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23877-8 
$15.99 
R 4-6 yrs
After more than six months of putting up with his grabby, noisy little sister, John
tells his mother it is time for the baby to go. Since Mom is willing to hear him out,
John warms to his theme, enumerating all the reasons the baby is no good. Con-
vinced, his mother requests John's help in packing a-bag for the baby, who will go
away to Grandma's, leaving Mom and John alone to play together. Luckily, in the
process of packing, John thinks of several things the baby is good for, and his
mother's suggestion that the baby will miss John while at Grandma's seals the
deal-the baby will go to Grandma's just for today, giving John and his mother
some much-needed alone time. John's understandable frustration at the months
of "sharing, and understanding, and being quiet" required of him as a big brother
comes across loud and clear in the text, and the fact that John's mother refrains
from correcting his unstated assumption of precedence within the family height-
ens both the validity of his concerns and his centrality within the story. In the
pastel-hued watercolors, full-on perspectives of John, contrasted with shoulders-
down shots of John's mother, continue to place the focus on the little boy. Wavy
outlines give the illustrated figures a cuddly touchability and increase the energy of
action scenes. The round-headed, golden-haired baby frolics around John, her
joyful appreciation of her brother providing an appealing visual foil for his petu-
lant fault-finding. This is a sweeter, less edgy treatment of the same theme as
Danziger's sardonic (and highly entertaining) Barfburger Baby, I Was Here First
(BCCB 10/04) and Jenkins' slyly witty That New Animal (BCCB 3/05), and gen-
tler adults will doubtless appreciate its tender treatment of a tough subject. TC
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
The Dragon Throne. Viking, 2005 
22 4p
ISBN 0-670-03631-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 8-12
Concluding the trilogy begun with The Book of the Lion (BCCB 2/00), Cadnum
brings Edmund Strongarm back to England from the Crusades, where he and his
friend Hubert are promptly knighted by conniving Prince John. They refuse to
swear fealty to the prince in return for the honor, though, and soon are on the run
with their old masters, Sir Rannulf and Sir Nigel. To keep her vindictive and
devious son at bay, Queen Eleanor intervenes on the knights' behalf and sends
them on a mission of her own-to accompany her lady in waiting, Ester de Laci,
on a pilgrimage to Rome, where Ester will offer thanksgiving for the miraculous
recovery of her wounded father. Although the challenges the party meets along
the route are predictable enough-they must fight off Prince John's henchmen, a
band of mountain bandits, and the champion of a powerful Roman family-all
are thrillingly paced and spring credibly from political circumstances of the pe-
riod. Likewise, Edmund's inevitable romance with Ester is grounded not only on
mutual attraction but also on the lovers' more mundane appreciation of the skills
and proprieties required to thrive among their social peers. This is a worthy wrap-
up to a solid, satisfying series. EB
JUNE 2005 
* 431
CARBONE, ELISA 
Last Dance on Holladay Street. Knopf, 2005 
196p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92896-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82896-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
As her foster mother, Mama Kate, dies of consumption, Eva prepares to meet the
woman who gave her up thirteen years ago. Little does she realize that the inno-
cent-looking address, 518 Holladay Street, belongs to a brothel, where she finds
that her mother, Sadie, is not only a prostitute, but white as well, unlike African-
American Eva. Miss B, the madam, threatens to throw Sadie out of the house but
thinks better of it when she sees how beautiful Eva is, and she sets her to work with
her white sister, Pearl, in the dance hall. As the girls work downstairs, Mom works
upstairs, until Miss B decides that their dancing isn't paying their keep. With the
imminent threat of being sent upstairs to work, Eva runs away. She finds both
help and hindrance on her way but eventually realizes that she must face her re-
sponsibilities and return to Denver, where she devises a plan to get Sadie, Pearl,
and herself out from under their debt to Miss B. Carbone fully realizes the opulent
decadence of Denver's unsavory element in 1878 while creating a strong coming-
of-age narrative as Eva sorts out her feelings about her possibilities. Secondary
characters highlight a separate agenda for Carbone of displaying the abuse of girls
in the developing American West: for instance, Sadie responds to Eva's appear-
ance by taking a near-fatal overdose of laudanum, an act that is dismissed by all as
something fallen women do, and regularly, in Denver's houses of ill repute. The
plot point of having Eva attacked by a mountain lion shouts rather than suggests
its metaphorical significance: if Eva can fight back against a fierce animal, surely
she can figure out how to rescue her family from their degradation. Despite such
moments of heavy-handedness, however, Eva's story of resilience, resourcefulness,
and entrepreneurial spirit takes the American girl into a whole new territory. KC
CARNEY, MARY Lou 
Dr. Welch and the Great Grape Story; illus. by Sherry
Meidell. 
Boyds Mills, 2005 
32p
ISBN 1-59078-039-6 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Necessity is the mother of invention, or so goes the saying. According to this
picture-book biography of Dr. Thomas Bramwell Welch, founder of the Welch
Grape Juice Company, the invention of grape juice was born of Welch's reserva-
tions about communion wine ("If only someone could find a way to use grapes to
make a drink that didn't turn into alcohol. Then the Lord's Supper could be
served to everyone"). A few bushels of grapes, some reflection on the work of
Louis Pasteur, and a single experiment later, Welch had created perfectly sweet,
alcohol-free grape juice. Though some aspects off the process aren't spelled out,
ambitious young chemists will enjoy piecing together the given scientific informa-
tion (how the boiling process prevents fermentation, why Dr. Welch had to wait
to test out his homebrewed concoction); those less interested in the science will
simply embrace the story of hypothesis leading to success. The timeline from the
invention of the juice to the successful start of the company is covered in a closing
note; there is, however, no bibliography or indication of historical sources. Meidell's
humorous, highly energetic watercolor illustrations capture the homey ambiance
of the 1869 New Jersey village and maintain a strong sense of pacing that moves
the story forward. Human faces are less carefully drafted, with eyes squeezed inex-
plicably shut in many illustrations and expressions at times completely unmatched
to the text (as in the spread of the church service where Dr. Welch, despite his
432 * THE BULLETIN
stern proclamations in the text, looks as though he is howling with laughter). Still,
there is something inspiring about the age-old story of the common man rising in
his ranks, and kids are likely to recognize the name from their breakfast table. HM
CARTER, DOROTHY 
Grandma's General Store: The Ark; illus. by Thomas B.
Allen. 
Foster/Farrar, 2005 
135p
ISBN 0-374-32766-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Life in the Jim Crow South goes from difficult to unbearable when Pearl and
Prince's father loses his job. He and their mother take out a loan and head north
to the promised land of Philadelphia, leaving Pearl and Prince with their grand-
mother for nearly a year, until they are settled enough to send for their children.
Though she's the narrator, five-year-old Pearl serves more as an entree into the
story than a genuine participant, since her emotional detachment in the face of
parental distance and dangerous event doesn't really ring true, and she's never
really developed as a character. Grandma's character is stronger in her fierce devo-
tion to her grandchildren and to fairness in life, but it's inconsistent: fearless
before truant officers, Klansmen, and hurricanes, she literally faints and calls for
the minister when she finds out that Prince has touched a gun that she keeps under
her bed. Allen's pencil drawings pick out most of the frightening and anxious
moments in the text, pointing to, if not exactly supplying, the emotional intensity
of such events unconveyed in the narration. The book lacks the snap and flair of
other tales of the northward impulse or life in the segregated south (Harrington's
Going North, BCCB 11/04, or some of Mildred D. Taylor's Logan family books
for younger readers), but it does offer an episodic slice of life, painting a textured
picture of growing up black under Jim Crow during the Depression, that may
prompt some intergenerational discussion of the way things used to be. KC
CHILD, LAUREN 
Hubert Horatio Bartle Bobton-Trent; written and illus. by Lauren
Child. 
Hyperion, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7868-5485-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
6-9 yrs
Hubert Horatio Bartle Bobton-Trent, a genius child born to "frightfully, fright-
fully rich" parents, must take charge of restoring the family fortune after his par-
ents' generosity and sociability leave the family penniless. Luckily, he has his best
friend, Stanton Harcourt III, to help him brainstorm and carry out cunning plan
after cunning plan. Unluckily, Hubert Horatio's parents (who haven't been in-
formed of their financial ruin) repeatedly blow whatever cash the two boys manage
to scrape together. Finally, the children sell the family mansion and move the
Bobton-Trents and their butler to a high-rise apartment, where everyone settles
happily into a new, penurious lifestyle made joyful by the fact that now they can
all live in adjacent rooms and nobody's cocoa gets cold on the trek from the kitchen.
The tongue-in-cheek text cheerfully lampoons Hubert Horatio's chi-chi lifestyle
(the family plays Monopoly with real money), presenting the characters as pleas-
antly frivolous rather than scandalously wasteful. The narration is a bit wordy
throughout, but the constant wordplay and the innovative layouts-in which lines
of text slither, swim, bounce, and negotiate an in-house maze-keep the text pro-
cedurally interesting (though sometimes difficult to read). Child's signature scribbles
and fabric swatches juice up the pages, while frequent changes in perspective and
viewing angle keep viewers on their toes. The tiny-mouthed, large-eyed characters
JUNE 2005 
* 433
themselves preserve a straightfaced seriousness (even while dancing or playing
Twister) that carries off the story's spoofery to perfection. Offer this posh parody
to Eloise devotees. TC
CHOI, YANGSOOK 
Peach Heaven; written and illus. by Yangsook Choi. 
Foster/
Farrar, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-374-35761-7 
$16.00 
R 5-8 yrs
In August of 1976 in Puchon, South Korea, author Choi (then a little girl) wit-
nessed a rainstorm in which plump, juicy peaches from the surrounding mountain
farms fell from the sky. As the yearly sale of these peaches was vital to the eco-
nomic well-being of the town, the stripping of the peach trees could have been a
disaster. Eager to help the peach growers, Choi and her family and neighbors
gathered the miraculously unblemished fruit into baskets and carried it back out to
the alpine orchards, where they tied many of the peaches to tree branches with
yarn for the farmers to find. The logic of the story is challenging-it's quite a
miracle that the ripe peaches were unharmed by their fall, and one wonders why
the peaches weren't simply returned to the farmers in baskets rather than labori-
ously reattached to the trees-but audiences caught up in the magic of the event
won't care. Choi's love of her homeland drives the plot, and her character's under-
standable passion for sweet, fresh peaches takes a temporary backseat to her desire
to help the farmers whose livelihood is endangered. Within the watercolor and
colored pencil illustrations, the cool blues and grays of rainwater and slate roofs
balance the ochres of the earth and buildings and the blush of ripe peaches. View-
ers' imaginations will be caught by drawings of the young girl-with a rope tied
from her waist to the porch support-wading through knee-high water in her
front yard, shoes and peaches bobbing around her, and of Choi and her brother
floating in little boats or baskets down the city street, gathering peaches to carry up
the mountainside. Deftly told and gracefully illustrated, Choi's vibrant and ap-
pealing childhood recollection is a memorable tale of a young person making a
difference. An author's note relates the significance of peaches in Korean mythol-
ogy. TC
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
Because Your Daddy Loves You; illus. by R. W.
Alley. 
Clarion, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-00361-4 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
Most dads have plenty of opportunity to yell at, complain about, and otherwise
shut down their young ones-but no matter the provocation, this daddy won't do
it. Unendingly patient and helpful, he is the greatest of dads-greater still because
(as the narrator emphasizes) his good works stem from his love for his child, here
pictured as a mop-headed, stick-limbed, effervescent little girl. Each new scenario
is introduced with an example of what Daddy could say but doesn't; a turn of the
page reveals Daddy behaving just as he should, his concern and tenderness evident
in his face and the playful yet gentle way he interacts with his child (who sprawls
all over him and the page in happy abandon). The final page underscores that
fatherly devotion, showing Daddy and daughter embracing as Daddy says, "I love
you." Clements' blurbs of dialogue and exposition effect a plainspoken style that
keeps this adulatory portrait from becoming saccharine. Alley's line- and-water-
color illustrations feature a summery palette of sandy tans and sky blues, the fig-
434 
* THE BULLETIN
ures drawn in a cartoonish mode. That nonrealistic style cuts some slack for real-
life dads, who may have a hard time living up to this superdad's standard. Realistic
or not, Clements' latest is sure to enjoy a long life as a gift book and a bedtime
story. TC
CLIMO, SHIRLEY, ad. 
Monkey Business: Stories from Around the World; illus. by
Erik Brooks. 
Holt, 2005 
[128p]
ISBN 0-8050-6392-7 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Fourteen fables and folktales featuring monkey characters are gathered in this illus-
trated collection, the tales categorized by global region of origin/collection (Africa
and Madagascar, the Americas, and Asia) and introduced with explanatory blurbs.
Popular tales such as "So Say the Little Monkeys" are combined with traditional
favorites like "The Stone Monkey" from China and "Prince Rama and the Mon-
key Chieftain" from India. Occasionally, thematically related indigenous proverbs
or informational insertions such as "When Is a Monkey Not a Monkey?" and
"Monkey Sign Language" follow a story. The narrative style is uncomplicated but
intimate and the dialogue accessible, making the stories a natural choice for read-
ing aloud or storytelling, and the tales are full of location-specific details of foliage
and fauna that endow each story with the ring of regional authenticity. The variety
of tales and blurbs and the skill of the telling make this volume a versatile addition
to any collection, circulating or reference-the cumulative Filipino tale "Uncle
Monkey and the Ghosts" is a fine story choice for improvisational, interactive tell-
ing, and the Mexican "The First Monkeys" could be combined easily with a craft
activity. The illustrations show the monkey characters in situ, helpfully providing
images of specifically mentioned species. An author's prefatory note and a bibliog-
raphy give context for the information given, and an introduction describes how
all the kinds of monkeys are part of the same family. Final illustrations not seen.
TC
CRUTCHER, CHRIS 
The Sledding Hill. Greenwillow, 2005 
[240p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-050244-4 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-050243-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Crutcher, a writer of books that are repeatedly challenged or banned, turns cru-
sader in this story of a boy who has lost too much to let a book be taken away from
him as well. Eddie Proffit, a brilliant thirteen-year-old, loses his dad and his best
friend within months of each other. In his shock and grief, he stops talking, and
the fundamentalist preacher who is counseling his mother decides to lean hard on
Eddie to snap out of his funk, get baptized, and lead the charge to ban a book that
the preacher finds offensive. Crutcher's appeal has always lain in his ability to keep
it real while castigating insensitive adults for visiting their anger and their failures
on the kids in their lives; he delivers strongly didactic messages in an inverted
fashion, from kid to adult, instead of vice versa. Here, however, he departs from
that formula, putting a decidedly smug and fiber-adult perspective into the voice
of his narrator, Eddie's friend Billy, who, being dead, has insider information on
how the universe and everyone in it really works. Though the book is openly and
even comically reflexive (the offensive book is written by one Chris Crutcher, who,
according to his website, is in a state of arrested adolescence, among other failings
JUNE 2005 
* 435
that he gleefully and unstintingly elaborates), the technique founders on the shoals
of too much philosophizing and caricatured portrayals of the would-be censors,
and no amount of supposedly postmortem insight into their motivations mitigates
the preachy arrogance of Crutcher's own apologetics on this and other issues. The
in-jokes may nonetheless appeal to Crutcher fans, who are legion, and the ability
of this book to stimulate discussion about intellectual freedom guided by someone
who has been through challenges makes it worth adding to a collection. Ulti-
mately, this is a sideways call to understand kids like Eddie, who think a million
miles an hour and find their best friends in books, and readers may welcome that
message. KC
DEUKER, CARL 
Runner. Houghton, 2005 
[22 4p]
ISBN 0-618-54298-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
It takes money to keep afloat the cramped, decrepit sailboat Chance Taylor calls
home-money his alcoholic father doesn't reliably provide. When Chance is ap-
proached about making some easy cash by the shady "fat guy" that works at the
marina, he's desperate enough to take the offer, even though he knows down in his
bones that something illegal is afoot. Adhering to the established schedule for his
daily run, Chance picks up unmarked packages near a remote point of the Seattle
waterfront, stashes them in a locker, and finds his recompense in his backpack. He
would probably continue in this uneasy state of purposeful ignorance, except the
nature of the packages suddenly changes, and Chance suspects he's not only ferry-
ing marijuana but plastic explosives. His worst fears are confirmed when the "fat
guy" ends up dead and Chance's father becomes the tragic victim of his son's
smuggling. Although Deuker seems less comfortable on the theme of interna-
tional terrorism than on his customary high-school ball fields and courts, he still
knows his way into the corners of tormented, guilty hearts. Deuker fans won't be
disappointed, and newcomers are likely to be hooked. EB
ELLIS, SARAH 
Ben Over Night; illus. by Kim LaFave. 
Fitzhenry & Whiteside,
2005 
32p
ISBN 1-55041-807-6 
$15.95 
R 
5-7yrs
When Ben and his friend Peter get together to play, they can be anything they
want-pirates, cooks, lighter than air-but what Ben really wants to be, more
than anything, is a successful "sleepover-nighter." No matter how many times he
tries to spend the night at Peter's, he always ends up walking home under the dark
of night, Dad's hand holding tight to his. His parents and brother offer typical
solutions (bring a flashlight, bring your blankey, bring your big brother along),
but it is his older sister Robin who quietly helps him to realize that what he needs
isn't something from the outside but a change from the inside. "What is the fastest
way to get from Peter's house to our house?" she asks; the implied answer is ab-
stractly offered that night, when Ben is asleep across from Peter ("Ben yawns. Ben
sleeps. Snooze-Boy Ben dreaming himself home"). Ellis is masterful at taking very
real fears very seriously through her development of Ben; the narrative remains
spot-on kid centered (as do the illustrations-the only depiction of an adult is a
piece of Dad's leg) and there is not a drop of condescension in her careful consid-
eration of the process of overcoming fears. What's more, she has captured the
joyful effervescence of childhood, filling Ben and Peter's days with imaginary play
436 
* 
THE BULLETIN
and laughter. LaFave's comic illustrations rely on saturated colors, with red-cheeked
faces and bold fields of color filling in the thick black composition lines and set
against bright white. The pages devoted to Ben's fears are steeped in midnight
blues and black, Ben's dot eyes peering into the darkness, and the layout remains
clean and focused throughout. While the book has obvious potential as a tool for
helping little ones overcome their fears of sleeping in strange places, it would work
just as effectively as a bedtime story for the ranks of fearless sleepover-nighters.
HM
FLANAGAN, JOHN 
The Ruins ofGorlan. Philomel, 2005 
[256p]
ISBN 0-399-24454-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
As a ward of Baron Arald, orphan Will has the opportunity to be chosen by one of
the Craftmasters the year he turns fifteen. Though he desperately wants to be
picked by the head of the Battleschool, Sir Rodney, for training as a knight, he is
instead offered the chance to train with the enigmatic Ranger, Halt. In the months
following, Will learns the skills of tracking, archery, horseback riding, and stealth
from his taciturn but kindly master. Meanwhile, Will's old enemy from the castle,
Horace, is training under Sir Rodney and having troubles of his own; a couple of
encounters outside the castle provide a resolution to Will and Horace's conflict,
just before Will saves his master from two horrible beasts sent by a traitor to assas-
sinate the Ranger. That traitor is Morgarath, former Baron of Gorlan, whose plots
to conquer the made-up, medieval, very English Kingdom of Araluen will prob-
ably provide the body of the action in the rest of The Ranger's Apprentice series, of
which this is the first book. With fast pacing, plenty of action, sympathetic char-
acters and entertaining dialogue that make Will's world a highly enjoyable place to
visit, this knightly adventure offers readers enjoyment without condescension. TC
FRADIN, DENNIS BRINDELL 
Let It Begin Here!: Lexington 6& 
Concord: First Battles
ofthe American Revolution; illus. by Larry Day. 
Walker, 2005 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8946-3 
$17.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8945-5 
$16.95 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
With so many middle-grade titles available on the opening battles of the Revolu-
tion, why add another? Because Fradin has packaged the information into an
account that's just as informative but far more exciting than the standard fare.
After a half-page introduction on the state of colonial affairs in 1775, he launches
right into present-tense narration that spurs the action into full gallop. Readers
track the events as they unfold by the hour: "April 18, 1775, 9:30 P.M. Paul
Revere, a Boston silversmith and messenger for the patriots, receives an urgent
request to visit Dr. Joseph Warren's home"; "April 19, 1775, 12:00 A.M. Paul
reaches Lexington and bangs on the door of the house where Hancock and Adams
are staying. Guards outside tell Paul to stop making so much noise. 'Noise!' yells
Paul. 'You'll have noise enough before long! The regulars are coming out!"' A
who's who of prominent participants, divided according to American and British
loyalty, opens the presentation, and the list is reprised at the close with remarks on
their respective fates. However, the text highlights less-renowned heroes as well,
such as the seventy-eight-year-old Samuel Whittemore who "brings down three
redcoats before the British shoot him in the head and stab him 13 times with
bayonets. Amazingly, he survives, and lives to the age of 96." Day's deep-toned
JUNE 2005 
• 
437
watercolors, textured with fine black hatching, perfectly complement the text, in-
vigorating even those scenes often frozen in reverent tableaux with energized real-
ism. This will be a first choice for Revolutionary War enthusiasts or for anyone
who relishes a well-told war story. EB
FRIEDMAN, ROBIN 
The Silent Witness: A True Story of the Civil War; illus. by
Claire A. Nivola. 
Houghton, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-618-44230-8 
$16.00 
R 
7-10yrs
Among the intriguing footnotes to Civil War history is the story of the Wilmer
McLean family, who witnessed-perhaps "hosted" is the better term-both the
onset and conclusion of hostilities in Virginia. A Manassas farmer willing to aid
the Confederate cause, McLean allowed General Beauregard to set up headquar-
ters in his home, but when a cannonball flew into their kitchen and the first Battle
of Bull Run was fought in their backyard, the family decamped to "safer" sur-
roundings-at Appomattox Courthouse. Four years later, their new home was
used as the meeting place for General Lee's formal surrender. Lula, one of the
Wilmer children, brought her rag doll through the family's shifts of residence, and
after the doll sat in the parlor at Appomattox, it was purloined by a Union officer
as a souvenir, "the silent witness" to the solemn martial ritual. Friedman notes the
doll's presence at the beginning of her narration and again at the end but makes no
attempt to anthropomorphize its thoughts. The bulk of the text is devoted to a
recap of the battles that transpired between the book-ended McLean roles. While
this unmistakably grounds the story in history rather than legend (the doll is, in
fact, extant), it creates some ambiguity in terms of a target audience, since it is
unlikely that the doll story will fascinate war buffs, or that the battles will captivate
homey human interest seekers. Still, Nivola's delicate, naive watercolors capture
the bittersweet dignity of a family doing its best to preserve their stability and their
Cause, and the author's note that expands on the McLean family and Lula's doll is
of considerable interest in its own right. EB
GATES, SUSAN 
Dusk. Putnam, 2005 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-399-24343-7 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
When a government lab in the middle of nowhere burns down thanks to Curtis,
an alcoholic assistant, three creatures escape: General Rat, a rat with human intel-
ligence; Wolf, a guard dog; and Dusk, a girl with hawk DNA. All three take up
residence in the nearby town, which is quickly abandoned by the human residents
and surrounded with an electric fence. Wolf and General Rat become leaders,
commanding troops of killer dogs or rats, while Dusk learns to use both hawk and
human abilities to survive. Dusk and Wolf strike an uneasy alliance based on
mutual fear of General Rat-Dusk uses her hawk vision to track the rats-but the
alliance crumbles when Jay, Curtis' teenage son, finds a way inside the electric
fence. Faced with new prey, both General Rat's and Wolf's armies move out, and
Dusk must decide if she is willing to ignore her predator instincts to save Jay.
Gates' prose is often too expository, flushing out its meaning rather than allowing
readers to hunt for it, but this is nevertheless a compelling story. Dusk's sense of
self, more hawk than human despite her inability to fly, is a fragile, pitiable thing;
as such, she is a poignant character rather than a likeable one, straddling two
worlds-animal and human-and longing for wholeness she may never achieve.
438 
* THE BULLETIN
Jay and his father, loosely characterized as kind losers running from their failures,
are willing dupes, positioning themselves as Dusk's saviors and ascribing far more
humanity to Dusk than she feels; as she thinks only of escaping into the sky with
the hawks, Jay thinks, "She looked happy now. Happy to be with him, share his
new life. That was just how he wanted it to be." Pair this with James Patterson's
Maximum Ride (BCCB 4/05) to compare two very different girls with a human-
bird genetic mix. KH
GIBLIN, JAMES CROSS 
Good Brother, Bad Brother: The Story ofEdwin Booth and
John Wilkes Booth. 
Clarion, 2005 
[2 56p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-09642-6 
$22.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Edwin Booth's life as nineteenth-century America's most prominent actor would
make for an interesting biography on its own, but his story is forever entwined
with the era's greatest tragedy; John Wilkes Booth was a rising young actor whose
glamorous magnetism might well have made him a stage legend had he not en-
tered the history books a different way. Giblin explores the lives of the two broth-
ers Booth as they head off in their different directions down the acting trail, converge
occasionally in professional and family capacity, and find their conflicting political
views driving them apart even before John's assassination of the president changed
his brother's life forever. The book offers a particularly poignant picture of the
family's trials in the aftermath of the assassination, with its members considered
suspect and reviled for carrying an assassin's name, even as Edwin reimbursed the
farmer whose barn was burned during the apprehension of his brother. Giblin
eschews much of the sensationalism and exaggeration that has surrounded this bit
of history, and he clearly differentiates between speculation and verified material,
but he relates the fraternal saga with verve as well as diligence. Theater fans will be
particularly interested in this evocative picture of life on the nineteenth-century
stage, and readers looking for a different slant on the oft-told story of Lincoln's
assassination will find new riches in this personally focused account. Reproduc-
tions of a multitude of period images, which convincingly demonstrate the stage-
door appeal of both Booths, add visual luster to the pages; a bibliography and
source notes are appended, and the bound book will include an index. DS
GOING, K. L. 
The Liberation ofGabriel King. Putnam, 2005 
[160p]
ISBN 0-399-23991-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-5
It's summer of 1976, and the prospect of moving from the elementary grades into
the school's prestigious West Wing holds no glamour for Gabriel King; in fact, his
Moving Up Day from fourth to fifth grade is ruined by bully Duke Evans and his
toady, who can't wait for him to become their daily victim. Gabriel's closest friend
Frita Wilson, the only African American in his class, is determined that they will
spend their summer methodically conquering Gabriel's extensive list of fears, work-
ing their way up from the trifling problems of spiders and eighteen-wheelers to the
genuine crisis of fifth grade and Duke Evans. Gabriel makes progress by fits and
starts until one of his many anxiety nightmares involves Frita, and his sharing of
the dream with his friend elicits Frita's own confession of secret fears. Although
Frita has always appeared to Gabriel as a pillar of strength, she is deeply troubled
by the knowledge that, when she was a baby, her family was persecuted by the Ku
JUNE 2005 
* 439
Klux Klan, an event that may well recur if her new Georgia community fails to
stand up to the bigoted Evans family and rally behind the Wilsons. Within the
framework of a classic bully story, Going incorporates the themes of discriminat-
ing between frivolous and healthy fears and what freedom means in an America
that continues to harbor racial bigotry. After her strong YA debut in Fat Kid Rules
the World (BCCB 6/03), Going demonstrates an affinity with a younger reader-
ship as well. EB
GONYEA, MARK 
A Book about Design: Complicated Doesn't Make It Good; written
and illus. by Mark Gonyea. 
Holt, 2005 
140p
ISBN 0-8050-7575-5 
$18.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
This streamlined little volume walks readers through some simple precepts of de-
sign in ten succinct chapters that address concepts such as balance, contrast, shape,
and color. Each chapter focuses on a particular graphic and its development, so
that readers can see the effects of the described changes as, for instance, two col-
ored elements on a white page compete for visual supremacy by changing size,
shape, and associates, or an image begins to lose impact as added elements bury its
focus. It's a terrific and long-overdue idea, especially with the subtitular message,
and the notion of playing out the process of a particular design in step-by-step
visuals is a clever one. Unfortunately, the concepts aren't always clearly expressed
in text or chapter titles-straight lines are contrasted not with curvy lines but with
diagonals, there's sometimes too little explanation of the visual effect, and occa-
sionally the illustrations miss chances to make their point (the comparison be-
tween the effects of warm and cool colors, for instance, would have been more
successful had only the colors changed from image to image); nor is there ulti-
mately any cohesion to what's essentially a sequence of exercises. Molly Bang's
Picture This is therefore a more successful treatment of design, but the points here
are still usefully made and vividly demonstrated; the text's simplicity lends itself to
a wide variety of audiences, whether you're looking to help kids design web pages,
arrange scrapbooks, or assess illustrations. DS
GORDON, DAVID 
The Three Little Rigs; written and illus. by David
Gordon. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2005 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-058119-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-058118-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-6 yrs
When their mama rig informs them it is time they made their own way in the
world, the three little rigs go to the various materials storehouses and build them-
selves solo garages out of lumber, brick, and steel. Soon thereafter, the mean and
nasty wrecking ball visits the first rig and then the second, crushing their garages.
The steel shelter of the third requires more smash than the ball can muster alone,
so he returns the next night with his partners in crime, a magnet and a cutter.
Meanwhile, the three little rig brothers have gotten together and developed a plan,
petitioning three big cranes for help, and soon the wrecking ball, magnet, and
cutter meet a fiery end in the melting pot of the steel mill. The resolution of this
motorized version of "The Three Little Pigs" is a little confusing, since careful
perusal of the illustrations suggests that the wrecking ball and its cronies did their
dirty work while suspended from the helpful cranes' own arms. Nonetheless, the
draw of vehicular characters and the thrill of seeing villainous adversaries melted
440 * THE BULLETIN
down (in addition to the appeal of the familiar made new) should make this a
smash with the machine-loving crowd, and repetition of sentence and episode
structure further ensure enjoyment for listeners or youthful co-readers. The illus-
trations themselves, with the sheen and shading of oil paintings, show the rigs and
their fellow mechanical characters in an industrial milieu complete with hazy sun-
sets and smoky days, dark interiors of warehouses, and violent orange and yellows
of fiery furnaces. The machines' facial features are inserted so seamlessly as to
seem natural, and young viewers will delight in discovering them. Fans of truck
and machine stories, especially Gordon's own The Ugly Truckling (BCCB 7/04),
will gear up for this one. TC
GRABER, JANET 
Resistance. 
Cavendish, 2005 
138p
ISBN 0-7614-5214-1 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Marianne's family has been involved in the underground resis-
tance movement in her Normandy village since her father was killed in battle. As
the stakes begin to escalate-the Germans are occupying the town, her mother is
hiding an injured Brit in the shed, a young German soldier is stationed to live in
their home, and the head of the German unit has on more than one occasion made
lecherous advances toward her-Marianne is suddenly feeling more entrenched in
the movement than she can handle, especially given her father's parting commis-
sion to look out for her deaf younger brother. This first novel has an edgy excite-
ment born of the well-drafted first-person perspective of a young person in the
know amidst enormous danger. Marianne's specific duties are secret even to her
immediate family members, who likewise keep their activities hidden. While the
plot movement depends somewhat heavily on reckless actions (Marianne, tired of
the danger posed by hiding the fugitive Brit, brings him out into the open with the
intent of turning him in), Marianne's actions are well suited to the aura of fear and
hopelessness developed throughout the story. As the story ends, it is uncertain
whether Marianne and her mother will in fact be arrested for their resistance ac-
tions; the open-ended conclusion is simply followed by a sentence-long epilogue
stating that two years later Normandy was liberated, and readers are likely to ex-
press some dissatisfaction with the abruptness. Still, historical-fiction fans will
enjoy getting into Marianne's head and experiencing the danger of the under-
ground movement through her trials. HM
GRAFF, NANCY PRICE 
Taking Wing. 
Clarion, 2005 
[224p]
ISBN 0-618-53591-8 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
With his mother recovering in a tuberculosis sanatorium and his father away train-
ing as a pilot in order to fight in World War II, thirteen-year-old Gus is sent to
spend the summer on his grandparents' Vermont farm. Raised in Boston, he is
largely bewildered by rural living, and he's at a complete loss when he suddenly
finds himself the caregiver of a brood of baby ducks whose mother was killed
beneath his granddad's tractor. Louise Lavictoire, a French-Canadian girl from a
nearby farm, becomes his companion over the course of the summer, helping him
to care for the ducks and winning his affection and appreciation with her quiet
intelligence. This tenderly told coming-of-age story explores Gus' evolution as he
corresponds with his parents, learns about the challenges of farm life, and explores
the responsibilities of being a caregiver. While the ducks play a central role in the
JUNE 2005 * 441
plot, they also have a symbolic function, as Gus cares for the abandoned offspring
when he himself is feeling detached from his own parents. The friendship between
Gus and Louise, whose impoverished family is largely marginalized by local folks
for their Canadian ways, their French language, and their Catholic faith, is easygo-
ing and believable, with occasional conflicts rising and resolving as feelings get
hurt and mended. Gus' thoughtful observations on the natural world are evoca-
tively composed, and readers will enjoy experiencing the summer of 1942 through
his contemplative eyes. HM
HANLEY, VICTORIA 
The Light of the Oracle. Fickling/Random House,
2005 
[320p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-75087-0 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-75086-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
One of the lucky few acolytes selected for training in prophecy, fifteen-year-old
Bryn Stonecutter has been recruited by Master Priest Renchald to serve in the
Temple of the Oracle. Bryn's visions always eventually come true, a clarity of gift
that makes her valuable and dangerous to Renchald, who is secretly organizing a
political coup against the present queen and searching for a renegade acolyte, Selid,
who repeatedly prophesies Renchald's death. When Bryn is targeted by Clea, a
jealous young priestess with a talent for curses, Bryn's gift and her relationship
with would-be boyfriend Kiran (a true-hearted acolyte with considerable magical
power) are endangered. Soon after she overcomes Clea's curse, Bryn's visions of
Selid lead her and Kiran to flee the Temple, Renchald in hot pursuit, and attempt
to save Selid's life and inform the queen of Renchald's treachery. Full of social
competition and romance, this enjoyably indulgent fantasy reads like a school story.
Characterizations also reflect the school-story atmosphere: while Renchald is de-
veloped into a underhandedly controlling but outwardly benevolent headmaster-
type, Clea functions only as a vicious, selfish, lustful debutante-a role she fills to
perfection. The chase and resolution are a tad anticlimactic, but the swift return
to the Temple for Renchald's downfall quickly shores up that slippage, and the
requisite happy ending ensures reader satisfaction. Set in the same world as the
author's The Seer andthe Sword and The Healer's Keep (BCCB 2/01 and 1/03), this
third offering can be enjoyed without reference to the first two books. Maps and
a glossary are included. TC
HILLIARD, RICHARD 
Neil, Buzz, and Mike Go to the Moon.
See review under Aldrin, p. 424.
HINMAN, BONNIE A Stranger in My Own House: The Story of W E. B. Du
Bois. 
Morgan Reynolds, 2005 
176p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-931798-45-1 
$24.95 
Ad Gr. 7-10
W. E. B. Du Bois is a controversial figure in American history, clashing with such
major figures as Booker T. Washington and Marcus Garvey over the best way to
serve the interests of equality and civil rights for African Americans. Hinman
traces the development of Du Bois' ideology from his roots in a small, relatively
integrated New England community, to his eye-opening fascination with the high-
society manners of his paternal grandfather, to his education at Fisk, Harvard, and
the University of Berlin. His Marxist studies in Berlin confirmed his belief that
442 
* THE BULLETIN
the problems of the color line stemmed more from economic disparity than any-
thing else, and he thus advocated for voluntary segregation and economic self-
sufficiency for blacks in America, unpopular stances with other leaders of the time.
Eventually, Du Bois left America for Ghana, dying there amid work on a multi-
volume history of the African people. Du Bois' political beliefs were complicated
and, as Hinman admits, confusing, mostly because he advocated democracy as a
political system and communism as an economic one. His most substantial legacy
is his groundbreaking and still vibrant scholarship; Hinman is less successful in
communicating the critical importance of the paradigm shift that his studies inau-
gurated than she is at pointing out his conflicts with other political figures of the
time. As Du Bois' life was long, varied, and active, the biography may be a daunt-
ing one for many readers, especially since its rather dry accounting of his political
and scholarly activities have little accent on the passion underlying them. None-
theless, Du Bois is an important and complicated figure, and this overview will
help young people understand his legacy. A timeline, bibliography, source notes,
and index are included. KC
JOCELYN, MARTHE 
A Home for Foundlings. Lord Museum/Tundra,
2005 
120p 
illus. with photographs
Paper ed. ISBN 0-88776-709-5 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-8
Established by Thomas Coram in 1741, the Foundling Hospital of London cared
for more than 27,000 orphaned English children until the closing of its doors in
1953. Framed by the author's personal research to learn more about her own
grandfather's experience growing up there, the text explores the remarkable story
of this institution through solidly composed narrative, primary-source documen-
tation, and personal memoir. Most notable about Jocelyn's work is the focused
attention on a single orphanage; rather than attempting to provide a broad over-
view of the history of orphanages (see Reef, below), she instead follows the specific
lineage and day-to-day happenings of the Foundling Hospital, and her careful
attention to detail, thoughtful inclusion of headings to identify focal topics, and
fair balance of expository narrative and quoted material helps to illuminate those
daily occurrences. An assortment of clearly captioned archival photographs, docu-
ments, and statistical records, placed at natural breaks within the text, further sup-
port the material presented. The story told herein is a positive one: the Foundling
Hospital is represented as an industrious and efficient institution where basic needs
were met and future citizens molded. While the text would function effectively in
providing background information for a novel study or history unit, Jocelyn's sto-
rytelling style makes for an enjoyable read straight through to the payoff at the
end, when the reader learns in detail the sought-after tale of her grandfather. A
glossary, timeline, source notes, selected bibliography, and index are included. HM
JONES, CHARLOTTE FOLTZ 
Westward Ho!: Eleven Explorers ofthe West. 
Holiday
House, 2005 
233p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1586-4 
$22.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
This offering focuses on a handful of explorers, surveyors, trappers, guides, and
adventurers who directly or indirectly opened up the Western territories for settle-
ment. Five sections introduce the men who searched for a Northwest Passage,
explored the Louisiana Purchase, advanced the fur trade, influenced cross-conti-
nental expansion, and surveyed the Western deserts and canyons. Some are names
JUNE 2005 * 443
familiar from textbooks, such as Zebulon Pike, John Fremont, and John Wesley
Powell; others are more obscure, such as mountain men Jedediah Strong Smith
and Joseph Walker. Since little is known of the lives of some of the earlier explor-
ers, coverage is necessarily sketchy, but even figures for whom ample information
is available receive fairly dry, choppy treatment. Plenty of maps and historical
reproductions pepper the chapters, but captioning generally fails to specify dates
for the illustrations or to explain incongruities (for example, the depiction of George
Bradley's rescue of Major Powell while clad in a set of hastily stripped-off long
underwear shows Bradley with pants, belt, and knee boots securely in place). Al-
though these are not the most compellingly told tales of the West, corralling these
eleven explorers in one volume-with notes, bibliography, timeline, and index-
could be a boon to report writers. EB
KARR, 
KATHLEEN 
Mama Went to Jail for the Vote; illus. by Malene
Laugesen. 
Hyperion, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0593-5 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Susan Elizabeth is being raised by a tolerant, if stodgy, father and a rabid suffragist
mother. As a little girl in pigtails, she prods Mama with questions about her cause
("Will you carry cigars and hang around the saloon when you have the vote?"),
enjoys watching Mama ride a white horse on a Women's Rights march, and per-
haps best of all, throws eggs at the boys who throw tomatoes at her mother. As
Susan Elizabeth grows older and Mama's activities continue unabated, the girl
begins to understand the seriousness of the cause and the determination of its
proponents, especially when her mother is hauled off to jail for six months ("She
accepted her punishment. Then she went right back to the war, right back to
carrying banners in front of the White House. I did too"). The plot is laden with
contrivance, and the gravity of the topic is undermined by Susan Elizabeth's ten-
dency toward pertness; Laugesen's incongruously lighthearted scenes, in which
parlor busts of early suffragists look upon the domestic ado with wry sternness,
make the whole movement look rather like an entertaining romp. Still, until read-
ers are old enough for Bausum's With Courage and Cloth (BCCB 1/05), this pri-
mary-grade look at the final drive for the Nineteenth Amendment offers a useful
introduction to an important moment in American history. EB
KILAKA, JOHN 
Fresh Fish: A Tale from Tanzania; written and illus. by John
Kilaka. 
Groundwood, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88899-656-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
After a long day fishing, Sokwe Chimpanzee heads home, eagerly anticipating the
money his successful haul will bring at the village market the next day. When Dog
eyes the catch longingly, Sokwe generously offers his friend a nice fat fish, only to
have Dog steal from his basket at the market the next day; when Lion observes the
theft, he breaks his leg in running to catch the miscreant. After a few plot disrup-
tions (taking Lion to the hospital, attending the Junior Soccer Championship),
the animals find Dog asleep in a tree surrounded by an assortment of fish bones;
they take him back to the village where a trial is held, Dog found guilty on all
counts, a sentence given, and all transgressions forgiven as the animals eat and
celebrate together. This unusual Tanzanian story, here in its first English transla-
tion, is chock-full of startling plot disjoint; instead of following a familiarly folk-
444 
* THE BULLETIN
loric pattern of betrayal and forgiveness, the narrative tends to lose focus and get
lost in its own wordiness. Yet somehow this is forgivable, given the element of
joyful chaos that accompanies the story. There's further compensation for the
lacking narrative structure in the vibrant, activity-filled illustrations, strikingly com-
posed in the Tingatinga style (whereby bicycle paint is applied to masonite). Full-
page paintings, each individually signed by the illustrator (who is likely more
recognized for his painting than his writing), face opposite pages of text and fea-
ture detailed caricatures of the animals, rendered in bold colors and traditionally
patterned Tanzanian fabric designs, set against backdrops of muted stripes of sky,
grass, and ground. The anthropomorphized animals fit neatly into their commu-
nity roles, providing young listeners with an offbeat portrait of village life in East
Africa. HM
KINERK, ROBERT 
Timothy Cox Will Not Change His Socks; illus. by Stephen
Gammell. 
Wiseman/Simon, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-689-87181-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Timothy Cox is a boy who finishes what he starts, and when he decides to go a
whole month without changing his socks (just to see what happens), no amount of
cajoling, threatening, lawmaking, or picketing on the part of his classmates, teach-
ers, family, and neighbors will change his mind. Kinerk's wacky tale of persistence
in the face of good sense unfolds in sizeable blocks of rhyming couplets comprising
both sophisticated and colloquial vocabulary ("The air... the air, Tim, it's tainted!"
versus "the guys at the station" who send out "'copters" to pester Timothy), result-
ing in a stylistic hodgepodge with plenty of verve, if not rhythmic consistency.
Timothy's loyal and long-suffering talking dachshund supplies ironic commen-
tary throughout, while Timothy himself revels in the vigorous reaction to his ex-
periment and swears to see the venture through. Gammell's watercolor-and-ink
illustrations preserve the off-the-wall tone of the text; an oozing and splattering
stream of virulent lemon-lime (representing his socks' growing smell) meanders
from Timothy's feet across the landscape, offending and overwhelming everyone
within sniffing distance. The wobbly buildings and pudgy people, viewed in non-
traditional planes, increase the sense of off-centeredness. Though the story runs
on rather long, and its final advice to readers (to be finishers themselves) is rather
patronizingly worded, Timothy's breeziness and the quirky charisma of the illus-
trations make this a clear choice for recommendation to aficionados of Silverstein
and Prelutsky. TC
LAGUNA, SOFIE 
Surviving Aunt Marsha. Scholastic, 2005 
202p
ISBN 0-439-64485-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
In this Australian import, Tina, Vince, and Aidan are left for three weeks at the
mercy of their officious aunt Marsha while their parents renew their vows in Paris.
Marsha is as bad as expected-she feeds the children bitter grapefruit juice and
repulsive kidney pie, she banishes their beloved dog from the house, and she pro-
hibits television watching and all other fun. As Tina is nearly twelve and therefore
responsible for her little brothers, she does her best to keep a stiff upper lip, remain
polite to Aunt Marsha no matter the provocation, and help her siblings do the
same, even if it means sneaking Vince out to the doghouse every night to comfort
their exiled pet-but even Tina can't keep the peace when Aunt Marsha throws
away Aidan's comic-book collection. As the big sister who is also a born "noticer,"
JUNE 2005 * 445
Tina delivers dynamic play-by-plays, humorous commentary, and illustrative family
stories with just the right combination of resentment against Aunt Marsha, con-
cern for her brothers, yearning for her friends, and the occasional surprised obser-
vation that Aunt Marsha may be more human than she seems. Those observations
set the stage for the dramatic climax and resolution, involving a too-high tree-
house, a violent storm, a pulley and harness, and a heroic rescue of the repentant
Aunt Marsha, who has gotten herself stuck up the tree while trying to save Aidan
(who scurried down the back way). Foreshadowing notwithstanding, Aunt Marsha's
subsequent conversion into a decent person with a penchant for tai chi and soccer
is a bit much to swallow; however, the change of heart experienced thereafter by
the three siblings flows logically from their previous characterization, reinforcing
the believability of the narrative. Tina's chatty narration, offered in short chap-
ters, makes this a story that will go down easily when read aloud as well as when
independently enjoyed. TC
LANGTON, JANE 
The Mysterious Circus. HarperCollins, 2005 
[2 2 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-009487-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-009486-9 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-6
The much-storied Hall family (first introduced in The Diamond in the Window,
BCCB 10/62) is witness to yet another magical adventure originating with Uncle
Krishna in India but swelling to realization in their long-suffering front hall. Ad-
vised by garbled phone conversation that Uncle Krishna is sending them a gift by
messenger, the Halls fail to recognize that messenger in Andy, who conceals his
identity from them for reasons of his own. Andy, who rides a unicycle and pulls
living, fully grown elephants from a tiny seed, directs the local kids to form a
"Misterious Circus" to entertain the townsfolk of Concord, Massachusetts. Andy's
power is such that the children and their circus animals (which include a Tyranno-
saurus rex, a brontosaurus, and a woolly mammoth) are able to drive off the con-
struction workers and vehicles sent by a giant corporation (Dizzy Enterprises) to
bulldoze the Mill Brook meadow and create instead a Thoreau theme park. With
the exception of the antagonist, Matilda Macintosh, who spearheads the theme-
park plan in order to get the Halls out of their house, the adults in this child-
centered narrative are agreeably helpless and hopeless, allowing their children to
caper about in the big top as well as save the day. Andy's eventual revelation of his
true identity as Krishna's nephew, Ananda, completes the circle of the story and
provides him with a reason to abscond with the elephant-bearing seed that was
presumably intended to be the gift for the Halls. Both readaloud audiences and
independent readers will exult in the atmosphere of the Hall family's world, where
anything is possible and all things are probable. TC
LASKY, KATHRYN 
Broken Song. Viking, 2005 
154p
ISBN 0-670-05931-5 
$15.99 
R Gr. 5-8
Lasky flashes back nearly a quarter century to create not a sequel or prequel, but a
parallel to her novel The Night Journey (BCCB 12/81). She follows the life of
Reuven Bloom, a gifted teen violinist from the Russian Pale of Settlement, who
witnesses the murder of his parents and elder sister in a pogrom and escapes with
his baby sister to tenuous safety with a distant relative, Lovotz Sperling, in Vilna.
He comes to admire Lovotz and his work with the revolutionary Bund, and when
446 * THE BULLETIN
Lovotz is murdered on the street Reuven takes up his cause, sending his sister off to
America and remaining in Vilna himself to serve the Bund as a Firebrand, sabotag-
ing Russian army equipment. On a temporary assignment, he helps to feed and
redirect a refugee family, and here the tale overlaps with Night Journey, for the
family he shelters is Sashie's. The child who recognizes the music in his soul will,
when they meet again after Reuven's emigration to America, become his wife,
great-grandmother to NightJourney's narrator Rachel. The stories converge with-
out a trace of gimmickry, and although Reuven's seven years, beginning here in
1897, rush by leaving details in a bit of a blur, there's no minimizing the treachery
and peril he survives. Readers unfamiliar with The Night Journey can easily begin
the adventure here and backtrack to the "original" next. EB
LERANGIS, PETER 
Smiler's Bones. 
Scholastic, 2005 
14 7p
ISBN 0-439-34485-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7 up
Minik was six years old in 1897, when he and five other Eskimos, including his
father, were brought to New York by famed explorer Robert Peary; four Eskimos,
including Minik's father, soon died, and one returned to Greenland, leaving Minik
to be raised alone in New York (mostly in the care of the family of William Wallace,
the superintendent of the Museum of Natural History). Now nineteen years old,
a troubled Minik arrives in Quebec City, hoping, after an unsuccessful suicide
attempt, to find transport back to Greenland-and to elicit the return of his father's
bones, which were not, as young Minik had been assured, buried with reasonable
attention to tradition but instead put on display in the museum. The book deftly
interweaves Minik's past and present into a haunting chronicle of a boy caught
between two worlds ("My heart is still that of a Smith Sound Eskimo, and there I
live with the comfort of snow, the excitement of the hunt, and the extremeness of
light and dark. But my brain is, I'm afraid to say, a New Yorker's. And I feel my
soul, like the winter sun, slipping, slipping, below the horizon"). Ultimately, though,
Lerangis conceives and creates this as a tale of hard-won resilience and hope rather
than annihilation, and the darkness is counterbalanced with human goodness and
touches of quiet humor. The book is straightforward about the destruction wrought
in the name of exploration and science, but the moral assessments are nuanced;
there's no cultural adulation of Minik's community and its ways, and "Uncle"
Will Wallace, despite being complicit in the museum's mistreatment of Eskimo
remains, genuinely loves his foster son. Readers with some historical background
will have a tremendous advantage here, since the book limits its contextual expla-
nation and focuses instead on Minik's emotional experience. With this perspec-
tive, the story brings moving echoes ofIshi, Ota Benga, and others who've struggled
with being representatives of a lifeway to which they can never return, as well as
being a compelling chronicle of one young man's almost overwhelming experi-
ence. An extensive note from Lerangis explains his research and approach to his
topic, and a list of relevant books and films is appended. DS
LEWIS, MAGGIE 
Morgy Coast to Coast; illus. by Michael Chesworth. 
Houghton,
2005 
[80p]
ISBN 0-618-44896-9 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Good things have happened to Morgy since his cross-country move to Massachu-
setts-he's getting a chance to try his skills at hockey, he's buddies with classmate
JUNE 2005 * 447
Byron, and he's finally acquired a dog. He's still not entirely sure of Byron's
friendship, however, especially since Morgy isn't up to local standards of hockey
playing, and Byron's uncle, the regular hockey coach, is away fighting fires in
California. As she did in the previous Morgy book (Morgy Makes His Move, BCCB
10/99), Lewis expertly captures the pell-mell randomness of life and its trials with-
out turning Morgy's narration into a frenetic jokefest. Plot threads about grey-
hound rescue, trumpet playing, Morgy's free-spirited aunt, Byron's heroic uncle
(who eventually gets together with Morgy's aunt), and Morgy's hockey weave com-
fortably together, united by Morgy's general and highly sympathetic anxiety about
the challenges his life is bringing him. Easygoing humor ("I felt like I'd never
eaten in my whole life," says a breakfast-deprived Morgy) helps take the edge off
the tension for readers if not necessarily for Morgy. With his modest doses of
insecurity and general likeability, Morgy continues to be a great easy-reader friend
for the uncertain and cocksure alike. Illustrations avoid turning the kids into
cartoons but emphasize the humor by investing humans and animals alike with
wide-eyed liveliness. DS
LION, MELISSA 
Upstream. Lamb, 2005 
149p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90877-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-74643-1 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr. 8-12
As Martha's senior year begins in Homer, Alaska, she is just barely dealing with the
recent loss of her boyfriend, Steven. Small clues are sprinkled in the early chapters
indicating a tragic death having to do with a hunting accident, but it isn't until late
in the novel that the reader learns that the gun was in fact in Martha's hands when
a bullet ricocheted, hitting Steven. This is a powerful novel of deeply integrated
sadness and beauty; as Martha goes through the process of mourning, the Alaskan
wilderness plays a significant role, infiltrating her consciousness and identity. Told
in first person, the story is studded with flashbacks, recollected conversation with
Steven, and memories of the accident. The side characters are carefully developed
so as to enrich the reader's understanding of Martha, from her younger sister Dottie,
who is as unquestionably devoted to Martha as she is blunt and self-assured, to
Katherine, the recently divorced Californian who wants to be a "real Alaska girl"
and runs the movie theater where Martha works, to Mr. Martin, a compassionate
teacher who supports Martha in his own quiet way. Martha does move forward,
thanks in part to the love and strength of those around her, and as she comes to
realize that the person she misses most of all is the person she used to be, she is able
to begin the process of healing. The shift toward this healing is utterly moving,
and this is a penetrating novel of loss and recovery that will stay with the reader
long after the last pages. HM
MADDEN, KERRY 
Gentle's Holler. Viking, 2005 
237p
ISBN 0-670-05998-6 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Livy Two enjoys the chaos of her big family. Wrapped in the love of her poet and
musician father, her pragmatic mother, and a whole passel of brothers and sisters,
she plays her guitar and writes songs to soften the hunger in her belly and to ease
the fears they all have that her little sister, Gentle, can't see right. Things do and
don't get better when Grandma Horace shows up, ragging on Daddy's unwilling-
ness to earn a steady paycheck to support his family. She stays on to help Mama
manage her brood, which isn't easy with Daddy off pursuing his dream of becom-
448 
* THE BULLETIN
ing a musician. Tragedy strikes when Daddy is left in a coma following a car crash,
but the family perseveres. Certainly, a period story (the book is set in the 1960s)
about a poor family in the Smokies with a blind child, a heroic dog, and a daddy in
a coma is a recipe for a book with as much corn in it as the pone they have to eat
every night, but Madden manages to belay much of the maudlin sentimentality by
injecting a healthy and often humorous sense of self-awareness into each of the
characters. The children are outspoken and clearheaded; they grimly accept the
fact that outsiders find their mountain poverty quaint, and they use that attitude
to sell sister Louise's paintings and Mama's hand-knit sweaters to tourists. None-
theless, they believe in the dignity of their arts, and though they question Daddy's
never-ending optimism about selling his songs in Nashville, they are infected by it
as well, with good reason, as their role models include Dolly Parton and Patsy
Cline. In fact, the biographies of these singers not only lend credibility to Livy
Two's dreams, but also to the story itself. The rough-and-tumble warmth of a
large family, the dreams of a young artist, and the persistence of love and faith in
hard times recommend this big-hearted novel to multiple audiences. KC
MADISON, BENNETT 
Lulu Dark Can See through Walls. 
Razorbill, 2005 
[256p]
ISBN 1-59514-010-7 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
At sixteen, Lulu Dark is convinced that she is one of a kind. When Alfy Romero,
lead singer of The Many Handsomes, arranges for a flunky to give her his phone
number at a concert, she takes it as proof of her uniqueness. However, Lulu's
purse-containing the phone number-is stolen, preventing a call, and when she
runs into Alfy on the street, he doesn't remember her. The rest of the city does
remember Lulu; in fact, they remember her doing things she never did, to the
point that it seems as if someone else is living Lulu's life (she even gets a call on her
cell phone from a person who claims to be Lulu and who wants her phone back).
Although less than keen to become a "girl detective," this intrepid teen is not
about to let anyone put something over on her, and she and two pals-one of
whom, a guy named Charlie, is a potential love interest-set out to solve the mys-
tery of the double Lulu. As a gutsy, optimistic rich girl, decent to the core, with a
tough exterior and an unfortunate gift for giving offense, Lulu Dark is immedi-
ately likeable. Her slapdash style of investigation heightens the comic tone of the
story even as the stakes are raised with the stalking of Lulu by an unknown party
and the discovery of a dead body in the bay matching the description of the miss-
ing purse thief. Strong but not condemnatory emphasis on the irony of claiming
uniqueness via makeup and clothing will find resonance with many teenagers, and
an ongoing feud with a classmate and the beginnings of a romance give the tale
additional pull. Recommend this gem to all readers into detection and/or ro-
mance among the rich and slightly famous. TC
MARCANTONIO, PATRICIA SANTOS, ad. 
RedRidin'in the Hood: and Other Cuentos;
illus. by Renato Alarcao. 
Farrar, 2005 
185p
ISBN 0-374-36241-6 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
A Pan-Latino cultural spin enlivens eleven folktales from non-Latino traditions in
this dynamic and humorous collection. In "Emperador's New Clothes," a con-
ceited high-schooler shows his classmates that coolness is, embarrassingly, only
skin-deep; in "El Dia de los Muertos," an Aztec husband braves the wrath of the
JUNE 2005 * 449
war god Huitzilopochtli to retrieve the soul of his beloved wife, only to lose her
when he dares to look back. "Hymie and Gabriela" best the gluttonous witch of
the desert and return to live happily ever after with their grateful and repentant
father, while a very different witch of the desert nabs the prince for herself in a
revisionist version of "Sleeping Beauty." Vigorous characters, an affable narrative
voice, and vivid details suggesting a range of Latino settings make this volume a
standout offering-Latino and other readers (and listeners) will laugh out loud at
the witty descriptions that pepper these cleverly reworked stories. Numerous elabo-
rate illustrations ornament the collection, their energetic, fluid lines and heavy
shading emphasizing personality and movement. This short, sparkling book will
find a ready fan base. A glossary of Spanish words is included. TC
MARCUM, LANCE 
The Cottonmouth Club. 
Farrar, 2005 
328p
ISBN 0-374-31562-0 
$18.00 
R Gr. 5-7
Mitch is nearly twelve, and his parents have just announced that this summer, the
family will leave California to visit his mom's relatives in "Lousyana." Once there,
smart-mouthed Mitch can't keep his trap shut, but his easygoing, farm-bred cous-
ins cut him enough slack (between daring him to race an ornery Brahma bull and
encouraging him to play Tarzan on an unpredictable rope swing) that Mitch even-
tually warms up to Louisiana life. However, his reckless nature leads him to trust
too much in the town bad boy, Finn, who with his pals encourages Mitch to drink
and drive, climb a dangerously high water tower, and dare a creek full of cotton-
mouths. Mitch's world is crammed with the artifacts and attitudes of the early
'60s, and the day-by-day details of his summer shine with halcyon glory. Mitch
takes all of that for granted, explaining very few of the abundant cultural details in
his chatty first-person narration-an authorial strategy that creates a high level of
verisimilitude while avoiding preachiness. Mitch's actions and commentary reveal
him as intelligent and rambunctious, quick to lose his temper but slow to hold a
grudge. Though he does learn quite a lot about human nature while in Louisiana,
this is not a problem novel; rather, it is an adventure yarn within a specific histori-
cal space, comparable in quality and atmosphere with Peck's A Long Way from
Chicago (BCCB 10/98). TC
MARTIN, 
DAVID 
Piggy and Dad Go Fishing; illus. 
by Frank
Remkiewicz. 
Candlewick, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-7636-2506-X 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
It's Piggy's first father-and-son fishing trip, and he's bursting with enthusiasm, at
least until he realizes just what it actually entails. First, there's this worm busi-
ness-it's impossible to stick a friendly little wiggler with a big grin onto a hook.
Next, there's the patience thing. Dad explains, "A fish has to be hungry. It has to
think about eating. It has to find the bait. It has to look at the bait and think
about it and say to itself, That looks pretty tasty." And when you do get lucky
enough to land your prize (after Dad's spill into the drink), that fish locks eyes
with you so sadly that you just have to toss him back. Even Dad hasn't looked at
the fishing experience quite this way before, and the tenderhearted pair reach an
agreement to forego the much anticipated "delicious fried fresh fish" and settle for
sandwiches instead, pitching bread bits into the water and attracting so many tak-
ers that a new sport is invented. "This is fun," admits Dad. "Why didn't I ever
450 
* THE BULLETIN
think of feed-the-fish fishing?", and the next day they're back again, this time with
doughnuts. Remkiewicz's pencil-and-watercolor-limned duo are two convincingly
ordinary porcine Joes-Piggy, with his spindly legs proudly but unnecessarily en-
cased in bright yellow boots; Dad, sporting a Hawaiian shirt and a lure-bedizened
porkpie (yes, porkpie) hat. While more traditional young sportsmen will favor
Claudia Mills' Gus and Grandpa Go Fishing (BCCB 10/03), squeamish anglers
will happily follow Martin down by the riverside. EB
McKAY, HILARY 
Permanent Rose. 
McElderry, 2005 
[240p]
ISBN 1-4169-0372-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-9
See this month's Big Picture, p. 423, for review.
MCNEILL, J. D. 
The Last Codfish. 
Holt, 2005 
183p
ISBN 0-8050-7489-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-9
It's been seven years since Tut's mother was lost at sea in a family boating accident,
but the memories and self-blame have kept him from uttering a word ever since.
Instead, he sends his mother original poems and lonely letters, sealed in his father's
empty liquor bottles and entrusted to the waves. Now fifteen years old, Tut does
his best to care for himself and his alcoholic father, a Maine fisherman whose daily
take isn't enough to feed and clothe both of them. The pair has little to do with
outsiders until Tut's inner silence is penetrated by the overtures of a lonely neigh-
bor girl, Alex. Soon a new English teacher, intrigued by Tut's gift for poetry,
insists his knowledge, ability, and personality be tested. Though the tests open
new doors for Tut, it is Alex's need for him and his near-loss of her that finally give
him back his speech. Tut's reticence and almost autistic behavior may initially
block entry by some readers, but within thirty pages his strange behavior and stark
inner landscape make sense, and within sixty pages Alex makes sufficient inroads
into Tut's world to wake him up and give readers a reason to like and identify with
him. Tut offers some unexpectedly acerbic and humorous comments, and the
narrative draw of his growing attachment to Alex is enhanced by her genuine like-
ability and need for his affection. The denouement is a bit rushed, with some
important events occurring offstage, but the skill with which the rest of the story is
told outweighs the unevenness of the ending. Obvious correlations can be drawn
between this book and Anderson's Speak (BCCB 10/99), but this story, with its
emphasis on a redemptive relationship, has more in common with Randle's The
Only Alien on the Planet (BCCB 3/95), and fans of such rescue dramas will be
gratified by Tut's finding of his own voice. TC
MEYER, ADAM 
The Last Domino. Putnam, 2005 
[240p]
ISBN 0-399-24332-1 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Life seems to keep getting worse for Travis Ellroy: his shocked and bitter parents
refuse to discuss the suicide of Richie, his older brother, and Travis has been en-
gaging in some malicious mischief that's damaged the car of a bullying classmate,
who's also the sheriffs son. He's therefore quick to find a kindred spirit in new
classmate Daniel, whose cool negativity and relentless cynicism echo not only Travis'
darker impulses but also the voice of Richie, which he keeps hearing in his head. A
humiliating rejection from the girl he likes fuels his anger, but Travis seems un-
JUNE 2005 
* 
451
aware that it's really Daniel feeding the flames, playing people against one other
and weaving a fabric of lies in a sociopathic desire to wind Travis up to violence-
with a result that exceeds even Daniel's expectations. The theme and the multivocal
narrative, which combines Travis' first-person account with transcripts of police
interviews and another character's journal, recall Myers' Shooter (BCCB 6/04),
while the notion of the deliberate catalyst of trouble goes back to Duncan's Killing
Mr. Griffin and beyond. This novel doesn't quite rise to those high standards,
however: the contrivance is somewhat too obvious here, both in the sometimes
awkward interpolated material and in the plotting; Travis seems so obviously a
ticking bomb that Daniel's intervention is largely superfluous, as some kind of
mayhem was inevitable regardless. There's still fascination in seeing Daniel ex-
ecute his psychological game and in the mounting tension as the book builds to-
ward the inevitable, foreshadowed (and extremely violent-Travis kills both his
parents before taking the gun to school and turning it on his classmates) tragedy.
This may therefore intrigue fans of Giles' Shattering Glass (BCCB 5/02) and other
dramas of dark doom. DS
MICHAEL, LivI 
The Whispering Road. Putnam, 2005 
[33 6 p]
ISBN 0-399-24357-7 
$17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-9
Initially abandoned by their mother at a workhouse, Joe and his sister Annie then
narrowly escape death at the hands of their abusive adoptive family before taking
to the road. Little Annie, who is a talented medium, is accepted by a traveling
carnival troupe, which unfortunately fails to welcome Joe; feeling unwanted, he
leaves Annie there against her will and joins a gang of street children. Joe's later
adventures include an Oliver Twist-like stint in a fine Victorian household (though
Joe's upper-class rescuer is merely interested in Joe's potential to rise above his
breeding), a painful reunion with Annie and their dead mother's spirit, and the
final adoption of Joe and his sister by a battle-scarred agitator for the rights of the
poor. Joe's inner struggles make him a sympathetic narrator, and Annie manages
to be both offputtingly fey and touchingly vulnerable. The sweeping scope of
their realistically danger-fraught saga means a hefty page count, but the action
takes right off and stays high as the siblings bash their original captor's head in
with a shovel and then run for their lives into the freezing night, pursued by hunt-
ing dogs; touches of eerie mysticism add to the atmosphere. The concluding events,
though based in historical occurrences, smack too much of serendipity-still, readers
invested in the siblings' well-being will be glad to see the characters reach a safe
haven. This fantastically touched story of the past could be a capable companion
for Aiken's Wolves of Willoughby Chase series. A glossary and author's note are
included. TC
MITCHARD, JACQUELYN 
Rosalie, My Rosalie: The Tale ofa Duckling; illus. by John
Bendall-Brunello. 
HarperCollins, 2005 
118p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072220-7 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072219-3 
$15.99 
R Gr. 2-4
Despite the fact that they named their only daughter Henry, nine-year-old Henry's
parents assure her that they did not want a boy and that they are perfectly happy
with their quiet, uneventful lives. Henry, however, is bored, and she lets them
know that it would be all right with her if they got a pet or a baby or something to
452 
* THE BULLETIN
spice things up. While delivering vegetables to a restaurant, her dad rescues a
duckling from a chef, and things get lively indeed. The duckling imprints on
Henry, who learns what it takes to care for a pet that is difficult to train and
control. Ultimately, though, Rosalie grows too big and too bored to stay in the
limited spaces Henry can offer, and Henry has to find a new home for her beloved
pet. Meanwhile, her parents have taken their daughter's advice, and by the time
Rosalie settles into her new home a baby brother has entered Henry's life. (Yes,
Henry has a bit too much power over her parents.) This story of duck love, remi-
niscent of Errol Broome's Drusilla the Lucky Duck (BCCB 12/03), provides more
than enough episodic mayhem to keep new readers turning the pages; from an
adorable Rosalie in diapers to coo over to a battered Rosalie nearly pecked to death
by her wild cousins, readers are led through a range of emotions that mirror the
bittersweet experience of having a pet of one's own. Black-and-white illustrations
milk the cuteness of the domesticated duck for all its worth, but they also show her
comically fierce side as she chases the mailman and bites a boy's toe. Though the
refrain Henry creates for Rosalie as their special song is a bit cheesy, Henry is
tenacious and wise when it comes to caring and advocating for her pet. Animal-
loving kids will find this tale just ducky. KC
MOORE, PETER 
Caught in the Act. 
Viking, 2005 
260p
ISBN 0-670-05990-0 
$16.99 
R Gr. 7-10
Ethan's buttoned-down, uptight world goes decidedly haywire when a new girl
walks into his high school. His comfortable relationship with his girlfriend, Jane,
is thrown off-kilter as he finds himself drawn to the enigmatic, mercurial Lydia,
who claims his attention through a shared passion for acting. Ethan comes from a
family where dinners are more like daily inquisitions, and his dawning realization
that he is not as smart as the other members of his family means Lydia's entrance is
a welcome compensation. She helps him maintain his charade of being an honors
chemistry student on his way to med school by blackmailing his teacher even while
she encourages him to slough off his plastic persona of perfect son. Convinced
that she understands him in some deep way that everyone else misses, Ethan leans
into Lydia's mystery, only to find that it masks some serious emotional chaos. The
results are suitably dramatic for two would-be thespians: Lydia stages what she
hopes will be an onstage murder/suicide during a rendition ofMacbeth. Narrative
suspense begins at their first meeting; even Ethan knows that this will end badly,
the only question being how. Moore creates a credible inner world for Ethan, who
is eaten up by his attraction for Lydia, even though he knows it is probably danger-
ously stupid. His desire to be known and loved is right on target, making his
vulnerability as well as his retreat entirely believable. Lydia's is a less successful
characterization; since the acceleration of her mental illness has all taken place
conveniently offstage and elsewhere, the momentum of her deterioration is too
quick. However, for those who appreciate a little less mellow muddying up their
drama, this is a good choice. KC
MORTON-SHAW, CHRISTINE 
The Riddles of Epsilon. Tegen/HarperCollins,
2005 
375p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-072820-5 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-072819-1 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 6-8
New residents on an isolated English island, fourteen-year-old Jess and her parents
JUNE 2005 * 
453
are caught up in a centuries-old struggle for local supremacy between the forces of
good and evil. Jess is haunted by Epsilon, a ghostly presence that guides her-by
means of riddles-to uncover an ancient mystery and prevent an approaching
doom. Her mother is overcome by a peculiar sickness that causes her to draw
image after image of a woman's frightened face and to retrieve from the beach
thousands of seashells, which she then carefully arranges in delicate paths in and
around their house. Jess' dad is unable to understand what troubles the women in
his family; he focuses instead on capturing starkly beautiful snapshots of a black
swan that has come to rest on a nearby lake. In the ensuing battle, Jess' mother is
designated as a human sacrifice to the black swan (who is really the incarnation of
evil) but is saved at the last minute by a golden eagle (the incarnation of good).
Presented in a combination of diary and chatroom formats, the fantasy story re-
ceives regular infusions of suspense with Epsilon's riddles, and Jess's growing con-
cern for her mother, as well as her mistrust of Epsilon (and everyone else), maintains
that tension. The riddles themselves contain multiple coded messages readers may
enjoy deciphering (though the answers are always provided a few pages later).
Characterization is somewhat limited, but Jess' personality is tangential to the plot,
which, focused as it is on the solving of riddles and the saving of innocents from
ravening evil, will sweep readers into the action on its own. TC
MOSLEY, WALTER 
47. 
Little, 2005 
232p
ISBN 0-316-11035-3 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
While running to the slave quarters one day, 47, a field slave, meets a strangely
colored man who calls himself Tall John and who tells the startled young man that
it is his destiny to free his people. Although the other slaves wonder whether Tall
John might in fact be High John the Conqueror of legend, Tall John assures them
that 47 is the chosen one. 47 must be convinced of his destiny if he is going to
fulfill it, however, and therefore Tall John must teach him that his enslavement is
more a matter of the mind than the body. Tall John also takes 47 on spiritual
journeys to his home planet to explain the nature of another, more dangerous
conflict being played out on Earth: a rogue race of beings called the Calash are
threatening to tear open the fabric of the universe if John's people, the Talam,
can't stop them. Wall, the leader of the Calash, has come to Earth and taken over
the body of a slave owner in order to find Tall John, who has received a prophecy
that 47 is the only one who can stop Wall; therefore the cosmic battle between
Wall and 47 takes the earthly form of a slave rebellion. 47's metamorphosis from
a hopeless, abused slave to a strong, loving hero is believably rendered as he is
taught through the careful ministrations of John, who is a beautiful and wise, if
not infallible, soul. Mosley, best known for his adult detective novels, combines a
carefully measured brutality with 47's patient explanations to highlight slavery's
excesses from the perspectives of both the owners and the owned. Tall John adopts
various personae at will-to Master Tobias, he is a shuffling, grateful slave, to
fellow slaves, he is a merry trickster, and to 47, he is an articulate, caring friend
with an urgent agenda to save the world and a powerful message about what it
means to be free. Combining African-American folklore, history, and science fic-
tion, Mosley creates an original tale that speaks to multiple audiences on multiple
levels, one that lands squarely and soundly in the gap caused by the paucity of
black fantasy and science fiction for young adults. KC
454 
* 
THE BULLETIN
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
Simply Sarah:Anyone Can Eat Squid!; illus. by Marcy
Ramsey. 
Cavendish, 2005 
76p
ISBN 0-7614-5182-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Sarah's third-grade lament is that she is utterly ordinary-just a plain old girl. Her
hair is not red, her skin is not the color of cocoa, and she can't count in Chinese.
Nothing she imagines or tries breaks her out of her ordinary rut, until she finds
that her favorite Chinese restaurant may be closing due to a lack of customers. She
works out the logical conundrum of having to advertise to get customers and hav-
ing to have customers in order to be able to afford to advertise, and she comes up
with a solution that earns her a spot at the restaurant's celebration table, reserved
for someone special. As usual, Naylor nails her protagonist's psychological profile
exactly; a third-grader suffering from a lack of distinctiveness makes for an utterly
believable character. A bit of stereotyping haunts the characterization of friend
Peter's feisty grandmother, but Peter himself provides a nice counterpoint to Sarah's
ambition, as he is perfectly happy to be ordinary. Chubby, cheerful third-grade
faces peek out of black-and-white illustrations that contribute complementary story
information. Naylor's elegant resolution of Sarah's existential predicament is what
makes this novel noteworthy; instead of Sarah standing out for some undiscovered
athleticism or artistic talent, she achieves distinction through creative problem
solving and community action, enlisting the help of her mom and setting things in
motion behind the scenes. This subtle introduction to the idea of doing well
through doing good won't necessarily unseat the quest to be the next WWF super-
star or American Idol, but it does offer an affirming alternative for the elementary-
school realist. KC
Nix, GARTH 
Drowned Wednesday. 
Scholastic, 2005 
389p
ISBN 0-439-70086-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Having just had his broken leg set in a super-resilient new cast, young Arthur
Penhaligon (from Mister Monday, BCCB 1/04, and Grim Tuesday) is whisked
away to the Border Seas to confront the third of the Morrow Days, who are pow-
erful rulers of a magical alternate universe called the House (and who correlate to
the seven deadly sins). Summoned to lunch with Drowned Wednesday, Arthur is
accidentally lost at sea atop his floating hospital bed, his feisty friend Leaf taken in
his place. Touching a painted buoy (marking buried treasure) leaves Arthur's
hands a permanent red and incurs the wrath of Feverfew, a ferocious pirate who
pursues Arthur through parallel universes, enslaving all in his path, including Leaf.
Aided by a second-rate sorcerer and a band of civilized, mercantile rats interested
in scientific discovery, Arthur evades Feverfew and keeps his appointment with the
vast Lady Wednesday, who was cursed with incurable gluttony and who now cruises
the Border Seas as a gigantic white whale. Briefly resuming her human form,
Wednesday offers Arthur a deal: she will give him the Third Key, a potent token
of power, if he will find the Will (stolen by the other Days) and then use the Key
to heal her. This panoply of narrative elements, some of which may recall other
classic tales, coalesces into a surprisingly coherent as well as funny and fast-moving
adventure fantasy. The complicated magical world becomes straightforward when
seen through Arthur's eyes, and the silliness and innocence of the indigenous hu-
manoids known as Denizens soften-but do not defuse-the danger inherent in
each new life-threatening crisis. Arthur himself takes decisive, saving action with-
out becoming a superboy, and his friends Leaf and the returning Suzy Blue lend
JUNE 2005 
* 455
strong female support. This third book in the Keys to the Kingdom series is a
smart and sassy offering; with two previous published predecessors and the possi-
bility of several sequels, it is a natural choice for fantasy buffs who hunger for a tale
of leviathan proportions. TC
PAPADEMETRIOU, LISA 
Sixth-Grade: Glommers, Norks, and Me. 
Hyperion,
2005 
[2 2 4p]
ISBN 0-7868-5769-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Best friends Allie and Tamara don't have a whole lot in common; Allie's a soccer
jock and an utter slob who couldn't care less about clothes and makeup, while
Tam remains mostly uninterested in sports and always pulls off the perfect outfit
and appearance for the moment. Still, they've been best friends all through el-
ementary school, and neither one believes that sixth grade will be any different.
Told from Allie's first-person perspective, this novel explores their changing friend-
ship from the inside: the hurt (when Tam chooses her old friend Renee as her lab
partner, leaving Allie with dorky Orren), the envy (when Tam tells Allie she's
going to her grandma's and is then spotted at the mall with said Renee), and the
growth (as Allie comes to realize how she, too, has changed, perhaps for the bet-
ter). It's a ubiquitous plot; what stands out in this novel is the refreshing style of
Allie's candid, humorously introspective commentary and the entertaining role
her invented vocabulary-where pecooliar is "something (or someone) both cool
and strange at the same time" and aflie is "a little, tiny lie, one that really hardly
counts"-plays in guiding the story. Add to that a wholly satisfying ending, wherein
Allie moves on to new friends with whom she shares a strong bond of interest
(soccer) and Tam, having chosen to stick with Renee, finds that Renee isn't all that
great a friend, and you've got an ideal summer read for tweensters with their eyes
set on the great big world of middle school. HM
PERL, ERICA S. Chicken Bedtime Is Really Early; illus. by George Bates. 
Abrams,
2005 
32p
ISBN 0-8109-4926-1 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
"From chickens to hamsters, from rabbits to sheep,/ Sooner or later we all need to
sleep." Perl follows this introductory couplet with a comical examination of the
bedtime rituals of a range of animals on and around the farm, from flossing chicks
to bunnies in "footy pajamies." There aren't a lot of facts here (save that hamsters
are guaranteed to be up all night "taking a brisk midnight jog on the wheel") and
probably not much truth to the strictly ordered bedtimes (chicks at six, lambs at
seven, etc.), but there's a soothing rhythm to the progression of the rhymed verses
through the hours of the evening. The rooster wakes everyone at dawn, including
the young boy stretching in bed; his hamsters, on the bedside table, are finally fast
asleep ("Wait, who's asleep now?/ You'll never guess who!"). Bates' thick acrylic
paintings assume a textured appearance suggestive of cut paper that adds an ele-
ment of dimensionality to the spreads. Animal expressions are kept minimal, for
the most part leaning toward jovial rather than cutesy, and the bountiful visual
humor (fish gargling, mama frog spoon-feeding insects to her offspring) calls for
post-readaloud perusal. Little ones will take comfort in observing how other babes
are nurtured and cared for at bedtime, and parents will get lots of mileage out of
the bouncy cadence and gentle theme. HM
456 
* THE BULLETIN
PETERS, JULIE ANNE 
Far from Xanadu. Tingley/Little, 2005 
282p
ISBN 0-316-15881-X 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Between going to school, lifting weights, playing softball, working at Thompson's
Feed, Seed, and Mercantile, and hanging out with Jamie (the other gay kid in
town), Mike's life in rural Kansas is fine, or so she'd like you to think. After her
dad's suicide two years ago and her mom's incapacitating depression, she's given
up her dreams of attending softball camp, winning a lucrative college scholarship,
and making something of herself-there's been no money since her brother ran
the family's plumbing business into the ground. Instead, Mike is determined to
get through her last year of high school without thinking of the future she would
have had. She finds an arresting diversion in the form of the new girl in school-
sexy, cool Xanadu-who soon has naive Mike wrapped around her little finger.
Xanadu isn't gay, but Mike won't let that stop her; she's sure her love will inspire
equal devotion, giving her life the meaning it so sorely lacks. Readers will know
immediately that Mike is gunning for tragedy, and indeed, the inevitable loss oc-
curs after a night of misdirected passion; as this fallout is a foregone conclusion,
Mike's relationship with Xanadu lacks the hint of feasibility that would have made
Xanadu's betrayal truly cutting. Instead, Mike's intricate relationship with her
brother and her poignant memories of her father are the most compelling and
genuine aspects of the novel. While readers may become impatient with Mike's
blindness, her mix of old-fashioned chivalry, down-home charm, suppressed hurt,
and palpable heart makes her likeable and attractive. Peters manages to make the
stereotypically butch Mike realistic and complex while at the same time crafting a
believable small town where the inhabitants rally around their gay kids, and that's
a feat readers will fall in line to experience. KH
PULLMAN, PHILIP, ad. Aladdin and the Enchanted Lamp; illus. by Sophy
Williams. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2005 
6 4 p
ISBN 0-439-69255-5 
$16.95 
R Gr. 4-6
In this retelling of the Arabian folktale, Aladdin is a self-absorbed but intelligent
scamp who is capable of love, bravery, and sacrifice. Pullman's descriptions clothe
the familiar story of the boy, his lamp, and its magic in convincing detail that
places the events in a version of ancient China ornamented with Arab customs and
goods, including beautiful slave girls-authorial choices in keeping with the tradi-
tional tale, according to an adapter's note. Humor and drama interweave through-
out the story, enlivening the exposition and intensifying the action, and a final
hint that Aladdin's downstairs neighbor, Shaheed the Nervous Poet, is the true
author of the text gives zest to the conventional happy ending. The numerous
honey-colored illustrations, dappled with deep crimsons, bold purples, and glitter-
ing ochres, present opulent images of supple-limbed beauties and powerful jinn,
adding to the story's exotic flair. This well-written, handsomely illustrated retell-
ing leaves its Disneyfied counterparts looking-well, cartoonish. TC
QUALEY, MARSHA 
Just Like That. Dial, 2005 
[2 4 0p]
ISBN 0-8037-2840-9 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Having broken up with her boyfriend, a restless Hanna goes for a midnight walk
around the frozen Minneapolis lakes, encountering a few other nocturnal rovers,
including a skylarking young couple on an ATV. The next day, she's stunned to
JUNE 2005 * 457
learn that the couple perished in the cold when their ATV went through the ice,
leaving a guilty Hanna wondering if she could have saved them had she warned
them of the ice's thinness or been around to help. Hanna's guilt drives her to
connect with Will, the boy who found the dead girl's body and reported the acci-
dent; though Hanna and Will's relationship founders when Hanna discovers their
age difference (Will is fourteen to Hanna's eighteen), Hanna finds herself getting
drawn into the drama and secrets of Will's family, which make her begin to ques-
tion the history of her own. Family secrets make for a compelling theme, and
Qualey accumulates some enticing plot elements: disappearing grandmothers, a
dead father, and a notorious survivor of a high-profile tragedy, as well as her and
Will's witness to the more recent event. It's that last experience that's most com-
pellingly conveyed, starting the book off with ice-edged tension, which expresses
itself most strongly in Hanna's rift with her best friends after one of them tells
Hanna's secret. Unfortunately, while the opening accident seems intended to act
as a catalyst, it ends up largely buried under a mountain of ensuing plot threads
that lack emotive punch; the narrative tends to talkily impede its own impact, too
often explaining reactions rather than letting readers react on their own. This is
nonetheless a plotline that should attract readers, especially those who have en-
joyed the strong heroines of Qualey's earlier books such as Revolutions ofthe Heart
(BCCB 5/93). DS
REEF, CATHERINE 
Alone in the World: 
Orphans and Orphanages in
America. 
Clarion, 2005 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-35670-3 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In her latest venture, this established author of nonfiction offers a narrative explo-
ration of the experience of orphans and the evolution of orphanages in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in the United States. Supported by a
striking assortment of archival photographs and informative captions, this care-
fully researched and sourced work provides a thorough overview of the institutions
themselves and the social and historical factors that impacted the plight of orphans
(racism, urbanization, sexual abuse) over time. Overall, the book is more success-
ful for its textbook characteristics (solid information, good photos, clear organiza-
tion) than for its emotional impact; while firsthand narratives and quotes are
sprinkled throughout, more personal accounts would have elevated the book to a
different, more complex level. The text also occasionally falls into lengthy com-
parisons of the various institutions that add little substance and remove the story
from its seeming attempt to offer a more intimate consideration of the phenom-
enon. Partner this informative work with Andrea Warren's more personally fo-
cused explanation (Orphan Train Rider, BCCB 9/96) for an in-depth examination
of the lives and times of orphans in the United States. Endnotes, a selected bibli-
ography, and photo credits are included. HM
REICHE, 
DIETLOF 
Ghost Ship; tr. from 
the German by John
Brownjohn. 
Scholastic, 2005 
31 3p
ISBN 0-439-59704-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Vicki lives and works in a New England bayside cafe known for
its seashell-rich decor and its display of the figurehead of the Storm Goddess, a
sailing ship lost at sea in 1772. Only the wooden head of the figure and a water-
458 * THE BULLETIN
proofed packet containing the quartermaster's diary were found, and both have
been stored for years in Vicki's home. When the figurehead is dismounted for
restoration work, Vicki's curiosity about the hollow head-and the diary--sets in
motion a chain of supernatural events that results in the lifting of a dreadful curse
as Vicki and her newfound friend Peter sort out the clues and evade the machina-
tions of the town's devious mayor and his brash accomplice. The resourceful
Vicki and the ever-cheerful Peter (the son of wealthy, self-centered parents who
spend their vacation lounging in the bayside hotel) are likeable heroes in this Ger-
man import's exciting tale of miraculous coincidences and fateful events. Encoun-
ters with the suddenly beached Storm Goddess (which shows no signs of age and
which hosts a ghostly reenactment of its crew's final hours whenever Vicki ap-
proaches) and with the anguished ghost of the quartermaster provide blood-tin-
gling drama, while constant interference from the mayor and his crony further
raises the stakes. Some readers may raise eyebrows over the book's sourcing the
ship's curse not in the crew's theft and sale of hundreds of suffering black slaves,
which is only briefly mentioned, but instead in their killing of white sailors, but
the robust story itself will invite repeated reading by mystery addicts and fantasy
fans. TC
RODOWSKY, COLBY 
The Next-Door Dogs; illus. by Amy June Bates. 
Farrar,
2005 
103p
ISBN 0-374-36410-9 
$15.00 
R Gr. 2-4
Sara Barker is generally a pretty brave nine-year-old, so it's an embarrassment to
her that she's got an unconquerable fear of dogs ("She was afraid of the ruffing
noise they made when they barked and the way they sometimes showed their big
white pointed teeth"). Her parents' attempts to alleviate the situation haven't
worked, but she's at least managed to keep her phobia from her friends and get
through her days despite the occasional canine encounter; now, however, her ami-
able new next-door neighbor has not just one but two dogs, and Sara may never
lose that "cold, quivery feeling in the middle of her stomach." There is no short-
age of titles about childhood anxieties, but it's unusual to find one that tackles a
full-on phobia. Rodowsky wisely eschews clinical discussion and treats Sara's di-
lemma with sympathetic understanding and believable detail, making it clear that
this problem isn't going to be solved with a little parental assurance or personal
determination. The book is particularly perceptive in its treatment of Sara's cha-
grin about her problem (resulting in the believable consequence of her older brother's
frequent teasing on the subject), and it's also believable that desensitization, in the
form of proximity of Sara's canine neighbors, actively reduces her anxiety. There's
hardly a kid alive unfamiliar with the cold feeling of anxiety and the ensuant self-
consciousness, and they'll appreciate this respectful treatment of the problem and
the unpushy reminder that things can get better. Heavily textured pencil sketches
make the proceedings a little foggy at times, but they soften the impact of Sara's
fears without condescension. DS
ROSEN, MICHAEL J. 
Three Feet Small; illus. by Valeri Gorbachev. 
Gulliver/Har-
court, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-15-204938-X 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
This little bear's got a big problem; he's "little in the middle of everything big,"
with no growth spurt in sight. The problem is clearly weighing heavily on him, as
JUNE 2005 
* 459
he catalogs the various tribulations of being small (needing a stool for the water
fountain, not reaching the shelf in his locker, not being able to see what's cooking
for dinner "without jumping to peek"). It isn't until Grandpa comes for a visit
and jokes that the little bear is getting too big for tossing into the air that he starts
to think, "Am I growing... a little but maybe can't tell?" The second half of the
book highlights the various signposts that growth has indeed come: seeing over
the deeper end of the pool, sneakers pinching, swinging a baseball bat all by him-
self. While the plot is slight and the conflict resolved almost as soon as it's devel-
oped, Rosen's take on the perspective of the little people is spot-on, and young
listeners will likely offer a silent nod of agreement with our small protagonist. The
creative selection of stumbling blocks perfectly suits the youthful point-of-view,
emphasizing familiar, everyday trials, and some entertaining bouts of language
play ("I'm a little less little, a little more big. I can't wait for the day when I'm
grown like a grown-up") add additional zest to the little bear's personal growth
journey. The unusual text layout (with one sentence per line in centered text
blocks) suggests a poetic meter that does not really exist; the sentences themselves
seem to want to fall into a rhyme but never do, making the story rather clumsy for
reading aloud. Gorbachev's signature hatch and crosshatch nonetheless imbue the
line-and-watercolor compositions with a solid dose of energy and liveliness; every-
day scenes of domestic life are full of color and texture . . and doesn't the little
bear look bigger on the last page? HM
ROSOFF, MEG 
Meet Wild Boars; illus. by Sophie Blackall. 
Holt, 2005 
[40p]
ISBN 0-8050-7488-0 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
4-6 yrs
Boris, Morris, Horace, and Doris are wild boars, and as such they cannot be trusted
to observe the niceties of polite society. They will "soak in the toilet for hours,"
"eat all your chocolate," "make horrible smells," and take every opportunity to
return rudeness for kindness. Rosoffs succinct prose packs the pages with boarish
behavior, turning the litany of piggish offenses into a shoutable catalog of
horridnesses. The hairy porcine foursome, unnaturally stuffed into ill-fitting
children's clothing, saunter through Blackall's gouache illustrations on delicate
trotters, leaving a smeary trail of brown hoofprints and ogling the reader with sly
mischief. The picture-perfect children (straight out of mid-twentieth-century el-
ementary readers) upon whom the boars unleash their pandemonium seem con-
stantly astounded to find that, try as one may, there is simply no making friends
with wild boars. That lesson won't be lost on the audience, who will be quick to
appreciate the ending image of a darling little baby boar leaving a stinky, gooey
mess on the carpet. Introduce this book at storytime and be prepared for multiple
requests for repeats. TC
Russo, MARISABINA 
Always Remember Me: How One Family Survived World War
II; written and illus. by Marisabina Russo. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2005 
42p
ISBN 0-689-86920-7 
$16.95 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
Every Sunday, Oma and her granddaughter Rachel sit down together and look at
Oma's two photo albums: one from before she came to America, a second from
her life in the United States. Every week, Oma "quickly closes the first album and
goes on to the second" before reaching the end, but on this particular week, she has
deemed Rachel old enough to hear the truth of her final years in Germany. The
460 
* 
THE BULLETIN
pages that follow detail the persecution of Jews in Nazi Germany, Oma's separa-
tion from her three daughters, and her eventual detainment in a concentration
camp. Ultimately, the story is a hopeful one, as Oma describes her reunion with
her daughters in America. This biographical picture book tells the story of the
author's own grandmother, and young listeners are likely to embrace this fact.
There remains, however, somewhat of an audience issue: there is little solid infor-
mation on the experience of the Holocaust, making it less useful for curricular
purposes, yet the story is not likely to generate much general interest. Further, the
simplified language largely fails to deliver the intended impact ("There was a po-
liceman holding a sheet of paper with my name on it. He said it was time for me
to go to a concentration camp"), and the uncharacteristically happy ending is ulti-
mately misleading. The photo-album technique works to good effect in the earlier
part of the story, with Oma's story guided by illustrated facsimiles of white-edged
family photos. When the text's emphasis turns to the concentration camps, the
recreated family photos cease and the illustrations instead depict watercolor rendi-
tions of stock images from the Holocaust in washes of gray and blue. Though it
works symbolically, this slight disjoint may be a bit confusing to the viewer. An
afterword offers general information on the Holocaust and Nazi Germany and
links the narrative to the author's own history; endpapers feature reproduced fam-
ily photos. Hesse's The Cats ofKrasinski Square (BCCB 10/04) offers a more
focused and powerful introduction to the Holocaust experience for young listen-
ers, but this might still direct a more family-oriented exploration. HM
SCIESZKA, JON, ed. 
Guys Writefor GuysRead. Viking, 2005 
272p 
illus. with
photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 0-670-06007-0 
$16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-670-06027-5 
$10.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
For the past several decades, national statistics have warned us that boys are in-
creasingly reluctant readers. Jon Scieszka has decided to tackle the problem head
on, using this book of eighty-eight vignettes (some original to the collection, some
reprinted here) by a who's who of male authors, editors, journalists, illustrators,
and professors to fund his companion website (guysread.com) aimed at hooking
guys up with stuff they will find appealing to read. Since the assignment seems to
have been to contribute something specifically about being a guy, most of the very
short (one to two page) essays assume the form of memoirs. Despite that, though,
some authors, notably Morris Gleitzman and David Lubar, manage to infuse their
particular brand of bizarre humor into their offerings, and several others simply
stick to their idiom-Douglas Florian offers a poem, Matt Groening, David and
Liam McKean, and Mo Willems deliver brilliant little comic-strip gems. A few
preach (these are usually the ones from the librarians and academics in the crowd),
but most offer explicitly boy moments that the authors claim to be tired of apolo-
gizing for or hiding-moments of wimpiness, poignancy, disappointment, bra-
vado. Some highlight stupid boy tricks; others are miniature portraits of the artists
as young men, featuring their artwork from grade school stacked up against cur-
rent pieces. Each piece is followed by a brief bio that states where the author grew
up and where he lives now, offers one random fact (and, for illustrators, a sample
piece of art), and provides a bibliography of up to three books that intrigued read-
ers might seek out. By the sheer force of its inclusiveness, this is an essential re-
JUNE 2005 
* 461
source for library or classroom; plus the format makes it great for augmenting
book talks or simply picking up whenever you've got a spare minute to fill. KC
SHULEVITZ, URI 
The Travels ofBenjamin of Tudela: Through Three Continents in
the Twelfth Century; written and illus. by Uri Shulevitz. 
Farrar, 2005 
48p
ISBN 0-374-37754-5 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Although Benjamin ofTudela left a "factual but impersonal" account of his twelfth-
century journey from his Spanish home to Eastern Europe and the Middle East,
little is known of his personal background. Shulevitz presents a fictionalized re-
construction of the trek, framed as Benjamin's own traveler's tales told upon his
return. Benjamin's account not only reflects his peculiar experiences as a Jewish
visitor in Christian and Muslim lands (he frequently comments on the necessity of
seeking accommodation in Jewish quarters of the cities he visits), but also his inter-
ests-and often his credulity-as a man of faith. He reports with respect-filled
awe on the opulence of Constantinople and Baghdad, and he regales his hosts with
tales of the false messiah ofAmadia (which was then fairly recent news), the coffin
of Daniel the Prophet, suspended from a bridge in Susa, and the perils of a sand-
storm in the Arabian Desert. Shulevitz inserts discreet sidebars from time to time,
with additional information such as travelers' letters of credit, the destruction of
the Temple in Jerusalem as it relates to Temple columns Benjamin saw in Rome,
and the Crusaders' capture ofJerusalem. City-, sea-, and desertscapes in luminous
emerald, sapphire, and topaz hues are richly textured in intricate layers of color,
grainy black outlining, and dashing brush marks, and the only discordant note is
struck by the stark white text boxes that intrude aggressively into the scenes. In a
closing note Shulevitz comments on the way he has amended Benjamin of Tudela's
Book of Travels; a bibliography is also included. EB
SHUSTERMAN, NEAL 
Dread Locks. 
Dutton, 2005 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-525-47554-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
In fourteen-year-old Parker's family, affection is indicated with expensive presents,
and Parker has everything he could ever want; as a result, he is incredibly bored. In
fact, his whole town is full of the rich and the idle-the perfect place for Tara, the
new girl at school, to find willing victims. Mysterious and alluring, always hidden
behind sunglasses, Tara insinuates herself into the different cliques at school, choos-
ing individuals to alternately befriend and discard. Parker, like others, finds her
exciting, even when her jilted friends come down with a strange illness that turns
them to stone. However, she seems to have her eye on Parker for a different
reason-could it be that she wants a companion? This Medusa story (first entry in
the Dark Fusion series) ignores most of the original to create a different mythos,
one where wealth leads to an insatiate, unfulfilled existence that mirrors Tara's
beguiling power: "If there's anything I've learned, it's that wealth hardens people.
Turning them to stone is easy-they're already halfway there." Parker's reflective
comments show that he is looking back on events, and perhaps that is the reason
for his unusually prescient feelings of Tara's unspoken menace; because of this
continual foreshadowing, however, it will come as a shock to readers that Parker is
surprised when he (much later than readers) makes the link between Tara and the
illness. However, Parker's attraction to the intensity Tara represents is believable
462 
* THE BULLETIN
as it spirals out of control and he becomes first her willing henchman, then a
Gorgon himself, while the result of their eventual showdown is pure poetic justice.
While not the most subtle retelling, this is an interesting spin on a familiar mytho-
logical monster. KH
SLOAN, BRIAN 
A Really Nice Prom Mess. 
Simon, 2005 
[272p]
ISBN 0-689-87438-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Ah, prom, the night of a young man's dreams-or not, if you're Cameron Hayes,
who's trying to keep the closet door closed on him and his boyfriend, Shane, while
still going to prom with him on a cunningly arranged double date involving Shane's
friend Jane and her friend Virginia. The plan goes quickly awry: upon realizing
she's acting as Cam's beard, Virginia gets drunk and truculent; staged fisticuffs
between Shane and Cam (to demonstrate Shane's heterosexuality after Cameron
idly makes out with Jane, Shane's date) turn into a real fight as Cam's anger about
Shane's constant pretense spills out. And that's the tame part of the evening, since
Cam escapes the authorities by leaving the prom with a hot bisexual pot dealer,
finds himself at a gay strip club, eludes a raid there by heading off to his friends'
post-prom illicit hijinks in the park, outs Shane to his best friend (who he then
takes to the strip club), and ends up getting a ride home with a sympathetic and
attractive cop-who proves to be Virginia's brother. The author's background is
in film and it's fitting that there are movie references, especially to John Hughes
pictures, throughout, since this could make an entertaining high-energy teen flick.
Unfortunately, Cam's narration squanders much of that energy by telling rather
than showing, overworking the descriptions of every element so as to slow the
story down and cueing responses from the audience by having characters laugh
extensively at one another's jokes; at an appropriately pell-mell pace, the unlikeliness
of the plot wouldn't have mattered, but here there's plenty of time to dwell on
every outrageous contrivance. Cam's romantic heart, even more than his smart
mouth, could still make him sympathetic to readers, who may be willing to over-
look the convenient suddenness of a new true love's replacing the old as just an-
other wonder of prom night. DS
SPILLEBEEN, GEERT 
Kipling's Choice; tr. by Terese Edelstein. 
Houghton,
2005 
[160p]
ISBN 0-618-43124-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 7-10
John Kipling, son of author Rudyard Kipling, charges bravely into battle at Loos,
France, in the Great War, and he is mortally injured in his first round of action.
As he lies dying, unable to speak or even cry out because of the wounds to his
mouth and throat, he drifts in and out of consciousness, replaying scenes from his
life that brought him to imminent death at age eighteen. Spillebeen skillfully
interweaves John's fictionalized memories of growing up under the smothering
attention and aggressive ambition of his famous father with harrowing, clinically
precise details of the often tender, often callous treatment the stricken boy receives
from comrades and enemy troops during his final hours. In narrating John's im-
mediate crisis, Spillebeen also offers readers an oblique but insightful look at the
famed Rudyard, an impassioned imperialist who pulls every string imaginable to
wedge his weak-sighted boy into the military, who genuinely rejoices in his son's
JUNE 2005 
* 463
advancement, and who suffers soul-wrenching grief and guilt over his own role in
John's death. An epilogue comments on the Kipling parents' subsequent efforts to
locate their son's remains and notes that the body was tentatively identified in
1992-a matter that has never been settled to a certainty, even by a source cited in
the brief bibliography. This Belgian import is not to be missed by young adults
interested in World War I or in the tragic backstory of The Jungle Book's creator.
EB
ST. GEORGE, JUDITH 
The Journey of the One and Only Declaration of Indepen-
dence; illus. by Will Hillenbrand. 
Philomel, 2005 
48p
ISBN 0-399-23738-0 
$16.99 
R Gr. 3-5
This informative yet lighthearted title focuses not on the text of the Declaration
but on the founding document itself, discussing its forms (Jefferson's handwritten
version and initial copies; its reiteration as the two-and-a-half-foot-long engross-
ing signed by the founding Congress; two hundred engravings commissioned by
the 1820 Secretary of State) and following its peripatetic route to its final (as far as
one can predict) repository in the National Archives. A parade of trivia marches in
quick time-the parchment's had to beat it out of town when national capitals
came under attack, it's been shoved into sacks and desks and safes, it's been ex-
posed to sunlight and cigar smoke and the dirty hands of an adoring public, it's
been locked away at Fort Knox, it's been the object of polite but covetous conten-
tion between the Librarian of Congress and the National Archivist. Hillenbrand's
spunky line-and-watercolor citizenry are plump and childlike, often taking on roles
of political cartoon characters: Lilliputian Patriots sporting colony abbreviations
topple a Gulliver-sized King George; squabbling Congressmen literally butt heads
outside the capital at New York during the Confederation period. St. George
furnishes enough Didjaknows?s to make any reader the toast-or major annoy-
ance-of the Fourth of July festivities. EB
STEINHOFEL, ANDREAS 
The Center of the World; tr. from the German by Alisa
Jaffa. 
Delacorte, 2005 
[480p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90266-2 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72943-X 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
The rural estate of Visible, so named by its quirky owner, is the talk of the little
German town nearby, as is the family that lives there. Phil and Dianne, seventeen-
year-old twins, are outsiders by virtue of their unconventional upbringing; their
American mother, Glass, gave birth to them on the snow-covered lawn at seven-
teen, and since then has encouraged them to make their own way while she em-
barks on a series of gossip-inducing affairs. Phil lives untouched in his own world,
protected from and at the same time at the mercy of the unspoken secrets around
him: the story of his unknown father, of the strangling silence between Glass and
Dianne, of Dianne and her midnight outings, among others. When Phil meets
Nicholas and falls desperately in love, the long-guarded center of his world is ex-
posed; released from his claustrophobic existence yet terrified of leaving its safety,
Phil realizes that he cannot fully break free without bringing to light the hidden
parts of Visible. This German Bildungsroman reads more like a memoir than a
novel, with a complex structure that moves between past and present thematically
rather than chronologically; as a result, the writing has a timeless, fairy-tale-like
464 
* THE BULLETIN
quality, aided by the occasional element of magical realism. The prose is often
beautifully poetic, and the detached, reflective tone is effective, though it evokes a
narrator looking back on his adolescence rather than experiencing it. Each charac-
ter is an intricate labyrinth whose mystery must be discovered, making reading the
stories an immersive experience. The gradual start coupled with the introspective
narrator and the unusual structure may put off readers not ready for such a literary
book; those who get through will be rewarded for their perseverance with a look at
love's wounding, hopeful, transformative glory. KH
SWEET, MELISSA 
Carmine: A Little More Red; written and illus. by Melissa
Sweet. 
Houghton, 2005 
32p
ISBN 0-618-38794-3 
$16.00 
R 6-9 yrs
When Carmine's beloved Granny invites her over for alphabet soup, her mother
warns her not to stop along the way ("Some people dilly-dally once in a while, but
Carmine made a habit of it"). She didn't mean to stop, really, she just wanted to
paint those red poppies in the distance, and it wouldn't have been a problem at all
if her dog Rufus hadn't told the wolf where they were going and how to get there
("Surreal as it may seem, dogs are descendants of wolves, and it made sense that
the wolf could understand his language"). This mischievous Little Red Riding
Hood retelling is propelled forward by the extra dose of buoyancy provided by
Sweet's carefully crafted language play; each page opens with a larger-font painted
word atop the text block that then figures prominently into that text, somewhat
reminiscent of example sentences in a spelling bee (e.g., "quiver - A rustling noise
in the bushes made Rufus QUIVER"). What's more, the words run alphabetically
through the story, resulting in an alphabet book/fairy tale that never strays from its
strong narrative line. 
Sweet departs from the typical vocabulary of an alphabet
book, however; in lieu of the expected range of common objects (A for apple, B for
butterfly, etc.), she employs all parts of speech and fairly complex-and at times
surprisingly funny-words. E is exquisite, I indeed, and the playful N reads "nin-
compoop. Everyone knows it isn't very nice to call a person, or even a bird, a
NINCOMPOOP, but sometimes Carmine couldn't help herself." The detached
humor of the narrative is well balanced by the scrappy mixed-media illustrations;
scratchy pencil outlines filled with patches of wet watercolor predominate, and
red, as would be expected, figures into most spreads. This would work effectively
for a springboard language arts activity, but it's lots of fun all by itself, too. A
recipe for Granny's Alphabet Soup is included. HM
TURNER, PAMELA S. 
Gorilla Doctors: SavingEndangered GreatApes. Houghton,
2005 
64p 
illus. with photographs 
(Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 0-618-44555-2 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
This latest entry in the estimable Scientists in the Field series (see Osborne's Project
Ultra Swan, BCCB 12/02, Montgomery's The Tara ntula Scientist, BCCB 4/04)
focuses on the people who provide veterinary care to the endangered mountain
gorillas in Rwanda and Uganda under the auspices of the Mountain Gorilla Vet-
erinary Project. The underlying point throughout the text is the challenge of
getting gorillas and humans to coexist successfully: doctors extricate gorillas from
poacher-set snares, make goodwill/informational visits on behalf of the gorillas to
local schools, and attempt to protect gorillas from the significant threat of human-
borne diseases. There's less information than in previous titles about the scientists'
JUNE 2005 * 465
backgrounds and career paths (and the Arts and Crafts font for the page numbers
sometimes makes them virtually unreadable), but the details of wilderness trek-
king, ecological action, and gorilla antics still make for enjoyable and often en-
lightening reading. Turner has a light touch that never undercuts the fundamental
seriousness of her subject, and she quietly makes the local people, who have to deal
with the gorillas marauding through their farms but who also benefit from gorilla
tourism, important figures in the account along with the scientists (some of whom
hail from the area originally). Color photographs of the gorillas and their habitat
(and the scientists and theirs) add appeal, especially when they're depicting the
irresistible orphan fostered by one of the vets. End matter includes a note about
donating to the project, a list of book and web resources, a postscript updating
readers on the gorillas, and an index. DS
URBIGKIT, CAT 
Brave Dogs, Gentle Dogs: How They Guard Sheep; written and
illus. with photographs by Cat Urbigkit. 
Boyds Mills, 2005 
32p
ISBN 1-59078-317-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Dogs that herd livestock have gotten a fair amount of press, but their counterparts
who guard and live among their charges maintain a lower profile. Urbigkit de-
scribes the work and the socialization process of the guardian dogs, who are raised
with their herd as pups and who essentially view the sheep as their pack (and vice
versa, since, as the book notes, ewes will cheerfully discipline unruly puppies), in
simple yet affectionate language that's suitable for reading aloud as well as reading
alone. The narrative skips around somewhat, never quite settling on a central
canine subject and getting a bit more excited about puppydom than the mature
dogs on actual duty, and it's only in a final author's note (which also details the
most popular breeds of guardian dog) that we learn the interesting history of guard-
ian dogs' introduction into the U.S. A pack of clear photographs depict the guard-
ian dogs and their charges on the wide Wyoming range; the images testify to the
predominance of earthtones in landscape and subjects, but sheep and dogs are
appealingly posed against the big sky, white snow, and tawny grasses. Dogs with
jobs remain an alluring topic, and this could partner effectively with titles about
rescue dogs and assistance dogs, provide an interesting slant on ranch life and
practices, or just offer a good excuse for looking at some cute puppy pictures. DS
VALCKX, CATHARINA 
Lizette's Green Sock; written and illus. by Catharina
Valckx. 
Clarion, 2005 
[32p]
ISBN 0-618-45298-2 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Out walking one day, a pretty young duck named Lizette finds a green sock. Tom
and Tim, two cat brothers who like to torment her, disturb her joy by laughing at
her lone sock, and she sets out to find its mate. Failing in her enterprise, she goes
home to mope, where she is joined by her rat friend Bert, who wears the solitary
sock as a hat. Meanwhile, Tom and Tim have found the other sock, and they
taunt Bert and Lizette with it until they tire of the game and throw the sock into
the lake. All's well that ends well, however, when Mom comes to the rescue with
a new sock; now Lizette and Bert both have lovely hats, and one helpful fish has a
new sleeping bag. The gentle trajectory of this French import's story is comple-
mented by the perky pastel-colored watercolors with chunky sepia outlines. Bert,
Lizette, and her mother have a European folk appeal in their simple patterned
466 
* THE BULLETIN
frocks, and the cat villains are made more villainous by their long trenchcoats and
perpetual smirks. The failure of the bad guys to work effective mischief makes this
a sweetly satisfying tale of resourcefulness, friendship, and the pleasures of a good
sock. KC
VOLPONI, PAUL 
Black and White. Viking, 2005 
[160p]
ISBN 0-670-06006-2 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-10
Eddie and Marcus are true oddities in their working-class/housing-project end of
town-a white guy and an African American whose longstanding friendship goes
far "past all that racial crap." In need of money to keep themselves in shoes worthy
of the highly recruited basketball stars they are and to run with an acceptable
crowd during their senior year, they sneak out Eddie's grandfather's handgun and
pull a series of stick-ups in dark parking lots. Eddie gets carried away and shoots
one of their marks, who survives and identifies Marcus as one of his assailants. It
isn't long before Eddie-always so tight with Marcus-is implicated as well, but
he catches a "lucky" break, since nobody can identify him with the same degree of
certainty. Eddie won't confess, and Marcus won't betray, and so the young men
embark on two very different paths through the justice system. Eddie and Marcus
tell their own sides of the story, and although Volponi never intrudes with a pe-
dantic or even sardonic observation of his own, he manages to raise a host of
unsettling questions concerning the responsibilities of friendship in general, and
whether a colorblind friendship in particular is even possible. The plotting is
tight, the action is swift, and the troubling outcome that finds Marcus headed to
prison and Eddie off to college is, sadly, all too believable. EB
WALKER, SALLY M. 
Secrets ofa Civil War Submarine: Solving the Mysteries of the
H. L. Hunley. 
Carolrhoda, 2005 
112p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-57505-830-8 
$18.95 
R Gr. 5-8
As she did in her outstanding Fossil Fish FoundAlive (BCCB 4/02), Walker again
takes up an offbeat topic and transforms it into a first-rate tale of scientific and
scholarly sleuthing. The first submarine to destroy an enemy vessel, the Confeder-
ate sub Hunley established itself as a death trap from the start, as two crews sank
and died during her trial runs. On her first true mission-a rousing success that
delivered a torpedo into the hull of the Union ship Housatonic-she sank for the
third time, but in murky waters from which she could not be immediately raised.
Rediscovered in 1995, she entered a new phase of her history as a trophy coveted
by treasure hunters, an artifact coveted by rival federal and state governments, an
engineering challenge to the team that would raise her, an enigma to maritime
historians who study and conserve her, and a crumbling coffin for the remains of
the men trapped within her. Walker begins with the ship's known history, printed
on buff-colored pages, and then shifts to white page stock for the Hunley's con-
temporary period. She is as adept at explicating the technicalities of submarine
design, the physics of diving, and the intricacies of raising the corroded vessel as
she is at recounting the battle and following the tracks of forensic anthropologists
who try to reconstruct the crew's last minutes. Plenty of color photos of the Hunley
and her caretakers, text notes, glossary, index, and reading lists round out the
volume. Beside reveling in the pure pleasure of a well-told shipwreck tale, readers
JUNE 2005 * 467
will expand their appreciation of the many sciences and skills required to retrieve
and restore fragments of our past. EB
WARNES, TIM 
Mommy Mine; illus. by Jane Chapman. 
HarperCollins,
2005 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-058948-5 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-058947-7 
$15.99 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
This sprightly little readaloud features mommies from the animal kingdom in all
of their glory, romping through their habitats with offspring in tow. Set against
white backgrounds, the uncluttered but decidedly energetic compositions high-
light mothers and children eating, snuggling, and playing together, accompanied
by simple rhymes in eye-catching fonts: "Mommy huge" (rhinos), "Mommy hairy"
(spiders), "Mommy spiny ... 
Mommy SCARY!" (alligators). The illustrations
fudge on some of the mother/child pairings-spiders and moths, for instance, are
not known for their maternal skills, nor are alligators spiny-and the text isn't
much more than a list, albeit an enjoyable one. These cavils aside, however, this is
a fun-on-the-tongue affirmation for kids and their mommies, who sometimes find
themselves grubby, chubby, hairy, spiny, scary, clumsy, nosy, loud, lazy, funny,
sticky, etc. ... 
KC
468 
* 
THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
MARANTZ, SYLVIA 
Multicultural Picturebooks: Artfor Illuminating Our World; by
Sylvia and Ken Marantz. 
Scarecrow, 2005 
238p 
2nd ed.
Paper ed. ISBN 0-8108-4933-X 
$32.00
In this second edition, authors Sylvia and Ken Marantz (a children's librarian and
art educator, respectively) continue to explore the way multicultural picture books
function to foster global understanding, a key objective in today's diverse class-
rooms. After two introductions, which respectively detail the process of selecting
and evaluating multicultural picture books and provide some background infor-
mation and resources for learning more about multicultural education, the bulk of
the text is dedicated to annotated citations of recommended picture books orga-
nized by broad areas of the world (Asia and the Pacific; The Middle East and
North Africa; Africa and African America; The Caribbean, South America, and
Central America; Aboriginal and Native Cultures of North America; and Multi-
cultural and Cross-Cultural Experiences). These sections are further divided by
nation, then into sections of folktales and original tales, contemporary stories, and
immigration stories. Each citation includes publication information, recommended
age levels, and a paragraph that summarizes the story and critically evaluates how
the illustrations offer insight into the specific culture in question. The emphasis
here is most definitely on illustration; the authors' stated criteria is to include books
that tell "a story that will appeal to children while including illustrations display-
ing some artistic competency and reflecting some aspect of the culture concerned."
Books included were published between 1997 and 2004, and all entries were in
print at the time of publication. This is a valuable resource for locating a recently
published story from a specific cultural context, and the detailed expositions on
the artwork make it equally useful for illustration studies. An appendix of addi-
tional resources and index are included. HM
JUNE 2005 * 469
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE: Avi; Barrett;
Benchley; Flanagan; Hanley;
Madison; Michael; Nix
Advertising-fiction: Naylor
African Americans: Carter; Hinman
African Americans-fiction:
Carbone; Going; Mosley;
Volponi
ALPHABET BOOKS: Sweet
Animals: Turner
Animals-fiction: Bauer, M.; Gates;
Graff; Mitchard
Animals-folklore: Climo
Animals-stories: Kilaka; Perl;
Rosoff; Warnes
ANTHOLOGIES: Scieszka
Archaeology-fiction: Barrett
Art: Gonyea
Art and artists-fiction: Qualey
Astronauts: Aldrin; Hilliard
Aunts-fiction: Laguna
Automobiles-stories: Gordon
Babies-stories: Broach What
Bears-stories: Rosen
BEDTIME STORIES: Clements;
Ellis; Perl
Behavior-stories: Rosoff
BIOGRAPHIES: Carney; Giblin;
Hinman; Jones
Biology: Turner
Birds-fiction: Auch; Graff;
Mitchard
Books and reading-fiction: Avi;
Crutcher
Brothers-stories: Broach What
Bullies-fiction: Broach Shakespeare;
Going
Bullies-stories: Valckx
Business-fiction: Bauer, J.
Censorship-fiction: Crutcher
Circuses-fiction: Langton
Civics: Karr
Civil War: Friedman
Clothing-stories: Valckx
CONCEPT BOOKS: Gonyea
Crime and criminals: Giblin
Crime and criminals-fiction: Bauer,
J.; Deuker; Madison; Meyer;
Volponi
Crime and criminals-stories: Kilaka
Death-fiction: Crutcher; Lion;
Qualey
Design: Gonyea
Dinosaurs-fiction: Langton
Dogs: Urbigkit
Dogs-fiction: Lewis; Rodowsky
Drama-fiction: Moore
Ducks-fiction: Graff; Mitchard
Ducks-stories: Valckx
Ecology: Turner
Ecology-fiction: Langton
Eskimos-fiction: Lerangis
Ethics and values: Bauer, J.;
Blackman; Choi; Crutcher;
Graber; Lerangis; Shusterman;
Volponi
Explorers and exploring: Jones
Explorers and exploring-fiction:
Lerangis
Families-fiction: Laguna; Madden;
McKay; Steinhbfel
FANTASY: Avi; Flanagan; Hanley;
Langton; Morton-Shaw; Mosley;
Nix
470 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Fathers-fiction: Deuker; McKay;
Spillebeen
Fathers-stories: Clements; Martin
Fear-fiction: Rodowsky
Fear-stories: Ellis
Fishing-stories: Martin
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Climo; Gordon; Marcantonio;
Pullman; Sweet
Food and eating: Carney
Food and eating-stories: Choi
Forensic anthropology: Walker
Friends-fiction: Auch; Going; Graff;
Lewis; McNeill; Papademetriou;
Volponi
Friends-stories: Valckx
Gays-fiction: Sloan; Steinhbfel
GHOST STORIES: Reiche
Gifts-fiction: Langton
Grandmothers-stories: Russo
Grief-fiction: Lion; McNeill
Growing up-stories: Rosen
Guilt-fiction: Lion
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Cadnum; Carbone; Carter;
Going; Graber; Graff; Karr;
Lasky; Lerangis; Madden;
Marcum; Michael; Shulevitz;
Spillebeen
History, British: Jocelyn
History, U.S.: Aldrin; Fradin;
Friedman; Giblin; Hilliard; Reef;
St. George; Walker
History, world: Bartoletti
Holocaust-stories: Russo
Homelessness-fiction: Auch
HUMOR: Child; Kinerk; Laguna;
Madden; Madison; Marcum;
McKay; Mitchard; Rosoff; Sloan;
Sweet
Independence Day: St. George
Inventors and inventing: Carney
Islands-fiction: Morton-Shaw
Jealousy-stories: Broach What
Jews-fiction: Lasky; Shulevitz
Jews-stories: Russo
Journals-fiction: Morton-Shaw
Knights and chivalry-fiction:
Flanagan
Korea-stories: Choi
Language arts: Sweet
Latinos-fiction: Marcantonio
Lesbians-fiction: Peters
Literature, American: Hinman
LOVE STORIES: Blackman;
Steinh6fel
Magic-fiction: Avi; Pullman
Medieval life-fiction: Cadnum
Monkeys-folklore: Climo
Mothers-fiction: Auch
Mothers-stories: Warnes
Music and musicians-fiction:
Madden
Mutism-fiction: McNeill
MYSTERIES: Broach Shakespeare;
Madison
Mythology, classical: Shusterman
Orphans: Jocelyn; Reef
Orphans-fiction: Michael
POETRY: Kinerk
Prejudice-fiction: Lasky
Prom-fiction: Sloan
Prostitution-fiction: Carbone
Racism-fiction: Blackman; Going;
Volponi
Ranchers and ranching: Urbigkit
Reading aloud: Climo; Kinerk;
Laguna; Langton; Lewis;
Marcantonio; Naylor; Pullman;
Scieszka; Urbigkit
Reading, easy: Bauer, M.; Carter;
Lewis; Mitchard; Naylor;
Rodowsky
Reading, reluctant: Benchley;
Scieszka
Relationships-fiction: Lion; Moore;
Peters; Qualey
Restaurants-fiction: Naylor
Revolutionary War: Fradin; St.
George
Romance-fiction: Sloan
Rural life: Urbigkit
Rural life-fiction: Graff; Marcum;
Peters
School-fiction: Hanley;
Papademetriou
Science: Turner
SCIENCE FICTION: Blackman;
Gates; Mosley
Secrets-fiction: Qualey
Sharks: Benchley
JUNE2005 
* 471
Ships and sailing: Walker
Ships and sailing-fiction: Reiche
Slaves-fiction: Mosley
Sleepovers-stories: Ellis
Smell-fiction: Kinerk
Space travel: Aldrin; Hilliard
Sports-fiction: Lewis
Storytelling: Climo
Storytime: Choi; Gordon; Perl;
Rosen; Rosoff; Valckx
Submarines: Walker
Suicide-fiction: Meyer
Summer-fiction: Marcum
SUPERNATURAL STORIES:
Barrett; Michael; Reiche
SUSPENSE: Meyer
Theater: Giblin
TODDLER BOOKS: Warnes
Toys: Friedman
Vacations-stories: Ashman
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Cadnum; Shulevitz
Voyages and travel-stories: Ashman
War-fiction: Spillebeen
Wealth-stories: Child
West, the: Jones
West, the-fiction: Carbone
Women's studies: Karr
World cultures: Lerangis
World War I-fiction: Spillebeen
World War II: Bartoletti
World War II-fiction: Graber;
Graff
World War II-stories: Russo
Writers and writing-fiction: Broach
Shakespeare; Crutcher; Spillebeen
NORTON JUSTER CHRIS RASCHKA
Author of "The Phantom Tollbooth" 
Caldecott Honor Winner
The Hello, Goodbye Window
"Juster crafts a cozy portrait of a grandchild
and her grandparents in this endearing book,
illustrated by Raschka's lush paintings."
Publishers Weekly, Starred Review
"Juster adopts the voice of the child
with a steady, sweet candor."
Kirkus Reviews, Starred Review *
"Raschka's visual interpretation of this sweet story
sings... This is the art of a masterful hand."
School Ubrary Journal, Starred Review *
"Two well-known names come together in
a book that speaks to the real lives of children."
Booklist, Starred Review 
"
MTPKIKIUN BUUKS PUKR L-ILUEIhN
Ir. ea.: U-/ooo-Uvv i-U
"A powerful novel.... A first-i
-
School L
Julie A. Swanson
for
l^A /»^r
"Swanson paints a compassionate and authentic portrait of a teen
facing a parent's death . . . Without being sensational or maudlin,
Swanson's novel is real: it's deeply sad and often painful to read, but
ultimately hopeful and uplifting." 
_ Booklist, starred, boxed review
"While readers will find the story emotionally challenging, those
onest portrayal of death will find it here."
-
Kirkus Reviews
"A realistic, sensitive look at a strong
family with deep faith, forced to make
wrenching, practical decisions." -
VOYA
Ages 12 and up
ISBN 0-8028-5273-4
223 pages * paperback * $8.00
r_| 
EERDMANS BOOKS
M 
for Young Readers
S11 9 
Grand Rapids/Cambridge
501 
An imprint of Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.
FAX 616-459-6540 * www.e
_
"One of Lester's Finest Works"*
Teachers guide
Md first chapter
available at
wini.llaithesuLn.cem
ItL 1.-718410-141- 
.
S
Ali1l andu
Agrli 
200
* 
"Altogether this novel does a SUMll 
job of showing the
inhumanity of slavery. It begs to be read aloud, and it could be used
in sections to produce some StUHEIHn reader's theatre."
-School Library Journal, Starred Review
* 
"The personal voices make this a StInlr 
text for group
discussion." 
-Booklist, Boxed, Starred Review
" "PIM•Iul theater and one of Lester's finest works."
-- Kirkus Raiews, Starred Review*
SJump at the Sun
An imprint 
tf liw rln eeksfer 
Chllden
Song of
Creation byPaul Goble
* 
"Caldecott medalist Goble has created a stunning prayer of praise...
[His] instantly recognizable illustrati
-
Kirkus, s
S"Crisp, evocative watercolors that
depict a wide spectrum of nature's
beauty. ... Goble's sweeping vistas.
show a gorgeous cross-section of God
gifts to the world."
-
Publishers Weekly, starred revi,
"Goble creates magical, yet concrete,
scenes.... A beautiful, praiseworthy
volume that does, indeed, sing."
-
Booklist
ISBN 0-8028-5271-8
32 pages - hardcover - $16.00
All ages
1 
YRO4503
S 
nL 
EERDMANS BOOKS
i- 
b 
for Young Readers
IEII 
Grand Rapids/Cambridge
An imprint of Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.
m 
m m
I
I
Unnari
1325 So
Chilm~P
U.SA
-10
Unisity of Illnois Pres 
PEIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
P
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A.GNIL
AD 
CHAMPAGN, I
ADDRESS SERVICE REQUESTED
(r
i~b
~ALS
GNR,
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2004 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, tide, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
1. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccb/
2. When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corer of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and insuttutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books a http www.lis.uueduubofbb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
II 
IIl lil IIIII
0008-9036(200506)58:1 0;1 -0
