ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
~Zq
Pc ·
4 •¸• •i•
"In9 true Pickensian fashion, orphan 911m, a young rat,
is beguiled into a Iiife oif crime by a one-eyed cat named
Buster. But Slim is not a thidf, and is saved by a mouse-boy
named Jim, whose ifamily fakes Slim in. Slim adjusts well to
his new life, and the two share a love of yo-yos;. 
B'ut Slim
is abducted by the hefariou5 Buster... This picture book
has a real story, with adventure, friendship, dastardly
deeds -and yo-yoS I" 
Starred review / ALA Booklist
~i "Channeling 
Aesop through Charles; Pickens, Egielski
brings together two yo-yo-wielding urban rodentS, and
pits them against a gloriously piratical feline hoodlum. The
Caldecoti- Medalist has outdone himself in the art (and)
a heavily battered typdface adds to the generally raffhsh
air of this droll, action-packed modern sable."
--Starred review / Kirkus Reviewzes
~2 
Ages 3 7. $15.95 Tr (0 06 028352 1); $15.89 Lb (0 06 028353 X)
THE 
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS 
September 2002
Vol. 56 No. 1
A LOOK INSIDE
3 
THE BIG PICTURE
John Coltrane's Giant Steps written and illus. by Chris Raschka
4 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
9 
* Postcards from No Man's Land by Aidan Chambers
11 
* Skeleton Hiccups by Margery Cuyler; illus. by S. D. Schindler
15 
* By the Side of the Road written and illus. by Jules Feiffer
29 
* The Making ofa Writer by Joan Lowery Nixon
30 
* No Zombies Allowed written and illus. by Matt Novak
34 
* Boo Hoo Boo-Boo by Marilyn Singer; illus. by Elivia Savadier
40 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
41 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elaine A. Bearden, Reviewer (EAB)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick, Reviewer (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the
United States, add $7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya
Company Ltd. Single copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus
Reprint Co., Route 100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300
North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http:/lwww.lis.uiuc.edu/pubofflbccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2002 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Chris Raschka from John Coltrane's Giant Steps ©2002. Used by permission of
Jackson/Atheneum Books for Young Readers.
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 3
THE BIG PICTURE
John Coltrane's Giant Steps
written and illus. by Chris Raschka
Can a temporal art be captured in a two-dimensional medium? Would elemen-
tary-school-age kids remotely care? Raschka's third literary foray into jazz, a whim-
sical performance of the John Coltrane title piece, answers respectively with an
"Amazingly well" and a resounding "Yes." Here he funnels the playful experimen-
tation that marked his earlier efforts (Charlie Parker Played Be Bop, BCCB 12/92,
and Mysterious Thelonius, 10/97) into a lively opus that is at once artily provoca-
tive and solidly kid-friendly.
"Good evening. And thank you for coming to our book." With a tacit
wink, Maestro Raschka invites children to take a giant step out of their traditional
picture-book role of viewer/listener and into the role of audience, and he straight
away whets their appetites with the promise of a "marvelous and tricky composi-
tion." Oddly assorted players-box, raindrop, snowflake, and kitten-take the
stage and do a bit of limbering up, and the silent music begins. A tempo-setting
raindrop pulses across a double spread, shifting from positive to negative images in
cool blues. It's joined by "sound foundation" box, overlaying the raindrop and
morphing between peach and yellow. Harmony snowflake ("taking the piano part
tonight") tumbles her lavender self into the increasingly complex translucent stra-
tum. And here comes Coltrane's own saxophone kitten ("the melody on top of
everything") striding across her colleagues, a pert and confident streak of inky
black. Well, perhaps a bit overconfident. Even pros have their off moments, and
as kitten lopes along in "BIG, BIG STEPS," the players tangle and collapse in a
humiliating heap: "People, people! What happened? ... [R]aindrops, you were
rushing on page 19. ... Snowflake.... What I want to see is rich color but not
muddy color. Remember. Coltrane's music is dense but transparent." They take
it again from page 14, and this effort is flawless: "Sheets ofcolor. Sheets of sound."
Wherever a child is situated along the humor continuum, there's bound
to be something here to please. First, there's the perennial allure of seeing the
experts-even in improbable guise-get it wrong, and Raschka's diagrammed
analysis of the failure, with arrows and circles in fiery editorial red, is a hoot. Those
who favor slapstick will, of course, glom onto the grand debacle, with box and
raindrop in a discouraged slump, snowflake literally coming to pieces, and droopy-
whiskered kitten flat on her back like a dead cockroach. Older members of the
audience, savvy to conductors' stereotypical perfectionism and fits of pique, will
chuckle knowingly at Raschka's exasperated kvetching.
Churning just beneath this pleasingly goofy, deceptively simple storyline,
though, is a dead-on examination of what makes Trane, Trane. Lecturing his
errant musicians, Raschka casts Coltrane's performance and compositional bench-
marks in child-accessible terms: "No matter how fast he's going, he always sounds
relaxed"; "But can you [box] be strong yet light?"; "He blew a fountain of notes, a
4 
* THE BULLETIN
shower of notes, but those notes made lines that were dynamic and strong and
vivid." It's the pictures, though, that make the truly daring media leap from the
otic to the optic shore. Watercolor is an ideal vehicle for conveying the complexity
of the Coltrane sound, and translucent colors that first slosh together in awkward
disarray later meld delicately into the harmony of the final take, tacitly directing
novice jazz listeners to "watch" for the logical thread within the dense knot of
sound. There's a powerful, if implicit message here: jazz is no cacophonous free-
for-all, but an intricate, disciplined musical form.
The real success of Raschka's performance will, in the end, be measured
by whether kids ask to hear "Giant Steps," or better still, lots of Coltrane tunes.
Fire up the AV equipment and put the Trane's CDs on red alert, because the smart
money says they will be asking. (Imprint information appears on p. 32.)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALDER, ELIZABETH 
Crossing the Panther's Path. Farrar, 2002 
230p
ISBN 0-374-31662-7 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Billy Calder, son of an Irish-born British officer and his Mohawk wife, finds his
loyalties aligning with his maternal relatives as settlers steadily encroach upon In-
dian lands in the Mississippi Valley, and he welcomes the chance to use his multi-
lingual skills in the service of Shawnee chief Tecumseh, who is determined to unite
disparate tribes in defense of their rights. Although this fact-based tale of the
westernmost battles in the War of 1812 is the stuff of gripping drama, Alder stol-
idly wades through the events, encumbering dialogue with historical background
("The Americans are not so stupid. Look how they took Detroit from the British
just as the British took it from France. ... We will not be trapping for long if the
American settlers continue to drive their wagons over the Appalachian Moun-
tains") and breathless exhortation ("But as long as there is breath in my body, I will
not give up. . . . We must let our rifles and arrows speak to the Americans").
Nonetheless, moments of genuine excitement-particularly Billy's rescue of the
Kinzie family in the wake of the Fort Dearborn massacre-shore up the sagging
action, and Alder's account of British and Indian defection from Tecumseh's cause
is often heart-wrenching. Readers who have met the romanticized Tecumseh as
the "older man" in Ann Rinaldi's Second Bend in the River (BCCB 3/97) may
enjoy this quite different spin on the leader's doomed crusade. EB
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
Thumbelina; illus. by Eva Montanari. 
McGraw-
Hill, 2002 
32p
ISBN 1-58845-478-9 
$12.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Andersen's famous tale of the diminutive adventuress is offered here in simplified,
accessible language that hews close to the original plot. Montanari's invitingly
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
5
earthy illustrations have an energetic sweep that contrasts playfully with the usual
romantic fairy-tale fare. Full and partial-spread paintings feature perspectives that
vary dramatically from page to page; the visual characterizations have a homely
quality that imbues the players with domestic, believable personalities. This title is
the best of a new folk and fairy-tale series from McGraw-Hill that is visually char-
acterized by shiny foil elements embossed on the covers and scattered randomly
throughout the illustrations. Andersen's lengthy tales are not always a first choice
for reading aloud to younger listeners; here's one adaptation that lends itself not
only to reading aloud, but even to reading alone by those young adventurers seek-
ing to meet a small, achievable challenge. JMD
ANDRYSZEWSKI, TRICIA 
Terrorism in America. Millbrook, 2002 
64p 
illus.
with photographs 
(Headliners)
ISBN 0-7613-2803-3 
$25.90 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
In this unfocused entry in the Headliners series, Andryszewski attempts to corral
an expansive, unruly topic within sixty-four heavily illustrated pages of text. A
recap of the explosive events of September 11, 2001 predictably opens the discus-
sion, which then segues into an attempt to set the attack within a broader context
of historical and recent domestic and international episodes of terrorism. A disor-
ganized litany (partly thematic, partly chronological) of tragedy and its perpetra-
tors ensues-e.g., the KKK and FALN, animal-rights and anti-abortion activism,
American hostages held in Iran, and Pan Am Flight 103 sabotaged over Lockerbie,
Scotland-all pertinent, but all underexamined. Andryszewski does present an
adolescent-accessible introduction to "leaderless resistance," the organization of
terrorist groups into independently operative cells, articulated in American militia
literature of the past decade and now deployed by elusive international terrorist
groups such as al-Qaeda. Moreover, she concludes with a chapter on America's
challenges for homeland security, posing hard-hitting questions about the suspen-
sion of legal rights for material witnesses, prosecution of suspected international
terrorists by military tribunal, a system of national ID cards, and broad latitude for
information gathering: "Security experts can advise us on what the government
might do . . . But the . .. responsibility for deciding what's best-not simply
what's safest-belongs not to experts or even to the government but to all of us,
collectively in how we choose to vote and individually how we choose to live."
Potent words, these, and probably well worth investment in this title. EB
ATINSKY, STEVE 
Tyler on Prime Time. 
Delacorte, 2002 
168p
ISBN 0-385-72917-0 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-6
To the naked eye, Tyler's just a twelve-year-old visiting his uncle, but as far as he's
concerned, he's a kid on the path to his destiny: stardom. His uncle is a writer for
one of the most successful shows on television, Kids in the House, and Tyler's
determined to land a role on the series despite the reservations and disapproval of
his mother and father. That's a fairly standard middle-grades plot, and the style
sometimes tips into fairly standard middle-grades glibness, but the book lifts itself
above the average with its detailed exploration of television production (Atinsky
has written for CBS and Disney). While there are obstacles and unlikeable people,
Atinsky wisely avoids setting up any cardboard villains, letting the process itself
provide sufficient challenge for Tyler. Tyler's a finy and starstruck kid, but he's
also credibly smart, able to see beyond his dreams to the reality ("I was beginning
to realize that this waiting thing was a big part of what acting was all about") and
6 
* 
THE BULLETIN
thus give his readers a glimpse of it as well. The combination of Hollywood gloss
and unusually insidery information is sure to satisfy kids looking for a zippy read
that goes beyond the pages of TV Guide. DS
BANY-WINTERS, LISA 
Funny Bones: Comedy Games and Activities for
Kids. Chicago Review, 2002 
155p 
illus.
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55652-444-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Budding comedians stalking the Great Guffaw will find some tips here for gather-
ing comic material, honing their improvisational skills, and perfecting cooperation
within an ensemble. Bany-Winters frequently refers readers to the work of the
masters-from Charlie Chaplin to Weird Al Yankovic-highlighting their come-
dic styles and innovations. The quickest way to annihilate a joke is to explain it,
though, and her descriptions of Abbott and Costello's "Who's on First?" patter or
Fred Astaire's ceiling dance simply don't translate well into print. Likewise, her
own suggested sample routines often fall flat, and the short one-acts that conclude
the presentation hardly scale the heights of hilarity. There is, however, a wealth of
promising warm-up games included, of interest not only to comedians but to any-
one with dramatic aspirations. Educators and children's group leaders in search of
team-building activities should also consider this a useful sourcebook. A glossary,
index, and a scattershot list of "Favorite Comedy Resources" (which only partially
coordinates with textual references) are provided for kids who take their comedy
seriously. Undistinguished but lively black-and-white drawings appear through-
out. EB
BEST, CARI 
Goose's Story; illus. by Holly Meade. 
Kroupa/Farrar, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-374-32750-5 
$16.00 
R 6-9 yrs
Based on a real-life incident in the author's backyard, this picture book tells the
story of a girl's encounters with an injured, one-footed Canada goose. All spring
and summer the young narrator observes the ostracized goose as it struggles to eat,
walk, and swim, but the big question still remains: will the goose be able to fly
south come fall? Despite the somewhat wishful ending (the goose, having success-
fully migrated, returns with a mate), Best largely manages to avoid sentimentaliz-
ing the familiar theme of animals triumphing over adversity. Though the narrator
carefully watches over the goose, it never becomes an anthropomorphic pet but
remains a realistically untamed bird. Readaloud audiences will appreciate Best's
rhythmic, poetic language ("[The geese] land in couples and stand in threes and
band together in bunches like people") and the simply expressed, genuine emotion
("My heart is thumping so loud I'm sure she can hear it. 'Oh, goose,' I say, 'what
happened to you?'"). Meade's painted and cut-paper collages feature a variety of
interesting perspectives, from overhead angles to ground-level closeups. The gin-
ger-haired narrator is appropriately kid-like in her postures and facial expressions,
and the goose is strikingly bold from her printed brown feathers, to her elegantly
arched neck, to her black-and-white head. Bring this out at storytime and watch
the wildlife lovers flock to it. JMH
BIBLE 
Storiesfrom the Bible; illus. by Lisbeth Zwerger. 
Neugebauer/North-South,
2002 
160p
ISBN 0-7358-1413-9 
$19.95 
R Gr. 2-6
Excerpts from the King James Bible are subtly but elegantly illustrated in this hand-
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 7
some volume. Selections from both the Old and New Testaments include stories
of the Creation, Moses, and King David, as well as stories of the birth, work,
death, and resurrection ofJesus. The large-print text is laid out in two uncramped
columns per page, with generous amounts of white space between columns and
lines. Zwerger uses a soft, earthy palette of subdued rusts, blues, greens, and grays
for a variety of illustrations and decorations. Some pages sport isolated elements
from the stories (a single animal, a horn, a berry branch, etc.) set against white
pages where they float in snowy serenity; others offer full-size paintings, distin-
guished by changing perspectives and unusual lighting and featuring effective char-
acterizations of biblical persona reminiscent ofZwerger's folkloric players in other
titles. Those seeking powerful additions to world religion and religious instruc-
tion sections should begin here. An index of Biblical chapters, books, and verses is
included. JMD
BOYDEN, LINDA 
The Blue Roses; illus. byAmy C6rdova. 
Lee & Low, 2002 
32p
ISBN 1-58430-037-X 
$16.95 
R Gr. 2-4
Ever since her birth, when he planted a rose in her honor and then named her after
it, Rosalie has been the apple--or more accurately the rose-of her grandfather's
eye. Year after year, she's his faithful partner in gardening, learning from him
about planting, reaping, and cycles ("That's what I like about gardens, Rosalie.
Nothing ever really leaves"), but he can't give her the blue rosebush she asks for
("Roses aren't blue, Rosalie"). He also can't ensure the permanence she desires,
whether it be in the plants they sow or in his own life: when she's nine, he dies,
leaving Rosalie devastated until his return in a dream and the appearance of blue
roses on his grave demonstrate to her that their connection remains. Though the
play on the emotions is fairly blatant and the ending is somewhat baffling (since
there aren't blue roses, is this some kind of botanical as well as spiritual miracle?),
this nonetheless has a tenderness and spirit that gives it more impact than many
stories of bereavement, and the gardening metaphor remains sufficiently well rooted
to avoid airy abstractness. The affectionate relationship between grandfather and
granddaughter is touchingly depicted, and it's a refreshingly contemporary por-
trait of a Native American family. C6rdova balances long, lean, accented lines in
her figures with tidy precision in her floral and garden details; though the people
are somewhat prettified, the earthy richness of the textured acrylics keeps the visu-
als appropriately grounded. This is a quietly respectful book about loss, survival,
and legacy. DS
BROOKS, KEVIN 
Martyn Pig. Chicken House, 2002 
230p
ISBN 0-439-29595-5 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Though fourteen-year-old Martyn has always loathed his alcoholic father ("I hated
every inch of him. From his broken-veined, red-nosed face to his dirty, stinking
feet. I hated his beery guts"), he didn't intend to kill him. Nonetheless, Dad's
dead, having hit his head on the fireplace stone in a fall (he drunkenly lunged for
Martyn, who instinctively shoved him away), and Martyn is determined to keep
his father's death a secret and stay in his own house, aided by the large bequest he's
stunned to discover his father had recently received. Fortunately, he's also aided
by Alex, the beautiful older girl down the road (with whom Martyn has longed to
be more than just friends), and together they work out a plan to remove Martyn's
father and acquire the money-a plan that goes wrong in ways more horrible than
8 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Martyn could ever have anticipated. The Americanized details of this British im-
port are unconvincing and awkward, but otherwise this is a dark and original psy-
chological drama. The twists of danger and betrayal will be genuinely unexpected
to most readers, and they bring a bitterness that many young adults will find grimly
satisfying. Martyn's occasional tendency towards philosophizing ("It's not as if I
broke any commandments or anything. Where does it say, 'Thou shalt not bury
thy father in a gravel pit?'") adds to the emotional resonance and paves the way for
the impact of the final revelations; Brooks' style, in this first novel, remains effec-
tively straightforward and immediate throughout. The pessimism here is sharper
and more personal than Robert Cormier's and less leavened than Lois Duncan's,
and that will be just bleakly right for many readers. DS
BROWN, MARGARET WISE 
Robin's Room; illus. by Steve Johnson and Lou
Fancher. 
Hyperion, 2002 
[34p]
ISBN 0-7868-0602-8 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-7 yrs
Robin leaves his things all over the house, grows plants in the bathtub, paints
pictures on the walls, etc., until his parents provide him not only with his own
room but with three carpenters to help him redo it to his own specifications. The
new room is a wonder-a cork wall to display his art, a closet "like an easel," a tree
growing in a tub-and "everyone said it was the best room in the house." The
specially equipped room is an appealing idea, but pedestrian descriptions give a
first-draft feel to Brown's posthumously discovered text, and the pace never quite
gets up to speed. Paintings by Johnson and Fancher (illustrators of Duncan's I
Walk at Night, BCCB 2/00) feature opaque, stylized forms rendered in a subdued
palette with a flat, polished finish; some surreal Egielski-like touches (a huge fish
leaning against a door) add interest to the compositions. Unfortunately, the illus-
trations fail to communicate the wonder of Robin's new space, and the upturning
of the text and images for several spreads is more confusing than imaginative.
There is some emotional resonance in the empowering of the overly indulged Robin,
however, and youngsters with a yen for a room of their own may find some fantasy
fulfillment here. JMD
CANNON, A. E. 
On the Go with Pirate Pete and Pirate Joe; illus. by Elwood H.
Smith. 
Viking, 2002 
32p 
(Viking Easy-to-Read)
Library ed. ISBN 0-670-03550-5 
$13.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-14-230136-1 
$3.99 
R Gr. 1-3
Pirate Pete ("tall and thin") and Pirate Joe ("short and round") are actually pirate-
wannabes who dance (Pete does the hornpipe, Joe the limbo), eat seafood, and
wash their eyepatches every Sunday night. Three short stories describe the friends
and their attempts to make good on their buccaneering aspirations, first by obtain-
ing a "ship" (actually a black van with a bumper that reads "PIRATES 'R' US")
and then by shopping for an appropriately piratical parrot. This easy reader's
mini-plots don't add up to much, but a silly sense of humor ("Something is still
missing from our pirate lives" exclaims Pete. "Pirate girls!" blurts out Joe) keeps
the text buoyantly afloat, and the sentence structure and patterns provide a helpful
lifeline to struggling readers. Smith's illustrations (mostly half-page with occa-
sional 
ll-page scenes) are executed in muted tones, and his rubbery-lined style
brings to mind old Krazy Kat comics; dialogue bubbles, labels, signs (a pair of
directional roadside signs point travelers to either "Pirate parrots" or "Pirate grumpy
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 9
bunnies"), and other clever details extend the humor even further. For older pri-
mary graders who find reading difficult but who think they are too sophisticated
for easy readers, and for pirate fans who enjoyed Laurence's Captain andMatey Set
Sail (BCCB 9/01), this title is a treasure. JMH
CARNEY, MARGARET 
Where Does a Tiger-Heron Spend the Night?; illus. by Melanie
Watt. 
Kids Can, 2002 
28p
ISBN 1-55337-022-8 
$15.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
Viewers tour the avian kingdom, scooping up a single salient fact about each of a
dozen birds they encounter along the way. "Why does an eagle plunge from the
sky?" asks the verso. Flip over the fold on the right side of the double spread: "To
grasp a fat catfish it spies swimming by." Watt's acrylic foldout pictures work well
with the question/answer format, highlighting each bird in a clear, anatomically
detailed closeup set in an attractive and accurately detailed habitat, then revealing
its peculiar trait when the spread is fully opened. While Carney sets an overall
gentle tone, she doesn't shy away from the less savory doings in birdland: "Why
does a vulture soar high overhead?/ It's sniffing the wind for the scent of the
dead." A closing spread of brief descriptions extends the text ("a roadrunner is
quick enough to kill a rattlesnake without being bitten"), although specific geo-
graphical regions and ranges are not consistently supplied. This could be an excel-
lent choice for reading with preschool siblings: the younger will glide through the
pictures and verse, while the elder swoops for the data at the end. EB
CHAIKIN, MIRIAM 
Angels Sweep the Desert Floor: Bible Legends about Moses in the
Wilderness; illus. by Alexander Koshkin. 
Clarion, 2002 
102p
ISBN 0-395-97825-4 
$19.00 
R Gr. 6-9
Chaikin previously ventured into Midrashim with the collection Clouds ofGlory
(BCCB 5/98), which retold numerous Bible stories from creation to Abraham.
Here she concentrates on the tale of Moses in the desert, delineating the many
ways God and his angels assisted the Israelites on their journey. The language is
austere and formal, and the opening chapters (which focus on the hierarchy of
angels and their tasks) are a bit slow; the pace picks up quickly, however, and the
relationships between God and man, good and evil, take center stage. Overall, the
rendering of this Biblical legend is powerful and accessible, and there's an interest-
ing focus on matters of faith (what it is, how individuals achieve it, what they do
once they have it). Koshkin's full-page paintings (watercolor, gouache, and tem-
pera) are also formal, with stiff and sometimes awkward figures; still, the palette is
warmed by earthy tones of gold and green, and the design is drawn into cohesion
by thin lines of gold framing each painting. Notes give chapter and verse for the
stories Chaikin retells; a list of references is appended. JMD
CHAMBERS, AIDAN 
Postcards from No Man's Land. Dutton, 2002 
312p
ISBN 0-525-46863-3 
$19.99 
R* Gr. 9 up
Since Jacob's grandmother, Sarah, is too ill to make a trip to Holland to meet
long-ago wartime acquaintances of her late husband, Jacob is sent in her place to
attend a ceremony at his grandfather's grave in Arnhem, honoring him and other
fallen soldiers from World War II. When he arrives in Amsterdam, Jacob is hosted
by young Daan, who is also the grandson of Geertrui, the woman who nursed
Jacob's grandfather in the war. In fact, this relationship turns out to have been
more intimate; Jacob's grandfather had an affair with Geertrui, and Jacob and
10 
* THE BULLETIN
Daan are half-cousins. Throughout most of the book, two narrative threads run
concurrently: one tells the story ofJacob's present-day trip while the other tells the
story of Geertrui's survival of the war and devoted tending of Jacob's grandfather.
Interspersed among the chapters of Geertrui's story are excerpts from real war
journals (a note in the acknowledgments credits the authors) that tell more about
the grisly battle of Arnhem in which Jacob's grandfather was mortally wounded.
Chambers' writing is complex and intense, with equal attention and detail given to
characters in both time frames. Both Jacob and Geertrui reach milestones of ma-
turity in their respective stories, and they experience parallel (albeit very different)
sexual awakenings: Geertrui in her love for a wounded soldier (Jacob's grandfa-
ther), and Jacob in his attraction to two young people, a girl in Arnhem and a boy
in Amsterdam. Chambers creates a heady flood of sensory and emotional detail
while keeping tight reins on several powerful plots and subplots, crafting an un-
usually compelling and balanced portrayal of two young people coming of age.
Fans of Anne Frank's diary will be particularly drawn to this volume, both because
of Jacob's own fascination with Anne Frank and because of its similarly unflinch-
ing honesty in depicting both life during war and the process of growing up. KM
CHESTER, JONATHAN 
The YoungAdventurer's Guide to Everest: From Avalanche to
Zopkio; written and illus. with photographs by Jonathan Chester. 
Tricycle,
2002 
40p
ISBN 1-58246-069-8 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Himself a Himalayan climber and photographer, Chester here introduces kids to
his rarefied stomping grounds. Personal experience gives him plenty of significant
and juicy details to share (on frostbite: "As bad as it looks, I ended up losing only
the very tip of one finger"), and he's also got a considerable amount of information
not usually found in such introductory volumes (there's a Sherpa known as the
"icefall doctor" who's been maintaining one route for twenty-five years; 17,600
feet is the upper limit for helicopter evacuation because the air is too thin higher
up), so much so that the alphabetical format fortunately recedes behind the mate-
rial. The visual impact is even more impressive, with each page carefully setting up
some perceptive and intriguing photographs (often with some useful overlaid text
diagramming important points) against contrasting colors and sometimes a well-
chosen quote in addition. Though some images are slightly at odds with the text
(if underwear "should be white," why is the pictured climber kitted out in psyche-
delic longies?), the aggregate view brings the Everest process closer than just about
any other book for young people. Suitable for reading aloud to some young ex-
plorers, tempting reluctant readers, and pairing with Jenkins' The Top ofthe World
(BCCB 4/99), this has a wide range of uses and will please a wide range of kids. A
glossary and an extensive list of resources, ranging from organizations to books
(unfortunately not all of the titles providing quotes in the text), magazines, and
websites, are included. DS
COLLIER, KRISTI 
Jericho Walls. Holt, 2002 
213p
ISBN 0-8050-6521-0 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Josephine is a preacher's daughter, accustomed to moving every few years and
battling the inevitable stigma of virtue that attaches to preachers' kids. When her
family moves from Indiana to the small Southern town where her father was raised,
she is unprepared for the 1950s culture of prejudice and segregation, in part be-
cause, as Josephine puts it, "I'd never seen a colored person up close before." Mean-
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
11
while, her mother shocks the congregation by getting a job and shocks Josephine
by hiring a black housekeeper, Abeline, but Josephine soon finds a friend, despite
local taboos against such relationships, in Abeline's son Lucas. Although the char-
acters are compelling, the pacing occasionally lags, and the climax, in which Lucas,
Josephine, and Lucas's brother perform an act of civil disobedience by demanding
that Lucas be given a library card, isn't as satisfying as the tension-filled buildup.
Nevertheless, this is an involving portrait of a complicated family; Josephine's fa-
ther is so eager to be seen as hometown boy who has made it that he's willing to
overlook injustices that Josephine's mother, herself one-quarter Cherokee and raised
on tales of the Trail of Tears, is actively working to fight. Collier creates a convinc-
ing portrait of the kinds of local and personal battles that eventually culminated in
the larger fights for civil rights. KM
CREW, GARY 
Mama's Babies. Annick, 2002 
160p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55037-725-6 
$18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55037-724-8 
$6.95 
R 
Gr. 6-12
"By the time I was nine years old," says narrator Sarah, "I had begun to doubt that
Mama Pratchett, the woman with whom I had lived for as long as I could remem-
ber, was in fact my mother." Sarah's got a point: there's never been any indication
of a Mr. Pratchett, young children turn up in the household at a startling rate, and
the latest baby arrived, unconventionally, off of the train that stops in their little
nineteenth-century Australian town. Bolstered by her new friendship with the
stationmaster's nephew, Sarah begins to see more of the outside world and to
think more critically about her family-and about the sinister tendency for the
children in it to die in circumstances that Mama Pratchett can't convincingly ex-
plain. Crew (author of Strange Objects, BCCB 9/93) has, according to a brief
explanatory note, drawn on three real-life cases where "baby farmers," women who
took in illegitimate babies for pay, turned to murdering their charges; the result is
a darkly realistic tale with a satisfyingly folkloric flavor and morality (including a
fitting fate for Mama Pratchett and a fairy-tale restoration to her birth family for
Sarah). As the unappreciated and put-upon mainstay of the household, Sarah is a
sympathetic figure indeed, and her gradually expanding understanding-of the
world as well as of her situation-is portrayed effectively. The central plot unfolds
with admirable balance: Crew doesn't shrink from the enjoyable sensationalism of
the drama, but Sarah's simply spoken, slightly Victorian narration adds a restraint
that provides intensity and suspense as well as control. The combination of acces-
sible style and absorbing story will make this a creepy winner for a wide range of
readers. DS
CUYLER, MARGERY 
Skeleton Hiccups; illus. by S. D. Schindler. 
McElderry,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84770-X 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Skeleton has the hiccups, and they're stubbornly resistant to cure, leaving him
hampered with the incessant "hic, hic, hic." His friend Ghost's suggestions don't
initially help either ("Eat some sugar"; "Press your fingers ... over your eyeballs"),
but the clever shade has one more trick up his ghostly sleeve. The streamlined text
gains a rollickingly poetic feel from its "hic, hic, hic" refrain, and audiences will be
unable to resist joining in. Schindler's gouache, watercolor, and ink illustrations
employ suitably dark background tones, making the bright whiteness of Skeleton
and his pal pop off the pages; details extend the text with laugh-out-loud results, as
12 
* THE BULLETIN
when Skeleton attempts to drink water while standing on his head (it comes out of
his eye sockets, of course). This is a peppy change of pace from the usual Hallow-
een fare that could make for a bone-rattlingly good storytime. EAB
DANZIGER, PAULA 
United Tates of America; written and illus. by Paula
Danziger. 
Scholastic, 2002 
159p 
illus.
ISBN 0-590-69221-6 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Sarah Kate ("Skate") Tate is moving into middle school, and she's
not crazy about the transition, especially with the changes in her cousin and best
friend, Susie. Susie wants to spend more time with a new classmate named Kiki
than with Skate, and she's even losing interest in scrapbooking with the "Happy
Scrappys" (Skate and three other friends). Through a strong relationship with a
great uncle (GUM), Skate begins to focus on her own independent interests (a
budding artist, she tries out for the school newspaper) and to consider the benefits
as well as the drawbacks of change. The text lacks the deft insight of Naylor's Alice
books, and GUM's viewpoints are heavy-handedly layered over the text; his death
and hefty bequest to the family seem more narratively convenient than likely. Skate's
narration has Danziger's typical liveliness, though, and she and her scrapbooking
will connect with preteens anticipating the move to middle school or younger kids
navigating the realm of girlhood friendships and growing into their own skin. A
full-length scrapbook section appended at the end of the book highlights the char-
acters and events in the story, complete with photographs. EAB
DEMAREST, CHRIS 
Here Come Our Firefighters!; written and illus. by Chris
Demarest. 
Little Simon, 2002 
[16p]
ISBN 0-689-84834-X 
$10.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-6 yrs
Nifty paper engineering heightens the action as a team of firefighters answers a
call. "Rrrring! The alarm sounds," and viewers pull the first arrowed tab that
rouses the emergency workers from their cozy beds, yanking down one set of blan-
kets and prying a pillow off another weary head. A second tab slides a firefighter
down the brass pole: "Grab your gear, and let's go." There are doors and covers to
open on the fire truck, boxes to lift as workers proceed from one phase of their job
to the next, and a double-page pop-up of a burning house, with axe-wielders scal-
ing the ladder and hose-wielders charging through the front door. Once the fire is
out, the scene shifts abruptly to the firehouse kitchen ("Firefighters are the best
cooks in town"). Flip the page and they're off on another call-"But duty always
comes first." Card stock and pull tabs are not the sturdiest, so this volume's shelf
life is bound to be short. Still, there's enough captioning of truck parts and gear to
satisfy clamors of "What's this?" and "What's that?", and Demarest's watercolor
depictions of a multicultural staff of men and women (and the essential firehouse
Dalmatian) assure listeners that these heroes could be right in their own neighbor-
hood, wherever that neighborhood may be. EB
DEWEY, JENNIFER OWINGS 
Paisano, the Roadrunner; written and illus. by Jennifer
Owings Dewey; illus. with photographs by Wyman Meinzer. 
Millbrook,
2002 
48p
ISBN 0-7613-1250-1 
$23.90 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Dewey affectionately recounts her experience with a family of unusual house
guests-a mating pair of roadrunners and their brood, one of which literally moved
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
13
into her home for several seasons. First introduced to a male she dubbed Hamlet,
who appeared in her yard one cold March day, Dewey soon made the acquain-
tance of "Edith" and was able to observe their nest building, clutch tending, and
brood nurturing, tolerated or ignored by birds with more important matters on
their minds. Lured by hand-fed treats and a warm fire, the chick Paisano actually
left his natural family and took up residence with Dewey, until at maturity he took
to the desert again in search of more appropriate companionship. It's clear that
Dewey did her homework in gathering information on roadrunner behavior, which
she smoothly integrates into her cozily chatty text, and her concluding "Useful
Facts" section is largely redundant. Meinzer's photographs, though sharp and well
coordinated with the text, seem suspiciously like stock shots since they omit any
wished-for views of Paisano and family interacting with Dewey or posing in her
home. An index will assist report writers, but Dewey's intimate storytelling will
best be appreciated by young naturalists or classes chilling out with an end-of-day
readaloud. EB
DISHER, GARY 
The Divine Wind: A Love Story. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2002 
153p
ISBN 0-439-36915-0 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 9 up
Writing retrospectively from 1946, Hartley Penrose recalls his emotionally com-
plicated wartime experiences in northwest Australia. Just out of school, Hart and
his sister, Alice, have reveled in their days pelting about the port city with Mitsy
Sennosuke, the daughter of a diver on one of Mr. Penrose's pearl boats, even though
Hart yearns to be more than just friends with Mitsy. Everything soon changes,
however: Hart and Alice's mother returns to Britain and dies in a bombing raid,
an accident on a Penrose boat cripples Hart and takes the life of Mitsy's father, and
wartime suspicions take their toll on nonwhites ranging from Japanese-Australians
such as Mitsy and her mother to aboriginal workmen. Hart's love for Mitsy, now
a nurse, continues to grow, leaving him anguished at both his competitor for her
affections and her treatment at the hands ofAustralia and Australians--even, some-
times, himself. Disher draws a penetrating picture of the Australian coastal town
and the friction behind its diversity, a friction suddenly exacerbated by the war;
the antipodean picture of that war experience (between the distant European war
that takes Hart's mother, the looming threat of Japanese occupation, and the dis-
appearance of Alice, now a nurse, in a Japanese attack) will be a fresh one to many
U.S. readers. Characterization seems much clearer to other characters than it is to
the reader, however, and the titular love story is largely a disappointment: Disher
repeatedly opts for telling in favor of showing, leaving readers with polished lines
and retroactive adult insight instead of emotional impact, and Hart and Mitsy's
eventual affair is treated tenderly but talkily. There's more resonance, however, in
Hart's inability to separate himself entirely from the bigotry of some of his coun-
trymen, and it's that harder truth that readers will find valuable. DS
EASTON, RICHARD 
A RealAmerican. Clarion, 2002 
155p
ISBN 0-618-13339-9 $15.00 
R Gr. 5-8
A booming 1890s coal-mining company is taking over the small town of Manorville,
Pennsylvania, buying up farms and bringing in recent immigrants to work the
mines. For Nathan, this means that all his friends and their families are moving
away to other places, while his own father refuses to leave the farm that has been
their family's home for as long as he can remember. Prejudice against the immi-
grant workers runs hot, and initially Nathan shares these biases, hurling rocks and
14 
* THE BULLETIN
insults at workers who use the lane on his family's property as a shortcut to the
mines. However, he soon meets Arturo, an Italian immigrant boy who is about his
age, and the two boys become friends. In the course of the boys' growing friend-
ship, their two families begin to trust each other, and when the mining company
hires thugs to beat up striking miners, Nathan and his parents hurry to the
shantytown where Arturo's family lives to warn the workers of the impending dan-
ger. Effectively capturing the perspective of a boy whose social world is undergo-
ing radical change, the book balances various plot lines with sure pacing to create a
compelling glimpse into the history of American industrialization. This is rife
with curricular connections (along with, for instance, Freedman's Kids at Work,
BCCB 10/94), and readers will be drawn into the realistic portrait of Nathan's
world and his ability to create understanding and friendship despite the odds. KM
EGIELSKI, 
RICHARD 
Slim and Jim; written and illus. by Richard
Egielski. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2002 
[40p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028353-X 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028352-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
Egielski gives new life to the age-old story of friends from opposite ends of the
socioeconomic spectrum by presenting the friends in question as rodents and their
setting as an amalgam of nineteenth- and twentieth-century cityscapes. Though
nearly lured into a life of crime by wily feline thug Buster, homeless, orphaned rat
Slim soon finds that he's not cut out to be a thief. A failed robbery attempt results
in a rooftop chase in which Slim meets up with Jim, a well-bred young mouse,
whom he saves from drowning when the two plummet into the river. Grateful,
Jim brings Slim home with him, and the two discover that they share a mutual
aptitude for yo-yo tricks. Despite the naysaying of Jim's grandpa ("Rats are noth-
ing but trouble"), Slim easily settles into Jim's family-until Buster returns and
kidnaps Slim. Slim and Jim's alternative historical world (populated by a variety of
animal species) is an alluring one, and the quick pace and plentiful action (much of
it owing a clear debt to Oliver Twist) will hold a restless primary-grade audience.
Full- and half-page illustrations (rendered in golden browns, rich reds, and stony
grays) capture both the drab seediness and the plusher side of city life; the noctur-
nal rooftop scenes, set against crimson, moonlit skies, are particularly dramatic.
With his eyepatch, earring, and toothy sneer, Buster makes a satisfying villain,
while dark-eyed, pink-eared Jim and Slim are as attractive and clean-cut as rodential
heroes come. Plenty of kids have a taste for melodrama and for mousy protago-
nists (think Stuart Little)-satisfy them with this tale of adventure. JMH
ELLSWORTH, LORETTA 
The Shrouding Woman. 
Holt, 2002 
151p
ISBN 0-8050-6651-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4 -7
In post-Civil War America, modern funeral homes and embalming methods were
beginning to replace traditional funeral practices and the women-like Evie's Ger-
man-American Aunt Flo-who presided over them. In rural Minnesota, however,
Aunt Flo's abilities are appreciated by everyone except her eleven-year-old niece,
whose grief for her recently deceased mother causes her to feel a kind of horror at
the woman who consorts with death. Brief chapters headed by old-fashioned titles
and attractive ink emblems plot the episodes that lead Evie to trust her aunt, un-
derstand the importance of her work, and, eventually, to learn from her. The
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
15
tricks of Aunt Flo's trade--concealed for most of the novel in a box of "plain-
looking pine with rough edges and an ill-fitting top"-will strike many readers as
disappointingly simple: face powder, herbs, pennies (to hold the eyes shut), and
forked sticks (to hold the head up and keep the mouth closed). Evie's flat voice
further demystifies the process of "laying out" (Aunt Flo "carefully washed the
woman's body, mixing the sweet-smelling herbs and spices into the water"), but
her factual descriptions lack the minutiae that would evoke the remarkable inti-
macy of the situation or the practical difficulties of the task. Some superficial
characterization further detracts from the novel's emotional impact (Evie's younger
sister Mae is particularly functional), but an intriguing topic, responsible period
research (detailed in an author's note), and skillful thematic development make
this an accessible and unthreatening introduction to a neglected area of women's
history. FK
ELYA, SUSAN MIDDLETON 
Home at Last; illus. by Felipe Davalos. 
Lee & Low,
2002 
[3 2p]
ISBN 1-58430-020-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 6-9 yrs
The Patiiio family has just arrived in the United States, where Papa takes a factory
job with his brother and Ana is promptly packed off to school. The young girl
slowly but successfully makes inroads into a new language and culture; Mama,
though, is pretty much stranded in their apartment with the twin baby boys, and
for her acculturation is a much greater challenge. Nothing at the grocery store is
familiar, she's overcharged by the clerk, and she's treated brusquely by neighbors
who have no patience with her stumbling attempts at English. Only when one of
the babies falls ill and Papa is not around to help is Mama finally convinced that
she, too, must learn English, and her diligence at night school finally pays off in a
triumph at the grocery store and the promise of their first family feast. Although
the tale focuses on Mama, it plays out through Ana's point of view, and the child's
frustration with Mama's stubbornness and her own inability to help in any direct
way are powerfully conveyed. Davalos captures much of Mama's pain and dignity
in her expressive doe eyes, but the figures in his oil scenes are posed in rigid, di-
orama-style groupings, and even liberal splashes of fuchsia and vibrant cerulean
blue never quite relieve the muddiness of his palette. The text, though a trifle
long, is smooth and well paced, and listeners who take communication for granted
will readily sense the vulnerability of a newcomer who has left her language at
home. EB
FEIFFER, JULES 
By the Side of the Road; written and illus. by Jules Feiffer. 
di
Capua/Hyperion, 2002 
[50p]
ISBN 0-7868-0908-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Richard is engaging in the time-honored pastime of hammering on his little brother
in the backseat ("If they stick you in the backseat of a car for two hours, what do
they expect?") when his fed-up father pulls over to the side of the road and gives
him an ultimatum: behave or get out of the car. Richard opts to get out, and as
time passes he grows increasingly fond of his ostensible punishment ("An hour
later I was kind of used to it. Two hours later it was where I wanted to live"). In
fact, he refuses ever to return, and he ends up living in a cozy little tunnel by the
16 
* THE BULLETIN
side of the road, becoming a celebrity, and finally meeting a nice girl and raising a
family in his tunnel. Though the domesticated ending falls somewhat flat, this is
an authentically childish fantasy played out with both sharp intelligence and wide-
eyed inventiveness. Feiffer captures the resolute stubbornness of childhood with
extraordinary precision (when Richard's father asks his son if he's learned his les-
son, "The way he said it made me unlearn the lesson I was right then in the middle
of learning"), mapping acute insights about family and relationships onto the de-
ceptively casual narration. The text is housed in white bars that run across page
tops and bottoms, making the fluid, often shadowy black-and-white art burrow
through the pages and echoing the physically strictured world wherein Richard
finds his freedom. Ultimately, this is both a youthful fantasy about tremendous
potency, with Richard's will triumphing over that of his parents, and a fable of
maturation, with Richard separating from his family, achieving independence, and
reuniting with them on an adult footing. The sheer subversive joy of the former
will be invigorating, and some readers may even absorb the subtle point of the
latter. DS
FRAMPTON, DAVID 
My Beastie Book ofABC; written and illus. by David
Frampton. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028824-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028823-X 
$15.95 
R 4-6 yrs
As the title suggests, this is an alphabetical menagerie, treating the wild kingdom
from alligator to zebra. Frampton introduces each creature with a pithy couplet
(or, in a few cases, a triplet), often joking about the critter's characteristics ("O is
for octopus, a fun guy to meet./ You can shake his eight hands, or are they eight
feet?"; "V is for vulture. They dine on decay./ A truly disgusting and smelly buf-
fet./ But better than broccoli any old day!"). The couplets are sometimes rhyth-
mically problematic and a little forced, but the contrivances themselves can be
funny and the humor is effectively geared for its audience ("J is for jaguar. Her
mom did insist/'Go wash again! There's a spot that you missed!'"). The palette in
the woodcut illustrations sometimes seems a little dusty due to the absence of
black, but colors are enjoyably fanciful, emphasizing contrast in each illustration.
Each page's design is satisfyingly replete without being overcrowded: thick hatch-
ing in lighter colors creates highlights, marrying well with imaginative and elegant
stipples, dots, and lines that give this zoo a classy rusticity, whether it be in the
flock of scarlet and smoky purple butterflies or the wrinkly, baleful-eyed orange
rhino. For kids not ready for Douglas Florian's Mammalabilia (BCCB 3/00), this
is an exotic and amusing bestiary. DS
FRANK, MITCH 
Understanding September 11th: Answering Questions about the
Attacks on America. Viking, 2002 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 0-670-03582-3 
$16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-670-03587-4 
$8.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Frank delivers on his titular promise, offering a genuine effort at understanding
the attack and its probable genesis and, most importantly, attempting to view the
United States through the eyes of its enemies ("Some have felt that by trying to
understand their motives, we are excusing what they did . .. But you can change
only what you understand"). A reporter for Time magazine who has covered the
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
17
terrorist attack, Frank exhibits well-tested skill in analyzing a complex event and
organizes his material into a navigable question-and-answer format with clear chapter
and intra-chapter headings, detailed index, comprehensive glossary, and a timeline
of the thirteen critical hours of September 11 running unobtrusively along the
bottom of each page. The real selling point, though, is his cool-headed approach
to inflammatory subject matter, from the broad continuum of women's rights in
different Islamic countries, to the history of holy war ("Knights of Europe traveled
to Palestine in the first of eight vain attempts to drive all Muslims from the Holy
Land. Those who went were promised eternal bliss in Heaven. Sound familiar?"),
to candid critique of America's foreign policy ("As the most powerful nation on
earth, America can go wherever its wants to but doesn't always think about what is
best for the locals. Because we don't want Middle Eastern countries to collapse in
a revolution and be taken over by rulers less friendly to us, out leaders have meddled
in the nations' affairs"). Like Andryszewski (above), Frank cautions against ero-
sion of civil liberties in the aftermath of last year's attack: "Every individual has
the right to question, to speak out, to make sure their rights are safe. Democracy
is about participation." Readers who join Frank in asking "Why?" will be better
able to debate "What comes next?" EB
GILSON, JAMIE 
Stink Alley. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
183p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029217-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-0688-17864-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
In a notable departure from her contemporary school and family tales, Gilson
turns to the early seventeenth-century English Separatists who sojourned in Hol-
land prior to their ultimate settlement at Plymouth Colony. Twelve-year-old Lizzie,
whose parents died soon after their arrival in Leiden, has been taken into the home
of congregation leader William Brewster. Determined not to be a burden, Lizzie
finds day work as a kitchen maid with a well-to-do local family and strikes up a
stormy friendship with their sassy eight-year-old son. The little boy's mischievous
meddling stirs trouble between Lizzie and the straightlaced Brewsters but also alerts
the community to a very real threat from English spies, who have come to round
up their illegal emigrant countrymen and bring them home for prosecution. Gilson
spins this underexamined chapter in the "Pilgrim" story into an engaging piece of
historical fiction, evoking with particular skill the Separatist elders' well-founded
fear that their children were being seduced by the permissive ways of their Dutch
hosts. Her revelation that Lizzie's young friend is actually the Rembrandt van Rijn
(his sketch of Lizzie squatting behind an occupied outhouse is quite a local hit) is
an extraneous bit of fluff that taxes credibility. However, Gilson's foray into the
past is, overall, a successful venture, and her knack for dialogue, honed on kidspeak
in the here-and-now, transports readers smoothly to the way-back-when. EB
GORMAN, CAROL 
Dork on the Run. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
184p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029410-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029409-4 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Sixth-grader Jerry Flack (last seen in Dork in Disguise, BCCB 9/99) has-he
thinks-successfully left his dork persona behind him at his old school. Con-
vinced to run for class president by his best friend/girlfriend, Brenda, Jerry finds
himself in competition with cool and popular Gabe Marshall. Gabe is also some-
thing of a bullying jerk, and the contest quickly turns nasty: Gabe takes unflatter-
18 
* THE BULLETIN
ing photos of the unathletic Jerry slipping all over the ice at the local rink and
passes them around; Jerry responds by pouring green goo all over Gabe and put-
ting the photos up on his campaign website. Gabe retaliates with increasingly
dangerous pranks, including holding Jerry by his legs out a second floor window
(while a cohort takes photos of the terrified, screaming Jerry with a telephoto lens)
and ambushing him in the bathroom and cutting off hunks of his hair just before
his public campaign speech. There are some serious issues here, but the book fails
to deal with them effectively, whitewashing the effect of Gabe's harassment in
order to get Jerry onto the high road (he remains nobly silent about Gabe's ac-
tions). Conversations are stilted, and the adult point of view is clumsily inserted
(Jerry muses on Gabe as class president: "It was unthinkable that he might win the
presidency and use his position for nothing more than helping out the students
who disrupt everyone else. The sixth grade at Hawthorne Middle School deserved
better than that"). Though there's some leavening humor, this unrealistic look at
bullying in middle school is ultimately full of adult wishful thinking; kids know
better. JMD
HAAs, JESSIE 
Shaper. Greenwillow, 2002 
186 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000171-2 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000170-4 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Fourteen-year-old Chad is still bitter about the death of his beloved dog, Shep
(shot by his grandfather after being irreparably injured in a road accident), and he
refuses to care for the family's goofy new dog, Queenie. His interest is nonetheless
piqued by his new neighbor, animal trainer David Burton (and his gorgeous fifteen-
year-old daughter, Louise), and by David's proposal that he use Chad in his work.
After working with David, Chad is surprised to realize that heedless Queenie can
actually be intelligent and responsive, but he's still wary of connecting with her or
doing anything else that suggests forgiveness for Shep's terrible end. There are
some compelling plotlines-Chad's grief, his yearning for Louise, his rejection of
his grandfather-and the book perceptively treats the human difficulties involved
in seeing new ways of relating to and training animals. The writing is sometimes
skittery, however, shooting off confusingly in different directions within a paragraph
or even a sentence, and the plot elements sometimes lack sufficient individual
exploration or connection with each other; the discussions of training philosophy
(shaping an animal's behavior using a clicker) are also sometimes more evangelistic
than clear or fairly assessed. Haas is still better than most authors at writing about
the human-animal relationship, however, and readers looking for something more
than a simple dog story may find this absorbing. DS
HAWES, LOUISE 
Waiting for Christopher. Candlewick, 2002 
224p
ISBN 0-7636-1371-1 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Fourteen-year-old Feena, recently moved to her small Florida town with her di-
vorced mother, has no friends and a barren life. When she witnesses toddler Chris-
topher being spanked repeatedly by his mother and sees how his mother leaves
him alone, threatening not to come back, she whisks him away on an impulse.
After her secret is discovered by Raylene Watson, a popular classmate, the two girls
decide to save Christopher from his abusive mother and team up to take care of
him--but Feena can't quite forget Christopher's now-childless mother. The plot
is such a complicated house of cards that the smallest puff of logic blows it right
down. Despite farfetched motivations, and outrageous coincidences, however,
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
19
there are psychological layers here that remain compelling. The characterizations
of the two girls are solid even when the plot is not, and Christopher's winning
personality will draw readers. Hawes capably captures the blank despair of Feena's
life, her grief over a baby brother dead of SIDS, the hope kindled by her friendship
with the indomitable Raylene. While readers may hoot at the contrivance of the
plot, the emotional drama will hold until the last page has been turned. JMD
HEILIGMAN, DEBORAH 
Honeybees; illus. by Carla Golembe. 
National Geo-
graphic, 2002 
32p 
(Jump into Science)
ISBN 0-7922-6678-1 
$16.95 
R 
5-9 yrs
Who does most of the work? Female bees, that's who, as readers learn in this
attractive introduction to the honeybees' life cycle. With a brief nod to the queen
and her male drones, Heiligman focuses on metamorphosis and the roster of se-
quential duties that a worker bee experiences in her six-week life-cleaning her
cell, nursing larva, tending the honeycomb, grooming the queen, guarding the
hive, foraging for nectar and pollen. This title is more simplified than Gail Gib-
bons' The Honeymakers (BCCB 4/97), omitting information about beekeeping
and honey processing as well as Gibbons' more thorough detail of insect anatomy.
With Golembe's vividly colored gouache scenes magnifying the bees' activities,
however, this is a more accessible introduction for group sharing. EB
HENSON, HEATHER 
Making the Run. 
Cotler/HarperCollins, 2002 
227p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029797-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029796-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 9-12
Lu is floating through her senior year, staying stoned most of the time and trying
to keep out of trouble long enough to graduate and get out of town. She's not
exactly tied down: her widowed father has basically written her off as a pothead
and juvenile delinquent, barely speaking to her except to offer the occasional criti-
cism of her clothes, behavior, or attitude. Things change, however, when Jay, a
friend of Lu's older brother, moves back to town, overwhelming Lu with memo-
ries of her childhood years and with attraction to Jay. Soon Jay and Lu are em-
barked on a torrid relationship that occupies most of Lu's attention, even though
her troubled (and unexpectedly pregnant) friend Gin needs Lu's support. Al-
though there's a lot of action packed into these pages, Henson's deft pacing sus-
tains the tension of events throughout the text, allowing narrative segments to
overlap like a series of waves, with one receding just as another splashes to the
foreground. Scenes with the sexually manipulative drug dealer (from whom Lu
buys marijuana) are appropriately creepy, but her drug use is portrayed as a delib-
erate means of tuning out a world that's simply delivering more action than Lu
knows how to handle. Although this story isn't comfortable, it is real; teen readers
will appreciate the lack of condescension in this book that tells it like it is for many
young people. KM
HICKMAN, JANET 
Ravine. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
2 1 5p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029367-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17952-5 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 4-6
In a time of knights and battles, princesses and magic, Ulfis the "wizard's boy," an
outlander captured in a raid and forced to serve in the household of the king. One
day a mist fills the woods and ravine near the castle; in the mist Ulf sees a dog,
20 
* THE BULLETIN
golden and wolf-like. A whistle calls the dog across the ravine-and across time,
since the dog, Duchess, belongs to present-day-dweller Jeremy. Unfortunately, all
the adventure is on Ulfs side of the ravine (kidnapping, magic, danger, rescue,
etc.), and the everyday drama of Jeremy's modern life pales in comparison. The
connections between the two worlds are tenuous and sometimes forced, and the
conveniences of plot and magical capabilities occasionally give pause. Still, Ulfs
story (based on the German hero saga of Gudrun the Fair) is compelling, and even
though the bridge between the worlds is an insubstantial one, readers may still be
willing to chance their way across. JMD
JIANG, JI-LI, ad. 
The Magical Monkey King: Mischief in Heaven; illus. by Hui-
Hui Su-Kennedy. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
122p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029544-9 
$14.89
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-442149-X 
$4.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Jiang (author of the autobiographical Red Scarf Girl, BCCB 2/98) tells eighteen
brief stories of the Magnificent Monkey King, from his birth as Stone Monkey on
the Mountain of Flowers and Fruits to his reign as Magnificent Monkey King,
from his sojourn in heaven as impudent servant to the Jade Emperor to his impris-
onment inside a mountain by the great Buddha. Stories of the Chinese mythic
hero are tricky to translate for younger audiences, but these adaptations employ
vigorous language that easily communicates the life force of the merry and mis-
chievous Monkey. This legendary trickster is both foolish and clever, irritating
and ingratiating; in many ways he is like a rambunctious, self-absorbed adolescent,
whose boorish tendencies are as repellent as his confident panache is irresistible.
Jiang's concise, funny introduction to this contradictory character is suitable for
storytelling and reading aloud, as well as being a smooth text for reading alone.
Black-and-white illustrations by Su-Kennedy, done in the style of Chinese block
prints, are interspersed throughout, and while they sometimes make this mischie-
vous Monkey look a touch too innocent, they do capture his insouciant flair. JMD
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Lookingfor Red. 
Simon, 2002 
116p
ISBN 0-689-83253-2 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Mike (Michaela) provides the hauntingly disembodied voice of this compelling
novel that chronicles family life after "my brother, Red, just disappeared from us
forever." However, the anticlimactic story behind Red's drowning (revealed within
the last five pages) is not the focus; indeed, facts are supplied sparingly and off-
handedly by a narrator who finds her own age, race, and gender (though not her
location) irrelevant in the context of her loss of the one person who until three
months previously "was always there, and we were always us." A family history
does emerge, however-Mike's father grew up in project housing but her mother
is a native of Cape Cod (where the story is set), descended from 120 years of "dark,
long-ago faces"-and Mike's extended family (especially eccentric Aunt Caroline
and Jo, a freethinking neighbor) provide understanding and support. The novel is
broken up into three sections-missing, looking, moving on-composed of brief
vignettes that chart these stages of grieving and introduce the sporadic appearances
of Red as a ghost. In the end, a ghostly ancestor (first seen by Mike years earlier
when she and Red had run away from home) joins Red and they disappear, just
after Mike begins to feel for the first time since his death "like I'm not being led by
a remote control." Emotional intensity casts a New England fog over many of the
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 21
usual narrative guideposts, but the novel's strong sense of place and familial rela-
tionships provides readers with some solid ground from which to make connec-
tions or gain insights. FK
JOHNSTON, TONY 
That Summer; illus. by Barry Moser. 
Harcourt, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-15-201585-X 
$16.00 
Ad 
7-10yrs
The narrator recalls the summer that his young brother, Joey, "took sick" with
what at first appears to be a standard stomachache but proves to be something
more serious: "Joey was dying." As Joey's decline continues, his family and friends
deal as best as they can with the difficult present and the looming future, while
Joey pieces a quilt depicting the things he's loved. Johnston's free-verse lyric is
concise and eloquent, and she provides some telling touches ("I learned a lot that
summer .... How to make a bed with your brother in it"); the understatement
realistically conveys the family's stunned silence about their loss. Unfortunately, it
also means that children will be left with many questions (they'll wonder, for in-
stance, why no doctor is mentioned, what makes Joey's hair fall out, and whether
their own simple tummyaches are also lethal), and the retrospective adult tone (the
events seem to take place in some unspecified past) and tendency toward overartful
simile and metaphor ("hope/ fluttered inside us, like a little green/ bird") further
pull the story away from the concrete and into a polished, sentimental bedside
vigil. Moser's grayscale portraits of the family in photographic borders effectively
suggest the haze of memory over these pre-sadness scenes, contrasting with the
occasional full-color image of Joey's friends, his quilt, and finally the surviving
narrator clutching Joey's beloved dog; though the faces are sometimes awkward,
the images are a sophisticated evocation of the change between then and now.
Ultimately this is more effective artistically than emotionally, but the underlying
story of loss may still touch audiences. DS
JONELL, LYNNE 
Bravemole; written and illus. by Lynne Jonell. 
Putnam,
2002 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-399-23962-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
A very ordinary earth-tunneling mole diligently pursues his daily work and returns
home to bask in the love of his wife and Babymole, and the single cloud over his
domestic bliss drizzles a few drops of jealousy over the Smartmoles, Bigmoles, and
Starmoles in the glittery world outside his experience. All that changes on the day
when two airborne dragons attack and destroy two "mountains" the moles have
labored so hard to build. Overcoming his initial paralyzing fear, Mole joins a host
of other "moles who were nobody special" to dig through the wreckage and rescue
trapped survivors, earning the title of Bravemole. Jonell's fable, transparently based
on the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center, is rife with reverent intention,
illustrated with an endearing cast of soulful, rosy-proboscised moles, and delivered
with flashes of graceful storytelling: "He would see Smartmoles whisking by, looking
very crisp as to whiskers and very bright as to teeth, and he wondered what it
would be like to be one of them." However, the tale narrowly misses two potential
audiences: it is too text-intensive to hold little listeners, and it's too heavy-handed
to pass muster with older readers. Adults commemorating the events of Septem-
ber 11th with their children may appreciate the emotional cushioning of this fan-
tasy, but many will find Mole's comforting words to Babymole, "You will not have
22 
* THE BULLETIN
to fight these dragons. We grown-ups will fight them for you," a promise they
cannot make with confidence. EB
JONELL, LYNNE 
When Mommy Was MAD; illus. by Petra Mathers. 
Putnam,
2002 
26p
ISBN 0-399-23433-0 
$13.99 
R 4-7 yrs
When Mommy bangs the pans around in the kitchen and "forgets" to kiss Daddy
goodbye, her sons worry that they've done something to provoke her ("Did you
color on the walls again?" demands the older Christopher of younger brother
Robbie), but then Christopher realizes that "maybe it's Daddy she's mad at. Maybe
it isn't us at all." "It feels like us," Robbie responds, as he alternately tries to cheer
and distract his mother to no avail; as a result, Robbie's own anger grows until he
reaches the boiling point and begins "borking" (bumping) his mother while she
gardens: "I am a borkupine and I am borking you with my prickles." Luckily,
Robbie's mom understands what is going on, lets go of her anger, and joins her
sons in a gentle game of pretend until Daddy returns home and all is made right.
Jonell uses realistic dialogue and a touch of humor to bring this all-too-common
scenario to credible life; Mommy's black mood, Christopher's worry, and Robbie's
puzzlement and anger are believably communicated in a way that will resonate
with many families. Mathers' childlike colored-pencil art, in which human beings
are reduced nearly to stick figures, is sometimes so naive and flat as to be rather
awkward. Still, the simplified faces and bodies are surprisingly emotive, and the
pages in which Robbie's angry actions take up the entire spread (rather than stay-
ing neatly contained within frames, as do the illustrations on the other pages) are
particularly effective. It's not unusual to see kids dealing with their own anger in
picture books, but it's somewhat rare to see children dealing with adult anger;
while the resolution may come a bit easily here, kids will find relief in the reassur-
ing ending and satisfaction in seeing a child, rather than an adult, as the agent of
peacemaking. JMH
JOOSSE, BARBARA 
Stars in the Darkness; illus. by R. Gregory Christie. 
Chronicle,
2002 
30p
ISBN 0-8118-2168-4 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
The nameless African-American narrator lives with his mother and brother in a
dangerous neighborhood in an anonymous city. At night they look out the win-
dow and squeeze their eyes, pretending that they "live on the moon," far away
from the dangers outside their windows ("If there's shots fired, we say it's the light
of the stars crackin' the darkness"). When the narrator's brother, Richard, starts
hanging around with "gang bangers," the narrator and his mother work together
to begin to organize their neighborhood against the influence of gangs. In the end,
the neighborhood is successfully organized, and now the stars in the darkness are
the flashlights of neighbors who have joined the nightly Peace Walks. This is
undeniably programmatic, but Joosse's narrator has a sure voice that young chil-
dren will recognize; when his brother denies his gang involvement, the narrator
says, "Richard thinks I'm a little kid, but I'm not as little as he thinks. I know what
I know." Christie's signature style uses thick brushstrokes to depict people with
exaggerated facial features and enlarged heads, accurately capturing the tension
and feat of people living in a war zone. Although some may find that the purpose
overrides the story, this will nevertheless appeal to young listeners who crave order
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
23
in their lives and the triumph of good neighbors over the evil of the streets. A list
of gang-prevention resources is included. KM
JORDAN, SHERRYL 
The Hunting ofthe Last Dragon. HarperCollins, 2002 
186p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028903-1 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028902-3 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 6-9
When Jude, son of a swineherd in fourteenth-century England, attends a fair, he
meets Jing-Wei, a young Chinese noblewoman exhibited as a freak because of her
slanted eyes, brown skin, and bound feet. After a fire-breathing dragon annihilates
Jude's family and home village, the boy joins the circus and becomes keeper to
Jing-Wei; soon the two flee the circus together, finding shelter in the home of Lan,
an old Chinese wise woman who lives in the woods. Lan has a plan to kill the
marauding dragon with dynamite and kites, the knowledge of which she brought
with her from China, and a determined Jing-Wei and a reluctant Jude travel to the
dragon's lair to carry out the plan. The setup is awkward and the openings and
closings of the chapters are repetitive (Jude is telling his story to a monk, who's
transcribing it, and each chapter opens with Jude saluting the monk and com-
menting on their progress; each chapter closes with Jude's promise to continue the
following day). There is little momentum and no suspense (the reader knows
from the start that Jude and Jing-Wei are safe at the monastery), and the storytell-
ing is marred by anachronistic characterizations, artificial dialogue, and unlikely
plotting. The author's note discusses the nature of scriptoria in fourteenth-cen-
tury England, the scientific advances of Chinese civilization, and other "based in
historical fact" elements of the text, in addition to explaining the authorial whimsy
of treating fire-breathing dragons as history. JMD
KEEHN, SALLY M. 
Anna Sunday. 
Philomel, 2002 
26 6 p
ISBN 0-399-23875-1 
$18.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
When a letter arrives informing thirteen-year-old Anna and her brother Jed that
their father has been wounded and is not expected to survive, Anna dons overalls,
chops off her hair, and with Jed and their cousin's "Bible horse" crosses the Con-
federate line into Virginia, where their father is being tended by rebel "she-devil"
Mrs. McDowell. This grandmotherly widow, the children discover, is a staunch
advocate of states' rights but adamantly anti-slavery, and she's taken better care of
their beloved Pa than the Union private who's ostensibly in charge. Pa rallies, but
just when it seems that they'll be able to smuggle him back to Pennsylvania, Lee's
troops retake the Union-controlled fort near the McDowell farm and the family is
separated once again. Keehn conjures up an intriguing cast of players: simple-
minded, God-praising Cousin Ezekiel and his sturdy plow horse that only responds
to shouted Scripture passages; profiteering sutler Mr. Eli, who drugs the children
to steal their horse; Mrs. McDowell and her grandson Joshua, who may or may
not have been responsible for Pa's injury and who may or may not be Confederate
spies. Unfortunately, Keehn expends more energy setting up than following up
promising characters and storylines, and the rushed happy ending (the family is
reunited and Mrs. McDowell is now disguised as a man as well) leaves too many
subplots dangling. The payoff may be small, but Anna is a likable narrator with a
strong, distinctive voice, and Samson the "Bible horse" is worth the price of admis-
sion. EB
24 
* 
THE BULLETIN
KERLEY, 
BARBARA 
A Cool Drink of Water. National Geographic,
2002 
32p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7922-6723-0 
$16.95 
R 
4-10 yrs
As the opening text states, "Somewhere, right now, someone is drinking water."
This exceptionally handsome photoessay explores the many ways people obtain
this fundamental element-drawing it from a community spigot or a murky river,
hefting it on a shoulder yoke or stacking it in flats of gallon bottles, collecting it
from a dripping rooftop or lapping it straight from a spurting fountain. Photo-
graphs have been selected not only for content but also for artistry of composition,
and they've been juxtaposed to evoke cultural contrasts. A man from Oman stands
before towering stacks of clay pots, holding a luminous jug in his broad hands;
opposite, a graceful glass pitcher of ice water stands beside plates of fruit, suggest-
ing not only the universality of the bulb shape, but also the hedonistic Western
pleasure of chilled water on a hot day. A denim-clad hiker pauses in a niche of
flame-colored, eroded rock, squeezing his "designer" water from a plastic bottle,
while the Australian cowboy on the facing page tips a burlap bag to his lips-his
bag, hat, and leathery skin a harmony of browns against a deep blue sky. Two final
spreads offer brief notes on the geographical location and context of each photo
and comment on the dwindling supply of potable water. The pictures alone,
though, speak eloquently of how this precious commodity is variously treasured or
taken for granted throughout the world, and reflective viewers will discern that a
region's affluence can be measured not only in terms of money but also in terms of
its vital resources. EB
LANDAU, ELAINE 
Osama bin Laden: A WarAgainst the West. 
Twenty-First Cen-
tury Books, 2002 
144p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-1709-0 
$23.90 
M 
Gr. 5-9
Eerie cover art-paper and fiber collage of bin Laden's head framed by money bag,
bomb, crossed bones, and a flame-dotted title cursively rendered in fuse-like string-
offers an accurate indication of the vitriolic contents ahead. With the title's text
largely prepared before the attack of past September and with the subject currently
(ahem) unavailable for interview, Landau cobbles together a biography from a
narrow selection of secondary sources, adding opening chapters on 9/11 and push-
ing all the necessary buttons to set the Stars and Stripes a-wavin': "[The WTC]
was a towering landmark that reflected the United States at its best"; "It's nothing
short of state-sponsored terrorism." Unnamed "scholars," "officials," and "ex-
perts" offer an indiscriminate melange of fact and opinion, and Landau is well past
the halfway mark in her discussion before she begins to incorporate supporting
evidence and connect the dots between terrorist activities and the fruits of U.S.
and international investigation into them. Adolescents who wade through the
verbiage (ineffectively assisted by a glossary that defines "famine" but not "sanc-
tions") will probably derive as fair an outline of bin Laden's life-from overlooked
young sibling, to playboy, to freedom fighter, to financier and coordinator for
radical Islamist warriors-as it's currently possible to learn. However, outdated
material (the Taliban-backed Afghanistan government is apparently still in power),
undersourced allegations (whatever their inherent truth), and breathless prose do
little to aid American readers in understanding why they've come under attack.
EB
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
25
LOURIE, PETER 
On the Trail ofLewis and Clark: A Journey Up the Missouri River;
written and illus. with photographs by Peter Lourie. 
Boyds Mills, 2002 
48p
ISBN 1-56397-936-5 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Having tailed the historical Sacagawea on one part of the Corps of Discovery's
journey, Lourie now navigates the Missouri in the wake of Lewis and Clark's keelboat
with several friends, a fiberglass twenty-two-footer, a motorized canoe, and a Ford
Bronco trailing along as backup. Even with comforts and securities that the Corps
could never imagine, the trip is an arduous one, with floodwaters, blind channels,
spent fuel, and nasty weather, and even as Lourie observes the changes that devel-
opment and hydrological technologies have brought to the Missouri, he catches a
glimpse of stretches of wilderness that the nineteenth-century mission would have
experienced as well. In a departure from his more tightly focused traveler's tales
(notably, Rio Grande, BCCB 4/99, and The Lost Treasure of the Incas, 11/99),
Lourie never quite defines just whose story he's telling here, the Corps' or his own,
and the text meanders uneasily among descriptions of the regions, quotes from the
explorers' journals, and snippets of his team's immediate adventures. With the
Expedition's bicentennial just around the corner, librarians readying their collec-
tions may nonetheless want to include this title as a useful update on the route. EB
MACDONALD, AMY 
Quentin Fenton Herter III; illus. by Giselle Potter. 
Kroupa/
Farrar, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-374-36170-3 $16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Pasty-faced Quentin III ("seldom seen and never heard") is just too good to be
true, while his untidy doppelganger, Quentin 3, is just the opposite ("Quentin's
shadow answered back/ and always took the last at snack"), until III finally breaks
out and gives in to the urge to "be bad-a bit./ To throw a little tiny fit," leaving
3 to fill-temporarily-the role of good boy. The contrast between these delicate-
featured upper-crust oddities (portrayed in old-fashioned short pants) is apparent
as soon as Quentin 3 enters the picture, since his elongated form repeatedly refuses
to be restrained by the roughly square confines of the art, instead poking out be-
yond the borders. The bouncy rhythms and playful vocabulary of the dynamic
text provide an appropriate sense of barely maintained order that complements the
exaggerations and quirky details in the clean, clearly focused illustrations. Though
the story is finally more remarkable for its symmetry than its insights, youngsters
receptive to the charms of the polysyllabic and mannered will enjoy this light-
hearted exploration of the two faces of childhood. FK
MASON, ANTONY 
In the Time ofPicasso: The Foundations ofModernArt. Copper
Beech, 2002 
48p 
illus. with photographs 
(Art around the World)
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2713-4 
$23.90
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7613-1628-0 
$8.95 
R 
Gr. 5-12
In the Time of Warhol: The Development of Contemporary Art. Copper
Beech, 2002 
4 8p 
illus. with photographs 
(Art around the World)
Library ed. ISBN 0-7613-2714-2 
$23.90
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7613-1629-9 
$8.95 
R 
Gr. 5-12
Compressing even just one period of art history into a small volume is a daunting
challenge, but these entries in the Art around the World series provide a tasty
26 
* THE BULLETIN
buffet of art in small bites. Each volume treats significant movements concisely in
a spread or two, explaining the movement's philosophy, mentioning its main artists,
and offering several representative images; the range is impressive, with Modern
Art including lesser-discussed directions such as Die Brticke and Social Realism,
and Contemporary Art helping readers understand confusing movements such as
Minimalism and Land Art. While the focus is largely Euro- and USA-centric,
there is some genuine "around the world" exploration in sidebars about art in
specific countries and regions, from France and the Soviet Union to the South Sea
Islands and India, which provide some eyeopening insights into surprising artistic
connections and influences. These don't have the depth of Greenberg and Jordan's
works (TheAmerican Eye, BCCB 12/95, etc.), but they're imaginative and compact
treatments, and they'll be mighty useful for quick explorations or pre-museum-
visit overviews. Each volume includes a chronology of its period, a brief history of
art, a rather scanty glossary (which would have been a great place to provide
pronunciation guides for many difficult terms), and an index. DS
MASON, SIMON 
The Quigleys; illus. by Helen Stephens. 
Fickling, 2002 
14 8p
ISBN 0-385-75006-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
The Quigleys are an amiable family of four (Mum, Dad, Will, and Lucy, fre-
quently known as Poodle), struggling with the obstacles of daily life. Each family
member, small or large, gets a chapter in the spotlight (which isn't always entirely
flattering). In general, the kids get the best of things: while babysitting for the
neighbors' children, Dad manages to misplace one of his charges until Lucy saves
the day, and Mum's birthday goes from bad to worse until the kids provide a
proper celebration. In her own chapter, clever little Lucy manages to march down
the aisle as a bridesmaid clad in the bee costume of her dreams, and rounding out
the book is the saga of Will's carefully laid plans for an avian Christmas present.
While the book sometimes laughs at the kids rather than with them, everybody
else gets laughed at as well, and the humor is warm and perceptive, rooted in daily
realities ("The house seemed very quiet without Mum. It was incredible to think
how much noise she must make when she was there") and vivid turns of phrase
("Lucy hated Dad's cauliflower cheese. She stared at it angrily, as if trying to
frighten it away"). The milieu is British from start to finish, and there's the same
affectionate haphazardness as in Ahlberg's The Woman Who Won Things (BCCB
6/02; there's also some of the accessibility of Judith Caseley's Hurricane Harry
(BCCB 11/91), making this an eminently suitable readaloud for younger kids as
well. Line drawings in a fierce scribble have an energetic childlike minimalism.
DS
MATTHEWS, JOHN 
The Barefoot Book of Knights; illus. by Giovanni
Manna. 
Barefoot, 2002 
80p
ISBN 1-84148-064-9 
$19.99 
R Gr. 4-6
Tom of Warwick is sent to the castle to be a page and to learn the ways of knights
and chivalry. While there, the young boy hears seven stories of knights from around
the world from Master William, the Armorer. The frame for the knights' tales-
Master William tells them to the pages and squires to illustrate some pointed mes-
sage about knighthood and the chivalric code-is a bit purposive, but it doesn't
detract from the tales themselves. Matthews' retellings, from the tale of King
Arthur's Kitchen Knight to the story of a Japanese samurai, employ vivid images
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
27
that will capture readers and listeners. Line-and-watercolor illustrations feature
fairly jolly characters (considering their sometimes dangerous circumstances) en-
gaged in traditional knightly pastimes (riding horses, rescuing damsels, conquer-
ing evil, etc.). Stylistically the paintings are reminiscent of but more playful than
Zwerger's watercolors, with a lighter palette and more cartoonish characteriza-
tions; even the page numbers have humor, reflecting as they do the themes of the
stories. A page of sources has suggestions for further reading. JMD
MCGINTY, ALICE B. 
Ten Little Lambs; illus. by Melissa Sweet. 
Dial, 2002 
26p
ISBN 0-8037-2596-5 
$14.99 
R 4-7yrs
"Ten little lambs who won't go to sleep. What will they do all night?" Any parent
or child with sleepover experience knows that these "lambs" will surely cavort into
the wee hours, and, sure enough, the unruly sheep "tackle and tumble, wrestle and
rumble," slide down piles of bedding, and tell stories, as one by one they drop off
to sleep in this rhyming bedtime countdown that puts a new twist on "counting
sheep." This entertaining look at overnight antics handily balances the freewheel-
ing fun with the inevitable sleepiness, while the rhythmic text manages to be rol-
licking in its rhyme and content ("they'll plow winding freeways through piles of
pj's") yet soothing in its pattern and repetition of phrases (" 
little lambs who
won't go to sleep. What will they do all night?"). Sweet's cotton-candy-hued
watercolor and colored-pencil illustrations set the stage by making it clear that the
frolicking "lambs" are actually human children, shown arriving for the sleepover
and then settling down to sleep before the more literal lamb counterparts take over
the action. Each spread also shows which lamb will be the next to succumb to
slumber (the one who yawns), while an increasing number of small insets keep
track of those who have already fallen asleep. The pajama-clad lambs themselves
are amusingly exuberant in their activity (wide eyes, open mouths, and flailing
limbs predominate) and endearingly cuddly when asleep. Bring this title out for a
lively bedtime readaloud or as the perfect ending to a pajama storytime; then watch
your listeners drift off to sheep, uh, sleep. JMH
MELTZER, MILTON 
Ten Kings and the Worlds They Ruled; illus. by Bethanne
Andersen. 
Orchard, 2002 
132p
ISBN 0-439-31293-0 
$21.95 
R Gr. 5-10
Following his Ten Queens (BCCB 7/98), Meltzer now chronicles a half-score of
male rulers, from Hammurabi to Peter the Great; stops in between include fairly
traditional choices (Alexander the Great, Charlemagne) as well as potentates of less
biographical popularity (Mansa Musa, Atahualpa). As with the previous title, the
writing is choppy and occasionally confusing (some entries' final summary lines
seem not to be summarizing but making new claims), and while there's plenty of
comparison to contemporary life and practice, there's little placement of these
kings into context with one another. Nonetheless, there's a wealth of significant
information here: Meltzer is particularly interested in the impact of rulers upon
their subjects, which leads to some unusual discussions of the reasons some em-
pires succeeded ("One thing that helped Alexander win people to his side was the
fact that he banned ravaging and looting") as well as the reasons for their demise
("After Attila's death his three sons quarreled over the distribution of power").
Between this approach and the multicontinental coverage, this therefore has more
global depth than many kingly collective biographies. Andersen's illustrations have
28 
* THE BULLETIN
some of the decorative quality of Jane Ray's, but the sweeping brushstrokes give
them an organic grain in the full-page portraits as well as the smaller insets; some
of the kings have rather feminine faces, but they're vividly depicted and dramati-
cally posed. Maps appear in each chapter; a bibliography and an index are in-
cluded. DS
MITTEN, 
CHRISTOPHER 
Shawn Fanning: 
Napster and the Music
Revolution. Twenty-First Century Books, 2002 
80p 
illus. with
photographs 
(Techies)
ISBN 0-7613-2656-1 
$22.90 
Ad 
Gr. 4-9
Shawn Fanning, who founded Napster and turned the music industry upside down,
is now only in his early 20s, and he's therefore an unusual subject for a biography.
Mitten presents him as a young genius who had a remarkable idea about file shar-
ing at a remarkably opportune moment in the history of the Internet, creating the
program Napster which allowed people across the country to swap musical record-
ings. Although the several lawsuits, court dramas, and corresponding arguments
about musical property rights are given significant air time, Mitten's bias is clearly
towards Fanning's position, and as a result descriptions of legal events seem slanted
to support Fanning's heroic status; the choppy writing also becomes wearing.
Nevertheless, Mitten offers concise and accurate explanations of crucial aspects of
the Napster phenomenon, such as file compression, MP3 (the format which made
music swapping possible), and bandwidth, the limited availability of which caused
many major universities to ban access to the Napster website. Although Fanning
is the central player, this is really a chronicle of the dramatic events surrounding
the creation, implementation, and eventual outlawing of Napster. Despite the
book's flaws, many libraries will want to purchase a copy because of the dearth of
material on topics such as this, where advances in technology make things possible
long before courts have decided whether they are legal; Napster is unlikely to be
the last such event in the burgeoning history of technological innovation. A bibli-
ography and index are included. KM
MONTGOMERY, SY 
Encantado: Pink Dolphin of the Amazon; illus. with photo-
graphs by Dianne Taylor-Snow. 
Houghton, 2002 
73p
ISBN 0-618-13103-5 
$18.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
This title returns to the same subject as Montgomery's adult book, Journey of the
Pink Dolphin: An Amazon Quest, describing her experiences in the Amazon Basin
as she tried to understand more about the pink freshwater dolphin. Montgomery
uses a second-person narration to put the reader mid-canoe ("You're over the log,
but you're not out of trouble"), and the adventures include seeing a wide array of
wildlife and meeting various people (from biologists to locals) as well as engaging
in elaborate attempts to see as much of the dolphins as possible. This isn't as
successful as Montgomery's The Snake Scientist (BCCB 4/99): the second-person
narration seems merely an evasion of the autobiographical nature of the experi-
ence, the poetic emphasis on the mysteriousness of the dolphin sometimes be-
comes overly sentimental and romantic, and the organization inclines towards the
haphazard, especially since the book out of necessity spends most of its time on
matters other than the dolphin itself. The pink creatures are indeed fascinating,
however, and the larger picture of the Amazon is a vivid and compelling one with
a useful ecological emphasis. The actual pictures are somewhat of a mixed bag,
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
29
since not all of them manage to surmount the difficulty of the circumstances and
instead appear fuzzy or dark, but there are evocative views of the scenery and the
flora and fauna. Readers will be disappointed at the paucity of information about
the magnetic dolphin, but there's useful information here to pique the interest of
budding environmentalists or to enhance a unit on the rainforest. The final few
pages include a hodgepodge of additional information such as Amazon-expedition
agencies, "Weird Whale Facts," and a collection of Amazon statistics in addition
to a rather eclectic list of books for further reading; an index is also included. DS
MOON, RUSSELL 
Witch Boy. 
HarperTempest, 2002 
203p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-440795-0 
$6.95 
R Gr. 7-12
Marcus has been undergoing some strange changes since he turned seventeen, such
as acquiring the ability to move things with only his mind ("I've thrown a lot of
crap now, in the last six months"), but he's more concerned about a conventional
change: he and his mother are moving away. He's particularly distressed at leav-
ing behind Jules, the girl who's his best friend; when they attempt to say goodbye
by becoming more than just friends, however, something goes terribly, tragically
wrong. The problem is that Marcus isn't sure exactly what-is Jules dead? did he
kill her?-and the situation is further worsened when he finds at his new school a
girl who's a dead ringer for Jules, a girl who seems to know about his powers and
who has knowledge Marcus doesn't about both his past and his destiny. The story
has a stark and impressive setup, effectively counterpointed by Marcus' wry and
bemused narrative, and the central mystery and agony ofJules' fate are compelling
indeed. The story loses some impact when it gets into the Wiccan details of An
Obair ("It's Gaelic, and it means 'The Business.' It is our business, it is the stuff of
our life") and Marcus' new and uninvited colleagues in same, but the underlying
enigmas are enough to keep reader interest high. Unanswered questions and a
foreshadowed but effective cliffhanger (Marcus meets his supposedly long-dead
father, who it is Marcus' destiny to kill) will tempt readers to the forthcoming two
volumes in this planned trilogy. DS
NIXON, JOAN LOWERY 
The Making ofa Writer. Delacorte, 2002 
97p 
illus.
with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90046-5 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73000-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
It's hard to imagine there was a time when Joan Lowery Nixon wasn't an estab-
lished writer, but this cheerful and pithy memoir proves that such an era indeed
existed. The author starts with her early youth, where her love of dramatic narra-
tive addicted her to radio programs such as The Lone Ranger and I Love a Mystery
("It was exactly what caring parents like mine would never, ever allow their chil-
dren to listen to") and led to elaborate dollhouse dramas for public consumption
as well as family puppet shows. Her determination to be a writer (obligingly ap-
proved of by her late great-aunt, Gussie, at a seance) led her to develop her skills in
interesting ways, ranging from attempting to invent new slang to composing po-
ems for her classmates to send off to lonely GIs off fighting World War II; finally,
she went after her destiny wholeheartedly, becoming a journalism major at college.
This youthful autobiography doesn't have the same sparkle as Betsy Byars' The
Moon and I (BCCB 3/92), and the chronicle sometimes veers towards material
more familially than generally interesting, but there are plenty of high points to
30 
* 
THE BULLETIN
absorb fans of writers in general and Nixon in particular. The picture of mid-
twentieth-century Los Angeles ("Los Angeles had a big backyard, and it was mine")
adds piquancy, and there's some low-key but intriguing tension added by Nixon's
modest rebellion against her parents, especially her mother, in opting for a career
as a writer; budding authors will empathize as well as emulate. A list often writing
tips is appended, and inserts offer a panoply of black-and-white photographs of
Nixon from beaming baby to young California beauty. DS
NOVAK, MATT 
No Zombies Allowed; written and illus. by Matt Novak. 
Jackson/
Atheneum, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-84130-2 
$16.95 
R 
4-7 yrs
As Witches Wizzle and Woddle prepare for their annual monster bash, they un-
cover photographs from last year's festivities. The photograph of the zombies
reminds the pair that said zombies were not ideal guests ("Those zombies kept
dropping their eyes in the punch bowl"), so the witches ban them from this year's
party, erecting a "No Zombies Allowed" sign in their front yard. Further cleaning
leads to the systematic discovery of other photographs of last year's awkward guests,
the banning of other wild and gruesome creatures (werewolves, swamp creatures,
etc.), and larger and larger signs in their yard ("No Ghosts, Skeletons, or Vampires
Allowed"). A final sweep of their home, however, reveals photos that cast asper-
sions on the behavior of witches themselves ("Remember how their brooms knocked
everything over?"), leading Wizzle and Woddle to reconsider ("Now that I think
about it... that wasn't such a bad party") and consequently to take down all of the
exclusionary signs. Novak's zingily hued watercolors in stippled textures and char-
acteristic cartoon-like figures with big, bulgy eyes perfectly partner this humorous
story, excellent for Halloween and beyond. Aside from its sheer enjoyability, this
lively title might be just the thing to spark a spirited discussion on exclusion v.
inclusion, even if the zombies do drop their eyes in the punch bowl. EAB
OSBORNE, MARY POPE 
New York's Bravest; illus. by Steve Johnson and Lou
Fancher. 
Knopf, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92196-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82196-1 
$15.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Joining the many tributes to New York's rescue workers on the anniversary of the
September 11 attacks is this original tall tale based on legendary nineteenth-cen-
tury firefighter Mose Humphreys. With hands "as big as Virginia hams" and arms
that could "swim the Hudson River in two strokes," Mose thinks nothing of lift-
ing a trolley car out of the way of his volunteer company and leaping from a
burning building with a rescued baby tucked into his top hat, exiting the scene
with a modest "Just doing my duty." His last "documented" call was to a burning
hotel, after which he was never seen again (although unconfirmed sightings put
him in the California gold mines and in Washington working for Lincoln). Years
later an old-time firefighter settles the matter: "Whenever we save folks, he saves
them, too... he'll never leave us. He's the very spirit of New York City." Johnson
and Fancher's burly artwork captures the muscular feats of the larger-than-life
hero and the wry humor endemic to the tall-tale genre. Viewers catch the hoisted
trolley car from below, the frantic work of the pumpers from above, Mose's do-
mestic quarters, crammed with comestible gifts from grateful rescuees, from dead
center. The powerful draw of the illustrations, however, cannot fully compensate
for a storyline that's disappointingly light on exploits and that fails, in the end, to
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 31
squarely consider that Mose may have actually lost his life in the call of duty. And
for a September 11th tribute, that's a grave omission indeed. EB
PRELUTSKY, 
JACK 
Halloween 
Countdown; 
illus. 
by 
Dan
Yaccarino. 
HarperFestival, 2002 
24p
ISBN 0-06-000512-2 
$6.99 
R 
2-4 yrs
The nameless narrator of this pithy board book lives in a residence absolutely
infested with ghosts, and he enumerates their in-house hangouts as he counts down
in rhyme ("There are ten ghosts in the pantry,/ There are nine upon the stairs/
There are eight ghosts in the attic,/ There are seven on the chairs"). Prelutsky's
verse, first published in 1977, converts well to board-book use, with its precise
rhythm suitable for both a speedy chant and a slow, sonorous intonation; there's
clever use made of the naturally suspenseful structure when the quiet "one ghost
right behind me" lets go with a climactic "Boo!" Yaccarino's sturdily drafted illus-
trations tame the proceedings suitably for the younger audience, emphasizing the
domestic rather than the otherworldly: the roundheaded, flickery-tailed ghosts
look like microscopic pond creatures turned humongous rather than shades from
beyond the grave, and they're clearly more of a vexation than a terror to the put-
upon young lad sharing space with them. Occasionally the artwork is less than
rigorously accurate in its interpretation of the text (only six of the seven ghosts are
actually "on the chairs," for instance), but the final page-turn-reveal of the ghostly
closeup on "Boo!" will provide just the right amount of shivers for little Halloween
novices. DS
PRINGLE, 
LAURENCE 
Strange Animals, New to Science. Cavendish,
2002 
64p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7614-5083-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Just when you think all the truly exciting faunal discoveries have been made, along
comes the Amazonian electric fish that feasts on the tails of its kin, or the Cuban
frog that can squat comfortably on a dime, or the Brazilian graveteiro, nicknamed
the "acrobat bird" for its ability to swing on the underside of branches. Pringle
investigates some of the more startling discoveries of the past decade, many of
which have been well known to people indigenous to their region but are new-
comers to the scientific community. Each find receives a two- or three-page de-
scription and, usually, an illustration (a fuzzy field photo, a clear studio-style portrait,
or a full-color scientific drawing), with just enough data to pinpoint the impor-
tance of the discovery and whet the appetite for more information. This is an
inviting title for kids on a casual stroll through the Animal Kingdom, as well as
those readers permanently camped out in the 590s. An index and a list of organi-
zations supporting animal conservation are appended. EB
RANSOM, 
CANDICE F. 
Maria von Trapp: 
Beyond The Sound of
Music. 
Carolrhoda, 2002 
112p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 1-57505-444-2 
$25.26 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Young fans of The Sound of Music musical or movie may well be curious about
what happened to Maria von Trapp and her family after they escaped from Aus-
tria, or even what Maria was like as a child. In this biography of von Trapp,
Ransom fills in those gaps of Maria's story as she briefly describes Maria's child-
hood and rebellious teen years and her family's experiences in America during and
32 
* 
THE BULLETIN
after World War II, in addition to the more familiar part of her life covered by the
stage play and film. Ransom's writing is serviceable, the life story she tells is defi-
nitely absorbing, and she manages to avoid being adulatory (for example, she makes
it fairly clear that von Trapp's impulsive nature and high standards sometimes
worked to the detriment of herself and her family). However, she sometimes fails
to fully explain particular incidents or glosses over them so quickly that they lose
some of their inherent drama. The passage of time from one incident to the next
is also occasionally confusing, particularly since the order of some events is quite
different from their cinematic and theatrical portrayals; thankfully, a chronology
at the end helps straighten out what happened when. Gray-bordered black-and-
white photos of the traditionally dressed von Trapps and their milieu help to en-
liven the otherwise bare-bones layout. Older readers may want to check out von
Trapp's autobiographies instead, but there aren't many biographies for youngsters
about von Trapp, and, despite the book's flaws, most report writers and Sound of
Music fans are likely to find this title adequate for their needs. Source notes, unfor-
tunately confusingly formatted, are included, along with an index, family tree, and
bibliography. JMH
RASCHKA, CHRIS 
John Coltrane's Giant Steps; written and illus. by Chris
Raschka. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2002 
34p
ISBN 0-689-84598-7 
$17.00 
R* 
6 -10 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 3, for review.
RECTOR, REBECCA KRAFT 
Tria and the Great Star Rescue. 
Delacorte,
2002 
184p
ISBN 0-385-72941-3$14.95 
R Gr. 4-7
Tria has lived all her life inside the shelter of her futuristic home, along with her
holographic friend Star and her holographic tutor Mr. Willoughby, and occasion-
ally with her archaeologist mother, who is often away on interplanetary travels.
This cosseted existence comes to an end when Tria gets a frantic call from her
mother, who orders her daughter to attend Back to Basics school-on the Out-
side, where Tria has never been. Before Tria even has time to be frightened, mov-
ers arrive to pack up all her things. Tria manages to hide Star's disk in her shoe and
barely escapes a kidnapping attempt by a fake moving company on the way to the
transport. Rector's narrative is full of intrigue, as Tria tries to rescue her mother,
who has been kidnapped by criminals in search of a device she unearthed on her
latest dig, and to search for the device herself. The thrills and spills are kept lighter
than the plot elements might suggest, avoiding terror in favor of a rollercoaster
reading experience. Rector balances the action-driven plot with her warm portrait
of Tria, a young girl who is adjusting as quickly as she can to a world full of real
people (and germs) instead of holograms. Eventually, the mystery is solved, and
attentive readers will relish the accomplishment of figuring out what the criminals
are looking for just before Tria does. Young science-fiction fans are sure to enjoy
this futuristic romp. KM
REISS, KATHRYN 
Paint byMagic. Harcourt, 2002 
271p 
(Time Travel Mys-
teries)
ISBN 0-15-216361-1 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Eleven-year-old Connor is stunned by the sudden change in his mother: the high-
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
33
powered lawyer in technological reach of every colleague and client is suddenly
Suzy Homemaker, smothering Connor and his sister with attention, insisting on
more family time, and-much to the horror of the rest of the family--throwing
out the televisions; even more alarming are the sudden and apparently painful
trances to which she's now subject. Connor begins to realize that these phenom-
ena are related to a book of paintings, some of which, inexplicably, seem to feature
his mother despite being painted fifty years before her birth. When he investi-
gates, he finds himself sucked back to 1926 and the house of painter Fitzgerald
Cotton; the artist is obsessed with his lost muse, the woman who stayed for a year,
who posed for his pictures, and who disappeared-and who's known to Connor as
his mother. Reiss employs some pleasingly unsettling elements: there's appeal in
the notion of magic paints that can draw people through time and that force their
users to act out dramas of preceding generations (Cotton is the descendent of an
evil Renaissance artist, and Connor's mother is related to that artist's captive model),
and there's something refreshingly old-fashioned about a son's braving danger to
save his mother. The writing often gets in the way of the story, however, with too
much discussion and complication (the flashback scenes to Renaissance Italy are
distracting) and not enough atmosphere; there's also a lack of credibility in Connor's
mother's difficult readjustment to the contemporary era and in the contrived ro-
manticizations, both of the tortured artist and of the simple joys of an earlier era.
Still, this may satisfy hungry fans of supernatural intrigue looking for a diverting
read. DS
ROTH, CAROL 
The Little School Bus; illus. by Pamela Paparone. 
Cheshire Stu-
dio/North-South, 2002 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7358-1647-6 
$15.50
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7358-1646-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
2-5 yrs
A yellow school bus, complete with a driver who looks suspiciously like a sala-
mander, goes on its morning rounds, picking up students from out in the suburbs
to the city proper. Each new passenger's ascension onto the bus is heralded by a
new rhyme to add to the cumulative chant: "The third one on is a sly, sly fox./ He
has no shoes, but he's wearing socks./ A fox with socks,/ a pig in a wig,/ a goat in
his coat,/ riding the bus to school, to school, riding the bus to school." The verse
is somewhat stilted, with the rhymes driven by necessity rather than cleverness, but
audiences will enjoy the energetic cumulation and the chance to practice their
ordinal numbers. The loud hues of the illustrations sometimes jostle uneasily for
attention, and there's an occasionally muddy tone to the colors. There's plenty of
playfulness to the schoolbound critters and the landscape through which they pass,
however, and kids will be diverted by the anthropomorphic turn on the familiar
experience. Despite the book's drawbacks, audiences will enjoy the mayhem as
they enthusiastically chant along. EAB
SANGER, AMY WILSON ;Hola! Jalapeno; written and illus. by Amy Wilson
Sanger. 
Tricycle, 2002 
18p
ISBN 1-58246-072-8 
$6.95 
R 3-6 yrs
This second entry in the World Snack series takes a simple list of popular TexMex
cuisine and turns it into a gleeful gustatory exaltation: "Dance, frijoles negros,
with rice we call arroz./ Roll on, enchiladas in your bed of cheese and sauce!" Each
entree (and dessert--don't forget the flan) is realized in an inventive collage of cut
34 * THE BULLETIN
paper and fabric. Handmade papers cannily emulate coarse-grained corn tortillas,
crinkled bits of green and white tissue spill from taco shells as shredded lettuce and
onion, running-stitched brown fabric suggests a mole-drenched chicken leg cozied
up beside a plate of flan on a lace tablecloth. Sanger supplies no explanation of the
dishes, only the occasional translation of a term if it fits neatly into the rhyme:
"Here's la cocina en mi casa/ (that's the kitchen in my house),/ where I eat a big
burrito/ almost wider than my mouth." She does, however, append a pronuncia-
tion guide to help non-Spanish speaking readers make the most of the musical
text. With its exuberant verse and sophisticated artwork, this title should have the
board-book set pushing away the mashed bananas in favor of spicier fare. EB
SHAW, SUSAN 
Black-Eyed Suzie. 
Boyds Mills, 2002 
167p
ISBN 1-56397-729-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
After a gradual downslide, twelve-year-old Suzie is finally stuck, locked into fetal
position (in what she considers to be a nice safe box that protects her from the
world) and unable to speak or swallow, when her uncle finally overrules her par-
ents and takes her to the hospital. From there she's transferred to a mental hospital
for treatment, where very, very slowly she begins to loosen her death grip on her
defenses, even letting go a word to those at the hospital with whom she's con-
nected. It's only when her beloved older sister, Deanna, visits after being injured
by their mother, however, that Suzie is driven to tell the secret she hides: her
alcoholic, constantly abusive mother burned Suzie as she later did Deanna, driving
Suzie into her imaginary box of safety. This is fairly programmatic right from the
start, when it's clear that Suzie's psycho mother has spent years destroying her
daughter (there are some definite similarities to Sybil here), so the focus on a single
incident seems rather misplaced (and the prospects for resolution at the end rather
overoptimistic). There's always considerable emotional appeal in a story of a dis-
tressed child's recovery, however, and Suzie's narration is affecting if sometimes
unsubtle. The story also adds touches of realism in the depiction of the larger
family dynamic (Dad unwilling to rock the boat, Deanna protective of her sister
but more protective of the family, and everybody intent that nobody get Mom in
trouble) and in the acknowledged unlikelihood that the girls will ever live with
their parents again. While this doesn't have the impact ofMagorian's GoodNight,
Mr. Tom, it's a similarly affecting tale of suffering and rescue that may grab both
would-be nurturers and those in distress themselves. DS
SINGER, MARILYN 
Boo Hoo Boo-Boo; illus. by Elivia Savadier. 
HarperFestival,
2002 
22p
ISBN 0-694-01566-0 
$9.95 
R* 
1-3 yrs
Ah, the vigor of toddlers: there's Lulu, "twirling in her tutu"; Andrew, "acting like
a choo choo"; and Zuzu, skipping in "Mama's muumuu." While these are re-
warding and satisfyingly bouncy activities, they sometimes come at a price, as the
three kiddies discover when they each crash to the ground and find themselves
slightly the worse for wear ("Oh, no! Boo hoo!/ Lulu's got a boo-boo!"). Fortu-
nately, distress is soon eased by a bit of first aid and a lot more caretaker cuddling
and soothing, and everybody's rarin' to go again. This is brief but all the better for
it with this audience, as the focus remains tight and immediate. Singer's chipper
and shareable rhyme gleefully oozes "oo"s, and it offers both sympathy and brisk
reassurance that will bolster dent-prone toddlers. Savadier's art deftly employs
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 35
subtle texture in paints and paper to add depth and richness to the images; her
zesty lines have a flair reminiscent of Christine Davenier's work, but her cozy
multicultural and multigenerational cast have a homey solidity all their own. This
inescapable part of kid life doesn't get much attention in literature; fresh and en-
joyable as well as welcome, this exception offers what's likely to become a com-
mon-and usefully diverting-family or day-care refrain. DS
SMITH, CYNTHIA LEITICH 
Indian Shoes; illus. by Jim Madsen. 
HarperCollins,
2002 
6 6p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029532-5 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029531-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-5
Ray Halfmoon lives with his grandfather in Chicago, and they're by and large a
comfortable and loving family sticking with each other through thick and thin in
six easygoing and self-contained chapters. In the first chapter, when Grampa be-
comes lonesome for his Oklahoma home and his Cherokee-Seminole roots, Ray
performs some clever shoe trading in order to acquire a pair of Seminole moccasins
that put Grampa "in mind ofbein' back home." As the year goes by, the two guys
find their sad Christmas away from Oklahoma brightened by their pet-sitting chores,
they survive Grampa's disastrous attempt to cut Ray's hair (turning the fiasco into
a great opportunity for some display of school spirit and grandfather-son bond-
ing), and they finally make it back to Oklahoma for a family visit. The events are
modest, but the charm here lies in the deeply understated text, the sly humor (Ray
the ringbearer "couldn't understand why he'd need a pillow to carry a ring. He'd
been carrying things his whole life without a pillow"), and the quiet radiance of the
relationship between Ray and Grampa. It's certainly valuable to have a genuinely
up-to-date look at a Native American family (Ray swaps a nice librarian his high-
tops, guaranteed "Indian worn," for the moccasins he gives to Grampa; Ray's uncle
reads the Cherokee Advocate on his laptop), but this is a book so permeated with
affection that many readers will just bask in the warmth and envy Ray his cool
Grampa. The black-and-white illustrations are somewhat literal, but they evince a
certain quiet amusement well suited to the text. DS
SMITH, DAVID J. 
If the World Were a Village: A Book about the World's People;
illus. by Shelagh Armstrong. 
Kids Can, 2002 
32p
ISBN 1-55074-779-7 
$15.95 
R Gr. 2-6
Without betraying a hint of overt didacticism, Smith imaginatively reduces Earth
to a population of a mere hundred persons and provocatively demonstrates through
carefully chosen statistics the often-chilling disparities among the world's haves
and have-nots: "If all the food were divided equally, everyone would have enough
to eat. But the food isn't divided equally.... 60 people are always hungry, and 26
of these are severely undernourished. .... Only 24 people always have enough to
eat"; "In the village there are: 42 radios/ 24 televisions/ 14 telephones/ 7 com-
puters." Smith lists, but does not specifically correlate, sources for his statistics,
noting areas of disagreement among experts on such volatile topics as population
growth and environmental issues. In a closing address to adults using the title with
children, he offers activities to promote "world-mindedness." Armstrong's deep
jewel-toned, chalky-looking acrylic "village" scenes and Smith's powerful, themati-
cally arranged observations stand confidently on their own. EB
36 
* THE BULLETIN
SPURR, ELIZABETH 
A Pig Named Perrier; illus. by Martin Matje. 
Hyperion,
2002 
34p
ISBN 0-7868-0302-9 
$15.99 
R 6-9yrs
Perrier is, as his name suggests, a pig of privilege, a "pedigreed miniature potbel-
lied pig" owned by the glamorous screen idol Marbella. Despite his pampered and
cosseted existence, Perrier sometimes feels "a deep longing, a hankering in his
hide, an emptiness in the pit of his little potbelly"; this yearning remains formless
until on a country vacation he's shoved into a mud puddle and the light dawns
("He felt . .
that's it... sensational!'). Scrubbed clean and returned to his posh
lifestyle, Perrier begins to pine away from mud deprivation, until one night he sees
Marbella in her chic beauty mudpack . .. 
The story curves occasionally into
archness, but there's a high and entertaining gloss to the writing ("Try as he might,
he could not purge his urge to sludge"), and young audiences will relish the book's
evident approval of the sheer subversive pleasure of wallowing. Matje's art is tres,
tres fashionable with its trim and elongated figures and its tasteful emphasis on
muted apricot and gray tones; the Deco-esque details don't, however, overpower
the slightly overwhelmed little piglet who peers out at the viewers. There's always
room for another pig in picture-book land, and Perrier will make viewers as happy
as a pig in-well, you know. DS
SPURR, ELIZABETH 
Surfer Dog. 
Dutton, 2002 
103p
ISBN 0-525-46898-6 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Pete's a junior surfer who lives for the waves, often holding his own with the older
surfers despite being only eleven and looking only eight. He's struggling for his
niche on a new beach when he runs into Blackie, a stray Labrador and a surfer
extraordinaire. After initial reluctance, his parents take Blackie to their hearts, but
they don't do the same with Pete's surfing passion; much to his horror, they ground
him for slipping grades just as he needs to prepare for a surfing competition. He's
even more devastated, however, when the competition reveals Blackie's real owner
(a big-time surfer himself), leaving Pete bereft both of his beloved dog and his
confidence in his surfing ability. This is a fairly stock sports story, complete with
cliches ("But Mom, I've gotta surf"; "Before you're ready to win, pal, you gotta
learn how to lose"), and there's little character to Pete; non-surfers may find the
surfing lingo a bit much to wade through (despite the glossary at the end). Surfers,
on the other hand, will revel in the detailed descriptions of their beloved pastime,
which will also convey some of the allure to noninitiates, and everybody will be-
come attached to Blackie, the gentlemanly companion and gifted surfer, who's an
original as well as an appealing conception. Despite the Disneyesque inevitability
of the events, readers may enjoy getting their feet wet here. DS
VAN DRAANEN, WENDELIN 
Sammy Keyes and the Search for Snake Eyes. 
Knopf,
2002 277p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91175-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81175-3 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Sammy (from Sammy Keyes and the Hotel Thief BCCB 7/98, etc.) doesn't like the
mall or its video arcade, but she's hanging out there because she's so tired of hear-
ing Marissa talk about softball that she's willing to try anything. That's her first
mistake; her second mistake is taking the heavy shopping bag from the desperate
teenager she meets in the arcade. The girl makes Sammy swear to meet her at the
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
37
mall later that evening so she can retrieve the contents-one beautiful baby boy-
but she never returns, and Sammy is left, literally, holding the bag. Sammy has no
illusions about her ability to take care of a baby, so she reluctantly turns him over
to her friend on the police force, Officer Borsch, but she can't keep herself from
meddling, even when her meddling puts her in progressively more danger. The
entry in the popular series has an inexorable momentum; gangs, oaths, loyalty, a
girl trying to break free, whiffs of real violence and real redemption keep the story
galloping along. Subplots-Sammy is discovered living illegally with her grand-
mother by a new neighbor; Heather, Sammy's arch-nemesis at school, gets Sammy
and her friends suspended from the softball team-also proceed with a consistent
liveliness that keeps the pages turning. Holding it all together is the affection
between Sammy and her grandmother, a growing fondness between Sammy and
Officer Borsch, the solid friendship between Sammy and Marissa, and the possible
attraction between Sammy and Casey (brother to, of all people, the horrible
Heather). Fast, suspenseful, and just a tad scary, this is just right for those readers
looking for some mystery-lite. JMD
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
Our Gracie Aunt; illus. by Jon J Muth. Jump at the
Sun/Hyperion, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0620-6 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
Johnson and his older sister Beebee are used to taking care of themselves, but when
their mother is gone for longer than usual, social worker Miss Roy intervenes. She
places the siblings with their mother's estranged sister, their aunt Gracie, or "Gracie
aunt," as Johnson soon calls her; there Gracie and the children adjust to living
with each other, talking, cooking, playing, and, sometimes, crying together. After
a sad but loving visit with their mother makes it clear that she will not be home any
time soon, the children return to their aunt, who promises, "I don't have to go
anywhere but here for now." There's a wishful adult sensibility here, and this is an
overly idealized picture of the experience of foster care. Nonetheless, the details
are uncomplicated yet subtle, the writing is understated, and the emotional rela-
tionships that form the core of the story are richly drawn. The lack of specificity-
we don't know how long the mother has been gone, exactly why she goes away,
what the children's daily life is like, where they live-gives the story a powerful
universality. Muth's watercolors treat their subjects tenderly, using soft washes of
color and smoky shadows for emotional atmosphere, the siblings' constant togeth-
erness and their articulate faces (and even feet, as Beebee idly toys with her shoes
while waiting for Mama). Though somewhat sentimental, this is an effective evo-
cation of an extremely difficult situation with which many children are familiar.
JMD
YOUNG, KAREN ROMANO 
Outside In. Greenwillow, 2002 
201p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029368-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17363-2 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
Twelve in the spring of 1968, Cherie Witkowski finds her sheltered suburban
world is expanding thanks to her newly won paper route; while she folds her pa-
pers, she reads the headlines, and none of them are good. The assassinations of
Martin Luther King, Jr. and Robert Kennedy stun the neighborhood, and the
kidnapping and murder of a thirteen-year-old girl from a nearby town brings ChCrie
an awareness of her own fragility. Outside of the news, friendships ebb and flow,
38 
* THE BULLETIN
and change is inevitable: a new baby is on the way, beloved longtime neighbors are
moving, and even Aim&e, Chdrie's younger sister, learns how to ride a two-wheeler.
This novel resembles a memoir as narrator Cherie bears witness to the events of a
turbulent summer in the life of a soon-to-be teenager and in the life of a nation.
Individual incidents-a friend teased at summer camp, a fight between a husband
and wife-are seen in high relief, set against Cherie's preconceptions and lit by
volatile emotions. Cherie has a believable voice, and, despite the retrospective
flavor, there's little imposition of adult viewpoint. Unfortunately, her testimony
to this time of change is left unformed and uninformed, with her point of view at
the beginning that of a child waiting for things to be explained, changing little
from start to finish. The pace of the novel is also overly measured; any forward
momentum is tempered by the narrator's internalization of her own responses to a
relatively random sequence of events. Still, those young readers who see their
parents and grandparents' youth as something long ago and far away may appreci-
ate this bridge to a seemingly distant era. JMD
YOUNG, MARILYN B. 
The Vietnam War: A History in Documents; written by
Marilyn B. Young, John J. Fitzgerald, and A. Tom Grunfeld. 
Oxford,
2002 
175p 
illus. with photographs 
(Pages from History)
ISBN 0-19-512278-X 
$32.95 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Young et al. take readers on a chronological tour of twentieth-century Vietnam
history, from French colonialism through the aftermath of U.S. troop withdrawal
in the 1970s. Each chapter is fashioned from standard textbook-style introductory
material and an eyeopening range of primary sources-from U.S. antiwar posters
and transcripts of Lyndon Johnson's White House tapes, to North Vietnamese
political cartoons and South Vietnamese certificates of safe passage. Telltale signs
of authorship by committee rear up occasionally in the form of topics (e.g., the
Christmas bombing of Hanoi) taken up briefly, dropped, and resurrected again
pages later. Pertinent material is buried in sidebars ("The promised elections of
1956 were not to be"), and some themes are jarringly underreported-the fall of
Saigon merits but a clause, women in Vietnam get only a paragraph of a nurse's
testimony, and the plight of returning veterans receives virtually no attention. More-
over, although documents have been selected to articulate a range of viewpoints,
no official or unofficial French voices speak to colonialism in Indochina. Still,
entries presented are c6mpelling and often provocative, and teens who reconstruct
this bit of "ancient" history from disparate images ofWoodstock, immolated monks,
and M-16s will unquestionably gain much needed perspective. A timeline, glos-
sary, index, and document sources are appended. EB
ZIEFERT, HARRIET 
EgadAlligator!; illus. by Todd McKie. 
Lorraine/Houghton,
2002 
34p
ISBN 0-618-14171-5 
$16.00 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Little Gator's big brother opts to nap on the bank rather than go exploring, so
Little Gator wanders away. When he runs into several groups of people and a
group of herons on their nests, they're horrified, responding (for the most part) by
shouting "EGAD ALLIGATOR!" and running away. Finally, Little Gator takes a
nap on a "log" that turns out to be a python, and then it's his turn to respond by
yelling "EGAD PYTHON!" Despite its slightness, the text offers the kind of
action and response that preschoolers find engaging. Unfortunately, it doesn't
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
39
provide a consistent pattern with the exclamations (sometimes the people yell
"EGAD ALLIGATOR!" and sometimes they just attack him with arrows or base-
ball bats without saying anything), so audiences may have a tough time joining in
on the fun. McKie's thick acrylic paints render his alligators and people with a
childlike simplicity, the blocks of color creating unadorned Matissian shapes with
slightly wobbly outlines. With some energetic reading aloud, there may be enough
dramatic engagement in this romp to attract preschool group audiences, for whom
Little Gator will be a sympathetic hero. KM
Putnam informs us that Gary Soto's new book, reviewed in the June Bulletin as
Body Parts in Rebellion: Hanging Out with Fernie andMe, has been retitled Fearless
Fernie: Hanging Out with Fernie and Me in the bound book.
In the July/August issue, the review of Sue Heap's What Shall We Play? omitted
the recommendation code; the book is rated Ad.
Also in the July/August issue, Emily Rodda's Rowan and the Zebak is incorrectly
categorized as the final title in the series; in fact, the series still continues.
The Bulletin regrets the errors.
40 
* THE BULLETIN
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
BLAKEMORE, CATHERINE 
Faraway Places: Your Source for Picture Books that Fly
Children to 82 Countries. Adams-Pomeroy Press, 2002 
468p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-9661009-2-1 
$28.95
Blakemore opens this ambitious and eminently useful bibliography with a discus-
sion of the "benefits of picture book travel," that is, the benefits of exposing American
children to stories set in countries other than the United States. She specifies the
intended audience for the books she recommends (ages 3-8) and suggests ways for
adult caregivers to present these titles to children. The bibliography is divided by
region: Africa, Asia, Australia and Oceania, Europe, North America (sans the
United States), and South America. Each region is divided alphabetically by country;
each country is divided (as applicable) into Specific Locations (such as cities), General
(fables, fairy tales, folktales, legends, etc.), Historical Figures, Nonfiction, Stories,
Poetry and Songs, and Books. Succinct summaries of more than 900 recommended
titles are offered in a narrative format under each section, followed by an alpha-
betical-by-author title list in the Books section. A location, author, and title index
is included, as is an extensive list of resources. Blakemore (an experienced pre-
school teacher) has pulled together an impressive guide that will not only aid col-
lection development but serve as a useful reference tool as well. JMD
DARBY, MARY ANN 
HearingAll the Voices: Multicultural Books for Adolescents; by
Mary Ann Darby and Miki Pryne. 
Scarecrow, 2002 
264p
ISBN 0-8108-4058-8 
$29.50
The title opens with a chapter explaining the authors' experience and their goals;
subsequent chapters contain suggestions for using recommended titles in language
arts and other classrooms, including directions for literary circles and other con-
crete, literature-related projects. The definition of multicultural here goes beyond
multiethnic, with the authors including books about children living in nontradi-
tional families, coping with major illnesses or other physical challenges, and deal-
ing with such issues as homosexuality, alcoholism, mental illness, racism, and abuse.
The booklist itself is an alphabetical list of titles, most of them published in the
1990s, aimed at adolescents between eleven and fifteen years old; each entry con-
tains bibliographic information, a suggested reading and interest level, and an iden-
tifier or identifiers (multiethnic, nontraditional family, grief/loss, etc.). The brief
annotations are often flawed, sometimes awkwardly written or overly effusive or
just plain inaccurate. Still, this is a useful compendium, made more so by the
additional information the authors provide. Appendices provide sample literary
circles and various subject and use booklists; there are also indices by author and
culture. JMD
SEPTEMBER 2002 
* 
41
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Hawes; Shaw
Actors and acting-fiction: Atinsky
ADVENTURE: Chester; Rector
African Americans-fiction: Collier;
Johnson
African Americans-stories: Joosse;
Woodson
Alligators-stories: Ziefert
ALPHABET BOOKS: Frampton
American Indians-fiction: Alder;
Boyden; Smith, C.
Anger-stories: Jonell When
Animals: Montgomery; Pringle
Animals-fiction: Haas
Animals-poetry: Frampton
Animals-stories: Roth
Art and artists-fiction: Gilson; Reiss
Art history: Mason, A.
Aunts-fiction: Ellsworth
Aunts-stories: Woodson
BEDTIME STORIES: McGinty
BIBLE STORIES: Bible; Chaikin
BILINGUAL BOOKS: Sanger
BIOGRAPHIES: Landau; Meltzer;
Mitten; Nixon; Ransom
Birds: Carney; Dewey
Birds-stories: Best
BOARD BOOKS: Prelutsky;
Sanger
Brothers-poetry: Johnston
Brothers-stories: Joosse
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Johnson
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Woodson
Bullying-fiction: Gorman
Civil rights-fiction: Collier
Civil War-fiction: Keehn
Community helpers: Demarest;
Osborne
COUNTING BOOKS: McGinty
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Brooks; Crew
Crime and criminals-stories:
Egielski
Current events: Andryszewski;
Frank; Jonell Bravemole; Landau
Death and dying-fiction: Boyden;
Brooks; Ellsworth; Henson;
Johnson
Death and dying-poetry: Johnston
Dogs-fiction: Haas; Hickman;
Spurr Surfer
Dolphins: Montgomery
Drug abuse-fiction: Henson
Ecology: Montgomery; Pringle
Ethics and values: Andryszewski;
Brooks; Frank; Hawes; Joosse;
Smith, D.
Explorers and exploring: Lourie
FABLES: Jonell Bravemole
Families-fiction: Crew; Johnson;
Mason, S.
FANTASY: Hickman; Jordan;
Moon; Reiss
Fathers-fiction: Brooks; Feiffer
Firefighters-stories: Demarest;
Osborne
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Andersen; Jiang; Matthews
Food and eating-poetry: 
Sanger
Foster care-stories: Woodson
Friendship-fiction: Collier;
Danziger; Easton; Henson
Friendship-stories: Egielski
Gangs-stories: Joosse
42 
* THE BULLETIN
Gardeners and gardening-fiction:
Boyden
Geography: Kerley; Smith, D.
Ghosts-fiction: Johnson
Ghosts-stories: Cuyler; Prelutsky
Grandfathers-fiction: Boyden;
Haas; Smith, C.
Growing up-fiction: Young, K.
Halloween: Cuyler; Novak;
Prelutsky
HISTORICAL FICTION: Alder;
Chambers; Collier; Crew; Disher;
Easton; Ellsworth; Gilson; Keehn;
Young, K.
History, U.S.: Andryszewski; Lourie
History, world: Meltzer; Young, M.
HUMOR: Bany-Winters; Cannon;
Cuyler; Mason, S.; Novak
Immigrants: Ransom
Immigrants-fiction: Easton; Elya;
Gilson
Insects: Heiligman
Inventors and inventing: Mitten
Kings: Meltzer
Knights-fiction: Matthews
Latinos-stories: Elya
Literature, children's: Nixon
Magic and magicians-fiction:
Hickman
Mental illness-fiction: Shaw
Mice-stories: Egielski
Moles-fiction: Jonell Bravemole
Monkeys-folklore: Jiang
Monsters-stories: Novak
Mothers-fiction: Crew; Hawes;
Rector; Reiss
Mothers-stories: Elya; Jonell When;
Joosse; Woodson
Mountaineering: Chester
Music and musicians: Mitten;
Ransom; Raschka
MYSTERIES: Moon; Rector; Van
Draanen
Nature study: Best; Carney; Dewey;
Heiligman; Montgomery
Orphans-fiction: Gilson; Jordan
Orphans-stories: Egielski
Parties-stories: Novak
Pigs-stories: Spurr A Pig
Pirates-fiction: Cannon
POETRY: Frampton; Johnston
POP-UP BOOKS: Demarest
Prejudice-fiction: Collier; Disher;
Easton
Racism-fiction: Collier; Disher
Rainforests: Montgomery
Rats-stories: Egielski
Reading aloud: Chester; Dewey;
Jiang; Mason, S.; Matthews
Reading, easy: Cannon
Reading, reluctant: Atinsky; Chester
Religious instruction: Bible; Chaikin
RHYMING BOOKS: Carney;
MacDonald; McGinty; Roth;
Sanger
Rivers: Lourie
ROMANCE: Disher
Rooms-stories: Brown
School-fiction: Danziger; Gorman
SCIENCE FICTION: Rector
Sheep-stories: McGinty
Skeletons-stories: Cuyler
Sleepovers-stories: McGinty
Social studies: Kerley; Smith, D.
SPORTS STORIES: Spurr Surfer
Storytelling: Jiang; Matthews
Storytime: Best; Cuyler; Novak;
Prelutsky; Roth; Singer; Spurr A
Pig; Ziefert
SUPERNATURAL STORIES: Reiss
Surfing-fiction: Spurr Surfer
SUSPENSE: Moon; Van Draanen
TALL TALES: Osborne
Technology: Mitten
Television-fiction: Atinsky
Terrorism: Andryszewski; Frank;
Landau
Theater: Bany-Winters
Time travel-fiction: Hickman; Reiss
Toddlers-stories: Singer
Vietnam War: Young, M.
Voyages and travel: Lourie
War: Young, M.
War-fiction: Alder; Chambers;
Disher
Water: Kerley
Witches-fiction: Moon
Witches-stories: Novak
World War II-fiction: Chambers;
Disher
Writers and writing: Nixon
TH BROKEN (AT
bu Lunne Rfae Perkins
le cat (and, as
ve'll see, an arm)
may be broken,
but the picture
book itself
is indisputably
whole,
inatively
nd emotionally
As Andy and his
tensely in the
ng room with
their injured cat, Andy asks his mom to tell him [about the time
she broke her arm]. Perkins gets the telling of an oft-told family
story just right... [in her] unpretentious paean to the ability of
stories to comfort and connect." -Starred 
review / The Horn Book
"The soft watercolors strike just the right note of gentleness
in this tender story of a broken cat, a broken arm, and the
"While this charming book can be read as
a reassuring look at coping . .
it also works
as a captivating family story."
-School Library Journal
Ages 5 up. $15.95 Tr (0-06-029263-6)
$15.89 Lb (0-06-029264-4)
IIIII 
mm
/
Yoa're Only Yoang Twice
Children's Literature and Film
TIM MORRIS
"Grounding his analyses in trips to the video store and reading
aloud to his son, Morris makes the question of whether Dr.
Seuss's 'oobleck' is really Lacan's objet petit a lot less scary than
it sounds." -
Publishers Weekly
Hardcover, $24.95
Writing Fiction for Cbildren
Stories Only You Can Tell
JUDY K. MORRIS
"[The exercises] will help both novices and seasoned authors gain
insight and move forward with their writing." -
Jane Leslie Conly,
author of Crazy Lady!, a Newbery Honor Book
Hardcover, $19.95
A whole new way to....Captivate a child's
attention and build their character.
It's INCREDIBLE...the only thing more exciting than watching
children learn, is watching them have FUN in the process!
I'm going to let you in on a secret...MAGIC POWER videos teach
the art of magic. Magic has a direct impact on character
development in the following ways: Encourages problem solving,
expands creative abilities, increases digital dexterity, strengthens
social skills, stimulates self confidence and is a unique & flexible
activity.
3 Powerful reasons to check out our report..
#1 Ideal children's activity for one child or a whole class.
#2 A unique and fun way to impact children.
#3 FREE gift just for requesting our report!
To learn more, simply call our TOLL FREE 24 hr. recorded message
line at:
1-888-554-3321 press MAGIC POWER videos.
I
m
both the positives and the negatives of the summer season in
28 short, rhyming poems that succeed in being both humorous
and finely crafted. . . . Florian's watercolor illustrations
accompany each poem, adding additional notes of simple
but stylish humor. This is children's poetry at its best."
-Starred 
review / Kirkus Reviews
S"Florian's intriguing art and lighthearted facility with words
1 -
t4i.c. 
a 
_4 U I 
1
11La\ eUs 
ellrCnlg a 
Wnlllr.
i 
-Starred review / School Library Journal
Tho 
s ar rhthm
j 
"Thno nornc nro h7hi
imaginative and packed like a
cottage trunk with the long beach
days and campfire nights
of summer."
-Starred review / Publishers Weekly
L1z/-.;)
.9268-7)
so by Douglas Florian
Winter Eyes
5.95 * Tr (0-688-16458-7)
se 
breenW1110W 
DOOKS 
An 
zmprmt 
of 
HarperCollinsPublishers
0 
531 
Avenue 
of 
d
"
n 
I 
this 
companion 
to 
his 
Wi 
s
UI 
UYc~ C~VIIIYUIYVII 
LY 1YJ 
· 11111~1 
L-YC__3_ 
LUILIlI 
LII111111~~
t
e 
ca 
ew 
or 
, 
www. 
ar
p
erc 
re 
m
1
Mg OPEN YOUR EYES TO A
WORLD OF DISCOVERY
Offering a new level
of information through
powerful visuals, this series
was specially developed
for children 5-8 who are
ready for their first books
about the natural world.
Full-color photography is
matched with clearly written
l Lhl
o 
tt 
xet 
he 
p 
give 
n
a stunning new view of
the world.
EARTH 
HUMAN BODY 
MAMMALS 
RIVERS AND LAKES
0-7894-8867-1 (hc) 
0-7894-9044-7 (hc) 
0-7894-8869-8 (hc) 
0-7894-9046-3 (hc)
0-7894-8868-X (Ib) 0-7894-9045-5 (Ib) 
0-7894-8900-7 (Ib) 
0-7894-9047-1 (Ib)
$9.99 (hc) each * $17.99 (Ib) each * 48 pp
AVAILABLE IN LIBRARY BINDING
Facbm 
S 
msho )1iCnmnrm,,t 
P-m 
JU'-r'-,Ia-/(/ 
ni' 
f
11()11 | 
l 
if)W|HHIC 
ltmsc 
llHm 
ourliH lbre*) 
LHIBRARY TAL
-
'- "Matt's big mouth gets him a three-day
suspension when [it's alleged] that the high
S 
school junior has threatened to bomb the
school. Fortunately, his classmate Ursula,
who calls herself'Ugly Girl,' heard what he
really said [and comes] to his defense.
Distinguished novelist Oates's first young
adult novel is a thought-provoking, character-
driven drama about the climate of hysteria
created by school violence, and how two
Steenagers find the courage to fight it and to
find themselves in the process."
-Starred review / ALA Booklist
W "The relationship between
SUrsula and Matt grows, credibly
and compellingly, against a convincing
high school backdrop."
-Starred review / Publishers Weekly
W- "A fast moving, timely,
compelling story."-Starred
review / School Library lournal
Grades 8 and up
$16.99 Tr (0-06-623756-4);
d u 
$16.89 Lb (0-06-623758-0);
Unabridqed audio, $25.00 Au (0-06-008969-5)
An Can 
Iead 
CBooal
o, 
R.OcTTE ZOLof 
t
<\N' 
Recipient of the 
0
SEASONS
A BOOK OF POEMS
ILLUSTRATED BY ERIK BLEGVAD
S"[In] this reassuring beginning reader... Zolotow filters each
poem through the lens of a child's sense of wonder. Loosely organized
around the seasons, the book is liberally plumped up with everyday
poems about birthdays, anger, grownups, parents and more. Blegvad's
landscapes gleam with the colors of the seasons and provide an ideal
accompaniment for Zolotow's gentle, comforting verses."
-Starred review / Publishers Weekly
"[This] collection of poetry that new young
readers can actually read themselves ...
[introduces] various
kinds of verse
forms, both
rhymed and
unrhymed,
in very short
bursts. A small
delight."
-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 4-8.
$14.95 Tr
(0-06-026698-8) (
$14.89 Lb
(0-06-026699-6)
Avialfo 
the
Graduate~~~ Sho 
fibrt 
nomto 
cec
ISBN 0-87845-105-6;
Number 39; 143 pages;
paper; $21.95*
STORY: FROM 
mFEPLACE TO CYBERSPACE
Connecting OCildren and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 39th Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their development
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
ture-and information in all forms.
The Bulletin Storytelling Revieuw Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of TheBulletin Storytelling Review contains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
* Price, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
Send ordcrs 1(): GSIPý 1111blicXions Office, Holm 2 i, 501 l". Daniel Succt, Chanipaign, 11ý
01820, Prepayflwnt rcquiicdý Viszi. Mýistcr(,ltrcl, At I le"icmi FAI)ress. DiscoNvi-lind chucks
(l)a\-,tbj(-totIIk'1 Ijkcvilý
111101 
IlLtfioll FCLýý11 k lit)" Othcr pt iblicalions cýin N, ohLiined hN
l1ttj):
V tillill IIw t
I )ooi,. SI 1oroýwl I adl I iholw I bool, III I I Ic ,,ý I I I 1c, )I dll. 0I limd(ý ()t I I Ic I I] i(I--d )tjt(_,S1 tl I C silippi I Ig
( I ý,t i,ý ý ý I , oi. I I Ic h I ýI I )ook, S 1,50 tor (ý:lcll 'I dd it ioml I hool, i I I ttic ýýi I Ilk 
I 
ýolirt I I
Ch"', hh)%in 10"c.)
Universit
1325 Sou
Champai
U.SA.
RETURN ~
Ir~:8
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2002 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http://www.prairienet.org/ccbl
2. 
When accessing The Bulletin Online for the first time, use the sub-
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and password.
This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit number but
may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your username. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at: http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
ed
.:a~ ~
~ALS
GNIL
l~~,.i 
·f";
0008-9036(200209)56:1 ;1 -1
i, 
; 
, • 
-,
