T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
December 2011
Vol. 65   No. 4
The Johns hopkins University press
1-800-537-5487 • press.jhu.edu
Disciplining Girls
Understanding the Origins of the 
Classic Orphan Girl Story
Joe SuTliff SanderS
At the heart of some of the most beloved children’s 
novels is a passionate discussion about discipline, 
love, and the changing role of girls in the twentieth 
century. Joe Sutliff Sanders traces this debate as it 
began in the sentimental tales of the mid-nineteenth 
century and continued in the classic orphan girl 
novels of Louisa May Alcott, Frances Hodgson 
Burnett, L. M. Montgomery, and other writers still 
popular today. 
Domestic novels published between 1850 and 1880 
argued that a kind of discipline that emphasized 
love was the most effective and moral form. These 
were the first best sellers in American fiction, and 
by reimagining discipline as a technique of the 
heart—rather than of the whip—they ensured their 
protagonists a secure, if limited, claim on power. This 
same ideal was adapted by women authors in the 
early twentieth century, who transformed the senti-
mental motifs of domestic novels into the orphan girl 
story made popular in such novels as Anne of Green 
Gables and Pollyanna. 
Through close readings of nine of the most influen-
tial orphan girl novels, Sanders provides a seamless 
historical narrative of American children’s literature 
and gender from 1850 until 1923.
$60.00 hardcover
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
December 2011
Vol. 65 No. 4
189  the BIg PICture
 
 Stars  by Mary Lyn Ray; illus. by Marla Frazee
190  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
191 • Sita’s Ramayana  ad. by Samhita Arni; illus. by Moyna Chitrakar
191 •  The Future of Us  by Jay Asher and Carolyn Mackler
196 •  Black & White: The Confrontation of Reverend Fred L. Shuttlesworth and 
Eugene “Bull” Connor  by Larry Dane Brimner
212 •  If You Lived Here: Houses of the World  written and illus. by Giles Laroche
225 • The Scorpio Races  by Maggie Stiefvater
232  Professional ConneCtions
234  subjeCt and use index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Funfsinn, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $12.00. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2011 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Stars ©2011 by Marla Frazee and used by permission of Beach Lane Books.
DecemBer 2011 • 189
the BIg PICture
Stars
by Mary Lyn Ray; illustrated by Marla Frazee
Childish wonder is an amazing thing, an approach to the world unfettered by 
convention and yet grounded in the specific, an easy bridge between “this is” and 
“what if?” that scientists try to recapture. Too often, though, books for children miss 
the mark in attempts to convey it, instead depicting adorable childish ignorance 
about adult-understandable facts. Mary Lyn Ray’s Stars, however, splendidly treats 
its subject with the matter-of-fact openness of childhood reminiscent of classics 
such as A Hole Is to Dig, applying it to a large and surprisingly intricate subject.
It’s not the astronomical science of stars that Ray focuses on; it’s what they 
mean to us on the ground both in their literal and symbolic incarnations, whether 
twinkling overhead, decorating our lives with shiny shapes, or metaphorically 
lighting our way, that this sweetly thoughtful picture book celebrates. That’s a big 
and abstract topic for a subject, but the text handles it with stylish aplomb by keep-
ing the focus squarely on the recognizable reality. On the manifest level, the text 
wanders amiably from sky-watching (“As soon as you see one, there’s another, and 
another”) to garden observations (”Yellow stars on pumpkin vines become October 
pumpkins”) to household details (“There might be a star on the calendar to mark 
a special day”), with stops along the way for the fanciful (“Moss where you might 
see fairies is made of green stars”). The intimate direct address, plain language, 
and gentle rhythm (“If you hold a wand the right way, you might see a wish come 
true. Not always. Only sometimes”) turn what could be a twee indulgence into a 
charming kid-level inquiry. Underneath the delicate catalogue of starry implications, 
however, is a quiet, often subtextual reassurance about feeling secure in a sometimes 
trying world, with the stars ensuring that “the dark that comes doesn’t feel so dark” 
and the stars at the end offering a benediction that doesn’t depend on visibility 
(“If sometimes you can’t see them,” the text notes accurately, “they’re still there”). 
Physically, the book is a thing of understated beauty: it’s got a tall reaching-
for-the-sky portrait-style orientation and an unobtrusive artistry in the backgrounds 
and endpapers that start the book with cerulean open air and head through smoky 
blue twilight to finish with glimmering nighttime inky black. The pencil-soft text 
has variety that suggests genuine neat hand printing in a style that perfectly captures 
the homey, confiding tone of the narrative voice. As she did in Scanlon’s All the 
World (BCCB 10/09), Frazee makes effective and appropriate use of the horizon 
line throughout her many landscape scenes, placing her young characters in relief 
against the wide skies; there’s a nice longitudinal shape to the compositions as they 
move between personable spot-art sequences and double-page-spread full-bleed 
embraces of the world, with a few intermediate steps in between. The artist peoples 
190 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
the starry pages with a small multicultural group of children, so viewers can follow 
their favorites throughout. Her Shirley Hughes–like talent for depicting kids who 
are cute but realistic and individual is on full display here: her subjects have all the 
variety and energy of good candid photography, and she’s particularly gifted in 
capturing the nuance of pose, the details of a kid’s belly pooching out, or cowlick 
springing up, or tongue sticking out in concentration. 
This is the kind of bigger-than-it-seems book that exemplifies picture 
books at their finest. Young dreamers in particular will appreciate the imagina-
tive approach, and they’ll especially enjoy experiencing this fanciful rhapsody as a 
bedtime book—especially if shared by flashlight in the warmth of a summer night 
under the stars. (See p. 221 for publication information.) 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
aChebe, Chinua How the Leopard Got His Claws; by Chinua Achebe and John 
Iroaganachi; illus. by Mary GrandPré. Candlewick, 2011 42p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4805-3 $16.99  
Ad 7-10 yrs
Noted Nigerian writer/scholar Achebe here offers a pourquoi tale for young audi-
ences. In this peaceful jungle setting, the leopard is king, and no animals save the 
dog have sharp teeth or claws. After being excluded from the community shelter for 
non-contribution, the dog stages a coup, and the animals name him king in place 
of the leopard. The leopard then adopts teeth and claws himself (fashioned from 
metal by a blacksmith) and returns to the village with a vengeance (“You shameless 
cowards. I was a kind and gentle king, but you turned against me. From today I 
shall rule the forest with terror”), and from that day forward the animals live as 
enemies. This original tale touches upon themes of liberation and justice, from the 
populace’s willingness to transfer allegiances to the dog’s violent usurpation of the 
kingship to the leopard’s brutal return to power. Unfortunately, the audience is likely 
to miss many of the post-colonial implications, and the text-heavy narrative will be 
daunting to younger listeners who might be content with the folkloric level of the 
tale. Grandpré’s dense acrylic illustrations are striking, though; the early spreads are 
as joy-filled as the later ones are dark and foreboding, and the closeups of animal 
faces are particularly powerful. This will likely require extra time for reading aloud, 
both because of its length and its heady content, but listeners may enjoy this dark 
tale of the establishment of the current state of the animal kingdom.  HM
DecemBer 2011 • 191
arni, samhita, ad. Sita’s Ramayana; illus. by Moyna Chitrakar. Groundwood/
House of Anansi, 2011 152p
ISBN 978-1-55498-145-8 $24.95  
R Gr. 5-8
This graphic-novel adaptation of the epic Indian legend the Ramayana picks up 
somewhere in the middle, with the banishment of Queen Sita, and the story is 
told mostly retrospectively from her point of view. All the requisite elements of 
an ancient epic are here: revenge, deceit, prophecy, abduction, murder, captivity, 
pride. Though the story is generally presented as the tale of a war between two 
kingdoms over desire for one woman, the female perspective eliminates much of the 
heroism of the war and instead reflects overtly on the tremendous cost, particularly 
to women and children (“War, in some ways, is merciful to men. It makes them 
heroes if they are victors. If they are the vanquished—they do not live to see their 
homes taken, their wives widowed. But if you are a woman—you must live through 
defeat . . . you become the mother of dead sons, a widow, or an orphan; or worse, 
a prisoner”). Rather than placing the reader in the middle of the battle scenes, the 
book delivers information about the war through messengers who report to the 
imprisoned Sita as she waits for her husband to rescue her, and the impact of the 
battle is thus a step removed. The artistic style derives from Patua scroll painting, an 
Indian folk-art form that offers painted images for an audience as stories are recited 
or sung while painted images are held up for an audience to see. The larger-than-
life artwork is bold, brash, and laden with tremendous passion; characters, both 
human and otherworldly, broadcast a range of deep emotions, and the density of 
the compositions adds further heft to the tale. Two appended essays offer invaluable 
insight into the book’s development. Thought-provoking and thrilling, this unusual 
volume deserves wide readership and even wider discussion.  HM
asher, jay The Future of Us; by Jay Asher and Carolyn Mackler. Razorbill, 
2011 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-491-1 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
As a teenager in 1996, Emma is only just beginning to grasp the concept of the 
internet, so when some recently downloaded software opens up a site called Face-
book, she’s taken aback. Initially she thinks the site, which contains a lot of her 
personal info and apparently originates some fifteen years in the future, must be a 
prank, but as she delves deeper, she becomes less certain. Panicking, she calls her 
neighbor and former best pal Josh (a recent awkward romantic encounter ended their 
nearly lifelong friendship) to take a look. The two become increasingly convinced 
of the site’s authenticity, especially when they realize that decisions they’re making 
today affect the statuses (literally) of their pages in the future. The knowledge of 
the future leads to some pretty serious ethical dilemmas, however (does Emma tell 
her best girl friend that she gets knocked up in the next year?), and soon Emma 
and Josh’s obsession with the site is wreaking havoc on their contemporary lives. 
Asher and Mackler each have YA name recognition in their own right, and this 
book demonstrates why. Despite a premise that could easily go awry and a plot 
that has little to no real action, the sparkling characterizations of Emma and Josh 
will immediately appeal to teens. Both are capable of petulance as well as compas-
sion, and their banter is witty even as it’s laced with underlying meaning. Though 
192 • The BulleTin
the details of the ’90s are a little over-kitschy at times, this capably demonstrates 
that the future is fascinating even after it becomes somebody else’s present.  KQG
atinuke Anna Hibiscus’ Song; illus. by Lauren Tobia. Kane Miller, 201l 32p
ISBN 978-1-61067-040-1 $15.99  
R 4-7 yrs
This is the picture-book debut for Anna Hibiscus, who lives in “Amazing Africa” 
and who has previously appeared in a series of early chapter books. In this exuber-
ant story, Anna perches at the top of a mango tree, looking down on the members 
of her extended family and rejoicing in her good fortune to the point where she is 
so happy that “she almost floats out of the tree.” Her family members offer advice 
on less precarious ways of celebrating joy, from counting the reasons for happiness 
to dancing to doing cartwheels, and each encounter makes Anna even happier 
until she is almost bursting with delight. In the end, Anna chooses to sing, and 
she composes an on-the-spot jingle about her happy feelings that she belts from 
the top of the mango tree. There’s not a whole lot of plot here, and the happiness 
theme could grow a bit thin were Anna not such a vivacious, affectionate child; 
instead, this is a tightly patterned ode to joy that features a close-knit extended 
family in an interesting setting. Tobia’s airy illustrations, homey lines tinted with 
planes of digital color, vividly capture the warmth of Anna’s family and village and 
offer relevant cultural details (the aunties’ patterned head wraps and skirts, the lush 
gardens). Anna herself is portrayed as an energetic little girl with light brown skin 
(her father is black, her mother white) and cornrows, zinging around town in her 
raspberry-colored dress. Partner this with Cunnane’s Chirchir Is Singing (BCCB 
10/11) for a melodious pairing of irrepressible African girls who just can’t stop 
themselves from expressing their joy.  HM 
barnett, maC Mustache!; illus. by Kevin Cornell. Disney Hyperion, 
2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-1671-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs 
King Duncan is a rather good-looking guy. Unfortunately, his aesthetically appeal-
ing features do not necessarily translate into good governing skills (who knew?). In 
fact, King Duncan spends so much time admiring his royal visage that his kingdom 
is literally falling apart—towers crumble, potholes pepper roads, and playgrounds 
are health hazards, but King Duncan’s best solution is to put up more banners 
depicting his kingly beauty. Finally fed up, his subjects take matters into their own 
hands, sneakily painting black mustaches on each royal caricature during the night, 
an act of rebellion that lands them all in jail. In order to accommodate so many 
prisoners, King Duncan is forced to build a larger jail—one that has complete 
towers, fully paved roads, and functional swings. The clever text will have leave 
youngsters giggling at the villagers’ inevitable triumph at the king’s expense, but 
the real appeal here lies in the illustrations with their cartoonish comedy and jokey 
details. Awash in vibrant color, the enjoyably overstuffed spreads are populated 
with plenty of hilarious but understated jokes (the signs of the protesting villagers 
are particularly amusing, and the mustaches are absurdly ubiquitous), inviting 
the viewer to pore over each page. A gilded peacock pattern frames each picture, 
completing the fractured fairy-tale feel. Youngsters will get a kick out of this kingly 
comedy, but you might want to hide the magic markers lest audiences follow the 
villagers’ example on your other picture books.  KQG 
DecemBer 2011 • 193
berk, ari Death Watch. Simon, 2011 [544p] (Undertaken Trilogy)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9115-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3603-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
After his father goes missing, Silas and his alcoholic mother lose their home and 
are forced to move to his uncle’s sprawling estate in his parents’ childhood town 
of Lichport. Gray and gloomy, standing at the edge of swampy marshes, Lichport 
has an air of decay and rot, and its residents are oddly focused on death and its 
surrounding ceremony. As the son of a mortician, Silas isn’t as bothered by this 
as others might be; more disturbing, however, is his uncle’s increasingly erratic 
behavior, particularly in regards to one shadowy room in the mansion, and the 
locals’ constant references to Silas’ father as “the Undertaker.” After finding an 
antique watch among his father’s belongings, Silas is finally able to see what they 
mean: the watch allows him to see dead people, and Silas realizes that Lichport is 
a necropolis filled with restless souls—souls to which his father, as the Undertaker, 
would have brought peace. Convinced his father met foul play among the lost 
spirits, Silas embarks on a journey to save his dad; what he finds instead is a horror 
show among his own kin and a town filled with deadly secrets. Darkly atmospheric, 
Lichport is a town populated with villains and tropes from familiar and lesser-known 
folktales, a place where nightmares come alive in the form of zombies, ghosts, and 
power-hungry relatives. Berk, a folklorist and mythology professor, keeps most of 
the stories focused on loss and grief, providing a very human face to the horror. 
At 500-plus pages, however, and with its somber and often lengthy ruminations 
on death and the afterlife, this is a dense read whose slow pace has the potential to 
seriously disappoint the average horror fan. Readers should be prepared to spend a 
fair amount of time with Silas’ story, but those who like complexity in their scary 
tales will find their patience rewarded by the satisfying conclusion.  KQG
bernobiCh, beth Fox & Phoenix. Viking, 2011 [360p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01278-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
After Kai and his gang of ragtag misfits helped Long City’s princess to achieve her 
heart’s desire and scored some serious cash in the process, Kai was pretty sure he 
had an easy life ahead of him. He did not, however, expect it to be so boring: with 
his group disbanded to follow their own dreams, Kai is left as apprentice to his 
mother (a rather intimidating sorceress), executing all sorts of mundane tasks while 
trying to ignore his growing feelings for Yun, his fellow worker and former best 
friend. Adventure calls again, though, when the king of Long City falls ill, Kai’s 
mother goes missing, and a ghost dragon entrusts Kai with the task of traveling to 
the Phoenix Empire to retrieve Princess Lian so she can save her father and thus 
fend off a power-hungry emperor. His journey through the land reveals Bernobich’s 
intricately built world: blending fantasy and science fiction, the author offers up a 
place that is strikingly familiar to modern-day readers with its “talk-phones” and “vid 
screens” but that is powered entirely by a force called the “magic flux.” Enigmatic 
spirit companions and ferocious ghost dragons call up images of Chinese culture, 
and the result is a fascinating amalgam of ancient magic and modern technology. 
Unfortunately, references to Kai’s previous adventure (a short story in Berman’s 
Magic in the Mirrorstone, BCCB 4/08) make it clear to readers that they came in 
194 • The BulleTin
at the middle of a story, and the characters’ emotional resonance is dependent on 
knowledge of their history; the complicated romance between Yun and Kai will be 
particularly perplexing to those unfamiliar with the previous work. Despite this, Kai 
is eminently likable as the trouble-seeking hero, and the intriguing setting makes 
this an adventure that may appeal to both fantasy and techno-geeks alike.  KQG
blake, kendare Anna Dressed in Blood. Starscape/Tor, 2011 320p
ISBN 978-0-7653-2865-6 $17.99  
R* Gr. 8-12
After inheriting both his current vocation and his weapon of choice, a silver athame 
(a traditional dagger), from his father after dear old Dad was taken out by one 
of his ghostly charges, Cas Lowood and his mom have spent the last three years 
moving from town to town sending murderous ghosts to their final resting place. 
Now Cas is in Thunder Bay, Ontario, to confront the spirit of a teen girl murdered 
over fifty years ago who is also apparently responsible for the dismemberment of 
a host of runaways. Cas witnesses her brutality up close when he sees her literally 
rip another boy in two, but for some reason she spares Cas, an act of mercy that 
leads him to believe she may in fact be cursed and sends him on a hunt to find a 
way to free her without destroying her in the process. Meanwhile, the flesh-eating 
ghost that killed his father appears to be taking his fight to the next generation, 
and Cas soon finds himself defenseless and clueless after his athame is stolen. The 
disturbing but terrifically plotted conclusion brings together the two story arcs with 
a startling amount of aplomb, and readers will be clamoring for the next installment 
of this wonderful blend of romance, satire, and horror. Cas’ snarky, hard-boiled 
narration recalls classic noir, and Anna is no doubt a serious femme fatale, with the 
emphasis on “fatale.” Readers shouldn’t let the aptly placed pop-culture references 
and sparkling wit fool them into thinking this is a light romp, however, because the 
action gets plenty gross and plenty scary at times. This is horror at its best.  KQG
booth, Coe Bronxwood. Push/Scholastic, 2011 328p
ISBN 978-0-439-92534-1 $17.99  
R Gr. 9-12
While Tyrell’s pops was in prison (see Tyrell), sixteen-year-old Tyrell used his DJing 
equipment to earn enough money to pay rent, but he wasn’t able to get his eight-
year-old brother, Troy, out of foster care—only his father can do that. As a result, 
Tyrell is deeply ambivalent about his father’s return; since he himself has been taking 
on a man’s responsibilities, he won’t go back to living under his father’s author-
ity, but he really wants Troy out of the system. Meanwhile, he also wants a new 
girlfriend after Novisha betrayed him, and he’s got his sights set on Adonna, even 
though she has never dated a guy from Bronxwood. Tyrell is clean, though, and he 
has so far resisted joining his best friend Cal’s family’s drug-trafficking operation, 
even though he lives with Cal and his brother. As he thought, his father comes 
home with plans to take up where he left off, running Tyrell’s life and demanding 
absolute obedience under the threat of physical violence, and Tyrell is left with 
no good options. The heartbreak here is that Tyrell has no positive role models as 
he tries to figure out what he wants from a relationship and what he wants from 
and for himself as a man; his father is manipulative and abusive, his friends are 
beaten down by their own older brothers, and most of the girls he meets, as well 
as his own tragically irresponsible mom, are just as lost as he is as they try to get 
what they can out of the men in their lives. As in Tyrell, Tyrell tells his own story 
DecemBer 2011 • 195
in language that never misses in its gritty authenticity; his sexual desires and their 
satisfactions are laid bare as are his emotional frustrations as he tries to successfully 
negotiate and perhaps escape a world that has defeated all of the adults in his life 
in one way or another.  KC
bottner, barbara An Annoying ABC; illus. by Michael Emberley. Knopf, 
2011 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96708-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86708-8 $17.99  
R 4-6 yrs
“It was a quiet morning until . . . Adelaide annoyed Bailey,” begins this abecedary 
of acrimonious behavior in a preschool classroom. Bailey then “blamed Clyde,” 
and the disgruntlement continues alphabetically from child to child until Zelda, 
who is trying to water a plant when Adelaide accidentally stands on the hose, 
“zaps” Adelaide (and also everyone else) with a blast of water: “Adelaide started 
it!” Miss Mabel, the teacher, encourages the tiger-costumed Adelaide to apologize, 
then “everyone apologized,” and the children enjoy a “quiet afternoon . . . mostly.” 
Although the font is a bit small for large group sharing, the initial letter of each 
child’s name is highlighted with a colored square, a helpful touch for teachers and 
students using this as an alphabet teaching tool. The pithy text tells a coherent tale 
in itself, but it’s Emberley’s humorous and highly expressive pictures (rendered in 
pencil and watercolor) that give viewers the full story. Adelaide, for example, ap-
pears in the background of several pages as she chases down the class rodent that 
escaped when she scared the cage-cleaning Bailey, and big Grover (who “grabbed 
Horace” in a bear hug) is shown throughout the pages still happily holding onto 
poor Horace in various ways. Emberley presents a fairly diverse lot of children 
(including a girl in a wheelchair) and capably illustrates a huge range of facial ex-
pressions and emotions, many hilarious. Use this to spice up a preschool alphabet 
lesson or storytime, but make sure kids get to spend some time up close to truly 
savor all the piquant details.  JH
bowler, tim Buried Thunder. Holiday House, 2011 216p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2397-2 $16.95  
Ad Gr. 7-10
“Someone’s going to die.” Maya doesn’t remember saying those words, but according 
to her brother, she did—right before she ran into the woods near their parents’ new 
inn and stumbled across three dead bodies. When the police are called to inves-
tigate, however, they don’t find any signs of the corpses, and since Maya’s brother 
didn’t actually see the bodies either, Maya is left looking like an attention hog or 
the town’s newest crazy person. Maya knows she isn’t insane, though, and she also 
knows that there’s something strangely wrong with her new home; that suspicion 
is confirmed (in her mind, at least) when the strange sounds she’s been hearing at 
night eventually lead her to the disemboweled and decapitated corpses of animals, 
and a fur-clad creature/person hunts her through the forest. The perspective here 
is limited to Maya, so readers will feel both her helplessness and fear in the face of 
what appears to be a supernatural menace bent on murder; Bowler expertly creates 
an atmosphere rich with enveloping shadows and eerie noises so that every aspect 
of her new home feels ripe with the possibility of terror. It is therefore terribly 
disappointing when the tension leads to an unexciting climax that involves pages 
of expository dialogue and seems more like a conclusion to an episode of Scooby 
196 • The BulleTin
Doo than the ending to a taut thriller. Readers may end up feeling a bit had, but 
scare-seekers and the like may still find this suitably engrossing, with an emphasis 
on gross.  KQG 
brimner, larry dane Black & White: The Confrontation of Reverend Fred L. 
Shuttlesworth and Eugene “Bull” Connor. Boyds Mills, 2011 [112p] illus. 
with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59078-766-3 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 5-8
The late Rev. Shuttlesworth, who spent much of his early ministerial career directly 
in the crosshairs of the KKK, has been overshadowed by the civil rights legacies of 
Dr. King and Mrs. Parks. But, as Brimner ably demonstrates here, Shuttlesworth was 
the driving force behind the movement in Birmingham at midcentury, and without 
his face-to-face showdowns with Public Safety Commissioner “Bull” Connor, the 
growing body of civil rights legislation might never have been enforced. The first 
two chapters of this title focus on the biography of each man—Shuttlesworth’s 
development of a religious philosophy that “made no distinction between a church 
member’s spiritual needs and that member’s social responsibilities”; Connor’s shift 
from a political progressive to an unwavering segregationist. The final section 
covers the strategies each man used to undermine his rival—fiery preaching, hosts 
of lawsuits, public demonstrations, and national media coverage versus harass-
ment, Klan threats, and carefully orchestrated city-sanctioned violence. Plenty of 
black-and-white photographs are included, and the effective page layout balances 
oversized quotations and excerpts against columns of prose, underscoring the drama 
while assisting readers in scanning sections of text. A list of further reading (nicely 
selected for middle-school readers), source notes, and an index are appended.  EB
brooks, kevin iBoy. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2011 288p
ISBN 978-0-545-31768-9 $17.99  
R Gr. 8-10
Challenging British author Brooks returns with a story of a sixteen-year-old teen 
in London, who suddenly finds himself with incredible powers after being hit 
with a phone. It turns out that key pieces of the iPhone have become embedded 
in his brain, and Tom is suddenly able to send emails, access police records, and 
force others to do what he wants—all by simply using his own newly enhanced 
brain. It’s best to just set the science aside immediately and go with the premise, 
and Tom is so vulnerable and well-intentioned that it’s fairly easy to do so. Read-
ers will likely be as passionate as he is about cleaning up his rough neighborhood, 
punishing the individuals who raped his crush and longtime friend, Lucy (and 
who would otherwise probably go free because of the dangers presented to anyone 
who cooperates with the police), and using his new powers for good. The fact that 
Tom isn’t always successful in harnessing and interpreting his new abilities is to be 
expected, as is the fact that his emotions outpace his common sense most of the 
time; however, these deficits make Tom appealingly imperfect. In the end, Lucy 
and Tom survive, the world is slightly better but not fixed, and a whole bunch of 
unresolved questions remain about who Tom is, who he can be, and whether we 
are made of our best selves, our worst fears, or some combination. Brooks also 
treated the machine/human composite topic in Being (BCCB 2/07), but this is a 
more contemporarily resonant approach: Tom is part of a normal, complex, and 
DecemBer 2011 • 197
satisfyingly built world, even with the technology piece added, which means this 
novel comfortably straddles both sci-fi and realistic fiction territory, thus broaden-
ing potential appeal.  AS
Carey, anna Eve. Harper/HarperCollins, 2011 318p
ISBN 978-0-06-204850-9 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Eve’s cozy little dreams of service to her government and then eventual retirement 
are shattered in an instant when she discovers the truth: women in this post-plague 
world are primarily viewed (and used) as breeding stock, and Eve actually faces 
a special mission as the person chosen by the King of New America to carry his 
children. Carefully trained to trust only the school and to avoid all men and boys, 
and raised with a great deal of book knowledge (albeit skewed) but no survival skills, 
Eve is ill-equipped to venture out into the unknown world, but she is certain that 
danger is better than cooperating with a government that views women as “sows.” 
The romance between Eve and a young man she meets on the road is poignant from 
the start, as readers will spot right away that it must end, even as they will likely wish 
as fervently as Eve that somehow normal life could still be achieved. Unfortunately, 
the strident, creepy, anti-male feminism shaping the education Eve receives makes 
women the culprits as much as anyone, resulting in a world so loathsome that it 
is unclear what is worth saving. In addition, few of the characters emerge as actual 
individuals, existing primarily to teach the protagonist important lessons about 
trust, faith, love, and loyalty. Nevertheless, readers who can’t get enough of the 
flood of dystopian books will find this an interesting take on what could happen 
if the few remaining folks on Earth split up by gender.  AS
Chin, jason Coral Reefs; written and illus. by Jason Chin. Porter/Roaring 
Brook, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-563-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 2-4
Information and fantasy collaborate in this imaginative introduction to coral reefs. 
Here readers can get “just the facts” on the structure, life cycle, and marine denizens 
of reefs, with the expected data on the polyps that build them and the forces (natural 
and man-made) that imperil them. As the well-organized text proceeds, however, 
the accompanying illustrations take readers on a little girl’s wild journey from the 
reading room at the New York Public Library (its ornate ceiling cleverly transformed 
into marine motifs), where she pulls Chin’s book from the shelf. As she strolls the 
aisles perusing the picture book, coral formations build in her wake, water presses 
out the library windows, and she’s underwater at a reef that has taken over the city 
streets. Just another reader figuratively “immersed” in her book? Maybe not, since 
she emerges from the library dripping wet, with shards of coral in puddles on the 
steps, and a band of intrigued kids anxious to share her book—and, no doubt, her 
fabulous experience. Some adults may fear that the illustrated story is sufficiently 
distracting to endanger the delivery of information, but it’s more probable that 
kids will just revisit the material until they’ve wrung what they need from pictures 
and text. Additional notes and a short bibliography are included, and endpaper 
sketches identify many of the fish and coral presented throughout the book.  EB
198 • The BulleTin
Choldenko, Gennifer A Giant Crush; illus. by Melissa Sweet. Putnam, 
2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-399-24352-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
Cooper’s best friend, Jackson, has a crush on their classmate, Cami, which he ex-
presses with anonymous gifts of a flower, candy, and a fancy homemade valentine. 
The other members of their grade-school classroom (all rabbits) soon figure it out, 
however, and one boy in particular, Carter Corey (who also has a crush on Cami) 
particularly ribs Jackson and Cami about it. Jackson is concerned that Cami won’t 
like him because of his size (he’s the biggest one in their class), but after she receives 
his valentine, Cami asks him to play soccer and stands up to Carter Corey, and 
happy Jackson knows his feelings are reciprocated. Choldenko is spot-on in her 
portrayal of the agonies and excitement of elementary school love, from the girls 
chanting “Cami has a boyfriend” to the attention-grabbing Carter Corey stealing 
Cami’s scarf on the playground to Jackson’s blushing embarrassment over his feelings 
(“Jackson’s cheeks flush red as a wrong-answer pencil”). Having Cooper narrate the 
story also handily provides an entry point for kids who haven’t quite reached the 
“first crush” stage yet, although even those kids will likely sympathize with Jackson 
as he worries that Cami doesn’t like him back (“Jackson’s face crumples up. ‘I would 
know if she liked me,’ he whispers”). Sweet’s cheerful mixed-media illustrations 
depict a sunny bunny world in which perky-eared rabbit kids wear hoodies and 
ball caps (but no shoes). Sharp-eyed viewers will appreciate Sweet’s attention to 
small details such as the cartons of carrot juice, rather than milk, in the cafeteria 
and the class fish also receiving a valentine of its own. This could help prompt a 
discussion about appropriate displays of affection in the classroom, but it would 
also be a sweet selection for a Valentine’s Day storytime.  JH
ChristoPher, luCy Flyaway. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2011 328p
ISBN 978-0-545-31771-9 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
Swans are a big thing in Isla’s family, with her bird-loving father particularly enam-
ored of a flock of whooper swans who return to the area every year to winter over. 
Just as the swans return this year, however, Isla’s father suffers a cardiac episode 
that sends him to the hospital to undergo surgery. As Isla visits her father in the 
hospital, she strikes up a friendship with Harry, a boy in the pediatric unit who’s 
being treated for leukemia; together they develop an interest in a lone young swan 
near the hospital grounds, a swan that seems uncannily responsive to Isla. As Isla’s 
father’s life hangs in the balance, she and Harry become fixated on teaching the lost 
youngster to fly and helping her find the flock, without whom she will be unable to 
survive. This is a multifaceted story fitted together neatly and smoothly with fine 
craftsmanship, so the various elements combine effectively rather than overload-
ing the book with contrivance. Isla’s swan obsession is realistically grounded in her 
relationship with her father, but there’s an appealing touch of folkloric mysticism 
in her connection to the birds. That’s an especially strong current in her connection 
to the young swan near the hospital and in Isla’s creation of a harness that allows 
her to wield swan wings, even to the point of becoming modestly airborne. The 
realistic basis of the story remains strong even in those moments, though, leaving 
readers tantalized with the possibility of a touch of the unearthly rather than con-
vinced of the fantastical. The more human components, such as the dynamics of 
DecemBer 2011 • 199
Isla’s relationship with Harry, are handed subtly and authentically as well. While 
animal lovers will particularly relish the details of Isla’s kinship with the swans, the 
skillfully turned human drama and the touches of first romance will draw a wide 
audience.  DS
Cole, broCk The Money We’ll Save; written and illus. by Brock Cole. Ferguson/
Farrar, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-374-35011-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
In a nineteenth-century tenement house, Ma sends Pa to the store, where he is duped 
into buying a young turkey to fatten up with table scraps for Christmas dinner 
(“Think of the money we’ll save!”). But where do you keep a turkey in a tenement 
apartment? They first try keeping “Alfred” (as he is named by the children) in a box 
by the stove, but he outgrows it; then Pa puts him in a pen on the fire escape, but 
Mrs. Schumacher, the lady downstairs, complains, so Pa trundles Alfred’s pen out 
over the street on the clothesline. This also proves problematic: Alfred’s cage crashes 
and he “chased the cats and pecked the dogs and wouldn’t let Mrs. Schumacher use 
the privies.” When the time comes for Pa to take Alfred to the butcher, however, 
the children revolt: “’It would be like eating a friend,’ said Bridget. ‘Well,’ said 
Pearl, ‘not a friend, exactly. It would be like eating Mrs. Schumacher.’” The family 
finally gives Alfred to Mrs. Schumacher (who turns out to be quite delighted to 
keep him as a pet) and celebrates a meager but happy Christmas. Cole’s amusing 
tale reads like a family story that’s been told so many times it’s become legend, and 
the historical setting will also make it seem satisfyingly folkloric to today’s children. 
Many kids, however, will understand all too well the notion of a family struggling 
to get by, whatever the era. Cole’s warm-toned, energetic line-and-watercolor il-
lustrations have a slightly scratchy look appropriate to the hardscrabble life of his 
subjects. Modern kids will be fascinated by the entertaining period details (straight 
razors, privies) and amused by Alfred’s increasingly grumpy mien as the family tries 
to thwart his misbehavior. This could easily be incorporated into a class history 
lesson or simply enjoyed as a unique and humorous holiday story.  JH
Cowley, joy Friends: Snake and Lizard; illus. by Gavin Bishop. Gecko, 
2011 126p
ISBN 978-1-8775-7901-1 $16.95  
R Gr. 3-5
This sequel (imported from New Zealand) to Snake and Lizard further explores the 
relationship between the loquacious Lizard and no-nonsense Snake, reptile room-
mates. Having formed an alliance, Snake and Lizard help their animal clients and 
comically negotiate various issues. These include spiders (Lizard welcomes them as 
easy pickings, while Snake fears arachnids), eating methods (Lizard doesn’t think 
Snake shows enough appreciation for his gifts of stolen eggs when she swallows 
them whole), and the treatment of prospective clients (Snake eats a frog who’d 
come to them for help). The contrast and conflicts between dramatic Lizard and 
plain-speaking Snake and the vignette-like chapters, though longer and more text-
focused, bring to mind Lobel’s Frog and Toad, and kids who loved that amphibi-
ous pair back in the primary grades will find this an equally enjoyable and more 
sophisticated friendship saga. Snake and Lizard’s adventures are appropriately rooted 
in their desert life, yet their concerns mirror relationship issues that middle-grade 
200 • The BulleTin
kids struggle with as well. While Snake and Lizard possess real individuality and 
depth, they are also frequently humorous, especially when trying to make sense 
of the human world that sometimes intrudes upon their habitat (they are amazed 
that humans shed their “skins” to bathe in the river and are convinced that a blue 
balloon is an egg from a reptilian sky god). Bishop’s frequent full-color line-and-
watercolor illustrations, filled with sunset and desert hues, add further warmth and 
vibrancy to the text.  JH
Cuevas, miChelle The Masterwork of a Painting Elephant; illus. by Ed 
Young. Foster/Farrar, 2011 [144p]
ISBN 978-0-374-34854-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
Abandoned by his mother and father as an infant, Pigeon Jones found himself a 
stand-in parent when he crawled off of the orphanage steps, across town, and onto 
the back of a friendly-looking elephant. Since then, Pigeon and Birch have been 
inseparable: Pigeon lives on the elephant’s back, never leaving the safety of his pro-
tective pachyderm, not even to attend the fifth grade; he even becomes celebrated as 
an artistic child prodigy (though it’s Birch doing the painting). When Birch decides 
he’d like to find the beautiful acrobat he was once in love with and Pigeon wants 
to start looking for his real parents, the two friends embark on a journey that takes 
them from New York to Hollywood to Paris in a search for something that, in the 
end, they discover they already had. The mature viewpoint of the evocative, flow-
ing prose makes it clear that little Pigeon is narrating his tale from a much older 
age, but the tone still manages to effortlessly capture the innocent and at times 
bewildered wonder of a child’s perspective. Parents reading with their children will 
most certainly recognize themselves in the old elephant’s fierce protectiveness and 
his sacrifices for Pigeon, while children will relate to Pigeon’s struggle to choose 
between the safety of a place well known and the allure of the big wide world. The 
emotional push and pull between the two protagonists is framed nicely by their 
fantastic, if somewhat purposeless, adventure, so that even listeners not ready to 
think about the possibility of leaving the nest will appreciate the fable-like quality 
of the friends’ journey. This is a contemplative but entertaining tale perfect to share 
at bedtime or on a rainy afternoon. Final illustrations not seen.  KQG
davies, niCola Talk, Talk, Squawk!: A Human’s Guide to Animal Communications; 
illus. by Neal Layton. Candlewick, 2011 64p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5088-9 $14.99  
R Gr. 3-5
Davies and Layton have been roaming fearlessly through the animal kingdom for 
several amusing and informative volumes now, starting with Poop: A Natural His-
tory of the Unmentionable (BCCB 9/04); as excellent communicators themselves, 
they have finally, unsurprisingly, turned to the topic of communication. The book 
covers forms of communication, from visual (“Uniforms are a very simple type 
of signal that says ‘one of us’”) to olfactory (“Any beaver without the family stink 
will get chased out of the lodge!”) to auditory (“Sound travels four times faster in 
water than in air, so sound is a really good way of sending messages underwater”). 
There’s also an overview of the kinds of messages animals are inclined to send, such 
as “Where are you?” and “I am gorgeous!” Particularly interesting to young readers 
will be the exploration of message mimicry, with safe animals copying dangerous 
DecemBer 2011 • 201
ones and vice versa, and the communication balance such fakery requires (“If this 
kind of lying got too common everyone would lose out”). While this is breaking 
less new ground than the previous titles, it’s a tasty overview of a broad and compli-
cated subject, and the distillation into bite-size pieces of introductory information, 
all rooted strongly in specific example, will be welcome to even tentative young 
biologists. The format is familiar from Davies and Layton’s previous outings, with 
art amiably noodling around the text, comic-book panel narratives popping up, 
and general irreverence the order of the artistic day, but Layton embraces color 
with new verve here, throwing in lively patterns and photocollage elements that 
spice up his doodly linework. This goes smack into the biology curriculum, but it 
could also make an unexpected appearance in language arts, and it’ll be a draw for 
reluctant pleasure readers. An index and brief glossary are appended.  DS
denenberG, barry Titanic Sinks! Viking, 2011 [72p] illus. with photo-
graphs
ISBN 978-0-670-01243-5 $19.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-8
One can pretty well predict that a fleet of Titanic books will be launched to mark 
the hundredth year of the famed ship’s sinking. Denenberg’s near-centennial of-
fering is an oversized, photo-illustrated, “special memorial edition” of a fictional 
periodical entitled Modern Times. The “publisher,” Mary Hudson, introduces the 
work, explaining how articles from 1907 through 1912 have been compiled to 
retrace the planning, launch, and demise of the Titanic, bookending journal entries 
from one of their chief correspondents, S. F. Vanni, who lost his life (but most 
fortunately not his minute-by-minute notes) in the disaster. The fictional conceit 
and attractive bookmaking will make this an enticing choice, but the legions of 
discriminating readers who are already up on their Titanic history may be less than 
impressed with such tell-tale slips-ups as Vanni’s forthright reference to young 
Mrs. Astor’s pregnancy (certainly not discussed in polite company), an April 11th 
photo appearing in an April 8th article, and Vanni’s simultaneous knowledge of 
events all over the ship (including steerage) as the ship went down. However, for 
Titanic novices and the truly Titanic obsessed, these quibbles will be swamped by 
the period photographs, trivia lists, fictional interviews, and “reporter” Vanni’s 
eyewitness account.  EB
dudley, david l. Caleb’s Wars. Clarion, 2011 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-547-23997-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
For Caleb, being a black teenager in 1940s Georgia means that he is in the midst of 
several wars: certainly, he is affected by the world war that his brother is off train-
ing to fight in, but more immediate to his experience are the wars between him 
and his overbearing father, who won’t treat him like an adult, and between him 
and the white boys in his town, who expect him to act like slavery never ended. 
At his mother’s urging and to his father’s great disappointment, he gets baptized, 
and when he emerges from the water, he hears a voice that he figures must belong 
to God. During this eventful summer, he defies his father and gets a job in town, 
only to find himself working with an enemy—a German POW—and he discov-
ers a spiritual gift for healing that he tries to keep secret. The basics of the story 
202 • The BulleTin
suggest similarities to Greene’s classic Summer of My German Soldier, but, with its 
focus on spirituality and ironies of relative privilege, this is a very different book. 
It’s also more an open-ended episode in a young man’s life than a tightly plotted 
novel; many things happen, but few are resolved. Caleb’s character is deftly and 
realistically drawn; with his turbulent teenage emotions and his inability to con-
ceptualize consequences, he does some pretty stupid things that are, in the end, 
validated as necessary resistance to the tyranny of racism that grips his town and 
time. His status as an imperfect vessel for such a powerful spiritual gift gives hope 
for readers struggling with their own faith in circumstances where anger at injustice 
outweighs patience and charity.  KC 
ely, sCott The Elephant Mountains. Orca, 2011 [204p]
ISBN 978-1-55469-406-8 $19.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
In this novel set in a future impacted by global warming, fifteen-year-old Stephen 
was only supposed to stay with his survivalist dad in the Louisiana bayou through 
the summer and then return to his wealthy mother’s home in New Orleans come 
fall. A series of violent hurricanes changes his plans, though, completely washing 
away Florida and leaving most of the rest of the South under water. After would-be 
looters kill Stephen’s father, the boy is determined to find his mother, so he packs 
food, water, and weapons on an airboat and, with Angela, an older girl who also 
lost her parents to looters, he sets off to try to find his way to whatever might be 
left of New Orleans. Along the way, the two teens are sometimes welcomed by 
those have stayed with their property, but they are more often menaced by survivors 
who have turned savage in their panic, and only Stephen’s constant vigilance keeps 
them alive. Stephen’s spare, emotionally flat ruminations regarding his mother’s 
licentious lifestyle and his own emerging sexuality reinforce the central theme of 
the text—how to preserve the possibility of love and attachment even when every-
one you meet seems to have abandoned any semblance of human charity, and you 
yourself have to kill to survive. However, considering the outflow of compassion 
and heroic action that generally accompanies natural disasters of this scale in real 
life, this unrelentingly apocalyptic fiction rings false, as does the fact that the only 
character with any ability to plan effectively or consider consequences is Stephen 
himself. Despite its departure from reality, though, readers who have a sense of 
themselves as unsung heroes who would rise to such a challenge may relate to his 
character and relish the chance to exercise their own survivalist imaginations.  KC
erlbruCh, wolf Duck, Death, and the Tulip; written and illus. by Wolf Erlbruch; 
tr. by Catherine Chidgey. Gecko, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-1-8775-7900-4 $17.95  
R 6-9 yrs
When Duck finally accosts the lurking figure behind her, she’s startled to find 
out that it’s Death, who stays close by “just in case.” As the conversation goes on, 
however, Duck decides that Death is “really quite nice,” and she and Death become 
chums, spending the summer discussing what happens after death and wander-
ing down to the pond together. Come the winter cold, the aging duck succumbs 
(“She’d stopped breathing. She lay quite still”), and Death carries his friend to 
“the great river” and sends her on her way. German author-illustrator Erlbruch 
brings unusual charm and accessibility to this fable-like tale of the life cycle’s end 
DecemBer 2011 • 203
that offers a comradely picture of Death akin to that in Bateman’s Keeper of Soles 
(BCCB 4/06). The audience will, like Duck, find Death surprisingly personable 
company, and this matter-of-factly humanistic portrayal may reassure kids spooked 
by more gruesome tales and elicit discussion from those uneasy about a sometimes 
frighteningly mysterious aspect of life. The art is minimalist, with the cut-paper 
figures of Duck and Death modeled with soft colored pencil strokes and layered on 
ivory backgrounds; the pale neutrality of the palette isn’t going to draw youngsters’ 
eyes, but there’s an appropriately quirky appeal in the ballet-like interplay between 
skull-headed Death (in a long checked coat) and gimlet-eyed Duck. The titular 
tulip, never mentioned in the text, is Death’s pretty accessory, hidden from Duck 
while she’s alive but adorning her body as a sweet valedictory touch as she floats 
downriver. The offbeat nature of the tale keeps it from being didactically biblio-
therapeutic, and it’s likely to provoke even more thought than the conventional 
accounts of aging pets and their grieving owners.  DS
flaCk, soPhie Bunheads. Poppy/Little, 2011 294p
ISBN 978-0-316-12653-3 $17.99  
R* Gr. 7-12
For nineteen-year-old Hannah Ward, being a dancer is “the most amazing, wonder-
ful, and crazy life that I could have imagined,” and she’s been a part of the pres-
tigious Manhattan Ballet Company (clearly a fictionalized New York City Ballet) 
ever since she was invited to join its school when she was fourteen. She’s hoping 
to be promoted from the corps de ballet to soloist, so she thrills when she receives 
any indication of favor from the magisterial director and aches when his attention 
turns to other girls, especially her friend and keenest competitor, Zoe. The route to 
being a ballerina has started to become complicated, though: she’s fallen for Jacob, 
a young musician and NYU student; she’s also being pursued by Matt, the worldly 
son of one of the ballet’s major patrons; and, agonizingly, her body is filling out in 
ways that diminish her suitability for the ballet aesthetic, forcing her to redouble 
her physical commitment to keep on track. This is absolute ballet-lovers’ catnip, 
filled with intimate, credible details of the daily grind of a dancer’s life (“Pointe 
shoes, Band-Aids, and Advil: if we had to pay for these three things, we’d barely be 
able to afford our rent”) and the pure joy of doing what you love (“There’s always 
something magical about the snow and the music, and about dancing with your 
friends”). It’s crystal-clear that the level of commitment required is simply out of 
most mortals’ ken, so that Hannah not only can’t manage a relationship with a 
non-dancer if she’s dancing as she wishes, she can’t know the city she lives in or 
talk regularly to her parents. Flack nonetheless presents a measured, vibrant, un-
melodramatic account of the possibilities, with a lively cast of literary soloists and 
corps de novel who present possible ways to survive, or not, as a dancer. Even the 
ballet-neutral will understand the conflict between career and personal life explored 
here, but this book will be absolutely irresistible to those who’ve always felt just one 
pirouette and years of ferocious training away from Margot Fonteyn.  DS
freitas, donna The Survival Kit. Foster/Farrar, 2011 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-374-39917-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
The death of Rose’s mother has left sixteen-year-old Rose utterly shattered, unable 
to face anything she’d formerly enjoyed, such as her cheerleading or her relation-
204 • The BulleTin
ship—especially her sexual relationship—with her beloved boyfriend, Chris, with 
whom she breaks up. Upon finding a bag entitled “Rose’s Survival Kit,” left by 
her mother, she attempts to work her way through grief according to her mother’s 
symbolic messages. Her first task, planting peonies, brings her closer to Will, a quiet 
schoolmate who works for a landscaper and who also lost a parent not long ago; 
soon her relationship with Will has blossomed into romance, but can it survive 
when Rose is still so wounded? While the grief is handled tenderly, the point is 
here is less the bereavement than the romance—it’s just a relationship measured 
by its redemptive qualities. Rose and Will’s growing love is movingly depicted, and 
there’s a pleasant absence of villainizing of exes. However, the family story is less 
successful, with Rose’s alcoholic father apparently deciding to quit cold turkey, and 
with nobody ever thinking to suggest counseling to Rose or her family; secondary 
characters tend to be more convenient than vivid, and poor old Chris never really 
gets credit for stepping in to support Rose when Will bails on her. Rabb’s Cures 
for Heartbreak (BCCB 4/07) is a more effective story of maternal loss, but readers 
looking for an emotional romance salted with plenty of tears will still respond to 
Rose’s journey.  DS
friend, Catherine Barn Boot Blues. Cavendish, 2011 [144p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-5827-2 $16.99
E-book ed. 978-0-7614-5930-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
When twelve-year-old Taylor is transplanted from city life to a rural farm a hundred 
miles away, things do not go so well. Farm work is tougher than the family realized, 
and they struggle with the new demands made upon them by a life that involves 
obstreperous livestock and constant physical labor. There are injuries, excrement 
encounters (Taylor accidentally goes to school with chicken poop in her hair), 
animal deaths, school problems (see above re: chicken poop), and parental tension. 
When Taylor’s new pal, Megan, suggests a plan to get her off the farm, Taylor soon 
throws herself into it, collecting demerit points and bad grades at school and leaving 
pointed articles (“Farming Can Be Dangerous to Your Health”) around the house. 
As things escalate, Taylor’s mom and dad reluctantly decide to sell the farm, until 
Taylor’s dad has an accident, one of the family’s pregnant sheep simultaneously 
begins her labor, and Taylor must work alone to deliver the triplet lambs. How 
are you gonna take them back to Minneapolis after they’ve delivered lambs on the 
farm? Friend gives Taylor a credible, engaging voice and peppers her narrative with 
plenty of humor; after a difficult time chasing sheep ends with Taylor and her dad 
prone, covered in sheep poop, and surrounded by the ovines, her dad turns to her 
and says, “Well, I’ve enjoyed this quality time we’ve spent together today, haven’t 
you?” It’s refreshing to see a city-folk-turned-farmers story in which real problems 
and struggles occur, but Friend also effectively shows the rewarding side of farm 
life. Hand this slim volume to city kids who dream of farm living or farm kids who 
will get a kick out of seeing their world through fresh eyes.  JH
DecemBer 2011 • 205
Gavin, jamila, ad. Tales from India: Stories of Creation and the Cosmos; illus. by 
Amanda Hall. Templar/Candlewick, 2011 88p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5564-8 $19.99  
Ad Gr. 4-7
This vibrantly illustrated collection of stories showcases ten tales rooted in Hindu 
mythology, from the creation of the world (“How the World Began”) to the back-
story of various deities (“The Birth of Lord Krishna,” “Hanuman, the Greatest”) 
to epic tales of bloodshed (“The Battle of Eighteen Days”) and romance (“The 
Choosing”). While some of the characters and settings may ring familiar, most 
young readers will be unaquainted with the stories herein and appreciate this as a 
largely accessible introduction to an immense body of folklore. Some tales are more 
user friendly than others, offering carefully patterned structures and a clear voice; 
some, however, lean towards the esoteric and, in many cases, are bogged down 
by literal details that detract from the storyline. Hall’s lush gouache illustrations 
sometimes offer assistance in interpreting concepts presented in the stories. The art 
is described in a note as being inspired by Udaipur miniature paintings, and the 
attention to detail is noteworthy, from the individual threads of silk in a woman’s 
scarf to the nearly translucent vine and flower details that grace most pages. This 
collection will probably get most of its use by browsers drawn to the gold-toned 
lettering on the spine, but many of the stories would also work as readalouds. An 
author’s note, illustrator’s note, and glossary are included.  HM
Giff, PatriCia reilly R My Name Is Rachel. Lamb, 2011 166p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-93889-4 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-83889-7 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98389-4 $10.99  
R Gr. 4-7
Rachel is devastated when she learns that her widowed father is moving the family 
from Brooklyn to seek out better opportunities in the rural community of North 
Lake. The Great Depression isn’t any kinder to North Lake, however: the job her 
father sought is no longer available, the farm they are renting is in disrepair, and 
the late winter storms bring cold and isolation unlike any the family has known 
before. Rachel’s father eventually finds work building roads, a job that takes him 
away from his three children for many months, and Rachel, her sister, Cassie, and 
her brother, Joey, must use all of their resources to survive alone in the countryside. 
There is a universal appeal in stories where kids endure hardship without adults, 
and Giff’s latest will not disappoint. Rachel is a wholly likable protagonist, and her 
voice offers a clear, youthful perspective on the era. The pacing of the novel feels 
deliberately slow, as if time is creeping along and options are running out, and the 
quiet tension plays beautifully to the facts of the difficult times. Offer this as an 
alternative perspective to Dust Bowl stories, or simply hand it to historical fiction 
fans ready to explore a new time and place.  HM
Graff, keir The Other Felix. Roaring Brook, 2011 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-655-8 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Fourth-grader Felix wakes up in the bedroom of his family’s small apartment with 
a tear in his robe, a missing slipper, and mud on his sheets—evidence that his 
recent dreams about being chased through a forest by terrible monsters may be 
206 • The BulleTin
more than just dreams. Unfortunately, reality has recently gotten just as unsettling 
for Felix as his nightmares: his mom and dad seem more stressed out and distant 
than usual, and Chase, the new kid at school, has decided Felix makes a perfect 
fall guy for his thieving ways. At least in his dreams, he has the Other Felix, a boy 
who looks exactly like Felix but who is much braver and stronger than the original. 
Predictably, the real Felix learns a thing or two about courage from his alter ego, and 
predictably, Felix also uncovers secrets about both the monsters and the bully that 
make them less frightening. Most readers will see where this symbolic tale is going 
from the moment Chase comes on the scene, but some will be able to look past the 
heavy-handed moral and recognize a kindred spirit in Felix. Quiet, unassuming, 
and plagued by realistic and universal insecurities, Felix is an amiable protagonist 
to whom even more boisterous youngsters will readily relate. Some of the more 
metaphorical aspects of the land of monsters and Felix’s interaction therein may fly 
over the heads of youngsters on their own, but this tale of maturation and friendship 
is suitable for sharing between parents and their children.  KQG
hall, meGan kelley, ed. Dear Bully: 70 Authors Tell Their Stories; ed. by Megan 
Kelley Hall and Carrie Jones. HarperTeen, 2011 370p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-206098-3 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-206097-6 $9.99  
R Gr. 5-10
In vignettes that range from letters to retrospective memoirs to poems to fictional-
ized present-tense tellings in words or comics to impassioned admonitions, seventy 
children’s and YA writers, most of them well known (Rachel Vail, R. L. Stine, Nancy 
Werlin, Mo Willems) share their collective wisdom on the subject of bullying. 
Most of the authors were themselves victims, but a range of perspectives is offered, 
including the stories of people who, to their shame and regret, either participated 
in bullying or stood idly by while someone else became a target. The attempt to 
focus on strong survivorhood sometimes undercuts the point by oddly suggesting 
people are better off for being bullied, but overall there is a forceful admonition 
that bullying must be stopped and that we all have a clear mandate to check our 
own bullying tendencies as well as to intervene when we witness acts of bullying. 
All emphasize the pain victims experience while the bullying is happening, up 
to and including some suicide attempts and successes, and a few accounts detail 
how the painful memories can linger into adulthood, even when the perpetrator 
has long forgotten the torture he or she inflicted. The message that emerges most 
forcefully is that there is life on the other side of bullying, and that holding out is 
worth it, no matter how bad things seem. This is a standout for curricular use, as 
the accounts are short, focused, and varied (though since they’re drawn from the 
authors’ own childhoods, they don’t touch on cyberbullying); today’s students can 
do the work of updating current bullying scenarios while these authors provide the 
much-needed long view for discussion.  KC
harrison, mette ivie Tris & Izzie. Egmont, 2011 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-173-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-257-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
In this contemporary story based on the legendary Tristan and Isolde, Izzie is 
perfectly happy with her A-list boyfriend, Mark, but she feels sorry for her best 
DecemBer 2011 • 207
friend, Branna (short for Brangane, of course), who has no boyfriend of her own. 
Since Izzie’s mother is a witch, she figures that she might have a love potion on 
hand, and she steals one from her mother’s cabinet and tries to get Branna and a 
new boy, Tristan, to drink it together. Alas, her plan goes awry, and she is forced to 
drink the potion after Tristan does to keep it from Mark. She immediately begins 
to yearn for Tristan, who, it turns out, has some magic of his own. Soon the two 
are allied in a fight with the magical serpent who killed Izzie’s father and who has 
been menacing the little town of magic users to which she and her mother fled upon 
the death of her father. The writing here is amateurish enough to be distracting at 
times, with strange gaps in narrative flow and unexpected changes in register that 
don’t quite produce the comic effect they intend. The plotting, pace, and characters, 
however, are all compelling enough to keep the suspense alive and pages turning. 
Though the allusion to Tristan and Isolde’s love story is useful for establishing the 
initial situation, the book soon turns away from the legend; the magical quest to 
avenge Izzie’s father and free the town from the evil serpent and the all-around 
happy ending take their cues from YA fantasy and chick lit, and fans of those genres 
(rather than those looking for an updated tale of doomed adulterous love) may 
find this a diverting read.  KC
holder, nanCy Unleashed; by Nancy Holder and Debbie Viguié. Delacorte, 
2011 [400p] (Wolf Springs Chronicles)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98979-7 $21.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74098-2 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98346-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
A podunk town in the middle of the Ozark mountains is not where Katelyn McBride 
thought she’d be spending her senior year, especially when it seemed as though she 
was near to reaching her goal of becoming a dancer in L.A. After her mother was 
killed during the latest California earthquake, however, Katelyn is forced to move in 
with her last remaining relative, her grandfather, in Wolf Springs, Arkansas, a town 
that is as isolated as it is strange. The friends she makes there—handsome Trick, 
the former queen bee Cordelia, and her mysteriously seductive cousin, Justin—all 
seem to have some pretty serious secrets; when Katelyn is attacked by a wolf—and 
eventually turns into some sort of monster herself—she begin to understand the 
nature of the town and the lupine alliances currently working within it. The plot 
certainly has a fair amount of promise, particularly in the political maneuvering 
between and among the wolf packs; Cordelia’s story is especially compelling as it 
pits her against her sisters in a battle for her alpha-male father’s love and sanity 
(the King Lear echo underscored by her older sister Regan). Indeed, Cordelia 
would make a far more intriguing protagonist than the rather vanilla Katelyn, 
who merely joins the ever-growing list of displaced YA girls who move to a small 
town, inexplicably attract the attentions of several bad boys, and find themselves in 
a whole mess of supernatural chaos only to be rather unimpressively rescued time 
and time again by said bad boys. Still, it’s a formula that works for a reason, and 
between the wolf mythology and the potential romances, Twilight fans will find 
enough here to latch onto.  KQG
208 • The BulleTin
huGhes, Catherine d., ed. National Geographic Little Kids: First Big Book of 
Dinosaurs; illus. by Franco Tempesta. National Geographic, 2011 128p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0847-5 $21.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0846-8 $14.95  
R 3-7 yrs
This is it: a dinofest for little kids with lots of creatures and just the right amount 
of consistent, clearly presented information on each one. The animals are ordered 
by size—small, medium, giant, and gigantic—and each gets a double-page spread 
with name, identifying feature or trait, a couple of short paragraphs of descrip-
tion, a fact box comprising period, food, and size (animal and man silhouetted to 
show comparative size), pronunciation, a couple of boxed facts, and a question to 
invite further thought: “Its [Therizinosaurus’] big claws would have been handy 
for digging in the ground to find insects. Have you ever tried digging in the dirt 
to find an earthworm?” Pre-readers who can’t round up a willing adult reader will 
be more than satisfied browsing the full-page painting Tempesta provides for each 
entry. End material includes some tips for parents to extend the reading experi-
ence, a world map with lists of dinosaurs color-coded to the continents, a glossary, 
and an index. An obvious choice for young library patrons, this title will also be a 
winner of a holiday gift.  EB 
judGe, lita Red Sled; written and illus. by Lita Judge. Atheneum, 2011 36p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2007-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3552-0 $12.99  
R 4-7 yrs
In this wintry picture book where the only text is onomatopoeic sound effects, a 
child leans a trusty red sled against the outside wall of the cabin and then retires 
inside at the end of day. An interested bear finds the sled and takes off for a satisfying 
slide with an accumulating number of animal friends, including a rabbit, a moose, 
an opossum, a couple of raccoons, a porcupine, and a rat. Eventually, the animals 
politely return the sled; its owner spots the tracks of the sled’s borrowers, waits for 
their return, and then joins them in their next night’s snowy downhill romp. In its 
simplicity and its subject the story recalls Nicola Smee’s Jingle Jingle (BCCB 4/08), 
and it’s also got much of the appeal of Aylesworth’s The Mitten (BCCB 1/10). 
Readers-aloud will relish the performance opportunities afforded by the critters’ 
exclamations of “Alley-oop!” as the sled speeds away and “Whoa” when it careens 
out of control, and there’s a pleasing contrast to the intimate hush of the “scrunch 
scrinch scrunch scrinch scrunch scrinch” made by footsteps (pawsteps?) in snow. 
Audiences will appreciate the fantastical touch, warming particularly to the pos-
sibilities of the human-animal outing under the stars. Soft pencil lines shade and 
outline pillowy sweeps of snowy landscape, touched with steel-blue tones under 
the night sky. Horizon lines feature strongly in the background, the exaggerated 
responses of Bear and co. provide closeup entertainment, and the red sled stands 
out in sharp contrast. Use this as a wintry bedtime book, and encourage the kids 
to listen for animal-sledding sounds as they fall asleep.  DS 
katz, alan Poems I Wrote When No One Was Looking; illus. by Edward Ko-
ren. McElderry, 2011 [160p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-3518-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0274-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
M Gr. 3-5
Katz, best known for his comedic kid-appealing lyrics set to popular tunes (Don’t 
DecemBer 2011 • 209
Say That Word!, BCCB 9/07, etc.), offers 100 original verses in this comic compila-
tion. The succinct verses derive humor from puns, family dynamics, and bathroom 
humor as well as a generous sprinkling of general silliness. This is solid ground 
for amusing grade-school poetry, as demonstrated by the likes of Jack Prelutsky 
and Douglas Florian. However, while a few verses trot serviceably toward their 
punchlines, most are disappointingly disabled by persistent scansion-deafness that 
leaves lines a near-impassible metric tangle. Additionally, entries often don’t convey 
their comic premise clearly enough or simply fail to provide a payoff worthy of the 
buildup. If you’re keen on Katz, focus instead on his musically based outings; for 
silly collections, stick to the previously mentioned stalwarts. Koren’s familiar shag-
gily hatched, beaky-nosed figures gambol entertainingly around the poems; while 
the softness undercuts their punch at times, they’re generally lively partners to the 
verse. An index of titles and an index of first lines are appended.  DS
kehoe, stasia ward Audition. Viking, 2011 [464p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01319-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
It’s Sara’s dream come true: she’s accepted a scholarship for a year of study at the 
Jersey Ballet, where she’ll also be attending the local private school and boarding 
with the ballet master. Vermont-raised Sara misses life back on the farm, though, 
and she struggles to keep up with the new standard expected of her and the keen 
competition for solo parts and advancement. She also falls head over heels for Fer-
nando, a choreographer as well as a dancer, who’s twenty-two to Sara’s sixteen, and 
the two embark on a steamy affair that initiates Sara into sex, into being an artist’s 
muse, and into throwing her heart at something other than dance. Sara’s free-verse 
narration is prosy and naïve but invitingly approachable, and her story has an edge 
that lifts it above the genre. Her barely legal relationship with Fernando, who is 
using her in ways she doesn’t even understand, is intriguing in its effects on her, 
as she begins to explore the possibility of her sexuality as power before she realizes 
just how little power it actually gives her. Ultimately, this is the compelling story 
of a girl who has to explore her dream of being a ballerina to find out how much it 
deviates from the reality (“In my fantasy,” she notes perceptively, “I never/ Actu-
ally/ Dance”). Hard-core dance maniacs will prefer the company details of Flack’s 
Bunheads, reviewed above, but readers looking for some exploration of the thrills 
and perils of early independence, career commitment, and relationships will be 
raptly involved in Sara’s story.  DS
kelly, tara Amplified. Holt, 2011 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9296-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 10-12
Trying to make up for her deadbeat mom and meet her father’s demands, Jasmine 
has been an overachiever all her life. Her true love is music, though—industrial 
rock, to be precise—and now that she’s finished high school, all she wants is a year 
to explore that love and get over her school burnout. When she tells her dad, he 
kicks her out. Luckily, an industrial rock band is looking for someone to double 
as guitarist and roommate, and Jasmine, on the basis of her mad guitar skills and 
bald-faced lies about her performance experience (she has none), gets the gig. It’s a 
wish-fulfillment premise, but Kelly goes beyond that to explore the hard work that 
goes into making a band successful, the messy social dynamics of the band scene, 
210 • The BulleTin
and the emotional perils of making the one stable source of fulfillment in your life 
into your meal ticket. The band members themselves are engagingly drawn, with 
lesbian lead singer and de facto big sis Veta a standout, and grumpy, good-hearted 
drummer Sean the perfect candidate for bittersweet romance. Coming from a fi-
nancially privileged background and earning her own way for the first time, Jasmine 
is an interesting and appealing blend of earnestness and attitude; she’s more naïve 
than entitled, but she’s determined to be self-sufficient and too proud to ask for 
help, even when she needs it. Her discomfort onstage is painfully realistic, tying in 
well with her overall issues surrounding vulnerability, and readers will sympathize 
deeply with her fear that she is only barely keeping it together. There’s inevitable 
fallout when Jasmine’s secrets are revealed, but Jasmine isn’t one to accept setbacks 
to her dream, and readers will be rooting for her and her newfound family to make 
it big.  CG
kessler, liz A Year without Autumn. Candlewick, 2011 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5595-2 $15.99
E-book ed. 978-0-7636-5608-9 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
The daughter of a therapist and a teacher, Jenni is shy, conservative, and never-
ever brave, while Autumn is the outgoing, friendly, and über-cool offspring of two 
artists. Despite their differences, the two have been besties since birth, and their 
families are about to spend an entire week together at their vacation homes right 
before the girls start seventh grade. Several days into their trip, however, when Jenni 
goes to Autumn’s condo for a visit, she finds an old lady claiming not to know an 
Autumn, and later when she does find her friend, Autumn is a completely different 
person—sad, lost, and utterly un-Autumn-like. Somehow, Jenni has gotten herself 
transported a year in the future, where she discovers that Autumn’s little brother 
lingers in a coma after a horrific accident and both families are falling apart. Once 
she discovers that the condo’s elevator jumps the space-time continuum, Jenni 
plans to use this to save Autumn’s brother and get both her friend and her family 
back. The time-travel ploy is an interesting device to explore the curious paths of 
“what-if,” but because it seems fairly inevitable that Jenni will indeed find a way to 
prevent the accident, the ongoing events lack necessary urgency. Most of the scenes 
are driven primarily by dialogue, placing the focus squarely on the relationship 
between the two girls, but their interactions become increasingly unbelievable, as 
the girls begin to sound like each other’s therapists instead of middle-school friends. 
Frances O’Roark Dowell offers a more nuanced portrayal of girl friendships at a 
precipice, but this offering of vicarious tragedy may still find an audience among the 
readers whose imagination take them to the more dramatic what-if scenarios.  KQG
kinG, a. s. Everybody Sees the Ants. Little, 2011 [280p]
ISBN 978-0-316-12928-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-10
Lucky Linderman has been bullied by Nader McMillan for years, but no one has 
ever intervened; even when Lucky starts exploring suicide, the concern about his 
mental health doesn’t extend to stopping the bullying. When Nader grinds Lucky’s 
face into the concrete at the local pool, Lucky’s mother has had enough. They escape 
to her brother Dave’s house in Arizona, where they accept the unbalanced hospitality 
DecemBer 2011 • 211
of his mercurial, pill-addicted wife as they both try to sort out their anger over the 
passivity of Lucky’s dad and reckon with their own passivity as well. Also ongoing 
for years have been Lucky’s dreams about visiting his grandfather in the Vietnamese 
POW camp where he died, dreams that are so vivid that Lucky actually awakens 
with souvenirs from his time in the jungle—cigars, chewing gum, banana stickers, 
etc. Lucky’s dreams, combined with his growing understanding of his mother, his 
aunt and uncle, and a girl he meets while in Arizona, help him navigate his way 
to a resolution to his problems that accepts all of the messiness and failures of the 
people around him, particularly the adults who are just as tormented by their own 
demons as he is by his. The dreams offer oblique but powerful messages for him 
to interpret; they function to put his experiences into perspective until he is able 
to act on the truths that he discovers. The unusual and occasionally comic juxta-
position of the POW experience with Lucky’s victimization throws each into sharp 
relief without trivializing either, offering compelling food for thought about the 
things we can control and the things we can’t, and how that distinction ultimately 
determines the need for action.  KC 
kirby, matthew j. Icefall. Scholastic, 2011 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-545-27424-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
When war comes to her father’s kingdom, young Solveig, along with her older 
sister and their little brother the crown prince, is sent to a mountain fortress for 
safekeeping. The stronghold is as isolated as it is impregnable: surrounded by snow-
covered bluffs and a frozen sea, the place seems more like a prison than a home to 
Solveig, a feeling that is only heightened when the berserkers—her father’s most 
elite and brutal warriors—are assigned to guard the siblings. As winter tightens its 
grip and the fortress walls seem to close about her, the only pleasure Solveig finds 
is serving as an apprentice to Alric, the royal skald, or storyteller, but when most of 
the castle residents fall ill and it becomes clear that there is a traitor in their midst, 
even that small joy is taken away. Finding her voice was one thing, but now Solveig 
must use her talents to ferret out the spy, convince an invading king of his own 
mortality, and lead her family to safety. Kirby masterfully interweaves the familiar 
aspects of Solveig’s coming of age with a taut, compelling mystery and survival 
story that fans of both fantasy and historical fiction will find utterly appealing. 
The power of storytelling is apparent not only in the actual plot of the story but 
in its format as well, as a spattering of chapters have Solveig directly addressing her 
narration to other characters in the book, a technique that creates both an effective 
intimacy and, as their situation worsens, a palpable sadness. There’s an arctic bite 
that permeates even the most mundane of scenes, making the ominous setting a 
character in its own right, while the inclusion of several Nordic myths complete 
the icy picture. Readers will be left thinking about this one long after the chill has 
left their bones.  KQG
kurlansky, mark Battle Fatigue. Walker, 2011 [244p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2264-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Kurlansky’s prologue finds narrator Joel Bloom pondering his imminent migration 
to Canada, a move he’s chosen over the alternatives: military service in Vietnam 
212 • The BulleTin
or incarceration for refusing to serve. Over the ensuing chapters he methodically 
reviews the ages and stages of his life and how the customs and attitudes of his 
parent’s World War II generation—public pride in wartime heroism, and private 
reticence to discuss the details of combat—made him and his childhood buddies 
eager to make their own marks as warriors. Joel, however, was just a tad more 
reflective than his pals, apt to question the efficacy of atomic bomb drills and the 
wisdom of a nuclear showdown over the island of Cuba. College offered not only 
temporary refuge from immediate decisions about draft or enlistment but also 
introduced him to a culture of protest that was almost unimaginable in his youth. 
By the time graduation arrived, Canada was his only real option, and by novel’s 
end Joel, now a young man settled in Alberta, can say with confidence, “But I’m 
not sorry at all. How often do you get a chance to stand for something? Refusing 
to go to war was actually one of the best moments of my life.” Joel’s memoirs, 
which reflect his state of mind at various points in childhood and adolescence, are 
poignant, funny, and heavily brushed with the irony of an adult who knows where 
these early ruminations will lead. Accessible across a range of reading levels, this 
could be an excellent class selection for American History or Language Arts.  EB
laroChe, Giles If You Lived Here: Houses of the World; written and illus. by Giles 
Laroche. Houghton, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-547-23892-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-5
Laroche scans five continents for examples of eye-catching, eyebrow-raising domes-
tic architecture that may shake American youngsters out of the house/apartment 
paradigm. Here children will see single-family homes carved from caves in Spain, 
a multifamily roundhouse in China, houses perched above water on stilts in Chile, 
houses floating on pontoons in the Netherlands, and so on. Each pictured style 
is accompanied by a boxed inset with an introductory paragraph, notes on build-
ing materials, location, dates of occupancy and a “fascinating fact.” Illustrations 
comprise Laroche’s signature cut-paper collage, vivid in depth and detail. The 
text is simple enough to be used with primary children studying units on shelter, 
while the images—and oddity—of the edifices will absorb the attention of middle-
graders. Whether you dream of painting a mural over your entire house, pulling 
up a drawbridge for privacy, or dropping a fishing line out your bedroom window, 
we’ve got a house for you.  EB
lee, inGrid Cat Found. Chicken House/Scholastic, 2011 [176p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-31770-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-38799-6 $16.99 
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Stray and feral cats have become a problem in eleven-year-old Billy Reddick’s 
small town, so much so that the townspeople are talking about rounding up and 
destroying the community of cats that congregates around the town’s old chapel. 
While Billy’s perpetually angry dad would be happy to take the first shot, Billy has 
a secret: he is hiding an injured stray (whom he later discovers is pregnant) in his 
bedroom. Gradually Billy finds some cat-loving allies—a young City Hall main-
tenance worker who cares for the stray colony behind the chapel, and a rebellious, 
artistic teenage girl who sneaks into the chapel at night to draw pictures of the 
DecemBer 2011 • 213
strays—and together the three formulate a plan to save the cats. With its realistic 
details of cat injury and destruction, this is a little bleaker than the cute kitten on 
its cover suggests that’s an authentic acknowledgment of the consequences of the 
situation, though, and Lee’s writing is crisp and solid. Her plot, unfortunately, is 
fairly contrived and heavily purposive, and not enough groundwork is laid to make 
Billy’s dad’s eventual change of heart believable. The ultimate solution of the cat 
problem (Billy, the City Hall worker, and the girl create a miniature version of the 
town behind the chapel to house the cats and “attract tourists”) is equally implau-
sible. Still, there is genuine drama in Billy’s predicament and in the plight of the 
stray cats, and the book raises some needed awareness of the complex problem of 
stray animal populations.  JH
little, kimberley Griffiths Circle of Secrets. Scholastic, 2011 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-545-16561-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 4-7
It’s been a year since Mirage, Shelby’s mother, walked out on the family; now Shelby 
reluctantly must move in with Mirage in her little house in the Louisiana bayou while 
her father travels. Eleven-year-old Shelby finds it hard to make friends at her new 
school, where she’s an outsider both because of her town origins and her mother’s 
reputation as the local traiteur, or healer, or, less kindly, swamp witch. Shelby’s 
one solace is her friendship with bubbly Gwen, a girl she meets in the cemetery, 
but as they grow closer, Shelby is increasingly puzzled by Gwen’s connections to 
Mirage and her vagueness about her family’s whereabouts. As readers will guess well 
before Shelby does, Gwen is the ghost of Mirage’s childhood playmate, but this is 
a largely unspooky ghost story; the anxiety here is all about Shelby’s relationship 
with her mother (in fact, her first reaction to Gwen’s connections to Mirage is keen 
jealousy). This is still a highly atmospheric tale, but the atmosphere isn’t drawn 
from the supernatural element but the daily-life details of the bayou, with Cajun-
inflected dialect and travel by rowboat the norm and Mirage’s house populated by 
a tame owl and opossum. The result is a ghost story suitable for youngsters with 
low freakout thresholds and a solid interest in domestic realism, and readers will 
revel in the literary journey through a rare and unusual way of life.  DS
lu, marie Legend. Putnam, 2011 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25675-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
These days, the United States is a historical legend, a distant dream of a time when 
the Republic and the Colonies were a single nation, before the floods and short-
ages and plague. Now the Republic is a totalitarian nightmare, battling both the 
Colonies and a homegrown terrorist group called the Patriots while suppressing 
all dissent and social mobility among its citizens. Pitted against each other amid 
all this are two teens (who take turns narrating): June, an orphaned, privileged 
prodigy and rising military star, and Day, a whip-smart, good-hearted street kid 
whose nonviolent subversive crimes and ability to escape capture have made him 
the Republic’s most-wanted offender. When Day is framed for June’s brother’s 
murder, June receives an expedited graduation and an order to hunt him down; 
luckily, fortune throws them together anonymously, and by the time June figures 
out just who it is that rescued her from a street fight, doubts about his guilt are 
214 • The BulleTin
(given that one super-hot kiss) inevitable. Unfortunately, so is his arrest and that 
of his family, so that June’s gradual rejection of everything she’s been taught about 
the virtue of the Republic coincides with increasingly perilous subterfuge, investiga-
tion, and escape efforts. The lightning pace, epically evil institutional bad guy, and 
compelling central mystery (who did kill June’s brother?) make this an easy sell, 
while the extent to which June is morally compromised by her actions throughout 
the book adds depth and offers an intriguing mirror image of the usual dynamic 
of powerful, conflicted boy and kind, determined girl. Fans of The Hunger Games 
(BCCB 11/08) will be all over this far-future tale of costly personal heroism in the 
face of brutal oppression.  CG
lynCh, Chris I Pledge Allegiance. Scholastic, 2011 184p (Vietnam)
ISBN 978-0-545-27029-8 $16.99  
R Gr. 6-9
For years and years, Rudi, Ivan, Beck, and Morris (the narrator) have been thick 
as thieves, their friendship often bound in the kind of pledges kids make to assure 
they’ll always have each other’s backs. As high school draws to a close and the 
reality of the Vietnam draft closes in, the guys swear that if one goes to war, they 
all go to war. Rudi, the eldest, is called up and joins the Marines, and the others 
fall in line. Ivan, always the most belligerent, can hardly wait to get to the Army 
recruiter; Beck, the brainiac, withstands his family’s disappointment as he abandons 
his college plans and joins the Air Force; Morris chooses the Navy. Nobody departs 
with a very clear sense of the military mission in southeast Asia, but Morris has his 
own personal goal—to protect his buddies, even from afar: “As long as I am here 
off this coast, firing on my friends’ enemies, we are all going to get through this 
and come home okay. I believe that.” However, as the four exchange letters and 
the occasional phone call, it becomes clear that the horrors each has experienced 
have altered their characters in ways they never could have predicted. Rudi, always 
the slow-witted misfit, loves the clarity of commands and takes to killing like a 
duck to water. Ivan becomes dour and withdrawn, Beck caustic and sardonic, and 
Morris reluctant to admit that he can’t really hold the band together. With a fine 
balance of thoughtfulness and gritty action, this initial series entry should readily 
attract a host of loyal fans.  EB
marGolin, PhilliP m. Vanishing Acts; by Phillip M. Margolin and Ami Margolin 
Rome. Harper/HarperCollins, 2011 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-06-188556-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7 
As the only daughter of a defense attorney (and an avid reader of crime thrillers 
and courtroom dramas), Madison Kincaid tends to see the criminal where oth-
ers would just see, well, everyday life. For example, when her friend Ann doesn’t 
show up for the first week of seventh grade, Madison assumes she must have been 
kidnapped and murdered, while her other friends just think that Ann is simply 
extending her European vacation with her parents. Besides worrying about her 
vanished pal, Madison is also trying to figure out how best to get (and retain) the 
attention of her workaholic father; she’s hoping if she solves his current case of a 
missing elementary schoolteacher, he might start treating her like an asset instead 
of a burden. The two missing persons cases turn out to be rather mundane in their 
resolutions, but there’s a nice security in this kind of non-threatening conclusion. 
DecemBer 2011 • 215
Similarly, Nancy Drew fanatics will likely see Madison as a counterpart to their idol 
and will appreciate the more relatable aspects of Madison’s situation, particularly her 
floundering relationship with her father. Unfortunately, the dialogue is sometimes 
distressingly stiff, and the convenient placement of several plot points would strain 
the credibility of even the most formulaic thriller. Still, there are plenty of readers 
who like their mysteries more cozy than gritty, and Madison’s attempts at sleuthing 
will no doubt find an audience among aspiring Miss Marples.  KQG 
mCdonouGh, yona zeldis The Cats in the Doll Shop; illus. by Heather 
Maione. Viking, 2011 140p
ISBN 978-0-670-01279-4 $14.99  
R Gr. 3-4
After Anna helped her father successfully pitch a new doll line to F.A.O. Schwartz 
in The Doll Shop Downstairs (BCCB 10/09), her immigrant family is doing just 
fine for themselves in their New York neighborhood. The same cannot be said for 
Anna’s cousin Tania, sent by her mother to America after World War I food shortages 
impoverish their Russian home. Anna is thrilled to have someone her exact age in 
the house, so much so that even when Tania turns out to be awkward and shy and 
even when Anna’s sisters give up on the poor girl, Anna keeps trying to befriend 
her cousin. Tania isn’t the only lost soul Anna is trying to save, however, as she 
attempts to rescue a cat and her crippled kitten from a nearby apartment, despite 
her father explicitly forbidding her to do so. Like its predecessor, this is a charming 
period piece that capitalizes on the nostalgia for its historical era without losing its 
emotional resonance with young readers. The black-and-white line illustrations are 
pleasingly romantic, primarily featuring Anna and her siblings dressed much like 
a certain American Girl Doll, along with the occasional furry kitty. Between the 
cats, the dolls, and the cozy family drama, what’s not to love?  KQG
mClauGhlin, lauren Scored. Random House, 2011 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96820-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86820-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89873-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10 
Imani has her reasons for rejecting her loyal best pal, going against her parents’ mor-
als, and spying on a fellow student: she’s in a world where everything is dependent 
on your score from Score Corp, and all of these things will raise hers. A higher 
score will get her a scholarship, and that scholarship will allow her to become a 
passionate, informed marine biologist who can help the polluted waterways. Soon, 
though, her plan is complicated when she begins falling for the unscored “bad” 
boy—who shows himself to be informed, well-adjusted, and no more prone to 
bad choices than Imani herself. Though Imani has always embraced the supposed 
neutrality of the endless cameras that watch, judge, interpret, and rate her every 
action, she’s starting to question the system. The rapid progression from test reli-
ance to numbers absolutism (it is mentioned that her parents grew up with No 
Child Left Behind) is effectively explained, and it is a chilling concept that will 
undoubtedly have teens examining the ways in which their own lives are shaped 
by scores. Unfortunately, the protagonists are used too often as props, spouting 
long diatribes against the scoring system, or conveniently deciding to research key 
points at just the right minute. In addition, Imani’s evolution from good (but fairly 
216 • The BulleTin
independent) girl to suck-up spy to rebel with a boyfriend is, at each turn, sudden 
and often poorly explained, and readers will wonder how much of her final ethical 
choices were boy-inspired rather than truly coming from her core. Nevertheless, 
the main argument that any method adults use to rank, sort, and judge teens is 
flawed will certainly resonate with readers who have seen first-hand the frequency 
with which they are categorized by some batch of numbers.  AS 
monninGer, josePh Finding Somewhere. Delacorte, 2011 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90789-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73942-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86214-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
When the owners of the stable where sixteen-year-old Hattie works plan to put 
down her favorite old horse, Speed, Hattie and her best friend, Delores, decide the 
old guy deserves one last chance for real freedom. Towing the stolen horse in an 
illicitly borrowed trailer, the girls drive west from New Hampshire, planning to set 
him free on federal lands so that the docile animal who’s spent his life submitting 
to human demands finally has one last chance “to live like a horse should live,” 
as Hattie puts it. On their road trip, the girls duck intrusive parents, make new 
friends, care for the declining Speed, and, eventually, encounter some cowboys in 
Minnesota who know a place that may be just the paradise for Speed that Hattie 
is seeking. Monninger, author of Baby (BCCB 9/07) and Hippie Chick (BCCB 
10/08), is the best YA writer going when it comes to the human-animal connec-
tion, and he articulately honors Hattie’s devotion to Speed and her enrapturement 
with horses in general. Yet he’s as kind to humans as to other animals, eschewing 
villains (Speed’s owners aren’t actually wrong about Speed’s condition, and they 
forgive Hattie, as does her worried mother) and offering moments of grace as 
the girls encounter kindly folks on their trip. The road trip is captured in all its 
relationship glory, the rhythms of solid friendship deftly conveyed as the girls talk 
about things small and large in the intimacy of the truck cab (“We’re women going 
west” is their purposeful motto). Horse lovers will relate to the girls’ pilgrimage, 
but readers don’t have to be animal aficionados to appreciate the transformative 
quality of a journey with a best friend.  DS
moore, inGa A House in the Woods; written and illus. by Inga Moore. Candle-
wick, 2011 48p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5277-7 $16.99  
R* 5-7 yrs
Two pigs live near each other in the woods, one in a den and one in a hut—that 
is, until their homes are inadvertently ruined by the friendly but much larger 
Bear and Moose, who each try to take up residence in the abodes: “Which left 
the two Little Pigs with nowhere to live—not to mention Moose and Bear. This 
was a pickle.” Moose has the bright idea to build one big house to shelter all of 
them, so they call up the Beavers to help: “The Beavers said that they wished to 
be paid in peanut-butter sandwiches. No one had any objection.” The Beaver 
Builders get the house done quite quickly indeed, and the furry foursome furnish 
it with items from the junkyard, whip up six plates of sandwiches for the Beavers, 
and then head to bed after a quiet evening in their new digs. Moore’s simple text 
is sprightly and inviting, with exclamations and asides that make the audience 
DecemBer 2011 • 217
feel present and included. Her elegant yet cozily rustic illustrations (rendered in 
autumnal hues of pencil, pastel, and wash) are particularly effective, with delicate 
shading and crosshatching adding rich but subtle textures. Her woodland critters 
are both highly expressive and realistically animal, and the curly-tailed Little Pigs 
and grinning, hard-hatted Beavers are utterly adorable in the very best way. The 
kind of kids who love to make forts and playhouses in the backyard or living room 
(and who are too young for The Boxcar Children or The Secret Garden) will find this 
especially appealing. This would work equally well for bedtime reading or group 
storytime; either way, youngsters (and their adults) will enjoy spending some time 
in this pleasant woodsy world.  JH
moriarty, Chris The Inquisitor’s Apprentice; illus. by Mark Edward Geyer. Har-
court, 2011 345p
ISBN 978-0-547-58135-4 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-8
In this imaginative alternative history, early twentieth-century New York is still a 
mix of nationalities, but the arriving immigrants bring more with them than just 
a desire for life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. Here, magic comes in all 
different flavors, from the love-inducing sweets in the bakeries of the Lower East 
Side to the more subtle financial swindling of the Wall Street Wizards—and all of 
it is illegal. Sacha is a nice Jewish kid who mostly tries to keep his head down and 
magic-free, but when a member of the NYPD notices his talent for correctly iden-
tifying witches, he gets dragged onto the force as an apprentice to Inquisitor Wolf, 
who is currently investigating the recent spate of magical assassination attempts on 
the life of Thomas Edison. With his invention of a machine that has the potential 
to render magic useless, Edison has invoked the ire of most of New York’s magical 
community, and all the signs indicate that the criminal originates in Sacha’s small 
Jewish community. The author’s love for the Big Apple is clearly apparent here, and 
the city becomes a character in its own right as Sacha explores its various boroughs 
and historical markers while working the case. Moriarty’s playful blend of fact and 
fiction will keep history buffs on their toes, as will the many appearances by noted 
figures in slightly different contexts, including Teddy Roosevelt as the disgraced 
police commissioner, J. P. Morgan as an egomaniacal mage, and Harry Houdini as 
a blacklisted revolutionary. The tone borders on didactic when Sacha contemplates 
the treatment of America’s immigrants, but this is a minor flaw in an otherwise 
engaging and fresh take on magic in the New World. Detailed black-and-white line 
drawings have an old-school flair in keeping with the tale. KQG 
morPurGo, miChael An Elephant in the Garden. Feiwel, 2011 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-312-59369-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
In the present day, an old woman named Lizzie tells a nurse and her young son 
the story of her past during the war. Young Lizzie, just sixteen in 1945 in Dresden, 
Germany, knows that the war is getting worse, and she’s particularly horrified by the 
fact that the zoo where her mother works plans to shoot the animals to keep them 
from becoming dangerous during the chaos of bombing. Her mother, however, 
manages to bring a young elephant, Marlene, home to their house, much to the 
delight of Lizzie and her little brother, Karli. Marlene takes off into the adjoining 
park one night, and the family chases after her, just as the first bombers begin to 
218 • The BulleTin
drop their payloads onto Dresden. With no city now to return to, the family presses 
onward, Marlene in tow; they meet up with and eventually form an alliance with 
Peter, a stranded RAF navigator, traveling together towards the Americans and, 
hopefully, safe refuge. While both the narrative framework and the events events are 
a bit contrived at times, readers compelled by the straightforward “you are there” 
storytelling and dramatic events will hardly give that a thought. Young Lizzie’s 
story (differentiated from the framing tale by typeface change) is quick-paced and 
moving, and her teenage viewpoint is believable as she falls for Peter and also tries 
to make sense of the wartime actions of the adults around her (her pacifist mother, 
for instance, sings a different tune when confronted with an actual “enemy”). An 
author’s note explains the historical inspirations for Morpurgo’s story, including 
a woman in Belfast who cared for an elephant at her home during the war.  JH
morPurGo, miChael, ad. The Pied Piper of Hamelin; illus. by Emma Chichester 
Clark. Candlewick, 2011 64p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4824-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
The essential outline of the German legend is well known: town councilors are 
desperate to rid their city of an infestation of rats; a mysterious piper offers to do the 
job for a modest price; the piper leads the rats to the river, where they drown, but 
the mayor refuses to pay; in an act of justice or revenge, the piper leads the town’s 
children away. Then, depending on the tale’s source and the teller’s taste for terror, 
the children are either gone for good or returned for a new and higher price. Here 
Morpurgo definitely takes the gentler path, choosing to bring the children back 
to their chastened parents. But it’s a far longer and frequently more tedious path 
than the tightly focused folktale generally traverses, with a drawn-out narration by 
the lame lad (who gets a much expanded role herein) and an awkwardly tacked-on 
ecological message about keeping your town tidy. Clark’s watercolors feature a piper 
who’s just shifty-eyed enough to provide a bit of menace and a cast of children clad 
in modern enough apparel to look anachronistic among their more traditionally 
folkloric elders. The rats, generally portrayed as a dashing mass of pointy-tailed 
shapes, steal every scene they’re in and ramp up the eeeeuw! factor, though children 
interested in a truly dark take on the tale will have to look elsewhere. No source 
notes are included.  EB
nayeri, daniel Straw House, Wood House, Brick House, Blow. Candlewick, 
2011 406p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5526-6 $19.99  
R* Gr. 7-10
Four stylistically brilliant novellas offer readers a range of exquisite reading ex-
periences in this collection. The first suggests Christian allegory, as a sentient 
scarecrow tries to protect his beloved farm from an evil intruder bent on stealing 
the farmer’s secret for growing living toys. The intruder can only manage to grow 
soulless homunculi, and hence covets the secret behind creating toys that can think 
and act for themselves. The next story puts a science-fiction spin on exploitation 
and genocide, as a large corporation promises a nanotech revolution that is in fact 
decimating whole continents as nano-machines mine natural resources, including 
humans, for molecules to transform into consumer commodities for the wealthy. 
The third tale offers a heartbreaking fantasy of wishes gone awry: effectively ex-
pressed wishes become embodied and must be rounded up by the wish police, a 
DecemBer 2011 • 219
group of supernatural folk charged with making sure the world proceeds as it should 
for better or worse, without the intervention of wishes. When an angry boy wishes 
his family dead, an enigmatic djinn with a jaded, snarky fish in his pocket teams 
up with a new partner who is not what she seems (that is, an extraordinarily tall 
leprechaun) to prevent murder and mayhem in what turns out to be a poignant 
family drama. Finally, a fairy tale–ish love story told by Death brings the funny to 
round out the emotional richness of the collection. Nayeri’s storytelling finesse is 
on full display here, as he creates characters and spins plots out of breathtakingly 
vivid wordsmithery; each story features language uniquely suited to its ambience and 
desired emotional effects, whether it be through clever wordplay in chapter titles, 
futuristic technojargon, a deliciously turned phrase, or a particularly apt metaphor. 
Language lovers as well as those who appreciate the artistry of a perfectly compact 
novella will consider this collection a treasure.  KC 
nolan, dennis Sea of Dreams; written and illus. by Dennis Nolan. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-470-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 1-3
In this wordless picture book, a little girl builds an impressive sandcastle at the beach, 
leaving it behind regretfully as the sun sets and the tide encroaches. Closeups then 
reveal inhabitants in one of the castle’s towers, a family that flees their flooded home 
in a small sailboat dwarfed by the huge waves. One of the kids falls overboard but 
is quickly rescued by seahorse-riding mermaids, who return the youngster to the 
boat; following a guiding seagull, who’s had a beady eye on the proceedings from 
the start, they land on an island where they encounter other little people and where 
they’re clearly making their home. Meanwhile, back on the beach, the girl builds 
another sandcastle under the eye of the same watchful gull, the tide rolls in again, 
and a light going in the tower suggests that another boatload of small inhabitants 
is readying for sea. The plot’s somewhat confusing, since the island the family lands 
on doesn’t seem like a happily conclusive destination, and the here-we-go-again 
ending seems to suggest that new people come into being every time the girl builds 
a castle, which undermines the specialness of the featured little voyaging family. 
The fantastical story is otherwise engaging, though, with an echo of David Wiesner 
in its use of fanciful elements in a real-world scenario. Stylistically, the illustrations 
make excellent use of their double-page-spreads with a multitude of sweeping 
horizontals that emphasize the wide-open sea spaces and the expanse of the foam-
ing teal waters; there’s an enticing realism in the sleek detailing, especially of the 
underwater denizens, that gives the fantasy an appealing sense of possibility. Kids 
drawn to the mystical minieature possibilities of the Borrower-esque in dollhouses 
and such will immediately appreciate the possibilities here.  DS
o’Connell, mary The Sharp Time. Delacorte, 2011 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98948-3 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74048-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89929-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Eighteen-year-old Sandinista struggles to finish her senior year following the death of 
her mother in September. When a sadistic teacher, Mrs. Bennett, takes out her own 
220 • The BulleTin
grief over the death of her husband on the vulnerable girl, Sandinista leaves school 
and gets a job at Pale Circus, a vintage clothes store with an eccentric owner and a 
kind co-worker named Bradley. She can’t stop thinking about Mrs. Bennett, though, 
and the awful way she treated not only Sandinista but also Alecia, a special-needs 
girl who has been mainstreamed into Mrs. Bennett’s class. Sandinista’s thoughts 
become increasingly obsessive and increasingly violent, until Bradley invites her 
into his confidence and they share their mutual pain. O’Connell’s prose is lyrical 
enough to be poetry, as Sandinista processes her anger and sadness both in conscious 
ways, through memories of her mother, and unconscious ones, where she berates 
herself for her passivity in the face of Mrs. Bennett’s abuse of Alecia, which relates 
obliquely to her inability to bring her mother back. The solutions to her problems 
come in small moments of grace from various quarters—each of the storeowners 
on the street near Pale Circus has his or her own story to tell and comfort to offer, 
as do the monks who live nearby, and especially Bradley, whose gentle acceptance 
brings Sandinista back from what could have been a horribly destructive act. Layers 
of metaphor, lush prose, and rich imagery compose an atmospheric portrait of a 
girl surviving wrenching grief and coming through to the other side with her own 
strength to offer someone in need.  KC
PeCk, riChard Secrets at Sea; illus. by Kelly Murphy. Dial, 2011 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3455-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Ever since their parents met untimely demises (Father in the jaws of a barn cat, 
Mother at the bottom of a rain barrel), the Cranston family of mice has looked to 
Helena, the eldest sibling, for guidance. Helena has done quite a competent job, 
wrangling her youngest brother into acceptable behavior and soothing the worries 
of her sisters, all while putting food on the table and keeping the mice out of sight 
of the Upstairs Cranstons (the human ones). Now, however, their host family is 
setting sail for Europe, taking with them the mice’s source of food and warmth. 
Seeing no alternative, Helena rallies her siblings and decides to brave the big blue, 
stowing away on a ship that will have all the Cranstons, human and rodential, ar-
riving in London just in time for Queen Victoria’s diamond jubilee. The ensuing 
maritime romp is fraught with aristocratic machinations, romantic bumblings, and 
serious danger in the form of a one-eyed killer cat. Helena’s wit is as quick as the 
breathless pace of her adventure, and her narration has all the class of a well-to-do 
lady of her time (even if that lady happens to be a rodent), with a dash of mer-
riment for good measure. Peck’s mice are unabashedly anthropomorphized, and 
animal-loving readers will delight in the mousy world he creates, complete with 
thimble-sized chamber pots and miniature dresses fashioned from handkerchiefs, 
while the historical setting is a natural complement for these prim and proper 
rodents. Readers who like their animals cute, their history entertaining, and their 
endings happy will find full satisfaction here.  KQG
Pinkney, jerry, ad. Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star; written and illus. by Jerry 
Pinkney. Little, 2011 36p
ISBN 978-0-316-05696-0 $16.99  
Ad 4-6 yrs
A chipmunk explores both the real world and a dream world in Pinkney’s illus-
trated version of the popular lullaby. A dandelion seed “star” sparks the chipmunk’s 
curiosity (“How I wonder what you are!”) and he follows its path, observing other 
DecemBer 2011 • 221
natural objects—flowers, dewdrops, and fireflies—along the way. As evening falls, 
the chipmunk finds an empty robin’s nest and, in a dream sequence, uses it as a 
boat to sail away into the sky where actual stars and the moon are seen. The chip-
munk’s boat then tips him out, and he falls onto a lily pad where he spies a white 
water lily before being jostled into the water by a fish. Luckily, he is rescued by a 
white swan, who flies him up to the moon, while the last page shows him asleep 
in his own nest. While there is a pleasant sense of end-of-day wind-down to the 
book, it’s rather confusing and muddled, both in concept and illustratively. The 
connection between the dandelion fluff (and the other natural objects) and the 
“star” of the lullaby lyrics is a shaky one, and that and the abrupt leap from realism 
to fantasy will go over the heads of young audiences. The warm, naturalistic detail 
of Pinkney’s art (in pencil, watercolor, and colored pencil) will appeal to nature-
lovers, and his chipmunk is a fetching little guy. Some of the dense spreads are hard 
to read visually, especially when the chipmunk is placed against a background of a 
similar color value. Adults could certainly use this as a bedtime or storytime book, 
but it might be more successful and enjoyable without the text. There’s oddly no 
mention of Ann and Jane Taylor, the authors of the original poem, anywhere in the 
book, but a detailed note does explain Pinkney’s artistic and adaptive decisions.  JH
PriCe, Charlie Desert Angel. Farrar, 2011 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-374-31775-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 9-12
Angel’s mother always knew how to pick a loser, and her ultimate hookup with 
Scotty ended in her murder. Angel, herself a witness to and nearly a victim of Scotty’s 
fury, is now on the run, but trying to stay one step ahead of Scotty, a professional 
tracker with several valuable connections through his host of illegal activities, 
seems impossible. As Angel hides out among a Mexican immigrant community 
on southern California’s Salton Sea, she draws each family who aids her into peril 
from Scotty. Rita, a Head Start teacher with a soft spot for kids, is determined to 
do all she can to keep Angel safe until the police can amass enough evidence to put 
Scotty away, but Angel comes to believe her best chance is to turn tracker herself 
and kill Scotty before he can kill her. Price starts off with harrowing scenes focused 
on the murder and Angel’s initial escape and then shifts into a meticulously paced 
cat-and-mouse chase, wringing more terror from a casually dropped cigarette 
butt, a locksmith van circling the neighborhood, and a handcuff purchase than 
many authors accomplish with a full-out bloodbath. With its blood-red cover and 
“What makes the hunted turn hunter?” tagline, this will be a magnet for thriller 
aficionados.  EB
ray, mary lyn Stars; illus. by Marla Frazee. Beach Lane/Simon, 2011 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2249-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3578-0 $12.99  
R* 4-7 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 189, for review.
remkiewiCz, frank Gus Makes a Friend; written and illus. by Frank Remkie-
wicz. Cartwheel/Scholastic, 2011 24p (Scholastic Readers)
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-24470-1 $3.99  
Ad Gr. K-1
There’s both truth and a play on words in the title of this story about Gus, a rhi-
noceros, who deals with the lack of a playmate by going out in the snow to make 
222 • The BulleTin
one . . . literally. After building the basics of his snowman he’s joined by Ned, a 
dopey-looking giraffe, and the two boys have a splendid time polishing and ac-
cessorizing their creation, ending finally with a nice lunch of soup (while Mom 
goes out to fetch Ned’s glasses back from the snowman). This super-slim volume 
includes one three-to-five word sentence per page, lots of repetition, and plenty of 
visual support for novice readers. The end’s a little clunky, though, and youngsters 
may not get the subtextual joke about Gus’ making a friend of Ned as he makes a 
snowman friend. Remkiewicz’s watercolor-and-pencil illustrations employ a vivid 
mosaic of colored elements, with painted and wallpapered walls filling the house 
and cheery multicolored clothing popping against the snowdrifts and blue skies. 
There is plenty of appeal in snowy-day friendship stories, and the simple format 
guarantees lots of success for newbies.  HM
reynolds, jan Only the Mountains Do Not Move: A Maasai Story of Culture and 
Conservation; written and illus. with photographs by Jan Reynolds. Lee & Low, 
2011 [40p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60060-333-4 $18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60060-844-5 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
This photographic essay explores the Maasai people of east Africa and their remark-
able success in adapting to overgrazing issues in ways that balance both tradition 
and modernization. Based upon Reynolds’ visit with a tribe in the northern part 
of Kenya, the narrative is divided into three parts. The first offers an informative 
introduction to the members of the tribe and their various roles, the second explores 
the natural world in which they live, and the third highlights the tribe’s success 
in adapting to change in environmentally friendly ways that help to ensure the 
continuation of their culture. The accessible text offers a solid if not deep intro-
duction to the Maasai people, and Reynolds’ sharp photographs provide plenty of 
visual information in striking portraits of tribe members as well as landscape and 
animal images. Reynolds combines documentary chronicle (“Ole Kiyaa’s young son, 
Washon, brings a stool for his father to sit on while he plays”) with general factual 
tidbits (“Maasai children respect their elders and appreciate the work they do for 
the family”), adding an immediacy to the cultural information that will appeal to 
young readers. While the text remains largely detached, the author’s note argues 
that the Maasai people’s success in finding sustainable ways to deal with overgrazing 
due to the loss of land, such as beekeeping, farming, and tourism, could serve as a 
model for the rest of the modern world. A glossary is included.  HM
root, Phyllis Scrawny Cat; illus. by Alison Friend. Candlewick, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4164-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-7 yrs
The small, scrawny ginger cat wandering around town once had a home and a 
name, but “Now everyone called him Get out of here!” He searches for a place to 
rest and eat to no avail, until a dog chases him down to the docks, a storm pops up, 
and he is forced to take refuge in a dinghy tied to the dock. The storm’s intensity 
increases, the rope snaps, and the boat is set adrift, but not to worry—by the next 
morning the dinghy has run aground on a small island inhabited by a woman: 
“Would the woman throw things at him and call him Get out of here?” Of course she 
DecemBer 2011 • 223
wouldn’t, and the scrawny cat happily finds food, a home, a name (Skipper), and 
a new best friend. Sure, this is formulaic picture-book territory, but Root’s simple, 
straightforward, yet subtly poetic language (“He was lonely. He was little. He was 
lost”) ensures that the formula works without danger of becoming melodrama. 
While animal-loving kids especially will sigh with satisfaction as the cat finally finds 
a kind-hearted caretaker, this plotline will likely resonate with any youngster who 
yearns for belonging. Friend’s gouache illustrations feature accents of dark reds, 
teals, golds, and the pumpkin orange of the cat’s fur, all of which stand out against 
the more muted natural tones of the town, sea, and sky. While human figures are 
sometimes a bit awkward, the little cat is a charming waif, from his bony frame to 
his huge, expressive golden eyes, and his skittish uncertainty is as effectively depicted 
as his eventual paw-kneading contentment. Pair this with Voake’s Ginger (BCCB 
4/97) for a purr-fect pair of orange kitty books.  JH
rubalCaba, jill I. M. Pei: Architect of Time, Place, and Purpose. Cavendish, 
2011 128p illus. with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-5973-6 $23.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-6081-7 $23.99  
R* Gr. 6-10
The last thing one expects in a book about an architect is an opening more remi-
niscent of high adventure than career biography. There’s a child born in war-torn 
China in the Year of the Snake, with its prophecy of problem-solving and over-
coming obstacles; a family at odds with the government; years of exile in Hong 
Kong; an emotionally distant father; a spiritually aware mother who dies young; 
a hard-hearted stepmother who turns her stepchildren out of the family home. 
Rubalcaba’s compelling backstory of Ieoh Ming Pei’s early years deftly sets the stage 
for his professional accomplishments as a housing designer turned starchitect in 
his adopted country, the United States. The main body of the text is organized 
around seven important projects in the U.S. and abroad which not only showcase 
Pei’s working methodology but also demonstrate how the aesthetic sensibility de-
veloped as a youth in China permeates his concern with the relationship between 
structure and site, and how retreat into silence is the first step toward inspiration. 
The central chapters range in mood and tone from the frustration of site location 
for the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library to the comedy-of-errors construction 
of Fragrant Hill Hotel in outrageously egalitarian, post-Revolutionary China to 
the rare incident of Pei’s political outrage at the Tiananmen Square massacre that 
followed hot on the heels of his Bank of China project for a newly independent 
Hong Kong. Exceptionally attractive bookmaking enhances the story of Pei’s 
career: stylish font with wide leading on generous white space; delicately framed 
color photographs, plans, elevations, and sketches harmonize with the text layout; 
bibliography, timeline, notes, resources, major Pei deigns, and index enjoy care in 
design seldom lavished on end matter. This is an essential addition to the 720s and 
a first choice for adolescents imagining a future in architecture or engineering.  EB
sarCone-roaCh, julia Subway Story; written and illus. by Julia Sarcone-
Roach. Knopf. 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-375-85859-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-9 yrs
“When Jessie was born in St. Louis, Missouri, she weighed 75,122 pounds and 
was 51 1/2 feet long.” About average, one would suspect, for a subway car. In her 
224 • The BulleTin
heyday, she shuttled visitors to the New York World’s Fair, transported commuters 
to their destinations, and mightily enjoyed the curves and drops that guided her 
along the tracks and under the river. Repairs and paint jobs kept her going for over 
two decades, but time took its toll, and she was successively put out to pasture in 
a train yard, stripped of her parts, hauled away on a barge, and dumped off the 
Atlantic coast, where sea life transformed her, “and now a whole city lives inside 
her.” The anthropomorphized car, with its cheery eyes and grinning grill, is designed 
to win the hearts of a quite young audience as it whooshes through hazily softened 
swaths of NYC. It may come as something of a shock, therefore, when the peppy 
tale of a helpful rail car takes an abruptly darker turn. An endnote offers some 
explanation about Jessie’s fate: “After they were taken out of service, many of the 
Redbirds [subway cars] were reused as artificial reefs in the Atlantic” and speaks of 
the reefs’ role in providing “new fishing grounds for both people and fish.” Hope-
fully an ecologically minded adult will talk up Jessie’s ongoing contribution to 
the maritime community; otherwise kids who rely on the text alone will probably 
conclude humanity done her wrong.  EB
sChanzer, rosalyn Witches!: The Absolutely True Tale of Disaster in Salem; written 
and illus. by Rosalyn Schanzer. National Geographic, 2011 144p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0870-3 $27.90
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0869-7 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4263-0888-8 $16.95  
R Gr. 4-8
If you’re looking for a starting point to delve into the tragedy of the Salem witch 
hunts, you can’t ask for more than a book that offers up a clear and concise account 
of the events leading up to and following the trials, provides a host of notes, sources, 
and further reading, all while maintaining the effortless tone of a seasoned storyteller 
and accompanied by eye-catching artwork that evokes the menacing terror of the 
times. Schanzer’s latest contribution to the nonfiction field is just that book, and 
the author easily navigates a large cast of characters and a sea of misinformation 
as she lays out a straightforward, chronological retelling of the events that focuses 
squarely on the people who lived it and relies heavily on direct quotes from pri-
mary sources. This facts-only approach limits the potential for sensationalism, so 
readers looking for titillating details of Satanic circles and animal sacrifices may be 
disappointed, but the author’s temperate and even-handed treatment of both the 
accused and accusers offers a brief but sympathetic look at Puritan life. Where the 
text avoids conjecture and merely relays objective evidence, the artwork hints at 
something more; the scratchboard illustrations recall seventeenth-century century 
woodcuts, and the monochromatic palette maintains an air of gloomy desperation 
while the occasional splashes of red tip the scales toward sinister, though whether 
the nature of that evil takes the form of mass hysteria or true devilry is never quite 
specified. Falling just short of 150 pages, this is sure to be useful in school projects 
or as a companion to the requisite Crucible unit for students looking for a more 
compact treatment than Aronson’s Witch-Hunt (BCCB 12/03).  KQG
sChreiber, joe Au Revoir, Crazy European Chick. Houghton, 2011 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-547-57738-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
As Perry Stormaire dutifully interns at his father’s office and tries to find something 
distinctive to write about in his college essays, his parents think it would be a good 
DecemBer 2011 • 225
idea for him to take their foreign exchange student, a tragically geeky Lithuanian 
girl named Gobi, to the prom. He resists but, as usual, is bullied by his father into 
agreeing; at the prom, though, it’s Gobi who turns into a bully, as she first beats up 
a pair of jocks who give Perry a hard time and then insists that Perry drive her into 
New York City. There she transforms once again, this time from geek to hottie, and 
embarks on a series of appointments that Perry soon figures out are assassinations. 
Again, he tries to resist, but she reveals that she has placed a bomb in his house, 
so he has no choice but to aid and abet her killing spree. In the midst of the high 
action and increasing body count, pathos rears its head as she reveals her backstory, 
which includes human trafficking and the death of her sister, and she also reveals 
Perry to himself, as the daddy-pleasing, passive boy she has seen all year long. The 
chapter headings, each a prompt for an admissions essay from a different college, 
highlight the mundaneness of most of our experiences in light of what Gobi has 
been through and the prom night she gives Perry. This not-so-subtle irony combined 
with Schreiber’s incisive wit and clever insights about high school and its relation 
to the larger world make this a slick, stylish read with serious implications that will 
give readers plenty to contemplate.  KC
smith, andrew Stick. Feiwel, 2011 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-312-61341-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Born with only one ear, Stick has grown used to the teasing he endures at school. 
Worse, however, is the abuse he and his brother endure at home at the hands of 
both their mother and father, who express their displeasure with savage beatings 
and by locking their sons in a room bare of all save a cot and a bucket. Stick and 
Bosten have each other, though, and they each have a close friend—Stick has Emily, 
and Bosten has Paul, in a relationship that is more than just friendship. It turns 
out that they also have an aunt, and when they go to her house for their Easter 
vacation they realize how different home life might be. It’s hard to go back home, 
especially when they find out that their mother has moved out, leaving them with 
their father, whom Stick realizes has been sexually abusing Bosten as well as beat-
ing them. When Bosten and Paul are caught in a compromising act, Bosten has 
no choice but to run away, and Stick soon follows, only to run into more trouble 
than he left at home. This tragic story has at its heart a solid core of brotherly love 
and loyalty that survives even the worst of situations; it’s those situations that are 
exceptionally difficult to read about and conceptualize, with their harsh and gritty 
realism. Aunt Dahlia seems almost too good to be true if readers don’t think too 
hard about the fact that she hasn’t tried to see the boys for the first sixteen years 
of their lives; however, it’s enough that she offers a safe haven for them when they 
finally make their escape. The prose is strong and evocative, lapsing into imagistic 
poetry at times to reveal the intensity of Stick’s emotions. Readers should be pre-
pared to have their hearts broken by these vulnerable, utterly lovable brothers.  KC
stiefvater, maGGie The Scorpio Races. Scholastic, 2011 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-545-22490-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Every November, the island of Thisby hosts the Scorpio Races, which feature the 
deadly water horses, or capaill uisce, who come to the island out of the sea. The 
horses, if they can be tamed, are the fastest creatures alive, but the carnivorous 
226 • The BulleTin
animals think nothing of eating the man who feeds them; what’s more, if the sea 
calls to them, they will rejoin it, rider and all. Sean Kendrick loves one of these 
animals, a red beauty named Corr, despite the fact that his father met his death at 
the teeth and hooves of another one. Puck Connolly, on the other hand, has no 
love for the capaill uisce, who killed both her parents. She wants to race, however, 
so that she can make enough to save their house now that she and her brothers are 
orphans. As Puck and Sean prepare for the races, they battle island prejudices about 
Puck, who is the first woman to ever compete in the race, and Mutt Malvern, who 
is determined to keep Sean from his fifth victory. A win for Sean is the only way 
Benjamin Malvern, Mutt’s father and Sean’s boss, will allow him to buy Corr; hence 
Puck and Sean, despite their growing feelings for one another, both need the win 
to realize their heart’s desire. Though the plot arc unfolds slowly, Stiefvater does a 
masterful job in creating an immersive world with well-developed traditions, his-
tory, prejudices, and complex social relations. The book credibly depicts the subtle 
tensions of a developing romance between two stubborn and taciturn people with a 
multitude of concerns: their training for the races, Puck’s worries about money and 
the splintering of her family, and Sean’s love and care for his horses, among other 
things. Those willing to take it slowly will be richly rewarded with a story whose 
mythic dimensions stand easily with its more quotidian ones, thus embodying the 
tensions between the water horses and their humans.  KC
sweet, melissa Balloons over Broadway: The True Story of the Puppeteer of Macy’s 
Parade; written and illus. by Melissa Sweet. Houghton, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-547-19945-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-9 yrs
Sweet introduces her picture-book audience to just the kind of inventor kids would 
want to meet: Tony Sarg, the wizard behind the giant helium balloons that awe 
viewers of New York’s Thanksgiving Day Parade. His first effort for Macy’s depart-
ment store was the design of mechanized puppets for their Christmas window, 
“Wondertown.” From there he moved on to orchestrating a parade for employees, 
which proved so popular that he devised oversized balloon figures operated on long 
sticks. As the parade audience swelled, the need for larger puppets became evident, 
and Sarg invented his signature helium behemoths, originally made of rubberized 
silk and manipulated by keepers who guided them along the streets (and under 
the elevated tracks!) on rope tethers. Sweet’s artwork is as joyous an affair as its 
subject—a confection of cartoon and collage and snippets of found print, with one 
glorious double-page spread in a vertical layout that demonstrates how the massive 
balloon dwarfs its costumed handlers. The text itself comes up a bit short on par-
ticulars of Sarg’s background and the timeframe for his accomplishments; closing 
notes, however, help fill this gap. Kids who can’t be there in person to revel in the 
aerial entertainment will be commandeering the remote for the TV broadcast. An 
author’s note, a bibliography, and source notes are included.  EB
van allsburG, Chris The Chronicles of Harris Burdick: 14 Amazing Authors Tell 
the Tales; illus. by Chris Van Allsburg. Houghton, 2011 202p
ISBN 978-0-547-54810-4 $24.99  
R Gr. 4-7
For twenty-five years, Chris Van Allsburg’s The Mysteries of Harris Burdick (BCCB 
9/84) has been sparking the imaginations of young writers who find themselves 
DecemBer 2011 • 227
inspired by the fourteen evocative images and their accompanying captions. Now 
fourteen award-winning authors have taken up the challenge to write their own 
stories inspired by the pictures. After a witty introduction by Lemony Snicket, liter-
ary luminaries such as Stephen King, Sherman Alexie, Kate DiCamillo, and Walter 
Dean Myers ply their trade with dexterity and skill. Interestingly, their stories never 
seem to attempt any sort of definitive take on their chosen illustrations—perhaps it 
is the richness of the illustrations themselves that leave plenty of room for contin-
ued speculation beyond these particular, idiosyncratic versions of what the picture 
might be about. Tabitha King, for instance, uses the clue of a baseball bat perched 
against an open window to find the thread for her tale but ignores the sailboat on 
the wall. Cory Doctorow pursues his own thematic ends in suggesting multiple 
universes that aren’t pictured in the illustration of a handcart crossing a body of 
water with four children under sail; similarly, Jules Feiffer considers the aging and 
ultimate death of a children’s book author through the inciting picture of a door 
in a basement. Overall, the authors use the pictures and their captions as mere 
jumping-off places for richly imagined stories peopled with intriguing characters 
moving through thoughtful plot arcs. Like the pictures themselves, then, this set 
of stories will be more inspirational than definitive, starting more conversations 
and opening more possibilities than they close. Well done, all.  KC
walker, sally m. Blizzard of Glass: The Halifax Explosion of 1917. Holt, 
2011 [160p] illus. with photographs.
ISBN 978-0-8050-8945-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Two ships attempt to thread their way through the narrow neck of Canada’s 
Halifax Harbour—one riding so high that its propeller isn’t fully submerged, the 
other loaded with munitions bound for the Great War in Europe. A third ship 
strays from its required lane; signals are confused, the munitions ship runs against 
the pier, and grinding metal touches off a series of fires and a massive explosion 
that levels blocks of buildings on both sides of the harbor—the worst man-made 
explosion in history to that date, overshadowed since then only by the atomic 
bomb detonated on Hiroshima. Walker combines a clear overview of the ship-
ping regulations and mishaps that led to the disaster with personal accounts of a 
handful of families whose members were going about their daily routines when 
the blast variously threw them to safety, buried them under rubble, or virtually 
erased them without a trace. Photographs and maps orient readers to the region 
of the explosion, and source notes and a bibliography will guide readers to further 
information. Titanic devotees, who are generally on the alert for a thrilling disaster 
tale, will be particularly interested in the connection with the more fabled disaster 
of 1912—the system of cataloging remains and personal effects that was devised 
in Halifax as Titanic bodies were recovered offshore after the wreck would be used 
to help identify the deceased once again just five years later. Can you think of a 
more compelling hook for a booktalk?  EB
228 • The BulleTin
weaver, janiCe Harry Houdini: The Legend of the World’s Greatest Escape Artist; 
illus. by Chris Lane and with photographs. Abrams, 2011 48p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0014-9 $18.95  
Ad Gr. 4-7
Illusionist, contortionist, inveterate risk-taker and master of self-promotion, Harry 
Houdini (born Erich Weiss) steadily maintains his status among the A-list person-
alities in school biography reports. Thus a new offering on his gasp-worthy career 
is generally considered for inclusion among the—dare we say “glut”?—of Houdini 
titles on the shelf. Weaver’s picture book–formatted bio falls short in comparison 
with such recent works as Jason Lutes’ Houdini the Handcuff King (BCCB 6/07) 
or Sid Fleischman’s Escape! (BCCB 10/06), lacking the novelty of Lutes’ graphic-
novel examination of Houdini’s Charles River escape and the rollicking narration 
of Fleischman’s lengthier study. What it does boast, though, is a serviceable (if 
somewhat thin) account coupled with a favorable picture-to-text ratio calculated 
to attract reluctant readers. Scads of black-and-white photographs and colorful 
ephemera are further supplemented with Lane’s flashy full-page paintings which, 
although largely extraneous and even a tad cheesy beside the primary-source im-
ages, do break the text into less daunting sections. Source notes, an index, and a 
bibliography are included, as well as an annotated list of websites.  EB
weeks, sarah Pie. Scholastic, 2011 182p
ISBN 978-0-545-27011-3 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Kind Polly Portman has won piemaking’s coveted “Blueberry Award” for thirteen 
years running; instead of selling her pies, though, Polly gives them away, and in 
return folks leave her supplies such as fresh fruit, cream, and bags of flour. When 
Polly dies unexpectedly in the summer of 1955, her ten-year-old niece and faithful 
sidekick, Alice, is bereft and also puzzled, as Aunt Polly has apparently bequeathed 
the recipe for her famous pie crust to her grumpy cat, Lardo, and has willed Lardo 
to Alice. As Alice grieves, she also deals with a town suddenly full of would-be 
bakers and the mystery of the missing pie-crust recipe. Someone else wants that 
recipe as well, however, and will go to great lengths to obtain it. Eventually, Alice 
stops the potential pastry purloiner and unravels just what Aunt Polly has done with 
the recipe; the answer helps soothe both Alice and her mother, Polly’s bitter sister. 
Weeks whips up a delicious story here, as sweet and substantial as a chocolate cream 
pie but with the tartness of a sour cherry confection as well. She depicts especially 
well the way that the smallest things evoke the most visceral grief, as when Alice 
realizes that the leftover piece of pie in the fridge is the last pie made by Polly that 
she will ever eat. A few of the small-town characters are slightly overdrawn, but 
the emotional arc of the story will carry readers through. The text richly describes 
the pie-making (and eating) process and includes multiple mouth-watering recipes 
for readers to try themselves. This would make a tasty readaloud for classrooms or 
families; stock up on pie ingredients first.  JH
wells, robison Variant. HarperTeen, 2011 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-06-202608-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Believing that his scholarship to Maxfield Academy admission would open new 
possibilities, Benson instead finds himself trapped in a place that seems part 
psychological experiment, part robot training grounds, and part boarding-school 
DecemBer 2011 • 229
nightmare. Whatever this venue actually is, Benson soon realizes that he will have 
to pick a gang (there are three), escape with little help, and figure out who is hu-
man and who (out of the actual people) can be trusted. The idea of a school where 
isolated teens interact with realistically human robots under careful observation is 
a cool one, and it is logical that the new kid, who falls hard for a girl who turns out 
to be non-human, would shake up the careful routine established in the school. 
There are simply too many elements, however, that remain entirely unclear—why 
Benson would have been sent to the school, how paint-gun battles are telling the 
scientists anything important enough to justify their frequency, and what the end 
result of all of this is actually intended to be. In addition, the intense desire of most 
of the kids to keep things the same, even while their peers are literally dying all 
around them, inspires sympathy but strains credulity. Nevertheless, dystopia fans 
seeking a fast-paced, action-heavy read will find this generates a lot of excitement 
if not lingering thought.  AS
white, ruth A Month of Sundays. Ferguson/Farrar, 2011 [176p]
ISBN 978-0-374-39912-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8 
Garnet always thought her father and his people wanted nothing to do with her 
and her mother, so she’s surprised as well as angry when her mother drops her off 
at the house of Garnet’s aunt, her father’s sister, while Mom goes to Florida to set 
up a new life for her and Garnet there. While Garnet’s aunt and one of her cousins 
seem delighted by her presence, her uncle and her other cousin are a bit frosty. 
They warm up, though, when they see that Garnet is making Aunt June happy by 
accompanying her to church services and helping around the house, and Garnet 
soon learns that their initial coldness was really worry, as Aunt June has cancer. 
Churchgoing eventually leads to a boyfriend for Garnet and a miracle for Aunt 
June, but the most salient event of the summer for Garnet is the appearance of 
her father, who, as it turns out, never knew she existed. White’s sure-handed and 
warm-hearted depiction of small-town Southern life in the 1950s shines here; young 
readers will find the stage-setting fascinating as White subtly weaves into her plot a 
sense of what new technologies like freezers and television meant to families when 
they were first introduced. Garnet’s emotional tenor is just right for her age and 
circumstances, as she moves through the anger of abandonment, the wonder and 
awkwardness of first love, and the initial confusion and ultimate sense of belong-
ing that accompanies finding a place in a family she didn’t know she had. Indeed, 
readers will warm to all of these characters who exude simple, unaffected grace and 
temperate, understandable human failings.  KC
wilson, n. d. The Dragon’s Tooth. Random House, 2011 483p (Ashtown 
Burials)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96439-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86439-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89572-2 $10.99  
R Gr. 5-8
After their father died at sea and their mother slipped into a coma two years ago, 
twelve-year-old Cyrus Smith and his sister, Antigone, have found life difficult. 
Things get even worse when a tattooed man shows up at their roadside motel, hands 
Cyrus a strange set of keys, and is shortly thereafter killed by several men wielding 
fireball-shooting guns; the shooters also burn down the entire motel and kidnap 
230 • The BulleTin
Cyrus and Antigone’s older brother. One of the fire enthusiasts is Maxi Robes, or 
Maximilien Robespierre, and it appears that the transmortal (mostly immortal, 
save for a key vulnerability) former French tyrant is intent on bringing his reign 
of terror to the Smiths’ front door. Thanks to the tattooed man, however, Cyrus 
and Antigone find themselves bestowed with membership in the elite Order of the 
Brendan, a group of talented explorers that have been battling Maxi and his boss, 
the evil Dr. Phoenix, for some time now; not everyone in the group is pleased to see 
the Smiths, though, and the siblings are forced to endure a series of grueling tests 
before they can invoke the help of the Order. So yes, the Smiths have it pretty bad, 
but fortunately for readers, their poor luck leads to a wild adventure that features 
swarms of deadly, carnivorous spiders, one gigantic snapping turtle, animal/human 
hybrids, and a double-timing cook—not to mention the occasional cameos by 
Amelia Earhart and Rasputin. The mythology behind the Order is neatly woven 
into the action-packed plot, offering a brief reprieve from chases and hunts with-
out slowing the pace. Even at a hefty 400-plus pages, this exhilarating story reads 
like a breeze, and fans of adventure will have a hard time putting it down.  KQG
winter, jonah Born and Bred in the Great Depression; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken 
Root. Schwartz & Wade, 2011 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96197-7 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86197-0 $17.99  
R 7-10 yrs
This biographical picture book tells the story of Winter’s own father, who was a 
child in East Texas during the Great Depression. Lyrical prose with ragged right 
margins recounts details (crowded sleeping arrangements, kerosene lamps in lieu 
of electricity) and episodes (going with his father to get ice in the Model T, his 
grandmother taking a bull by the horns after it wandered into her yard) that the 
author himself heard in his father’s stories. Winter’s narration effectively addresses 
his father directly (“There were no toilets, so you had to use an outhouse. I know, 
because you told me, Dad. This was the world you grew up in”). Overall, this is a 
resonant depiction of the times with an honest and personal take on history and 
memoir, questioning the stories (“Sometimes it’s hard to believe this world was even 
real. Maybe I’ve remembered it wrong”) and transitioning from retelling them to 
returning to the source with questions about the hermit in the woods, the wood-
burning stove, the passing hoboes. Root’s pencil, ink, and watercolor illustrations 
depict Winter’s father as a towheaded boy in constant familial contact, whether 
at his mother’s side or in his father’s arms. There’s a rawboned McCloskey-esque 
air to some of the draftsmanship, and the slightly cool tones and rustic textures 
emphasize the difference and difficulty of the time even as the human interactions 
are tender. Despite the toughness of the featured era, there is abundant joy in this 
volume that resonates both in the text and illustrations. Captioned family photos 
adorn the endpapers, adding further depth to this deep portrayal of a close-knit 
family surviving and even thriving in hard times.  HM
winter, jonah Wild Women of the Wild West; illus. by Susan Guevara. Holiday 
House, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-1601-1 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Fifteen women who made a mark in the Old West—from household names like 
DecemBer 2011 • 231
Calamity Jane and Annie Oakley, to the less widely recognized names like Paiute 
leader Sarah Winnemucca and entertainer Lotta Crabtree—step into the spotlight 
in this picture-book collection of brief biographies. Each entry is approximately 
a page in length, accompanied by a dignified portrait (most are based on photo-
graphs) and a more lighthearted pen sketch spilling over the border. Winter tries 
his derndest to whip up equal levels of excitement for each featured character, but 
it’s not easy to make public speaker Mary Lease or philanthropist Nellie Cashman 
quite as enticing as monte dealer “La Tules” Barcelo or outlaw Belle Starr. Several of 
these ladies have actually been tamed quite a bit for this presentation, and readers 
who are interested enough to pursue additional research will readily discover that 
Winter has been holding out on some fascinating tidbits: Ms. Starr was shot from 
behind and killed, possibly by her own son, and performer Lola Montez was an 
oft-wedded and bedded European courtesan long before she trod the boards with 
her “spider dance” out West. It’s still a browsable collection of colorful and notable 
ladies, though, and their variety makes a quiet point about the complexity of an 
era that was more than just rawhide and six-shooters. A bibliography is appended, 
as is a timeline that sets the featured women into the context of events in the West 
from 1848 through 1898.  EB 
yovanoff, brenna The Space Between. Razorbill, 2011 [368p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-339-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
The daughter of Lilith and Lucifer, Daphne makes her home in Hell. The son of 
a cancer victim and stepson of a grief-stricken workaholic, Truman has made his 
home into a living hell, drinking away his pain and generally messing up his life. 
The two first meet near the gates of Hell, after Truman tries to off himself by slit-
ting his wrists but Daphne’s brother Obie, an uncharacteristically kind half-demon, 
saves him, returning Truman to earth for a second chance. A year later (at least in 
Truman’s world; time doesn’t exist in Daphne’s world), Obie has gone missing and 
Daphne leaves Hell for the first time ever to track down the one mortal who may 
have an idea where Obie is. Truman is initially reluctant (and too drunk) to help, 
especially after Daphne informs him that they are probably being hunted by the 
archangel Azrael. Something about Daphne draws him in, though, and Truman 
ends up joining the search, only to uncover the significance of his own nature and 
his obsession with death. As she did in her debut novel, The Replacement (BCCB 
9/10), Yovanoff skillfully constructs a world that is as abundant in mythology as 
it is in secrets, offering enough information to create an enticingly vivid place but 
imbuing it with plenty of shadows to leave the reader uneasy but fascinated. Where 
The Replacement was marked by an air of gloomy gore, the tone here is of utter 
melancholy, focusing specifically on Truman’s grief and Daphne’s insular depression. 
Neither one is a particularly admirable character, but their connection is entirely 
believable as the one thing that keeps them moored while the rest of their worlds 
fall away. Painfully romantic and richly imagined, this offering solidifies Yovanoff’s 
status as an author to watch. KQG
232 • The BulleTin
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
It’s the end of the year, and we wanted to take this opportunity to highlight some 
interesting articles that you may have missed that have been recently published in 
various library world publications, both professional and academic. 
bader, barbara “Virginia Haviland: Children’s Librarian, U.S.A.” The Horn 
Book Magazine 87.1 (Jan/Feb), 2011: 60-66
___. “Augusta Baker: Reformer and Traditionalist, Too.” The Horn Book Magazine 
87.3 (May/June), 2011: 18-25
___. “Mildred Batchelder: The Power of Thinking Big.” The Horn Book Magazine 
87.5 (Sept/Oct), 2011: 15-22
Bader’s three-part series takes a look at the generation of youth services librarians 
who followed in the footsteps of Anne Carroll Moore and Alice Jordan while 
adapting their services and programs to successfully meet the challenges of their 
times. Haviland’s career spanned over four decades and several continents as she 
became heavily involved in the then-new International Board on Books for Young 
People and eventually was named the first director of the Children’s Book Section 
in the Library of Congress; meanwhile, Baker transformed the image of African-
Americans in children’s books and highlighted the significance of the oral tradition 
in librarianship as a noted storyteller; finally, Batchelder’s thirty-year involvement 
with children’s literature and services through the American Library Association left 
an indelible mark on both the organization and the entire field of youth services. 
Bader takes a close look at each woman, contextualizing their contributions while 
relating their impact to the overall culture of children’s literature. For any librarian 
or scholar interested in the historical trajectory of youth services librarianship, this 
series is a can’t-miss.  KQG 
Gruner, elisabeth rose “Wrestling with Religion: Pullman, Pratchett, and the 
Uses of Story.” Children’s Literature Association Quarterly 36.3 (2011): 276-295
In a volume that focuses on the intersection of religion and children’s literature, 
Gruner argues for a direct link between the narrative impulse and the religious 
impulse by examining the presence of narrative causality and the characters’ resis-
tance to it in Pullman’s His Dark Materials trilogy and Pratchett’s Tiffany Aching 
series.  KQG
karP, jesse “The Power of Words and Picture: Graphic Novels in Educa-
tion.” American Libraries 42.7/8 (July/August), 2011: 33-35
The appeal and popularity of graphic novels can’t be denied, but the educational 
value of the graphic format is still often challenged, even by those in the library field. 
Karp presents a concise but effective argument for the complex visual narratives 
that GNs have given rise to by looking at the story arc communicated by Shaun 
Tan’s The Arrival. Librarians who are still fighting for a place for graphic novels 
and comic books on their shelves will find support here.  KQG 
DecemBer 2011 • 233
lemPke, susan dove “Sports in Series Nonfiction.” Booklist 108.3 (1 Oct. 
2011): 58-59
Series nonfiction sometimes gets a bad rap, and the sports book in particular is often 
ignored by review journals and the like. But as Lempke (a former reviewer for the 
Bulletin) points out, these very same books are often overwhelmingly popular, either 
for school projects or for entertainment value. She takes a look at the characteristics 
of solid sports series nonfiction as well as offering best practices for the selection 
process, especially in times of tight budgeting.  KQG 
234  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Smith
Adventure: deas; Schreiber; 
Wilson
Africa–stories: Atinuke
Africa: reynolds
African Americans: Brimner
African Americans–fiction: Booth; 
dudley
AlphABet BookS: Bottner
AlternAtive hiStory: Mo-
riarty
Animals: davies
Animals–fiction: Cowley; lee; Mor-
purgo Elephant
Animals–stories: Achebe; erlbruch; 
Judge; Moore; pinkney; root
AnthologieS: hall; van Alls-
burg
Architecture: laroche; rubalcaba
Asian Americans: rubalcaba
Aunts–fiction: Weeks
Ballet–fiction: Flack; kehoe
BedtiMe StorieS: Judge; 
pinkney; ray
BiogrAphieS: Brimner; rub-
alcaba; Sweet; Weaver; Winter 
Women
Biology: davies
Birds–fiction: Christopher
Boarding schools–fiction: Wells
Brothers–fiction: Smith
Brothers and sisters–fiction: giff; 
kirby
Bullying: hall
Bullying–fiction: graff; king
Cajuns–fiction: little
Careers–fiction: Flack
Cats–fiction: lee; Mcdonough
Cats–stories: root
Christmas–stories: Cole
Civil rights movement: Brimner
Communication: davies
Cousins–fiction: Mcdonough
Crime and criminals–fiction: Bowler; 
Brooks; Moriarty; price; Wilson
dancers–fiction: Flack; kehoe
death–fiction: Berk; Freitas; yova-
noff
death–stories: erlbruch
demons–fiction: yovanoff
depression, the: Winter Born
depression, the–fiction: giff
dinosaurs: hughes
disasters: Walker
disasters–fiction: denenberg; ely
dreams–fiction: graff; king
dystopias–fiction: Carey; lu; Wells
ecology: Sarcone-roach
elephants–fiction: Cuevas
emotions–stories: Atinuke
Ethics and values: Achebe; Booth; 
Carey; graff; hall; kurlansky
Faith–fiction: dudley
Families: Winter Born
Families–fiction: Booth; Cuevas; 
Friend; king; Mcdonough; Sch-
reiber; White
Families–stories: Cole
FAntASy: Asher; Berk; Bernobich; 
Chin; Cuevas; harrison; holder; 
Subject and uSe Index
keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in All-CApS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
DecemBer 2011  •  235
kessler; nayeri; nolan; Stiefvater; 
Wilson; yovanoff
Farm life–fiction: Friend
Fathers–fiction: Christopher; lee; 
Margolin
Fathers: Winter Born
Folk-like tAleS: Achebe
FolktAleS And FAiry tAleS: 
gavin; Morpurgo Pied
Food and eating–fiction: Weeks
Friends–fiction: Cowley; Cuevas; 
kessler; lynch; Monninger; 
remkiewicz
Friends–stories: erlbruch
Future–fiction: Asher; Carey; lu
gays and lesbians–fiction: Smith
gender–fiction: Carey
ghosts–fiction: Blake; little
grAphiC novelS: Arni; deas
grief–fiction: Freitas; o’Connell; 
Weeks
hiStoriCAl FiCtion: Cole; 
denenberg; dudley; giff; kur-
lansky; Mcdonough; Morpurgo 
Elephant; peck; Weeks; White
History, U.S.: Brimner; Schanzer; 
Winter Women
homes–stories: root
horror: Blake; Bowler
horses–fiction: Monninger; Stiefvater
houses: laroche
houses–stories: Moore
huMor: Barnett; Bottner; Cole; 
katz; Moore
illness–fiction: Christopher
india–folklore: gavin
internet–fiction: Asher
Jews–fiction: Moriarty
kings–stories: Barnett
Language arts: van Allsburg
legendS: Arni; harrison
Literature, world: Arni
Maasai: reynolds
Magic–fiction: Moriarty
Magicians: Weaver
Marine life: Chin
Mice–fiction: peck
Mothers–fiction: little; o’Connell
Moving–fiction: holder
Music and musicians–fiction: kelly
MySterieS: Margolin
Nature study: Chin; davies
poetry: katz
poverty–stories: Cole
princesses–fiction: Bernobich; kirby
prom–fiction: Schreiber
puppets: Sweet
Reading aloud: Cowley; Cuevas; 
gavin; katz; peck
Reading, advanced: peck
Reading, beginning: remkiewicz
Reading, reluctant: Weaver
relationships–fiction: Christopher; 
Flack; harrison; holder;kehoe; 
kelly
relationships–stories: Choldenko
rhyMing StorieS: pinkney
romance–fiction: Freitas; Stiefvater; 
yovanoff
School–fiction: Friend; Margolin
School–stories: Bottner; Choldenko
SCienCe FiCtion: Brooks; deas; 
Wells
Secrets–fiction: Berk; White
Ships and sailing: Walker
Short StorieS: hall; nayeri; 
van Allsburg
Sports–fiction: Stiefvater
Stars–stories: ray
Storytelling: gavin
Storytelling: Winter Born
Storytelling–fiction: kirby
SupernAturAl StorieS: 
Blake; Bowler
SurvivAl StorieS: ely; giff
SuSpenSe: price
teachers–fiction: o’Connell
thanksgiving: Sweet
time travel–fiction: kessler
transportation: Sarcone-roach
turkeys–stories: Cole
urban life–fiction: Booth
valentine’s day–stories: Choldenko
verSe novelS: kehoe
vietnam War–fiction: king; kurlan-
sky; lynch
voyages and travel–fiction: Bernobich; 
Carey; Cuevas; denenberg; ely; 
236  •  The BulleTin
Monninger; Morpurgo Elephant; 
peck
voyages and travel–stories: nolan
War–fiction: Arni; lu; lynch
Werewolves–fiction: holder
West, the: Winter Women
Winter–fiction: kirby; remkiewicz
Winter–stories: Judge
Wishes–fiction: nayeri
Women’s studies: Winter Women
WordleSS BookS: nolan
Work–fiction: o’Connell
World cultures: laroche; reynolds
World War i: Walker
World War ii–fiction: dudley; Mor-
purgo Elephant
T
he Bulletin of the Center for 
Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and 
critical evaluations of current children’s 
books. T is invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding 
the ever-evolving children’s literature ﬁ eld. 
Reviews give an in-depth look at a selected book’s content, reading 
level, strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, as well as 
suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August).  
To order:
Volume  (). 
Call: -- or --
., individuals (print or online) 
Fax: --
., institutions (print or online)  
Email: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu
., institutions (print & online) 
Online: www.press.jhu.edu/journals
ISSN - / E-ISSN -
Published by 
T H E JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER 
FOR CHILDREN’S BOOKS:
ESSENTIAL.
 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please direct inquiries and orders to the ChLA: 
www.childlitassn.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
