ILL I N
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
k.
1151F·
r~iiuli· 
rr
.E
cbl- 
..~t~""
~Fift beuiul ilutae trai cars on fo each of
thre trul gra 50 stte, fo Main 
t~o Calfrna
that rang frmstate birds to nativerees ( and sons)... .
othero
*qi "Page-flippers wllmarve at the ever-chngn intensity of Sis'
wil deih in thi spff approach to reerc.
-·Stare 
Reie / The Bulei of the Center for ChildrensBok
~i* "Rieaders wilpore ove the unique deino each [train r]. ..
.
He ives both youngster hugr fo stt fat and those casting
abou fo unsa hitria morsl ampqle reso to clmbabar
thi fstie 
rai."-StarreRview 
/ Pulsers Weel
100784S1.(S~~
IhI*05713H SI
ror yom
r 
tiiis
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 2004
Vol. 58 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
157 THE BIG PICTURE
Toby and the Snowflakes by Julie Halpern; illus. by Matthew Cordell
158 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
168 * Andy Warhol: Prince ofPop by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan
172 * Next Stop Neptune: Experiencing the Solar System by Alvin Jenkins; illus.
by Steve Jenkins
176 * Search for the Golden Moon Bear: Science andAdventure in the Asian
Tropics by Sy Montgomery
178 
* Here in Harlem: Poems in Many Voices by Walter Dean Myers
180 * The Little Gentleman by Philippa Pearce; illus. by Tom Pohrt
189 
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
190 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except
August by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science
(GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Timnah Card, Reviewer (TC)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Krista Hutley, Reviewer (KH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Molly Dolan
Krista Hutley
Maggie Hommel
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $75.00; multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each
additional; individuals, $50.00; students, $15.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $7.50. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box
1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950; toll free 866-244-0626.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2004 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Matthew Cordell from Toby and the Snowflakes ©2004. Used by permission of
Houghton Mifflin Company.
DECEMBER2004 
* 157
THE BIG PICTURE
Toby and the Snowflakes
by Julie Halpern; illus. by Matthew Cordell
Even for adults, who quickly tire of shoveling pounds of snowy wonder from the
sidewalk, snow can bring a certain enchantment to the world, and for children, its
powers are magical. One of the reasons for that magic is its ability to suddenly
transform familiar landscapes (as explored in Perkins' Snow Music, BCCB 12/03);
another is its evanescence, its tendency to disappear sometimes even more quickly
than it came.
For Toby, snow isn't the only thing that can disappear quickly: yester-
day his best friend moved away, leaving only "his baseball glove that smells like
Parmesan cheese" and a very lonely Toby, who's desperate enough, only a day
later, to peer into the mailbox in the hope of a letter from his distant pal. Sud-
denly, companionship unexpectedly arrives out of the blue (or, more likely, out of
the gray): when Toby greets a falling snowflake, it returns his salutation, inviting
him to come and play, and as others fall, they join him in snow angels and general
good fellowship ("Some tell jokes. Others talk about movies they have seen. One
snowflake wishes for a warm piece of pecan pie"). After forming his new friends
into one very fine snowman, a tired and happy Toby returns inside, but the next
day's sun sends the snow where all good snowflakes must go. The snowflakes
explain the rightness of their departure ("We snow, we disappear, we come back
again. It is the nature of the snowflake"), and the arrival on the scene of a friendly
new boy (whose baseball glove "smells like cheddar cheese") suggests that friend-
ship too has its times of coming and going.
This tender exploration of the classic lost-friend story not only breathes
new life into a well-worn message but also manages to make its metaphor into a
lively literal experience. Halpern's text is quietly plainspoken, with its short sen-
tences and present-tense narration, but it's also evocative at a kid's-eye level ("Piles
of snow fluff around Toby's boots"), in touch with important youthful matters
such as baseball and boyish camaraderie. Wisely eschewing sentimentality about
Toby's flaky friends, it instead gains its charm from a quiet accumulation of homely
realism dusted with a flurry of fantasy; Toby's sweetly matter-of-fact and unsurprised
response to his meteorologically motivated mates is logical as a response to new
friends, whether they're snowflakes or not.
Cordell's line-and-watercolor illustrations have a similar groundedness:
Toby's staunch little figure (his pointy red hat subtly recalling Peter's headgear in
Keats' The Snowy Day, a small homage to a wintry book with sensibilities similar
to this one) appears amid an obviously chilly winter wonderland, wherein winter's
lean light subdues the palette into whites touched with pale greens and grays, and
even Toby's red coat is muted into shadow. Slightly wavery yet determined lines
158 
* THE BULLETIN
echo the protagonist's mood and drive the visual drama (the double-page spread of
Toby's forlorn face peering into the empty mailbox is both comic and touching),
while the snowflakes' characterization is prudently left to the text, with only shad-
owy letters floating across Toby's view to convey their message (or his imagining
thereof). Generous white space surrounds the vignettes and larger vistas, lending
the visual narrative that same crystalline stillness of a neighborhood newly blan-
keted, underscoring the snowy motif and subtly highlighting Toby's own isola-
tion.
The book's quiet wonderment and portrayal of a solitary (well, humanly
solitary) exploration of winter's joys will certainly make this a cold-weather favor-
ite. Don't just relegate it to the seasonal shelf, however, since young listeners will
also respond year-round to its sensitive message about friendship's cycles and will
relish an out-of-season evocation of the snow's wonders. (Imprint information
appears on p. 170.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
NEW 
BOOKS 
FOR 
CHILDREN 
AND 
YOUNG 
PEOPLE
JlLW 
IJUTT 
rJlV'A 
JInl\ 
U•-,IllJ.Li U iV'Ul 
I. IjV. 
U.LJ
ALVAREZ, JULIA 
Finding Miracles. Knopf, 2004 
264p
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-92760-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-82760-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Milly Kaufman finds that the arrival of Pablo, a refugee from strife in his Latin
American homeland, brings into sharp focus her uncertainties about her heritage.
Milly was born in that same unspecified country, where her parents, Peace Corps
workers, fell in love with her as an adorable foundling in an orphanage and adopted
her, and she's always been uneasy with this difference from the rest of her family.
As she gets to know Pablo, she grows more interested in the land of her origin, and
when he and his family visit their country after the installation of a new demo-
cratic regime, Milly joins them and discovers first-hand the personal history she's
been denying. It's a little odd that Milly's upbringing has been clouded in such
problematic secrecy despite her therapist mother, and awkwardness and superflu-
ous exclamation points sometimes undercut Milly's narration, but more often the
writing is witty yet accessible ("We all groaned. It was kind of mandatory when a
teacher was this kindergarten-perky about an assignment"). Alvarez is particularly
effective at blending the familiar story of teenage identity anxiety with the more
challenging depiction of a country whose people have undergone terrible suffering
under an oppressive regime. Since she never names Milly's homeland, the story
can represent a multitude of experiences, and Milly's growing connection to her
origins not only conveys her personal journey but also intimates the possibility of
a greater global connectedness. Milly's no mere metaphor, though, and the book
perceptively depicts the ambivalence she and her family feel about her explora-
tions. An unusual story skillfully given the ease of more common dramas, this will
draw readers ordinarily skittish about politics as well as offering some useful cur-
ricular possibilities. DS
6
DECEMBER 2004 
* 
159
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
The Little Mermaid; tr. from the Danish by Anthea
Bell; illus. by Lisbeth Zwerger. 
Minedition, 2004 
48p
ISBN 0-698-40001-1 
$15.99 
R Gr. 4-6
Andersen's moral tale of "The Little Mermaid" has been all but eclipsed by the
animated film and other contemporary revisions that soften the heroine's fate.
This version, produced in honor ofAndersen's upcoming 200th birthday, features
a new translation of the moving original accompanied by Zwerger's accomplished
watercolors. Admittedly, an unabridged version of Andersen's story is a bit long
for a traditional picture-book format, but the translation is lively and readable.
The format is fairly text-heavy, and the picking out of one line of text in contrast-
ing color is a puzzling action, since the line occasionally seems to caption the ac-
companying illustration but sometimes appears randomly chosen. Though
Zwerger's spare and uncluttered compositions contrast with Andersen's vivid and
intricate word pictures, they evoke a sense of the calm and quiet depths of the sea.
The interstitial creatures that meander through the white borders surrounding the
text are quite beautiful specimen studies by themselves, and the larger spreads,
though sometimes at odds with story detail, nevertheless convey the somber mood
of Andersen's quietly affecting tale. For those troubled by the secularization and
Disneyfication of this ultimately otherworldly tale, this presentation ofAndersen's
original sets an engaging verbal tone for young readers and an appropriately serene
visual tone to help them grasp its ethereal resonance. KC
ANDERSEN, HANS CHRISTIAN 
Tales ofHans Christian Andersen; tr. from the Dan-
ish and comp. by Naomi Lewis; illus. by Joel Stewart. 
Candlewick, 2004 
[208p]
ISBN 0-7636-2515-9 
$22.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
Thirteen of Andersen's short fairy stories, including greatest hits such as "The
Ugly Duckling," "The Little Mermaid," and "The Emperor's New Clothes," are
newly translated by Lewis, an internationally recognized expert on Andersen's work.
The translations are polished but unpretentious, retaining the freshness ofAndersen's
ironic authorial commentary and the conversational quality of the narration that
caused the originals to make such a splash when they were first published; a whim-
sical dialogue about Andersen's mixed fate and a brief biographical sketch precede
the stories. The digitally created illustrations underscore the demure yet fey tone
of the text-lengthened, sometimes slanted eyes set in ruddy-cheeked faces wear
intelligent (but rarely gentle) expressions, while bundled-up, blobby bodies, some-
times recalling Edward Lear's figures, display rounded, graceful outlines on clouded
background washes. This book can be approached in two ways, depending on the
needs of the reader or listener-read as a whole, with the introduction to the col-
lection and the translator's notes prefacing each story, it can serve as an overview of
Andersen's contribution, or it can simply provide a rich source of good stories for
reading or reading aloud. TC
BECKER, HELAINE 
Boredom Blasters: Brain Bogglers, Awesome Activities, Cool Com-
ics, Tasty Treats, and More; illus. by Claudia D:ivila. 
Maple Tree, 2004 
160p
Trade ed. ISBN 1-897066-02-3 
$21.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-897066-03-1 
$9.95 
R Gr. 3-5
This overstuffed collection of diversion breaks down into four sections-activities,
recipes, brain teasers, and games, salted with pages of riddles and comics. While
160 
* 
THE BULLETIN
some entries are old classics (optical tricks involving afterimages, for instance, or
versions of MadLibs), there's so much on offer that every reader will find some-
thing new. Pastimes range in difficulty from hardly any at all (take a quiz) to the
moderately involved (recipes and crafts) to the strenuous ("rooster wrestling," hop-
ping around clutching your ankles and warring with other roosters). Silliness is the
watchword here, but it's the good and uncondescending kind: the snarky humor
enlivens descriptions and even warnings ("Warning! As hot as lava!" cautions one
of the recipes), and touches of wit lift this above your average think-'n'-do book
(first turns at games are determined by factors such as the longest fingernails or the
most buttons on clothes). The wide array means there's something to occupy
restless youngsters in just about every situation, whether it be strapped in the backseat
of the minivan, stuck inside on a rainy day, planning for slumber-party mayhem,
or hanging out awkwardly in the backyard with out-of-town relatives, and there's
nothing to stop daring librarians from incorporating various activities and games
into their own efforts at ennui extermination. High-energy layouts saturated with
contrasting colors sport lively computer-generated art, further brightening up dull
times; answers to the brain-teasers appear in back. DS
BODETT, TOM 
Norman Tuttle on the Last Frontier: A Novel in Stories. Knopf,
2004 
[19 2p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-99031-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-89031-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
As Bodett explains in his introduction, he pulls the character Norman Tuttle from
previous (unnamed) adult novels and here follows his coming of age from a gangly
preteen desperate to win his Alaskan fisherman father's approval, through his bum-
bling, consuming, and often self-destructive first love for (and, for a while, with)
beautiful Laura Magruder, and on to his temporary banishment to farming friends
down in the contiguous forty-eight and his eventual rapprochement with his long-
suffering family. Episodes in the life of Norman range from fishing (and falling off
his father's boat in the night) to hunting (killing his first buck isn't quite the rush
Norman hoped it would be) to dating (which comes, as a result of follies in the
name of love, to be closely associated with being grounded), and Norman's matu-
ration provides a natural trajectory for the neatly crafted short stories. The tales,
many of which could be excellent readalouds for a junior-high audience, are re-
lated with the comfortable intimacy of a practiced storyteller; the wry humor that
defines the tone also makes Norman and his father's small flashes of understanding
all the more touching. Readers who enjoy the easygoing goofiness of Gary Paulsen
and Richard Peck stories but prefer their characters set in the here-and-now should
speedily be introduced to Norman Tuttle. EB
BOND, 
REBECCA 
This Place in the Snow; written and illus. by Rebecca
Bond. 
Dutton, 2004 
[40p]
ISBN 0-525-47308-4 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
When a heavy snowfall transforms a village ("It hatted the houses. It capsuled the
cars in thick and sticky white"), the snowplow follows soon after, piling all the
cleared snow into a huge snow mound. The neighborhood kids, all kitted out for
DECEMBER 2004 
* 
161
winter action, then proceed with glee to the new mountain and embark on serious
development ("They tunneled deep pockets. They hollowed large holes"), shap-
ing the mound into an elaborate architectural confection, a fantastical construc-
tion of snow. The text employs softly poetic imagery in description and often
personifies the setting ("Now rooms asleep at once awakened") and makes the
action itself the agent ("And there was the hurry of eating hotcakes"), emphasizing
the experience rather than the characters. There's full fascination given to the
details of the group's remodeling of the snow ("Then using their arms, they built
up snow wallways. And using their feet, they trampled snow floors") and the
exciting wintry contrast between cozy indoors and chilly outside adventure. The
visuals emphasize that contrast as well, with warm-toned vignettes portraying in-
door life as a homely scramble to prepare for outdoor adventure while the outdoor
snowscapes are shades of pool blue on white, sometimes touched with comple-
mentary ochres; brushstrokes add subtle underlying texture to the scenes, even
suggesting canvas with cross-grained strokes. The intricately concocted snow world
has a Seussian glory with its organically rounded shape, random passageways (prob-
ably unsafe as all get out, but they're awfully appealing), and joyful population.
This is sort of McLerran's Roxaboxen (BCCB 3/91) for snow bunnies, and it will
inspire youngsters who've exhausted the traditional snowmen and snow angels to
try their hand at their own elaborate snow creations. DS
BONE, IAN 
Fast Forward: A Dangerous Secret; illus. byJobi Murphy. 
Delacorte,
2004 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90240-9 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73210-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Hamish has always been a movie buff, preferring the big screen to his own hum-
drum life. When he's accepted to Capra Video High School, where lessons on
how to "script, shoot, and edit professional videos" are de rigueur along with nor-
mal classes, he feels he's finally found his calling. As it turns out, he has: Hamish
has been chosen to enter into a movie world in a Vidz (a special kind of video), in
order to fight evil-evil that has a mirror in reality. In the Vidz, Hamish is King's
Champion, fallen out of favor thanks to Lord Dudley, and he must save the king
and defeat Dudley in order to save his school in real life. At first glance, the
intermingling of various formats-illustrated still shots, script-writing, and regu-
lar text-is intriguing, but upon close examination the combination reveals a dearth
of direction. The pencil and watercolor illustrations, though apparently meant to
look like film reel images, are muddy and amorphous, having little composition or
detail to elevate them above bland sketches. Furthermore, they are poor storytell-
ers: too vague to stand alone, they are accompanied by "sound bites" of dialogue
or setting as an expository crutch. The occasional scripted chapters fare better,
though again their purpose is not integral to the story. However, the imaginative
premise in general and Hamish's character in particular will strike a chord with
many readers, especially as Hamish finds the larger-than-life world of the Vidz,
where he is a strong and handsome hero, better than his usual shy, lonely exist-
ence. Bone sets up this Australian import as the first episode in Vidz series; overall,
the flawed presentation may not bother readers who relish the story behind it, and
such readers will appreciate the prospect of sequels aplenty. KH
162 
* THE BULLETIN
BOOTH, MARTIN 
Doctor Illuminatus. Little, 2004 
173p
ISBN 0-316-15575-6 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Twin sister and brother Pip and Tim find that their new home at Rawne Barton,
a stately English manor house, is the battleground of two powerful alchemists
from the fifteenth century, each of whom has conquered death and continues to
fight for domination of the other. One of the alchemists is twelve-year-old Sebastian,
whose father built Rawne Barton and left his son to continue the struggle against
the evil Pierre de Loudeac, a corrupt alchemist who uses supernatural gifts to de-
stroy those who oppose him. de Loudeac has for centuries pursued the forbidden
knowledge necessary to create a homunculus, "a created man" with no soul or
mind of its own and that can therefore be ordered to do its master's bidding.
Now, having assembled the information he needs, de Loudeac has begun to gather
the physical components for the monster. Drawn willy-nilly into the race to pre-
vent such a creation, the twins have several spine-chilling encounters with the
wicked alchemist and his gruesome handiwork before their combined efforts allow
Sebastian to overthrow de Loudeac's master plan. The prose is skillful and the
premise promising, and Pip and Tim are distinct individuals with believable
thoughts and fears. The action is well paced and the magical aspects are consistent
and evocative. However, the narration remains somewhat distanced from the char-
acters throughout the story, keeping the horrific elements just this side of melo-
drama but sacrificing the psychological depth that would make the tale a truly
satisfying read. Further episodes are indicated, so fantasy addicts who like their
imaginary worlds with a hint of gore will do well to dive in here. A brief historical
overview of alchemy introduces the novel. TC
BROWN, DON 
Kid Blink Beats the World; written and illus. by Don
Brown. 
Roaring Brook, 2004 
32p
ISBN 1-59643-003-6 $16.95 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
Here Brown changes out of his customary picture-book biographies and into child-
centered history, which doesn't seem an entirely comfortable fit. In an uncharac-
teristically choppy text, he retells the story of the child newspaper vendors who, in
1899, led a strike against two New York publishers over a penny surcharge on
papers for resale. Although Brown's scrawly line and earthtone-washed pictures
do justice to the featured street urchins, imbuing each scruffy face with clenched-
jawed determination, there often aren't enough kids pictured to convey the breadth
of their movement (one "mob" consists of a dozen children). Some direct quota-
tions, undoubtedly amended according to reportorial practices of the day, are too
rarified for a child listener-"we must either make a stand or be down ridden by
the disciples of avarice and greediness"-while others employ vocabulary that evokes
a puzzled grimace--"A feller don't soak a lady." There is, of course, considerable
delight to be derived from the spunky child uprising itself, and an author's note
expands the episode a bit for an interested audience. Those who do pursue the
note, however, may be confused by the text's claim that "nearly all the newsies in
New York City ... had quit selling papers" and the note's observation that The
New York Times and The New York Tribune were not struck. This may not be
the first stop for young report writers, but keep it in mind for a Labor Day display.
EB
DECEMBER 2004 
* 
163
BROWNE, 
ANTHONY 
Into the Forest; written and illus. by Anthony
Browne. 
Candlewick, 2004 
26p
ISBN 0-7636-2511-6 
$16.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
After being awakened by a noise in the night, a young boy's fears mount the next
morning as his father is missing from the breakfast table, and Mom offers no ex-
planation for Dad's absence. The next day, she sends the boy off to visit his
Grandma, who isn't feeling well, admonishing him to take the long way around
rather than cutting through the woods. Of course the boy chooses the shorter path
through the woods, where his anxiety grows. Browne follows his familiar intertex-
tual protocol as his protagonist meanders through an ominous black-and-gray for-
est filled with fairy-tale objects, meeting a boy who tries to sell him a cow, a
golden-haired girl who wants a bit of his cake, and pair of forlorn, abandoned
children searching for their woodcutting parents. Spying a red coat with a hood,
he puts it on and begins worrying about wolves and getting lost on the way to
Grandma's. The payoff to the growing atmosphere of delectably chilling eeriness
is rather disappointing as the plot fizzles: a knock on Grandma's door is answered
by a weird voice that turns out to be Grandma with a cold, and the strange noise
he hears approaching from behind is Dad, who accompanies him home. Browne
deftly captures the lightened mood with sunny yellow backgrounds that create
veritable sunbursts around Dad and Grandma. The night noise and Dad's ab-
sence prove to be red herrings as far as the plot goes, but Browne uses them to
subtly trace the sinister connections children sometimes make between unrelated
incidents; he captures the mounting suspense of such flights of fancy and uses the
fairy-tale references to provide plausible motivation behind the boy's overactive
fear factor. Children who take peculiar delight in magnifying the mundane with
creepy imaginings will find themselves right at home here. KC
CADNUM, MICHAEL 
Starfall: Phaeton and the Chariot of the Sun. 
Orchard,
2004 
124p
ISBN 0-439-54533-1 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-9
Stung by another young man's taunting concerning his dubious parentage, Pha-
eton demands that his mother, Clymene, name his true father. She admits to her
liaison with Phoebus Apollo and encourages Phaeton to seek out the sun god to
confirm her claim. Apollo, proud and delighted to acknowledge his son, promises
Phaeton his dearest wish, and when the boy demands to drive the god's chariot on
its light-bringing journey around the world, Apollo must comply, despite his mis-
givings. Phaeton, unable to control the horses, wreaks havoc around the globe,
and he must finally be stopped by Jove's thunderbolt. Cadnum's retelling of the
classical myth is closely based on Ovid's rendering, but it's adapted into slightly
formal prose that suggests, rather than emulates, the original poetry. Successful
tailoring, like trimming longer monologues, expanding stretches of plotting (e.g.,
Phaeton's journey to Apollo's palace), limiting Phaeton's immediate family, fash-
ioning cousin Cycnus into a teen of Phaeton's age, and maximizing the climactic
chariot ride, retains the myth's integrity as it brings the adventure to middle grad-
ers. The setting is purposely vague, and Cadnum drops Ovid's references to
Phaeton's African origins, as well as all pourquoi commentary on seared lands and
blackened skin. Two more retellings from Metamorphoses are forthcoming, and, if
this inaugural title is any indication, mythology lovers will be well served. EB
164 
* THE BULLETIN
CHOTJEWITZ, DAVID 
Daniel Half Human and the Good Nazi; tr. from the Ger-
man by Doris Orgel. 
Jackson/Atheneum, 2004 
298p
ISBN 0-689-85747-0 
$17.95 
R 
Gr. 6-10
When Daniel Kraushaar is thirteen, in 1933 Germany, he and his best friend,
Armin, delight in minor acts of vandalism; for them painting swastikas on walls is
adolescent bravado rather than political commitment. Both long to share in the
excitement and camaraderie of the Hitler Youth (HJ) movement, but Daniel's
ambitions are extinguished when his parents reveal that his mother is of Jewish
descent. Herr Kraushaar's loyal service in the Kaiser's army initially affords the
family some protection, but when Hitler's regime consolidates power, Daniel and
his parents are victims of Kristallnacht. Armin, now active in the HJ, is required
by his superiors to "interrogate" Herr Kraushaar, but advance warning to Daniel
gives his friend time to hide out and probably saves the family from imminent
tragedy. Chotjewitz focuses on the boys' increasingly impossible attempts to be
normal teenagers and close friends-Armin's efforts to reconcile friendship with a
half-Jew and participation in the HJ are at once hypocritical and touching, while
Daniel's adolescent tendency to blame his problems on his parents rather than on
Nazism is all too believable. The Kraushaars manage to emigrate to the United
States, but there is no happy ending. The erstwhile friends meet again as adults-
Armin as a defeated SS officer and Daniel as an Allied interrogator-and Daniel
refuses to secure Armin's release: "Armin, supposedly, had also just done his job.
And now I did mine." If truth is the first casualty of war, here friendship is one of
its fallen comrades. EB
CROSSLEY-HOLLAND, KEVIN 
How Many Miles to Bethlehem?; illus. by Peter
Malone. 
Levine/Scholastic, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-439-67642-8 
$16.95 
R Gr. 3-6
In this poetic retelling of the Nativity story, each of the traditional participants
explains his/her role in the event. Mary, "tight as a drum. Round as the lady
moon calling out to me," voices her anxiety over the impending birth and places
her hope in Joseph's transaction with the innkeeper. The innkeeper, out of room
and out of food but willing to eke out an accommodation for the couple, guides
them to the ox's stall. The overtired ox sends them on to the donkey's stall. The
donkey points out they're better off inside with him than wandering "in the dark
and the damp" with the shepherds. And so it goes until everyone from Herod to
the Magi to the Christ Child himself has spoken. Malone's lush paintings are rife
with references to traditional artistic styles-Christian iconography in the Christ
Child with victory banner and lamb; formal groupings of Renaissance pedigree,
meticulously detailed still-life vignettes-but the startling overhead perspective of
a manger, the Madonna's uncharacteristically cropped and unveiled hair, and the
stunning vortex of the swirling, multihued angel host reflect a more modern sensi-
bility. Although the text will be accessible to any child familiar with the Christmas
story, a slightly older audience inclined to linger over the stately prose and vibrant
illustration will find this title rewarding. EB
DE LINT, CHARLES 
The Blue Girl. Viking, 2004 
368p
ISBN 0-670-05924-2 
$17.99 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Seventeen-year-old Imogene, determined to alter the downward spiral of her life,
changes social allegiances when her family moves to a more urban area-de Lint's
DECEMBER 2004 
* 
165
oft-revisited fictitious city ofNewford. Ignoring the bullies who target her, Imogene
focuses instead on negotiating a friendship with Maxine, a brainy, kind girl who
was the lone outcast before Imogene got there. The two girls soon become in-
volved with yet another outsider, the ghost ofAdrian, a loner teen who died falling
from the school roof years before in an unfortunate incident with some brownies
(fairies, not food) gone bad. Intriguing as her friendship with Adrian is, it proves
dangerous for Imogene, as his crush on her leads the still-resident brownies to lure
Imogene into making herself a target for the soul-eating anamithim, voracious
beings who stalk the boundaries between light and shadow. Each of the three
likable primary characters in this tri-voiced narrative treads a path of self-discovery
and growth, with Imogene giving the main focus and Maxine and Adrian provid-
ing background information and narrative tension as information is given and
withheld. Though their slangy dialogue is a bit stilted, the self-aware characters
are clever, witty, and wry, and the prose is otherwise quite smooth. The consis-
tently attractive, shimmeringly dangerous environment, the sympathetic charac-
terization, and the mirroring of the "real" world with the magical one will give
readers plenty of incentive to immerse themselves in de Lint's peculiar brand of
urban magical realism. TC
DRAKE, JANE 
Snow Amazing: Cool Facts and Warm Tales; by Jane Drake and
Ann Love; illus. by Mark Thurman and with photographs. 
Tundra, 2004 
80p
ISBN 0-88776-670-6 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
This smorgasbord of winter tidbits includes a broad collection of relevant material
from snow-tinged folklore to zoology of winter animals, exploration of snowflakes'
crystalline structure to an overview of famous snow studiers. The overall effect is
to perk up readers' interest in a season that less-hardy souls may simply avoid or
endure (thus making them, as the book explains, chionophobes or chionoeuphores)
by letting them wade in hip-deep to various aspects of winter without getting their
feet cold. Unfortunately, some challenging terms are left unexplained in the text,
a few explanations are a little confusing or insufficient, and citations and bibliogra-
phy would have added value to much of the material; the illustrations are rather a
cartoonish and unsubtle letdown next to the crisp (if sometimes small) photo-
graphs. The breadth of the approach is nonetheless a breath of fresh, chilly air,
and it will allow this title to add an intriguing and browsable dimension to science
units. A glossary and index are included. DS
DUNKLE, CLAR B. 
Close Kin. Holt, 2004 
2 1 6p
ISBN 0-8050-7497-X 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Several years after sisters Kate and Emily take up residence in the underground
goblin realm near their family's estate in England (see The Hollow Kingdom, BCCB
2/04), the goblin Seylin proposes to Emily and she rejects him without thinking.
Piqued, Seylin leaves the kingdom to find his "own" people-the elves whose
looks and magical abilities he inherited from elf brides captured by goblins long
ago. When Emily realizes Seylin is gone, perhaps forever, she sets out to bring him
home. The elves Seylin and Emily discover are no longer the noble, civilized race
they once were; their culture, their literacy, and even their magic were destroyed in
the last goblin-elf war, when many elves died and their books were carried off by
their erstwhile foes. Now the union of the bloodlines, once abhorrent to the elves
(but always necessary for the often-barren goblins), holds the potential to save
166 
* 
THE BULLETIN
both peoples, as the projected progeny would carry the goblin genes of strength
and the elf genes of comeliness and would have access to the magical lore of each
race, lovingly preserved by the ever-practical goblins. As in the first book, nimble
narration and sympathetic characterization involve the reader from page one. Since
the novel follows Seylin's and Emily's individual wanderings across the English
countryside, the plot necessarily reflects that apparent randomness for much of the
story; however, all loose ends are satisfactorily tied in at different points through-
out the resolution. The varied emotional repercussions of those resolutions on the
characters keep the strings of the tale taut throughout the denouement and pro-
vide sufficient basis for a third book while enriching the present story. While
converts to the first book will savor the development of the tale begun therein, new
readers will wholly enjoy this offering on its own merits, making this a strong
second volume in an original and engrossing fantasy trilogy. TC
EHRENHAFT, DANIEL 
10 Things to Do before IDie. Delacorte, 2004 
[224p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90912-8 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73007-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Ted Burger is having an ordinary day, hanging out at the diner with his best friend,
Mark (who feels that Ted is too tentative about life), and Mark's girlfriend, Nikki
(whom Ted thinks about a little more than one ought to think about one's best
friend's girlfriend). Ordinary transforms dramatically when it's discovered that a
disgruntled ex-employee poisoned the fries that Ted ate, leaving him with twenty-
four hours left before he dies at the ripe old age of fifteen. Ted decides that instead
of seeking treatment he'll carpe the only diem left to him, and he embarks on a
quest to cross his goals, ranging from sexual defloration to partying with his favor-
ite band, off of his life list. This doesn't have quite the tightness and polish of the
author's TellIt to Naomi (BCCB 10/94): the premise is a transparent device rather
than a credible construction (nor is there ever any doubt that Ted will somehow be
spared his death sentence), and Ted's day veers uneasily between Ferris Bueller-
esque hijinks and meaningful examination. The breezy style and format (lots of
subtitled sections, often chock-full of lists) have a considerable appeal, though,
and Ted's narration is ruefully funny about his fate as well as his peregrinations.
The book wisely avoids a reductive live-every-day message by pointing out that life
devoted to impulse isn't a solution either (Mark has failed to note Nikki's increas-
ing dissatisfaction, for instance), and the main characters, especially those of loyal,
thoughtless Mark and Ted's earnest girlfriend, Rachel, are interestingly drawn.
Despite the wavering tone, the premise and sequence of wild events will doubtless
draw readers eager to live as if each day were their last, even if only vicariously. DS
FRANK, HILLARY 
I Can't Tell You; written and illus. by Hillary Frank. 
Graphia/
Houghton, 2004 
[208p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-618-49491-X 
$6.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 9-12
During a fight with Sean, his best friend/college roommate, Jake blurts out mul-
tiple indiscretions that cost him their friendship, probably forever. Setting aside
the content of his revelations (he has slept with three of Sean's girlfriends, but he
justifies himself by saying that in each case he had liked the girl before Sean started
dating her, and Sean is a hound anyway), he decides that talking itself is the prob-
DECEMBER 2004 
* 
167
lem, so he stops. The novel therefore consists of notes that Jake writes on various
media, from napkins to dry-erase boards. Several people are willing to join his
game, including his latest crush, Xandra, and his pals Roger and Paul, who provide
useful foils to Jake's introspection by spinning out the comic (their notes almost
always escalate into increasingly bawdy body humor predicated on bad puns on
any word that could migrate into a slang term for male anatomy) and providing a
dose of reality in the situation, which might have become maudlin and weird oth-
erwise. Frank once again shows her dexterity in crafting entirely believable charac-
ters in the crucible of freshman dorm life; even Jake's silence, which lasts over a
month, becomes plausible in that environment. Jake is an inveterate punster and
wordsmith, and his notes provide clever repartee that would be difficult to repli-
cate in everyday speech, which is exactly the point he wants to make-writing
allows you to think out what you are going to say, providing your partner is pa-
tient enough. Unfortunately, Xandra is not; he hesitates, and she is lost. His
unsent letters to her and to an imaginary sister (lost in a miscarriage) add dimen-
sion to both his character and the plot, and the insight he gains from his self-
imposed silence is satisfying, if not entirely profound. The insights readers will
gain, however, are perhaps deeper, as Frank manages to convey a credible boy's-
eye view on matters of the heart. KC
FRENCH, VIVIAN 
T. Rex; illus. by Alison Bartlett. 
Candlewick, 2004 
30p
ISBN 0-7636-2184-6 
$15.99 
R 4-6yrs
A young boy and his grandfather visit a museum exhibit about the great Tyranno-
saurus rex, with Granddad explaining some of the bits of knowledge about the
huge dinosaur while his information-hungry grandson pelts him with questions.
While the grandfather and boy participate in rhymed Q&A, each speaker in a
different font, a third, smaller typeface provides more specific and factual informa-
tion. This isn't as informative as other similarly formatted early biology (Davies'
Big Blue Whale, BCCB 10/97), since the dialogue has more to offer in the way of
enticing rhythm than factuality, but there's an explanation that becomes the book's
main point: many facts about T. rex are yet to be discovered, and "the person to
tell us might just be YOU!" Bartlett's rich and spicy acrylic illustrations depart
from the painstaking naturalism of many dinosaur books, offering a world of en-
hanced color and texture, as thick layers of opaque colors are decorated with
scratched hatchings that expose foundation colors. The Tyrannosaurus' gaping-
mouthed ferocity is tempered by the cheer of the palette and by the toylike round-
ness of the fond grandfather and grandson. Kids just starting down the dinosaur
path will appreciate the gentle blend of fact and companionship. A brief index is
included. DS
GLASER, LINDA Mrs. Greenberg's Messy Hanukkah; illus. by Nancy
Cote. 
Whitman, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8075-5297-6 
$15.95 
Ad 4-7 yrs
Rachel is awfully antsy to get the Hanukkah observances underway. She wants
latkes and company for the first night of Hanukkah, but Mama urges patience:
"Enough with the latkes! ... I told you already, we'll make them next week when
the relatives come." Rachel talks her parents into letting her visit Mrs. Greenberg,
their tidy neighbor, and then talks Mrs. Greenberg into making latkes. With
Rachel's enthusiastic "help," Mrs. Greenberg's kitchen and fortitude are in
168 
* THE BULLETIN
shambles-ingredients are strewn on the floor, and Mrs. Greenberg is sprawled in
an armchair. Mama and Papa come to pick up their daughter, and it looks like
Mama will have to make those latkes after all and host Mrs. Greenberg in her own
home. Other than said latkes, background menorahs, and an odd passing com-
parison between cooking oil and the miraculous lamp oil, there is little that is
Hanukkah-specific here. Certainly there is no explanation of religious significance
or secular customs. There are, though, a bubbly, bow-lipped protagonist, forbear-
ing parents, an inviting clash ofVera Williams-esque patterns in the homey decor,
and warm neighborliness throughout. For children who are already up on their
holiday traditions, this will probably be enough. EB
GREENBERG, JAN 
Andy Warhol: Prince of Pop; by Jan Greenberg and Sandra
Jordan. 
Delacorte, 2004 
193p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90079-1 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73056-X 
$16.95 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
The noted team of Greenberg and Jordan (authors of Vincent Van Gogh and Chuck
Close: Up Close, BCCB 6/02 and 5/98, among other stellar works on art) turn
their hands to one of the most broadly famous artists in history, certainly the most
famous merely for being famous. The book manages to make Warhol's larger-
than-life life conceptually manageable, carefully tracing the stages from his child-
hood as a sickly but bright youngest son of Eastern European immigrants through
his burgeoning commercial-art career in youth and to his eventual development
from artist into publicity phenomenon. En route, there's thoughtful but not over-
confident exploration ofWarhol's strange character, and his relationship with family,
boyfriends, and the maelstrom of strange humanity that surrounded him; there's
also lucid explanation of Pop Art's challenge and contribution to the art scene and
Warhol's specific cultural impact. It's a shame that the color art reproductions
have not only been relegated to an insert but also diminished by the flat and grainy
paper stock, so that viewers get no sense of Warhol's trademark gloss and crisp
colors. As usual for this author pairing, though, the text is a model of thorough
and inventive research, drawing on print publications, websites, filmed material,
projects in production, and interviews; extensive end matter includes a detailed
timeline, a glossary of art terms, detailed source and explanatory notes (particularly
frank about mentioning contradictions), a list of Warhol's written works and a
selected list of his movies, and an index. DS
GREENE, RHONDA GOWLER 
Santa's Stuck; illus. by Henry Cole. 
Dutton,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-525-47292-4 
$16.99 
R 
3-6 yrs
Santa may be long on generosity, but he's short on self-control. He polishes off the
cookies left for him (as a thank-you or a bribe?) by the snoozers upstairs, but then
cannot resist the spread of holiday goodies intended for Christmas Day feasting.
Some fruitcake, fudge, and chocolate pie later, Santa can't make it back up the
chimney, and the reindeer and family pets all join in the effort to extricate him
from the fireplace. It takes a resourceful mouse on a toy bulldozer to deliver the
critical shove and send Santa back on his nocturnal rounds. Greene narrates her
tale in springy rhyme, with occasional opportunities for adult hamming
("Pu-u-u-ush. .. pu-u-u-ull . . . Pu-u-u-ush. .. pu-u-u-ull... 
Pu-u-u-sh ...
POP!") and kiddie chanting ("No-o-o-o-o luck-Santa's stuck!"). 
Cole comple-
DECEMBER 2004 
* 169
ments the text with a classic crimson-clad Santa of impressive girth and a cast of
critters whose strained determination to get the Big Guy back on track is fairly
palpable. Zoom-ins on the fireplace activity threaten to overwhelm the customary
Christmas palette with hearthstone grays and wainscot browns, but there are enough
flashes of Christmas tree, gift wrapping, and red-and-green reindeer harnessing
(not to mention Santa's prominently bulging rear end) to keep things cheery.
Perhaps this year it might be wise to replace those Christmas Eve cookies with
crudites. EB
GRIFFIN, PENI R. 
11,000 Years Lost. Amulet, 2004 
[332p]
ISBN 0-8109-4822-2 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
What happens when a plucky Mexican-American eleven-year-old gets trapped for
two and a half months in the late Pleistocene with a group of migratory Clovis
hunter-gatherers? She learns the language, works her butt off to earn her share of
the food, and figures out how to improve the future of the people who took her in.
This impressively detailed, engagingly written novel is part historical, part specula-
tive fiction. The social fabric of the Clovis people is a multilayered weave of folk-
tale, gesture, custom, and tool use. Translations between languages and cultures
are difficult but usually not impossible for protagonist Esther, who in turn pro-
vides entry into her experience for the reader. Esther is an estimable character with
a logical mind and a loyal, forgiving nature, and the people she lives and works
with are no less mentally acute or honorable. Esther's natural optimism keeps the
tone hopeful even as sickness and death strike the group, though the hazards of life
in a time dominated by giant predators and hard hunting are not downplayed. A
unique, superior contribution to speculative adventure fiction, Esther's survival
story is an emotionally satisfying, well-crafted read. A cheery author's note de-
scribes the established facts, theoretical postulations, and literary inventions that
make up the story, and an annotated partial bibliography cites an impressive num-
ber of books and websites used in her research. A glossary of Clovis terms is in-
cluded, though all terms are also defined by context or direct statements within the
text. TC
HALE, MARIAN 
The Truth about Sparrows. Holt, 2004 
260p
ISBN 0-8050-7584-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Departing her Missouri home for the Texas coast because of drought and the
Depression has left Sadie feeling bitter and resentful. She doesn't like the looks
strangers give her strong and capable father, who has lost the use of his legs to
polio. She doesn't like picking cotton, and she doesn't like the shantytown on the
Aransas Pass Seawall where she and her family have ended up. Much as she tries to
get her selfishness and irritation under control, she worries that what Mama says is
true, that who you are on the inside always shows through on the outside. Sadie
may be humble enough to work cleaning shrimp at the cannery, naively believing
she can save enough money to get her family's old life back, but she still feels that
she and her family are different from their neighbors in the shanty town; her snob-
bery almost costs her some important friendships. Sadie's self-accusations can be a
bit wearying at times, but they are in keeping with her introspective character.
Her moral development is consistent and believable as she moves from blaming
others to realizing that she is the main author of her own misery. Along the way,
170 
* THE BULLETIN
the beauty of the coastal landscapes, the sorrow she feels for a lonely traveler who
happens upon their home, and the persistent affection of friends guide her to a
new understanding of what it means to be well off. Hale's lyrical prose evokes a
strong sense of place and time; her well-drawn characters and eventful plot make
this a meaty, satisfying read that will undoubtedly become a favorite in a Depres-
sion-era fiction collection. KC
HALPERN, JULIE 
Toby and the Snowflakes; illus. by Matthew Cordell. 
Houghton,
2004 32p
ISBN 0-618-42004-5 
$15.00 
R* 4-7 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 157, for review.
HANSEN, JOYCE 
African Princess: The Amazing Lives ofAfrica's Royal Women;
illus. by Laurie McGaw. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion/Madison, 2004 
48p
ISBN 0-7868-5116-3 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
This collective biography offers portraits of six women, who lived in times ranging
from 3500 years ago (Hatshepsut of Egypt) to now (Elizabeth of Toro), and in
regions ranging from Egypt (Hatshepsut again) in the north to Angola much far-
ther south (Njinga of Matamba). It's not surprising that such a variety of origins
yields a variety of experiences, with some women living in privilege from early
youth, some rising out of slavery, some whose fortunes swing back and forth. Each
minibiography provides birth and death dates, if known, for its subject, and then
offers a chronicle of the highlights of her life, including details of youth, family,
and ascension to various positions of power, whether it be ruler, consort, or gov-
ernment minister. The biographies are strongly inclined toward the adulatory,
with positive speculation running rampant and a preference for romantic views of
royalty (despite the fact that several of the women engage in the usual royal pas-
times of warfare and usurpation), and occasionally key facts are omitted (what
happens to Tata Ajachd's child with King Glele, which occasions the couple's
marriage?). It's hard to resist a gallery of princesses and queens, however, and this
one benefits from its fresh focus (these are far from the usual royal suspects), and
Hansen carefully tunes her account to maximize the appeals of strong women of
unusual accomplishment. Images of artifacts and period art, along with rather
stodgy oil portraits of the women, decorate each chapter, along with elaborate,
slightly fussy borders. Use this as a companion to Brewster's To Be a Princess
(BCCB 12/01), to extend African history or culture units, or just to feed the rav-
enous crowds of royal-readers. There are no source notes, but a brief bibliography
is included, along with an index. DS
Ho, MINFONG 
Peek: A Thai Hide-and-Seek; illus. by Holly Meade. 
Candlewick,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-7636-2041-6 
$16.99 
R 
2-5 yrs
An engaging, round-faced Thai toddler partially hidden by her bright orange um-
brella invites both her father and the viewer into a game of"Jut-Ay" (pronounced
"shut-A"), or peekaboo, in the lush environs of her home. Father quizzes the local
animals in a rhyming refrain that will delight audiences almost as much as the
onomatopoeic sounds that alert the father to their presence. Curiously, the sto-
ryline features a pattern of escalating threat (not unlike traditional English nursery
songs such as "Rock-a-bye Baby") as the animals progress from the benign and
DECEMBER 2004 
* 
171
friendly (rooster, puppy, turtle, monkey) to the sinister and genuinely dangerous
(snake, crocodile, tiger), until the exasperated father calls time and the little girls
runs into his waiting arms. Meade's illustrations cleverly mitigate the threat with
their persistent cheeriness and high energy. Using cut paper that has been stained
with mottled and striated watercolors, she layers texture, shape, and color to create
a sun-splashed jungle for creatures and humans to play in. The challenge of repli-
cating Thai animal sounds, the inviting landscapes and rhythms, and the universal
delight of hiding and seeking will make this a storytime favorite for toddlers. KC
HOOKS, BELL 
Skin Again; illus. by Chris Raschka. 
Jump at the Sun/Hyperion,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-7868-0825-X 
$16.99 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
hooks and Raschka follow up their celebration of nappy hair (Happy to Be Nappy
BCCB 1/00) with a call to look beyond skin color. Avowing that "the skin I'm in
looks good to me," hooks encourages her audience to realize that skin is just a
covering over a real me made of "real history, real dreams, and the stuff of all we
hope for." Expressing undeniably lofty and well-meaning sentiments, hooks' mes-
sage is nonetheless fairly well-traversed territory in child-aimed discourse on race,
and it comes off as somewhat heavy-handed. Raschka's illustrations, on the other
hand, breathe fresh air into the concept with their frisky, be-bop quality. Mustardy
browns and darker umbers (as well as cobalt blues and assertive pinks) reinforce
the textual concerns with the variations of skin color, while Raschka's minimal but
aggressive brushstrokes tease out a tentative winsomeness in his figures' facial ex-
pressions as they approach one another. Though the text is jaunty and rhythmic
enough, and the illustrations have an infectious energy, the book is rather a the-
matic miss for the age group: the angsty overtones of seeking the real me under my
skin color are more suited to an older audience who have the self-awareness that
they in fact have an identity and a history to trace, and that there might be a
problematic difference between the real self and the one people perceive. KC
IBBOTSON, EVA 
The Star ofKazan; illus. by Kevin Hawkes. 
Dutton, 2004 
405p
ISBN 0-525-47347-5 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
As a baby, Annika is found in a mountain church near Vienna by Ellie and Sigrid,
a cook and a housekeeper, during the glory days of the Austro-Hungarian empire.
A third of the way into the book and twelve years into Annika's life, her mother
shows up to reclaim her and carry her off to the family estate in Germany, where
the lonely girl befriends a stable boy who eventually risks everything he cares about
in order to assure her safety. Bearing themes of secrets, betrayal, friendship, family
loyalty, and even the promise of romantic love for Annika, this is not the typical
Ibbotson storyline-magic has no place in this historically grounded environment.
This departure from the author's fundamental style is somewhat successful; part A
Little Princess, part The Wolves of Willoughby Chase, the first half of the story is
filled out with delectable descriptions of Austrian cooking, several scenes in which
Annika's generous personality shows to admiration, and wry portrayals of the all-
too-human adults upon whose whims her fate rests. Unfortunately, by the middle
of the book it is evident that this rendering of the betrayed orphan heiress story
will receive stodgily (i.e., convoluted and coincidence-ridden) traditional treat-
ment, and at the end, the stable boy and his horse are rather forcefully pushed to
provide a finishing image that proves unsatisfactory. Still, this period drama of
172 
* THE BULLETIN
love and misplaced loyalty, jammed with delicious snippets of historical detail, will
win its own cadre of dedicated fans. Cheery line drawings add appeal. TC
JENKINS, ALVIN 
Next Stop Neptune: Experiencing the Solar System; illus. by Steve
Jenkins. 
Houghton, 2004 
40p
ISBN 0-618-41603-X 
$16.00 
R Gr. 3-7
Steve Jenkins, noted illustrator of nonfiction (Caldecott Honor winner for What
Do You Do with a Tail Like This?, BCCB 3/03) here teams up with his father, a
former professor of astronomy and physics, for a vivid overview of the Earth and
its cohorts in solar orbit. Concise text, much of it expressed in captions for illus-
trations large and small, explains some basic facts about the birth of the solar sys-
tem and planetary orbits, then proceeds to discuss each planet (and a few critters
such as moons, asteroids, and comets for good measure). Jenkins Junior's inven-
tive cut- and torn-paper art drives the drama: repeated imaginative demonstra-
tions of relative scale (a hand cradles items at the size the planets would be if the
sun were the size of a basketball) and distance (those same items are arrayed along
a quiet residential landscape) drive home a macrocosmically intimidating context.
Each heavenly body's spread includes a scale model of its size in relation to Earth
and some key factual tidbits, including the traditional measure of how much some-
body would weigh in each of the different gravities and a less traditional tidbit
about each sphere's distance from Earth expressed in terms of driving time. While
there are certainly some notable achievements in astronomical photography, the
solar system is a difficult thing to squeeze into an aperture; these theoretical visual
explorations therefore provide a clarity and convenience of viewpoint that actual
photographs simply don't. This is therefore a dramatic and easily absorbed intro-
duction, which could be counterpointed with Seymour Simon's classic planetary
works or a browse through recent images available online. There is no index, but
a brief bibliography and an invitation to surf the web, starting at NASA's solar
system page, are included. DS
JOHNSON, ANGELA 
Bird. Dial, 2004 
133p
ISBN 0-8037-2847-6 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Having lost her father before she was two, thirteen-year-old Bird is unwilling to let
her stepfather disappear as well, so she leaves Cleveland and takes a bus to Ala-
bama, hoping to find Cecil and bring him back to her and her mother. Once
there, she takes up residence in the shed of a farm family, and her story becomes
intertwined with the stories of two boys-Ethan, who has recently received a heart
transplant and is the youngest member of the farm family, and Jay, whose brother
Derek was Ethan's donor. Bird's presence in their lives helps Jay finally to grieve
his brother's death, and Ethan to find the courage to live his new life more boldly;
the boys' losses and fears help Bird see that she won't find what she longs for in
Cecil. Connections and revelations unfold slowly through chapters that alternate
between the voices of Bird, Ethan, and Jay, but avid readers of recent fiction will
have little trouble switching between the different narrators and perspectives, as
Johnson manages to give each a distinctive voice and a compelling backstory. As is
her wont, however, she leaves significant gaps in the mundane details that hold her
poetic portraits together, the most significant being how Bird was able to find the
farm family in Alabama, who, as it turns out, are Cecil's relatives, from a picture
she finds among his things in Cleveland. Cecil's complex character remains sketchy
DECEMBER 2004 
* 
173
as well; beloved by both Ethan and Bird, he is capricious and inconsistent, and
though some great past tragedy is alluded to as an explanation for his mania for
running (both literally and figuratively), no details are forthcoming. However,
readers willing to accept the spiderweb of fate that draws these characters together
will find a sweetly compelling story of forgiveness, insight, community, and accep-
tance of the things that scar us. KC
JOHNSON, KATHLEEN JEFFRIE 
A Fast and Brutal Wing. 
Brodie/Roaring Brook,
2004 
191p
ISBN 1-59643-013-3 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
After Halloween night, when sixteen-year-old Emmet and his fourteen-year-old
sister, Niki, are found in the woods naked and covered with blood and bites and
scratches, Emmet is sent to the Tomington Center for psychiatric care and Niki is
confined at home. All anyone knows is that their friend Doug called the police to
report that his friends attacked reclusive writer Nicholas Slanger in the woods
surrounding his home, though he later recants his statement. Though there is no
evidence that Slanger was there, he is now missing, and the kids know more than
they're saying. There is more at stake than Slanger's life, however, for Niki and
Emmet have even darker secrets. Niki believes that she and Emmet can transform
into animals-she, a cat, and he, a hawk-and that this transformation is the
reason for what happened that night: is she right, or has she constructed an elabo-
rate fantasy to protect them from the truth about their father, who disappeared
two years ago? In this suspenseful and involving psychological drama, each teen-
ager writes in his or her own distinct, complex voice: Emmet's melancholy rumi-
nations from the hospital ward, Niki's lyrical fantasy fiction and vitriolic handwritten
notes, and Doug's daffy emails combine to tell the story of a brother and sister who
may or may not be animals, who may or may not be killers, who may or may not
be lovers. (A local man's gossipy news articles provide a necessary community
counterpoint.) Johnson's masterful structure allows readers to gather the same
facts and fancies from these disparate voices but draw their own conclusions; inter-
pretations hinge on the fact that every character has two or more sides, only one of
which is showing-every lie may be a truth, every truth a lie. Readers who love
both an intellectual and a subjective challenge will want to talk about this book
right away, while those who are attracted by a rich atmosphere will find this an
intense and meaningful offering. KH
JUAN, ANA 
The Night Eater; written and illus. by Ana Juan. 
Levine/Scholastic,
2004 
40p
ISBN 0-439-48891-5 
$16.95 
R 
4 -7 yrs
Every day's beginning is precipitated by the Night Eater, who wanders the strato-
sphere with his friends and gleefully gobbles down the delicious night, which al-
lows the sun to emerge. When the moon makes a thoughtless comment about his
friend's increasing girth, the self-conscious Night Eater swears off his staple meal;
while the Earth's denizens initially enjoy the novelty of a lengthy nightfall, they
eventually grow tired of the endless night and beg the Night Eater to return. The
text is sometimes a little frothy with imagery, but there's a solid bedtime story
underneath it, so the result is a fetching nocturnal fairy tale. Juan's acrylic and wax
art employs delicate dustings of contrast to soften her world while making her
figures three-dimensional. The world itself is a gleaming fantasia of magical real-
174 
* THE BULLETIN
ism in slightly twilit carousel colors, and the Night Eater himself is a plump pink
figure in a huge pink stocking cap and obviously artificial orange beak; with his
festive costume and imploring eyes, he rather resembles a Rosemary Wells bunny
who's run off with the Cirque du Soleil. Unlike many bedtime books with elabo-
rate visions that draw browsing parents, this one will also please drowsing young-
sters, making it a particularly happy choice for repeated readalouds with sustained
interest from both reader and readee. DS
LAY, KATHRYN 
Crown Me! 
Holiday House, 2004 
202p
ISBN 0-8234-1845-6 
$16.95 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Justin may only be in fifth grade, but he's sure his future lies in politics, and he's
determined that the presidency of fifth grade will be the place to start. He's there-
fore thrilled when a history project enthrones him as king for two weeks (though
he's less than delighted with his co-regnant queen, Andrea, who's also his compe-
tition for president). While there are some definite perks-kids currying favor,
the attention of cool sixth-graders, the ability to put people in the "dungeon"-
Justin is frustrated that he's not receiving the regard he had planned, and he be-
comes increasingly and counterproductively excessive in his attempt to garner the
esteem of his subjects. This is an appealing premise, since many readers will relish
the notion of lording it and queening it over their classmates, and it's realistic that
Justin and Andrea end up victims of their own overweening pride. Their swift
conversion to good citizenship is more didactic than credible, however, and there's
virtually no real characterization: Justin and Andrea are largely power-mad twerps,
and the one attempt to deepen a character-the class bully is secretly the admired
reading tutor of a younger kid-is wincingly contrived. Ultimately, this is a story
that exists entirely outside of reality in order to make its point, so only kids truly
compelled by the idea of grade-school royal hijinks will find the proceedings en-
gaging. DS
MARTINEZ, AGNES 
Poe Park. Holiday House, 2004 
[150p]
ISBN 0-8234-1834-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-6
A few days after Enoch Morales turns eleven, his best friend, Spence, is shot and
killed as the boys play around the fire hydrant near Poe Park in their Bronx neigh-
borhood. While recovering from the shock of losing his closest friend, Enoch
discovers that his protective buddy was a drug runner. When Enoch's half-brother,
Miguel, comes from Puerto Rico to live with him and their mother, Miguel swiftly
works his way into the Firearms, the street gang run by Spence's cousin, Dougie.
Still fighting to make sense of his own continuing life in the face of his friend's
death, Enoch begins to take a stand against the violence surrounding him, with
some success. The simple plotline is actually an unfurling of complex social pres-
sures that rest too heavily on very young shoulders. Martinez's plainspoken prose
offers descriptions permeated by the perspectives of the street, creating a credible
voice for Enoch as a painfully idealistic, loving boy with strong feelings and con-
siderable courage. Like Walter Dean Myers' Scorpions (BCCB 7/88), this acknowl-
edges the struggle of its inner-city protagonist's life while affirming its worth.
Numerous unobtrusive references to the history, stories, and poems of the park's
namesake, Edgar Allen Poe, draw understated parallels between that author's
DECEMBER 2004 
* 
175
troubled life and the clear and present dangers of the neighborhood encircling his
cottage, supplying additional strata to a story that is a formidable achievement on
its own merits. TC
MAYBARDUK, LINDA 
James the Dancing Dog; illus. by Gillian Johnson. 
Tundra,
2004 
24p
ISBN 0-88776-619-6 
$15.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
James is an affectionate and nosey pooch who loves helping out his human parents
as they teach the dancers in the ballet company. He's thrilled when the company
plans to perform Giselle, with its part for a hunting dog, but he's chagrined when
the part goes to a sleek and supercilious wolfhound, who's lamentably lacking in
artistic flair ("What sort of hunting dog neither sniffed nor snuffed, trailed nor
tracked, posed nor pointed?"). On opening night, however, the interloping wolf-
hound freezes in stage fright, and a well-practiced James takes his deserved place in
center stage. While things wrap up a bit quickly (audiences would doubtless enjoy
more detail of James' final acclaim), James is the perfect protagonist for this pri-
mary-grades-set AllAbout Eve, especially with the added fillip of James' apparent
unsuitedness for his dream part ("his dancer's soul stayed wrapped in a beagley
body"). Maybarduk has a deft paw with the specifics as well: youngsters will
particularly appreciate the occasional pun ("He worked doggedly to improve")
and the dancers' pre-performance tradition of rubbing James' rotund tummy for
good luck. Johnson's line-and-watercolor art smoothly partners the text in a comic
pas de deux, and viewers will relish the interplay between text and illustration (ames'
"help" with lessons, straightforwardly phrased in the text, is sure to elicit giggles).
Narrow scratchy lines range from free-form scribble on the backgrounds to bristly
hatching on textured areas, while James himself is an irresistible mound of hound
in the Martha tradition, with bulbous nose and questing eyes. Pair this with
Marshall's Swine Lake (BCCB 7/99) for a gleefully animalistic take on the dance.
DS
MAZER, HARRY 
A Boy No More. Simon, 2004 
136 p
ISBN 0-689-85533-8 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Adam Pelko, who lost his father and very nearly lost his own life at Pearl Harbor in
A Boy at War, has moved to California with his mother and younger sister. As he
struggles to settle in at a new school, at which he's both admired and resented as
something of a wartime celebrity, a letter arrives from his old Japanese-American
friend Davi Mori, who asks him to help establish contact with family members
who have been sent to the internment camp at Manzanar. Adam's mother is dead
set against his involvement, but he makes a couple of trips on Davi's behalf, finally
arriving at Manzanar with a forwarded letter, only to find Davi himself has been
imprisoned at the camp with his entire family. Mazer puts Adam mechanically
through his paces, neglecting emerging subplots (Mom's satisfaction with her
employment in the war industry; a possible love interest with an older high school
girl; confrontations with a school bully) as he hustles his protagonist on to his
encounter with the injustice of the Japanese relocation program. Falling action
follows Adam's decision to stay with Mom or move to his grandfather's farm, and
the novel jerks to a close with a friendly letter to Davi and a trip to the post box to
mail it. The title's brevity and wartime theme may make this a viable choice for
176 
* THE BULLETIN
reluctant readers, but middle graders who want to reconnoiter behind the barbed
wire of the internment camps should consider the nonfiction opportunities of
Michael Cooper's Fighting for Honor (BCCB 2/01) instead. EB
MILEs, VICTORIA 
Wild Science: Amazing Encounters between Animals and the People
Who Study Them; illus. by Garth Buzzard and with photographs. 
Raincoast,
2004 
168p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55192-618-0 
$18.95 
R Gr. 5-9
This approachable overview gives a chapter each to ten scientists who practice
hands-on biology with wild animals. Subject animals range from whales to bats,
bears to turtles; most scientists are involved with some kind of population track-
ing, but some are investigating behavior or attempting to reintroduce species to
formerly inhabited areas. Each chapter has four sections, one chronicling a par-
ticular animal-scientist event or encounter, a second giving background on the
scientist, a third explaining a particular species characteristic or scientific practice,
and a fourth giving an overview of the studied species. While technical glitches
sometimes plague the text (incorrect conversions from decimal measurement, a
confusion between homonyms, a missing line) and some of the animal encounters
described are a bit far in the past now, the book effectively captures the enthusiasm
of the scientists on, often literally, the frontier (one wolf scientist lived for years in
a Montana wilderness cabin with no plumbing or electricity). The author's inter-
views with her subjects-the human ones-pay off in allowing the scientists to
speak for themselves a good deal of the time, which adds engagement and liveli-
ness to the scientific explorations. Appealing and sometimes appealingly gross
details stud the accounts, the scientific projects are presented with welcome con-
creteness, making it easy for young environmentalists to understand the stakes,
and a plethora of glossy photographs testifies to the photogenicity of the animals
(and sometimes the scientists as well). This will draw browsers as well as animal-
loving youngsters wondering how to turn their passion into a career. End matter
includes a glossary, a list of web and print resources, and an index. DS
MONTGOMERY, SY 
Search for the Golden Moon Bear: Science andAdventure in the
Asian Tropics. Houghton, 2004 
80p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-618-35650-9 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 5-9
This adaptation of the author's adult book combines some enticing elements in-
deed: an endearing subject, an adventurous quest, and a mystery waiting to be
solved. The endearing subject is a bear with a beautiful golden coat, hitherto
undocumented but appearing in reports and photographs from Southeast Asia;
the quest is the journey undertaken by the author and two companions to find
examples of such bears, and the mystery is the species of the bear in question.
Montgomery has earned her chops as a writer for young people (The Snake Scien-
tist, BCCB 4/99, The Tarantula Scientist, 4/04), so it's an added delight to see her
taking part in the journey and playing a small but significant role: "I volunteered
to stick my hands into a cage with a live bear in it-and pull out some of its hair
with my eyebrow tweezers." This isn't a self-aggrandizing tale of brave pluckage,
however; Montgomery alluringly unfolds the tale of the hints of the bear's exist-
ence and puts it against both an ecological and cultural backdrop, explaining the
threats to bears in the region (pet trade, harvesting for organ and parts sales) and
also describing Cambodia's harsh history and how, paradoxically, it might have
DECEMBER 2004 
* 
177
actually protected the bear populations. There's also an as-it-happens thrill to the
exploration, particularly as it results, as science often does, in different discoveries
than had been anticipated (the golden bear is a different coloration of a known
species, but some of the other strange bears the group pulled samples from were
unknown in the area before). The book's layout is unfortunately rather stodgy,
with pages dense with text and fonts changing distractingly; it does, however, make
the most of the few photos of the golden bear itself and cunningly expands the
visuals with contextually relevant images, so that readers will likely overlook the
scarcity of the star turn's actual appearances. This is a natural, pardon the pun, for
young environmentalists and animal lovers, as well as readers who just like a good
science mystery. Final pages provide an overview of bear statistics, a list of bear-
related organizations and their websites, some material for further reading, and an
index. DS
MORPURGO, MICHAEL 
Private Peaceful. Scholastic, 2004 
208p
ISBN 0-439-63648-5 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 7 up
It may be the beginning of the twentieth century, but young Thomas, known as
Tommo, experiences a traditional rural boyhood in West Country England. It's
no idyll, however: he's haunted by his father's death (which he believes to have
been his fault), and his family, no longer entitled to inhabit their laborer's cottage,
depends on the unreliable generosity of the landowner, who disapproves of the
family's independent behavior. Throughout all the ups and downs, the constant
in Tommo's life is his supportive older brother Charlie, so when war is declared
and Charlie joins up, Tommo lies about his age and becomes part of Charlie's
company. In addition to the now well-known depredations of trench warfare in
Belgium and bitter realism about the war's prospects, Tommo suffers pain beyond
that when a brutal sergeant unjustly charges Charlie with desertion, and he's sen-
tenced to execution by firing squad. Many of these elements are familiar from
other works about the period (Peyton's Flambards trilogy, and John Wilson's And
in the Morning, BCCB 4/03), but this is smoothly and compellingly told. The
sustained focus on Tommo's life and the rich interpersonal dynamics in family
and village make this a story about far more than war, but that focus also empha-
sizes what the war and its effects destroyed. Tommo narrates the story in flash-
backs, returning periodically to the present, with the progression of time carefully
noted as he awaits an event that proves to be Charlie's execution; this device steps
up the tension, since readers aren't initially sure what the awaited event is, while
adding a sense of doomed inevitability to Tommo's telling. This is a vivid and
evocative story of youth and of war, and young readers will find it easy to imagine
themselves in Tommo's place. An author's note provides a bit more background
on the First World War, the treatment of deserters, and his sources for this story.
DS
MYERS, WALTER DEAN 
Antarctica: Journeys to the South Pole. Scholastic,
2004 
[144p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-439-22001-7 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
There has been a blizzard of Antarctic books for young people in the last few years
(such as Jennifer Armstrong's Shipwreck at the Bottom of the World, BCCB 2/99,
and Robert Burleigh's Black Whiteness: Admiral Byrd Alone in the Arctic, BCCB
178 
* THE BULLETIN
2/98), but most of them have focused on specific expeditions. Myers takes a dif-
ferent tack and offers instead what one might term a collective expeditionography,
providing an introduction to nearly a dozen voyages significant in the exploration
and history ofAntarctica. Though he includes the traditional figures such as Scott
and Shackleton, his structure allows him to treat less popularly remembered (and
less filmed) exploits such as those of James Ross, Charles Wilkes, and Carsten
Borchgrevink and speak more generally about expanded modern exploration.
Unfortunately, it's never clear exactly why these particular figures are chosen and
not others, and there's little linkage of the episodes into an overall narrative; read-
ers unfamiliar with maritime and polar literature may wish for a glossary of the
technical terms left unexplained, and small errors and inconsistencies further muddy
the icy waters. There's still plenty of heroism, derring-do, and tragedy, however,
compressed into readable chapters studded with plenty of photographs and maps,
as well as the occasional factual sidebar on Antarctica itself. This is therefore likely
to appeal to readers intrigued by the tip of the Antarctic iceberg but not quite
ready to view its icy depth, and it may entice some armchair trekkers to proceed to
more challenging works. DS
MYEmR, WALTER DEAN 
Here in Harlem: Poems in Many Voices. 
Holiday House,
2004 
88p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-8234-1853-7 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 9 up
Inspired by Edgar Lee Masters' Spoon River Anthology, Myers also creates a gallery
of imagined voices (nearly sixty in all) connected to a place, in this case his beloved
Harlem. "Testimony" in several parts from longtime Harlem resident Clara Brown
acts as a recurring chorus between clutches of poetry from young students and old
veterans, undertakers and nurses, evangelists and numbers runners (each poem is
headed with the speaker's name, age, and profession or situation). Voices are
therefore varied, as is Myers' approach-sometimes his poems speak in the demotic
voice of his subject, sometimes they provide a highly wrought poetic narration that
gives wings an individual's own voice might not to an experience-and the result
is a rich tapestry of humanity caught as they pass through a shared neighborhood
and experience. The more imagery-dense entries sometimes sparkle with more
poetic craftsmanship than intimacy or emotion, making them admirable rather
than moving, but many of the poems are compact and compelling encapsulations
of a single thread of existence. Exuberant joy abounds in a deacon's rhyming
hymn to a shouting church ("Don't give me no whispering church/ Don't be
mumbling nothing to my Lord"); the spare Christmas song of an unemployed
single mother is heartbreaking in its gentle despair ("The last straw crumbled weeks
ago/ The last man happened years before/ The last hope tiptoed past the door"); a
thoughtful stoopsitter muses on the gradual progress of successive generations ("I
ain't doing/ Nothing and I ain't in a hurry to get nowhere/ But I enjoys watching
the young folk"). The verses are often quite sophisticated, so readers reassured by
the slenderness of the volume and its big print and wide leading may be enticed
into reading more thoughtfully than they had thought they could; black-and-white
selections from Myers' famous photography collection provide their own mute
voices of people seeming to look destiny in the eye, and views of Harlem itself and
relevant memorabilia add additional texture. This offers a multitude of opportu-
nities-for reading, reading aloud, readers' theater, and even for prompting an
individual or group assignment at creating such a reflection of one's own home
place. DS
DECEMBER2004 
* 
179
NELSON, BLAKE 
Rock Star, Superstar. Viking, 2004 
228p
ISBN 0-670-05933-1 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Pete's sophomore year is highlighted by his playing bass with his beloved band,
Mad Skillz, but the seniors in the band are starting to contemplate other possibili-
ties. Pete finds another possibility of a different kind in Margaret, who starts out
as the weird girl Pete's embarrassed to be seen with and gradually becomes his
girlfriend. When Pete is initially dismissive of an opportunity with a different
band, highlighted by rich but untalented brothers with more interest in spectacle
than musicianship, Margaret encourages him to explore this new outlet. The band,
Tiny Masters of Today, begins to take off, generating a following that extends
beyond the local and bringing Pete into an unexpected limelight, which changes
his social status and his relationship with Margaret. Pete's flat, self-centered narra-
tion is believable in its limited voice and blinkered viewpoint (after he's thor-
oughly angered Margaret, he wonders, "Why did she keep getting in fights with
me?"), but that authenticity comes at the price of interest: the droning tone and
absence of insight become rather wearing. The rise of Tiny Masters to fame and
potential recording success isn't really credibly portrayed, either, and plot threads
about Pete's overly happy-go-lucky father and late mother are never really devel-
oped. There are still occasional flashes of acumen in the narrative, however, as
when Pete realizes that Margaret isn't the weird unpopular girl he's been taking for
granted as a girlfriend but actually a rather cool and admired figure, or when he
finds disappointment in his sexual dalliance with a popular girl ("It was like every-
thing a guy could want, and yet most of the time it just felt weird and kind of
pointless"). Ultimately, though, the appeal here is the classic rising-rocker story,
from musical riffs to musician's rifts, fawning groupies to feuding roadies, so this
may engage readers with their own dreams of rock stardom, who'll enjoy the vi-
carious ride. DS
PASCAL, FRANCINE 
The Ruling Class. Wiseman/Simon, 2004 
176p
ISBN 0-689-87332-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Francine Pascal serves up a new novel, and mean girls are on the menu. When
Twyla Gay moves from Lubbock to Dallas, she ends up in a school that is far more
posh than her formerly blue-collar experience. She performs reconnaissance on
her new digs by latching onto Myrna Fry, a hopeless wannabe who is the current
butt of the cruel practical jokes perpetrated by the Ruling Class, the glamorous
clique that rules the high school. When the RC turns its attention to Twyla Gay,
she, like the ever-optimistic Myrna, wants to think their overtures are genuine, but
when their pranks turn dangerous, she hovers between quitting school to avoid
their harassment and staying to exact revenge. She opts for vengeance and, finding
one ally, enacts a program of revenge that trots out all the hyperbolic cliches of
teen-movie climaxes, with one rather daring and unusual twist. Pascal is nothing
if not compulsively readable; she blows a bit of freshness into this relatively formu-
laic plot through the believably Texan lilts of her alternating narrators. Myrna is
too wincingly stupid to be entirely credible, but Pascal is clearly using her as a foil
for both Twyla Gay and any reader who may have similar mixed feelings about
how naive they are willing to pretend to be regarding the dynamics of snide in
order to achieve a place among teen royalty. As Twyla Gay says, "that kind of
dumb can't be defeated, it can only be used," and use it she does, not only to get
information, but to keep herself focused when she's tempted to give up like the
180 
* THE BULLETIN
other girls harassed by the RC. Her story will provide plenty of wish-fulfilling
satisfaction to anyone who's ever been oppressed by her school's mean girls. KC
PEARCE, PHILIPPA 
The Little Gentleman; illus. by Tom Pohrt. 
Greenwillow,
2004 
200p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-073161-3 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-073160-5 
$15.99 
R* Gr. 3-7
Mr. Franklin has broken his leg, limiting his mobility, and he convinces Bet, his
housekeeper's young granddaughter, to take over his secret investigations in a nearby
meadow. She's astonished to find that those investigations feature a talking and
sentient mole, who's been drawn by her reading aloud and who has a few choice
words about Mr. Franklin's plan to keep him in captivity. Bet develops a friend-
ship with the mole and learns his story-witchcraft made him both sentient and
immortal three hundred years ago, and he's since been forced to endure an unend-
ing existence only occasionally lightened by human friendship-while he in turn
learns about the impending changes in her future, as she contemplates a reunion
with her mother, who left when Bet was a baby. Pearce is a classic author, and this
hearkens back to British domestic fantasy of previous days in tone and flavor,
without ever seeming antiquated or out of touch. There's a cozy homemade feel to
the narrative ("He began to read slowly, clearly, and above all, loudly, in a deliber-
ately 'listen to this' kind of way"), and the fine craftsmanship of the writing shores
up the story rather than obscuring it. The story offers both time-honored appeals,
such as the notions of a talking animal and a young person's special understanding
of the situation and relationship with a creature, and fresh uses of some of these
traditional elements, such as lonely Bet's anguish at the mole's yearning to return
to a normal, and soon mortal, existence. With a style and subject that would make
an engaging chapter-by-chapter readaloud as well as a readalone, this is a finely
honed, quietly emotional, and vividly realized work from one of the field's mas-
ters. Pohrt's pencil illustrations have a soft sturdiness that mirrors the text's seri-
ous yet friendly tone. DS
PEYTON, K.M. 
Stealaway; illus. by David Wyatt. 
Cricket, 2004 
86p
ISBN 0-8126-2722-9 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Nicky is relocating to a remote Scottish castle, where her equestrian mother will be
working for a transplanted American who plans to revive a traditional border breed
of ponies. Nicky is at first dismayed by her bleak new surroundings, but she
becomes intrigued by the mysterious supernatural pony who appears in the stable
and by the area's bloody history; soon she and Jed, her mother's boss' son, realize
that they must find a way to keep that history from playing itself out to endanger
those living in the present. The plotting, especially the resolution, is fairly cursory,
and there's virtually no character development, but Peyton crams a considerable
amount of atmosphere and adventure into this small space. As one would expect
from her horse-book history (she's the author of the classic Flambards trilogy as
well as a multitude of other horsey delights), she's particularly strong on the eques-
trian aspects of the story: Rowan, the shimmering pony who's a link to the past, is
eminently desirable as a stablemate as well as an evocative supernatural device.
This will be just the spooky thing for animal lovers moving beyond Dick King-
Smith and those looking for an easy-reading ghost story with some serious men-
ace. Wyatt's hatch-heavy sketches add texture and enhance both the inviting and
spooky feels of the story. DS
DECEMBER 2004 
* 181
PORTER, PAMELA 
Sky; illus. by Mary Jane Gerber. 
Groundwood, 2004 
83p
ISBN 0-88899-563-6 
$15.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Since the death of her parents in a car accident, Georgia has lived with her grand-
parents on their farm at the edge of the Blackfeet reservation in Montana, a farm
that becomes a mass of churning water when the local dam breaks. Georgia and
her grandparents barely make it away with their lives, only to find that the dis-
placed Indians are segregated to lesser quarters in the shelter and charged for any
food and services they receive. When they move in with Georgia's uncle Lester,
Georgia finds a young paint filly, like Georgia an orphan; Georgia names the foal
Sky, and her raising and training of Sky gives her life a renewed focus as she and
her family struggle to rebuild their lives. Georgia's narration is understated but
still emotionally accessible, believable as the voice of an eleven-year-old from a
family of quiet strength and credible as she deals with past loss and current trag-
edy. The absence of period indicators (only the jacket flap and author's note make
clear that this is a story set forty years ago) may mislead readers somewhat (one
hopes that the institutionalized racism Georgia's family encounters is a thing of
the past), but the rural setting is well realized, and Georgia's gentle training of Sky
makes its own point without becoming preachy. There's enough horse story in
here for horse-story fans and enough accessible family drama for kids just looking
for a solid yet undaunting read. Soft black-and-white illustrations are somewhat
stiffly drafted, but they add to the book's welcoming look. DS
POYDAR, NANCY 
Brave Santa; written and illus. by Nancy Poydar. 
Holiday
House, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1821-9 
$16.95 
R 4-7 yrs
Jack happily throws himself into the pre-Christmas festivities-the festivities, that
is, that don't require him to interact with anyone besides his parents. The pros-
pect of sitting on Santa's lap to confide his wish list is so daunting to the shy little
boy that his father guides him through a practice session. When the moment of
truth arrives, Jack ducks behind a curtain at the department store, only to find that
Santa is hiding out, too: "I only talk to children once a year. All those boys and
girls! Oh, dear!" Jack now mentors him in the art of Santa-ing, and soon they can
both face the ordeal with confidence. Adults may wonder how this particular
Santa ever passed his employment screening, but little believers are unlikely to be
so critical. Certainly there's some intrinsic logic to shyness in the secular namesake
of Saint Nicholas, who was reputed to perform acts of largesse on the sly. Poydar's
thickly brushed paintings are as buoyant (and frequently cluttered) as the holiday
itself, and liberal dashes and splashes of icy white bring out the shine in everything
from icicles to nose tips to the lenses in Jack's horn-rimmed specs. If it took over
sixteen hundred years for St. Nick to shed his shyness, there's plenty of hope for
timid tykes. EB
PRELUTSKY, JACK 
If Not for the Cat; illus. by Ted Rand. 
Greenwillow,
2004 
[4 0p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-059678-3 
$17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-059677-5 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Veteran and versatile poet Prelutsky turns his hand here to a collection of seven-
teen elegant haiku featuring members of the animal kingdom. Within the strict
182 
* THE BULLETIN
syllabic formula of the haiku, the poet achieves not only the traditional spare speci-
ficity but also some interesting variations in tone, from the anteater's colloquial
summation ("It's a busy life") to the ants' groupthink chant ("We are we are we")
to the moth's formal rhetoric ("Why am I drawn to the flame/ Which extin-
guishes?"). Prelutsky's gift for word choices that shimmer with sense and sound
displays itself in phrases such as "wrinkled hulks/ with astonishing noses" (elephants,
of course), counterpointed deftly with deliberately paced monosyllables ("Our ears
block the sun"). Rand's mixed-media illustrations rely largely on limpid water-
color and fluid strokes of ink, with delicate nubbly effects from spatterwork and
chalk. While the draftsmanship is occasionally somewhat literal, other images are
eloquent and evocative; balanced compositions tacitly emphasize the significance
of structure throughout, while dark/light contrast creates particularly dramatic
images in the depiction of the mouse, the skunk, and even the army of ants. As
one of the least threatening forms of poetry, haiku is too often sentenced to medi-
ocrity: this polished collection will demonstrate the genre's merits to a wide range
of audiences. The final page provides both index and subject identification for the
poems. DS
RAPP, ADAM 
Under the Wolf, Under the Dog. Candlewick, 2004 
310p
ISBN 0-7636-1818-7 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 9-12
Steve currently resides in a facility for troubled youth, but most are here for drug
abuse or suicidal tendencies, and he doesn't really fit in either category. What's led
him here, as he describes in his journal, is a series of life depredations that have sent
him reeling into irrationality: his mother's long, horrible, and unsuccessful bout
with cancer, his father's concomitant catatonic depression, his brother's drug-
induced haze and subsequent suicide, and his own unintentional self-woundings
along the way, from a lacerated leg to an injury that eventually results in blindness
in one eye. There's some classic Rapp territory here: the falling by life's wayside,
the raw physicality of degradation (there are more bodily fluids here than in a
medical lab), the bizarre irrationality of human behavior under duress, and the
strange connections diverse people can make when passing through the world.
The institutional frame and its events, especially Steve's romance with another
teen there, suggest a story of recovery, but that direction is less convincingly and
effectively told than the account of Steve's deterioration, and the emotional context
for his downfall is credibly constructed. That and the car-crash fascination of
watching Steve spiral ever further down will certainly draw readers with a taste for
the harder edges of reality. DS
ROGERS, GREGORY, illus. 
The Boy, the Bear, the Baron, the Bard; illus. by Gregory
Rogers. 
Porter/Roaring Brook, 2004 
32p
ISBN 1-59643-009-5 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
This wordless picture book follows the adventures of a young boy who embarks on
a surprising adventure: after happening on an old theater, he's transported to a
stage in Elizabethan London. His appearance mid-performance disrupts the play
and angers the playwright (who seems to be William Shakespeare), so he flees the
theater and acquires a companion when he frees a caged bear; boy and bear cross
the bridge to the north of the river, where they free a prisoner, the titular baron,
from the Tower, and then return to the river, where they meet the queen on her
royal barge and engage in a frolic. Still pursued by the playwright, the boy heads
DECEMBER 2004 
* 
183
back to the now-darkened theater, where he narrowly escapes the irate Shakes-
peare by returning to his own time. Layouts range from comic-strip panels to
double-page full-bleed spreads, with illustrations (line-and-watercolor touched with
colored pencil) cinematically shifting from broad views of period London to up-
close images from varied perspectives of the comically drawn characters. The book
makes the most of its wordless conceit, with some repeating visual refrains (hands
periodically meet in closeup) and humorous details (the heads on the Tower Bridge's
spikes peer up ruefully at the ravens nesting atop them), and the London landscape
is largely true to its era (though it's a bit clean). Unfortunately, the story never
really develops any real trajectory, despite the generous helping of action-it's
mostly just characters running first hither and then yon, depending on the visual
depiction to generate drama, and that visual depiction will only achieve real im-
pact for viewers with the historical background sufficient to understand the con-
text. The excitement of a visual chase may be sufficient to keep some viewers
entertained, though, and this could certainly serve as an inventive component in
an introduction to the Elizabethan world, especially in tandem with Mannis' The
Queen's Progress (BCCB 6/03). DS
ROTrrMAN, S. L. 
Slalom. 
Viking, 2004 
247p
ISBN 0-670-05913-7 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Seventeen-year-old Sandro wastes no time enlightening readers with his version of
how he came to be a poor kid living in a wealthy Colorado ski community. His
Texan mom had spent her senior spring break here and fallen hopelessly in love
with a dark, mysterious young man of dubious Italian pedigree and wealth, who
left her with a hotel bill and soon-to-be Sandro. Disowned by her family, she and
little Sandro moved back to the resort, where she barely supports them with her
waitressing job and waits for Alessandro, Sr. to come and find her again. The
darned thing is, he actually does, and now while Sandro struggles with his own
issues concerning his slot on the high-school ski team, he also watches the re-
kindled romance between Mom and his newfound father seeming to head straight
for Heartbreak Redux. That Alessandro turns out to be a slightly buffoonish nice
guy rather than a total rotter may be good for Sandro, but it's not all that much
fun for the reader, and although Sandro's grousing and predictions of doom are
vital to maintaining tension, his crankiness is often wearying and it may leave the
audience wondering why two snow bunnies follow him in hot pursuit. Still, there's
enough racing and rivalry to rivet teen melodrama fans, and if the daytime soaps
want to take to the slopes, here's the inspiration for an Emmy-winning screenplay.
EB
SEDGWICK, MARCUS 
The Book ofDead Days. 
Lamb, 2004 
273p
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90158-5 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-73055-1 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Fifteen-year-old Boy has served the cantankerous alchemist and magician Valerian
with unquestioning devotion for years. Now, in the days between Christmas and
the New Year, he must follow his master through open graves, gruesome laborato-
ries, and desecrated crypts to find the book that will instruct Valerian how to free
himself from his pact with the devil and so save his life. Accompanied by the
outspoken and valiant Willow, a servant girl escaped from her abusive mistress,
Boy and Valerian pursue the book into the watery catacombs beneath the City-
184 
* THE BULLETIN
where the secret of the book will change the relationship between the boy and his
master forever. Played out over the course of five days, the sequences of the story
elaborate the themes of these named days: the Day of the Clever Contributor ends
with a startling revelation from Willow, while the Day of Unfailing Coincidence
brings all the pieces of the story together for the final confrontation with the devil.
Sedgwick's pensive prose smoothes and humanizes this offbeat tale, establishing
the groundwork for the conclusion with a subtlety that makes all the coincidences
seem natural extensions of the action. Boy, Willow, and even the aggressive Vale-
rian are painted with compassion, and minor characters are portrayed with a round-
ness that deepens the ambience and fleshes out the story. Fans of Stroud's
Bartimaeus Trilogy will welcome this first novel in a promising fantasy series. An
author's note provides historical explanation for the Dead Days and discusses the
genesis of the story. TC
SHUSTERMAN, NEAL 
The Schwa Was Here. Dutton, 2004 
[272p]
ISBN 0-525-47182-0 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 6-9
The Schwa is a school legend-a boy who blends into the background, who slides
from memory like water through a sieve, who slips out of sight and mind like a
magician. Such power can be a moneymaking bonanza, thinks eighth-grader
"Antsy" Bonano, and after a series of experiments to quantify the "Schwa Effect"
(e.g., the Schwa dresses up in a cat costume and stands in the boys' bathroom
singing "God Bless America" and still passes unnoticed), Antsy hires him out as a
spy and starts the betting on a series of dares. When a dare backfires, however,
Antsy and the Schwa find themselves working unpaid for the notorious Old Man
Crawley, a crotchety, wealthy, and powerful shut-in. In between walking Crawley's
dogs and entertaining his blind niece, on whom they both have a crush, Antsy and
the Schwa become friends-until the truth about the Schwa's past changes every-
thing. The Schwa's reactions to his unfortunate condition, especially when he
fears that he will one day cease to exist, are believable, and they make him a strongly
sympathetic character. Antsy is the perfect counterpoint as the smart-alecky, dis-
respectful kid who nevertheless means well, and his arsenal of penetrating insight,
mocking humor, and grudging sensitivity helps destroy the invisible barriers of
several people-his parents, Crawley, and the Schwa in particular. Shusterman
makes sure readers are aware of the schwa and its symbol in the dictionary, but he
lets them do their own work to decide what it means to the character; similarly, he
leaves the Schwa Effect unexplained, preferring instead to raise philosophical ques-
tions about the many kinds of social invisibility. This surprisingly thoughtful
story will give readers more than they bargained for; they may be surprised by the
open-ended conclusion, but it will make them laugh while it leaves them thinking.
KH
ST. GEORGE, JUDITH 
Take the Lead, George Washington; illus. by Daniel
Powers. 
Philomel, 2004 
48p
ISBN 0-399-23887-5 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-4
You're on Your Way, Teddy Roosevelt; illus. by Matt Faulkner. 
Philomel,
2004 
48p
ISBN 0-399-23888-3 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-4
"Sometimes there is a happening in our lives that changes the way we think about
DECEMBER 2004 
* 
185
ourselves and sends us along a new path," writes author St. George in her intro-
duction, and each volume in her new series on the younger days of United States
presidents focuses on just such a controlling issue in its subject's life. The titles
start by covering the biographical information one would expect for a president's
early life-Washington's British citizenship, his rocky relationship with his mother,
his admiration for his older stepbrother; Roosevelt's privileged background, his ill
health, his travels. Then for each the author isolates the formative theme or event
that she feels led her subject to the Presidency. For Washington, it was the survey-
ing mission he joined at sixteen, which tested his mettle in wicked weather on a
harsh frontier. For Roosevelt, it was his childhood battle with asthma, which he
brought under control through a self-imposed program of body building and strenu-
ous physical activity. There is obviously some danger in implying a simple con-
nection between adolescent character and fitness for elective office, but of more
immediate concern to this series is finding the right readers. St. George's prose
and the cartoonish, exaggerated caricatures (Faulkner and Powers share similar
approaches in their watercolor pictures, although Faulkner hones his work to a
more comedic edge) call for an audience of younger listeners and viewers, but the
length of text and the chapter format suggest an independent readership. 
Chil-
dren with a taste for biography and who are ready to step beyond the David Adler
picture books might want to take this series for a test drive. EB
STADLER, ALEXANDER 
Duncan Rumplemeyer's Bad Birthday; written and illus. by
Alexander Stadler. 
Wiseman/Simon, 2004 
32p
ISBN 0-689-86732-8 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Duncan Rumplemeyer has bad days-days when he just doesn't feel like sharing
or following rules. Unfortunately, one of those bad days starts very early on his
birthday, when he wakes up realizing "Presents are in this house"and sneaks out to
open them. Things go from bad to worse when Duncan disses the clown his
parents have hired for his birthday and tells his friends they can't play with his new
toys. Party over, Duncan finds himself alone in his room, where he realizes that
gel creatures and machines that make rude noises are only fun if shared. Duncan's
self-awareness of his bad days seems clothed in adult sensibilities ("Some days I
wake up feeling mischievous, and on those days it's hard for me to pay attention to
the rules"), but his behaviors and their consequences are drenched in kid logic.
The linework has a shaky, overly caffeinated edginess to it, and the watercolors
that halo the figures aptly suggest an aura of excessive energy. Stadler's generally
effective colorwork shines most in the night scenes, especially where guilty Duncan
is caught out by Mom's flashlight. Duncan's friend Flora, with her squiggly hair
and cool, no-nonsense demeanor ("Flora told me I was a selfish baby, and then she
accepted my apology") is a standout character; her appreciation and abetting of
Duncan's mischievous behavior keeps the story from becoming too much of an
adults-know-best fable. Though the message of the book is a bit overplayed in the
narration, it will certainly resonate with kids who've likely all been there and done
that. KC
STEPHENS, J. B. 
The Big Empty. 
Razorbill/Penguin, 2004 
208p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-59514-006-9 
$6.99 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
In the two years since the respiratory virus Strain 7 appeared, over half of the
human population has died. The United States is under martial law, schools are
186 
* THE BULLETIN
thinly disguised holding pens, execution awaits even petty criminals, and the Cen-
tral States (called the Big Empty) have been forcibly evacuated to conserve re-
sources. Rumors about the Big Empty are plentiful, but few are aware that a
quasi-utopian community (named Novo Mundum, for I make the worldanew) also
exists there. Seven teenagers journey, some accidentally, some deliberately, to join
this community. Their stories are told in alternating chapters, starting separately
and gradually coming together. The technique works for a few characters, but
because Stephens shifts ultimately between seven storylines, none of them has time
to develop much depth or distinctiveness, and any narrative tension built up in
one section is lost by the time readers return to it. Nonetheless, apocalyptic dis-
eases and their aftermath are always interesting fodder for social and political com-
mentary; the military dictatorship, the reorganization of the country, the appearance
of new social conventions (revealing clothes are out, and the handshake has been
replaced by a non-contact greeting) are all compelling developments that will have
no trouble generating interest. Readers who aren't quite ready for The Stand or
the social commentary found in Brave New World and 1984 (Stephens gives both
a nod) could find this first entry in a new series infectious. KH
WARD, HELEN 
Finding Christmas; illus. by Wayne Anderson. 
Dutton,
2004 
32p
ISBN 0-525-47300-9 
$16.99 
R 
5-7yrs
It's Christmas Eve and the little girl in the red coat still hasn't found the perfect
gift. Shoppers push her off the teeming sidewalk "into the damp gloom of De-
cember Lane, which was as gray and cold and empty as a winter without Christ-
mas." In that unlikely place she finds a shop packed with toys she's never
encountered and staffed with pointy-eared men filling a last-minute order. There's
only one customer, and he's just bought the place out, leaving nothing for the little
girl. The shop assistant assures her, "Not to worry. . . . Sometimes the best
presents are the ones that find us," and just outside the door a stuffed bear para-
chutes from a sky-bound sleigh, the perfect gift for the little girl's baby brother.
Happy ending not withstanding, moodiness dominates this holiday offering.
Outdoor scenes are gray, interiors are gray, toys and Christmas lights are muted
with gray, and even the little girl and the shopkeeping elves are waxy, cadaverous
yellow shadowed in gray. Anderson does offer touches of child-pleasing magic,
inviting viewers to search for clues as to the adult customer's identity: bright red
pants and fur-cuffed boots that peek out from beneath his (gray, of course) coat, a
handkerchief spilling from his pocket that will become the toy bear's parachute, a
reindeer that coyly spies on the girl from around the corner, and Santa's own
unmistakable face as he peers back into the store. Children with the patience to
follow the formal narration-and immune to the creepiness of cobwebby shelves,
dead insects, and a looming, staring, larger-than-life toy selection-may nonethe-
less welcome a truly offbeat Yule offering. EB
WHITE, RUTH 
Buttermilk Hill. Farrar, 2004 
168p
ISBN 0-374-35112-0 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
Piper's idyllic existence in the small town of Buttermilk Hill is suddenly thrown
off-kilter by her mother's decision to return to college. Her father, unable to
accept his wife's ambitions, moves out and finds the family he always wanted, with
a wife who wants nothing more than a house in the country to raise their children,
DECEMBER2004 
* 
187
a set of twin boys who will perhaps realize Piper's father's thwarted dreams of
baseball glory. Piper manages her disappointment by writing poetry and spending
time with Lindy, her best friend (and also her aunt, though they are the same age),
and with Bucky, a boy from their school who has troubles and secrets of his own.
Piper's acceptance into a boarding school for gifted writers throws her into a welter
of insecurity: this is her dream, but is it worth leaving the people she loves? Her
decision-making process etches a faint line of empathy from her to her father,
whose own choice to stay in Buttermilk Hill instead of playing pro ball seems
more understandable to her when she herself is faced with the possibility of leav-
ing. A powerful subplot involving Bucky lifts this novel above the usual tale of
divorce recovery, as do the characterizations: the three kids are surrounded by
good-hearted adults who make mistakes, have regrets, and keep on learning and
loving through hardship. White's choice of setting is felicitous: the era of the early
1970s provides just the right environment for a woman to assert her desire to have
more than a home and family, and for that decision to carry a tinge of scandal and
become the grounds for divorce. Moreover, it was a time when a random trucker's
CB conversation could plausibly intervene as a deus ex machina to galvanize a plot
thread. All in all, White knows her way around good, old-fashioned storytelling
that leaves a lump in the throat and a warm feeling in the heart. KC
ZIEFERT, HARRIET 
Schools Have Learn; illus. by Amanda Haley. 
Blue Apple,
2004 
32p
ISBN 1-59354-056-6 
$15.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
The best word games are ones that kids can pick up quickly and play along with,
and this book provides just such an opportunity. By cleverly bending rules of
predication using the verb "to have," Ziefert creates bouncy and surprising rhymes
that carry her toothy scholars through a typical day at school. Students leave home
and board buses-"Good-byes have hugs. Backpacks have lugs"-and arrive at
school where "Lines have push. Monitors have shush." They go to various classes
and to the library ("Schools have learn. Books have return"), ending their day at
an assembly ("Friends have greets. Auditoriums have seats"). The kids are comi-
cally diverse; balloon-shaped heads seem to blow up out of tiny necks and sprout
hair of eccentric shape and proportion. The layouts are full yet uncluttered, allow-
ing the wordplay to take center stage while the illustrations reinforce the playful
tone of the language. Though each character is individually distinct, a general
mood of glee and hilarity permeates the school. The goofy syntactical pattern is
infectious, so post-reading time will likely take on a life of its own: Games have
crazes. Reviewers have praises. Your turn. KC
ZINNEN, LINDA 
The Dragons ofSpratt, Ohio. 
HarperCollins, 2004 
233p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-000022-8 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-000021-X 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Seventh-grader John Salt (always called "Salt") helps his parents run a wildlife
preserve in southern Ohio. He loves the work, which allows him to be the stand-
in parent for a weyr of baby Chinese dragons, newly hatched in the hills near his
home. As the dragonlings grow, danger approaches in the form of a visit from
Salt's treacherous aunt, the renowned cosmetologist Dr. Mary Athena Salt. With
Salt's parents away on a business trip, his aunt is able to further her research into
the anti-aging qualities of dragon's blood, capturing and harvesting one of the
188 
* 
THE BULLETIN
dragonlings for blood samples. Desperate to save the rest of the weyr, Salt and his
friends Ham and Candi work to distract the doctor and hide the rapidly maturing
dragons in an abandoned strip mine. The fantastical premise, developed at a break-
neck pace, is supported with loads of faux-scientific detail that anchors this light-
weight story in the not-far-distant future. The prose is competent and the
caricaturish characters are drawn fairly well, if a bit unevenly; Candi's political
maneuverings as she attempts to hide her braininess from her shallow classmates
are presented with a sharp-edged sympathy, while Salt's unrequited crush on the
class beauty queen is trivialized at every turn. Ham is a standard if shadowy best
friend, and Dr. Salt is every inch the obsessive comic-book villain, despicable yet
magnetic. The attraction of dragon stories is as long-lived as dragons themselves;
despite the story's weaknesses, your clutch of dracophiles may snatch this lively
and engaging offering right up. TC
DECEMBER 2004 
* 189
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
JONES, PATRICK 
Connecting YoungAdults and Libraries: A How-to-Do-It Manual
for Librarians; by Patrick Jones, Michele Gorman, and Tricia Suellentrop. 
3rd
ed. 
Neal-Schuman, 2004 
438p
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55570-508-1 
$75.00
Now there's a third edition of this invaluable resource, your best one-stop shop-
ping for guidance on young adult services. DS
TRIM, MARY 
Growing and Knowing: A Selection Guide for Children's
Literature. Thomson/K. G. Saur, 2004 
280p
ISBN 3-598-11581-4 
$94.00
Self-described as a response to university students' request for course readings "to
which British students of children's literature can relate," Trim's textbook-like
volume provides a broad synopsis of the field and consideration of the literature
from a British perspective. This is not so much a guide to purchasing books as a
thoughtful overview of the myriad issues and considerations involved in to select-
ing books for children. The body of the work is divided into two parts; the first
considers the child (his or her development and the place of various genres of
literature), and the second explores the professionals who work with children's
literature and discusses such topics as selection principles, activities and program-
ming, and the role of the school and library. Recommended titles are embedded
within the content of each chapter and then cumulatively listed as "Children's
Books Cited" at the end of each chapter, along with quotes from children, discus-
sion questions, suggestions for further reading, and a bibliography. The text pro-
vides a little bit of information on a lot of topics, from child development to library
program planning, from selecting books for special groups and contexts to explor-
ing different genres of literature. Later chapters provide more in-depth consider-
ation of electronic books and the importance of selecting books representative of a
diverse culture. Despite its British emphasis, this is a helpful text for any scholars
or students seeking to understand the importance of careful book selection. HM
190 
* THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ACTIVITY BOOKS: Becker
Adoption-fiction: Alvarez
ADVENTURE: Ibbotson; Rogers;
Sedgwick
Africa: Hansen
African Americans-fiction: Johnson,
A.
African Americans-poetry: Myers
Here
Animals: Miles
Animals-fiction: Pearce
Animals-poetry: Prelutsky
Animals-stories: Ho
Antarctica: Myers Antarctica
ANTHOLOGIES: Andersen Tales
Art: Greenberg
Astronomy: Jenkins
Bears: Montgomery
BEDTIME STORIES: Juan
Behavior-stories: Stadler
BIBLE STORIES: Crossley-
Holland
BIOGRAPHIES: Greenberg; St.
George
Biology: Drake; Miles; Montgom-
ery
Birthdays-stories: Stadler
Books and reading-fiction:
Sedgwick
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Johnson, K.
Brothers-fiction: Martinez;
Morpurgo; Rapp
Building-stories: Bond
Bullies-fiction: Pascal
Career guidance: Miles
Christmas-fiction: Crossley-
Holland
Christmas-stories: Greene; Poydar;
Ward
Cliques-fiction: Pascal
CRAFT BOOKS: Becker
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Johnson, K.; Martinez
Dancers and dancing-stories:
Maybarduk
Dating-fiction: Bodett
Death and dying-fiction: Ehrenhaft;
Martinez; Rapp
Depression, the-fiction: Hale
Dinosaurs-stories: French
Disabilities-fiction: Hale
Divorce-fiction: White
Dogs-stories: Maybarduk
Dragons-fiction: Zinnen
Ecology: Miles; Montgomery
Epidemics-fiction: Stephens
Ethics and values: Alvarez;
Chotjewitz; Ehrenhaft; Lay;
Mazer; Shusterman
Explorers and exploring: Myers
Antarctica
FANTASY: Bone; Booth; de Lint;
Dunkle; Griffin; Pearce; Peyton;
Rogers; Sedgwick; Zinnen
Fathers-fiction: Nelson; Rapp
Fathers-stories: Browne
Films and filmmaking-fiction: Bone
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Andersen Little; Andersen Tales;
Browne;
Food and eating-stories: Glaser;
Juan
DECEMBER 2004 
* 191
Friends-fiction: Chotjewitz; de Lint;
Frank; Martinez
Friends-stories: Halpern; Stadler
Future-fiction: Stephens
Games-stories: Ho
GAMES: Becker
Gangs-fiction: Martinez
GHOST STORIES: de Lint; Peyton
Gifts-stories: Ward
Goblins-fiction: Dunkle
Grandfathers-stories: French
Growing up-fiction: Bodett
Hanukkah-stories: Glaser
HISTORICAL FICTION: Hale;
Ibbotson; Porter; Rogers
History, African: Hansen
History, U.S.: Brown
Horses-fiction: Peyton; Porter
HUMOR: Becker; Bodett;
Ehrenhaft; Greene; Shusterman
Identity: hooks
Illness-fiction: Stephens
Japanese Americans-fiction: Mazer
Jews-fiction: Chotjewitz
Labor movement: Brown
Language arts: Ziefert
Latinos-fiction: Alvarez; Griffin;
Martinez
Literature, children's: Andersen
Literature, world: Cadnum
Magic-fiction: Booth; Pearce;
Sedgwick
Mental illness-fiction: Rapp
Monsters-fiction: Booth
Moving-fiction: Hale
Music and musicians-fiction:
Ehrenhaft; Nelson
MYSTERIES: Johnson, K.
Mythology, classical: Cadnum
Native Americans-fiction: Porter
Nazis-fiction: Chotjewitz
Neighbors-stories: Glaser
Orphans-fiction: Ibbotson
Play-stories: Bond
POETRY: Myers Here; Prelutsky
Prejudice-fiction: Porter
Presidents: St. George
Princesses: Hansen
Racism-fiction: Porter
Readers' theater: Myers Here
Reading aloud: Andersen Little;
Bodett; Myers Here; Pearce;
Porter; Prelutsky
Reading, easy: Peyton
Reading, reluctant: Jenkins; Pascal
Relationships-fiction: Frank;
Nelson
Revenge-fiction: Pascal
RHYMING STORIES: French;
Greene; Ho; Ziefert
Royalty: Hansen
Royalty-fiction: Lay
Santa Claus-stories: Greene;
Poydar; Ward
School-fiction: Lay; Pascal;
Shusterman; White
School-poetry: Ziefert
Science: Drake; Jenkins; Miles;
Montgomery
Self-esteem: hooks
SHORT STORIES: Bodett
Shyness-stories: Poydar
Sisters-fiction: Dunkle
Snow: Drake
Snow-stories: Bond; Halpern
SPORTS STORIES: Rottman
Stepfamilies-fiction: White
Stepfathers-fiction: Johnson, A.
Storytelling: Norman
Storytime: Bond; Halpern; Ho;
Poydar
SURVIVAL STORIES: Griffin
Theater-fiction: Rogers
Time travel-fiction: Griffin
TODDLER BOOKS: Ho
Voyages and travel: Montgomery;
Myers Antarctica
Voyages and travel-fiction:
Cadnum; Dunkle; Johnson, A.;
Stephens
Voyages and travel-stories: Browne
War-fiction: Alvarez
Winter: Drake
Women's studies: Hansen
WORDLESS BOOKS: Rogers
Work: Brown
World War I-fiction: Morpurgo
World War II-fiction: Chotjewitz;
Mazer
Writers and writing-fiction: Frank;
Johnson, K.; White
192 
* THE BULLETIN
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION OF THE
BULLETIN (ISSN 0008-9036), as required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN is published eleven times a year (monthly except August); annual
subscription price is $70.00 (institutional, domestic), $77.00 (institutional, foreign), $50.00
(individual, domestic), $57.00 (individual, foreign), $15.00 (student).
The owner and publisher is the Graduate School of Library and Information Science at
the University of Illinois, a nonprofit organization. Office of publication is located at 501
E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6211. The managing editor is Deborah Stevenson,
The Bulletin, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820. There are no stockholders, bond-
holders, mortgages, or other security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status
for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preceding twelve
months: 3464.8; number for single issue nearest filing date: 3519. Average number of
copies of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during preceding twelve months:
2665.6; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 2891. Average number of copies
distributed for free per issue during preceding 12 months: 21; number for single issue
nearest to filing date: 21. Average number of total copies distributed during preceding 12
months: 2686.6; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 2912. Average number of
copies of each issue not distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after printing) during
preceding 12 months: 778.2; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 607.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Cheryl Jestis
Journals Manager
University of Illinois Press
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
September 21, 2004
FIVE
STARRED
r Ktt
TRIAL ISSUE
of an award-winning
publication!
Visit
www.TeachinqK-8.com
Click on
FREE TRIAL ISSUE
Teaching K-8 is 
filled with hundreds of unique ideas
and activities that help teachers present new challenges
to their students, learn new concepts and develop new skills.
To receive your
FREE TRIAL ISSUE visit
www.TeachingK-8.com
Teaching K-8 Magazine
40 Richards Avenue * Norwalk, CT 06854
MAGAZIm
FOjR
"cARousing 7ale of
Obstacles Overcome"
his lively and handsomely designed account of
Teddy Roosevelt's youth ... makes a rousing tale of
obstacles overcome. "-Kirkus Reviews*
"This picture-book biography constitutes a vigorous
story ... that can be read aloud to younger
listeners but alone by newly independent readers.
St. George's skill in presenting information with
a light touch keeps the pace lively."
-The 
Horn Book Magazine
':~ ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~~~. 
.
:.''*' .
' 
* 
:'
University of Illinois Press 
P
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820 
POSTA
U.S.A. 
AID
ADORESs SERVICE REQUESTED
scriber number that appears in the upper left-hand corner of the
mailing label on your print copy as both your username and pass-
word. This subscriber number will usually be a four- or five-digit
number but may also be a five-character letter/number combination.
3. After logging in for the first time, you will be required to change your
password to something other than your userame. This password is
case sensitive and should be one word only. Please store this new
password in a safe place. Your username (which is also your sub-
scriber number) will not change.
Remember, The Bulletin Online Is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books at h 
w.ls.uiu.edu/puoff/cb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
l lllll 
l 
IIllll
8-9036(200412)58:4;1-A
ICALS
uGN, IL
""
