ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
i- 'I
Ai1;
8.. r
JAf4
9fa
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
4
*\.
. ** %
u 
^r`i 
olinoi
?·p-: 
4; 
~~~
9, 
.;i
ICbb
Mao, she was secure in her place as one ot the foremost students
in a Shanghai school. Then in 1966, when Ji-Li was twelve, her
world turned upside down. Chairman Mao launched the Cultural
Revolution and suddenly everything formerly good was bad....
[With its] chronicle of humiliations, beatings, and relocations ...
Jiang's engrossing memoir transcends politics and becomes the
story of one little girl trying to survive."-Booklist
"Jiang paints a detailed picture of everyday life in Shanghai while
slowly adding the dark strokes of political poison that begin to
invade it."-Publishers Weekly
Ages 10 up.
$14.95 TR (0-06-027585-5)
* HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10022
THE BU 
L 
E T I N
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS 
January 1998
Vol.51 No. 5
A LOOK INSIDE
151 
THE BIG PICTURE
The Beauty of the Beast comp. by Jack Prelutsky and illus. by
Meilo So
152 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
167 * Commander in ChiefAbraham Lincoln and the Civil War by Albert
Marrin
173 * Lightning Time by Douglas Rees
177 * Saturday Night at the Dinosaur Stomp by Carol Diggory Shields; illus.
by Scott Nash
181 * Puppies written and illus. with photographs by William Wegman
182 * Rapunzel ad. and illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky
183 BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1997
185 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM))
CENTER STAFF
Shirley Chan
Linda Fenster
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1998 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration from The Beauty ofthe Beast by Jack Prelutsky, illustrated by Meilo So. Illustra-
tions ©1997 by Meilo So. Used by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
JANUARY 1998 
* 151
THE BIG PICTURE
The Beauty of the Beast
comp. by Jack Prelutsky; illus. by Meilo So
You can't accuse Jack Prelutsky of resting on his laurels. This wide-ranging collec-
tion differs substantially from his sturdy and chantable anthologies, his high-spir-
ited collections of his own verse, or even his focused partnerships with Peter Sfs
depicting creatures mythical and haunting. The poetry here is more musing and
thoughtful than in those other compilations, with verse forms ranging from free
verse to haiku to various metered rhymes. There's a diverse group of poets as well,
with John Gay, Ted Hughes, and Yvor Winters rubbing shoulders with Jane Yolen,
Valerie Worth, and Jonathan London (not to mention Prelutsky himself); selec-
tions are generally fresh and unanthologized, with a few more familiar entries
(William Carlos Williams' feline "Poem," for example) balancing things out.
Prelutsky's own original haikus introduce each of the five sections, which focus,
respectively, on insects, fish, reptiles, birds, and mammals (the leaving of mam-
mals to the last, which could be viewed as either humble or contrary, is refreshing).
Tone and vocabulary also vary considerably; some poems are lighthearted, some
intense, some lyrical, some plainspoken; there are some entries accessible to most
readers immediately and some where the pleasure of sound may well precede a
youthful understanding of sense. The book shines with the wonderful generosity
of excess, containing a richness that has the patience to be savored slowly over
several browsings and readings.
This collection would be at least enticing no matter what the setting, but the
visuals here enhance the words' poetry with their own. So's watercolors bring an
unusual rootedness to the medium: inky dark-edged billows of pigment contrast
with rough print-like impressions and dry-brush scratchings, stippling here bal-
ances a sweeping curve there. Some of her animal figures evince an impressionis-
tic, intensely colored speed reminiscent of early Brian Wildsmith, while other scenes
offer a lightness and fluidity resembling the art of Lisbeth Zwerger. Choosing a
picture for our cover proved to be a delightfully difficult task: was it going to be
the velvety octopus floating through the dappled aqua deeps, or perhaps the pink-
tongued tiger who dips his sketched paws in the edge of the pond as he drinks?
What about the dun mare, whose arched neck and delicate, stiffly brushed mane
are reminiscent ofJapanese watercolors? Is there any way to use the spread depict-
ing lines of geese soaring past the sunset, their wings at precisely individual angles?
Can we live without the wonderful roundness of the rabbit amid the lacy grass and
scarlet poppies? (In the end, as you doubtless gather, the answer to the last ques-
tion was no.)
152 
* THE BULLETIN
It's not just that the pictures are beautiful, it's also that the book is beautifully
designed. The roomy picture-book-sized pages creatively interweave art and text
on snowy-white backgrounds, with a multitude of critters per page. Bats swoop
across the spread in smoky gray shadows as text appears in a beam of white light.
The "Giraffes" poem descends between the lengthy necks of a pair of said animals.
Schools of iridescent fish swim through the briny verses and circle the section title.
The endpapers offer "what is this?" closeups of butterfly wings, leopard spots,
shimmering fish scales, and tightly packed feathers. Even the cover under the
book jacket is filled with the creatures of air, water, and land, offering rows of tiny
thumbnail images of the beasts within. The overall feeling is that of a world burst-
ing with poetry and creatures, the inhabitants of a literarily inclined ark streaming
out of confinement.
The result is a dramatic, playful, and eminently browsable volume that makes
the animal kingdom seem a royal one indeed. A worthy successor to William
Cole's classic anthologies, I Went to the Animal Fair (BCCB 1/59) and The Birds
and the Beasts Were There (3/64), this can be read aloud to just about any age, who
can then be left with the book to hunt down-in poetry, that is-their favorite
animal, and who will doubtless find themselves reconsidering their dismissal of
others. An index of authors and titles is included. (Imprint information appears
on p. 176.)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AARDEMA, VERNA, ad. 
Anansi Does the Impossible: An Ashanti Tale; illus. by Lisa
Desimini. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-81092-X 
$16.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Taken from Aardema's book The Sky God Stories, this tongue-in-cheek rendition
of how stories came to belong to all humanity is given a fresh new look by Lisa
Desimini's mixed-media illustrations. This retelling is both similar to and differ-
ent from Haley's A Story, A Story (BCCB 12/70)-similar in that Anansi wins the
tales from the Sky God, but different in that it is Anansi's clever wife, Aso, who
engineers the feat. Desimini's collages are unusually involving, their apparent sim-
plicity giving way to compositional richness on second and third looks, as Anansi
(shown as a black spider in a kente-cloth vest) captures a python, a fairy, and forty-
seven stinging hornets as payment for the stories. Desimini's media choices (oil
glazing, cut paper, and black velvet paper, to name a few) are visually intriguing
and give the illustrations a feeling of depth and density, from the image of the Sky
God, a dark blue mass of sky with cloudy eyebrows, to the green textured paper
foliage, to the changing colors of the backgrounds. The text is a bit old-fashioned
and stiff, but Aardema's usual sound effects are here, and they add a participatory
note that harmonizes well with the playfulness of Desimini's visuals. A glossary
and source note are included. JMD
JANUARY 1998 
* 
153
ADLER, DAVID A. 
Hiding from the Nazis; illus. by Karen Ritz. 
Holiday House,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8234-1288-1 
$15.95 
R 
6-8 yrs
This picture-book biography focuses not on a famous subject, but on an "ordi-
nary" German Jewish family driven first to the Netherlands and then into hiding
because of Nazi persecution. Four-year-old Lore Baer watches her grandfather led
away, never to be seen again, before she is sent to stay with a Christian family
throughout the war years. The account realistically acknowledges the trouble Lore
had in rejoining her parents, whom she believed had "given her away" because she
had done something wrong. There's also a carefully developed description of the
background situation so that listeners can get a clear picture of the public turmoil
affecting private individuals. The appropriately subdued watercolor art is capable;
the characters are expressive in feature, if sometimes awkwardly drawn or studied
in pose. Adler's narrative style involves short, simple sentences and a documentary
tone, complete with a concluding historical note. This would be an emotionally
intense nonfiction companion to a reading of Oppenheim's The Lily Cupboard
(BCCB 3/92). BH
ALTMAN, LINDA JACOBS 
Forever Outsiders: Jews and Historyfrom Ancient Times to
August 1935.
See review under Holocaust, p. 162.
AYER, ELEANOR H. 
A Firestorm Unleashed: January 1942 to June 1943.
.
From the Ashes: May 1945 and After; by Eleanor H. Ayer and Stephen
D. Chicoine.
.
Inferno: July 1943 to April 1945.
See review under Holocaust, p. 162.
BAUER, MARION DANE 
If You Were Born a Kitten; illus. by JoEllen McAllister
Stammen. 
Simon, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80111-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
Eleven baby animals and a human baby are the subjects of this large and strikingly
illustrated book for preschoolers. Repeating the phrase "If you were .... 
," the
author presents each baby almost immediately after its birth-for example, "If you
were born a kitten, you'd slip into the world in a silvery sac, and your mother
would lick, lick, lick you free." The problem for observant lapsitters will be that
there is no silvery sac to be seen in the illustration. This inconsistency plagues
other double-page spreads as well: the opossum babies who supposedly would "fit
into a teaspoon" are shown big enough to fit into a large soup ladle (or a small
shovel); kids won't be able to find the teeth on the snouts of the baby snakes; and
where is the "halo of long, brown hair" on the "brand new elephant"? This is not
to say that the pictures are not extremely appealing-they are. You'll want to
reach out and pet the "porcupette," and stroke that deer mouse's furry torso, be-
cause Stammen has done a fine job using the big format of the book to highlight
the touchable details of many of the animals. While the reader winces, the little
ones will enjoy the simple text, love the babies, and probably forgive the disparities
with total aplomb. PM
154 
* THE BULLETIN
BEDARD, MICHAEL 
Glass Town; illus. by Laura Fernandez and Rick
Jacobson. 
Atheneum, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-689-81185-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
As children, the Bronte siblings engaged with great seriousness in imaginative play,
creating fictional worlds and writing about them extensively. Writing from the
point of view of young Charlotte, Bedard describes life at the Haworth parsonage
and the exploration of the children's fantasy world of Glass Town. The book is
particularly good at conveying the intensity of the children's secret lives, and the
suggestion that this intensity was poured out in writing in the Brontes' childhood
and adulthood is subtle but clear. There's little here to absorb young readers un-
aware of the Brontes' adult achievements, however, and the prose's romantic phrase-
ology sometimes becomes overly purple ("She is a child of the moors, a friend of all
things wild and free. She feeds on cloud and drinks the wind"). Color paintings of
the imagined worlds have an old-fashioned dramatic power to them, but the por-
traits of the children themselves make them look inappropriately modern, attrac-
tive, and tidy; pen-and-ink sketches, looking like white-line engraving, are more
effective. This is more evocative than Ross' Charlotte Bronte and Jane Eyre, re-
viewed below, but it's not quite as well-done as Catherine Brighton's The Brontes
(BCCB 7/94). Kids hooked by the Ross biography and not yet ready for Jane Eyre,
however, may find this an intriguing next step. DS
BERGER, BARBARA HELEN 
A Lot of Otters; written and illus. by Barbara Helen
Berger. 
Philomel, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22910-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
3-6 yrs
As her pajama-clad child drifts in a box on the sea reading a bedtime story, Mother
Moon calls for her "moonlet." The little boy accidentally drops the red storybook
into the water, where it is rescued by friendly otters. Mother Moon despairs, and
"with every tear that fell from her eyes, a star fell into the sea." The otters dive for
the stars, retrieve them, and then play with them. All this "commotion of light"
gets the attention of Mother Moon who finally sees her child with the otters and
gathers him into her arms for a cozy reunion. This is an affirmation of the bond
between mother and child, but even fantasy requires a certain logic, and the con-
nection between child, otters, and mother is tenuous at best. But although this is
unapologetically sentimental and a bit confusing, taken at face value it is a sweet
bedtime story full of adorable whiskery-faced otters, a rosy-cheeked moonlet boy,
a star studded sea, and a beautiful Moon Mother illustrated in shimmery watercol-
ors and pastels. Adult readers might look in vain for more reasonable causality, but
young listeners may be perfectly happy with this moonlight sail. PM
BOND, NANCY 
The Love ofFriends. McElderry, 1997 
296p
ISBN 0-689-81365-1 
$17.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
In this sequel to A Place to Come Back To (BCCB 3/89, itself a sequel to The Best of
Enemies, 9/78), sixteen-year-old Charlotte has traveled to England to visit her be-
loved friend, Oliver. Things are not as she expected, however, since Oliver's mother
and stepfather have been called away suddenly (it becomes clear that they think
Charlotte's visit has been postponed), and Oliver needs Charlotte's support to
make a pilgrimage to Scotland in order to meet an old friend of his late great-uncle,
who cared for Oliver and to whom he never had a chance to say a proper farewell.
There's an effective amount of suspense in the story-readers will be curious first
JANUARY 1998 
* 
155
as to why Oliver is being so peculiar, then if he and Charlotte will manage to make
it to Scotland, and finally about what's going to happen when the adults find out
about it all. Charlotte's emotions are sympathetically and believably portrayed as
she tries to sort out her loyalties to her friend and her responsibility to both sets of
parents. The book depends a great deal on the previous volume, however, and the
references to and discussions of people from the earlier titles often distract from
the plot. The inclusion of a plot thread about Ariadne, a girl Charlotte and Oliver
meet along the way, involves too many coincidences, and Ariadne's character is a
bit purposively drawn. While it doesn't ultimately stand on its own, the book
treats with integrity the emotional dramas of the previous title, and those with an
interest in the characters will want to see the new developments. DS
BROOKS, MARTHA 
Bone Dance. Orchard, 1997 
179p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33021-4 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30021-8 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Alexandra (Alex) Sinclair's father was a ne'er-do-well, so she is doubly shocked
when he dies suddenly and leaves her an isolated cabin on a lake. Lonny LaFreniere
loves his stepfather but could never explain to him why he is repelled by the land
his stepfather reveres so highly, land sold to Alex's father and now belonging to
Alex. The two teenagers are drawn together by visions of the spirits of their Ameri-
can Indian ancestors, some recently dead, some long deceased. These manifesta-
tions are simply handled, with Alex recognizing the spiritual significance of the
visits and Lonny reacting with fear, seeing the visits as vengeance for a long-past,
unintentional desecration of a burial site. While Alex reconciles her psyche with
her father's deliberate absence from her life, Lonny reconciles his grief at his mother's
death, and the two young people find in each other their soulmates. Brooks tips
into foggy romanticism and a nonspecific, somewhat generic spiritualism, but it
isn't often enough to get boggy, and it is offset by the concrete, unsentimental
language that depicts the religious (and the carnal) yearnings of the story's charac-
ters. The pacing is steady if sometimes stolid, but there is a strange lack of inten-
sity as even disparate scenes maintain an odd tonal sameness. Still, Lonny and
Alex are well-realized characters, and readers will enjoy watching them find each
other. JMD
BUNTING, EVE 
Ducky; illus. by David Wisniewski. 
Clarion, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-395-75185-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Based on an actual incident which occurred in 1992, the story chronicles the ad-
ventures of Ducky, one of 29,000 plastic bathtub toys shipwrecked during a storm.
Sea snakes, sharks, bad weather, and loneliness plague Ducky until he is found by
a boy on the coast of Washington state and happily ends up in the boy's bathtub.
As anyone who has ever been a kid knows, toys are real and they have feelings, so
there can be no doubt that young listeners will relate to the pathetic plight of this
yellow plastic duck ("Our ship has disappeared. The sea is big, big, big. Oh, I am
scared!"). Bunting's text ably captures the poignant feelings of the lost and found
protagonist, even if it is only yellow plastic. Wisniewski's obvious expertise with
paper is somewhat overshadowed by a disunity in the color scheme where primary
colors unfairly compete with a more subtle palette. The composition is often er-
ratic: the icy blues and whites of one wintry spread showcase the illustrator's craft,
while other spreads seem either overdone or lackluster. Children will nevertheless
156 
* THE BULLETIN
be delighted to learn that the story is factual (a concluding author's note gives
details, which may be necessary to understand parts of the story), and everyone
should have a, uh, ducky time. PM
CARLE, ERIC Flora and Tiger: 19 Very Short Stories from My Life; written and
illus. by Eric Carle. 
Philomel, 1997 
57p
ISBN 0-399-23203-6 
$17.95 
R Gr. 3-6
Children who share Carle's fascination and respect for animal life will enjoy these
quiet, intimate stories from his life in Germany and in the United States. Each
family tale revolves around a creature-a bug, a bird, or a bear-that touched
Carle's imagination or sometimes his funnybone. Opa (Grandfather) treats his
arthritic fingers with ant and bee stings, Carle has a painful encounter with a wasp
caught in the seat of his pants, Carle and his wife watch as state troopers stand
guard over slumbering bears that have become intoxicated on fermented apples.
Each anecdote is accompanied by a paper-collage vignette or two, gracefully poised
against the tall white pages of dense, cramped type. The stories, best savored one
or two at a time rather than tackled en masse, could provide soothing readaloud
fare for youngsters at bedtime or older listeners at the close of a hectic school day.
EB
CHAN, GILLIAN 
Golden Girl and Other Stories, ISBN 1-55074-385-6; Glory Days
and Other Stories; ISBN 1-55074-381-3. 
Each book: 
Kids Can,
1997 
120p 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Each of these books by Canadian writer Chan contains five stories, and all the
stories focus on kids at Elmwood High School, so that minor characters in one
story become protagonists of another, and one narrator's enemy is another one's
friend. Entries in Golden Girl tell of an outcast's relief that there's someone lower
on the totem pole than he, a popularity queen's play for an attractive student
teacher, and the school bully's community service time. Glory Days offers a look
at a girl's longed-for date gone viciously wrong, a cruel prank that makes a kind
boy the butt of school-dance humiliation, and a boy's determination that his be-
loved younger brother will survive their father's unlived sports dreams better than
he did. While the writing rarely lifts above the ordinary and the characterizations
hold little surprise, the gradual interweaving of the cast members' stories is highly
effective. The result is a convincing demonstration of the fact that every indi-
vidual, whether nerd or bully or hanger-on or hipster, has an inner life of highs and
lows, certainties and uncertainties that may have little to do with the appearance
he or she presents to others, and it may encourage readers to consider their own
classmates more thoughtfully. As in the Naked City, there are a million stories in
every high school; teens will appreciate this sampling of Elmwood's. DS
COLIER, JAMES LINCOLN Jazz: An American Saga. Holt, 1997 
104p 
illus.
with photographs
ISBN 0-8050-4121-4 
$16.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Here's a breezy, accessible crash course in the evolution of American jazz, from its
origins in the melding of African and European traditions through its permuta-
tions of Dixieland, swing, bop, avant garde, and jazz-rock fusion. Although per-
sonal idiosyncrasies of some of the jazz greats pop up in discussion, the focus is on
style and technique, with enough music theory to serve as a listening guide for
JANUARY 1998 
* 
157
serious young enthusiasts. A thoughtfully selected array of photographs gives readers
a sense of the players' venues, from music halls to clubs to recording studios. Collier
stresses the importance of understanding and appreciating more than one favorite
style of jazz, and it is therefore a little surprising that he ends his chronological tour
with jazz-rock fusion and "neo-bop," never examining or assessing contemporary
Latino influences or experiments with world music. Nonetheless, Collier's pas-
sion for his subject (to say nothing of his excellent discography of "critically im-
portant recordings") should launch listeners on their own roads of discovery. EB
COLLINGTON, PETER 
A Small Miracle; illus. by Peter Collington. 
Knopf,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-679-88725-3 
$18.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
In this wordless book, a woman living in a shabby caravan trudges into the winter
snow to earn some money; after pawning her beloved accordion, she loses her
payment to a passing thief. Returning home in despair, she encounters the same
thief plundering the church; though he escapes, she wrests the charity box back
from his grasp and restores it along with the Nativity scene, whose figures had
been flung all over the church. Those Nativity figures-Mary, Joseph, the three
wise men, and a representative shepherd-come to life and rescue the woman,
who has collapsed in the snow, and they fill her caravan with holiday provisions,
including the reclaimed accordion. It's less complicated to watch in pictures than
it is to describe in words: Collington is a master of the wordless form, and his
narrative, which flows from panel to panel with clarity and rhythm, is effective and
understandable. The panel sizes are fluid, changing to alter the cadence of the
story as appropriate. The human figures are pale and indistinct, but the Nativity
denizens are richly garbed and otherworldly, and the book isn't above giving them
some humorous moments, as when the small figures (not much over knee-high)
struggle to push a shopping cart through the supermarket aisle. The absence of
text keeps the story from becoming overly sentimental, and the fantasy is similar
enough to toys coming alive that the young audience will appreciate the idea whether
they catch the theological overtones or not. DS
COWLEY, 
JOY 
Singing Down 
the 
Rain; illus. 
by 
Jan 
Spivey
Gilchrist. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027603-7 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027602-9 
$14.95 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
The air was so thick, you had to "cut it up to breathe it," and the heat had lasted so
long, "even polite conversation was drying up." As the adults of the town gather
on the porch of the grocery store to fan themselves and complain, little Brianna
and her friends witness the arrival of a small, wild-haired woman with dangling
parrot earrings and a "smile so big, it used up most of her face." The woman
promises to bring the rain down by leading the community in song, but the skep-
tical adults turn away in embarrassment. The children, affected more by the mu-
sic itself than by faith in its efficacy, sing along, and as their efforts bring results,
the adults wholeheartedly join in while the rainmaker quietly slips away. Gilchrist's
figures are unevenly rendered and awkwardly drafted, the faces poorly articulated
and unexpressive. The textual crescendo of "Oo-sha-la! Bo-ba-lo-lee's," and the
resultant welcome rains, however, are almost palpable, and storytime audiences
may be happy to echo the refrain, "Sweet wonder!" EB
158 
* THE BULLETIN
DOLPHIN, LAURIE 
Our Journey from Tibet: Based on a True Story; illus. with
photographs by Nancy Jo Johnson. 
Dutton, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-525-45577-9 
$15.99 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Sonam tells the story of her Tibetan childhood and her parents' eventual decision
to send their children to India, away from Chinese oppression. The long and
difficult journey takes them by truck to the mountain pass, through the Himalayas
on foot, and then through Nepal to India by bus. It's a compelling story, but
many aspects of it will confuse young readers. How did Sonam's brother get to
India to become a monk if leaving Tibet is illegal? Just how long is the journey to
India? What is Sonam doing now, and is she in contact with her family back in
Tibet? How much of the story is actually true? There are plenty of atmospheric
(though sometimes fuzzy) photographs of subjects ranging from the Himalayas to
the milking of a yak, but the acting out of such a treacherous journey seems odd
(and Sonam looks awfully tidy on her arrival in Nepal). Nonetheless, Tibet is
increasingly prominent in the news these days, and this child's-eye-view of the
situation may enlighten young readers. Afterwords, one from the Dalai Lama,
further explain the situation. DS
DORRIS, MICHAEL 
The Window. 
Hyperion, 1997 
[112p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2240-6 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0301-0 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 4-8
Rayona, the heroine of Dorris' adult novels Yellow Raft in Blue Water and Cloud
Chamber, is eleven years old in this prequel. In clean, elegant prose, Dorris tells
the story of a young girl loved by her alcoholic mother and ignored by her charm-
ing but irresponsible father. When her mother is sent into court-ordered rehab,
Rayona's father, Elgin, is forced to step in, and two foster homes later he takes
Rayona to stay with her paternal grandmother, great-grandmother, and aunt in
Kentucky. Rayona, who knew she was of mixed parentage (her mother is Ameri-
can Indian, her father is African American) is nonplussed by the discovery that this
side of her father's family is white. She is taken to the bosom of these women, who
surround her with affection and emotional support the like of which she has never
really experienced. That there are family secrets she doesn't know becomes clear;
that her mother doesn't know Elgin's family is mixed is also clear; that the richness
of her family's diversity will make Rayona strong is only hinted at in this brief
volume. Rayona is beautifully realized, her emotional complexity combining with
her self-awareness and generosity of heart to make her a three-dimensional charac-
ter that reaches out from the page. Characterizations are succinct and finely tuned,
each player given an individuality that has the ring of reality. Knowledge of Dorris'
two adult titles featuring Rayona are necessary for an understanding of this novel;
it stands quite firmly on its own. JMD
EHLERT, LOIS 
Hands; written and illus. by Lois Ehlert. 
Harcourt, 1997 
24p
ISBN 0-15-201506-X 
$13.00 
R 4-7 yrs
To call this nicely designed title a lift-the-flap book seems a misnomer, but that's
what it is-sort of. The heavy stock cover pages are in the shape of a work glove,
and Ehlert's simple text discusses work, the much-loved work of a mother and
father as they sew, build, and garden through the narrator's childhood ("My father
JANUARY 1998 
* 
159
always works with his hands. He builds things in his workshop.... 
My mother
makes things, too. She has lots of colorful cloth, ribbons, lace, buttons, and thread").
The mixed-media collages show the crafts juxtaposed with their relevant tools: a
birdhouse is followed by photos of a ruler, pencil, hammer, etc.; a bright pincush-
ion and candy-colored buttons are followed by a pattern, scissors, and fabric scraps.
The text comes to an emotional high point when the narrator is given a work table
and joyfully says, "Now I have my own spot. ... There are so many things I want
to make.... I want to be an artist. Then I'll join hands with my mom and dad."
This is a richly layered narrative with literally layered illustrations that simply and
succinctly link the child to the parents and to the future. The glossy pages and
saturated colors are warm and appealing, and the encouraging paper-engineering
element gently leads the reader along to the satisfying conclusion. JMD
EVANS, DILYS, comp. 
Weird Pet Poems; illus. by Jacqueline Rogers. 
Simon,
1997 
37p
ISBN 0-689-80734-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The compiler's own poem sets the stage: it's our protagonist's eighth birthday,
and he's allowed to choose himself a pet. As spreads offer up a dozen verses from
poets such as Karla Kuskin ("The Porcupine"), Lee Bennett Hopkins ("I Can Get
an Ant"), and Theodore Roethke ("The Bat"), the boy examines and contemplates
the menagerie of poetically described possibilities one by one, until he finally ends
up with a puppy. It's an intriguing idea, but it's a bit contrived, and youngsters
may find the imaginary animals (the Doze) and extinct critters (the pterodactyl)
odd companions for the more mundane dog and turtle. Rogers has a nice touch
with her animals and their realistic and fanciful settings (the yak in a barbershop,
the porcupine throwing quill darts); the people are less memorable, with our hero
inclined towards long-lashed and bland prettiness. This is still a pleasant gallery of
animal poems with a useful twist, and it might prompt some poetical pet reflec-
tions from its audience. DS
GALLO, DONALD R., ed. 
No Easy Answers: Short Stories about Teenagers Making
Tough Choices. 
Delacorte, 1997 
323p
ISBN 0-385-32290-9 
$16.95 
Ad 
Gr. 8-12
Sixteen original tales by prominent young adult authors revolve around characters
who are "called upon to make moral choices, to face the consequences of their
actions, to consider what it means to 'do the right thing.'" Several are achingly
poignant-Walter Dean Myers' "The Stranger," a near-despairing tale of a drug
addict; Jack Gantos's darkly comedic and cruel "X-15s," in which prospective gang
members must each procure a dead pet; Rita Garcia-Williams's "Wishing It Away,"
in which a pregnant teen's family and community studiously ignore or deny her
condition, only to turn against her when she abandons her newborn in a dump-
ster. Unfortunately, tamer entries set the tone-Jean Davies Okimoto's facile
yarn about homework cheating, "Eva and the Mayor"; Lensey Namioka's wildly
mismatched historical fiction/ghost story "Little Li and the Old Soldier"; and Will
Weaver's "The Photograph," which finds the lesbian victim of a nasty schoolboy
prank all too graciously letting the guilty protagonist off the ethical hook. Mazer's
anthology Twelve Shots (BCCB 10/97), though narrowly focused on the issue of
gun possession, offers a more consistent but equally challenging menu of moral
dilemmas that demand disquieting choices. EB
160 
* 
THE BULLETIN
GLASS, ANDREW 
A Right Fine Life: Kit Carson on the Santa Fe Trail; written and
illus. by Andrew Glass. 
Holiday House, 1997 
[44p]
ISBN 0-8234-1326-8 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-5
Part biography and part tall tale, the formula Glass applied so successfully to Bill
Cody in The Sweetwater Run (BCCB 12/96) works equally well in this account of
Kit Carson's early life and first journey on the Santa Fe Trail. From prairie fires
and buffalo stampedes to flea infestations and emergency amputations, Kit recalls
his adventures with homespun thunder and dash ("Huge, shaggy, horned buffalo
broke wild-eyed through the thick dust cloud. Their hooves' poundin' made an
awful uproar. Spooked horses fell and riders jumped to save themselves"). Gnarly
men and horses, frenetically tossed across vibrant, intricately textured backgrounds,
keep pace with the fast-moving text. A pair of meaty concluding notes fill in
background on the trail and Carson, and endpaper maps allow readers to retrace
the route. EB
GOURLEY, CATHERINE 
Wheels of Time: A Biography ofHenry Ford. Millbrook,
1997 
48p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-0214-X 
$20.90 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
Time serves both as a mile marker and a metaphor in this impressionistic biogra-
phy of the motor maven, who set his inventive course by tinkering with watches,
altered time management in his factory, and capped his career by attempting to
recapture in his idyllic Greenfield Village a preindustrial past he had helped to
dismantle. Brevity may entice readers, but a choppy text that jolts awkwardly
from one chapter topic to the next does little more than sketch a few highlights of
Ford's career. Although worker dissatisfaction with the boredom of the assembly
line is addressed, such notable but unflattering traits as Ford's anti-Semitism and
virulent anti-unionism are ignored. Profusely illustrated with period photos, this
may provide a visual supplement to wordier accounts of Ford's life. EB
GRAY, KEITH 
Creepers. Putnam, 1997 
134p
ISBN 0-399-23186-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Our nameless narrator is, like most of his friends, a Creeper: whenever possible,
he spends his nights dashing through rows of backyards evading detection and
pursuit in a modern equivalent of counting coup, where youthful bravery, status,
and skill are all related to one's Creeping success. Our protagonist makes a grave
error, however, which results in the worst shame of all-the arrest of his Creeping
Buddie, Jamie. The boy's attempts to get Jamie out of trouble (by getting in good
with the complainant's daughter, a cool sixteen-year-old named Ruth) are compli-
cated when Jamie's house burns, killing Jamie before proper amends can be made-
but then Jamie appears in his friend's room, apparently alive and well and
determined to go out Creeping. This sounds sci-fi-ish but it's not: the Creeping
obsession is depicted in a realistic context as the longtime secret passion of teenag-
ers (the narrator's older brother, Carl, was a renowned Creeper in his era), and the
fixation is believably portrayed. Though the setup, with all its jargon in capital
letters and its sacred rules, seems a little mannered, the details of vaulting over
fences, evading dogs, and ducking angry homeowners are genuinely exciting. The
reappearance of Jamie (apparently not a ghost so much as a projection of the
narrator's wishful thinking) is less well-handled, but it's peripheral to the main
JANUARY 1998 
* 161
appeal of the book-kids earning honor by engaging in daring adventures under
cover of dark. DS
GREENE, RHONDA GOWLER 
When a Line Bends. .. A Shape Begins; illus. by James
Kaczman. 
Houghton, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-395-78606-1 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-5 yrs
Get those sharp eyes and pointer fingers ready for this simple yet engaging intro-
duction to basic shapes. It begins by considering straight lines ("a tall pole for
fishing, a leash and a trail,/ a kite string, a shoelace, a whisker, a tail"), and then
swerves and bends those lines into ten familiar shapes, from the humble circle and
square to the decorative crescent, octagon, and heart. Each bright and busy double
page spread features a rhyme chock full of shape references and an imaginative line
and watercolor scene in which each example is boldly apparent or sometimes art-
fully concealed. When the text says, "A circle's a button, a sock hole to mend, a
shiny blue marble, a penny to spend," the youngest viewers should have no trouble
finding the button, marble, and penny cupped in an outstretched hand, but they'll
have to look more carefully to spy the tiny hole in the sock of the stilt-legged man
strolling across town with his yo-yo. And for truly driven overachievers, some
shapes unidentified in the text are sprinkled throughout the picture (e.g., a dia-
mond carried off by a masked robber, four diamonds formed by the window cur-
tains). Happy hunting. EB
GRIMES, NIKKI 
It's Raining Laughter; illus. with photographs by Myles C.
Pinkney. 
Dial, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-2004-1 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-2003-3 
$14.99 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Poems here discuss topics ranging from names ("We got Zulu, Juji, Mojo
names ... Leopard, Lion-spirit names"-"Where'd You Get Them Names?") to
libraries ("I flip the pages of a book and slip inside"-"At the Library") to body
shapes ("Sideways Beauty" and "Wallet Size"). The emphasis is on the positive
and the joyful, and the photographs-the African-American cast apparently con-
sists largely of Pinkney's own children-reflect this emphasis with their vigor and
expressive energy (though shadows and focus problems occasionally detract from
the images). The book's upbeat tone sometimes slips into the saccharine, and the
colored squares of the background layout don't show the pictures to their best
advantage, but overall the themes of reverence, joyfulness, and self-esteem will
make this a lively family or Sunday School readaloud. DS
HAAS, DAN 
You Can Call Me Worm. 
Houghton, 1997 
167p
ISBN 0-395-85783-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Will Glasser, a.k.a Worm, has just been informed by some snide
eighth graders that his father, separated from his mother, has spent the last two
days up on the roof of his house-not fixing it, just sitting there. Worm and his
older brother Todd set out on a walking odyssey to find their way to their father
and get him down. The brothers camp, hide, and run their way across suburban
housing developments; Todd and Worm have a falling out over the nature of their
father's illness, and Worm goes on alone. Haas portrays a hero's search for self in
the wilds of the suburbs as Worm seeks his father and an explanation for the up-
162 
* 
THE BULLETIN
heaval in his life. The two boys' running gives the narrative a pell-mell feeling,
which is intensified by Worm's introspective, solitary dialogue as he explains him-
self to himself. The conclusion doesn't go for the easy answer, but neither does it
leap for the sensational-Worm finds his father on the roof, discovers a few things
he's not certain he wants to know, and engages in the mental gymnastics necessary
to adjust to his new knowledge. When his father asks, "Do you want me to start
calling you Will?" Worm replies, "'No,'... just like I'd had a long time to think
about it. But I didn't need to think about it. It was Worm who'd trooped through
the rain, and snared squirrels, and found his way here, and Worm who could
maybe start thinking, one of these days, real late at night if he couldn't sleep, about
his father having been in a mental hospital and his mother having a boyfriend. It
was Worm who'd come down off the roof, at least." And it's Worm whom readers
will take to their hearts and remember. JMD
HOLOCAUST series
ALTMAN, LINDA JACOBS 
Forever Outsiders: Jews and History from Ancient Times to
August 1935. ISBN 1-56711-200-5
AYER, ELEANOR H. 
A Firestorm Unleashed: January 1942 to June 1943. 
ISBN
1-56711-204-8
.
From theAshes: May 1945 andAfter; by Eleanor H. Ayer and Stephen D.
Chicoine. 
ISBN 1-56711-206-4
.Inferno: July 1943 to April 1945. 
ISBN 1-56711-205-6
SHERROW, VICTORIA 
Smoke to Flame: September 1935 to December 1938. 
ISBN
1-56711-201-3
.
The Blaze Engulf: January 1939 to December 1941. 
ISBN 1-56711-
202-1
SHULMAN, WILLIAM L., comp. 
Resource Guide: A Comprehensive Listing ofMedia
for Further Study. 
ISBN 1-56711-208-8.
,comp. 
Voices and Vision: A Collection ofPrimary Sources. ISBN 1-56711-
207-2
Each book: Blackbirch, 1997 
[80p] 
(Holocaust) 
$18.95 
illus. with pho-
tographs
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 5-9
This simply written, liberally illustrated history of the Holocaust reaches back to
earlier periods of anti-Semitic persecution, discusses the step-by-step acceleration
of legalized Nazi violence before and during World War II, reveals the extent of
methodical extermination of Jews in Germany and German-occupied territories,
and registers the aftershock of international discovery with the liberation of the
concentration camps and testimony of survivors. Although Milton Meltzer, Bar-
bara Rogasky, and Miriam Chaikin-among others-have given us better mono-
graphs blending background information with primary source selections, this series
has the advantage of breaking down a factual monolith into manageable segments.
It could, in fact, serve as fare for high-school reluctant readers as well as elementary
and junior-high students. The historical photographs, maps, and period illustra-
tions break up the text without distracting from it, and captioned sections offer
organizational guideposts. The repetition of the same introduction in all of the
JANUARY 1998 
* 
163
volumes lends an unfortunate uniformity, and the text sometimes assumes the
detached tone of a newscast in describing what were, after all, horrific individual
tragedies, as well as nations involved in catastrophic conflict. Perhaps this imper-
sonality lends the distance necessary for young people to incorporate the incom-
prehensible, and one book (Voices and Visions) does systematically interweave
eyewitnesses' accounts with an overview of the whole period. BH
HUYNH, NHUONG QUANG 
Water Buffalo Days: Growing Up in Vietnam; illus. by
Jean and Mou-sien Tseng. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
117p
ISBN 0-06-024957-9 
$13.95 
R Gr. 3-6
A brief introduction explains, "I always planned to return to my hamlet to live the
rest of my life there. But war disrupted my dreams. The land I love was lost to me
forever. These are my memories." In sixteen chapters, the author shares his recol-
lections of a prewar world where water buffaloes are an integral part of village life.
When Water Jug, the family water buffalo, dies of old age, the search begins for a
replacement. This is no small endeavor, and the importance of finding and train-
ing the perfect bull is engagingly related. In fact the whole book reverberates with
cultural vitality and affection as the villagers' interaction is set against the life story
of Tank, the newly acquired family buffalo, who proves his worth by protecting
the valuable herds from wild pigs and the village from a marauding tiger. There is
a refreshing, wholesome quality that permeates this successful narrative, which
opens a new window on the tangible joys of affection between man and beast, in
this case a lumbering water buffalo instead of the family poodle. Inevitably the
war does catch up to the village and a stray bullet kills Tank, ending this story and
beginning another. PM
KIPLING, RUDYARD 
Rikki-Tikki-Tavi; ad. and illus. by Jerry Pinkney. 
Morrow,
1997 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14321-0 $15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14320-2 
$16.00 
Ad 
7-10 yrs
"This is the story of the great war that Rikki-tikki-tavi fought, all by himself, through
the English family's house in India," but it's a slightly dampened version of the
mongoose's victory over the encroaching snakes. Pinkney has wisely left the bulk
of Kipling's magnificent text intact, but his abridgments do rob the text of some
style and atmosphere in the interest of streamlining. The art relies on cream back-
grounds and dusty earth colors touched with garden green; Pinkney effectively
varies perspective from spread to spread, sometimes looking across at Rikki and
the rest and sometimes employing a more elevated human perspective. Unfortu-
nately the draftsmanship gets quite awkward-the people in particular are stilted
and stiff, and even Rikki occasionally appears more stuffed than live. Nag and
Nagaina, though, are sinuous and vivid snaky presences, and the textual world of
animal defense and justice is effectively visually realized. While not quite up to the
standard of Kipling, this might entice a child into the jungle. DS
LEVINSON, NANCY SMILER 
She's Been Working on the Railroad. Lodestar,
1997 
104p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-67545-0 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In a half-dozen chapters, Levinson sketches the range of jobs women have held
with railroads and supporting industries since the mid-nineteenth century--from
164 
* THE BULLETIN
switchers to engineers, from car cleaners to interior designers, from Harvey girls to
on-board nurses. Some of the episodes are indeed exciting, such as the death of a
telegraph worker during an electrical storm, and some of the women's achieve-
ments are impressive. Even the relentlessly celebratory tone cannot inject much
life, however, into the account of nurses trying to calm fussy babies on a delayed
run, or a Vice President for Public Relations who "may be flying across the coun-
try for a meeting" or "purchasing a railroad painting, photograph, or collectible
artifact like a valuable old lantern." Historic struggles for entry into unions and
enforcement of Equal Employment Opportunity legislation are adequately cov-
ered though, and readers are left with no doubt that, although women have risen
impressively through the ranks, "prejudice, stereotyping, and resistance still exist."
Period photos, a glossary, and an index are included. EB
LEVY, ELIZABETH 
My Life As a Fifth-Grade Comedian. HarperCollins,
1997 
184 p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026602-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Fifth-grader Bobby Garrick is the class clown, and his clowning is about to get him
kicked out of school and into the "alternative" program for students with serious
behavior disorders. Bobby is a good kid having a bad time: his father is sarcastic,
his older brother has been thrown out of the house, his mother is passive, and his
principal doesn't think there's any hope for him. Bobby's grandmother, however,
loves Bobby's jokes, and so does his new fifth-grade teacher, Mr. Matous-at least
within reason. Mr. Matous convinces Principal Deal to let Bobby make up his
undone classwork by working on a school-wide project: a laugh-off, the students
against the teachers, ending with a final match between the funniest teacher and
the funniest kid. Bobby is a sympathetic, strongly articulated character, and his
friendship with the almost perfect Janeen is charmingly drawn. The family dy-
namic depicted by Levy hits some realistically sour notes, but Bobby finally stands
up to his scathingly sarcastic father and engineers an almost-reconciliation be-
tween his father and older brother. Unsurprisingly, Bobby and Mr. Matous are
the finalists in the laugh-off, and, unsurprisingly, Bobby wins-not because he's
funny, but because that's how the story is supposed to end. Levy unaccountably
loses her humor-momentum right when the plot needs it most, at the maudlin,
tie-up-all-the-loose-ends, have-all-the-kids-applaud-when-Bobby-forgives-Dad
conclusion. Up until that moment, though, Bobby is a character worth rooting
for-and most of the time, his jokes are even funny. JMD
LITTLE, JEAN 
The Belonging Place. Viking, 1997 
124 p
ISBN 0-670-87593-7 
$13.99 
R 
Gr. 4-6
In the tragic opening of this short novel, the tiny Elspet Mary loses her mother:
"She was knocked down by a runaway horse. Her head struck a paving stone. She
was dead when they took her up." Her Mam's untimely death, followed by her
seafaring father's demise shortly after he leaves her with her Aunt Ailsa and Uncle
Will Gordon, creates the emotional background for this first-person narration set
in Scotland and Canada in the 1830s. The young child's voice resonates with an
immediacy and integrity as she tells her story. We follow her from Aberdeen to
her new home in Glen Buchan, where she struggles to belong with the help of a
reassuringly normal family and the feisty Granny Ross. Her child view filters
events with a gentle poignancy as Elspet comes to terms with her origins and her
JANUARY 1998 
* 
165
new place ("'She's not like us,' Grandmother Gordon had said. Mother almost
erased those words by telling me, over and over, that I was not only like them; I
was theirs"). While the plot is often driven by the simple dynamics of a happy,
bustling, and sometimes stressful family life, there are just enough exciting epi-
sodes to pick up the pace: the death of Elspet's mother the Gordons' harrowing
journey to their new homestead in Canada; the fate of Jamie, a homely orphan
baby. Young readers will appreciate this quiet but strong little page-turner with a
protagonist learning to belong against the backdrop of one family's abounding
love, simple faith, and pioneering spirit. PM
LITTLESUGAR, AMY Jonkonnu: A Story from the Sketchbook of Winslow Homer;
illus. by Ian Schoenherr. 
Philomel, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22831-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
The War Between the States has been over for a decade, but Cilla's white Virginia
neighbors have certainly not opened their hearts to Northerners or to the black
residents of their own community. When artist Winslow Homer stays at the hotel
owned by Cilla's family, guests buzz with gossip about the unwelcome Yankee
who "only draws the people who live down the red clay road. He says they're the
prettiest." Cilia secretly tails him on his sketching expeditions, and she begins to
see these other neighbors through his eyes as he prepares studies for his controver-
sial painting Dressingfor the Carnival. Littlesugar bases her fictionalization on an
actual incident in Homer's career, and her account closely follows his legendary
staring match with a town bigot. Schoenherr's stiffly composed paintings convey
a cool formality and occasional woodenness which, however thematically appro-
priate to this tale of an outsider, are emotionally distancing. Still, this portrait of
the freedmen's Jonkonnu celebration is a refreshing alternative to more mundane
flags-and-fireworks offerings for the Fourth ofJuly. EB
LOWRY, Lois 
Stay!: Keeper's Story; illus. by True Kelley. 
Lorraine/Houghton,
1997 
128p
ISBN 0-395-87048-8 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The canine narrator is a mongrel with class, a poetically inclined, refined animal of
good upbringing if not bloodlines. He leaves the relative safety of his first home
(an alley outside a French restaurant) for the perils of the wide world in search of a
human friend, and he finds one in the guise ofJack, a homeless alcoholic who lives
under a bridge and is happy to use Lucky, as he calls the dog, to attract loose
change from passersby. After Jack dies of unexplained causes, Lucky finds himself
a new friend, a photographer who uses Pal's (Lucky's new name) natural talent for
sneering on command to make himself rich. Pal runs away from this unsatisfac-
tory arrangement and finds a home with a girl and her mother, who name him
Keeper. He is ecstatically happy; then he sees another dog who looks remarkably
like him on TV, recognizes it as his long-lost sister, and engineers a tearful re-
union. Keeper speaks directly to the reader, k la Victorian heroes and heroines,
and he sees himself in a heroic and literary light. The narration is tonally uneven,
however, the style is mannered rather than involving, and Keeper's periodic essays
into poetry distract from the story. That's too bad, because the lost-dog plot has a
lot of kid appeal, and Lowry can be very amusing about aspects of canine life.
Black-and-white illustrations are generously scattered throughout, and they lend
an air of rakishness to the proceedings undelivered by the actual text. JMD
166 
* THE BULLETIN
LYONS, MARY E. 
The Poison Place. Atheneum, 1997 
16 5p
ISBN 0-689-81146-2 
$16.00 
Ad Gr. 6-9
It is 1827, and Moses Williams, freed slave, is telling his life story to his almost
twelve-year-old daughter, Maggie. His life story is inextricably bound with that of
his former master, Charles Willson Peale, founder of Peale's Museum in post-
Revolutionary War Philadelphia, and Peale's son, Raphaelle. Moses' life story
reveals more about Charles Peale than it does about Moses: how Peale was forever
striving to make more money, how he started and maintained the museum, and
how he consistently rationalized his feelings about slavery. Moses feels in his heart
that Peale was also responsible for the terrible death of Raphaelle, who was appar-
ently poisoned from the arsenic used to preserve the specimens for museum exhib-
its. The volume is divided into museum locations, the first landing, the long hall,
the main stairway, etc., presumably to give some sense of the all-important envi-
ronment in which the characters live. Lyons incorporates a great deal of historical
fact into this fictionalized biography but very little heart. So little is revealed about
the narrator that any emotional involvement on the part of the reader is hard to
come by. Moses as narrator has a solid if prosaic voice; he states repeatedly that he
hated being a slave and he hated slavery, but this is told rather than shown, and his
personality is sadly undeveloped. The language is stilted and formal, and the con-
stant asides to the one-dimensional literary device of the listening daughter are
intrusive. Notes are included. JMD
MCDONOUGH, YONA ZELDIS 
Anne Frank; illus. by Malcah Zeldis. 
Holt,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-4924-X 
$16.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
While there have been other picture book introductions to Anne Frank (including
Adler's Picture Book ofAnne Frank, BCCB 3/93), this one is distinctive for its
clarity and naive art. Starting with some background facts that resemble the ac-
count of Lore Baer (see review under Adler, above), McDonough describes the all-
too-familiar progression of Nazi occupation, the Franks' escape into hiding, the
famous diary named Kitty, the raid on the secret annex, and Anne's death in Bergen-
Belsen. The low-key narrative is set in heavy typeface on cream-colored paper
within thick-framed blocks, all the better to balance pictures that are bold with
red, green, yellow, and blue contrasts. It could be argued that the colors are too
cheerful or, conversely, that they represent the intensity of unnaturally magnified
experiences. In either case, there is a fingerpaint effect here, and the compositions
project childlike figures and flat perspectives that reinforce the reality of such events
actually happening to a child. With the Holocaust introduced at early stages in
the curriculum these days, this will be helpful in setting the stage for children's
inevitable meeting with an international icon. BH
McGOUGH, ROGER 
UntillMet Dudley: How Everyday Things Really Work; illus.
by Chris Riddell. 
Walker, 1997 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8624-3 
$16.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8623-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
The Dudley of the title is a bespectacled hound, who has enlightened a little girl, a
la Mr. Peabody and Sherman, about the workings of various aspects of daily life:
the toaster, the dishwasher, the vacuum cleaner, and garbage trucks. Each item
receives two spreads-the first describes the young narrator's previous understanding
JANUARY 1998 
* 
167
of these machines' functioning ("When you put the slices of bread into a toaster
and push the handle down, an alarm goes off underground, telling the toast elves
to spring into action"), the second provides Dudley's accurate, step-by-step expla-
nation, complete with labeled diagram. The explanations are clear and may well
be revelatory to many readers, young and old, who aren't up for more scientific
explanations or even David Macaulay's The Way Things Work (BCCB 1/89). The
pre-Dudley explanations are cute to the point of being condescending, however,
and the Dudley idea isn't really worked into the book very well; the end, which
simply lists other Dudley-explained processes without sharing further knowledge,
finishes the book weakly. The art occasionally overcomplicates itself, but the pro-
cesses are spaciously depicted. With all the nonfiction for the younger grades, very
little of it explores the mystery of everyday objects; this is an appealing if flawed
exception. DS
MAGUIRE, GREGORY 
Six Haunted Hairdos; illus. by Elaine Clayton. 
Clarion,
1997 
151p
ISBN 0-395-78626-6 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 5-7
Readers of Six Spiders Spinning (BCCB 10/94) will be familiar with the rivalry
between the all-girl Tattletales club, led by imperious Thekla Mustard, and the
boys' group the Copycats, led by Sammy Grubb. Here they're clashing over the
matter of ghosts: when the boys staunchly insist on the existence of specters, the
girls decide to dress up as spirits and scare them silly. There's a complication,
however, in the form of real ghosts-and they're not your garden-variety people
haunts but the shades of woolly mammoths, which the girls and boys must join
forces to assist. This has an entertaining Pinkwateresque bizarreness to it, with the
plot galloping along in its own version of reality and random events coming to-
gether despite complete illogic just because they can. Maguire stacks the deck a
little in favor of the boys' club, whose sympathetic new member, Salim, is himself
plagued by a ghost that followed him from India, and which benefits from the
assistance of Pearl, the one classmate unaligned with either side. That's okay,
though, because Thekla is such an entertaining antagonist it would be a shame to
water her obnoxiousness down with reader sympathy. Fans of the absurd and
slightly satirical should feel right at home with this madcap ghost story. DS
MARRIN, ALBERT 
Commander in Chief Abraham Lincoln and the Civil
War. Dutton, 1997 
246p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-45822-0 
$25.00 
R Gr. 7-12
Marrin once again brings extensive research and his own considerable flair for
military history to this third account of a Civil War leader (see Unconditional
Surrender, BCCB 3/94 and Virginia's General, 1/95), demonstrating how Lincoln's
passionate dedication to restoring the Union at any cost consistently informed his
strategies and decisions as Commander in Chief. A wealth of details concerning
Lincoln's esteem for his enemies, his bitter disappointment with a string of inef-
fectual generals, and his deeply felt kinship with ordinary citizens humanize the
legend, and an objective assessment of Lincoln's contradictory views regarding
emancipation demonstrates that he was first and foremost a military pragmatist
and only a reluctant Liberator. The momentum stalls slightly as a lengthy second
chapter on slavery separates the narrative of Lincoln's early years from that of his
political career, but that's a small toll to pay to traverse Marrin's road from Fort
168 
* 
THE BULLETIN
Sumter to Appomattox Court House. Period photographs and illustrations fur-
ther enliven the text; an index and a substantial bibliography are appended. EB
MEDEARIS, ANGELA SHELF 
The Ghost of Sifty Sifty Sam; illus. by Jacqueline
Rogers. 
Scholastic, 1997 
34p
ISBN 0-590-48290-4 
14.95 
R 6-9 yrs
This is a readaloud, tell-aloud ghost story with laughs, chills, and good food, in
which Chef Dan takes on the challenge of staying overnight in the house haunted
by Sifty Sifty Sam. Sam makes his presence known a little at a time, appearing
piecemeal to the frightened Dan, and demanding to be fed ("'MORE! MORE!'
cried the ghost/ with a mighty bellow./ 'GIVE ME MORE FOOD/ BECAUSE
I'M ONE HUNGRY FELLOW'"). Dan cooks and Sam eats, and in the morning
the sated spirit offers his services to the chef, and they make a deal-Dan will keep
Sam fed if Sam will wash the dishes. Medearis' free-verse, sometimes rhyming text
is sometimes a little tough on the reader, as it doesn't always scan, making the
rhythms a bit forced, but it's a fairly minor quibble given the appeal of both chef
and ghost. The swirling, whirling watercolors show the haunted kitchen in all its
messy glory, Sifty Sam as huge, hairy, and scary, and Chef Dan as round, big-eyed
and plump, in compositions large enough to be enjoyed in a small group setting.
This has echoes of "Wait Till Martin Comes," but there's a happier conclusion for
the brave Chef Dan, who sticks to his pots and pans despite his terror and comes
out a winner. JMD
MOORE, MARTHA 
Angels on the Roof. Delacorte, 1997 
186p
ISBN 0-385-32278-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Shelby's mother's latest self-improvement kick involves a minor obsession with
Georgia O'Keeffe and a burning desire to move to New Mexico. Despite her
resistance, Shelby finds herself in the passenger seat as Zoe, her evasive, slightly
flaky mother, drives them not to New Mexico but to a small town in Texas called
Red Valley. Zoe had lived in Red Valley years before, and Shelby is certain she will
find the answers to her questions about her father's identity there. Aunt Onie,
Zoe's foster mother, takes them in. With the catalyst of a sudden storm, Shelby
has a dramatic recovered memory of herself at three years old, standing naked in
the bath, her father beating her with a belt buckle, her mother turning her back
and leaving the room. Aunt Onie explains that Zoe fled Red Valley years ago to
protect Shelby from her abusive father and that she has returned now only to
verify that he is really dead. Moore has a nice touch with the Texas environment,
evoking a solid sense of physical place whether on the dusty plains, in the moun-
tains, or at the counter of the local diner. The plotting is a bit coincidental-
Shelby and Zoe's reconciliation is a contrived piece of business involving a barefoot
Zoe standing on a gas station roof to flag down Shelby's northbound bus-but the
small-town characters have an absorbing, eccentric reality about them that is at-
tractive. Aunt Onie's accident (she slips while whittling and cuts herself) and
Shelby's sudden memory recall are shockingly visceral, the descriptions of violence
and blood juxtaposed against O'Keeffean images offlatlands, blue sky, and curves
of white bone. The pacing falters here and there, and Aunt Onie's homegrown
wisdom has a facility that is ultimately irksome, but the characters are emotionally
real and quirky enough to keep the pages turning. JMD
JANUARY 1998 
* 
169
MURPHY, STUART J. 
Circus Shapes; illus. by Edward Miller. 
HarperCollins,
1997 
[34p] 
(Mathstart: Recognizing Shapes)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-027437-9 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-027436-0 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
2-4 yrs
Circus acts introduce the circle, square, triangle, and rectangle in this concept
book. Murphy takes no advantage of the multitude of shapes that occur naturally
at a circus; instead each shape is merely propped up by various circus animals for
no apparent reason. Neither the stodgy rhyming text nor the bland illustrations
do much to explicate the shapes: "Elephants make a circle/ and then march 'round
and 'round./ The circus band starts playing./ The tent fills up with sound." Ah,
but the elephants march in a line, and the circles on the drum and tuba are simply
ignored. The "acrobats" who are "twirling to a special circus song" are actually
aerial artists with no musicians in sight, but no matter... they have nothing to do
with the shapes either. A list of suggestions for further shape identification activi-
ties is included, any of which should prove more entertaining than this outing.
Save the price of admission for Rhonda Gowler Greene's offering, reviewed above.
EB
MYERS, ANNA 
The Keeping Room. 
Walker, 1997 
135p
ISBN 0-8027-8641-3 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Thirteen-year-old Joseph Kershaw has sworn to defend the family from the British
as his father, a respected South Carolina colonel, leads the local Camden militia in
the Revolution. Camden's remaining civilians surrender at Cornwallis' advance
and the British general seizes the Kershaw mansion as his headquarters, hanging
traitors outside Joseph's window, incarcerating smallpox-infected prisoners in the
outbuildings, and holding the Kershaws as virtual prisoners in their own home.
With neither social status nor paternal guidance to support and direct him, Joseph
clings desperately to his hatred of the enemy and vows to shoot at least one Redcoat
with a pistol he has concealed in the keeping room. However, when a sympathetic
occupying officer loses his life in Joseph's defense, the boy is forced to rethink not
only his indiscriminate abhorrence of the British but also other unexamined no-
tions he had once blindly accepted from his father. Joseph's narrative voice, that
of a spoiled son accustomed to deference, occasionally betrays the frightened child
within and subtly changes in tone from simple arrogance to hard-won self-confi-
dence. Myers neither underplays the violence nor overplays the valor of war, mak-
ing this a riveting entry for Revolutionary camp followers. EB
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
"I Can't Take You Anywhere!"; illus. by Jef
Kaminsky. 
Atheneum, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31966-5 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Naylor has a gift for immediacy, and that's no small thing in the limited space of a
picture book. With a maximum of strong characterization and a minimum of text
she gives us Amy Audrey Perkins, "sort of a klutz." The "can't take you anywhere"
of the title is the refrain of Amy Audrey's affectionate but wary aunts, uncles, and
parents, all victims of Amy Audrey's talent for clumsy disaster. Amy Audrey pulls
herself together for her Aunt Linda's wedding and manages quite gracefully-no
stumbling, tripping, or spilling-and her rather insensitive relations are so sur-
170 
* THE BULLETIN
prised they trip all over themselves and wind up in a messy pile on the floor. The
(deservedly) smug Amy Audrey pats the corners of her mouth with her napkin,
saying, "Aunts and Uncles, I declare! I can't take you anywhere!", and goes on
eating her cake. Kaminsky's watercolor cartoons have a rakish, Jack Kentish flair
to them, with big-eyed expressive characters surrounded by lots of white space that
suit the story's (and Amy Audrey's) somewhat frenetic pace. Amy Audrey is a
character to take to heart, and her triumph has a wry humor that will please adults
as it tickles youngsters. JMD
NIKOLA-LISA, W. 
Till Year's Good End: A Calendar ofMedieval Labors; illus. by
Christopher Manson. 
Atheneum, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80020-7 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 3-6
As the author's note indicates, this is a pictorial of the monthly labors done by
medieval peasants. Rhyming couplet banners unfurl across each double-page
spread, announcing the month and its accompanying labor ("DECEMBER I hunt
with master, his dogs I tend-/ And rejoice full well at year's good end"), while
further textual details can be found below the illustrations. Visually, the artist's
use of a black pen heavily detailing the deeply shadowed watercolors creates a
Middle Ages mood; the somber-faced peasants go about their tasks amid earthy
fields, timbered dwellings, and dark forests. The clearly written text concentrates
largely on agricultural information, which is well served by the calendar format.
Though many unknown terms are explained ("the hayward, a peasant who was
responsible for watching the fields and the movement of farm animals, blew his
horn to call the peasants in for a feast provided by the lord"), a glossary would have
been useful for those that are not-will kids know what "demesne lands" or "priv-
ies" are? Nevertheless, this nonfiction offering may fill the gap in a Robin Hood
unit. PM
OPPEL, KENNETH 
Silverwing. Simon, 1997 
[160p]
ISBN 0-689-81529-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
From the opening scene where Shade, a young Silverwing bat, enjoys "the deli-
cious beetle meat as it squirted down his throat," we are initiated into a fully real-
ized fantasy world where bats, owls, pigeons, and rats do battle. This is a realm
where good and evil walk a well-defined line. Shade, the runt of the colony, be-
comes separated from the rest and meets up with Marina, a Brightwing bat, who
has been banded by humans. Together they seek their winter migration destina-
tion, Hibernaculum, using a mysterious map-song given to Shade by his mother.
In many ways, this tale is reminiscent of the swashbuckling Redwall series with its
unlikely hero overcoming great odds, its narrow escapes, its tragic deaths, and its
triumphant endings. Though the plot has a measure of contrivance and some
characters are of the stereotypical variety, the unceasing action and suspense will
propel readers past any complaints. There are plenty of bad guys that kids will love
to hate, but Goth, a huge and vicious vampire bat with a taste for other bat flesh,
is the most despicable: "Goth brought a bat back to the cave and tore into it
hungrily. His stomach churning, Shade saw that it was a Brightwing." Since
Shade doesn't find his long-lost father, Marina stays to help him search, and vengeful
bad guy Goth isn't dead after all, can Silverwingl be far behind? Send the Redwall
aficionados to this bat tale and watch them pant for the sequel. PM
JANUARY 1998 
* 
171
OTTEN, CHARLOTTE F. 
January Rides the Wind: A Book ofMonths; illus. by Todd
L. W. Doney. 
Lothrop, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-12557-3 
$15.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-12556-5 
$16.00 
R* 
5-8 yrs
This poetic calendar depicts each month in a double-page spread and a compact
free-verse poem. January "rides the wind,/ sideswipes deer and rabbits./ Their
white tails billow/ like pillowcases on the line," as well-wrapped children sled across
the ground in a spray of snow; the year ripens through spring, summer, and au-
tumn and then back to winter again. Otten's deft use of soundplay-internal
rhymes, alliteration, repetition, assonance-combines with fresh and vivid imag-
ery to make the poems musical and atmospheric evocations. The multicultural
cast of kids appear to be living each month to the fullest, and Doney's oils have the
medium's characteristic depth and texture; he plays rich hues against one another,
with the greens and blacks of the June evening contrasting with the luminescent
yellow of a boy's shirt, and the cerulean blue of an October sky balancing out the
dappled golds and russets of autumn trees. Whether the climate reflects the
audience's or seems to them an exotic collection of extremes, listeners will appreci-
ate the lyrical temporal tour and may wish to contribute their own similar offer-
ings. DS
PATRICK, DENISE LEWIS 
The Adventures ofMidnight Son. 
Holt, 1997 
152p
ISBN 0-8050-4714-X 
$15.95 
M 
Gr. 4-6
Midnight Son was born into slavery, but when Master goes off to fight in the Civil
War, leaving his plantation in the hands of his ineffectual son, Midnight's father
steals a horse and sends his only boy off to freedom. After days of wandering and
escape from a brief capture, Midnight is miraculously taken in by an English-
speaking Mexican who just happens to be the foreman of a cattle ranch that is,
wondrously, in need of a new hand. Quicker'n you can say gitalonglittledogie,
he's mastered the trade, is signed on as wrangler on a cattle drive, is befriended by
the freeman cook, saves the spare horses from flood and twister, and happily ends
his journey in a comfortable hotel room, with a free black boy to draw his bath and
run for his clothes, the prospect of another genial cattle drive ahead, and gold in
his pockets. Even readers who aren't up on oater conventions will be suspicious of
the trite dialogue: "It don't matter to you, black, white, red, or brown huh? You
sure about that?" ... "Sure as that sun's gonna come up tomorrow, pardner!" And
as our hero packs his bedroll for the next drive, many will wonder why he doesn't
think to put some of his newfound wealth toward securing his family's freedom.
EB
PEVSNER, STELLA 
Sing for Your Father, Su Phan; by Stella Pevsner and Fay
Tang. 
Clarion, 1997 
107p
ISBN 0-395-82267-X 
$14.00 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
With this novel based on coauthor Tang's childhood, we peer into the life of Su
Phan, a young Chinese girl growing up in North Vietnam during the Vietnam
War. Because her family is relatively wealthy, her father is eventually torn from
the family and taken to a prison ("'So you think you're too good to be Commu-
nist, eh?' shouted one soldier, delivering a kick"). We follow the rest of the family's
subsequent deprivation and relocation during increasingly frequent bombings by
the Americans until the day her older-than-his years father returns to the family,
172 
* THE BULLETIN
the war ends, Su Phan marries, and she immigrates to the United States. There is
plenty of raw material here for a riveting tale of trial and triumph, but nothing
substantial ever materializes. Stereotypical characterizations (a crotchety grand-
mother, a sacrificing mother) and wooden narrative ("Before long, I will not be a
child anymore, but a young woman") hamper a story that lacks emotional depth.
It's still intriguing to see the Vietnam War from the other side, however, and the
story's brief afterword provides some usefulness in terms of its historical setting.
PM
PFITSCH, PATRICIA CURTIS 
Keeper of the Light. 
Simon, 1997 
[144p]
ISBN 0-689-81492-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Faith has kept the lamp at the Port Henry Lighthouse burning steadily since her
father's death months before, and now she is resentful that Mr. Chesterfield of the
Lighthouse Board has appointed a new keeper, Nathaniel Kent. The teenager
cringes at the thought of moving to town, where she will be expected to attend
school and engage in more "ladylike" pursuits, and the casual naivete of her re-
placement feeds her fears for the safety of the Lake Superior sailors who, with the
limited technology of the nineteenth century, rely on the guidance of the light.
Once in town, Faith is further troubled by her discovery of a longstanding rela-
tionship between her mother and Mr. Chesterfield, who seems to be dictating too
much of their lives. When a storm on the lake threatens the safety of her mother,
who is returning by ship from a brief family business trip, Faith defies her mother's
orders to stay away from Port Henry, and she joins Kent in an effort to rescue crew
and passengers from the grounded vessel. Faith's ambivalent but increasingly cor-
dial relationship with Kent is skillfully drawn, and the climactic rescue scene is
charged with tension. However, the longstanding relationship between her mother
and Chesterfield, which plays a large part in Faith's story, is never explained, and
Faith's unresolved future will leave readers puzzled rather than enlightened. EB
PRELUTSKY, JACK, comp. 
The Beauty of the Beast: Poems from the Animal King-
dom; illus. by Meilo So. 
Knopf, 1997 
101p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-57058-4 
$26.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-87058-X 
$25.00 
R* 
Gr. 4-8
See this month's Big Picture, p. 176, for review.
QUALEY, MARSHA 
Thin Ice. 
Delacorte, 1997 
261p
ISBN 0-385-32298-4 
$14.95 
R Gr. 7-10
Arden is seventeen, a talented crafter of picture frames living in northern Wiscon-
sin with her older brother, who has been her guardian since the death of their
parents a decade ago. Tragedy comes again when her brother goes missing while
snowmobiling, and all signs point to his falling through the river ice to his death-
or do they? Initially in mourning, Arden begins to believe that her brother, over-
whelmed by responsibility (his girlfriend had just informed him she was pregnant),
has staged his death in order to escape to a new life, and she dismays all her friends
and advisors by devoting her time and money to finding him. Qualey (author of
Nobody's Daughter, BCCB 3/91, and Revolutions ofthe Heart, 5/93) writes some of
the best YA heroines, strong and necessarily self-sufficient in a world that makes
depending on oneself advisable; here she's made that psychological situation lit-
JANUARY 1998 
* 
173
eral, with Arden having to go it alone in the house that once held her parents and
her brother. That's a compelling story, and Qualey capably keeps the question of
Scott's death enigmatic, offering a fair amount of clues either way, while Arden
struggles to come to grips with the implications of both possibilities and what her
future may hold. Unfortunately the intensity is cheapened by an overly neat, tie-
everything-up ending that treats the book as a thriller, calling into question the
point of the carefully wrought psychological drama. Arden's an impressive hero-
ine and her predicament is fascinating; she deserved a better, if perhaps less happy,
ending. DS
REES, DOUGLAS 
Lightning Time. 
DK Ink, 1997 
[172p]
ISBN 0-7894-2458-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* Gr. 6-9
When fourteen-year old Theodore Worth meets the abolitionist, John Brown, for
the first time, it is because Theodore's father reluctantly agrees to allow Brown to
hide in their Boston home. Following this encounter, Theodore witnesses the
capture of Jacob, his grandfather's servant, by brutal slave catchers and Jacob's
subsequent suicide, which experiences hurl young Worth into his part in Brown's
crusade. Although Theodore and his family are fictional the rest of this tightly
drawn narrative is historically derived (a historical note details the facts of the
story) and never stops gathering momentum. Theodore's voice resounds with au-
thenticity whether he speaks of his fancy education ("Weems's school was exclu-
sive, expensive, and run on the highest principles of dullness"), his friendship with
Bob, a fellow telegrapher, or his newfound zeal ("Only one thing seemed clear to
me. If I had had old John Brown's pistol with me that day, Jacob would still be
alive"). The conflicted generational gap between Theodore and his Quaker mother
and austere father is another fully realized and significant story element which
nonetheless remains true to the context of the times. In the suspenseful climax,
Theodore's skill with his telegraph key provides his integral role at Harpers Ferry
and ultimately furnishes his deliverance and his destiny. Rees shows remarkable
skill in distilling a complicated period in U.S. history into a boy's honest delivery
of his own coming-of-age story. This would serve as a perfect complement to
Clinton Cox's Fiery Vision: The Life and Death ofJohn Brown (BCCB 7/97) PM
ROBERTS, LAURA PEYTON 
Ghost ofa Chance. Delacorte, 1997 
183p
ISBN 0-385-32508-8 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Melissa and her best friend Chloe have everything a girl needs: they're gorgeous
and well-dressed, and boys are crazy about them. Chloe also has a ghost haunting
her house, a really hunky eighteen-year-old guy named James. Chloe arranges for
Melissa and James to meet and a love triangle emerges-Melissa loves James who
loves Chloe who loves a friend of her brother's named Brett. The plotline has
occasional moments of lucidity as it follows the predictable path of Melissa's search-
ing out information on James' short life and tragic death. There's some intense if
ghostly making out, but finally Chloe decides James is too possessive; she wants
him to go on to the great beyond, and he conveniently does. Melissa assuages her
broken heart with dates with a school hunk and Chloe's college-student brother,
Chaz. Characterization is minimal, and a subplot about Melissa's parents' divorce
is sublimely shallow. This is clueless about anything even remotely resembling
depth, but the combination of plot elements-gorgeous girls, hunky guys, and a
174 
* THE BULLETIN
romantic ghost who has the consideration to depart when things get complicated-
may be enough to keep romance fans reading till the predictable end. JMD
ROGERS, FRED 
Let's Talk About It: Stepfamilies; illus. with photographs by Jim
Judkis. 
Putnam, 1997 
32p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-399-23144-7 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-399-23145-5 
$7.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Those familiar with the estimable Mr. Rogers and with the other books in this
series (Adoption, BCCB 4/95, etc.) will recognize the calm and reassuring tone
here. The text discusses the problems of new stepfamilies ("Sometimes it might
seem like there are too many changes. . . . When you're part of a stepfamily, you
may not like some of the new ways of doing things") and ways to cope with them
("If you can talk about things that make you happy, sad, or angry, your parents
and the other people in your stepfamily can better understand what you're feel-
ing"). Photographs of two new stepfamilies appear throughout; their lives seem
tidier than the average, but some of the resentful and lonely faces will strike a
chord with readers. There's nothing especially new here, and the approach is a
little bland, but its solidity and authority make it effective. Particularly likely to
reassure adults in search of a way into the topic, this is a helpful low-key approach
to the issue. DS
ROHMANN, 
ERIC 
The Cinder-Eyed Cats; written and illus. by Eric
Rohmann. 
Crown, 1997 
36p
Library ed. ISBN 0-517-70897-3 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-517-70896-5 
$17.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
A young boy climbs into his sailboat and sails-through the air, along with gulls
and other boats-to a distant tropical shore. There he drops anchor and creates a
sand-sculpture, a huge fish against whom he comfortably leans while napping.
Soon the sand-fish awakes and five cinder-eyed cats join him in play, and then all
the denizens of the briny deep begin to cavort through the air about the enrap-
tured boy. They disappear at dawn, and the five cats collapse into a doze as the
boy sails away from the island in the morning sun. This is, of course, a dream
book, and the initial logical fantasy of sailing one's boat through the air to faraway
places has the appropriate wishful allure. The sinewy grace of the tigerish quintet
of cats also has its imaginative appeal, but the explosion of fish is more crowded
and confusing than glitteringly otherworldly. There's a solidity and a drabness to
the fishy spreads that take the magic out of the idea that the water-dwellers have
escaped to the air, and the rhyming text is merely descriptive rather than enhanc-
ing the vision; nor is it ever quite clear what the titular cats have to do with this
panoply of fish. Youngsters who don't insist that books make more sense than
their dreams may appreciate some of the make-believe here. DS
Ross, STEWART 
Charlotte Bront" and Jane Eyre; illus. by Robert Van
Nutt. 
Viking, 1997 
[4 6p]
ISBN 0-670-87486-8 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Chronicling the life of Charlotte Bronte and the story of her most famous novel,
this starts with the family's arrival at Haworth and goes on to describe the Bronte
siblings' childhood of sadness (two beloved elder sisters dead before they were in
JANUARY 1998 
* 175
their teens), wildness (running across the Yorkshire moors), and closeness (creat-
ing worlds and books together). In describing Bronte's later life, Ross is honest
about her love for her married teacher in Belgium, her impatience with her stu-
dents, her uneasiness in company, and her unprepossessing appearance; he also
takes pains to point out the inaccuracies in Elizabeth Gaskell's famous early biog-
raphy of Bronte. The book is compact and informative, but the writing is some-
times disjointed and there's little discernible pacing or differentiating emphasis;
the potted Jane Eyre in six pages unfortunately reduces the subtle and powerful
novel to soap opera. Van Nutt's occasional pencil sketches have charm and fluid-
ity, but the color full-page paintings are stiff and sometimes ungainly, removing
their subjects further rather than bringing them to life. Young readers looking for
an author biography or an introduction to Jane Eyre may nonetheless find this
concise account useful and unintimidating. A chronology and list of books for
further reading are included; there is no index. DS
ROTTMAN, S. L. 
Hero. 
Peachtree, 1997 
134p
ISBN 1-56145-159-2 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 7-10
Sean is fifteen, and his life is a disaster: his divorced mother's an abusive alcoholic,
his father's been only a support check for years, and his drug-dealer classmate has
it in for him. After a fight, he's suspended (again) and sentenced to community
service at Mr. Hassler's horse farm. Mr. Hassler is stern but fair and supportive,
and Sean begins to develop a connection to the place, the horses, and the people.
Between his mother's physical collapse, his father's reappearance, and his danger-
ous classmate, he may find life's obstacles too much to overcome even with Mr.
Hassler's help. This is a well-meaning book, and the rescue fantasy aspect of the
plot has its appeal. The contrivances, plot cliches, and cardboard characterization,
however, keep the story flat and unbelievable; much of Sean's misery seems piled
on merely to make his triumph the more dramatic, and the book's ethics are not
always clear (there's little questioning about saintly Mr. Hassler's hitting of Sean's
father, for instance). While it's hard to be opposed to redemption, the complete
unsubtlety of the message makes the dark more interesting than the light here-
surely not the intended effect. The readers likeliest to overlook the book's flaws in
favor of its drama may well be put off by the tiny print. DS
SAY, ALLEN 
Allison; written and illus. by Allen Say. 
Lorraine/Houghton,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-395-85895-X 
$17.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When Allison gets a new red kimono for her birthday, she looks just like her doll,
Mei-Mei-and hardly at all like her parents. This is because she's adopted, a fact
that hits Allison like a ton of bricks and leaves her angry and destructive. She finds
peace, however, with the adoption of a stray cat, whose embrace by the family
reassures her. Say doesn't shrink from the seriousness of Allison's anger, and the
depiction of her recognition of difference is convincing. Nonetheless, this is a
complicated subject and the book's quick leap to a solution gives it an air of con-
trivance and may leave young listeners behind. The watercolor illustrations un-
deremphasize the adults, making Allison, with her penetrating dark stare and
realistically stubborn expression, more immediate. There aren't that many youth-
ful adoption books that acknowledge the process doesn't have to be all roses; this
may be rather set up, but some young listeners might appreciate the acknowledg-
ment of discomfort. DS
176 
* THE BULLETIN
SCHLEIN, MIRIAM 
Sleep Safe, Little Whale; illus. by Peter Sfs. 
Greenwillow,
1997 
20p
ISBN 0-688-14757-7 
$14.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
This lullaby book bids goodnight to seven different babies-a little whale, tiny
kangaroo, baby bear, infant panda, penguin chick, little elephant, and fuzzy ea-
glet-and exhorts them each to "sleep safe" as they drift off, cozy and protected
("Sleep safe, baby panda,/ clinging to your mama's fur,/ hidden in the old hollow
tree./ Sleep safe"). Sfs' illustrations use two thematic border rows for each image,
holding the sleepy babies safely in their frames, and the babies themselves are made
particularly pettable and endearing by textural hatchmarks that give a tactile sense
to the precise drawings. While the text and individual portraits are on one side of
the accordion fold-out, the other side features a global panorama that proceeds
gradually through ocean and mountain, forest and savannah and includes not only
the babies serenaded in the text but a multitude of other cuddling infant/parent
pairs-including a final human mother and child on the last page. While the
accordion-fold format doesn't make this the easiest book for the bedtime sharing
it's otherwise well-suited for, it's nice to see a title that really uses the format artis-
tically; kids will relish traveling over the folds of the world or surrounding them-
selves with it while searching for other sleepy babies. DS
SEIBOLD, J.OTTO 
Olive, the Other Reindeer; written and illus. by J.otto Seibold
and Vivian Walsh. 
Chronicle, 1997 
[34p]
ISBN 0-8118-1807-1 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
When Olive the dog mishears a line from "Rudolph, the Red-Nosed Reindeer" as
"Olive, the other reindeer," she decides she must really be a reindeer. After mak-
ing her way to the North Pole, she joins Santa's sleigh team (firmly fastened to it,
since despite her delusion she can't actually fly) and finds her canine capabilities
(chewing, fetching, scenting) invaluable to the team on their Christmas deliveries.
This isn't a pointed tale, wherein Olive learns to appreciate herself as a dog, but
rather an enjoyable dopey joke that continues as it started, with comic twists on
the original song keeping things moving. Those who have seen this pairing's ear-
lier Mr. Lunch books will recognize the hi-tech neo-retro look of the computer-
drawn art; its muted yet contrasting hues keep the skewed figures in their packed
compositions humorous but not garishly so, and olive-drab Olive is an appealing
toylike pup. Youngsters who enjoyed books such as Yorinks' Christmas in July
(BCCB 11/91) will celebrate this sleighride through the silly side of Christmas.
DS
SHAIK, FATIMA 
Melitte. 
Dial, 1997 
[160p]
ISBN 0-8037-2106-4 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-9
Slight, hazy memories suggest to thirteen-year-old Melitte that once she was lav-
ished with a mother's love. Her only clear knowledge has always been that she
lives in Monsieur Duroux's one-room cabin, that Madame Duroux is harsh and
demanding, that Monsieur is reluctant to curb his wife's outbursts, and that nei-
ther will give her a straight answer concerning her mother. Through snippets of
strangers' conversation she learns she is a slave, and the full implication of her
status is driven home to her insistently as she ages. Slaves on a neighboring Loui-
JANUARY 1998 
* 177
siana plantation caution her that the affection of the Durouxs' little daughter Marie,
who is generally entrusted to Melitte's care, will disappear as soon as the youngster
becomes aware of their disparate social status. The strong sisterly bond between
the two girls is in fact tested when Monsieur Duroux, who Melitte learns is actu-
ally her father, prepares to sell her. Marie reasons, speaks, and acts with a precocity
difficult to credit, and Melitte's plight is resolved (six-year-old Marie helps her
escape) with too little difficulty and too much sentimentality. Still, Shaik's prose
is graceful and often lyrical, and her sharp description of a slave's life under a
master who is powerful even in dire poverty offers an alternative to readers for
whom "slavery" conjures images of Tara and Twelve Oaks. EB
SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM 
Macbeth; ad. by Bruce Coville; illus. by Gary
Kelley. 
Dial, 1997 
48p
Library ed. ISBN 0-8037-1900-0 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8037-1899-3 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
The fact that Shakespeare lifted his plots wholesale from works that are little re-
membered today suggests that his merit lay in something other than simple plot-
ting; compressed accounts of the plays tend to support this theory, since Shakespeare
reduced to bare bones invariably ends up losing something. Coville, who previ-
ously adapted A Midsummer Night's Dream (BCCB 7/96), unfortunately doesn't
escape this trap. He's made judicious choices and cuts here, leaving the incorpo-
rated dialogue in a form close to the original while saving time by using narration
to move the plot along. The result is accessible but rushed and superficial, and
certain ambiguities (the Macbeths' intentions towards their kingly guest, for one)
are more confusing than tense. Kelley's dark and shadowy pastel illustrations of-
ten set the mood effectively (though the unvarying palette resists vitality), but
except for some pleasingly unprepossessing weird sisters, they don't bring the events
any closer than the text does. This will undoubtedly be useful as an educational
introduction to Shakespeare, and it will help keep kids from getting lost in the
plot, but the absence of actual drama means that they may be puzzled as to what all
the fuss is about. DS
SHERROW, VICTORIA 
Smoke to Flame: September 1935 to December 1938.
_ 
.
The Blaze EngulfS: January 1939 to December 1941.
See review under Holocaust, p. 162.
SHIELDS, CAROL DIGGORY 
Saturday Night at the Dinosaur Stomp; illus. by Scott
Nash. 
Candlewick, 1997 
26p
ISBN 1-56402-693-0 
$15.99 
R 
5-8 yrs
When dinosaurs brush their teeth to get ready, it's got to be for something impor-
tant: "Hey dinosaurs, it's rock 'n' roll time! Slick back your scales and get ready to
romp. On Saturday night at the Dinosaur Stomp!" Taking poetic license to
jurassic lengths, this large, shareable rhythmic romp will rock young listeners back
to prehistoric (or is that prehysteric?) times. Toothy, googly-eyed dinosaurs of all
shapes, colors, sizes, and species are cartoonishly rendered in watercolor and pen
making "dinosaur tracks" for the party. Old (over-the-hill dinosaurs sans den-
tures) and young (nervous first-time-party-goer dinosaurettes) join the rest for stuff
like "The Triassic Twist and the Brontosaurus Bump,/ The Raptor Rap and Juras-
178 
* THE BULLETIN
sic Jump." This is not meant to be anything but fun, so don't quibble about
whether it is wise to let Tyrannosaurus Rex lead a conga line. Roll up the rug and
invite your own dinosaur wannabes for a dinosaur stomp of their own-just get
out of the way. PM
SHULMAN, WILLIAM L., comp. 
Resource Guide: A Comprehensive Listing ofMedia
for Further Study.
,comp. 
Voices and Vision: A Collection ofPrimary Sources.
See review under Holocaust, p. 162.
ST. GEORGE, JUDITH 
Betsy Ross: Patriot of Philadelphia; illus. by Sasha
Meret. 
Holt, 1997 
118p
ISBN 0-8050-5439-1 
$15.95 
Ad Gr. 3-5
In the ongoing debate over whether Betsy Ross actually stitched the first national
flag, St. George votes a resounding affirmative, relying on the affidavits of Ross's
family and acquaintances that Washington and his committee had met with the
now-famed upholstery shop proprietor. Yea or nay, focusing on this bit of trivia
deflects attention from the broader significance of Ross as a scrappy survivor in
politically troubled times-Quaker outcast, three-time widow, and savvy shop
owner who catered to Tory and Patriot as business exigencies dictated. While
short chapters bring St. George's offering within easy grasp of younger history
buffs, thinly developed episodes and choppy prose somewhat dampen the interest:
"George Ross had an idea. His nephew's widow was the perfect person to make
the flag.... She could be trusted to sew the flag without a word to anyone." Still,
readers looking for easy accounts of the Founding Mothers can cut their teeth on
this beginner biography. EB
STEVENSON, JAMES 
The Unprotected Witness. 
Greenwillow, 1997 
[176p]
ISBN 0-688-15133-7 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
This sequel takes up where Bones in the Cliff(BCCB 6/95) left off. Pete is living
with friend Rootie and her grandmother in New York City when his criminal
father is killed despite being in the witness protection program. The people who
killed him think Pete knows the location of the two millions dollars apparently
stolen by his father. Pete doesn't know, but he and Rootie figure it out, and to-
gether they determine to retrieve it. They enlist the aid of Mooshie, a disenfran-
chised rich kid who drives a Lincoln Continental held together by duct tape. The
plot turns are strictly movie-of-the-week, with the death of Pete's father's only
friend in a suspicious fire, a federal agent who turns out to be a crook, and the
discovery of two suitcases full of money. No grownups have salient roles in this
mystery, and the plot is pretty lightweight-a struggle on a slippery ferry deck
takes care of the bad guys, and Rootie and Pete go home to Grandma and a vaca-
tion trip to Saratoga-but it's still involving. Pete has a fairly strong narrative
voice, and while the suspension of disbelief will have to be positively gargantuan,
the action is so fast that it leaps over plot holes. The text is not nearly as choppy as
in the previous title, and Pete's voice is more mature, as suits his age and experi-
ence. JMD
JANUARY 1998 
* 
179
STOEKE, JANET MORGAN 
A Friendfor Minerva Louise; written and illus. by Janet
Morgan Stoeke. 
Dutton, 1997 
24p
ISBN 0-525-45869-7 
$13.99 
R 
3-6 yrs
Stoeke's snoopy hen is out on neighborhood reconnaissance again, and this time
she concludes that the people down the road must have a new bunny. They seem
to have provided it with every comfort; there's an indoor hutch (a crib), and just
beyond the pot of flowers on the kitchen window sill (a jar of bottle brushes) she
can see an outdoor hutch (play pen). When she doesn't find the bunny under the
gardening workbench (changing table) or in the cozy nest (diaper bag), Minerva
Louise heads outdoors and spots him being wheeled in a carriage. It's just as she
suspected all along-there's a purple bunny (stuffed, of course) surrounded by
"some great toys," including the real baby. Simple matte paintings, outlined and
bordered with a black crayon, guide little sleuths along the trail of visual clues.
Listeners who aren't quite ready to decode Amelia Bedelia's verbal gaffes will relish
this headstrong hen's latest outing. EB
SZEKERES, CYNDY 
The Mouse That Jack Built; written and illus. by Cyndy
Szekeres. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic, 1997 
26p
ISBN 0-590-69197-X 
$5.95 
Ad 
2-4 yrs
In this take-off on the traditional cumulative rhyming story "The House That
Jack Built," small bunny Jack builds himself a snow mouse. Szekeres' rhyming
text has balance and rhythm without sacrificing fun or spontaneity: "These are the
whiskers/ that wiggled and twitched,/ causing poor Jack to giggle and itch,/ put
next to the raisin,/ used for a nose,/ on the face of the mouse that Jack built." The
watercolor and ink illustrations, reminiscent of a cutesier Rosemary Wells, enliven
and extend the text with small visual additions to the story, such as a pair of happy
mice, dressed in mufflers and wool hats, who build themselves a whole line of
snow bunnies. The rhyme scheme loses its consistency toward the end, and the
preciousness of the animals wears a little thin, but this is a jolly little book that is
going to strike a happy chord with a lot of preschoolers. Its small size doesn't lend
itself to group tellings, but turn it into a flannel board and it will become a toddler-
time staple. JMD
TABOR, NANCY MARIA GRANDE 
We Are a Rainbow; written and illus. by Nancy
Maria Grande Tabor. 
Charlesbridge, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-88106-646-X 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-88106-417-3 
$6.95
Bilingual paper ed. ISBN 0-88106-417-3 
$6.95 
M 
4-7 yrs
Tabor uses brief text and rainbow tinted, paper-dollish collages to illustrate the
concept of same and different, and up to a point it works. Comparisons between
"there," the home left behind, and "here," her new home, are simply made: "There
I would eat tortillas for breakfast. Here people have them for dinner." Unfortu-
nately, sappiness overpowers simplicity midway through the book. It then be-
comes one of those well-intended "we're all the same so let's all get along"
sermonettes for kids that ends up in a tangle of sentimental cliches ("Our tears and
our smiles are like the rain and the sun. They help our friendships to grow") and
doubtful generalities ("We all like to dance and sing"). The likely result of all this
silliness ("And friendships are like rainbows . .. they shine for everyone!") is that
180 
* THE BULLETIN
kids will try to find a better book. Give them Frog and Toad-they're much more
eloquent. PM
TASHJIAN, JANET 
Tru Confessions. 
Holt, 1997 
167p
ISBN 0-8050-5254-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Tru wants to be the star of her own television show. She also
wants to find a cure for her developmentally delayed twin brother, Eddie, and she
spends secret hours searching the Internet under her mother's login. The novel is
in the form of a computer journal, which gives it a technological immediacy. Tru
has the voice of a buoyant, creative adolescent, and the media she uses to express
herself-computers and video-suit her intense adolescent desires and youthful
determination to just not admit defeat. But ultimately, Tru has her intelligent if
unwilling eyes opened to the fact that there is no cure for Eddie, and that someday,
despite her best efforts, she will leave him behind. For the most part, Tru's voice
has the tone and point of view of a twelve-year-old, complete with yearning, exas-
peration, and grief. Near the end, when Tru sees the reality ofher-and Eddie's-
situation and all those threads begin to tie up, the author's voice disconcertingly
takes over, and an adult speaks instead of an adolescent. Still, readers will enjoy
following Tru through her bouts of sibling and creative angst, and they'll cheer her
on when her video documentary about Eddie wins the local community cable
award. Readers will walk away from this book with visions of an optimistic, bright
future for an optimistic, bright character. JMD
WALLACE, BARBARA BROOKS 
Sparrows in the Scullery. 
Atheneum, 1997 
152p
ISBN 0-689-81585-9 
$15.00 
R Gr. 5-8
Colley Trevelyan, apparent heir to his recently deceased parents' fortune, is kid-
napped in the night from his ancestral home and finds himself a new "boarder" at
the Broggin Home for Boys, where he is underfed, overworked, and most certainly
destined for a short life and a terrible death in the glass factory. But for the first
time in his life Colley has friends-the other orphans (the "sparrows" of the title)
bought and sold by the nefarious Broggins and his wife. This is fully realized
Victorian melodrama, with horrific villains, spunky child-heroes, and a sense of
coincidence that would make Dickens (or Joan Aiken) proud. After suffering
through the horrors of the Broggins Home, surviving the food and the physical
dangers, and recovering from a near-fatal illness, Colley is miraculously rescued by
his long-lost black-sheep-of-the-family cousin, Jeremy, now a ship's captain en-
gaged to marry the young woman who discovers Colley in the home in the first
place. The ending is cheerfully neat, and the loose ends tie up with remarkable
tightness, but this is a suspenseful, nicely rendered piece of historical fiction.
Wallace's language is evocative and consistent, her sense of place is startlingly vivid,
and her orphans deserve their own musical. Just booktalk the scene where Colley
is tossed into the Hole and watch Sparrows fly off the shelves. JMD
WALLACE, IAN 
A Winter's Tale; written and illus. by Ian Wallace. 
Groundwood/
Douglas & McIntyre, 1997 
[32p]
ISBN 0-88899-286-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
For her ninth-birthday present, Abigail wants to go winter camping in the bush
like her older brother. She and her father and brother leave their city home and
JANUARY 1998 * 
181
head off into the frozen Canadian wilderness, where they dig a snow trench and fill
it with pine boughs for their campsite; the zenith of the trip, however, is when the
family frees a trapped fawn from fishing line frozen into the ice. The story is
hampered by the absence of conflict and there's a bit of snowy schmaltz in the
writing, but the specifics of winter camping and exploration, which will be unfa-
miliar to many readers, are fascinating and desirably adventurous. The acrylic art
on rough canvas has some appealing details (the trees growing around Abigail's
bed at home, the lacy purple shadows of trees on snow), but much of the delicate
coloration of winter landscapes is lost amid brazen blasts of color, and the land as
well as the figures seem stiffer than life. The unusual outing is appealing, however;
it's also a rare outdoor rite-of-passage story about a girl, many of whom will relish
the idea of this icy expedition. DS
WALLNER, ALEXANDRA 
Laura Ingalls Wilder; written and illus. by Alexandra
Wallner. 
Holiday House, 1997 32p
ISBN 0-8234-1314-4 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 2-4
This is an inviting first look at the popular Little House author who "wanted the
children now to understand more about the beginnings of things, to know what is
behind the things they see-what it is that made America as they know it." This
easy biography provides youngsters a brief but straightforward introduction to
Wilder and what lies behind those many stories of her life long ago. Wallner's
paintings of Laura's life vividly recreate its adventures, hardships, numerous moves,
and warm family times. In one sweeping scene, "land that looked like a sea of
grass" textured with layers of hatchmarks ripples with the prairie wind, while in
another spread an army of green grasshoppers invades the serenity of the Ingalls'
yellow clapboard home. The art's Americana look is right in step with the heart of
this little biography and the woman who inspired it. This is an engaging overture
for budding Laura fans, and it would make a good readaloud biography as well.
PM
WEGMAN, WILLIAM 
Puppies; written and illus. with photographs by William
Wegman. 
Hyperion, 1997 
96p
ISBN 0-7868-0320-7 
$24.95 
R 
Gr. 5-10
Opening with the confession, "I didn't really want a dog," Wegman treats his
readers to a chatty, affectionate account of how Weimaraners insinuated them-
selves into and ultimately overtook his art. First came the brainstorm: "There was
a similarity between this sock and Man Ray. Man Ray looked like the sock. The
sock looked like Man Ray. Man Ray looked like many things. This idea grew on
me." Then came the early poses with Man Ray's successor, Fay. And with Fay's
motherhood (Wegman discusses the delivery of her first litter with detailed enthu-
siasm rarely witnessed outside a coffee klatsch) came the new venture into puppy
photography. "Just set them down, or up, and shoot.... Watch them flow into
one another-one organism, seeking heat and its mother's scent." Interspersed
between brief chapters are glorious galleries of photos taken at various stages of the
dogs' development. Viewers who are troubled by the circus-like manipulation of
the canine subjects must be impressed, and perhaps even relieved, by Wegman's
solicitude for his pups in his various roles of obstetrician, matchmaker, and proud
"papa." For avowed fans of Wegman's art, this is obviously mandatory reading.
EB
182 
* THE BULLETIN
YACCARINO, DAN 
Good Night, Mr. Night; written and illus. by Dan
Yaccarino. 
Gulliver/Harcourt, 1997 
34p
ISBN 0-15-201319-9 
$15.00 
R 4-7 yrs
In a vibrant Rousseauian landscape, Mr. Night, a black shadow lit with stars, walks
the soon to be sleeping earth, closing the flower petals, quieting the animals, and
calming the sea. The child narrator sees Mr. Night as a cozy friend who plays
music for him while he sleeps and whispers dreams into his ear. "Then, when the
sun starts to rise, Mr. Night grows tired. He lies down just over the hill and drifts
off to sleep. And when I wake, I whisper, 'Good Night, Mr. Night."' The simple
text is -set against an opaque, naive landscape of undulating hills and trees and
dramatically clouded skies, with an intense but not harsh palette of petal reds and
grass greens. The only real darkness is Mr. Night himself, whose comfortably
round form is textured with little white stars and who has a crescent moon for an
eye. This is a storytime natural, daytime or bedtime, and both reader and listener
will appreciate Yaccarino's controlled text and flamingly colorful illustrations. JMD
ZELINSKY, PAUL O., ad. 
Rapunzel; ad. and illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. Dutton,
1997 
40p
ISBN 0-525-45607-4 
$16.99 
R* 
5-8 yrs
Just as Donna Jo Napoli has elaborated "Rapunzel" fictionally in Zel (BCCB 7/
96), Zelinsky has elaborated the fairy tale visually, with a sequence of paintings
that reflect Italian Renaissance art in their refined modeling of feature and drap-
ery, antique burnish of hues, and idealized drafting of landscapes and interiors.
Rapunzel's tower, for instance, combines the effects of marbled mosaic and intri-
cate cloisonne, projecting a seductive safety rather than an ominous detention.
The sorceress herself, like Trina Schart Hyman's witch in Paul Heins' Snow White
(BCCB 5/75), is a portrait of aging elegance rather than an unattractive crone,
lending psychological force to the interpretation of generational conflict. Graphi-
cally articulated with lavish attention to detail, this is strongly balanced with a
formal but flowing text that shows a depth of familiarity with the tale's history
(summarized in an extensive author's note). There's a fine echo in the wife's dress
tightening from pregnancy at the tale's opening and Rapunzel's asking the sorcer-
ess to help her with her tightening dress after the prince's nightly visits; this is a
version in which Rapunzel gives birth to twins in the wilderness before her reunion
with the prince and her healing his blindness with tears. Although romantic, the
overall tone is distant, appropriate for a story with action and implications as tradi-
tionally forbidding as these. BH
JANUARY 1998 
* 
183
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1997
Selecting the best books of the year can be an invigorating, exasperating experi-
ence. We find that some books we thought would age well don't, and some books
we thought would fade in the memory turn out to have remarkable staying power.
We have a short fiction list this year; the picture-book list, on the other hand, is
quite lengthy; and the nonfiction list is equally packed, with journalism and snakes
and science experiments jostling for attention. Lest it be said we do not have
passionate opinions, take a look at our website (http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/
bccb) in January for the "Blue Ribbon Dissents," a look at the books reviewers
think should have made the list and didn't. We can lament over the lack of stellar
fiction for younger readers or rejoice over being able to offer them Prelutsky's
poetic abundance, Lester's pithy autobiography, and Mochizuki's triumph of the
human spirit. We choose to rejoice.
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor
FICTION:
Anderson, M. T. Thirsty. Candlewick. (April)
Bloor, Edward. Tangerine. Harcourt. (March)
Deuker, Carl. Painting the Black. Houghton. (June)
Dines, Carol. Talk to Me: Stories and a Novella. Delacorte. (September)
Fine, Anne. The Tulip Touch. Little, Brown. (September)
Hopkinson, Deborah. Birdie's Lighthouse; illus. by Kimberly Bulcken Root.
Schwartz/Atheneum. (September)
Kindl, Patrice. The Woman in the Wall. Houghton. (March)
Pullman, Philip. The Subtle Knife. Knopf. (November)
VanOosting, James. The Last Payback. HarperCollins. (June)
PICTURE BOOKS:
Adoff, Arnold. Love Letters; illus. by Lisa Desimini. Blue Sky/Scholastic.
(March)
Demi, ad. One Grain ofRice: A Mathematical Folktale; ad. and illus. by Demi.
Scholastic. (February)
Diakitd, Baba Wague, ad. The Hunterman and the Crocodile: A West African
Folktale; ad. and illus. by Baba Wagu6 Diakit6. Scholastic. (February)
Ho, Minfong. Brother Rabbit: A Cambodian Tale; illus. by Jennifer Hewitson.
Lothrop. (May)
Janisch, Heinz, ad. Noah's Ark; illus. by Lisbeth Zwerger. North-South.
(December)
Koller, Jackie French. No Such Thing; illus. by Betsy Lewin. Boyds Mills.
(March)
184 
* THE BULLETIN
Lowell, Susan. The Bootmaker and the Elves; illus. by Tom Curry. Orchard.
(December)
Manna, Anthony, ad. Mr. Semolina-Semolinus: A Greek Folktale; ad. by
Anthony Manna and Christodoula Mitakidou; illus. by Giselle Potter.
Schwartz/Atheneum. (July)
Mayne, William. Lady Muck; illus. by Jonathan Heale. Houghton. (April)
Pinkney, Brian. The Adventures ofSparrowboy; written and illus. by Brian
Pinkney. Simon. (June)
Pyle, Howard, ad. Bearskin; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman. Books of Wonder/
Morrow. (November)
Riley, Linnea. Mouse Mess; written and illus. by Linnea Riley. Scholastic.
(December)
Soto, Gary. Snapshots from the Wedding; illus. by Stephanie Garcia. Putnam.
(April)
Stewart, Sarah. The Gardener; illus. by David Small. Farrar. (October)
Voake, Charlotte. Ginger; written and illus. by Charlotte Voake. Candlewick.
(April)
Wells, Rosemary. Bunny Cakes; written and illus. by Rosemary Wells. Dial.
(March)
Zelinsky, Paul O., ad. Rapunzel. Dutton. (January 1998)
NONFICTION:
Adler, David A. Lou Gehrig: The Luckiest Man; illus. by Terry Widener.
Harcourt. (April)
Bierhorst, John, ad. The Dancing Fox: Arctic Folktales; illus. by Mary K.
Okheena. Morrow. (July)
Bishop, Nic. The Secrets ofAnimal Flight; written and illus. with photographs by
Nic Bishop. Houghton. (June)
Davies, Nicola. Big Blue Whale; illus. by Nick Maland. Candlewick. (November)
Hampton, Wilborn. Kennedy Assassinated! The World Mourns: A Reporter's Story.
Candlewick. (October)
Jaffe, Nina, ad. The Mysterious Visitor: Stories ofthe Prophet Elijah; illus. by
Elivia Savadier. Scholastic. (June)
Lester, Helen. Author: A True Story; written and illus. by Helen Lester.
Houghton. (April)
Ling, Mary. The Snake Book; by Mary Ling and Mary Atkinson; illus. with
photographs by Frank Greenaway and Dave King. DK. (May)
Mochizuki, Ken. Passage to Freedom: The Sugihara Story; illus. by Dom Lee. Lee
& Low. (September)
Normandin, Christine, ed. Echoes of the Elders: The Stories and Paintings of
ChiefLelooska; illus. by Chief Lelooska. Callaway/DK Ink. (December)
Prelutsky, Jack, comp. The Beauty of the Beast: Poems from the Animal Kingdom;
illus. by Meilo So. Knopf. (January 1998)
Simms, Laura, ad. The Bone Man: A Native American Modoc Tale; illus. by
Michael McCurdy. Hyperion. (December)
Wick, Walter. A Drop of Water; written and illus. with photographs by Walter
Wick. Scholastic. (February)
JANUARY 1998 
* 
185
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-stories: Say
African Americans-fiction: Dorris;
Lyons; Patrick; Shaik
African Americans-poetry: Grimes
African Americans-stories:
Littlesugar; Medearis
Africa-folklore: Aardema
Agriculture: Nikola-Lisa
American Indians-fiction: Brooks;
Dorris
Animals-fiction: Carle
Animals-poetry: Evans; Prelutsky
Animals-stories: Kipling; Szekeres
Animals: Bauer; Huynh
Art and artists-stories: Ehlert;
Littlesugar
Art and artists: Wegman
Aunts and uncles-stories: Naylor
Bats-fiction: Oppel
BEDTIME STORIES: Berger;
Rohmann; Schlein; Yaccarino
BIOGRAPHIES: Adler; Bedard;
Carle; Huynh; McDonough; St.
George; Wallner
Brothers and sisters-fiction:
Qualey; Tashjian
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Wallace, I.
Brothers-fiction: Haas
Camps and camping-stories:
Wallace, I.
Chickens-stories: Stoeke
Child abuse-fiction: Moore
China: Dolphin
Christmas-stories: Collington;
Seibold
Civil War: Marrin
Civil War-fiction: Rees
Clubs-fiction: Maguire
Cowboys-fiction: Patrick
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Gray; Rottman; Stevenson
Dinosaurs-stories: Shields
Divorce: Rogers
Dogs-fiction: Lowry
Dogs-stories: Seibold
Dogs: Wegman
Ethics and values: Gallo; Tabor
FANTASY: Oppel; Rohmann
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Dorris
Fathers and daughters-stories:
Wallace, I.
Fathers and sons-fiction: Haas;
Myers; Rottman; Stevenson
Fathers-stories: Ehlert
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY
TALES: Aardema
Friends and friendship-fiction:
Bond; Gray; Roberts; Stevenson
GHOST STORIES: Maguire;
Medearis; Roberts
HISTORICAL FICTION: Little;
Littlesugar; Lyons; Myers;
Patrick; Pevsner; Pfitsch; Rees;
Wallace, B.
History, U.S.: Marrin; St. George
History, world: Nikola-Lisa
Holocaust: Adler; Holocaust;
McDonough
Jews-history: Holocaust
Literature, children's: Wallner
Literature, English: Bedard; Ross;
Shakespeare
186 
* THE BULLETIN
Mathematics: Greene; Murphy
Mental illness-fiction: Haas
Middle ages: Nikola-Lisa
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Dorris; Moore; Pfitsch
Mothers and sons-fiction:
Rottman
Music and musicians: Collier
Nature study: Bauer
Orphans-fiction: Little; Wallace,
B.
Photography: Wegman
POETRY: Evans; Otten; Prelutsky
Railroads: Levinson
Reading aloud: Carle; Prelutsky;
Wallace, B.; Wallner
Reading, family: Grimes;
Prelutsky
Reading, reluctant: Stevenson
Revolutionary war-fiction: Lyons;
Myers
School-fiction: Chan; Maguire
Science: McGough
SHORT STORIES: Chan; Gallo
Slavery-fiction: Lyons; Patrick; Rees;
Shaik
Snakes-stories: Kipling
Social studies: Dolphin
Spiders-stories: Aardema
Stepfamilies: Rogers
Storytelling: Aardema; Medearis
Storytime: Bunting; Otten; Shields;
Stoeke; Szekeres
Toys-stories: Bunting
Transportation: Gourley; Levinson
Vietnam-fiction: Pevsner
Vietnam: Huynh
Voyages and travel-fiction: Bond; Haas
Voyages and travel-stories: Bunting;
Rohmann
Voyages and travel: Dolphin
Weather-stories: Cowley
Weddings-stories: Naylor
World War II: Adler; Holocaust
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION OF THE BUL-
LETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN 0008-9036), as required by 39
U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is published eleven times
a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is $40.00 (institutional, domestic), $47.00
(institutional, foreign), $35.00 (individual, domestic), $42.00 (individual, foreign).
The owner and publisher is the University of Illinois Press acting for the Graduate School of
Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois, a nonprofit organization. Office of
publication is located at 1325 South Oak St., Champaign, IL 61820-6903. The managing editor is
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, Children's Research Center, 51
E. Armory Ave., Champaign, IL 61820. There are no stockholders, bondholders, mortgages, or
other security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status for
Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preceding twelve months:
5547; number for single issue nearest filing date: 5512. Average number of copies of each issue
distributed by mail to paid subscribers during preceding twelve months: 4176; number for single
issue nearest to filing date: 4527. Average number of copies distributed for free per issue during
preceding 12 months: 81; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 76. Average number of
total copies distributed during preceding 12 months: 4257; number for single issue nearest to filing
date: 4603. Average number of copies of each issue not distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled
after printing) during preceding 12 months: 1290; number for single issue nearest to filing date:
909.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Nancy K. Barrett
Assistant Business Manager, University of Illinois Press
October 21, 1997
Teaching 8
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
c______; 
Every issue of Teaching K-8
\ 
provides informative articles on
Tlchinl'.~ 
the cutting edge of education.
You'll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
Drnon't mice 
y"llo r\n thicr ralnahl
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
TeachtngK8
x 
54808, 
Boulder, 
CO 
80322-4808
88793
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
8-8793
j"= The Horn Book stars
TI 
Et 
h'l- 
«-( 
friit*i--
1n 
1LIaLt L 
nLICl 
LULUIC,
creatures called Overlords
raise humans for their
own sinister purposes.
No child lives past 14-
except for the brave few
who escape to join the
rebel band led by the
computer-human hybrid
called Shade.
"A dark, engrossing science
fiction novel.... Each of
the team of young
[escapees] is brilliantly
and sympathetically
characterized.... Grim,
unusual, and fascinating."
-The Horn Book
"Fast-paced, exciting.... A well-written and engaging book."
-School Library Journal
)n-adventure
eal."
R (0-06-027324-0)
o by Garth Nix
SABRIEL
12 up. $15.95 TR
)-06-027322-4)
$5.95 PB
)-06-447183-7)
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA
RETunN POSTAGE GuARAEE
0008-9036(199801)51:5*; 1 -G
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
41,
J,
16~i~k"
~;· 
.*
r
.: 9'
