T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
July/August 2014
Vol. 67   No. 11
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 67 (2014).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $60.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$100.00 (print); $110.00 (online);  
$140.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
July/August 2014
Vol. 67 No. 11
559  the BIg PICture
 
 Elizabeth, Queen of the Seas  by Lynne Cox; illus. by Brian Floca
560  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
563 •  Naked!  by Michael Ian Black; illus. by Debbie Ridpath Ohi
571 •  The End or Something Like That  by Ann Dee Ellis
596 • The Pilot and the Little Prince  written and illus. by Peter Sís
599 •  Rules of Summer  by Shaun Tan
600 •  Separate Is Never Equal: Sylvia Mendez & Her Family’s Fight for  
Desegregation  written and illus. by Duncan Tonatiuh
608  suBjeCt And use Index
611  AnnuAL Author And tItLe Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Amy Atkinson, Reviewer (AA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Kim Naples, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $100.00 or electronic $110.00; combined print & electronic $140.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Elizabeth, Queen of the Seas copyright ©2014 by Brian Floca and used by permis-
sion of Schwartz & Wade. 
July/August 2014 • 559
the BIg PICture
Elizabeth, Queen of the Seas
by Lynne Cox; illustrated by Brian Floca
Animal stories are enduringly popular with youngsters, whether they’re tales of 
the lost and found or stories of loyal companionship, chronicles of dogs or yarns 
about cats. More unusual is a story about an animal who did exactly as she pleased 
and let the humans adjust to it; extremely unusual is a book not about furry dogs 
or cats but a huge wayward elephant seal. Such, however, is the tale of Elizabeth, 
Queen of the Seas.
The charming Elizabeth is the star of this fact-based story about the 
legendary seal who inexplicably swam up the Avon River to make her home in the 
busy New Zealand city of Christchurch. Stretching her 2,000-pound body out 
comfortably across warm city streets, she became rather a traffic hazard, so although 
the residents—especially one small boy, Michael—delighted in their regal visitor 
(named for Queen Elizabeth II), they feared she’d get hurt or cause an accident. 
Attempts to relocate her—first to a nearby seal beach, then to a colony miles away, 
and finally to a location hundreds of miles from the city—always resulted in the 
determined elephant seal’s return, and after her final triumphant reappearance, 
the city decided to embrace their unusual resident and warn traffic around her. 
Cox, the famous long-distance swimmer, has an understandable affinity 
with a seagoing creature who swims tenaciously toward her goal. She writes with 
eager accessibility, keeping the story’s impact high by minimizing embroidery and 
focusing on key dramatic moments. She also possesses a storyteller’s rhythm (“Eliza-
beth looked at him with her dark brown eyes, snorted once, and once again”) and 
ear for the occasional picturesque detail (the towing boat heads out “past the silty, 
brownish-green river mouth into the cold, dark ocean”). The character of Michael, 
apparently a tribute to the Christchurch boy who (according to a note) told the 
author about Elizabeth, offers a fine identification point for young audiences who 
would similarly rejoice at a friendly local elephant seal. However, the book doesn’t 
present him as a hero who eclipses Elizabeth; instead, he’s narrative counterpoint to 
her, waiting and watching along with listeners while allowing her to remain the star.
Floca’s loose-limbed line and watercolor illustrations have a touch of the 
informality of Robert Andrew Parker in their casual linework dabs and scrawls, and 
they move easily from spread to vignettes, seal to humans. Showstopping landscapes 
make Elizabeth’s attachment to the locale utterly understandable: verdant spreads 
of the tree-lined, reflection-dappled river drip with golden weeping willows; a 
luminous moon makes Elizabeth’s nocturnal path through the smoky water into a 
shimmering road; the populace of Christchurch throngs onto a lovely bridge (and 
down alongside it, and in boats within it) to witness the return of the prodigal 
560 • the Bulletin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
elephant seal. Elizabeth herself is touched slightly with anthropomorphism in her 
contented if whiskery smile, but her massive gray bulk is absolutely believable, and 
there’s plenty of cheerful charm in the human Christchurch populace. 
The book’s sunny temperament, Southern setting, and focus on an 
animal who knows where she wants to be despite human intervention make it a 
neat inverted complement to Carnesi’s compelling and fact-based Little Dog Lost 
(BCCB 2/12). But maybe they’re not so different—they’re both stories of animals 
who, much to human delight and relief, finally found safe homes, and that’s the 
takeaway that’s going to matter to audiences. A note about elephant seals and a 
photo of the real Elizabeth are appended. (See p. 566 for publication information.) 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
Andreu, MAriA e. The Secret Side of Empty. Running Press, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-5192-0 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-5205-7 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
M. T. isn’t like the other girls in her posh Catholic school: her family is from Ar-
gentina, and they are undocumented, so she believes that her chances for education 
end with high school. Her father is depressed and abusive, forced to cobble together 
low-wage jobs after his business partner betrayed him, a dismal situation exacerbated 
by his cultural insistence that her mother not work. M. T. is becoming increasingly 
desperate and depressed herself; her secret weighs heavily on her, and she believes 
that even the love she has found with a kind boy is doomed once he learns that she 
is not who he thinks she is. She contemplates suicide, and a well-meaning friend 
reports her to the police, setting off a chain of events that eventually lead to her 
leaving home, just in time for the DREAM Act to open a future she didn’t think 
possible. This is certainly a timely and important topic, and Andreu has experienced 
what it was like to be undocumented in the only country she considers home. 
The autobiographical element gives some retrospective flavor to the situation that 
sometimes contradicts the contemporary setting, but the book effectively generates 
empathy for the plight of the undocumented as well as the abused by giving voice 
and dimension to M. T. She is a complex character, by turns cruel to her mother, 
July/August 2014 • 561
loving to her little brother, petulant with her boyfriend, and strong in facing down 
a father who expresses his frustration by using his fists. While her situation is not 
necessarily typical, the feelings that accompany it deserve an airing and can open 
discussions about and beyond immigration, stretching to any teen who feels as 
if his or her circumstances offer little hope for the future. Resources for suicide 
prevention and domestic violence are included.  KC
AtwAter-rhodes, AMeliA Bloodwitch. Delacorte, 2014 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99091-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74303-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98074-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-9
Vance has lived in a metaphorical cage his whole life: though he’s surrounded by 
luxury and adored for what he can provide as a shape-shifter (he can turn into a 
quetzal at will), he knows that he cannot really leave Midnight, a vampire enclave. 
Once unexpected events land him on the outside for the first time, Vance learns 
that he may actually have an extremely rare kind of magic that could make him 
powerful as a destructive force for or against the vampires, depending on who 
successfully exploits him first. Not much actually happens in this first novel in 
what is obviously intended to be a series, but the set-up is rich and absorbing, and 
given the complex world-building, a slow introduction is beneficial. The extreme 
innocence with which Vance narrates is poignant, as it’s clear that his belief in 
others will yield nothing good. At the core, the vampire underworld that Vance is 
only just beginning to understand is dark and fascinating, and the slow unfolding 
of the ways in which it operates heightens suspense. Atwater-Rhodes fans will find 
this on their own, and they’ll appreciate the similar tone and grammatical style to 
her earlier books; vampire buffs may need a bit more coaxing to see how a shape-
shifting quetzal protagonist fits into a book they’ll like, but the vamps are the real 
(tortured and torturing) stars here.  AS
AuerbAch, AdAM Edda: A Little Valkyrie’s First Day of School; written and illus. 
by Adam Auerbach. Ottaviano/Holt, 2014 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9703-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-6 yrs
Edda loves her homeland of Asgard, where she lives with her father, sisters, and 
a host of magical creatures. Still, she feels lonely without any other Valkyries her 
age, and her perceptive papa decides to send her to school—on Earth. Anxious 
and excited, Edda summons her bravery only to find herself very different from the 
other students: she struggles to sit still, wait in line for the slide, and understand 
why not everyone shares their food like they do at the feasts back home. When 
she pens an account of Asgard for a class assignment, though, and her peers beg to 
know more, with one new friend even flying home with her and her father to play 
after school. Though text relies overmuch on the adult joke of Edda’s origins and 
the straightforwardly drawn digitally colored illustrations sometimes tip from the 
poker-faced into the flat, this story still manages to charm. The depictions of the 
struggles of Edda’s day (at lunchtime, nobody wants to trade for her giant leg of 
meat) bring a needed spark to the book, eliciting giggles through their humorous 
but sympathetic rendering of a little girl struggling to fit in. Audiences who have 
562 • the Bulletin
recently survived their own first day of school may relate to her trepidation, and 
those soon facing a first day will likely admire Edda’s bravery. This could also work 
as enjoyable if light-on-substance supplement to an introductory unit on mythol-
ogy, and it might inspire the more timid little Valkyries.  AA
bAker, ken How I Got Skinny, Famous, and Fell Madly in Love. Running Press, 
2014 269p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7624-5014-5 $9.95  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Emery is a big girl in a SoCal beach town that only has room for the hyperthin 
and Botoxed. Her mother is a former LA Lakers cheerleader, her father is a former 
Laker turned motivational speaker, and her sister is a model hoping for a career 
in television. In the midst of her appearance-obsessed family, Emery luxuriates in 
overeating and rejecting all of her mother’s bribes to lose weight. When she finds 
out that their house is about to go into foreclosure, however, she reluctantly agrees 
to star in a reality/help show called 50 Pounds to Freedom, which will require her to 
lose fifty pounds in as many days in order to win $1,000,000. The show also offers 
her the opportunity to vlog on her own YouTube channel, where she sounds off 
about the damage wrought by impossible beauty standards, women’s magazines, 
the f(at)-word, and slut-shaming. Emery’s situation and her diatribes against it 
will certainly appeal to many readers; she speaks to the concerns of many teens 
in a voice that is witty and brave, if predictable and clichéd. However, all of her 
motivations are psychologically simple, traceable, and unsurprising: her problems 
with her weight are both genetic and a result of teen rebellion against unrealistic 
expectations, her problems with unsafe sexual activity are a result of her insecurity 
and longing for fatherly attention, and her struggles to lose weight quickly result 
in unsafe behaviors that she recognizes as such. If the book itself lacks nuance, so 
does the environment it portrays, but readers who are fans of the reality and help 
show genres, especially those who enjoyed Demetrios’ Something Real (BCCB 
1/14), may appreciate this insider’s look at how such a show is made, marketed, 
and critiqued by one of its participants.  KC 
bertozzi, nick Shackleton: Antarctic Odyssey; written and illus. by Nick Ber-
tozzi. First Second, 2014 125p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-451-6 $16.99 
 R Gr. 6-10
In this graphic novel, Bertozzi follows legendary explorer Ernest Shackleton from 
professional nadir (in the opening sequence Shackleton collapses from scurvy, 
bringing his time as lieutenant on Robert Falcon Scott’s 1902 expedition to a dis-
appointing end) to triumphant climax, saving his team from feared abandonment 
at the bottom of the world. In between is, of course, a whale of an adventure—as 
readers familiar with the expedition will know and newbies will learn. Black and 
white artwork is largely confined in tidy frames unless, for example, Endurance lists 
under ice compression and sends Bertozzi’s artwork tumbling as well. The illustra-
tions effectively relay what prose alone would take pages to tell—how the small 
fleet of lifeboats driving landward against the wind had to pick their way through 
ice-jammed leads, or how an emergency operating room was cobbled together 
when a crew member had to have frostbitten toes amputated. Bertozzi opts here 
for more breadth than depth of coverage, and life-threatening episodes often fly 
by so quickly that it’s difficult to fully appreciate one panic before the next one 
July/August 2014 • 563
arrives. The bone-chilling wetness, the numbing cold, and the persistent struggle 
against hopelessness come through clearly, though, and should send armchair 
adventurers sprinting for a history of the expedition (perhaps Elizabeth Kimmel’s 
Ice Story, BCCB 2/99) or Tim Jarvis’ recreated journey in Chasing Shackleton.  EB 
bertrAnd, diAne GonzAles There’s a Name for This Feeling/ Hay un nombre 
para lo que siento; Spanish tr. by Gabriela Baeza Ventura. Piñata, 2014 [76p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55885-784-1 $10.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Ten brief tales appear in this bilingual collection of short stories, expressing a 
full range of contemporary realism, from two stories featuring grandparents’ 
declining mental status to a vignette of an eleven-year-old potato chip mogul. 
Bertrand displays a marked facility in switching between topic, form, and genre, 
but unfortunately, this multifaceted approach also means that the book is marked 
by a distinct lack of focus. While some stories—like a pubescent cross-country 
team’s search for a rumored naked woman on their route—would be spot-on for 
middle-schoolers, others require levels of contemplation more often found among 
older teens. Several selections, like the title story in which a teenage girl misreads 
an ex’s signals with heartbreaking results, have hi-lo potential for readers hesitant 
in either language, while others tightly pack sophistication into a few pages, as in 
an encounter between a silent hospital clown and a young woman reeling from 
a miscarriage that her mother calls a “blessing.” A similar unevenness shapes the 
stories’ tones, with, for example, a tale of one guy’s disregard of his parents’ warn-
ing to avoid New Year’s Eve fireworks dipping into didacticism. Still, these kids 
display a lot of approachability and their stories encompass a breadth of Latino/a 
experiences across language ability, socioeconomic status, and gender, giving the 
collection the potential to reach a wide audience. Perhaps the most felicitous use of 
this compendium, though, would be in a bilingual composition classroom to show 
off a diversity of approaches to the short story; this would be aided by suggested 
discussion questions and writing exercises appended.  TA 
blAck, MichAel iAn Naked!; illus. by Debbie Ridpath Ohi. Simon, 2014 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6738-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6739-2 $10.99  
R* 4-7 yrs
From the opening spread (“Naked!” cries a boy in a bubble bath), this latest offer-
ing from the partnership of Black and Ohi (I’m Bored, BCCB 10/12) is an all-out 
celebration of the joys of being a kid. The initial jubilation comes as the post-bath 
boy gallops around the house stark naked, speculating on other ideal spots for 
nakedness (“I should dress like this all the time. I could go to school naked. Play 
on the playground naked”). When Mom approaches with an armful of laundry, 
the boy resists—“Who needs pants? Or shirts or shoes or capes”—before realizing 
the potential of that final thought—“Wait. . . . Capes???” He then rejoices in the 
perfect combination of nakedness and capedness (“Eating another cookie mostly 
naked but also caped!”), before inevitably ending up cold and all-out exhausted, 
noodled on a very patient mother’s shoulder as she carries him to bed. The point of 
view is spot-on here, and the little boy protagonist is entirely lovable in his unadul-
terated elation. The text, all in our hero’s voice, effusively conveys his energy, and 
the progression from bursting at the seams (or absence thereof) with enthusiasm 
564 • the Bulletin
to being completely, undeniably beat will be familiar to parents of animated little 
people. The digitally rendered illustrations, thick linocut-like borders and smooth 
planes of color with occasional texturing, match the energy of the story, and the 
mop-headed boy’s expressions are sweetly effervescent. Full frontals are cleverly 
obstructed throughout, and the variety of angles and perspectives (viewed from 
above, behind, at a distance, up close) lend visual interest. This is a story that begs 
to be read aloud and delighted over by young and old alike.  HM
blAckburne, liviA Midnight Thief. Hyperion, 2014 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-7638-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4847-0628-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
A lifetime of thieving to make ends meet on the streets of Forge has left seventeen-
year-old Kyra a bit morally flexible, so when she’s approached by the leader of the 
Assassins Guild to put her sneaking skills to use fighting the “fatpurse” nobles, she 
accepts. Her first kill, however, sends her into a guilt-ridden tailspin and she flees. 
When she’s eventually captured by the Palace Guard, she realizes (along with the 
help of a handsome young knight) that her activities with the Guild were actu-
ally assisting the advancement of the Demon Riders, a group of rebel barbarians 
responsible for brutal attacks in the countryside. Blackburne offers up a complex 
world where no one is entirely evil or good, and even those wrestling for power 
through less than civil means are inspired by noble intentions. Kyra is an appealing 
heroine, confident in her physical prowess but insecure in her identity, and teenag-
ers in particular may relate to her increasing frustration as her attempts to establish 
her independence and her own beliefs are constantly thwarted by the powers that 
be. The romance between Kyra and Tristam, the knight, unfolds sweetly, but it’s 
Kyra’s journey toward self-discovery, especially as her childhood connection to the 
Demon Riders is revealed, that takes precedence. There are plenty of narrow escapes, 
thrilling chases, and tender kisses to accompany the more thoughtful elements here, 
too, and readers will be pleased with a satisfactory conclusion that leaves room for 
a sequel or two.  KQG 
brown, Jennifer Torn Away. Little, 2014 276p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24553-1 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24551-7 $9.99 
 R Gr. 7-10
Residents of areas frequently beset by tornados are taught what to do and where 
to go when the alarms sound, but as Jersey Cameron observes, no one tells you 
what to do after a tornado destroys everything. Alone in her Missouri home when 
a particularly devastating twister blows through, Jersey survives as her home is flat-
tened above her. She emerges to learn that most of her neighbors survived, but after 
nearly three days of wondering and worrying, she finds that her mother and her 
little sister have not, and that her stepfather is too lost in his grief to think straight. 
He ships her off to her birth father’s family, and when she can no longer tolerate 
their hard drinking and meanness, she runs away only to find herself deposited on 
the doorstep of her maternal grandparents, whom her mother hated and whom she 
therefore feels obligated to hate as well. With each relocation, Jersey learns things 
about her mother that upset her idea of who she was, and she has to discover for 
herself who her relatives really are. Deftly aligning reader emotions in perfect sync 
July/August 2014 • 565
with Jersey’s, Brown portrays Jersey’s initial terror, stunned disbelief, frantic despera-
tion, explosive rage, and ultimate acceptance with credible sensitivity, minimizing 
melodrama but clearly communicating that the aftermath of the tornado is just as 
battering as the event itself. The specific tragedy thus acts as a general framework 
for the expanding perspectives Jersey gains as she realizes that her mother was a 
complicated, imperfect person, that friends and neighbors sometimes close ranks 
around their own in times of stress, and that family is a matter of heart and choice 
rather than biology or obligation. As these life lessons reach across teen experience, 
this will have appeal far beyond the tornado-prone Midwest.  KC
cArson, MAry kAy Park Scientists: Gila Monsters, Geysers, and Grizzly Bears in 
America’s Own Backyard; illus. with photographs by Tom Uhlman. Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 76p (Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 978-0-547-79268-2 $18.99  
Ad Gr. 4-8
Carson explores three national parks beloved by tourists—Yellowstone, Saguaro, and 
Great Smoky Mountains—and directs readers’ attention to the science behind the 
oohs and aahs of their natural wonders. Yellowstone boasts hydrothermal theatrics 
of gushing geysers and boiling mud pots, and grizzlies that require delicate man-
agement to keep them in harmony with visitors and nearby residents. At Saguaro, 
high school scientists assist in inventorying the famous towering cacti that give 
the park its name and the venomous gila monsters whose lifestyle continues to 
puzzle scientists. The Smoky Mountains are home to tiny red-cheeked salamanders, 
whose DNA is helping to shed light on surviving climate change, and the Photinus 
carolinus, a synchronously flashing lightning bug. Although each section has its 
charms, treatment is uneven. The Yellowstone entry suffers from several glitches, 
from the number of geysers in the park (claimed as about 300 in the fast facts and 
“thousands” in the main text) to a disconnect between the scientists’ examination 
of a rise in hydrothermal temperature in a section of the park (a sign of possible 
volcanic eruption) and the sidebar’s reassuring claim that “none of these signs of a 
stirring volcano is happening.” The Saguaro coverage is light on procedure, with 
no real explanation of how the featured high-schoolers are using their measuring 
sticks, and overall, the background of the scientists, which is generally a highlight 
of this series, is thin. Photographs will draw plenty of browsers, though, and a well-
designed page of fast facts and resources is displayed prominently at the opening 
of each section; a glossary and source notes are included. Kids anticipating a trip 
to one of these parks may want to study up now and show off their impressive 
vocabularies when they arrive.  EB
chenG, AndreA The Year of the Fortune Cookie: An Anna Wang Novel; illus. by 
Patrice Barton. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 154p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-544-10519-5 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-544-28984-0 $15.99  
R Gr. 3-5
As Anna Wang (of The Year of the Book, BCCB 7/12, and The Year of the Baby, 
BCCB 7/13) begins sixth grade at the local middle school, life becomes increas-
ingly complicated. Best bud Laura is now going to Catholic school, leaving Anna 
with only Camille (who is, like Anna, Chinese American) as her only close school 
friend. Because of Anna’s knowledge of Chinese and familiarity with international 
adoption (Anna’s little sister was adopted from China), she has also been asked by 
566 • the Bulletin
her former teacher Mrs. Sylvester to accompany her and her husband to China as 
they adopt a baby girl. Anna continues to thoughtfully spread her wings in this 
title, joining a school service club and making a new friend, traveling to China with 
the Sylvesters and improving her Chinese, and further exploring what her heritage 
means to her as a Midwestern Chinese-American kid. Complex issues of interna-
tional adoption and cultural and racial identity are age-appropriately introduced 
and respectfully considered within the context of Anna’s experiences, and Anna’s 
introspective young adolescent voice continues to ring with authenticity. Quieter 
tweens just beginning to examine their own identities will relate to Anna’s narrative, 
and fans of Anna’s previous adventures will definitely want to keep following her 
as she journeys toward young adulthood.  JH
conAGhAn, briAn When Mr. Dog Bites. Bloomsbury, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-61963-346-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Scottish teen Dylan Mint has Tourette’s, with symptoms including coprolalia 
(uncontrollable swearing), and he attends a special school for kids with disabilities. 
Even when he’s not tic-ing, he has a way with colorful language, and he has devel-
oped his own kind of slang. He also has issues with understanding adults, though, 
which cause him to misinterpret a cryptic conversation between his mother and her 
doctor to mean that he is going to die in March. He immediately makes a bucket 
list that includes his three preoccupations: he wants to have sex, ensure the social 
happiness of his friend Amir, and see his father, whom he thinks is deployed in a 
war zone, once more. Dylan confronts the racism that plagues Amir head-on, and 
he is open and irreverent about the circumstances of attending a school for teens 
with special needs, even if he focuses mostly on negative teasing and bullying; in-
deed, the only kindness among peers we see is between him and Amir as they try 
to figure out girls and discuss the meaning of their friendship. Dylan’s Tourette’s 
makes him vulnerable outside of school as well, as is evidenced by an incident that 
hovers between a serious wedgie and a scary rape (from which he emerges none 
the worse for wear). While the book does a nice job of showing a teen coping with 
more than his disorder, the misunderstanding about his dying is so clumsily handled 
that even inexperienced readers will call it out as a device and wonder how Dylan 
could be so naïve. Dylan’s thickly local jargon may also be a challenge, but since 
much of it bears on taboo subjects such as racism, sex, and disability, teens will 
laugh their way through to find Dylan’s heart of gold.  KC
cox, lynne Elizabeth, Queen of the Seas; illus. by Brian Floca. Schwartz & 
Wade, 2014 42p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95888-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85888-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98769-4 $10.99  
R* 5-8 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 559, for review.
July/August 2014 • 567
cronin, doreen Boom Snot Twitty; illus. by Renata Liwska. Viking, 2014 [34p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78575-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-6 yrs
Three friends, Boom (a bear), Snot (a snail), and Twitty (a robin), intend to spend 
the day together, but their differing tastes complicate the plan. Boom is easily bored 
and wants action, while Twitty wants to stay put and crochet, and both want to 
hide when wind and rain hit; cheerful Snot, meanwhile, is content to go with the 
flow no matter the weather. When evening falls, however, the three agree that they 
should snuggle up together to sleep. While the contrasting personalities of the friends 
provide some interest, very little actually happens in this story, and the tale teeters 
from quiet to dull. The poetic simplicity of the language (“The sky got dark and 
the rain came down. ‘Run!’ yelled Boom. ‘Hide!’ cried Twitty. ‘Rain!’ said Snot”) 
gives a bit of liveliness to the narrative, though, and Liwska’s lovely soft-focus art is 
frame-worthy; her cuddly rendering of the three little critters makes them especially 
hard to resist. Fuzzy brown Boom could easily be a relative of Minarik and Sendak’s 
Little Bear, and fluffy Twitty (with her sometimes unsuccessful crochet projects) is 
equally appealing, but it is pale gray-green Snot, with her tidy spiral shell, jaunty 
red antennae bows, and wide-eyed optimism, who steals the show. This could be 
used for a discussion on personalities, but it will be more successful as part of a 
subdued, rainy-day snuggle session with a thoughtful child or two.  JH
crozA, lAurel From There to Here; illus. by Matt James. Groundwood, 
2014 28p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-365-0 $18.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-366-7 $16.95  
R 4-8 yrs
This follow-up to I Know Here shows our protagonist now relocated from her rural 
Saskatchewan home to a life in urban Toronto. Back in Saskatchewan, Dad came 
home for lunch, while here he’s gone all day; there, she and her siblings “traveled 
in a pack,” but now her older brother has gone his own way; there smelled like 
home, but here just smells like new carpet. It’s not all bad, though: a girl named 
Anne invites the protagonist out to ride bikes together, and our transplant realizes 
the city can bring good new things, too. This has the same plainspoken child per-
spective as the first title, setting out movingly how deeply unrooted and how bereft 
such a big move can make a kid; the details of what’s altered are sharply observed, 
daily life normalities that will resonate with kids in town and country. Saturated, 
painterly strokes of ink take on an expressionistic flair in the absorbing illustrations, 
which often face “there” and “here” against each other across the gutter, vividly 
conveying their opposition. The girl’s imaginings are occasionally brought to the 
fore, with rangy pine trees shadowing her city bedroom, and intrigued viewers will 
want to pore over the spreads for other significant elements (such as Anne’s earlier 
appearance). Even kids who haven’t moved have likely been uncomfortably away 
from home, so just about everyone will be able to relate to this; it would make an 
interesting pairing with Perkins’ Pictures from Our Vacation (BCCB 7/07) for a look 
at the way new experiences can surprise us.  DS
568 • the Bulletin
d’lAcey, chris A Dark Inheritance. Scholastic, 2014 [304p] (UNICORNE 
Files)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-60876-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-60879-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-7
Michael can’t initially figure out how he saved the dog—one moment he was 
observing a dog at risk and the next instant he was holding it out of harm’s way. 
It turns out that Michael has an ability to alter reality, which makes him valuable 
to a group called UNICORNE, a group with which his father had been secretly 
associated before his disappearance three years earlier. Michael’s first task on the 
team isn’t, as he’d hoped, to begin searching for his father but rather to investigate 
the rescued dog, his deceased owner, and a mystery around a classmate whom the 
dog seems to find particularly appealing. Michael’s sardonic younger sister provides 
a refreshing counterpoint to his general earnest tone, as does the sexy, dangerous 
Chantelle, a member of UNICORNE who is masquerading as household help 
to keep an eye on Michael. The plot’s a little overstuffed, but presumably future 
volumes in the series will sort it all out for the reader; in the meantime, the snappy 
pace and amiable protagonist who knows he is making things up on the fly, and 
notes so with wry resignation, make for a lively and enjoyable read.  AS
de los sAntos, MArisA Saving Lucas Biggs; by Marisa de los Santos and David 
Teague. Harper/HarperCollins, 2014 279p
ISBN 978-0-06-227462-5 $16.99  
R Gr. 4-6
Just like all the O’Malleys before her who had the family “quirk,” thirteen-year-old 
Margaret vows not to use her ability to time travel. Yet when corrupt, hardened judge 
Lucas Biggs sentences her father to death for a crime he didn’t commit, Margaret 
sees a chance to change the past—and Biggs’ heart—before it’s too late for her fam-
ily. With help from her best friend Charlie and Charlie’s Grandpa Josh (who had 
been the judge’s friend in childhood), she moves between her hometown of Victory, 
Arizona and its 1938 counterpart, when town founder Victory Fuels Corporation 
facilitated the starvation and murder of striking miners and their families. The 
book takes on some weighty issues here, from workers’ rights to metaphysics, and 
handles them with grace and sensitivity. While concrete descriptions of Margaret’s 
unique inherited ability and the time travel process are understandably scant, the 
first-person narrative voices, alternating among Margaret, Grandpa Josh, and, later, 
Charlie, provide a sense of immediacy and conviction. The authors’ graceful use 
of language and fearless exploration of a more spiritual dimension simultaneously 
comfort and challenge readers, encouraging deep thoughts without proselytizing, 
and providing plenty of suspense besides. A restrained but resonant rumination on 
social justice, community, and trusting the light within each of us, this novel makes 
a good companion for armchair time travelers and budding philosophers alike.  AA
dellAirA, AvA Love Letters to the Dead. Farrar, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-374-34667-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In response to a school assignment, Laurel begins a therapeutic odyssey, writing 
letters to dead celebrities as she tries to come to terms with the death of her beloved 
July/August 2014 • 569
sister, May. She and May were always close, but May was the one who tried to jolly 
everyone up when their parents fought, and May was the one most affected by their 
parents’ divorce. As much as she tried to save Laurel from sadness, May couldn’t 
save herself, and her bad choices had ripple effects on her little sister. Laurel writes 
to Kurt Cobain, Judy Garland, Janis Joplin, River Phoenix, Amy Winehouse, and 
Amelia Earhart, among others, each celebrity’s personal history playing a role in 
her growing understanding of how innocence is lost and pain grinds people down. 
She tells them of her experiences starting a new school, falling in love, and watch-
ing her two friends, Natalie and Hannah, stumble toward a relationship they both 
want but that scares Hannah. Reminiscent of Chbosky’s The Perks of Being a Wall-
flower, this is powerfully emotional stuff, particularly as Laurel moves from merely 
reporting on what happens to processing how she feels and why. The trajectory of 
her growth through grief moves slowly but surely, from reading Elizabeth Bishop’s 
poetic meditation on “the art of losing” to writing her own in prose that becomes 
progressively more lyrical and introspective until it resolves, fittingly, into a poetic 
love letter to her much-missed sister.  KC
diAz, stephAnie Extraction. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2014 [416p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-04117-3 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-3732-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Extraction, being removed from the surface populace for work in the safer Core, 
is the only hope for most on this grueling planet where otherwise your life as a 
manual laborer ends when you are killed at twenty years old. Clementine is chosen 
for extraction, and while she is sad to leave her boyfriend, she knows that at least 
in the Core she can work, contribute, and flourish. Unfortunately, the Core is far 
from the promised perfection, and Clem is faced with vengeful classmates, harsh 
situations, and the pressing secret that the end of the world is coming. Clem is, 
on occasion, irritatingly slow to action, but her general belief that she is doing the 
right thing propels her in exciting (if not always logical) directions. Disappoint-
ingly, a muddy plot and flat character development make it hard to understand or 
care about what happens to the planet, and the plot elements—testing to find the 
exceptional, saviors that turn out not to be—are all pretty well-worn. Nevertheless, 
there are certainly dystopia fans who can’t get enough, and the fact that this all 
takes place on a different planet (complete with acid-dripping moon and habitable 
inner layers) at least shakes up the setting in intriguing ways.  AS
dolAMore, JAclyn Dark Metropolis. Hyperion, 2014 292p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-6332-9 $17.99
E-book ISBN 978-1-4231-8100-2 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 6-9
The city of Dolamore’s urban fantasy has a vaguely 1920-ish feel about it, complete 
with dance hall girls, labor unrest, and the lingering effects of a devastating war, 
but here magic exists as well, and it’s a dangerous and desired commodity. Three 
teenagers there unravel a tangled web of government lies and secrets as they search 
for the truth behind a recent spate of missing persons. Sixteen-year-old Thea is 
trying to make ends meet as a waitress at the glamorous Telephone Club; her best 
friend Nan goes missing one night and finds herself in an underground prison with 
only fleeting memories of previous life; Freddy is a teenaged, silver-haired magician 
570 • the Bulletin
who has the ability to raise the dead and with whom Thea searches for Nan. The 
novel is primarily driven by dialogue, providing only a sketchy outline of the sur-
rounding world. The lack of detail makes the city and its inner workings generic 
and underdeveloped, but it also serves to place the teens’ search and particularly 
Freddy’s ethical dilemma—how to stop raising the dead for his politician uncle’s 
nefarious schemes—front and center. The bad guys are easily identifiable from the 
get-go, and a straightforward plot, plentiful dialogue, and tidy resolution makes 
this a plausible choice for readers, younger and reluctant, wanting to move from 
middle-grade fantasies to darker YA fare.  KQG
doodler, todd h. Veggies with Wedgies; written and illus. by Todd H. Doo-
dler. Simon, 2014 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9340-7 $14.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9341-4 $10.99  
Ad 3-5 yrs
Mass speculation ensues among the garden vegetables when Farmer John leaves his 
tightie whities hanging on the clothesline (to the veggies’ responses of “What are 
those?” and “They look comfy”). A scholarly carrot explains to the others precisely 
what underwear are and how they function, and the veggies subsequently decide 
that they would like to try them on. Veggies turn out not to be naturals at donning 
underpants (“It took a little bit of hopping and a lot of wiggling”), and they are 
ultimately distressed by the discomfort caused by “terrible wedgies.” When they 
swap the garments around among them, though, they all find the perfect fit, and 
they are so pleased that they make up an underwear song on the spot. The appeal 
here is entirely rooted in the entertainment draw of underpants, as there’s not 
much plot to the story, and even those willing to suspend logic (why would the 
farmer’s underpants be different sizes? How big are these veggies, anyway?) will find 
that there is not quite enough humor to carry the narrative. That said, there is an 
abundance of visual comedy as the assorted produce bounce around the farmyard 
in undergarments (especially in the backside gallery of veg displaying their wedge). 
The digitally rendered illustrations offer large fields of solid color with little tex-
tural detail; the veggies themselves are composed of a few basic colors, half-circle 
mouths, and large googly eyes, and the backdrop is mostly the brown dirt of the 
garden. Kids ready to move up from Todd Parr’s underwear titles may appreciate 
the anthropomorphized cast of underpants-wearing produce delighting in their new 
find. Meanwhile, “Farmer John is still looking for his underwear.”  HM 
dubuc, MAriAnne The Lion and the Bird; written and illus. by Marianne Dubuc; 
tr. from the French by Claudia Z. Bedrick. Enchanted Lion, 2014 70p
ISBN 978-1-59270-151-3 $17.95 
R* 5-7 yrs
While working in his garden in the autumn, Lion finds an injured bird. He ban-
dages its wing and takes it into his home, where it heals and keeps him company 
over the winter. When spring returns, the bird rejoins its flock as they once again 
pass through the area. Lion is sad but understands (“And so it goes. Sometimes 
life is like that”), yet still he hopes that perhaps he will see his friend again. Sure 
enough, as autumn approaches, the bird returns to spend the winter with Lion, 
much to the satisfaction of both friends. The minimal text (many spreads are in 
fact wordless), leisurely pace, and serene pictures in warm, subdued tones gracefully 
capture the seasonal passage of time, making this lovely French import an experi-
July/August 2014 • 571
ence over which to linger. The book’s length makes it read like an extended picture 
book, or perhaps a picture-book sized easy reader; it would work particularly well 
for a bedtime or lapsit session with an adult, although primary-graders with some 
reading experience could easily tackle it on their own as well. Dubuc’s illustrations 
are carefully composed, and the subtly varied tones and pencil-like hatching and 
detailing add texture and depth to the scenes. The post-migration scenes skillfully 
portray Lion’s loneliness as he is dwarfed by an ocean of surrounding white space 
or eats alone at his dining table. Pair this with Prahin’s Brimsby’s Hats (BCCB 1/14) 
for another quiet book about waiting for a friend’s return or with Runton’s Owl and 
Wormy, Friends All Aflutter (BCCB 3/11) for a look at biding one’s time through 
seasonal changes.  JH
duyvis, corinne Otherbound. Amulet/Abrams, 2014 [400p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-0928-9 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 7-12
Doctors believe that seventeen-year-old Nolan Santiago has a rare form of epilepsy, 
which is causing him to have daily seizures and hallucinations. Nolan, however, 
knows that during those seizures he is seeing a different world through the eyes 
of Amara, a mute servant on a planet that relies on and has nearly been destroyed 
by magic. Amara, gifted with the ability to heal almost instantaneously, is on the 
run with the exiled Princess Cilla and is forced to endure painful magical attacks 
meant for the princess—attacks that Nolan suffers as well as he helplessly looks 
on. An accidental overdose on his latest medication allows Nolan to gain control 
of both his visions and Amara’s body, but it also strips Amara of her healing ability, 
leaving her and Cilla vulnerable. Debut author Duyvis constructs characters that 
run the gamut of diversity, from the multiracial Nolan, who also has a physical 
disability, to the sexually fluid Amara, whose romantic relationship with her male 
lover Maart is complicated by her attraction to Cilla. The portrayals are believably 
complex, avoiding gimmickry or heavy-handed messages in favor of subtle, nuanced 
examinations of power dynamics and privilege. Framing all this is a brilliantly paced  
edge-of-your seat adventure, as Amara and Cilla flee from one danger to the next, 
that’s paired with an intriguing, twist-filled mystery, as Nolan tries to sort out his 
connection to this other world and his role in it. Fantasy and speculative fiction 
fans will no doubt enjoy the ride, while authors should take note—this is how you 
do fantasy in a global world.  KQG 
ellis, Ann dee The End or Something Like That. Dial, 2014 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3739-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-12
When Kim died, she left her best friend Emmy strict instructions on how to 
contact her in the afterlife. Emmy has done everything she’s supposed to, wait-
ing at designated meeting spots for entire days for Kim to appear and consulting 
the books of psychic medium Dr. Ted Farnsworth, whom the girls met when he 
brought his act to their hometown of Las Vegas. Though Kim never manifests, 
the grieving Emmy does see her recently deceased teacher, as well as other persons 
now departed. Haunted not only by these specters but also by the guilt of how she 
treated Kim and her own chronic inability to own her emotions, Emmy struggles to 
make peace with her newfound gift, the loss of her friend, and the idea of moving 
572 • the Bulletin
on. Ellis (This Is What I Did:, BCCB 9/07) conveys intense ideas and emotions—
from changing relationships to body image to budding romance to deep loss—in 
spare and exacting prose believable as the internal monologue of a protagonist who 
struggles to put voice to her feelings. Emmy makes a sympathetic and nuanced 
character, frustrating but never alienating as she clumsily moves through her grief 
while dealing with the peers and adults, portrayed here with observant precision, 
who make up her life. This is a sad novel, but not one wallowing in its misery; 
rather, with understated humor, compassion, and evenhandedness in its staccato 
sentences, it takes readers on a meaningful journey into grief and uncertainty—and 
gently leads them back to safety.  AA 
finneyfrock, kAren Starbird Murphy and the World Outside. Viking, 
2014 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01276-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Life with the Free Family on their Washington farm is all that Starbird has known, 
and she’s mostly content, despite missing the Family’s leader, EARTH, who has been 
away for several years. When an opportunity opens up to work at the Free Family’s 
restaurant in Seattle, however, she takes it, mostly because she’s been hurt by the boy 
she likes. Now at sixteen she’s attending school for the first time, using her excellent 
head for math to try to pull the restaurant out of the red, and discovering that the 
Free Family members in the Seattle house don’t all share Starbird’s faith in EARTH 
and the Family. Her rediscovery of her long-lost brother, who left the Family three 
years ago, complicates her view of the Family still further, and she’s torn between 
her long-held beliefs and her growing unease about the Family’s secrets and ways. 
As with other novels about sheltered teens encountering a startlingly heterogeneous 
world (such as Cantor’s Searching for Sky, BCCB 6/14) this one maps well onto 
normal teenaged rejection and individuation; Finneyfrock also engagingly conveys 
the outsider’s view of the daily life most of readers take for granted (money, for 
instance, is both a physical and a conceptual taboo in the Family). Though there 
is indeed corruption in the high levels of the Family (it was EARTH’s henchman 
who drove Starbird’s brother out, and there’s money being siphoned off to EARTH 
under his pre-Family name), the book has more nuance than some about intentional 
communities, and Starbird’s eventual challenge to the community calls out fraud and 
lies without dismissing the utopian ideal itself. Starbird’s gently growing romance 
with a nice accounting-capable classmate is sweet, and the absorbing situation will 
prompt lively discussion about independence and belief.  DS
flood, c. J. Infinite Sky. Atheneum, 2014 244p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0658-1 $17.99 
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0660-4 $10.99 
 R Gr. 6-9
When her mother takes off from their small English town, thirteen-year-old Iris 
is left with her gruff, distant father and Sam, her once adoring but now angry and 
rebelling older brother. Summer offers a reprieve from the prying questions and 
unwanted pity of her school friends, and Iris finds herself particularly fascinated by 
a group of Irish Travelers who have illegally settled on her family’s property. Despite 
her father’s warnings to stay away from the “parasites,” Iris befriends Trick, meet-
ing the fourteen-year-old Traveler boy daily to roam the countryside, swim in the 
July/August 2014 • 573
nearby river, and share her secrets. Meanwhile, Sam becomes increasingly involved 
with a gang of skinheads, drinking and fighting, and Iris’ magical summer comes to 
an abrupt end when a drunk Sam meets with an angry Trick. An opening scene at 
a funeral sets the stage for tragedy immediately and creates an underlying tension 
to the idyll that Iris finds with Trick, tingeing each romantic moment between the 
two with a deep sense of melancholy. Flood’s prose is wisely restrained, with an 
elegant simplicity that captures both the beauty of Iris’ rural surroundings and her 
inner turmoil. The ending avoids any neat resolution, offering only the idea that 
unbearable tragedies must nonetheless be borne. American readers may be unfamiliar 
with the Traveler culture, but they’ll recognize prejudice when they see it and feel 
for the impossible situation in which Iris finds herself.  KQG
GAndhi, Arun Grandfather Gandhi; by Arun Gandhi and Bethany Hegedus; 
illus. by Evan Turk. Atheneum, 2014 42p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2365-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5082-0 $10.99 
 R 6-9 yrs
In this picture-book memoir, Arun Gandhi recalls his family’s arrival at the ashram 
of the Mahatma, and the mixed emotions with which he approached his world-
famous grandfather. The elder Gandhi seems to be either extraordinarily busy 
in public or closely guarded in solitude, and he’s certainly not easily accessible 
to the sensitive Arun. Moreover, Arun’s transition to life in the ashram, with its 
language challenges, chores, and unfamiliar games (soccer) leave him frustrated 
and angry—traits he believes are a discredit to the family name. The relationship 
between the two develops gently over time, with the elder Gandhi offering some 
reassurance that anger runs in the family and some sensible tips on making temper 
productive, and Arun growing into harmony with his grandfather and his way of 
life. The story is told simply and unsentimentally, and the embedded moral never 
feels heavy-handed. Turk’s mixed-media painting and collage illustrations are a 
stunning extension of Arun’s story, creatively incorporating the fibers and threads 
his grandfather has spun on his spinning wheel. Black thread coils around Arun 
as he sulks over his lessons or takes his frustration out on a pencil stub; white 
threads fly off Gandhi’s wheel and bind together the revolving cast of family and 
neighbors who bring the Mahatma’s message of peace to life. Deep, inky shadows 
are equally well deployed, as isolated Arun is first a tiny figure overwhelmed by his 
grandfather’s shadow but later casts his own shadow beside his grandfather’s as they 
walk side by side. Recent picture books such as McGinty’s Gandhi: March to the 
Sea (BCCB 6/13) focus on the Mahatma’s accomplishments; this opens a window 
onto his compassion and wisdom.  EB
Gerstein, MordicAi, ad. You Can’t Have Too Many Friends!; ad. and illus. by 
Mordicai Gerstein. Holiday House, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2393-4 $16.95  
R 4-7 yrs
Duck is an expert jelly bean farmer, and when the king (a rotund boy with a mop 
of black hair and an “I’m the King” t-shirt) demands a loan of the harvest, he is 
honored to comply. Time passes, and when the beans have yet to be returned, Duck 
sets off to reclaim them (“Quack, quack, quack!/ Quack, quack, quack!/ I’m off to 
get/ my jelly beans back!”). Along the way he meets a motley cast of creatures—
Dog, Lady Ladder, Babbling Brook, and a group of wasps—who magically shrink 
574 • the Bulletin
and hop into his pocket. Following Duck’s poor reception at the castle, each of the 
friends jumps out in true size to help Duck triumph against the trials put to him 
by the king’s mother; in the end, the repentant boy king arrives with a dump truck 
full of jelly beans and an apology. Based on the French fairy tale “Drakestail,” this 
contemporary retelling offers both a child-centered treasure (jelly beans!) and a 
happier ending, since the final spread finds the duck and the boy king surrounded 
by friends eating jelly beans together. The story is effectively paced, with repetition 
solidly moving the tale along and humorous moments adding chuckles along the 
way. The great draw here is Duck’s charming naïveté; he never once suspects foul 
play as he is repeatedly put in precarious positions, each time rising above it all and 
jovially knocking on the castle door again. While the illustrations (in pen and ink, 
acrylic, and colored pencil) include Gerstein’s familiar blues and aquas and his lively 
draftsmanship, they’re more streamlined than some of his immersive works, with 
lots of white space setting off the sweet jelly-bean tones of the vignettes; copious 
speech bubbles add immediacy (and also opportunities for dramatic interpreta-
tion). Young listeners will appreciate this quirky friendship tale and champion the 
relentlessly optimistic Duck.  HM 
Goodrich, cArter Mister Bud Wears the Cone; written and illus. by Carter 
Goodrich. Simon, 2014 44p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8088-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8089-6 $10.99  
R 5-8 yrs 
The doggy housemates Mister Bud and Zorro from Say Hello to Zorro (BCCB 3/11) 
are back, and they’ve encountered a change in their beloved routine. Mister Bud 
has a “hot spot,” an irritated place on his side that he can’t stop licking, so the dogs’ 
owner has put him in a safety collar to keep him away from the spot while she’s at 
work. That wrecks all the pups’ daily activities: Mister Bud can’t reach treats on the 
floor, he can’t find Zorro in hide and seek, and when nimble little Zorro races off 
with Mister Bud’s favorite toy, a galumphing and vision-impaired Bud takes down 
a lamp in pursuit. Zorro’s convinced that Mister Bud is in big trouble—but in 
fact their loving mistress understands the problem, removes the cone, and a happy 
routine evening is had by all. The humor here comes not from the low-impact 
plot but from the goofiness of the situation and the interplay between the calm 
text, Zorro’s yapping in-art exclamations, and the comedic illustrations. The dogs 
have an amusing and familiar siblingesque dynamic, with Zorro moving swiftly 
from sympathetic assistance to cunning abuse. The watercolor illustrations, soft 
vignettes on white space, make the most of wired little Zorro, the manic-faced 
pug, who’s funny from every angle (a rear-only shot as he dives in the cabinet for 
dog biscuits proves this), and the comic portrayal of dog daily life in their owner’s 
absence will get kids thinking about their own pets’ private lives. There are some 
distinct performance possibilities here, and it may even inspire kids to interpret 
their own sibling dramas in pet form.  DS
Gordon, AMy Painting the Rainbow. Holiday House, 2014 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2525-9 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-9
All their lives, cousins Ivy Greenwood and Holly Swanson have spent part of the 
summer with their relatives at the family lake house in New Hampshire. Now 
July/August 2014 • 575
thirteen, the girls find themselves changing, with new tensions driving a wedge 
between them. It doesn’t help that Holly develops an unrelenting interest in their 
deceased uncle Jesse, the twin brother of Ivy’s explosive father, just as Ivy becomes 
more intent on not rocking the boat, whether around her constantly fighting parents 
or the extended family who keep Jesse’s life—and death—shrouded in mystery. Yet 
clues about him keep appearing, linking him and the Greenwoods to a Japanese 
college student whom the family sheltered during World War II some twenty-four 
years prior to the current Vietnam War era. As Holly pushes the tight-lipped adults 
for more information while Ivy shuts down, displaying her emotions only through 
her music or sporadic outbursts, the girls learn not only about their family and its 
secrets, but also how they can each change without losing one another. This coming-
of-age story is quiet and lovely, equally evocative of the magic of summers and the 
pain of leaving childhood. Moving between Holly’s narration and Ivy’s diary entries, 
the book captures the raw emotions of navigating friendships in transition, as well 
as the fascination with family mysteries so typical of young adolescents. Gordon 
skillfully weaves in a lesson on war and politics, subtly revealing the many strong 
feelings and viewpoints that divide nations and families that are just as relevant 
today. Young readers looking for a mirror to their own evolving relationships and 
family dynamics will find just that in this contemplative and honest novel.  AA
Green, JAcqueline Secrets and Lies. Poppy/Little, 2014 305p (Truth or 
Dare)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-22031-6 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-22029-3 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
At the end of Truth or Dare (BCCB 7/13), Emerson, Tenley, and Sydney thought 
their troubles were over and that the deadly game of dares had stopped with Tricia’s 
death. Now the darer is back, however, and the girls will do nearly anything to 
protect the malign secrets he or she knows about each of them, all of which are 
provided in this book as backstory, making it fairly accessible as a standalone. As 
they chase down clues to the malefactor, each girl is also attempting to manage 
her love life through break-ups and new possibilities, and the darer is resorting 
to more and more dangerous games, poisoning Sydney’s ex, nearly killing Tenley, 
threatening to kill Tenley’s mother, and actually killing another girl as a warning 
to the trio. Tenley and Emerson become more fully fleshed characters here, with 
Tenley’s self-awareness the key to making her likable as she acts the mean-spirited 
vixen to get the information she needs. Emerson, on the other hand, works through 
the insecurities that drove her to make such questionable choices in the past and 
is primed to make the right choice just as things fall apart, while Sydney, whose 
character development largely took place in the first book, may be naïvely pushing 
the real killer’s buttons. So many unanswered questions, so much tingly suspense, 
so much dark drama: by the end of this book, some readers will think they have 
the identity of the darer figured out based on who is being targeted and how, but 
that herring may turn out to be red after all; in any case, anticipation for the finale 
will be high.  KC
576 • the Bulletin
hAndler, dAniel Girls Standing on Lawns; illus. by Maira Kalman and with 
photographs. The Museum of Modern Art, 2014 64p
ISBN 978-0-87070-908-1 $14.95  
Ad Gr. 7-12
Even in the age of selfies, we’ve all seen these old-school images—scratchy black-
and-white photos with thin white borders, featuring people standing stiffly outdoors, 
squinting into the sun. This diminutive, beautifully bound art book, the first of 
a proposed series, consists of page after page of such photos, almost all of young 
women standing on lawns as the title indicates, all taken by unknown amateur 
photographers ranging in date from 1900-1955, and all part of MoMA’s collec-
tion housed in the Department of Photography. Accompanying these vernacular 
photographs are color paintings by Kalman that replicate the stances and subject 
matter in her distinctive naïve impressionistic style. Handler provides free verse that 
is both spare and sparse throughout the collection, contextualizing the thematic 
groupings and offering imaginative insight into what might have motivated the 
preservation of such frozen moments. The project is interesting and the images 
thought provoking. However, it rather tardily follows similar projects teens are 
doing themselves through social media outlets such as Instagram and Snapchat, 
and in fact Handler’s poetry seems less inspired and more cryptic than one might 
hope given the rich potential of the visuals. Teens looking for more substantial 
poetry inspired by vintage photographs would be better served by Cynthia Rylant’s 
Something Permanent (BCCB 5/94), while younger readers could look to Walter 
Dean Myers’ Brown Angels (BCCB 10/93). Information about the collection and 
photo credits are included.  KC 
heAley, kAren While We Run. Little, 2014 [333p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-23382-8 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-23383-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
This intense sequel to When We Wake (BCCB 4/13), explores further questions 
about power and ethics, morality and survival, and love and hate as it continues to 
follow Abdi and Tegan. These two have been captured by the government and are 
now being forced to hawk Australia’s cryonics project or face torture, even while 
it becomes clear that there are fatal problems with the program. Tegan, frozen for 
100 years (starting in 2027) is meant to be the shining example of what cryonics 
can offer, but she and Abdi and their traveling, musical-ambassador tour may not 
be be able to compete with the underlying truth, especially after their friends aid 
the duo in a risky escape. The group of friends is remarkably, refreshingly diverse in 
ways that are conveyed clearly but with enough nuance and smoothness that they 
remain a group of flawed, realistic teens rather than a purposive cast of characters. 
The heated romance between Abdi and Tegan is fascinating, particularly as they 
know how it has rendered them vulnerable to their enemies, and how its situational 
origins may mean that it’s unsustainable. Readers unfamiliar with the first volume 
will be able to catch up through the fluidly integrated backstory, though they will 
likely be so intrigued to read about how Tegan first woke and met Abdi, her complex 
beloved, that they’ll want to go back and see how it all began.  AS
July/August 2014 • 577
heAsley, Gwendolyn Don’t Call Me Baby. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2014 [320p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220852-1 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220853-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Since before she was born, Imogene’s entire life, from first steps to first period, 
has been recorded on her mom’s popular blog; in fact, her name was even decided 
through a reader poll. Now Imogene is fifteen, and she’s had enough. Imogene’s 
best friend, Sage, is also a victim of a blogging mom, and the two decide to turn an 
English assignment requiring them to blog into a mommy-daughter blog war. They 
are immediately grounded (as per advice from their mothers’ readers), which causes 
Sage to dig in and Imogene to rethink her strategy. She sees value in unplugging 
completely, but Sage is still going for a frontal assault, which causes a rift in their 
friendship. The conflict is peacefully resolved with the adults remaining firmly in 
control while the onus of understanding and compromise falls on the girls; a strong, 
explanatory voice overlays the first-person narration, intrusively glossing various 
terms and metaphors whenever they come up, which is often. The portrayal of a 
plugged-in mom and a technology-resistant teen makes a nice reversal, though, 
and Imogene’s exploration of the value of balance and privacy is one that may elicit 
reflection from young readers. Despite (or because of?) a bit of heavy-handedness 
in terms of understanding and valuing the needs and foibles of your elders, this 
could be a match for mother-daughter reading groups.  KC 
henry, April The Body in the Woods. Ottaviano/Holt, 2014 [272p] (Point 
Last Seen)
ISBN 978-0-8050-9852-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Alexis, Nick, and Ruby each have different reasons for volunteering with Portland 
Search and Rescue. Alexis’ mother’s mental illness has sensitized Alexis to the needs 
of people who periodically go missing, and she also needs an extracurricular for her 
college applications if she hopes to get a scholarship. Nick is trying to live up to the 
reputation of his heroic father who was killed in Iraq, a task made difficult by his 
own disappointing physique and his even more disappointing tendency to panic 
in the face of danger. Ruby is socially awkward to a degree painfully matched by 
her weird obsessions. When the three are called to their first real SAR, seeking an 
autistic man who wandered into the woods and is likely hiding rather than lost, 
they surprise everyone by finding a dead body instead. Ruby springs into action 
in her CSI persona, quickly assessing that the girl was strangled. Forbidden by her 
parents from pursuing the case, she does anyway, and soon she, Nick, and Alexis 
are tracking down their own leads. Characterization in this first title in a proposed 
series is not shallow so much as obvious; each teen is who he or she needs to be to 
move the mystery along, chase down red herrings, and eventually crack the case 
when the police fail. Alexis engages in a side plot of pretending to be homeless in 
order to find her mother, who has disappeared; this experience and Ruby’s obses-
sive knowledge of police procedure enable the integration of SAR protocols into 
the narrative without too much awkwardness. Short chapters, quick pacing, an 
easy-to-follow mystery, and a smidge of real danger make this a likely choice for 
TV crime drama fans.  KC 
578 • the Bulletin
holczer, trAcy The Secret Hum of a Daisy. Putnam, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16393-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-7
After the accidental drowning of her mother, twelve-year-old Grace has to move 
in with her only remaining relative, the grandmother who threw Grace’s mother 
out when she was pregnant with Grace. Grace stubbornly refuses to give her 
grandmother a chance and decides to be as difficult as possible, hoping to escape 
her mother’s childhood small town and be sent to live with her best friend. She 
begins to encounter meaningful signs that she reads as her mother’s messages to 
her from beyond the grave, and as she tries to untangle their symbolism, she finds 
herself making friends, learning about her parents’ past, and getting to know her 
grandmother. The story is overdetermined, with just too much tragedy, too many 
meaningful motifs, and too many colorful characters, but it’s also written with 
soft loveliness and some complementary pithy energy (when classmate Archer says 
something dumb to cover his liking Grace, the kids fall silent, “giving a moment 
of silence to the death of Archer’s dignity”). Grace’s gradual understanding of the 
complexity of her mother’s history and her letting go of it as a story of heroes and 
villains is tactfully and effectively conveyed, and though we’ve seen this story before, 
it’s particularly accessible to younger readers here. The overall effect is rather of 
Patron’s Higher Power of Lucky (BCCB 1/07) shot with an Instagram filter, so Lucky 
fans and atmosphere aficionados may both take to Grace’s poignant journey.  DS
howe, kAtherine Conversion. Putnam, 2014 [448p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16777-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Becoming class valedictorian and getting admitted to Harvard are Colleen’s top 
priorities as she enters her senior year at St. Joan’s Academy, but when her friends 
and classmates at the elite private school start coming down with mysterious ail-
ments, her attention quickly shifts from academics to discovering the source of this 
strange illness. It all begins when queen bee Clara Rutherford suddenly develops 
Tourette’s-like tics, and soon after other girls start losing their hair, having seizures, 
and even coughing up metallic substances. The school administration blames stress, 
the eventual media circus blames vaccines and/or pollution, but Colleen wonders if 
it isn’t related to the history of her small Massachusetts town—Danvers, formerly 
known as Salem village. Interludes set in Salem in 1706 (the year Salem accuser 
Ann Putnam publicly apologized) alternate with Colleen’s accounts of events, and 
an author’s note reveals that while the Salem panic provided obvious inspiration, so 
did a more recent true event in Le Roy, New York, where twenty teenagers started 
exhibiting bizarre symptoms. Colleen makes a fascinating narrator—she’s spent a 
lifetime being calm, cool, collected amid the academic elite, and she approaches this 
chaos with the same haughty confidence; it’s when the cracks in her façade begin to 
show late in the book that readers suddenly realize she may not be as reliable as she 
initially seemed. Her final encounter with the mother of her best friend is utterly 
chilling, and readers will be left pondering the pressure society puts upon young 
women and the anxiety that results when they buck those expectations.  KQG 
July/August 2014 • 579
hutchins, M. k. Drift. Tu, 2014 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62014-145-8 $19.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62014-146-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R Gr. 7-10
Five years ago, Tenjat and his sister Eflet escaped the island of Ita into the naga-
infested waters of Hell to outrun the vicious Handlers who were hunting their family 
down as traitors. They washed up on the shores of the island of Gunaji—which, like 
all islands in Hell, rests on the back of a massive turtle—but now the small farm 
Tenjat has cultivated there over the years is failing, and he decides to join Gunaji’s 
Handlers, much to Eflet’s disappointment. His training reveals secrets behind 
Gunaji’s existence that he’s only guessed at, but Eflet insists those secrets are only 
half the truth; she’s proven right when the island is attacked and Tenjat must strike 
a deal with creatures he thought were his mortal enemies in order to save Gunaji. 
An informative author’s note points toward Mayan mythology and culture as the 
foundational inspiration for the setting, along with elements of Hinduism and 
early Mesopotamian culture, and the resulting mosaic of a world is fascinating in 
its intricacy. The turtle-eat-turtle island structure calls up Philip Reeve’s predatory 
mobile cities (in Mortal Engines, BCCB 3/04, etc.), but the revelations behind the 
source of Hell and Deep Hell add a spiritual element not often explored in YA 
literature. Well-developed characters match the complex setting: both Tenjat and 
Eflet are refreshingly flawed, often fumbling toward understanding and repeating 
mistakes as they adjust to new information. Everyman Tenjat in particular offers a 
nice alternative to the superiority of the “chosen one” trope. Fantasy and speculative 
fiction fans are the obvious audience here, but readers of historical fiction or those 
interested in a more anthropological take on the battle between good and evil may 
find this to their liking as well.  KQG
iMAi, AyAno, ad. Puss & Boots; ad. and illus. by Ayano Imai; tr. from the Japanese 
by Sayako Uchida; ad. by Kate Westerlund. Minedition, 2014 [26p]
ISBN 978-988-8240-71-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 5-8 yrs
In this adaptation of “Puss in Boots,” Puss uses his snazzy boots to drum up busi-
ness for his down-and-out shoemaker owner with the shape-changing “monster” 
who lives in a nearby castle. Entranced by Puss’s fabulous footwear, the monster 
orders multiple pairs for himself, each one a different size and shape, so that he 
can be shod in style whatever his guise. When he refuses to pay, however, clever 
Puss instructs his master to construct a minuscule pair of boots, which Puss then 
offers to the monster with this caveat: “I doubt even you, with your great power, 
could change yourself into something so small. Why, you would have to be the 
size of say, well . . . a tiny mouse, for instance.” The indignant monster obligingly 
does just that and Puss wastes no time in gobbling him up (sans shoes, of course), 
allowing the shoemaker and Puss to then set up shop in the now vacant castle. The 
streamlined approach to the familiar plot keeps the action focused and quick, and 
it also places the gorgeous art front and center. A minimal palette of muted creams, 
browns, grays, and golds, contrasts pleasingly with eye-catching red and leafy green 
accents. Small details are very carefully rendered but edges are slightly blurred and 
softened, giving a dreamlike quality to the pictures. As in Imai’s version of Aesop’s 
Fables (BCCB 1/14), intriguing surreal touches add to the otherworldly tone, as tiny 
580 • the Bulletin
clouds “rain” into the monster’s teacup and flowers grow out of cracks in the floor. 
The streamlined narrative presentation makes this accessible to younger kids, while 
the sophistication of the art ensures that older ones will be equally enthralled.  JH
Johnson, vAriAn The Great Greene Heist. Levine/Scholastic, 2014 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-52552-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-52554-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-9
Jackson Greene’s scheming and conning is the stuff of legend at Maplewood Middle 
School, but a run-in with the administration has him swearing to go straight. That 
intention evaporates when his best friend Charlie de la Cruz gets wind that Keith 
Sinclair might be using his dad’s monetary clout to rig the upcoming Student 
Council president elections and shut down school clubs so that funds can be di-
verted into his own student org. As the election draws nearer, Jackson assembles a 
team of talented students to hack, lock pick, and distract their way into the election 
results to ensure that Gaby, Charlie’s sister and Jackson’s maybe-more-than-friend, 
honestly takes the election. Blitz introductions to the multicultural ensemble cast 
and unexplained references to Jackson’s past heists are bewildering at first, but once 
readers have their bearings, all of the pieces fall into place for a satisfying whirlwind 
caper. Johnson manages to make much of the crew’s nerd-ery (there’s not so much 
a whiff as a reek of Star Trek) undeniably cool, and while there’s not much room 
for character growth, this multicultural group of kids is capable on the basketball 
court and in the computer lab. As likely to appeal to fans of Andrew Clements’ 
school stories as Carter’s The Heist Society (BCCB 6/10), this is a smartly crafted 
but breezy adventure that might just have students secretly cooking up schemes 
of their own.  TA
Joyce, williAM The Numberlys; by William Joyce and Christina Ellis. Moonbot/
Atheneum, 2014 50p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7343-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7346-1 $10.99  
Ad 5-9 yrs
A long time ago, there were no letters or colors, only numbers keeping things very 
orderly. Five friends in this drab but steampunky world, however, finally get sick 
of dinners of 00267 (“which was thick and gray and gloopy”) and, after much ex-
perimentation with breaking down and reassembling numerals, are able to invent 
the alphabet, which also bursts forth into color. There’s a certain whimsy to Joyce’s 
overstatement of the problems of uniformity (“There weren’t any . . . jellybeans or 
pizza”), but the link between letters and the vibrant and diverse world isn’t made 
very clear, and overwrought handling of the concept draws the set-up out too long. 
As with Joyce’s The Fantastic Flying Books of Mr. Morris Lessmore, this concept began 
with a mobile app, and the interactivity of that medium has carried over into the 
book’s design, with spreads switching often between vertical and horizontal and 
several wordless images showing off the creativity of the newly designed glyphs 
in alphabetic order. However, that frequent flipping does make the physical book 
cumbersome to read. The most compelling aspect here is the illustrations, which 
pay clear homage to Lang’s Metropolis in their fuzzy black-and-white, larger-than-
life, and gear-driven cityscapes. These contrast effectively with the mad-scientist 
wordsmiths, who are a veritable crew of rounded robotic-looking folks with white 
July/August 2014 • 581
faces and big, expressive eyes. While there are a number of picture books that give 
the perils of uniformity a stronger treatment—Jeffers’ The Hueys in the New Sweater 
(BCCB 7/12), for example—Joyce’s en vogue aesthetic and incorporation of numbers 
and letters will likely mean this sees some serious circulation.  TA
kessler, liz Poppy the Pirate Dog’s New Shipmate; illus. by Mike Phillips. Can-
dlewick, 2014 58p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6751-1 $14.99  
R Gr. 1-2
Dalmatian dog Poppy enjoyed a swashbuckling summer with her human family 
(“She’d found buried treasure with Suzy. She’d worn her skull-and-crossbones scarf 
and had pirate adventures every day”), but now that everyone has gone back to 
work and school she’s bored and lonesome. When her family brings home a kit-
ten, George, to be Poppy’s new “shipmate” and “little brother,” Poppy is skeptical. 
George attacks Poppy’s tail and tries to play with her toys, and Poppy scares George 
into the garden and onto a lily pad in the backyard pond. Only when Poppy sees 
how frightened George is does she relent, and when the family returns home that 
evening they find Poppy and George cuddled together in Poppy’s dog bed. The easy 
reader/beginning chapter book format, with its heavy, black typeface against plenty 
of clean white space and the simple sentences and vocabulary, is as inviting as the 
book’s endearing canine hero, and kids not quite ready for lengthier chapter books 
will find this title (the second in a series) a fine transitional bridge. Phillips’ frequent 
ink and watercolor illustrations are lively and entertaining, and although the human 
figures seem to possess only one facial expression (open-mouthed enthusiasm) and 
Poppy’s eyes are occasionally a bit hard to distinguish from the numerous black spots 
on her head, Poppy and orange tiger-striped George are overall a pretty winsome 
pair. Fans of Cynthia Rylant’s Mr. Putter and Tabby or Henry and Mudge series 
may find Poppy’s adventures a worthy step up the reading ladder.  JH
kornell, MAx Me First; written and illus. by Max Kornell. Paulsen/Penguin, 
2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-15997-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
Donkey siblings Hal and Martha are constantly trying to top each other, despite 
their parens’ protestations. Following a day at the river steeped in arguments and 
outdoings, Hal and Martha are granted permission to head home without their 
parents. They unsurprisingly find opportunities to challenge each other along the 
way, but the tide turns when a log bridge snaps and Martha falls into the creek. Hal 
helps her up, and a new sense of compassion and concern overtakes their relation-
ship. That evening, they compete not to prove themselves but to show kindness 
to each other, and in the comical final pages, Mom and Dad argue over who first 
noticed the improved behavior. Kornell’s family tale offers a refreshing twist on 
the typical sibling-rivalry plot that works to good effect; the shift between the 
sibs is largely inferred, but it is this quiet transformation that lends meaning. The 
story’s warmth is effectively balanced by the illustrations’ acrylic washes, whereon 
natural blues, greens, and browns predominate. This may prove just the story for 
approaching the topic of sibling competition in a family, but it will draw plenty of 
viewers for its balance of humor and poignancy alone.  HM
582 • the Bulletin
krosoczkA, JArrett J. Platypus Police Squad: The Ostrich Conspiracy; 
written and illus. by Jarrett J. Krosoczka. Walden Pond/HarperCollins, 
2014 [240p] (Platypus Police Squad)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207166-8 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-207167-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Kalamazoo City’s monotreme detectives Zengo and O’Malley are fresh from their 
last case (The Frog Who Croaked, BCCB 6/13) when the opening of the mayor’s pet 
project of a massive indoor-outdoor amusement park, the Dome, goes wrong and 
thrill-seekers get stuck on the fair rides. Their initial investigation suggests sabotage. 
Is Pandini, sleazy magnate who always seems to be dealing in something shady, 
behind the shenanigans? Or is it the dream team of savvy tycoons and engineers, 
strangely hired from rival city Walhalla, who constructed the Dome? Maybe the 
mayor himself? Neither the plot nor the laughs are as mile-a-minute in this second 
volume as in the first, but the buildup of the conspiracy is unusually effective for 
a kooky adventure with animal characters, with plenty of red herrings to keep 
readers guessing. Nods to noir continue to abound, and Zengo again surfaces as a 
believably complex rookie, trying to prove himself as independently capable in a 
way that will resonate with the target audience. With its plentiful spot art and zany 
appeal, this is a fine follow-up for readers already hooked on the platypus beat.  TA
krull, kAthleen What’s New? The Zoo!: A Zippy History of Zoos; illus. by Marcel-
lus Hall. Levine/Scholastic, 2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-545-13571-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 2-4
Zippy indeed is this speedy timeline of significant moments of zoo history that 
offers a paragraph about a historical zoo on each page, beginning 4,400 years ago 
with the Sumerian King of Ur’s private zoo. Subsequent stops range through great 
lights of early history such as Ethiopia, China, and Greece, covering private zoos 
of rulers and citizens and municipal zoos such as the one in the city of Alexandria. 
The nineteenth century sees the first publicly accessible zoo in London and the 
beginning of the notion of zoos as places of preservation; the twentieth century 
sees the disappearance of zoo cages in favor of wild environments and the growth 
of breeding programs. There’s plenty of interesting information here, balanced 
with lively details about pope-dousing elephants and celebrity giraffes, and the 
transformation of zoos from royal status symbols to their contemporary iteration 
is effectively conveyed. However, the hit-and-run approach to history leaves scads 
of questions unanswered (how did municipal zoos so grow in popularity in a mere 
few decades that Melbourne felt obliged to have one by 1862? How did all these 
zoos acquire their animals, and how did they keep them?) and stories without 
punchlines (what did Pope Leo X do after the elephant sprayed him?). New Yorker 
artist Hall imbues his figures with the same lithe, round-eyed cartoonish charm 
as mid-century magazine cartoonists such as Whitney Darrow, yet his ink and 
watercolor illustrations also have a bold nursery vigor; in fact, the art, despite its 
touches of artless sophistication, aims the pages to a younger audience than the text 
suggests. Animal lovers will find some intriguing anecdotes here, though, and this 
may sate the curiosity of zoo aficionados not yet ready for Zoehfeld’s Wild Lives 
(BCCB 4/06). A list of sources is appended.  DS
July/August 2014 • 583
kuehn, stephAnie Complicit. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2014 [224p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-04459-4 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4668-4305-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
It’s been two years since Jamie saw his beloved but frightening older sister, Cate, 
incarcerated in juvenile detention after setting fire to a barn and nearly killing a girl 
caught in the inferno. Now Cate’s out, and she’s taunting Jamie with phone calls 
that hint at a shared secret, and episodes of vandalism and destruction in the area 
suggest that she’s gone back to her old ways. Meanwhile, Jamie’s falling hard for a 
girl, Jenny, and trying to understand the childhood history he’s forgotten and the 
reason behind his apparently psychosomatic bouts of complete numbness in his 
hands—is this a result of his covering up for his sister? Kuehn (Charm & Strange, 
BCCB 9/13) concocts an enjoyable and cinematic suspense thriller, with a dra-
matic backstory for Jamie and Cate (their birth mother was murdered when Jamie 
was only six, and they were subsequently adopted). Cate is a wonderfully witchy 
antagonist, and the twists and turns are ably doled out, with a few foreshadowing 
moments of what’s to come. While Kuehn’s overselling of the cover story means 
that the truth doesn’t explain everything, that doesn’t really matter in the heat of 
the horrific, catastrophic, and literarily delicious unraveling of the lies. This would 
be an excellent next step from or precursor to Werlin’s similarly twisty The Killer’s 
Cousin (BCCB 9/98).  DS
lloyd-Jones, eMily Illusive. Little, 2014 [406p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25456-4 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-25458-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
A newly developed vaccine seems like the perfect solution for a deadly, widespread 
virus, but the inoculation turns out to cause superpowers in a small number of the 
recipients. If you are one of those who are now immune and boasting new abilities, 
then you can be certain that someone is going to try to exploit them. There are 
criminals who consider themselves on the moral high ground, and cops who more 
resemble villains, and then there is Ciere, a seventeen-year-old illusionist whose 
power has been mostly blocked since the death of her mother. Whether it will come 
back in time to save her beloved adopted family isn’t clear, but Ciere is determined 
to protect those she loves, whether or not she can do it by faking out the world with 
impressive illusions or just by fighting like hell instead. The occasionally languid 
pace doesn’t mesh perfectly with the sharp action plot, but those moments do offer 
insight into Ciere’s complexities, and she is a deeply sympathetic protagonist. Offer 
this to fans of Moore’s V Is for Villain (BCCB 5/14); they’ll enjoy a new look at 
superpowers the hands of teens too smart to trust the grownups who clearly have 
no clue how to manage a changed society.  AS
584 • the Bulletin
MAciel, AMAndA Tease. Balzer + Bray, 2014 328p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-230530-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-230532-9 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
New girl Emma’s successful attempt to steal Sara’s boyfriend, Dylan, led to a full-on 
bullying campaign by Sara and her controlling best friend, Brielle, complete with 
physical abuse, online harassment, and public humiliation. The boys were complicit, 
talking trash about Emma during the day and going out with her at night, but Emma 
herself is no innocent, so no one expected her to respond by hanging herself. The tide 
of public opinion shifted when Emma’s parents filed criminal charges against Sara, 
Brielle, and several of the boys involved in the harassment. The novel is focalized 
through Sara, whose regret is never unmingled with defensiveness and anger even 
when it shifts to understanding; after all, her heart was broken when she walked 
in on Emma and Dylan kissing, and she didn’t kill herself, so why should Emma 
when Dylan’s affections seem to shift once again? What’s more, if Emma was so 
popular with the guys, and even had some girl friends, then what did the opinions 
of a few mean girls matter? These are good questions, and they are thoughtfully 
posed here as Sara sorts through the blame game and learns some unsettling truths 
about herself, aided by her therapist and a boy who has had his own share of bad 
press. While Sara’s obstinate refusal to absolve Emma of wrongdoing offers a nu-
anced perspective to this narrative inspired by the real story of Phoebe Prince, the 
boys still get off easy, both legally and morally, a point that bears further discussion. 
The takeaway, though, that some girls are stronger than others, steers readers away 
from easy moralizing and pins a little bit of responsibility on everyone involved. 
Resources about bullying and suicide are appended.  KC
MAteo, José MAnuel Migrant; illus. by Javier Martínez Pedro; tr. from the Span-
ish by Emmy Smith Ready. Abrams, 2014 22p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0957-9 $17.95  
R Gr. 5-8
Recently arrived in Los Angeles, a nameless young narrator recounts the journey of 
his or her family from their life working on privately owned ejido land in Mexico to 
hopping a freight train bound for the U.S. and hiding from the “men who looked 
like the police.” The story of undocumented migration is told in an easygoing 
but insistent voice, reflecting a child’s-eye view of leaving home for a bewilder-
ing new one. The draw here will be the book’s format: a single, black and white, 
Aztec-inspired ink illustration on amate paper, in an accordion-folded codex. The 
intricate image unfolds slowly, pulling the reader along from rural fields to the 
streets of L.A., and makes a breathtaking feast for eyes to carefully examine in full 
when opened completely. The smallness of the hundreds of individuals in the whole 
spread effectively conveys the helplessness of children caught in transnational flows, 
even as the narrator’s strong voice conveys migrant children’s agency, ordinariness, 
and love of play. Curricular uses here abound: beyond a brief examination of the 
causes and effects of North American migration (facilitated by a factual authors’ 
note and perhaps a pairing with Tonatiuh’s Pancho Rabbit and the Coyote, BCCB 
7/8/13), this would also be an interesting component to add to an examination of 
the book as a physical object.  TA 
July/August 2014 • 585
MAthieu, Jennifer The Truth about Alice. Roaring Brook, 2014 [208p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-909-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
The small town of Healy, Texas, is left reeling when its high-school star quarterback 
is killed in a car crash. Everyone’s looking for someone to blame, and no one wants to 
admit that it could have been the four beers that football god Brandon Fitzsimmons 
downed before he got behind the wheel, so their sights land on Alice Franklin. Alice 
supposedly slept with both Brandon and some college guy last year at a party and 
was sexting with Brandon the night he died—according to Brandon’s best friend 
Josh, who was riding with Brandon in the car. Key observers—but, interestingly, 
not the participants, Brandon and Alice—take turns narrating, revealing a truth 
that is far less salacious but a bit more complicated than the rumors purport. First, 
there’s queen bee Elaine O’Dea, hostess of the infamous party and fierce supporter 
of the slut-shaming campaign that ensues post-party; Kelsie Sanders, Alice’s for-
mer best friend, is desperate to hang onto to her recently gained popularity and 
starts a “Slut Stall” in the girl’s bathroom, where everyone details Alice’s supposed 
misdeeds in Sharpie. Josh, meanwhile, is grappling with grief and guilt, and Kurt 
Morelli, the nerdy outsider, seems to be the only person left in town willing to give 
Alice the time of day. Keenly observed internal monologues flesh out characters 
that initially seem little more than small-town stereotypes, and Mathieu manages 
to offer an explanation for several of the characters’ more reprehensible behaviors 
without exonerating them. Alice voices the final chapter, leaving readers with a 
hard-earned nugget of wisdom that “if you give people enough time, eventually 
they’ll do the most heartbreaking stuff in the world.” Swift pace and compact size 
may entice reluctant readers as well as those interested in a juicy yet thoughtful 
take on human dynamics.  KQG 
MccArthy, JennA Maggie Malone and the Mostly Magical Boots; by Jenna Mc-
Carthy and Olivia Swann. Sourcebooks, 2014 [208p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-9306-1 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5 
Maggie Malone’s father has lost his job, so she’s forced to transfer to Randolph J. 
Pinkerton Middle School—or, as the kids at Maggie’s private former school call 
it, “Stinkerton”—for her sixth grade. She winds up with the worst possible locker 
location, gets whacked in the head by a falling history book, and has to wander 
around school in a giant reindeer sweatshirt from the nurse’s office after said history 
book causes her to bleed all over her clothing, all on her twelfth birthday. When 
she arrives home and finds a birthday package from her favorite aunt, she doesn’t 
know what to make of the scuffed-up brown boots inside; that is, until she tries 
them on and inadvertently summons a genie named Frank, who tells her she can 
be anyone else for a single day. She soon finds herself living the life of teen pop icon 
Becca Starr, with a personal assistant, all the red and black jelly beans she wants, 
and a stadium of fans cheering for her as she belts her top hits. With snappy prose 
and plenty of wit, McCarthy and Swann give young readers an enjoyable and ac-
cessible heroine in Maggie Malone. Her dabble with stardom (and, presumably, 
future adventures) may literally be pure wish fulfillment, but Maggie still walks 
away having learned a valuable lesson about appearances versus reality. The au-
thors deliver this moral with a light touch, letting Maggie put the pieces together 
586 • the Bulletin
and then translating her wisdom into action in her new school and with her new 
classmates, all while maintaining her charming narration. Playful and imaginative 
in plot while practical and approachable in tone, this is for readers wanting a dash 
of the authentic with their escapism.  AA
Miller, lAuren Free to Fall. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 473p
ISBN 978-0-06-219980-5 $17.99  
R Gr. 8-10
Rory loves her Lux, this dystopia’s hyperextended version of iPhone Siri, and she 
is more than happy to let it make her eating, dressing, transportation, and most of 
her significant life decisions. Even so, Rory recognizes her own intelligence, and 
she knows that she deserves her hard-earned spot in a prestigious school. She soon 
finds, though, that all is not well there, and she becomes embroiled in mysteries 
around secret societies, mass cultural domination via nanotechnology, and new 
revelations about her own parents that shake her foundation of what she always 
believed about herself. There’s a high body count here, but there is never much 
doubt that the key characters will all emerge just fine, each following paths that 
may not be the most ethical or socially enlightened but that do ring true to the 
character development. Fans of the lighter batch of dystopias where mostly all ends 
well and the problems are fixed by the epilogue will find this a worthy addition, 
and romance buffs will likely find Rory’s steamy, smoothly developed relationship 
with her ally North to be a satisfying one.  AS
Millet, lydiA Pills and Starships. Black Sheep, 2014 283p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61775-275-9 $18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-61775-276-6 $11.95  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Nat doesn’t want to go along with her parents’ plans to end their lives in a week, but 
she doesn’t see that she has much choice; in this near-future dystopia where resources 
are scarce, deciding to commit suicide is strongly encouraged. The death package 
involves a trip to Hawaii, lots of mood-numbing drugs for everyone, and a cultish 
set-up where the whole family is brainwashed and doped up into submission. Nat’s 
resistance strengthens when she realizes that there may be a growing opposition to 
this practice, and that she can perhaps save her family by allying herself with them. 
While the main concept is gripping, the storytelling lacks edge and impact—this 
in itself is intriguing given the overwhelming use of “pharma” to dull all sorrow 
or even strong emotions, but it is difficult to connect with a narrator who seems 
indifferent to everything. In addition, the fact that these are diary entries written 
to an unknown being who may find the book in the future dulls the immediacy 
and suspense of the plot. Patient readers may still find much to consider in this 
ultimately contemplative glimpse into what might happen if our ability to prolong 
life exceeds our resources to support it.  AS
MiyAres, dAniel Pardon Me!; written and illus. by Daniel Miyares. Simon, 
2014 36p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8997-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8998-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
The peace and quiet of solitude on his tiny island is what our parroty little protago-
July/August 2014 • 587
nist enjoys, but the tranquility is soon shattered when a chatty stork lands alongside 
him with a cheery “Pardon me.” Then a leaping frog, followed by a swimming 
turtle, settle themselves onto the increasingly crowded island with a “Pardon me” 
apiece as well. When a nearby fox starts a sentence with “Pardon me,” the little bird 
loses it in a tantrum that sends his island mates scurrying away. Unfortunately, the 
fox was trying to impart valuable information: the little bird’s island is actually a 
crocodile, and when the croc surfaces, the little bird abruptly disappears and the 
reptile gives a satisfied summative burp, followed by a genteel if smirking “Pardon 
me.” The bird’s fate seems a little extreme as a punishment, but it sure is funny, and 
the all-dialogue text is a natural for performance as well as reading aloud. Miyares’ 
luminous digital illustrations set the scene in sweeping double-page spreads of 
cobalt sky and delicate green rushes, while the kinetic, brush-swept animal figures 
have an intriguing combination of fine texturing, translucent details, and saturated 
tones; their big eyes and extravagant gestures neatly suit the humor of the tale. In 
addition to its performative possibilities, this could make a lively companion to 
other stories that end with surprise mealtimes, such as Klassen’s I Want My Hat 
Back (BCCB 11/11).  DS 
Murphy, clAire rudolf My Country, ’Tis of Thee: How One Song Reveals the 
History of Civil Rights; illus. by Bryan Collier. Holt, 2014 45p
ISBN 978-0-8050-8226-5 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 3-5
The titular song (more formally entitled “America”) was once a contender for the 
United States national anthem. The tune was nixed by citizens who couldn’t bring 
themselves to elevate a melody so closely associated with the British monarchy, but 
its 1831 Samuel Francis Smith iteration nonetheless remains a highlight of the patri-
otic canon. In this picture book account, Murphy revisits pivotal moments—social, 
political, and martial—in which the familiar song was co-opted and re-lyricized as 
a partisan theme song. Revolutionary War soldiers changed “God Save the King” 
to “God Save the Thirteen States”; abolitionists sang “My country, ’tis for thee, 
Dark land of slavery, For thee I weep”; labor activists lashed out against Industry 
with “Land of the Millionaire; Framers with pockets base; Caused by the cursed 
snare—The Money Ring.” The examples here demonstrate the versatility of the song 
itself and the power of a singable tune to rally supporters around a cause. Many of 
the verses, however, incorporate archaic language and period references that require 
explanation, and that illumination is consigned to endnotes, an arrangement that 
will leave readers who routinely ignore end matter reaping the consequences, or 
force diligent readers to flip to the back of the book after each spread. Collier’s 
mixed-media illustrations, sober in tone and rich in symbolic imagery, are worth 
lingering over and will add dimension to classroom discussions arising from a shared 
reading of this title. Annotated source notes direct children to resources they are 
unlikely to access, but lists of “Musical Links” and “If You Want to Learn More” 
will indeed be helpful in connecting readers to songs and recordings, many online. 
The music and complete lyrics to the 1831 song are also included.  EB
588 • the Bulletin
nelson, blAke The Prince of Venice Beach. Little, 2014 233p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-23048-3 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-23047-6 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Cali’s now so thoroughly acculturated into the street and surf 
life of Venice Beach that you’d never know he ran away from foster care in Nebraska 
nearly four years ago. He’ll be eighteen in a few months, and perhaps it’s time now 
to start to thinking about the future and maybe even consider a more mainstream 
life than his current situation in the backyard treehouse of a generous New Age-y 
lady can afford. He’s had little formal education, but he has a keen eye for people 
and has even made some money helping the police track down strays like himself. 
This begins to sound like a life plan—that is, until he is given cause to wonder 
about the backstories of the people he’s turned in. Now that he’s discovered the 
whereabouts of missing rich girl Reese, for example, he’s not terribly keen to turn 
in someone who seems to be a harmless free spirit eager to ditch a repressive father. 
Cali might even have feelings for her—or not. There’s also his new friendship 
with sweetly nerdy Ailis, whom he also loves a little—or not. Although the ever-
hardy amateur detective theme is well played, it’s Cali’s coming-of-age—or rather 
his leisurely drift into awareness that adolescence may have a shelf life—that’s so 
thoroughly entertaining here. Nelson writes with respect for Cali’s predicament 
and his life choices, acknowledging the pleasures and limitations of a laid-back life. 
This is a great summer read, or perhaps an even better one for early autumn, when 
you just aren’t ready to let summer go.  EB
pAkkAlA, christine Jasmine and Maddie. Boyds Mills, 2014 203p
ISBN 978-1-62091-739-8 $16.95  
R Gr. 4-7
Jasmine’s life has fallen apart since the death of her father, and her mother has 
decided they need a fresh start in a new town. Since even with her mother working 
two jobs they can only afford to live a trailer park, Jasmine feels even more help-
less, hating the way the other girls in her new school, particularly Maddie, seem 
to have everything Jasmine covets. Maddie, however, is in the midst of her own 
crisis. She lives in the shadow of her perfect sister, and when she fails to make the 
eighth-grade soccer team, she knows it’s only a matter of time until her soccer- 
obsessed best friend, who was selected for the team, drifts away. The alternating 
first-person narration highlights the misunderstandings between the girls as they 
base their judgments on appearances and interpret behaviors through the lenses 
of their own inner conflicts. Though their circumstances are vastly different, their 
worries and insecurities prompt them to similar behaviors, namely theft, and their 
struggles with dishonesty and its aftermath are sensitively portrayed as they learn 
to approach each other with empathy rather than jealousy. Both girls are budding 
wordsmiths, so their observations are peppered with witty similes and vivid images, 
and the poems they share at their teacher’s prompting are heartfelt and lyrical. In 
the tradition of Frances O’Roark Dowell, Pakkala manages to capture a poignant 
moment in tween life, when friendships strain and girls are struggling to find their 
voices and assert their identities. Mistakes and tensions are interlaced with tender 
moments and liberating laughter, self-protective lies with explosive honesty; this 
is not girl, interrupted but girl, launched.  KC
July/August 2014 • 589
peArson, MAry e. The Kiss of Deception. Holt, 2014 [544p] (The Remnant 
Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-8050-9923-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
The marriage of Arabella (known as Lia), First Daughter of Morrighan, to the 
crown prince of Dalbreck is meant to establish a tentative alliance between the 
two kingdoms, but Lia has no interest in forgoing the possibility of a future loving 
relationship in favor of duty and tradition. On the day of her wedding, she escapes 
to a small seaside town where she disguises herself and soon settles contently into 
life as a maid at an inn. Her hope for true love seems to become a possibility when 
two newcomers catch her eye, but the two men, one the jilted prince and the other 
a paid assassin with an unknown patron, have their own reasons for tracking Lia 
down. Pearson balances the character-driven main text with excerpts and passages 
from the two kingdoms’ holy books and songs, making it clear that the events in 
Lia’s life correspond with fate. Lia herself is a likable heroine, and the selfishness 
in her act of leaving a kingdom in shambles for some future love is negated by her 
obvious naïveté about political strategies and romantic relationships. Most intrigu-
ing are the two love interests, though, partly because of the way Pearson structures 
their narrating chapters; while Lia knows the two men as Kaden and Rafe, readers 
only know their internal thoughts as The Prince or The Assassin, adding to the 
mystery and the romantic secrecy. An attack on Lia’s family reveals who’s who and 
ensures that Lia will make a return to Morrighan in a future installment.  KQG 
pizzoli, GreG Number One Sam; written and illus. by Greg Pizzoli. Disney 
Hyperion, 2014 [34p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-7111-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-6 yrs
Sam is definitely used to being number one: the pointy-nosed pup and his zippy 
red rodster win every race. One day, though, his friend Maggie the elephant beats 
him out in a flash finish, leaving Sam unsure of himself and nervous for the next 
race. He breaks ahead quickly but—oh no! Five bespectacled chicks are in the 
track! Sam stops to usher the interlopers to safety, and the other racers—including 
a cleverly placed cameo of the croc from Pizzoli’s breakout hit The Watermelon Seed 
(BCCB 6/13)—fly by, only to cheer his heroism when he reaches the finish line 
last. The lesson that there’s more to life than winning is perhaps more trite here 
than in Manceau’s recent The Race (BCCB 5/14), but it is effectively conveyed in 
spare and approachable prose and sweetens the peppy racecar plot for a pleasant 
readaloud. Pizzoli’s screen-printed illustrations in vivid spot colors of aqua, gold, 
and cherry create a groovy ’50s colorway—complemented with design details like 
starbursts and eye-popping background washes—will be equally enjoyed far away 
in a storytime audience or up close and personal. These retro elements combine 
with the animals’ fuzzy outlines and wide-eyed naïveté recall a slightly blockier P. 
D. Eastman, and the simple text recalls those easy readers as well. With its appeal 
to both racecar enthusiasts and fans of quiet heroism, this will zoom off shelves, 
so be sure to stock up.  TA 
590 • the Bulletin
pluM, AMy After the End. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 322p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222560-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222562-7 $9.99  
Ad Gr. 8-10
In this movie-ready plot, Juneau has been raised to believe that World War III killed 
most of humanity and left the rest ravaged, diseased, and dying, save for her and 
her small village safely sheltered up in Alaska. Actually, the world is going about as 
normal, a fact that stuns Juneau when she leaves the safety of her village, seeking 
to find her comrades after they are kidnapped. Her superhuman abilities (which 
she has been led to believe are caused by a deep connection to the land) lead her to 
Miles, a clueless boy who starts out trying to capture her to hand over to his father 
but ultimately, through budding love and a nascent sense of social justice, decides 
to help her find her clan. The book’s tendency to play Juneau’s disconnect with the 
modern world for cheap humor or shock value detracts from the much more visceral 
fear of a teen who is suddenly left completely alone, a terrifying concept that, even 
if Juneau is as preternaturally staunch and heroic as she is written, deserves more 
weight than it gets. Nevertheless, readers may be intrigued enough by Juneau’s 
quest to want to know whether she will find her clan, whether their supernatural 
abilities can be exploited by the bad guys, and what will happen between her and 
Miles in the next outing.  AS
price, ben Joel Earth Space Moon Base; written and illus. by Ben Joel 
Price. Random House, 2014 [28p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97201-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37311-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98194-4 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-7 yrs
Few of us realize that deep below the surface of the Moon is a small but intrepid 
team protecting Earth from extraterrestrial invaders. Patrolling among the planets 
and stars, Spaceman navigates a flying saucer launched from their moon base; 
Robot scans the monitor for trouble; Monkey is at the ready with bananas. When 
a suspicious crater is located on a distant planet, Monkey emerges with his banana 
shooter, littering the planet with fruit, which lures dreadful aliens up top for a 
feeding frenzy (“Sleepy and full, the creatures retreat./ They’ve all had far too 
much to eat./ Feeding time is important, you see—/ It stops them from eating 
you and me”). The story’s pretty thin and the scansion sometimes wobbly, but the 
concept of tentacled aliens tamed by a yummy part of a well-balanced breakfast 
is, ahem, a-peeling. Price’s moon base is an amusingly old-school, gray-toned vi-
sion of mechanical banana loaders, hardware-intensive computer technology, and 
Buck Rogers-era spacecraft, while the aliens, in lurid hues of green and purple (and 
individually identified on the endpapers), make a brilliant showing against their 
dull planetary rockscape. This may not make the most soothing bedtime fare, but 
kids whispering “Goodnight, Moon” can take some comfort in the knowledge that 
Spaceman, Robot, and Monkey are there to keep us safe.  EB 
qitsuAlik-tinsley, rAchel, ad. The Raven and the Loon; ad. by Rachel and Sean 
Qitsualik-Tinsley; illus. by Kim Smith. Inhabit, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-927095-50-8 $16.95  
R 4-9 yrs
A long time ago, Raven and Loon both had coats white as snow. Raven finds that 
July/August 2014 • 591
pretty boring, so the obstreperous corvid bursts into Loon’s iglu with an idea: they 
could create more interesting coats for each other. Raven uses his magic and soot 
to paint an elaborate pattern on Loon’s back, and he’s so pleased with his own work 
that he won’t sit still when Loon tries to return the favor, leading her to dump 
soot all over him in frustration; he retaliates by upsetting her stone lamp, smash-
ing her feet flat. This Inuit pourquoi tale is told with a pleasing brusqueness and 
breezy sense of humor that make for a lively readaloud. The angular hatch-worked 
illustrations use a super-cool palette to evoke the starkness of the Arctic setting, 
while compositions play intriguingly with perspective for a lighthearted, zig-zaggy 
feel. Details like floating eyebrows and beaky grins and grimaces are surprisingly 
effective at capturing emotion. Though a source note is not included, this would 
pair well with Sarad’s First Spring (BCCB 5/06) for an Inuit-framed exploration 
of how things came to be.  TA 
quinn, kAte kAryus (Don’t You) Forget About Me. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2014 334p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-213596-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-213598-8 $10.99  
R Gr. 8-12
A sleepy little town in the mountains, Gardnerville offers its residents a golden life, 
an illness-free existence that might last even hundreds of years—if, that is, they 
manage to make it through adolescence. Whatever power fuels the town’s life-giving 
properties needs to be fed, and every four years, it causes a teenager (or several) to 
go berserk, using formerly underwhelming magical powers to kill—often in spec-
tacularly gory fashion—to sate the power’s hunger. Four years ago, Skylar’s sister 
Piper enticed sixteen sleepwalking teenagers to leap to their deaths off a bridge; 
she has been locked up in the reformatory ever since, and Skylar is certain the only 
way to get her sister’s freedom is to destroy Gardnerville and all it stands for. Quinn 
blends eloquent prose and startling imagery to create a truly creepy small town, 
one in which the elders have essentially traded their offspring for eternal youth. 
Readers are dropped right in the middle of Gardnerville and left disoriented, but 
intriguingly so; a drug addiction has left Skylar’s memory riddled with holes, and 
her susceptibility to flashbacks and/or hallucinations gives the story’s trajectory an 
enigmatic and unstable feel. Nothing is as it seems, even the plot twists; the trope 
of the big reveal is thoroughly subverted here, with several characters disclosing 
supposed truths that are either refuted or complicated in later scenes and the 
ultimate interpretation left up to the reader. This disturbing contemplation on 
morality, memory, and the fictions we construct to survive will find an audience 
among fans of Brenna Yovanoff (The Replacement, BCCB 9/10) and Dia Reeves 
(Bleeding Violet, BCCB 3/10).  KQG
rAbinowitz, AlAn A Boy and a Jaguar; illus. by Cátia Chien. Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-547-87507-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 6-9 yrs
In this picture-book memoir, the narrator describes his painful childhood difficulties 
with stuttering and the release he discovered through his relationships with both 
pets and zoo animals, to which he could talk with ease. As Rabinowitz becomes an 
adult, he learns ways to reduce his stuttering and begins to study wildlife, beginning 
592 • the Bulletin
with black bears and moving on to jaguars. A test of his speaking abilities comes 
when he is given only fifteen minutes to try to convince the government of Belize to 
create a jaguar sanctuary—and succeeds. Upon returning to the jungle, he follows 
the tracks of an exceptionally large jaguar, only to find that the jaguar is in turn 
following him: “I know I should feel frightened, but I squat down and look into 
the jaguar’s eyes. . . . In this animal’s eyes are strength and power and sureness of 
purpose.” The measured narration and the brevity of the text give powerful weight 
to the author’s words, and while an author’s note would have been useful to explain 
some details, these gaps may well prompt kids to Google Rabinowitz to learn more 
about him and his work. Chien’s acrylic and charcoal pencil illustrations skillfully 
use color and perspective to add further emotional depth to the text (the stuttering 
boy clutches his throat in a tight window of white space against a mottled crimson 
background, for example), and there is a slight resemblance to the art of G. Brian 
Karas in some of the figures and compositions. Kids with speech issues, and those 
who bond with animals more easily than with fellow humans, will especially relate 
to Rabinowitz’s emotionally honest narrative.  JH 
rAschkA, chris The Cosmobiography of Sun Ra: The Sound of Joy Is Enlightening; 
written and illus. by Chris Raschka. Candlewick, 2014 34p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5806-9 $15.99  
Ad 6-9 yrs
Creating a picture-book biography of a musician who claimed to come from Saturn 
(and who eschewed his birth name and was less than forthcoming about his birth-
date) is quite a challenge, and Raschka agrees early on to simply play along and take 
Herman Blount, alias Sun Ra, at his word. He follows the career of the jazz musician 
through his name changes and the formation of his malleably named orchestra—the 
Arkestra—their several shifts of venue, and ultimately their best known iteration, 
replete with “robes of purple cotton, silk scarves, bone necklaces, and crowns of 
shining metal foil.” What remains elusive here, though, is an effective evocation 
of Sun Ra’s music, which veers notably and famously from a bebop-influenced big 
band sound, to chants that playfully (or perhaps dead seriously) conjure militant 
extra-planetary anthems, to electronic soundscapes suitable as soundtracks for 
travel far beyond Sun Ra’s home planet. Apart from offering an inventive opening 
scene of a roughly outlined Sun Ra crashing down to Earth and a few views of the 
full Arkestra in their dazzling garb, Raschka pays surprisingly little attention to the 
musicians’ visual statement, which would be most intriguing to a child audience. 
Instead, viewers find cityscapes and contemporary musicians, which are skillfully 
rendered in Raschka’s signature explosion of thick, freewheeling line and splashes 
of vibrant watercolor but which are not exactly the essence of Sun Ra. A closing 
note offers a bit more biographical information, and a list of selected album titles 
is included. An annotated list of individual pieces showcasing the Arkestra’s range 
would have been welcome, but musical explorers will easily track Sun Ra down 
on Planet YouTube.  EB
July/August 2014 • 593
rubin, susAn GoldMAn Freedom Summer: The 1964 Struggle for Civil Rights in 
Mississippi. Holiday House, 2014 [128p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8234-2920-2 $18.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 6-10
Everyone knew that heading into the deep South to urge disenfranchised blacks 
to claim their right to vote would be fraught with danger. The 1964 Mississippi 
Summer Project organizers, drawn from a coalition of civil rights groups, trained 
their fresh-faced volunteers to withstand beatings and cautioned them to have bail 
money pre-arranged. The possibility of death, acknowledged but still remote, turned 
to reality when three volunteers—Michael Schwerner, James Chaney, and Andrew 
Goodman—were arrested, released, ambushed, murdered, and buried on June 21st, 
when the project had barely begun. Rubin’s account of the infamous Mississippi 
summer skillfully follows two intertwined threads: the murders and subsequent in-
vestigation, with its crafty maneuvering on both the local and federal levels; and the 
Project’s full-speed-ahead implementation of education programs and community 
centers, with the group’s focus on literacy, civic engagement, and ultimately, voter 
registration. The expansive cast of characters may be a bit overwhelming, but the 
wealth of intimate family photos, scenes of local activity, and line and watercolor 
sketches by observer Tracy Sugarman help put faces to the names and make the 
high stakes for both residents and volunteers all the more tangible. Extensive back 
matter, also illustrated, includes a timeline, document reproductions, source notes, 
bibliography, pictures credits, and index.  EB
schuMAcher, AnnA End Times; illus. by Rohan Eason. Razorbill, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-748-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
The apocalypse may be coming, but at least the residents of Carbon County, 
Wyoming are well informed, given the extraordinary number of end-times signs 
and the presence of Daphne, a newcomer who seems well equipped at interpreting 
them. Daphne just wants to let go of her problematic family back in Detroit and 
settle in with relatives in a small but cozy town, but trouble seems to follow her. 
In Carbon County, she quickly finds herself stuck in a complex romance, trying 
to figure out how the world might end and what she can do to stop it, and seeking 
to help her cousin who is headed into a doomed marriage. Even as emotionally 
responsive as Daphne is, it’s odd that smaller human issues take up so much of 
her time if the world is coming to an end. Clumsy dialogue and characters who 
lack depth or nuance (adolescent boys, for example, seem to be either monstrous 
hormonally driven jerks or tough outsiders with hearts of gold) mar what could 
otherwise be an intriguing read, particularly for readers who are familiar with 
religious end times concepts. Nevertheless, the allure of a hot romance, a smart 
pace that builds effectively, and epic scenes of good versus evil may be enough to 
keep readers engaged and ready for the next installment of this new series. Final 
illustrations not seen.  AS
594 • the Bulletin
shArAfeddine, fAtiMA The Amazing Travels of Ibn Battuta; illus. by Intelaq Mo-
hammed Ali. Groundwood, 2014 28p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-480-0 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-481-7 $14.95  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Ibn Battuta, a devout fourteenth-century Muslim, set out to visit important cities 
and sites throughout Dar al-Islam (the Muslim countries), on three continents and 
over nearly three decades. Ibn Battuta is a deeply fascinating individual, and his 
epic travels remain awe-inspiring centuries later. Unfortunately, the compression 
of his ambitious adventures into a slim picture book means that there’s little page 
space to delve into description or to linger over a traveler’s tale; instead, the text 
rushes through the highlights with the briefest of comments on each stop, and the 
book never mentions some of his more perilous encounters or his personal life. 
No comprehensive map is included, but Mohammed Ali’s page designs cleverly 
incorporate grainy landforms jutting into sapphire seas or threaded with azure riv-
ers, offering smaller regional maps with place names included, as well as vignettes 
of the local architecture. Although this title is not as lavish as James Rumford’s 
Traveling Man (BCCB 12/01), it may whet readers’ interest to pursue Ibn Battuta’s 
story in more depth, perhaps through the virtual tour at ibnbattuta.berkeley.edu 
(The Travels of Ibn Battuta).  EB
sheinMel, AlyssA b. Second Star. Farrar, 2014 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-374-38267-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Peter Pan serves as the inspiration for this psychological drama dusted with a touch of 
magical realism. While Wendy Darling’s parents and the police believe her younger 
brothers drowned in a surfing accident, Wendy is certain John and Michael are 
still out there, so she sets off on a road trip up the California coast to find them. 
She ends up in Kensington Beach, a timeless place with “perfect waves,” and ends 
up taking surfing lessons from a boy named Pete and crashing with him and his 
crew in an old abandoned mansion. When Pete eventually informs her that he 
kicked her brothers out for using drugs a few months back, Wendy feels betrayed 
but uses the info to track down Jas, the beach’s charismatic dealer of “fairy dust,” 
which caused her brothers’ downfall. Wendy’s own dance with the dust leads to her 
psychological breakdown, and the reliability of her narration becomes question-
able. While Wendy becomes involved with both Pete and Jas, the primary romance 
here is one with the beach, the water, the epic surfing that goes with it, and the 
freedom that all that entails. Characterization, on the other hand, is weak: nearly 
every teen encountered here is the embodiment of want in a sea of privilege (both 
Wendy and Jas come from exceptionally wealthy homes), and though their plight 
is understandable, their angst blends together in an undifferentiated fog of yearning 
and not a whole lot of reflection. Still, there’s magic in the evocative description of 
the sea and surfing, and the multiple twists at the end will certainly have readers 
reconsidering their childhood views of Barrie’s classic.  KQG
July/August 2014 • 595
shine, Joe I Become Shadow. Soho Teen, 2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-358-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61695-359-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Fourteen-year-old Ren thinks that being kidnapped out of her bed in the middle 
of the night is the worst thing to ever happen to her, but she has no clue just how 
bad things can get. It turns out that Ren would otherwise have died very soon, and 
she has therefore been chosen by an organization to begin training as a Shadow, a 
hyper-trained secret guardian of a person destined to be important sometime in 
the future. Ren’s subject appears to be a hapless college genius, but there’s much 
more to him than there seems, and it soon becomes clear that the bad guys after 
him might actually be the good guys with whom Ren has allied herself. It’s a 
complex plot, and things move quickly, but sophisticated sci-fi fans will enjoy the 
layers. Ren’s training, a process that takes years and which very few of her peers 
survive (one aspect involves injecting agonizing fluid every night with the end 
result being a pain-free existence if you can stay sane for the years it takes to kick 
in), is squirm-worthily horrendous, but it is all effectively described and logical 
within the context, and Ren, as narrator, chooses to gloss over much of the worst 
she endures. Shine elegantly traces the development of the world, explaining how 
a culture that is still reeling from one single change (in 1992 a satellite built to 
take high-res pictures of Earth instead sent pictures from 2042) could end up so 
disturbing under the placid surface.  AS
shultz, cArA lynn The Darkworld. Harlequin, 2014 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-373-21120-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
With a ghost for a best friend and the ability to see dead people, sixteen-year-old 
Paige Kelly isn’t exactly a newbie when it comes to the supernatural. She’s nonethe-
less thrown for a loop when a fire demon attacks her at school, killing a classmate 
and setting a classroom ablaze. Fortunately, the swoonworthy new guy, Logan 
Bradley, shows up with a magical sword and defeats the demon; he then informs 
Paige that her ghost-seeing ability places her amid the ongoing war between de-
mons and warlocks in Darkworld, an alternative realm. A romance ensues, several 
battles are had, but a secret of Logan’s puts their relationship and the fates of both 
the mortal world and Darkworld at stake. The snark and camp are similar in tone 
to Hawkins’ Rebel Belle (BCCB 4/14) or Clement-Moore’s Prom Dates from Hell 
(BCCB 7/07), but the mechanics here are more obvious and contrived, with the 
feisty, independent-minded Paige making some rather uninspired and boy-centered 
decisions that are more plot driven than character motivated. Still, the whip-smart 
banter between the two leads is entertaining, smart and stylish with an almost old 
Hollywood glamour, and the push and pull romance takes a dramatic turn when 
Logan’s secret is revealed. Formulaic, sure, but when the formula makes for a breezy 
beach read with a touch of demonic fun, it may be hard to resist.  KQG 
596 • the Bulletin
sís, peter The Pilot and the Little Prince: The Life of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry; 
written and illus. by Peter Sís. Foster/Farrar, 2014 44p
ISBN 978-0-374-38069-4 $18.99  
R* Gr. 4-8
Sís’ mystically touched style enhances this biography of famous French aviator 
and author Saint-Exupéry, who is most famous in America for his authorship of 
The Little Prince. For all the titular reference to that book, however, this is more 
focused on Saint-Exupéry the adventurous and pioneering aviator, and a dramatic 
story it is. Saint-Exupéry dreamed from early youth of becoming a pilot, eventually 
becoming part of the innovative plan to deliver the mail by air in the 1920s. He 
flew deliveries over Europe and northwest Africa, lived for a time in the Western 
Sahara, and then developed routes to South America. When World War II came, 
Saint-Exupéry ended up exiled to New York, where he penned The Little Prince; 
eventually he joined a French squadron in North Africa, flying reconnaissance, and 
was lost without a trace on a flight in 1944. This is a highly effective distillation of 
a fascinating life, and its focus on the opening up of the skies will be a revelation to 
kids whose knowledge extends only to the Wright Brothers and Charles Lindbergh. 
As usual with Sís, design and art are part of the story rather than partnering it, 
and the round captioned vignettes that dapple or underscore the spreads provide 
ample opportunity for reader engagement. Dramatic vistas balance empty space of 
desert or sky against details that often have their own haunting graphic impact in 
the delicately stippled components; Sís’ maps take the aesthetic of early maps, with 
browned touches and curious particulars, and brush them with symbolism to treat 
cities and landscapes as animate as well as animated. This would add considerable 
dimension to explorations of early flight, but it would also pair excellently with 
an introduction—or reintroduction—to The Little Prince. A brief bibliography is 
included on the copyright page.  DS
sitoMer, AlAn lAwrence Caged Warrior. Hyperion, 2014 216p
ISBN 978-1-4231-7124-9 $16.99 
 Ad Gr. 9-12
McCutcheon Daniels has been trained from a tender age in mixed martial arts by 
his father, a womanizing, gambling, drug-dependent failed boxer who relies on his 
son’s talent to keep the dysfunctional family afloat, ever since Mom left and took 
their stable income with her. Known as Bam Bam in the Detroit underground 
cage fighting circuit, McCutcheon is proud of his abilities and shares his father’s 
plan for a professional career in sanctioned fighting. However, when a persistent 
high school teacher, Mr. Freedman, finagles him a berth at a high-performing 
charter school, McCutcheon slowly reaches for the bait. Dad, who’s indebted to 
local mobsters, can’t let that happen, and he kidnaps his own daughter, the beloved 
little sister McCutcheon is virtually raising on his own, with an implied threat to 
sell her into the sex trade if the son doesn’t fall in line. There’s lots of high-drama 
appeal here, certainly, and action fans will be drawn by the MMA component. 
Though the ramped-up violence is part and parcel of a story about unsanctioned 
cage fighting, other narrative elements seem overdrawn for dramatic effect. The 
elder McCutcheon is thoroughly vile, Mr. Freedman is endlessly patient, kinder-
gartner Gemma is adorably innocent and precocious, and love interest Kaitlyn is 
predictably brilliant, tough, and understanding. Narrator McCutcheon takes the 
role of stoic warrior with a heart of gold, and although most readers will recognize 
July/August 2014 • 597
his character for the stereotype it is, they’ll easily project themselves into it in their 
own testosterone-charged fantasies.  EB
spinelli, eileen Another Day as Emily; illus. by Joanne Lew-Vriethoff. Knopf, 
2014 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-449-80988-4 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-449-80987-7 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-80990-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
The summer that Suzy turns twelve starts off with a drama: her four-year-old 
brother is hailed as a hero after dialing 911 for an ailing neighbor. Hero boy Parker 
becomes the narrative that dominates Suzy’s household, even as she enjoys the 
summer program at the library, where she’s learning about Emily Dickinson, and 
gets increasingly interested in a nice boy. When Parker ends up wrecking Suzy’s 
birthday (Phillies-loving Suzy and her father were going to attend her first game 
ever when Parker goes temporarily missing), she’s had enough. She shuns the world, 
garbs herself in white dresses, and asks to be called Emily, all in the manner of the 
poet who inspires her—but is being Emily really the solution to her problems? In 
Spinelli’s lightly turned and accessible free verse sequence (each short poem has its 
own title and leads seamlessly into the next), Suzy’s voice is prosy and authentic with 
just enough insight to lend perspective (“One teeny-tiny coax/ and I might topple,” 
thinks an Emily-weary Suzy hoping to be encouraged to join a family outing). The 
book quietly layers factors on Suzy that make her vulnerability understandable, 
and it hits a nice note, not too serious (her father’s audible grumbling has a certain 
objective reality) but not dismissive, about her Emily phase. Spinelli continues to 
be a sympathetic chronicler of tween tribulations that don’t always rise to the level 
of trials, offering a rewarding experience for young readers not looking to leapfrog 
into YA. Final illustrations not seen.  DS
stuber, bArbArA Girl in Reverse. McElderry, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9734-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9736-8 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-10
In her 1951 Kansas City high school, Lily Firestone stands out like a sore thumb—
she’s the only Asian student at school, and she’s suffering more harassment than 
ever now that the U.S. is fighting the North Koreans and Chinese in the Korean 
War. Lily’s parents, who adopted her when she was three, don’t like to talk about 
Lily’s birth parents, so Lily’s growing search for her pre-Firestone identity is aided 
by her mischievous but loyal little brother, Ralphie, and a kindly black janitor at 
the school who knows what it’s like to be a visible minority. With their support, 
she traces the story of her origins before her arrival at the city’s Catholic orphan-
age, finally discovering the identities of the Chinese woman she refers to as her 
“Gone Mom” and of her father. Stuber paints with clarity the homogeneousness of 
mid-century mid-America, where Lily’s father can blithely say in front of his Asian 
daughter that “Orientals are . . . shrewd” and racist newspaper cartoons are part of 
classroom current events. Lily’s detective work is absorbing, and her exploration of 
her heritage speaks to every teenager’s identity challenge, not just her own. Char-
acterization is variable, though: Ralphie is a standout, but the supportive janitor 
598 • the Bulletin
falls into the Magical Minority trap, and Lily’s dream boy offers little to justify 
his dreaminess. Additionally, Lily’s backstory is an elaborate cinematic melodrama 
involving valuable artifacts, secret loves, and timely nun-offered revelations that’s 
absorbing but at odds with the nuanced realism of her identity quest. Lily’s journey 
is still an intriguing one, however, and readers may be drawn by the stark picture 
of mid-century mid-America.  DS
sullivAn, lAurA l. Love by the Morning Star. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-547-68951-7 $17.99
E-book ISBN 978-0-547-68958-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 9-12
Half-German Jewish, half-British Hannah Morgenstern flees to her mother’s family 
estate in England to escape Nazi-ruled Germany. Knowing she must accept whatever 
treatment the Liripips give her, she’s nonetheless dismayed to find herself a servant 
unwelcome to even speak to her aunt and uncle. Additionally, she acts as a lady’s 
maid to beautiful Anna Morgan, spy and Nazi sympathizer, who was meant to enter 
the house as a servant, but whom the Liripips have mistaken for Hannah and treated 
as family. Anna becomes intent on marrying Teddy, the charming Liripip son, even 
as his step-cousin Hannah has fallen head over heels for him as well, and a collection 
of mistaken-identity errors leaves all three confused about who loves whom. It’s 
hard to get past the weirdness of the lighthearted upstairs/downstairs portrayal of 
looming war and genocide, and the story sometimes becomes too labored to achieve 
the zaniness necessary for comedies of error. Nonetheless, well-executed moments 
of humor (including Lord Liripip’s thinking his sprightly new servant had been a 
courtesan) and a sprinkle of sly innuendo will make precocious readers giggle, while 
the nicely tied-up love story will satisfy those romantics urging characters to follow 
their hearts. Sullivan offers apt observations on human nature, though her character 
development ultimately falls short; high-spirited, Anne Shirley-esque Hannah, for 
instance, inexplicably abandons her quest to uphold Jewish traditions. Still, like 
Hannah, this novel manages to amuse if not charm, and it may suit those erudite 
high-schoolers who appreciate a good Wodehouse reference.  AA
swAin, h. A. Hungry. Feiwel, 2014 [372p]
ISBN 978-1-250-02829-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
In a world where you take medication to ward off hunger and a supplement to 
satisfy all of your nutritional needs, one girl’s growling stomach can be revolution-
ary. In her own family, it’s shocking and dangerous, as Thalia’s parents are key 
scientists involved with this complex system where people are distracted by flashy 
technology, drugged up to address any problems that emerge, and kept in the dark 
about the true state of the world. The familiarity of drugs that fix the problems of 
other drugs and of genetic tampering that is meant to yield perfection is compel-
ling—readers tapped into medical science will find Swain’s scenario startlingly 
realistic. Thalia’s privilege makes her a rather unreliable narrator as she begins to 
interact with the have-nots of the world, and she sees a noble struggle in what the 
actual participants actually find just degraded lives. This is more endearing than 
exasperating, however, and Thalia does grow considerably over the course of the 
July/August 2014 • 599
novel. Unfortunately, there are too many plot phases, so the various situations in 
which Thalia finds herself end up being confusing and tiring, detracting from the 
momentum of the story. Nevertheless, a female protagonist who isn’t staunch, 
heroic, and perfect is increasingly rare in dystopias, so Thalia’s fumbling around 
for the right path is refreshingly different.  AS
swiAtkowskA, GAbi Queen on Wednesday; written and illus. by Gabi Swiat-
kowska. Foster/Farrar, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-374-37446-4 $17.99  
Ad 4-6 yrs
With nothing to do since Sunday, a bored Thelma decides on Wednesday that she 
will make herself queen. While her imperial duties at first amuse her, the burden 
of picking the royal pets, locating a royal palace, and hiring the royal help soon 
give her a royal headache, prompting her to abdicate the throne in favor of bore-
dom. The prose in this first writing effort from Swiatkowska is as subdued as the 
languid Thelma, accompanying her search for excitement at a pace that captures 
her innate ennui; ultimately, though, this is largely a scenario rather than a plot, 
so Thelma’s boredom is rather overeffectively conveyed. Depicted here with the 
wide-eyed, formal otherworldliness that has hallmarked Swiatkowska’s previous 
work as an illustrator, Thelma and her entourage make visually stunning subjects. 
The paint-and-pencil renderings skillfully employ a muted palette with punches 
of red, yellow, and blue to capture this surreal-feeling, lackadaisical world; the 
art also provides humor, as Swiatkowska slyly tucks ever more animals into each 
scene (the royal staff and the royal pets all trying to sleep in one bed is particularly 
charming), adding a level of accessibility to the story. The combination of these 
lighthearted moments with the eerie adultness of the children reads more like an 
album of daguerreotypes staged by Wes Anderson on a rainy day at the family 
dacha than a candidate for storytime. Yet, for those children—or perhaps those 
parents—looking for offbeat fare to relieve their own boredom, this sophisticated 
exercise in stylization may prove just the ticket.  AA
tAn, shAun Rules of Summer; written and illus. by Shaun Tan. Levine/Scho-
lastic, 2014 [52p]
ISBN 978-0-545-63912-5 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 3-5
Big brothers set the rules, and little brothers violate them at their peril. Such is the 
lesson learned in this lushly eccentric summer interlude where a young boy tries 
to keep up with his imaginative older brother; text is almost entirely limited to 
the rules themselves, while illustrations reveal the stories behind them, the conse-
quences of their breach, and the relationship behind the trajectory. At first the older 
sibling comforts and protects his younger brother from the fantasy consequences; 
for instance, when the younger boy breaks the rule “never leave a red sock on the 
clothesline,” a huge red rabbit threatens the scene while the boys huddle together 
in hiding. Soon, though, the younger boy starts to test his limits against these 
arbitrary rules, and his big brother lets the consequences play out, excluding the 
boy when he tries to argue or ask for a reason. Finally, the younger boy is left all 
alone, imprisoned in the lonely shelter of waiting for an apology until, presumably, 
the older brother decides that a pesky little brother is better than no companion 
at all and gives in so that they can enjoy the last day of summer together. Tan is a 
600 • the Bulletin
master of the cryptic visual metaphor, providing just enough guidance through the 
few words to allow readers to construct their own analogous situations of coping 
with a sibling, whether they are the controlling ones or the annoying tagalongs. 
The oversized format encourages sustained attention to the painterly textures and 
quirky details while also suggesting the fragile bond between the boys in a much 
larger world; beyond richly colored backgrounds, Tan makes his human figures 
small in a landscape that’s relatively barren in terms of realistic urban structures 
but abounding in fantasy creatures. The effect is an externalization of the deeply 
felt emotions of childhood, and it is heightened by the smallness of the single lines 
of text centered on mostly blank verso pages that feature only accidental scribbles, 
as if to indicate that so much of what happens can’t be put into words, and words 
themselves tell less than half the story.  KC
tAylor, seAn Goal!; illus. with photographs by Caio Vilela. Holt, 2014 36p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62779-123-6 $17.99  
Ad 4-8 yrs
It’s all about the pictures in this photographic global tour of kids playing soccer. 
Each opening features a full-page color image of children in action in a particular 
country, and on the opposite page, an inset box with a bit of national soccer trivia. 
Togo, for instance, highlights a half-dozen children kicking the ball in a “field” of 
sand, while the info insert notes that the world’s youngest person to play in a World 
Cup qualifier was a thirteen-year-old from Togo. In Nepal, a pair of uniformed 
schoolgirls lead the pack in front of an ancient religious landmark, and the fast 
fact involves a charity game between politicians and TV comedians that was at-
tended by thousands of Nepalese. While the photo and sidebar will keep browsers 
entertained, the main text weighs down the effort with throw-away platitudes: 
“You can lose a game and still play your very best. And that is a kind of winning.” 
A world map is included, marked with each featured country and the date its first 
soccer team was founded. That, great photos, and good stories are all young soccer 
fans will really need.  EB
tonAtiuh, duncAn Separate Is Never Equal: Sylvia Mendez & Her Family’s Fight 
for Desegregation; written and illus. by Duncan Tonatiuh. Abrams, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1054-4 $18.95  
R 6-9 yrs
Before Brown v. Board first brought in the heavy equipment to level the national 
educational field, important court battles were being fought—and won—at local 
levels. Among the most notable, and later overlooked, cases involved the Mexican-
American Gonzalo Mendez family in California, whose dark-skinned children were 
assigned to a substandard “Mexican” public school, while their fairer-skinned cousins 
were invited to attend the “white” school. Mendez attempted to rally parents whose 
children were likewise shut out of the better public school, but found many too 
afraid of economic reprisal to raise a protest. Finally, Mendez found an attorney, 
and the school case went to court. There, testimony from the school superintendent 
demonstrated the depth of bigotry against the Mexican Americans, but a final rul-
ing stated that “public education must be open to all children by unified school 
association regardless of lineage.” Tonatiuh frames the story through the experience 
of the Mendez daughter, Sylvia, whose first day at the integrated school is far from 
a social success. When her mother reminds her of what they had been through to 
get her into a good school, the story proceeds through a flashback, culminating in 
July/August 2014 • 601
a better second day and a promising school year for Sylvia. Tonatiuh’s cast, stylized 
with subtle motifs that echo indigenous Central American artwork, replays the 
legal battle with dignified formality. An author’s note provides adult readers with 
additional material to share on the Mendez family in the aftermath of the trial, in 
addition to a glossary, index, bibliography, and photographs. This will rightfully 
be a first choice for juvenile collections on civil rights.   EB
treGAy, sArAh Fan Art; illus. by Melissa DeJesus. Tegen/HarperCollins, 
2014 [368p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224315-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-224317-1 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 8-12
When Jamie first asks Eden to the prom, he doesn’t realize that she is a lesbian, but 
it doesn’t really matter anyway, since he’s recently realized that he has fallen hope-
lessly head-over-heels for his best friend, Mason. This is evident to nearly everyone 
else in the senior class, despite the fact that Jamie, while out to his family, remains 
in the closet at school in fear of losing Mason. As Jamie grows closer (platonically, 
of course) to Eden, he also confronts homophobia when a graphic short story he 
illustrates and submits for the school literary magazine is rejected by the editorial 
staff as too controversial; he skirts their authority to publish it anyway, in effect 
outing himself and summoning the wrath of school administration. There aren’t 
any surprises where this is going, and the will-they/won’t-they plot between Jamie 
and Mason drags on too long in increasing unbelievability until graduation day, 
where a cruel prank leads finally to their first kiss. Jamie’s obliviousness to Mason’s 
signals that he might also be gay stretches reader credulity, and the overall ach-
ingly romantic tone will either be cheerfully lapped up or laughed at (“He smells 
like Speed Stick, shampoo, and all I’ve ever wanted”). Nevertheless, Jamie’s angst 
in spite of being well-liked—understandable in a small Idaho city, even one with 
a GSA—and Mason’s troubles with his womanizing Mexican father add depth. 
Additionally, the implication that the J/ason pairing is ’shipped by Eden and her 
“art geek girl” pals is treated both with obligatory glee and the implication that 
dabbling in real people’s lives has real consequences. Fans of cotton-candy romance 
will overlook the contrivance to find exactly what they dreamed wrapped up in a 
chaste but messy bow. Final art not seen.  TA
turner, AMber Mcree Circa Now. Disney Hyperion, 2014 [288p] illus. 
with photographs
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-7639-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8783-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-6
Tragedy strikes the close-knit Monroe family when twelve-year-old Circa’s beloved 
father dies in a car wreck. Since he was driving to deliver retouched photos at the 
time, Circa’s mother avoids the part of the family’s photography studio where Circa 
and her father had freshened clients’ old photos, as well as added to their own 
“Shopt” file—a family treasury of images with unexpected elements inserted using 
Photoshop, complete with amusing captions. Circa’s grief at her father’s passing 
and her frustration with her depressed, slightly agoraphobic mother is tempered 
somewhat by the arrival of Miles, a teenage boy suffering from amnesia who has 
602 • the Bulletin
only a photo bearing the Studio Monroe stamp. Circa soon realizes there is a con-
nection between her dad and Miles; not only is there a family resemblance, but 
Miles would be the same age as the baby her father “Shopt” into a photo. With a 
growing belief in the power of these pictures, Circa sets out to see if she can use 
her own talent for altering images to reshape reality in this novel that imbues a 
family tragedy and grieving process with elements of magical realism. Much like 
the storyline, Circa is accessible and inoffensive, if a trifle unbelievable; Turner 
occasionally disrupts the story’s momentum by telling rather than showing, and 
while the insertion of photos from the “Shopt” file provides context, these greeting 
card-esque visuals jar rather than supplement. Still, the tenderness, imagination 
and hope underpinning the story, as well as the ultimate message of finding good 
in the bad, will have readers turning the pages to see how Circa might shape her 
present even if she can’t change the past.  AA
vAlentino, serenA The Beast Within: A Tale of Beauty’s Prince. Disney, 
2014 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-5912-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-6
The tale of a beautiful girl transforming a beast to his original princely form is 
a familiar and often retold one, but the story of how exactly the prince initially 
came to be cursed and why is less well known. Valentino sets her version of the 
prince’s perspective in the Disney world, with Cogsworth, Lumiere, and even 
Mrs. Potts all making an appearance. The setting and the plot are far darker here, 
however, and musical numbers with dancing cutlery are replaced by the internal 
contemplations of an increasingly melancholic and occasionally violent Beast as he 
transforms from human to monster. It begins with the Prince’s betrayal of Circe, 
a young maiden whom he initially woos for her beauty and then rejects when he 
discovers she is merely a pig farmer’s daughter. Her older sisters, a trio of magical 
witches, vengefully cast a spell on the Prince, and the spoiled, selfish man futilely 
tries to outrun his fate, losing his human form and almost his mind in the process. 
Valentino is so successful at making the Prince unlikable that he seems nearly ir-
redeemable, and a disjointed timeline makes it difficult to identify the chronology 
of the moral transformation that must precede his physical one. The combination 
of the Disney tie-in and the thoughtful, more folkloric elements, though, makes 
this an interesting choice for readers who’ve outgrown the pink-princess phase but 
are still captivated by fairy tales.  KQG 
virGo, seán The Shadow Mother; illus. by Javier Serrano Pérez. Groundwood, 
2014 64p
ISBN 978-0-88899-971-9 $21.95  
R Gr. 5 up
A man who came of age sailing on ships falls in love with the girl he meets in the sea; 
when she sheds her shadow on the beach at night, he claims it—and thus her—for 
his own. He brings her back to his seaside home, and there they have a son, who 
grows up “in a silent house,” with both his mother and father happier outside. In 
the attic one day the boy discovers his father’s sea chest, and in it, a skin, black on 
one side and white on the other. The skin’s rough edges prick the boy’s fingers and 
give him a suffocating fever, but a voice in the night tells him that going into the 
ocean’s waves will cure him. A reimagining of Celtic selkie lore, this book contains 
July/August 2014 • 603
a long arc, gossamer prose, and conceptual artwork that require sophistication 
well beyond what’s considered standard picture book age, but readers willing to 
engage will find a text lush with tactile imagery and the quandaries of loneliness 
in the midst of obsession and love. Serrano Pérez’s pencil illustrations combine the 
elongation and chiaroscuro of El Greco with the soft roundness of Paul Zelinsky’s 
pencilwork and the surrealism of Dalí in panels that place human faces as part of 
the landscape as fish fly into homes through windows. The panels are tinged with 
the faintest of colors, giving them a vintage aesthetic reminiscent of woodcuts and 
enhancing the who-knows-when-and-where setting necessary for the sharp folk-
loric edge of this book; these are interspersed with cloudy yet more concrete spot 
art with slightly more color. There are more questions than answers in this slim 
volume, but readers willing to sit with a haunting tale that will break if handled 
too roughly will be rewarded with an artfully paired word-and-image reverie.  TA
voAke, steve Hooey Higgins and the Tremendous Trousers; illus. by Emma Dod-
son. Candlewick, 2014 135p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6923-2 $14.99  
R Gr. 2-4
After his lively debut in Hooey Higgins and the Shark (BCCB 4/12), young Hooey 
is back for another adventure. A successful routing of the class bully (Hooey 
convinces him to unknowingly sit on an anthill, causing him to be bitten and to 
doff his pants) and a class contest centered on safety prompt Hooey, his pal, Twig, 
and his older brother, Will to invent TremTrows, short for Tremendous Trousers 
that will protect the wearer from harm. The kids have high hopes for the bubble- 
wrap-stuffed sweatpants, especially after they add bottles of cola and mint-filled 
balloons which will, in theory, inflate like air bags when the mints hit the cola. 
Unfortunately, during their contest entry’s public presentation, Twig accidentally 
releases all the mints at once when he is hit in, erm, a sensitive area with a soccer 
ball, resulting in a cola-soaked audience and a failure to win the prize. The shock 
of the explosion does, however, cure a small student’s persistent hiccups, and the 
student’s grateful father rewards Hooey with three tickets to the local fair. Voake 
excels at quick pacing and pithily hilarious description (“Twig looked bewildered, 
as if he was having one of those dreams where meerkats ride bicycles and juggle 
with melons”), and this well-written romp will appeal especially to the boys who 
goof off in the back of the classroom with rubber bands and paperclips. Dodson’s 
monochromatic ink line and wash art features exaggerated figures and a scribbly, 
spattery look that complements the rowdy storyline, and frequency of the illustra-
tions will further entice reluctant readers. It’s hard to beat exploding pants for sheer 
kid appeal, and this would make a LOL-inducing readaloud as well as a splendid 
readalone selection.  JH
wAldron, kevin Panda-monium at Peek Zoo; written and illus. by Kevin Wal-
dron. Templar/Candlewick, 2014 43p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6658-3 $16.99  
R 5-8 yrs
In the frenzy of preparation for an animal parade at his zoo, zookeeper Mr. Peek 
gets a bit sloppy, unknowingly letting out the penguins, absent-mindedly applying 
black shoe polish to the tortoises’ shells, inadvertently overheating the polar bear 
environment, and forgetting to feed Mr. Whiskerwitz, the lion. Luckily, his small 
son Jimmy is on the ball, and he adroitly and quietly sets things to rights. When 
604 • the Bulletin
panda cub Lulu is discovered in Mr. Whiskerwitz’s pen, Mr. Peek fears the worst, 
but not to worry: Jimmy has fed the lion, and the big cat is gently playing with 
little Lulu. The zoo parade is then held without further ado, but careful viewers 
will spot Mr. Peek about to step on a banana peel tossed down by a monkey, and 
the final pages show Mr. Peek triumphant but with his leg in a cast. The jaunty 
language (“Jimmy, my boy, everything is tickety-boo for our big day at Peek Zoo!”) 
and carefully structured plot will make this a successful readaloud selection. Nu-
merous illustrative details also clue viewers in on the action that happens outside 
the textual narrative—a can of shoe polish atop one of the tortoise’s shells hints 
at Mr. Peek’s mistake with them, for example, and tiny Lulu can be seen heading 
off to the lion’s cage in one corner as the zookeeper panics about her whereabouts. 
Though the darker hues make the visuals a little hard to differentiate at times, the 
zoo antics and the lively, retro digital illustrations recall Savage’s Where’s Walrus? 
(BCCB 2/11). The exuberant action of the green-suited, handlebar-mustached Mr. 
Peek, the diminutive Jimmy, and the various zoo residents will keep kids’ attention, 
though, especially those who loved Rathman’s Goodnight, Gorilla (BCCB 5/94).  JH
wAtson, Jude Loot: How to Steal a Fortune. Scholastic, 2014 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-46802-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-63395-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
When a heist goes wrong, a trio of curses falls upon the trio of thieves. One dies; 
one is jailed; and Alfie, the mastermind, struggles for years to prevent the deaths of 
his twin children, as mysteriously foretold at the crime scene. Thus, March (raised 
by his larcenous father) and Jules (raised by her impresario aunt) have been kept 
apart to thwart the prophecy that they would die together before their thirteenth 
birthday. Alfie’s own death, however, puts paid to the separation, and the pair are 
prematurely reunited and left with a desperate hope—to reassemble the seven 
moonstones lost in the fateful theft, undo the curse, and collect millions of dol-
lars from the jewels’ owner. Missing, along with the jewels, is fundamental trust 
between the siblings, but March and Jules, aided by a pair of misfits they meet in 
their brief stay at a group home, nonetheless undertake a caper that would have 
made dear old Alfie glow with pride. This is less a who-done-it than a how-will-
they-do-it tale, but readers who enjoy racing protagonists to the solution should 
be well compensated with the clever scams the kids pull off to grab the goods and 
cheat destiny. Quick changes of scene keep the action rolling, and some of the most 
engrossing acts play out in the underground circus venues at which Jules has been 
reared to perform as an acrobat. Assorted characters from Alfie’s past, largely of 
the endearing crook variety, balance the tension with levity and make this a richly 
entertaining romp.  EB
weitz, chris Young World. Little, 2014 [384p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-22629-5 $19.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-22627-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
The adults and kids are dead, and just the teens remain, at least until they stop 
producing the right protective hormones and succumb as well. The illness is harsh 
and fast moving, and there is no known cure, though one small group of teens 
July/August 2014 • 605
is determined to follow a faint lead in hopes of saving the world. They quickly 
discover that leaving their relatively peaceful enclave in a New York park brings 
even more risk than they anticipated as they encounter cannibals, polar bears, teens 
manufacturing weapons with 3-D printers, and a fabled single old man known 
to still be alive, who is terrifyingly dangerous even while he offers insight into a 
cure. The group of protagonists defy heroic stereotypes even while they are clearly 
the best people for this mission; their determination and keen interest in survival 
trumps their relative inexperience, and and their shared strong sense of ethics 
keeps them from raping and pillaging their way through the world, which would 
certainly be an easier approach. Their natural inclination toward decency in a world 
where plenty have dropped many of the societal guidelines for morality makes for 
powerful philosophical conflicts within the larger action-packed adventure plot. 
The rush up to a climactic conclusion is effective, given the narrative build-up 
through New York and toward the one location where a cure, the literal solution 
to saving the whole world, might be discovered. It’s also a pretty irresistible spot to 
end, guaranteeing interest in the remaining two novels of this promised trilogy.  AS
whelAn, GloriA Queen Victoria’s Bathing Machine; illus. by Nancy Carpen-
ter. Wiseman/Simon, 2014 44p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-2753-2 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5885-7 $10.99  
Ad 7-10 yrs
In this rhyming story, poor Queen Victoria would love to go for a dip in the ocean, 
but the immense impropriety of the queen being seen in public in bathing attire 
puts the kibosh on that idea—until her husband Albert comes up with a plan. After 
Victoria nixes Albert’s first thought—catapulting her from the window—Albert has 
a light-bulb moment. He builds Victoria a little shed on wheels, in which she can 
change into her swimming costume and be rolled to the water’s edge where she can 
then discreetly exit directly into the ocean. This solves the problem, and Victoria 
can finally enjoy a pleasant swim. It’s stretching it a bit to call this factual, since 
Albert didn’t actually invent the bathing machine (which was popular for decades 
before Victoria was even born), but her swim and bathing machine are indeed 
historically rooted; an author’s note gives a brief description of Victoria, her life 
and family, and the actual bathing machine (which can still be seen today on the 
Isle of Wight), as well as a list of resources, mostly geared towards adults. Modern 
kids will need more context than is given here to understand what the big deal was 
with Vicky taking a public plunge, and Whelan’s rhyming text, while sprightly and 
clever, doesn’t always scan (“Good-bye to the land, good-by to the turf,/ Victoria 
rode the waves and dove into the surf”). Carpenter’s dynamic digitally created art, 
with animated, inky black outlines and dappled textures, breathes life into these 
historical figures, however, and the casual scenes of royal home life behind closed 
doors are drolly amusing. Despite a few hitches, this might provide a useful spring-
board for youngsters ready to dive into further study of this mighty monarch.  JH
606 • the Bulletin
wiersbitzky, shAnnon What Flowers Remember. Namelos, 2014 151p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-166-3 $18.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-167-0 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60898-168-7 $8.95  
R Gr. 5-7
The summer before middle school is the beginning of Delia’s gardening business; 
with her beloved neighbor, Old Red, who taught her to garden, she gathers heir-
loom seeds and sells them throughout town. She also notices that Red’s forgetting 
things; come winter, it becomes clear his dementia has advanced to the point 
where he can’t live on his own, and before the next summer comes, he’s moved 
into a nursing home. Delia starts a project for him, collecting and writing down 
memories people around town have of Old Red over the years; while she initially 
hopes these memories will jog his own, she gradually moves to an understanding 
that she’s gathering the past that he’s losing. Delia’s narration is divided by months, 
clocking the calendar’s progression as Old Red loses touch with such details, and 
the subtle theme of memory and loss is artistically complemented by the focus on 
growth in the gardens and in Delia’s own life (her sweet first romance with Tommy 
Parker). There are echoes of Patricia MacLachlan in the book’s period flavor (the 
story seems to be set thirty years or so in the past), the tenderness, and the deft 
writing that keeps a heart-tugging plot lovely as well as brimming with sentiment. 
Delia’s move from grief for what she’s losing to a deeper understanding of her old 
friend is smoothly depicted, and the book is wisely understated about Old Red’s 
clearly being a father and grandfather figure to the fatherless girl. The story will 
bring new perspective for readers struggling with their own beloved elders, and the 
liquid joy of a serious tearjerker to anybody who likes a poignant human drama.  DS
willeMs, Mo My New Friend Is So Fun!; written and illus. by Mo Willems. Hy-
perion, 2014 57p (Elephant & Piggie)
ISBN 978-1-4231-7958-0 $8.99  
R Gr. K-1
Gerald and Snake stare down an introvert’s worst fear when they suddenly realize 
that their best friends, Piggie and Brian Bat, are spending time together. At first, 
they are happy to find out that their friends have met, but soon they realize that 
friends as nice as Piggie and Brian might prefer new companions to old. As Gerald 
and Snake decide to put a stop to the fun they imagine the two having together, 
their anxiety is exacerbated by a misunderstanding about who’s being referred to 
as a best friend. Fortunately, Piggie and Brian remain committed to their original 
buddies, and all ends well on the endpapers where Gerald, Snake, and Pigeon play 
their own game of drawing pictures of their best friends. Brian Bat’s overly large, 
oval, sclera-less eyes are just a tad creepy, but his constant smile and expressive 
mirroring of Piggie assure readers that he is a worthy addition to the crew; the use 
of blushing as a charming visual indicator of bashful pride is particularly effective 
in this outing, too. Nervous friends will appreciate the book’s reassuring point 
about trusting old loyalties and expanding one’s friendship circle. Even amidst the 
repetition and the simplicity of controlled vocabulary, Willems manages to hit that 
singular moment where even the most restrained readers can’t help but bark out 
a laugh (conduct an experiment with friends, and you’ll find it), indicating that 
the rhythm of expectation and novelty are expertly manipulated, once again, to 
maximize cognitive growth in this early reader.  KC
July/August 2014 • 607
yovAnoff, brennA Fiendish. Razorbill, 2014 [352p]
ISBN 978-1-59514-638-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-10
Ten years ago, the residents of New Bend, terrified by the hellish creatures emerg-
ing from the surrounding woods, burned the homes of those they thought were 
responsible; their victims, the craft folk of the Hollow, were left either dead or 
homeless—and the demon creatures disappeared. Seven-year-old Clementine was 
saved only because someone trapped her in a cellar, and there she stayed for a decade, 
kept alive in a trance by some powerful craft. When she’s finally freed, her return 
to town is greeted with suspicion, coinciding as it does with several sightings of 
ghastly creatures in the countryside. Even worse, Clementine’s presence heightens 
the power of the town’s remaining crafters—four teenagers who want nothing more 
than to keep their abilities under wraps. Yovanoff creates yet another beautiful 
but disturbing setting, with elegant prose describing the picturesque countryside 
in one paragraph and the gut-wrenching stench of hellhounds in the next; the 
insularity of the town and lack of sense of time or place adds to the unease. The 
teens at the center of the story are given distinct personalities that render them 
likable and sympathetic at times, and frustrating and suspicious at others. Their 
struggle—to come to terms with potentially destructive powers with no real tools 
to do so—looks an awful lot like the urge toward independence in adolescence, 
and the warnings, hostility, and threats from the adults around them underscore 
the fact that the grownups here aren’t necessarily afraid of the kids’ power, just the 
lack of adult control it represents.  KQG
zAfón, cArlos ruiz Marina; tr. from the Spanish by Lucia Graves. Little, 
2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-04471-4 $19.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-32017-7 $9.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Eager to escape the confining halls of his boarding school, fifteen-year-old Oscar 
Drai wanders the streets of Barcelona in 1979, exploring abandoned old homes in 
the formerly wealthy but now decaying neighborhood of Sarrià. His expeditions 
lead him to befriend Marina, a mysterious girl who welcomes Oscar into the crum-
bling mansion she shares with her father, an ailing reclusive artist. On an outing 
to a cemetery, Oscar and Marina encounter a ghostly woman cloaked in black, 
and what follows is three intertwining gothic tales, replete with jealous lovers, mad 
doctors, tragic illnesses, and untimely loss. Zafón’s cinematic prose in this Spanish 
import gives both a vividness and urgency to elements that might otherwise seem 
merely melodramatic, and classic horror tropes—a spider across the hand, a woman 
veiled in black—are used to astounding effect here, creating an eerie atmosphere 
that chills the reader even as it moves them forward. A deep sense of melancholy 
pervades the narration as an older Oscar reflects upon his time with Marina, setting 
the stage for that particular tragedy, but his directness also delivers scares in spades, 
as he recounts with grotesque detail narrow escapes from sinister automatons and 
a confrontation with a decaying human monster. A dark and stormy night isn’t 
even necessary for this immersive, truly terrifying tale to leave readers with more 
than a few nightmares.  KQG 
608  •  The BulleTin
Abuse–fiction: Andreu
Adoption–fiction: Stuber
Adventure: Bertozzi; Black-
burne; d’Lacey; duyvis; Johnson; 
Plum; Watson 
African Americans: raschka 
ALPhABet BookS: Joyce
Alphabet–stories: Joyce
Alzheimer’s disease–fic: Wiersbitzky
Animals: Cox; krull; rabinowitz
Animals–stories: Cronin; dubuc; 
Miyares; Waldron
Appearance–fiction: Baker
Art: handler
Asian Americans–fiction: Cheng; 
Stuber
Aviation: Sís
BiLinguAL BookS: Bertrand
BiogrAPhieS: Bertozzi; gandhi; 
rabinowitz; raschka; Sharafed-
dine; Sís
Birds–stories: gerstein; Qitsualik-
tinsley
Blogs–fiction: Baker; heasley
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Flood; 
hutchins; kuehn; Sheinmel; 
Spinelli; tan
Brothers and sisters–stories: kornell
Bullying–fiction: Maciel
Cars–stories: Pizzoli
Cats–fiction: kessler
Cats–stories: imai
City life–stories: Croza
Civil rights movement: rubin; 
tonatiuh
Clothing–stories: doodler; Black
Communities–fiction: Finneyfrock
Compassion–stories: dubuc
Contests–stories: kornell; Pizzoli
Corruption–fiction: diaz
Cousins–fiction: gordon
Crime and criminals–fiction: Black-
burne; dolamore; green; henry; 
kuehn; Lloyd-Jones; Plum; 
Quinn; Shine; Sitomer; Watson
Crime and criminals: rubin
Cults–fiction: Finneyfrock; Swain
Current events: Andreu
death–fiction: ellis; Mathieu; turner
disabilities: rabinowitz
disabilities–fiction: Conaghan; 
duyvis
disasters–fiction: Brown
dogs–fiction: kessler
dogs–stories: goodrich; Pizzoli
drug abuse–fiction: Sheinmel
dystopias–fiction: diaz; healey; 
Miller; Millet; Swain; Weitz
elections–fiction: Johnson
Ethics and values: de los Santos; 
hutchins; Maciel; Quinn
explorers: Bertozzi
Fame–fiction: McCarthy
Families–fiction: Brown; Finney-
frock; gordon; holczer; Mateo; 
Schumacher; Sitomer; virgo
Families–stories: Croza; kornell
FAntASy: Atwater-rhodes; 
Blackburne; dolamore; duy-
vis; hutchins; Pearson; Quinn; 
Subject and uSe Index
keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
July/AugusT 2014  •  609
Shultz; turner; valentino; yovanoff
Fathers–fiction: turner
FoLktALeS And FAiry tALeS: 
gerstein; imai; Qitsualik-tinsley; 
valentino; virgo
Food and eating–fiction: Swain
Food and eating–stories: doodler
Friends–fiction: Cheng; Conaghan; 
ellis; Flood; howe; kessler; tregay; 
Willems
Friends–stories: Cronin; dubuc; ger-
stein; goodrich
Future–fiction: healey; Millet
gardens and gardening–fiction: Wi-
ersbitzky
gays and lesbians–fiction: tregay
ghoSt StorieS: Zafón
gossip–fiction: Mathieu
grandparents: gandhi
grandparents–fiction: Brown; holczer 
grAPhiC noveLS: Bertozzi
grief–fiction: Brown; dellaira; ellis; 
holczer; turner; Wiersbitzky 
hiStoriCAL FiCtion: gordon; 
Stuber; Sullivan
History, U.S.: Murphy; rubin; 
tonatiuh
History, world: krull; Sharafeddine 
horror: Zafón
huMor: Auerbach; Black; doodler; 
goodrich; kornell; krosoczka; 
Miyares; voake; Waldron; Whelan
identity–fiction: Cheng; Spinelli
identity–stories: Joyce 
illness–fiction: howe; Weitz
imagination–stories: Swiatkowska
immigrants–fiction: Andreu; Mateo
india: gandhi
inuit–stories: Qitsualik-tinsley
inventions–fiction: voake 
irish travelers–fiction: Flood
islands–stories: Miyares
Jealousy–fiction: Willems
Journals–fiction: Millet
Language arts: handler
Latinos: tonatiuh
Latinos–fiction: Andreu; Bertrand 
Lies–fiction: Plum
Literature, children’s: Sheinmel
Magic–fiction: Atwater-rhodes; 
dolamore; McCarthy; Watson; 
yovanoff
Martial arts–fiction: Sitomer 
Memory–fiction: Quinn; Wiersbitzky
Missing persons–fiction: nelson 
Monkeys–stories: Price
Monsters–stories: imai
Mothers–fiction: heasley
Moving–stories: Auerbach; Croza
Multiracial people–fiction: duyvis
Music and musicians: Murphy; ras-
chka 
Music and musicians–fiction: Mc-
Carthy
Muslims: Sharafeddine
MySterieS: d’Lacey; henry; kros-
oczka; kuehn; nelson
Mythology, Norse: Auerbach
national parks: Carson
numbers–stories: Joyce
orphans–fiction: Brown
Photography–fiction: handler; turner
Platypuses–fiction: krosoczka
Prejudice–fiction: Flood; yovanoff
Privacy–fiction: heasley
Prophecies–fiction: Schumacher
race relations: tonatiuh
race relations–fiction: Stuber
Reading aloud: voake
Readers theater: goodrich; Miyares
Reading, beginning: Willems
Reading, easy: kessler; voake
Reading, reluctant: dolamore; voake
relationships–fiction: nelson; Pak-
kala; tan; Zafón
reputation–fiction: Mathieu
rhyMing StorieS: Price
robots–stories: Price
romance–fiction: healey; Pearson; 
Shultz; Sullivan; valentino
royalty: Whelan
royalty–fiction: Pearson
royalty–stories: Swiatkowska
runaways–fiction: nelson
School–fiction: Cheng; Conaghan; 
howe; Johnson; Mathieu; McCar-
thy; Miller; Pakkala; tregay 
Science: Carson
610  •  The BulleTin
SCienCe FiCtion: diaz; Lloyd-
Jones; Miller; Shine; Swain
Seals: Cox
Search and rescue–fiction: henry
Secrets–fiction: Finneyfrock; gordon; 
green; Pearson; Shine; virgo 
Selkies–fic: virgo
Servants–fiction: Sullivan
Short StorieS: Bertrand
Sisters–fiction: dellaira
Soccer: taylor
Social studies: Murphy 
Space travel–stories: Price
Spies and espionage–fiction: Sullivan
Sports: taylor
Storytime: Black; Cox
Suicide–fiction: dellaira; Maciel
Summer–fiction: gordon; Spinelli; 
tan
SuPernAturAL StorieS: 
d’Lacey; de los Santos; Shultz
Superpowers–fiction: Lloyd-Jones
Surfing–fiction: Sheinmel
SurvivAL StorieS: Weitz
SuSPenSe: green; Watson
television–fiction: Baker
time travel–fiction: de los Santos
tourette’s syndrome–fiction: 
Conaghan
tricksters–stories: imai 
undocumented people–fiction: 
Andreu
vampires–fiction: Atwater-rhodes
verSe noveLS: Spinelli
voyages and travel: Bertozzi; Sharafed-
dine
voyages and travel–fiction: Mateo 
World cultures: taylor
Writers and writing: Sís
Zoos: krull
Zoos–stories: Waldron
July/August 2014 • 611
T h e B u l l e T i n
 
of the Center for Children’s Books
Author/title index, volume 67
sepTemBer, 2013—july/augusT, 2014
100. Morgan. 171.
100 Bears. Bardos. 442.
123 Versus ABC. Boldt. 8.
14 Fibs of Gregory K. Pincus. 175.
3:59. McNeil. 225.
5th Wave. Yancey. 61.
9 Lives of Alexander Baddenfield. Mar-
ciano. 169.
Abbott. Forbidden Stone. 302.
Abby Spencer Goes to Bollywood. Bajaj. 
394.
Abominables. Ibbotson. 217.
Acampora. I Kill the Mockingbird. 494.
Aces Wild. Perl. 45.
ACID. Pass. 535.
Across a Star-Swept Sea. Peterfreund. 231.
Adderson. Norman, Speak! 495.
Adler. Danny’s Doodles: The Jellybean 
Experiment. 70.
Aesop. Aesop’s Fables. 254.
Aesop’s Fables. Aesop. 254.
Africa Is My Home. Edinger. 150.
After Eden. Douglas. 264.
After Iris. Farrant. 17.
After the End. Plum. 590.
Afterparty. Stampler. 478.
Again! Gravett. 21.
Agee. Little Santa. 200.
Agosín. I Lived on Butterfly Hill. 440.
Ajmera. Music Everywhere! 392.
Albee. Bugged! 495.
Alexander. Crossover. 303.
_____. He Said, She Said. 201.
Alice from Dallas. Sadler. 422.
Alienated. Landers. 413.
All Different Now. Johnson. 523.
All Our Pretty Songs. McCarry. 36.
All Our Yesterdays. Terrill. 182.
All That Glows. Graudin. 313.
All That’s Missing. Sullivan. 240.
All the Truth That’s In Me. Berry. 76.
Allegiant. Roth. 331.
Allies & Assassins. Somper. 542.
Almond. Boy Who Swam with Piranhas. 
71. 
_____. True Tale of the Monster Billy Dean 
telt by hisself. 255.
Almost Fearless Hamilton Squidlegger. 
Ering. 513.
Almost Super. Jensen. 318.
Also Known As. Benway. 7.
Altebrando. Battle of Darcy Lane. 495.
_____. Roomies. 245.
Amato. Missing Monkey! 496.
Amazing Travels of Ibn Battuta. Sharafed-
dine. 594.
Ancient Animals. Thomson. 57.
And We Stay. Hubbard. 268.
Anderson, B. Monster Chefs. 392.
Anderson, J. Sidekicked. 4.
Anderson, L. Impossible Knife of Memory. 
255.
Andreu. Secret Side of Empty. 560.
Angel Creek. Rippin. 112.
Angel Island. Freedman. 311.
Animal Book. Jenkins. 218.
Animal Opposites. Horácˇek. 96.
Anna Was Here. Kurtz. 101.
612 • the Bulletin
Anne Frank’s Chestnut Tree. Kohuth. 163.
Annika Riz, Math Whiz. Mills. 469.
Anonymous. Letting Ana Go. 5.
Another Day as Emily. Spinelli. 597.
Ant and Honey Bee. McDonald. 170.
Antigoddess. Blake. 203.
Anywhere but Here. Kyi. 164.
Appelt. True Blue Scouts of Sugar Man 
Swamp. 71.
Apple Orchard Riddle. McNamara. 37.
Archer. Urgency Emergency! 72.
Arcos. There Will Come a Time. 496.
Are You Experienced? Sonnenblick. 116.
Arlo Rolled. Pearson. 536.
Armentrout. Don’t Look Back. 497.
Armstrong. Loki’s Wolves. 5.
_____. Sea of Shadows. 393.
Arndt. Best Foot Forward. 73.
Arnett. Avalon. 348.
Aronson, M. Griffin and the Dinosaur. 
497.
Aronson, S. Believe. 201.
Art of Flying. Hoffman. 216.
Art of Secrets. Klise. 462.
Ashes on the Waves. Lindsey. 30.
Ashes to Ashes. Walker. 288.
Ask Again Later. Czukas. 353.
Ask Me. Pauley. 535.
Ask My Mood Ring How I Feel. López. 33.
At Home in Her Tomb. Liu-Perkins. 465.
At the Same Moment. Perrin. 420.
Athans. Secrets of the Sky Caves. 498.
Atwater-Rhodes. Bloodwitch. 561.
Auerbach. Edda. 561.
Auxier. Night Gardener. 441.
Avalon. Arnett. 348.
Avasthi. Chasing Shadows. 136.
Aviary Wonders Inc. Samworth. 376. 
Babe Conquers the World. Wallace. 482.
Baby Bear. Nelson. 327.
Baby Bear Counts One. Wolff. 125.
Baby Elephant in the Wild. O’Connell. 
418.
Baby’s Got the Blues. Shields. 335.
Baccalario. Suitcase of Stars. 394.
Bacigalupi. Zombie Baseball Beatdown. 73.
Back to Blackbrick. Fitzgerald. 88.
Backwards. Mitchell. 227.
Bad Birthday Idea. Valentine. 287.
Bad Bye, Good Bye. Underwood. 545.
Bad for You. Pyle. 175.
Bag of Marbles. Joffo. 160.
Baity. First Book of Ore. 441.
Bajaj. Abby Spencer Goes to Bollywood. 
394.
Baker. How I Got Skinny, Famous, and Fell 
Madly in Love. 562.
Baldacchino. Morris Micklewhite and the 
Tangerine Dress. 498.
Baldacci. Finisher. 395.
Balliett. Hold Fast. 6.
Bambino and Me. Hyman. 521.
Barakiva. One Man Guy. 499.
Barclay. Hiding Phil. 74.
Bardhan-Quallen. Tyrannosaurus Wrecks! 
442.
Bardoe. Behold the Beautiful Dung Beetle. 
442.
Bardos. 100 Bears. 442.
Barnes. Naturals. 202.
Barnett. Battle Bunny. 239.
_____. President Taft Is Stuck in the Bath. 
395.
Barton. My Bus. 499.
Bascomb. Nazi Hunters. 74.
Baseball Is. Borden. 304.
Baskin. Runt. 6.
_____. Subway Love. 500.
Bass. Graffiti Knight. 395.
Bassoff. Lost Girl Found. 443.
Battle Bunny. Scieszka. 199.
Battle Magic. Pierce. 232.
Battle of Darcy Lane. Altebrando. 495.
Battling Boy. Pope. 278.
Bean. Big Snow. 135.
Bear’s Big Bottom. Smallman. 336.
Beast Within. Valentino. 602.
Beaty. Knock Knock, My Dad’s Dream for 
Me. 256.
Beaudoin. Wise Young Fool. 75.
Beauty and the Beast. Jones. 362.
Beauty’s Daughter. Meyer. 275.
Becker. Journey. 75.
Bedford, D. Two Tough Crocs. 500.
Bedford, M. Never Ending. 396.
Bedrick. Lion and the Bird. 570.
Bedtime Monsters. Schneider. 237.
Beekle. Santat. 540.
July/August 2014 • 613
Before My Eyes. Bock. 351.
Behold the Beautiful Dung Beetle. Bardoe. 
442.
Beil. Lantern Sam and the Blue Streak 
Bandits. 396.
Being Sloane Jacobs. Morrill. 326.
Believe. Aronson. 201.
Benincasa. Great. 501.
Benjamin Franklin. Krull. 222. 
Bennett. Vampire Baby. 7.
Benny Goodman & Teddy Wilson. Cline-
Ransome. 400.
Benoit. Cold Calls. 501.
Benton. End (Almost). 349.
Benway. Also Known As. 7.
_____. Going Rogue. 256.
Berger. Crankenstein. 76.
Berk. Say It Ain’t So. 502.
Berman. Red Caps. 349.
Bernard. Find Me. 137.
Bernheimer. Girl Who Wouldn’t Brush Her 
Hair. 137.
Berry. All the Truth That’s In Me. 76.
Bertozzi. Shackleton. 562.
Bertrand. There’s a Name for This Feeling/
Hay un nombre para lo que siento. 563.
Best Foot Forward. Arndt. 73.
Better Off Friends. Eulberg. 308.
Betty Bunny Wants a Goal. Kaplan. 319.
Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea. 
Tucholke. 120.
Between Two Worlds. Kirkpatrick. 462.
Beyer. Little Fish. 138.
Beyond Magenta. Kuklin. 321.
Beyond the Door. McQuerry. 416.
Bick. White Space. 350.
Big Bear’s Big Boat. Bunting. 141.
Big Bug. Cole. 507.
Big Guy Took My Ball! Willems. 60.
Big Snow. Bean. 135.
Bike Thief. Feutl. 516.
Bildner. Soccer Fence. 397.
Bingham. Formerly Shark Girl. 8.
Binny for Short. McKay. 105.
Bird. Chan. 352.
Birthday Queen. Wood. 190.
Bishara. Relativity. 257.
Bits & Pieces. Schachner. 237.
Bix. Spending Spree. 202.
Black, H. Coldest Girl in Coldtown. 138.
Black, M. Naked! 563.
Black Spring. Croggon. 83.
Blackburne. Midnight Thief. 564.
Blackstone. Sorry You’re Lost. 303.
Blackwell. Undercurrent. 139.
Blackwood. Curiosity. 443.
Blair. Leap of Faith. 139.
Blake. Antigoddess. 203.
Blessing Cup. Polacco. 110.
Block. Love in the Time of Global Warm-
ing. 77.
_____. Teen Spirit. 257.
Bloodwitch. Atwater-Rhodes. 561.
Blossoming Universe of Violet Diamond. 
Woods. 290.
Blue Iguana. Townsend. 424.
Bluemle. Tap Tap Boom Boom. 350.
Bluffton. Phelan. 46.
Blythewood. Goodman. 153.
Bo at Ballard Creek. Hill. 23.
Bobo the Sailor Man! Rosenthal. 176.
Bock. Before My Eyes. 351.
Body in the Woods. Henry. 577.
Bogart and Vinnie. Vernick. 58.
Bolden. Searching for Sarah Rector. 258.
Boldt. 123 Versus ABC. 8.
Bombs over Bikini. Goldsmith. 519.
Bone by Bone. Levine. 166.
Book of Babies. Na. 276.
Book of Broken Hearts. Ockler. 43.
Boom Snot Twitty. Cronin. 567.
Borden. Baseball Is. 304.
Boundaries. Walker. 425.
Boundless. Oppel. 419.
Bow. Sorrow’s Knot. 203.
Boxers. Yang. 190.
Boy and a Jaguar. Rabinowitz. 591.
Boy on the Porch. Creech. 82.
Boy Who Swam with Piranhas. Almond. 
71. 
Boyer. Run, Dog! 444.
Boyne. Stay Where You Are & Then Leave. 
397.
Boys of Blur. Wilson. 548.
Bracelet of Bones. Crossley-Holland. 402.
Bradbury. Moment Comes. 77.
Bradley. Call Me by My Name. 502.
Bragg. How They Choked. 503.
614 • the Bulletin
Brashares. Here and Now. 398.
Breakfast on Mars. Stern. 56.
Breakfast Served Anytime. Combs. 448.
Brendler. Radio Girl. 204.
Bright before Sunrise. Schmidt. 377.
Brimsby’s Hats. Prahin. 279.
Britt. Jane, the Fox & Me. 140.
Brokenhearted. Kahaney. 162.
Broom. Lion and the Mouse. 503.
Brother, Brother. Carmichael. 79.
Brotherhood. Westrick. 243.
Brown, B. Hanukkah in Alaska. 140.
Brown, D. Great American Dust Bowl. 69.
_____. He Has Shot the President! 444.
Brown, J. Torn Away. 564.
Brown, P. Mr. Tiger Goes Wild. 78.
Brown, S. Caminar. 398.
Bruchac. Killer of Enemies. 304.
Bruno & Lulu’s Playground Adventures. 
Lakin. 464.
Brush of the Gods. Look. 32.
Bryan. Can’t Scare Me. 141.
Bubble World. Snow. 55.
Buddy and the Bunnies in: Don’t Play with 
Your Food! Shea. 283.
Bugged! Albee. 495.
Bugs in My Hair! Shannon. 113.
Bully. Seeger. 53.
Bunting. Big Bear’s Big Boat. 141.
_____. Cart That Carried Martin. 204.
_____. Washday. 504.
Burg. Serafina’s Promise. 142.
Burgess. Hit. 399.
Burn Out. Helvig. 407.
Burning Sky. Thomas. 183.
Butcher. Cabin Girl. 504.
Buzz Kill. Fantaskey. 515.
By the Grace of Todd. Galveston. 312.
Cabin Girl. Butcher. 504.
Cabrera. Row, Row, Row Your Boat. 445.
Caged Warrior. Sitomer. 596.
Caine. Prince of Shadows. 445.
Caletti. Last Forever. 399.
Call Me by My Name. Bradley. 502.
Call of the Klondike. Meissner. 274.
Calmenson. No Dogs Allowed. 305.
Camel in the Sun. Ondaatje. 328.
Caminar. Brown. 398.
Cammuso. Misadventures of Salem Hyde. 
142.
Camp Rex. Idle. 460.
Campbell. Mysterious Patterns. 446.
Can’t Scare Me. Bryan. 141.
Cantor. Searching for Sky. 505.
Capetta. Entangled. 258.
Captain Cat. Moore. 227.
Cardi. Chance You Won’t Return. 446.
Carle. Friends. 205.
Carleson. Tyrant’s Daughter. 305.
Carlson. Very Nearly Honorable League of 
Pirates. 143.
Carlton. Two Lies and a Spy. 143.
Carmichael. Brother, Brother. 79.
Carnivores. Reynolds. 49.
Carpet People. Pratchett. 233.
Carson. Park Scientists. 565.
Cart That Carried Martin. Bunting. 204.
Carter. Pawn. 205.
Case of the Missing Donut. McGhee. 37.
Case of the Time-Capsule Bandit. Spencer. 
181.
Case of the Vanishing Honeybees. Markle. 
170.
Casella. Thin Space. 144.
Cassidy. Skylark. 505.
Castellucci. Tin Star. 351.
Castor. VIII. 9.
Cat Champions. Laidlaw. 412.
Chan. Bird. 352.
Chance You Won’t Return. Cardi. 446.
Changers. Cooper. 508. 
Charlie Bumpers vs. The Teacher of the 
Year. Harley. 92.
Charm & Strange. Kuehn. 27.
Chasing Cheetahs. Montgomery. 470.
Chasing Shadows. Avasthi. 136.
Cheese Belongs to You! Deacon. 207.
Cheng. Year of the Fortune Cookie. 565.
Cherry Money Baby. Cusick. 207.
Children of the King. Hartnett. 47.
Chima. Enchanter Heir. 259.
Chin. Gravity. 439.
Chitchat. Isabella. 268.
Choyce. Jeremy Stone. 447.
Christensen. Single Pebble. 206.
Christopher, L. Killing Woods. 259.
July/August 2014 • 615
Christopher, Neil. Country of Wolves. 260.
Christopher, Nicholas. True Adventures of 
Nicolò Zen. 260.
Church. Ten Tiny Toes. 352.
Cinotto. Itty Bitty Kitty Committee. 506.
Circa Now. Turner, A. 601.
Clanton. Table Sets Itself. 206.
Clara and Davie. Polacco. 329.
Clark, G. Parched. 506.
Clark, H. What We Found in the Sofa and 
How It Saved the World. 9.
Clark, K. Freakboy. 144.
Clark the Shark. Hale. 92.
Claude at the Beach. Smith. 541.
Cliff. Delilah Dirk and the Turkish Lieu-
tenant. 10.
Cline-Ransome. Benny Goodman & Teddy 
Wilson. 400.
Clough. Petal and Poppy. 448.
Coaltown Jesus. Koertge. 100.
Cocca-Leffler. Theo’s Mood. 79.
Codename Zero. Rylander. 375.
Cody. Will in Scarlet. 145.
Cokal. Kingdom of Little Wounds. 261.
Colbert. Pointe. 506. 
Cold Calls. Benoit. 501.
Cold Spell. Pearce. 230.
Coldest Girl in Coldtown. Black. 138.
Cole, H. Big Bug. 507.
Cole, J. No Dogs Allowed. 304.
Collins. Year of the Jungle. 80.
Colors for Zena. Wellington. 59.
Columbus. House of Secrets. 10.
Combs. Breakfast Served Anytime. 448.
Come Back, Ben. Hassett. 93.
Come Back, Moon. Kherdian. 220. 
Compestine. Secrets of the Terra-Cotta 
Soldier. 401.
Complicit. Kuehn. 583.
Conaghan. When Mr. Dog Bites. 566.
Conjured. Durst. 84.
Constable & Toop. Jones. 218.
Conversion. Howe. 578.
Cook, E. Year of Mistaken Discoveries. 
449.
Cook, T. Really Awesome Mess. 80.
Cooper, E. Train. 81.
Cooper, I. Woman in the House (and Sen-
ate). 508.
Cooper, M. Fighting Fire! 353.
Cooper, S. Ghost Hawk. 145.
Cooper, T. Changers. 508. 
Cosimano. Nearly Gone. 401.
Cosmobiography of Sun Ra. Raschka. 592.
Cotter. Don’t Push the Button! 306.
Counterfeit Family Tree of Vee Crawford-
Wong. Holland. 95.
Counting by 7s. Sloan. 54.
Country of Wolves. Christopher. 260.
Cousins. Peck, Peck, Peck. 81.
Cox, J. Ukulele Hayley. 82.
Cox, L. Elizabeth, Queen of the Seas. 566.
Cracks in the Kingdom. Moriarty. 325.
Crankenstein. Berger. 76.
Crash. Monninger. 275.
Creature of Moonlight. Hahn. 456.
Creech. Boy on the Porch. 82.
Cremer. Inventor’s Secret. 509.
Cress. Meyer. 324.
Crocodile and the Scorpion. Emberley. 
209.
Croggon. Black Spring. 83.
Cronin. Boom Snot Twitty. 567.
Crossan. Weight of Water. 11.
Crossley-Holland. Bracelet of Bones. 402.
Crossover. Alexander. 303.
Crowder. Parched. 11.
Croza. From There to Here. 567
Cruel Beauty. Hodge. 316.
Cummins. Flying Solo. 12.
Cunnane. Deep in the Sahara. 146.
Cunningham. Bad for You. 175.
Curiosity. Blackwood. 443.
Cusick. Cherry Money Baby. 207.
Cy in Chains. Dudley. 209.
Cydonian Pyramid. Hautman. 22.
Cypess. Death Sworn. 509.
Cyrus. Your Skeleton Is Showing. 12.
Czukas. Ask Again Later. 353.
d’Lacey. Dark Inheritance. 568.
Daisy Gets Lost. Raschka. 234.
Dance Like Starlight. Dempsey. 451.
Dangerous. Hale. 406.
Danny’s Doodles: The Jellybean Experi-
ment. Adler. 70.
Dare Me. Devine. 208.
Dare the Wind. Fern. 310.
Dark Between. Gensler. 90.
616 • the Bulletin
Darkest Fear. Tiernan. 286.
Dark Inheritance. d’Lacey. 568.
Dark Metropolis. Dolamore. 569.
Darkworld. Shultz. 595.
Dashner. Eye of Minds. 262.
Daugherty. Night School. 13.
Dauvillier. Hidden. 449.
Davey. Laika. 146.
Davies. Lion Who Stole My Arm. 306.
_____. Promise. 450.
Day I Lost My Superpowers. Escoffier. 514.
Day My Father Became a Bush. Van Leeu-
wen. 184.
Day the Crayons Quit. Daywalt. 13.
Daywalt. Day the Crayons Quit. 13.
de Gramont. Meet Me at the River. 262.
de la Cruz. Frozen. 263.
_____. Ring and the Crown. 510.
de la Peña. Living. 174.
de Lint. Seven Wild Sisters. 450.
de los Santos. Saving Lucas Biggs. 568.
Deacon. Cheese Belongs to You! 207.
Dead Ends. Lange. 165.
Dead Girls Don’t Lie. Wolf. 189.
Dear Killer. Ewell. 514.
Death Sworn. Cypess. 509.
Death-Struck Year. Lucier. 414.
Dee Dee and Me. Schwartz. 238.
Deep Blue. Donnelly. 511.
Deep in the Sahara. Cunnane. 146.
Defy. Larson. 271.
Delilah Dirk and the Turkish Lieutenant. 
Cliff. 10.
Dellaira. Love Letters to the Dead. 568.
DeLuca. Lost Girl Found. 443.
Demetrios. Something Real. 263.
Dempsey. Dance Like Starlight. 451.
Derting. Taking. 510.
Despain. Shadow Prince. 451.
Dessen. Moon and More. 14.
DeStefano. Perfect Ruin. 208.
Deuker. Swagger. 147.
Devine. Dare Me. 208.
Diary of a Worm. Houran. 24.
Diaz. Extraction. 569.
DiCamillo. Flora & Ulysses. 147. 
Diesen. Picture Day Perfection. 148.
Digger, Dozer, Dumper. Vestergaard. 121.
Dillard. Extraordinary Warren. 307.
Dillon. Story of Buildings. 511.
Dinner with the Highbrows. Holt. 459.
Dinosaur Kisses. Stein. 55.
Dirt Bikes, Drones, and Other Ways to Fly. 
Wesselhoeft. 546.
Dirt Diary. Staniszewski. 284.
Divided We Fall. Reedy. 280.
Dogs of War. Keenan. 219.
Dolan. Weasels. 301.
Doller. Where the Stars Still Shine. 148.
Dolamore. Dark Metropolis. 569.
Dolphins of Shark Bay. Turner. 241.
Dominguez. Maria Had a Little Llama/
María tenía una llama pequeña. 83.
Don’t Call Me Baby. Heasley. 577.
Don’t Look Back. Armentrout. 497.
Don’t Push the Button! Cotter. 306.
Don’t Wear Polka Dot Underwear with 
White Pants. Gutknecht. 214.
 (Don’t You) Forget About Me. Quinn. 
591.
Donaldson. Superworm. 354.
Donnelly. Deep Blue. 511.
Donofrio. Where’s Mommy? 402.
Donovan. Waffler. 84.
Doodler. Veggies with Wedgies. 570.
Door. Marino. 531.
Dorothy Must Die. Paige. 471.
Douglas. After Eden. 264.
Dowell. Sound of Your Voice, Only Really 
Far Away. 14.
Downer. Wild Animal Neighbors. 264.
Downey. Ninja Librarians. 512.
Drama Queens in the House. Williams. 
427.
Dream Thieves. Stiefvater. 117.
Dreamer Wisher Liar. Harper. 456.
Dreams of Gods & Monsters. Taylor. 544.
Drift. Hutchins. 579.
Dubuc. Lion and the Bird. 570.
Dubosarsky. Golden Day. 15.
Duck & Goose Go to the Beach. Hills. 
521.
Dudley. Cy in Chains. 209.
Duffy. Fairy Tale Comics. 149.
Duncan. Salvage. 512.
Durand. Mitchell Goes Bowling. 15.
Durst. Conjured. 84.
Dusk. Shulevitz. 114.
July/August 2014 • 617
Dust of Eden. Nagai. 418.
Duyvis. Otherbound. 571.
Dyerville Tales. Kozlowsky. 526.
Earth Space Moon Base. Price. 590.
Earthfall. Walden. 185.
Eat Like a Bear. Sayre. 178.
Eaton. How to Train a Train. 85.
Edda. Auerbach. 561.
Eddleman. Sky Jumpers. 149.
Edge. Twelve Minutes to Midnight. 403.
Edge of Falling. Serle. 378.
Edinger. Africa Is My Home. 150.
Ehlert. Scraps Book. 354.
Ehrlich. With a Mighty Hand. 85.
Electrical Wizard. Rusch. 178.
Elephant’s Story. Pearson. 230.
Elfman. Tesla’s Attic. 335.
Eliza Bing Is (Not) a Big, Fat Quitter. Van 
Vleet. 424.
Elizabeth, Queen of the Seas. Cox. 566.
Elliot, D. Henry’s Map. 16.
Elliott, L. Thanksgiving Day Thanks. 150.
Ellis, A. End or Something Like That. 571.
Ellis, C. Numberlys. 580.
Ellis, D. Looks Like Daylight. 151.
Ellis, L. Ugly One. 16.
Ellis, M. Petra K and the Blackhearts. 307.
Ellis, S. Outside In. 513.
Elvgren. Whispering Town. 452.
Elya. Little Roja Riding Hood. 452.
Emberley. Crocodile and the Scorpion. 
209.
Enchanter Heir. Chima. 259.
End (Almost). Benton. 349.
End or Something Like That. Ellis. 571.
End Times. Schumacher. 593.
Engines of the Broken World. Vanhee. 241.
Engle. Mountain Dog. 86.
_____. Silver People. 308.
Entangled. Capetta. 258.
Ering. Almost Fearless Hamilton Squidleg-
ger. 513.
Erskine. Seeing Red. 210.
Eruption! Rusch. 50.
Esbaum. Hatched! 355.
Escoffier. Day I Lost My Superpowers. 514.
Eulberg. Better Off Friends. 308.
Ever After High. Hale. 215.
Every Body’s Talking. Jackson. 522.
Everybody Paints! Rubin. 374.
Ewell. Dear Killer. 514.
Ewing. Lure. 309.
Explorer. Kibuishi. 221.
Expressing the Inner Wild. Gordon. 359.
Extra. Lasky. 166.
Extraction. Diaz. 569.
Extraordinary Jane. Harrison. 406.
Extraordinary Warren. Dillard. 307.
Extremities. Lubar. 33.
Eye. Macaulay. 272.
Eye of Minds. Dashner. 262.
Eye to Eye. Jenkins. 409.
Fairy Bell Sisters. McNamara. 38.
Fairy Tale Comics. Duffy. 149.
Fake ID. Giles. 358.
Faking Normal. Stevens. 380.
Falconer. May. 533.
Fallout. Strasser. 117.
Fama. Plus One. 403.
Fan Art. Tregay. 601.
Fangirl. Rowell. 176.
Fantaskey. Buzz Kill. 515.
Far from You. Sharpe. 476.
Farizan. If You Could Be Mine. 86.
Farley. Ike’s Incredible Ink. 87.
Farmer. Lord of Opium. 265.
Farrant. After Iris. 17.
Farrell. Pure Grit. 404.
Faulconer. Mom for Umande. 515.
Faulkner. Gaijin. 516.
Feathers. Stewart. 380.
Feder. Spooky Friends. 87.
Federle. Five, Six, Seven, Nate! 265.
Fei. What the Rat Told Me. 333.
Feinstein. Foul Trouble. 152.
Fern. Dare the Wind. 310.
Fetch! Michalak. 469.
Feutl. Bike Thief. 516.
Fiendish. Yovanoff. 607.
Fighting Fire! Cooper. 353.
Find Me. Bernard. 137.
Finest Hours. Tougias. 286.
Finisher. Baldacci. 395.
Finkelstein. Schools of Hope. 517.
Finneyfrock. Starbird Murphy and the 
World Outside. 572.
Firefly July. Janeczko. 408. 
First Book of Ore. Baity. 441.
618 • the Bulletin
First Drawing. Gerstein. 153.
Fisher, C. Slanted Worlds. 404.
Fisher, S. Scare Scape. 88.
Fishman. Well’s End. 405.
Fitzgerald, L. Under the Egg. 355.
Fitzgerald, S. Back to Blackbrick. 88.
Five, Six, Seven, Nate! Federle. 265.
Flight of the Honey Bee. Huber. 158.
Flight School. Judge. 524.
Flights and Chimes and Mysterious Times. 
Trevayne. 545.
Flip Flap Farm. Scheffler. 376.
Flo & Wendell. Wegman. 187.
Floca. Locomotive. 89.
Flood. Infinite Sky. 572.
Flora & Ulysses. DiCamillo. 147. 
Florian. Poem Depot. 517.
Fly. Gravel. 455.
Fly Away. MacLachlan. 530.
Flying Solo. Cummins. 12.
For the Good of Mankind. Wittenstein. 
188.
Forbidden Stone. Abbott. 302.
Forgive Me, Leonard Peacock. Quick. 111.
Forman. Just One Year. 210.
Formerly Shark Girl. Bingham. 8.
Fortunately, the Milk. Gaiman. 89.
Foul Trouble. Feinstein. 152.
Found. Yoon. 484.
Fox and the Crow. Subramaniam. 479.
Foxlee. Midnight Dress. 266.
_____. Ophelia and the Marvelous Boy. 
310.
Frankel. Ward. 17.
Freakboy. Clark. 144.
Frederick. Season of the Witch. 211.
Free to Fall. Miller. 586.
Freedman, P. My Basmati Bat Mitzvah. 
152.
Freedman, R. Angel Island. 311.
Freedom Summer. Rubin. 593.
Freitas. Gold Medal Winter. 311.
Frenzy. Lettrick. 465.
Freytag. My Humongous Hamster. 356.
Friday Never Leaving. Wakefield. 185.
Friends. Carle. 205.
Friesen. Mayday. 453.
From Norvelt to Nowhere. Gantos. 90.
From There to Here. Croza. 567
Frost. Salt. 18.
Frozen. de la Cruz. 263.
Fry. Secrets of the Book. 356.
Full Ride. Haddix. 215.
Gaijin. Faulkner. 516.
Gaiman. Fortunately, the Milk. 89.
Galbraith. Two Bunny Buddies. 453.
Galveston. By the Grace of Todd. 312.
Game Over. Schreiber. 475.
Game Slaves. Skinner. 379.
Gandhi. Grandfather Gandhi. 573.
Gansworth. If I Ever Get Out of Here. 19.
Gantos. From Norvelt to Nowhere. 90.
Garcia. Unbreakable. 266.
Gardner. Operation Bunny. 357.
Garza. Maximilian & the Bingo Rematch. 
312.
Gavin. Knightley & Son. 454.
Gay. Read Me a Story. 19.
Gebhart. There Will Be Bears. 518.
Gensler. Dark Between. 90.
Geography of You and Me. Smith. 477.
Gerstein. First Drawing. 153.
_____. You Can’t Have Too Many Friends! 
573.
Ghost Hawk. Cooper. 145.
Ghost in the Glass House. Wallace. 186.
Ghost in the House. Paquette. 44.
Ghosts of Tupelo Landing. Turnage. 382.
Gibbs. Poached. 357.
Giff. Winter Sky. 267.
Giles, G. Girls Like Us. 518.
Giles, L. Fake ID. 358.
Gill. Secret of Ferrell Savage. 358.
Gingerbread Man Loose on the Fire Truck. 
Murray. 42.
Girl and the Bicycle. Pett. 473.
Girl Called Fearless. Linka. 528.
Girl from the Tar Paper School. Kanefield. 
319.
Girl in Reverse. Stuber. 597.
Girl Who Wouldn’t Brush Her Hair. Bern-
heimer. 137.
Girls Like Us. Giles. 518.
Girls Standing on Lawns. Handler. 576.
Glaser. Stone Soup with Matzoh Balls. 454.
Glass Casket. Templeman. 337.
Goal! Taylor. 600.
Goblins. Reeve. 111.
July/August 2014 • 619
Going Over. Kephart. 525.
Going Places. Reynolds. 421.
Going Rogue. Benway. 256.
Gold Medal Winter. Freitas. 311.
Golden Boy. Sullivan. 57.
Golden Day. Dubosarsky. 15.
Goldman. Whiskers, Tails, & Wings. 91.
Goldsmith. Bombs over Bikini. 519.
Goldstone. That’s a Possibility! 20.
Goodman, C. Blythewood. 153.
Goodman, S. How Do You Burp in Space? 
20.
Goodrich. Mister Bud Wears the Cone. 
574.
Gooney Bird and All Her Charms. Lowry. 
323.
Gordon, A. Painting the Rainbow. 574.
Gordon, G. Herman and Rosie. 211.
Gordon, S. Expressing the Inner Wild. 359.
Gospel of Winter. Kiely. 364.
Graffiti Knight. Bass. 395.
Graham, B. Silver Button. 154.
Graham, E. Mysterious Traveler. 231.
Grandfather Gandhi. Gandhi. 573.
Grandmaster. Klass. 321.
Grant. Half Lives. 91.
Grasshopper Jungle. Smith. 336.
Gratton. Lost Sun. 21.
Graudin. All That Glows. 313.
Gravel. Fly. 455.
Gravett. Again! 21.
_____. Matilda’s Cat. 359.
Gravity. Chin. 439.
Gray, K. Losing It. 154.
Gray, R. Have You Heard the Nesting Bird? 
405.
Great. Benincasa. 501.
Great American Dust Bowl. Brown. 69.
Great Greene Heist. Johnson. 580.
Great Trouble. Hopkinson. 157.
Greatest Dinosaur Ever. Guiberson. 155.
Green, J. Secrets and Lies. 575.
Green, S. Killer Instinct. 519.
Green, T. New Kid. 360.
Green Bath. Mahy. 35.
Greenberg. Mad Potter. 212.
Greene. Sophie Hartley and the Facts of 
Life. 212.
Greenwald. Welcome to Dog Beach. 455.
Griffin. Loud Awake and Lost. 213.
Griffin and the Dinosaur. Aronson. 497.
Grim. Johnson. 361.
Grimes. Words with Wings. 213.
Gris Grimly’s Frankenstein. Shelley. 113.
Grudge Keeper. Rockliff. 474.
Gude. When Elephant Met Giraffe. 313.
Guiberson. Greatest Dinosaur Ever. 155.
Gumazing Gum Girl. Montijo. 106.
Gus, the Dinosaur Bus. Liu. 31.
Gutknecht. Don’t Wear Polka Dot Under-
wear with White Pants. 214.
Guys Read: Other Worlds. Scieszka. 239.
Haddix. Full Ride. 215.
Hagen. Landry Park. 314.
Hahn. Creature of Moonlight. 456.
Hale, B. Clark the Shark. 92.
Hale, K. No One Else Can Have You. 267.
Hale, S. Dangerous. 406.
_____. Ever After High. 215.
Half a Chance. Lord. 323.
Half Lives. Grant. 91.
Hall. Hidden Girl. 314.
Handbook for Dragon Slayers. Haskell. 22.
Handler. Girls Standing on Lawns. 576.
Hanukkah in Alaska. Brown. 140.
Harley. Charlie Bumpers vs. The Teacher of 
the Year. 92.
Harper. Dreamer Wisher Liar. 456.
_____. Sasquatch and Aliens. 457.
Harrington. Sure Signs of Crazy. 93.
Harris. What’s In There? 155.
Harrison. Extraordinary Jane. 406.
Hartland. How the Meteorite Got to the 
Museum. 216.
Hartnett. Children of the King. 347.
Hasiuk. Your Constant Star. 520.
Haskell. Handbook for Dragon Slayers. 22.
Hassett. Come Back, Ben. 93.
Hatched! Esbaum. 355.
Hattemer. Vigilante Poets of Selwyn Acad-
emy. 457.
Hautman. Cydonian Pyramid. 22.
_____. Klaatu Terminus. 458.
Have You Heard the Nesting Bird? Gray. 
405.
Have You Seen My Dragon? Light. 528.
Haven. Williams. 339
Hawkins. Rebel Belle. 406.
620 • the Bulletin
Haydu. Life by Committee. 520.
_____. OCD Love Story. 23.
Hays. What I Came to Tell You. 94.
He Has Shot the President! Brown. 444.
He Said, She Said. Alexander. 201.
Healey. While We Run. 576.
Heartbeat. Scott. 282.
Heasley. Don’t Call Me Baby. 577.
Heaven Is Paved with Oreos. Murdock. 
172.
Hegamin. Willow. 360.
Hegedus. Grandfather Gandhi. 573.
Heldring. League. 156.
Helvig. Burn Out. 407.
Hemphill. Hideous Love. 156.
Henkes. Year of Billy Miller. 157.
Henri’s Scissors. Winter. 125.
Henry. Body in the Woods. 577.
Henry’s Hand. MacDonald. 168.
Henry’s Map. Elliot. 16.
Here and Now. Brashares. 398.
Here Comes Destructosaurus! Reynolds. 
538.
Here Comes the Easter Cat. Underwood. 
287.
Here I Am. Kim. 271.
Herman and Rosie. Gordon. 211.
Herrera. Hope Is a Ferris Wheel. 458.
Herrndorf. Why We Took the Car. 315.
Hey, Charleston! Rockwell. 235.
Hi, Koo! Muth. 369.
Hidden. Dauvillier. 449.
Hidden Girl. Hall. 314.
Hidden Like Anne Frank. Prins. 537.
Hideous Love. Hemphill. 156.
Hiding Phil. Barclay. 74.
Higgins. Waiting for the Queen. 94.
High & Dry. Skilton. 476.
Highest Number in the World. MacGregor. 
366.
Hill, K. Bo at Ballard Creek. 23.
Hill, L. When the Beat Was Born. 95.
Hills. Duck & Goose Go to the Beach. 
521.
Hit. Burgess. 99.
Hockensmith. Nick and Tesla’s High-Volt-
age Danger Lab. 232.
Hodge. Cruel Beauty. 316.
Hoffman, J. Art of Flying. 216.
Hoffman, S. Jacob’s New Dress. 407.
Hofmeyr. Magic Bojabi Tree. 217.
Holczer. Secret Hum of a Daisy. 578.
Hold Fast. Balliett. 6.
Holland. Counterfeit Family Tree of Vee 
Crawford-Wong. 95.
Holt. Dinner with the Highbrows. 459.
Holub. Little Red Writing. 217.
Home for Mr. Emerson. Kerley. 363.
Hood. Rooting for You. 361.
Hooey Higgins and the Tremendous Trou-
sers. Voake. 603.
Hope Is a Ferris Wheel. Herrera. 458.
Hopkins. Tree Lady. 96.
Hopkinson. Great Trouble. 157.
Horácˇek. Animal Opposites. 96.
Horowitz. Twenty-Six Pirates. 24.
Hostage Prince. Yolen. 62.
Hostage Three. Lake. 222.
Houran. Diary of a Worm. 24.
House of Purple Cedar. Tingle. 481.
House of Secrets. Columbus. 10.
How Do You Burp in Space? Goodman. 
20.
How I Became a Ghost. Tingle. 240. 
How I Discovered Poetry. Nelson. 370.
How I Got Skinny, Famous, and Fell 
Madly in Love. Baker. 562.
How the Beatles Changed the World. 
Sandler. 331.
How the Meteorite Got to the Museum. 
Hartland. 216.
How They Choked. Bragg. 503.
How to Catch a Bogle. Jinks. 97.
How to Cheer Up Dad. Koehler. 463.
How to Train a Train. Eaton. 85.
How to Wash a Woolly Mammoth. Robin-
son. 280.
Howard. Unhinged. 316.
Howe. Conversion. 578.
Hubbard, Jennifer. Until It Hurts to Stop. 
158.
Hubbard, Jenny. And We Stay. 268.
Huber. Flight of the Honey Bee. 158.
Huey. Ick! Yuck! Eew! 159. 
Hueys in It Wasn’t Me. Jeffers. 317.
Hughes. Unhooking the Moon. 159.
Hung Up. Tracy. 381.
Hungry. Swain. 598.
July/August 2014 • 621
Hurwitz, J. Two and Only Kelly Twins. 97.
Hurwitz, M. Summer I Saved the World . . .  
in 65 Days. 459.
Hutchins. Drift. 579.
Hutchison. Wounded Name. 25.
Hyman. Bambino and Me. 521.
Hypnotize Me. Korman. 26.
I Am Abraham Lincoln. Meltzer. 274.
I Am the World. Smith. 115.
I Become Shadow. Shine. 595.
I Have a Bad Feeling about This. Strand. 
543.
I Kill the Mockingbird. Acampora. 494.
I Lived on Butterfly Hill. Agosín. 440.
I Pledge Allegiance. Mora. 417.
Ibbotson. Abominables. 217.
Ick! Yuck! Eew! Huey. 159. 
Idle. Camp Rex. 460.
If I Ever Get Out of Here. Gansworth. 19.
If You Could Be Mine. Farizan. 86.
Ike’s Incredible Ink. Farley. 87.
Illusive. Lloyd-Jones. 583.
Imai. Puss & Boots. 579.
Imperfect Spiral. Levy. 29.
Impossible Knife of Memory. Anderson. 
255.
Impostor. Winnacker. 124.
In the After. Lunetta. 34.
In-Between. Stewart. 284.
Indelible. Metcalf. 38.
Infinite Moment of Us. Myracle. 173.
Infinite Sky. Flood. 572.
Inheritance. Lo. 167.
Insanity. Vaught. 288.
Interrogation of Ashala Wolf. Kwaymul-
lina. 412.
Into That Forest. Nowra. 174.
Invasion. Myers. 173.
Inventor’s Secret. Cremer. 509.
Isaacs. Meanwhile, Back at the Ranch. 317.
Isabella. Chitchat. 268.
Isadora. Old Mikamba Had a Farm. 160.
Itty Bitty Kitty Committee. Cinotto. 506.
Jackson. Every Body’s Talking. 522.
Jacob’s New Dress. Hoffman. 407.
Jaffe. Minders. 269.
Jane, the Fox & Me. Britt. 140.
Janeczko. Firefly July. 408. 
Jarrow. Red Madness. 408.
Jasmine and Maddie. Pakkala. 588.
Javaherbin. Soccer Star. 522.
Jeffers. Hueys in It Wasn’t Me. 317.
Jenkins. Animal Book. 218.
_____. Eye to Eye. 409.
Jennings. Odd, Weird, & Little. 269.
Jensen. Almost Super. 318.
Jeremy Stone. Choyce. 447.
Jim Curious. Picard. 536.
Jimmy the Joey. Rose. 49.
Jinks. How to Catch a Bogle. 97.
_____. Saving Thanehaven. 25.
Jobin. Nethergrim. 409.
Jocelyn. What We Hide. 410.
Joe and Sparky Go to School. Michalak. 
39.
Joffo. Bag of Marbles. 160.
Johnson, A. All Different Now. 523.
Johnson, C. Grim. 361.
Johnson, J. Mark of the Dragonfly. 460.
Johnson, V. Great Greene Heist. 580.
Johnston, J. Little Red Lies. 161.
Johnston, E. Story of Owen. 391.
Johnston, M. Frozen. 263.
Jones, K. So Much for Democracy. 523.
Jones, G. Constable & Toop. 218.
Jones, N. Princess Pink and the Land of 
Fake-Believe. 524.
Jones, R. Wild Boy. 161.
Jones, U. Beauty and the Beast. 362.
Jordan. The Mad Potter. 212.
Josephine. Powell. 278.
Journey. Becker. 75.
Joyce. Mischievians. 270.
_____. Numberlys. 580.
Jubilee. Potter. 420.
Judge. Flight School. 524.
Junction of Sunshine and Lucky. Schindler. 
332.
Jungle of Bones. Mikaelsen. 368.
Jury. Scan. 525.
Just Jake. Marcionette. 366.
Just Like Fate. Patrick. 109.
Just One Year. Forman. 210.
Juvie. Watkins. 242.
Kadohata. Thing about Luck. 26.
Kahaney. Brokenhearted. 162.
Kalman. Thomas Jefferson. 318. 
Kanefield. Girl from the Tar Paper School. 
319.
622 • the Bulletin
Kantorovitz. Very Tiny Baby. 461.
Kaplan. Betty Bunny Wants a Goal. 319.
Kate. Teardrop. 270.
Kate Walden Directs. Mata. 532.
Kaufman. These Broken Stars. 320.
Kearney. Trouper. 219.
Keenan. Dogs of War. 219.
Kehoe. Sound of Letting Go. 362.
Kelsey Green, Reading Queen. Mills. 41.
Kenneally. Racing Savannah. 220.
Kephart. Going Over. 525.
Keplinger. Swift Boys & Me. 526.
Kerley. Home for Mr. Emerson. 363.
Kerr. Winter Horses. 410.
Kessler. North of Nowhere. 98.
_____. Poppy the Pirate Dog’s New Ship-
mate. 581.
Ketchup Clouds. Pitcher. 277.
Kherdian. Come Back, Moon. 220. 
Khoury. Vitro. 363.
Kibuishi. Explorer. 221.
Kiely. Gospel of Winter. 364.
Killer Instinct. Green. 519.
Killer of Enemies. Bruchac. 304.
Killing Woods. Christopher. 259.
Kim. Here I Am. 271.
Kimmel. Taste of Freedom. 320.
Kimmelman. Sam and Charlie (and Sam 
Too) Return! 461.
King. Reality Boy. 98.
Kingdom of Little Wounds. Cokal. 261.
Kinslayer. Kristoff. 164.
Kirby. Lost Kingdom. 99.
Kirkpatrick. Between Two Worlds. 462.
Kiss of Deception. Pearson. 589.
Kite That Bridged Two Nations. O’Neill. 
228.
Kizer. Matter of Days. 99.
_____. Pieces of Me. 411.
Klaatu Terminus. Hautman. 458.
Klass. Grandmaster. 321.
Klise, J. Art of Secrets. 462.
Klise, K. Show Must Go On! 221.
Knightley & Son. Gavin. 454.
Knock Knock, My Dad’s Dream for Me. 
Beaty. 256.
Knowles. Living with Jackie Chan. 162.
Koehler. How to Cheer Up Dad. 463.
Koertge. Coaltown Jesus. 100.
Kohuth. Anne Frank’s Chestnut Tree. 163.
Korman. Hypnotize Me. 26.
Kornell. Me First. 581.
Kozlowsky. Dyerville Tales. 526.
Krishnaswami. Problem with Being Slightly 
Heroic. 100.
Kristoff. Kinslayer. 164.
Krosoczka. Platypus Police Squad: The 
Ostrich Conspiracy. 582.
Krull. Benjamin Franklin. 222. 
_____. Lives of the Scientists. 27.
_____. What’s New? The Zoo! 582.
Kuehn. Complicit. 583.
_____. Charm & Strange. 27.
Kuklin. Beyond Magenta. 321.
Kulling. Tweedles Go Electric. 527. 
Kumin. Lizzie! 463.
Kung Pow Chicken. Marko. 367.
Kurtz. Anna Was Here. 101.
Kwaymullina. Interrogation of Ashala Wolf. 
412.
Kyi. Anywhere but Here. 164.
Laidlaw, R. Cat Champions. 412.
Laidlaw, S. Voice inside My Head. 464.
Laika. Davey. 146.
Lake. Hostage Three. 222.
Lakin. Bruno & Lulu’s Playground Adven-
tures. 464.
Landers. Alienated. 413.
Landry Park. Hagen. 314.
Lange. Dead Ends. 165.
Lantern Sam and the Blue Streak Bandits. 
Beil. 396.
LaRochelle. Moo! 165.
Larson. Defy. 271.
Lasky. Extra. 166.
Last Forever. Caletti. 399.
Last Ride of Caleb O’Toole. Pierpoint. 110.
Last Wild. Torday. 423.
League. Heldring. 156.
Leap of Faith. Blair. 139.
Learning Not to Drown. Shinoda. 541.
Legrand. Year of Shadows. 101.
Lehrhaupt. Warning: Do Not Open This 
Book! 28.
Lena’s Sleep Sheep. Lobel. 102.
Leppanen. Trick-or-Treat. 28.
Lester. Loch Mess Monster. 527.
Letting Ana Go. Anonymous. 5.
July/August 2014 • 623
Lettrick. Frenzy. 465.
Leveen. Sick. 223.
Levine. Bone By Bone. 166.
Levithan. Two Boys Kissing. 29.
Levy, D. Imperfect Spiral. 29.
_____. We Shall Overcome. 272.
Levy, J. Thomas the Toadilly Terrible Bully. 
322.
Lewin. Thumpy Feet. 102.
Lewis. September 17. 365.
Lieberman. Silver Six. 30.
Life by Committee. Haydu. 520.
Light. Have You Seen My Dragon? 528.
Like Carrot Juice on a Cupcake. Sternberg. 
479.
Lindsey. Ashes on the Waves. 30.
Linka. Girl Called Fearless. 528.
Lion and the Bird. Bedrick. 570.
Lion and the Mouse. Broom. 503.
Lion Who Stole My Arm. Davies. 306.
Little Blue Lies. Lynch. 366.
Little Ducks Go. McCully. 468.
Little Fish. Beyer. 138.
Little Red Lies. Johnston. 161.
Little Red Writing. Holub. 217.
Little Roja Riding Hood. Elya. 452.
Little Santa. Agee. 200.
Litwin. Lost in Bermooda. 365.
Liu. Gus, the Dinosaur Bus. 31.
Liu-Perkins. At Home in Her Tomb. 465.
Lives of the Scientists. Krull. 27.
Living. de la Peña. 174.
Living with Jackie Chan. Knowles. 162.
Lizzie! Kumin. 463.
Lizzy Bennet’s Diary. Williams. 548.
Lloyd. Snicker of Magic. 466.
Lloyd-Jones, E. Illusive. 583.
Lloyd-Jones, S. Poor Doreen. 529.
Lo. Inheritance. 167.
Lobel. Lena’s Sleep Sheep. 102.
_____. Taking Care of Mama Rabbit. 322.
Loch Mess Monster. Lester. 527.
Lockhart. We Were Liars. 529.
Locomotive. Floca. 89.
Loftin. Nightingale’s Nest. 413.
Loki’s Wolves. Armstrong. 5.
London. Proxy. 32.
Long, I. Ziggy’s Big Idea. 466.
Long, S. Whistle in the Dark. 103.
Long Way Home. Martin. 273.
Look. Brush of the Gods. 32.
Look at This! Onyefulu. 229.
Looks Like Daylight. Ellis. 151.
Loot. Watson. 604.
López. Ask My Mood Ring How I Feel. 33.
Lord of Opium. Farmer. 265.
Lord, C. Half a Chance. 323.
Lord, E. Open Road Summer. 530.
Losing It. Gray. 154.
Lost Cat. Mader. 168.
Lost Children of the Far Islands. Raabe. 
474.
Lost Girl Found. Bassoff. 443.
Lost in Bermooda. Litwin. 365.
Lost Kingdom. Kirby. 99.
Lost Planet. Searles. 333.
Lost Sun. Gratton. 21.
Loud Awake and Lost. Griffin. 213.
Louis. What the Rat Told Me. 333.
Love by the Morning Star. Sullivan. 598.
Love in the Time of Global Warming. 
Block. 77.
Love Letters to the Dead. Dellaira. 568.
Lowry. Gooney Bird and All Her Charms. 
323.
Lubar. Extremities. 33.
_____. Stranger Things. 34.
Lucier. Death-Struck Year. 414.
Lulu and the Rabbit Next Door. McKay. 
468.
Luna. Theory of Everything. 223.
Lunetta. In the After. 34.
Lure. Ewing. 309.
Lynch. Little Blue Lies. 366.
_____. Right Fight. 324.
Macaulay. Eye. 272.
_____. Toilet. 167.
MacDonald. Henry’s Hand. 168.
MacGregor. Highest Number in the World. 
366.
MacHale. Storm. 414.
_____. SYLO. 35.
Maciel. Tease. 584.
MacLachlan. Fly Away. 530.
_____. Truth of Me. 103.
Mad Potter. Greenberg. 212.
Mad, Wicked Folly. Waller. 289.
Mader. Lost Cat. 168.
624 • the Bulletin
Maggie Malone and the Mostly Magical 
Boots. McCarthy. 585.
Magic Bojabi Tree. Hofmeyr. 217.
Mahy. Green Bath. 35.
Mama Built a Little Nest. Ward. 384.
Man Made Boy. Skovron. 181.
Manceau. Race. 467.
Mann, Jennifer A. Sunny Sweet Is So Not 
Sorry. 169.
Mann, Jennifer K. Two Speckled Eggs. 467.
Marciano. 9 Lives of Alexander Badden-
field. 169.
Marcionette. Just Jake. 366.
Marentette. Stowaways. 531.
Maria Had a Little Llama/María tenía una 
llama pequeña. Dominguez. 83.
Marina. Zafón. 607.
Marino. Door. 531.
_____. Uncrashable Dakota. 224.
Mark of the Dragonfly. Johnson. 460.
Markle. Case of the Vanishing Honeybees. 
170.
Marko. Kung Pow Chicken. 367.
Marr. Loki’s Wolves. 5.
_____. Rags and Bones. 224.
Marrin. Volcano beneath the Snow. 415.
Martin. Long Way Home. 273.
Martin & Mahalia. Pinkney. 46.
Martinez. I Pledge Allegiance. 417.
Marty McGuire Has Too Many Pets! 
Messner. 417.
Mass. Space Taxi. 532.
Mata. Kate Walden Directs. 532.
Mateo. Migrant. 584.
Mathieu. Truth about Alice. 585.
Matilda’s Cat. Gravett. 359.
Matson. Nil. 533.
Matter of Days. Kizer. 99.
Matter of Souls. Patrick. 472.
Maximilian & the Bingo Rematch. Garza. 
312.
May. Falconer. 533.
Mayday. Friesen. 453.
McBratney. There, There. 104.
McCarry. All Our Pretty Songs. 36.
McCarthy. Maggie Malone and the Mostly 
Magical Boots. 585.
McClure. Wanderville. 415.
McCully. Little Ducks Go. 468.
_____. Pete Won’t Eat. 93.
McCune. Talker 25. 534.
McDonald. Ant and Honey Bee. 170.
McGhee. Case of the Missing Donut. 37.
McGinnis. Not a Drop to Drink. 104.
McKay. Binny for Short. 105.
_____. Lulu and the Rabbit Next Door. 
468.
McKinley. Shadows. 225.
McNamara. Apple Orchard Riddle. 37.
_____. Fairy Bell Sisters. 38.
McNeil. 3:59. 225.
McPhail. My Mother Goose. 273.
McQuein. Premeditated. 226.
McQuerry. Beyond the Door. 416.
Me First. Kornell. 581.
Meanwhile, Back at the Ranch. Isaacs. 317.
Meet Me at the River. de Gramont. 262.
Meeting Cézanne. Morpurgo. 172.
Meissner. Call of the Klondike. 274.
Meltzer. I Am Abraham Lincoln. 274.
Meshon. Tools Rule! 416.
Mesrobian. Sex & Violence. 226.
Messner. Marty McGuire Has Too Many 
Pets! 417.
_____. Wake Up Missing. 171.
Metcalf. Indelible. 38.
Metzger. Trick of the Light. 39.
Meyer, C. Beauty’s Daughter. 275.
Meyer, M. Cress. 324.
Mi Familia Calaca/My Skeleton Family. 
Weill. 339.
Mice Mischief. Stills. 479.
Michalak. Fetch! 469.
_____. Joe and Sparky Go to School. 39.
Midnight Dress. Foxlee. 266.
Midnight Thief. Blackburne. 564.
Migrant. Mateo. 584.
Mikaelsen. Jungle of Bones. 368.
Milgrim. Some Monsters Are Different. 40.
Miller, L. Free to Fall. 586.
Miller, P. Sophie’s Squash. 106.
Miller-Lachmann. Rogue. 40.
Millet. Pills and Starships. 586.
Millie and the Big Rescue. Steffensmeier. 
116.
Mills. Annika Riz, Math Whiz. 469.
_____. Kelsey Green, Reading Queen. 41.
Minders. Jaffe. 269.
July/August 2014 • 625
Mirk and Midnight Hour. Nickerson. 327.
Misadventures of Salem Hyde. Cammuso. 
142.
Mischievians. Joyce. 270.
Miss Emily. Mutén. 369.
Missing Chancleta. Vicente. 338.
Missing Monkey! Amato. 496.
Mister Bud Wears the Cone. Goodrich. 
574.
Mister Max. Voigt. 122.
Mistwalker. Mitchell. 325.
Mitchell, S. Mistwalker. 325.
Mitchell, T. Backwards. 227.
Mitchell Goes Bowling. Durand. 15.
Miyares. Pardon Me! 586.
Mom for Umande. Faulconer. 515.
Moment Comes. Bradbury. 77.
Monday, Wednesday, and Every Other 
Weekend. Stanton. 337.
Monninger. Crash. 275.
Monster Chefs. Anderson. 392.
Montgomery. Chasing Cheetahs. 470.
_____. Tapir Scientist. 41.
Montijo. Gumazing Gum Girl. 106.
Moo! LaRochelle. 165.
Moon and More. Dessen. 14.
Moonday. Rex. 112.
Moore, I. Captain Cat. 227.
Moore, K. Neverwas. 368.
Moore, P. V Is for Villain. 470.
Mora. I Pledge Allegiance. 417.
Morales. Niño Wrestles the World. 3.
More Than This. Ness. 107.
Morgan. 100. 171.
Moriarty. Cracks in the Kingdom. 325.
Morpurgo. Meeting Cézanne. 172.
Morrill. Being Sloane Jacobs. 326.
Morris Micklewhite and the Tangerine 
Dress. Baldacchino. 498.
Moses. Sittin’ Up. 276.
Most Dangerous Deception. Zettel. 245.
Mountain Dog. Engle. 86.
Mouse with the Question Mark Tail. Peck. 
45.
Mr. Ball Makes a To-Do List. Townsend. 
423.
Mr. Tiger Goes Wild. Brown. 78.
Mr. Wuffles! Wiesner. 124.
Muckers. Wallace. 186.
Mull. Sky Raiders. 471.
Mumbet’s Declaration of Independence. 
Woelfle. 483.
Murdock. Heaven Is Paved with Oreos. 
172.
Murphy, C. My Country, ’Tis of Thee. 
587.
Murphy, M. Say Hello Like This! 326.
Murray. Gingerbread Man Loose on the 
Fire Truck. 42.
Museum of Intangible Things. Wunder. 
484.
Music Everywhere! Ajmera. 392.
Mutén. Miss Emily. 369.
Muth. Hi, Koo! 369.
My Basmati Bat Mitzvah. Freedman. 152.
My Blue Is Happy. Young. 126.
My Bus. Barton. 499.
My Country, ’Tis of Thee. Murphy. 587.
My Humongous Hamster. Freytag. 356.
My Mother Goose. McPhail. 273.
My New Friend Is So Fun! Willems. 606.
Myers. Invasion. 173.
Myracle. Infinite Moment of Us. 173.
Mysterious Patterns. Campbell. 446.
Mysterious Traveler. Peet. 231.
Na. Book of Babies. 276.
Nagai. Dust of Eden. 418.
Naked! Black. 563.
Napoli. Skin. 107.
_____. Storm. 370.
Naturals. Barnes. 202.
Nazi Hunters. Bascomb. 74.
Nearly Gone. Cosimano. 401.
Nelson, B. Prince of Venice Beach. 588.
Nelson, K. Baby Bear. 327.
Nelson, M. How I Discovered Poetry. 370.
Neptune’s Tears. Waggoner. 58.
Ness. More Than This. 107.
Nethergrim. Jobin. 409.
Neubecker. Winter Is for Snow. 228.
Never Ending. Bedford. 396.
Neverwas. Moore. 368.
New Kid. Green. 360.
Newman. Plastic, Ahoy! 534.
Next. Waltman. 383.
Nick and Tesla’s High-Voltage Danger Lab. 
Pflugfelder. 232.
Nickel Bay Nick. Pitchford. 233.
626 • the Bulletin
Nickerson. Mirk and Midnight Hour. 327.
Night Gardener. Auxier. 441.
Night School. Daugherty. 13.
Nightingale’s Nest. Loftin. 413.
Nil. Matson. 533.
Ninja Librarians. Downey. 512.
Niño Wrestles the World. Morales. 3.
No Dogs Allowed. Calmenson. 305.
No Fits, Nilson! OHora. 43.
No Monkeys, No Chocolate. Stewart. 56.
No One Else Can Have You. Hale. 267.
No Place. Strasser. 285.
Noggin. Whaley. 547.
Noisy Paint Box. Rosenstock. 330.
Norman, Speak! Adderson. 495.
North. Starglass. 108.
North of Nowhere. Kessler. 98.
Not a Drop to Drink. McGinnis. 104.
Nowhere Box. Zuppardi. 290.
Nowra. Into That Forest. 174.
Noyes. Plague in the Mirror. 42.
Number One Sam. Pizzoli. 589.
Numberlys. Joyce. 580.
O’Connell. Baby Elephant in the Wild. 
418.
O’Donnell. Space Rocks! 371.
O’Neill. Kite That Bridged Two Nations. 
228.
OCD Love Story. Haydu. 23.
Ockler. Book of Broken Hearts. 43.
Odd, Weird, & Little. Jennings. 269.
Offill. Sparky! 371.
OHora. No Fits, Nilson! 43.
Old Mikamba Had a Farm. Isadora. 160.
Olive’s Perfect World. Plecas. 47.
Oliver. Panic. 372.
Oliver and His Alligator. Schmid. 52.
Ondaatje. Camel in the Sun. 328.
One Busy Day. Schaefer. 422.
One Man Guy. Barakiva. 499.
One or Two Things I Learned about Love. 
Sheldon. 283.
Only Ever Always. Russon. 51.
Onyefulu. Look at This! 229.
Open Mic. Perkins. 109. 
Open Road Summer. Lord. 530.
Operation Bunny. Gardner. 357.
Ophelia and the Marvelous Boy. Foxlee. 
310.
Oppel. Boundless. 419.
Ostrovski. Paradox of Vertical Flight. 229.
Otherbound. Duyvis. 571.
Otis Dooda. Potter. 48.
Outfoxed. Twohy. 121.
Outside In. Ellis. 513.
Over You. Reed. 48.
P.S. Be Eleven. Williams-Garcia. 61.
Paige. Dorothy Must Die. 471.
Painting the Rainbow. Gordon. 574.
Pakkala. Jasmine and Maddie. 588.
Panda-monium at Peek Zoo. Waldron. 603.
Panic. Oliver. 372.
Paquette. Ghost in the House. 44.
_____. Paradox. 44.
Paradox. Paquette. 44.
Paradox of Vertical Flight. Ostrovski. 229.
Parched. Clark. 506.
Parched. Crowder. 11.
Pardon Me! Miyares. 586.
Park. Xander’s Panda Party. 108.
Park Scientists. Carson. 565.
Parrots over Puerto Rico. Roth. 281.
Parsons. Road Rash. 472.
Pass. ACID. 535.
Patch. Slonim. 114.
Patricelli. Tickle. 419.
Patrick, C. Just Like Fate. 109.
Patrick, D. Matter of Souls. 472.
Pauley. Ask Me. 535.
Pawn. Carter. 205.
Pearce. Cold Spell. 230.
Pearson, M. Kiss of Deception. 589.
Pearson, S. Arlo Rolled. 536.
Pearson, T. Elephant’s Story. 230.
Peck. Mouse with the Question Mark Tail. 
45.
Peck, Peck, Peck. Cousins. 81.
Peet. Mysterious Traveler. 231.
Pelletier. Summer Experiment. 473.
Perfect Ruin. DeStefano. 208.
Perkins. Open Mic. 109. 
Perl. Aces Wild. 45.
Perrin. At the Same Moment. 420.
Pet War. Woodrow. 244.
Petal and Poppy. Clough. 448.
Pete Won’t Eat. McCully. 93.
Peterfreund. Across a Star-Swept Sea. 231.
Petra K and the Blackhearts. Ellis. 307.
July/August 2014 • 627
Pett. Girl and the Bicycle. 473.
Pflugfelder. Nick and Tesla’s High-Voltage 
Danger Lab. 232.
Phelan. Bluffton. 46.
Philbrick. Zane and the Hurricane. 328.
Picard. Jim Curious. 536.
Picture Day Perfection. Diesen. 148.
Picture Me Gone. Rosoff. 235.
Pieces of Me. Kizer. 411.
Pierce. Battle Magic. 232.
Pierpoint. Last Ride of Caleb O’Toole. 110.
Pigeon Needs a Bath! Willems. 547.
Pills and Starships. Millet. 586.
Pilot and the Little Prince. Sís. 596.
Pincus. 14 Fibs of Gregory K. 175.
Pinkney, A. Martin & Mahalia. 46.
Pinkney, J. Tortoise & the Hare. 277.
Pitcher. Ketchup Clouds. 277.
Pitchford. Nickel Bay Nick. 233.
Pizzoli. Number One Sam. 589.
Plague in the Mirror. Noyes. 42.
Plastic, Ahoy! Newman. 534.
Platypus Police Squad: The Ostrich Con-
spiracy. Krosoczka. 582.
Plecas. Olive’s Perfect World. 47.
Plourde. You’re Wearing That to School?! 
47.
Plum. After the End. 590.
Plus One. Fama. 403.
Poached. Gibbs. 357.
Poem Depot. Florian. 517.
Pointe. Colbert. 506. 
Polacco. Blessing Cup. 110.
_____. Clara and Davie. 329.
Polisner. Summer of Letting Go. 372.
Poor Doreen. Lloyd-Jones. 529.
Pope. Battling Boy. 278.
Poppy the Pirate Dog’s New Shipmate. 
Kessler. 581.
Popular. Van Wagenen. 546.
Port Chicago 50. Sheinkin. 334.
Potter, A. Jubilee. 420.
Potter, E. Otis Dooda. 48.
Powell. Josephine. 278.
Prahin. Brimsby’s Hats. 279.
Pratchett. Carpet People. 233.
Premeditated. McQuein. 226.
President Taft Is Stuck in the Bath. Barnett. 
395.
Preus. West of the Moon. 537.
Price. Earth Space Moon Base. 590.
Prince of Shadows. Caine. 445.
Prince of Venice Beach. Nelson. 588.
Princess Pink and the Land of Fake-Believe. 
Jones. 524.
Princess Sparkle-Heart Gets a Makeover. 
Schneider. 540.
Prins. Hidden Like Anne Frank. 537.
Problem with Being Slightly Heroic. Krish-
naswami. 100.
Promise. Davies. 450.
Proxy. London. 32.
Pure Grit. Farrell. 404.
Puss & Boots. Imai. 579.
Pyle. Bad for You. 175.
Qitsualik-Tinsley. Raven and the Loon. 
590.
Queen on Wednesday. Swiatkowska. 599.
Queen Victoria’s Bathing Machine. 
Whelan. 605.
Quick. Forgive Me, Leonard Peacock. 111.
Quinn. (Don’t You) Forget About Me. 591.
Raabe. Lost Children of the Far Islands. 
474.
Rabinowitz. Boy and a Jaguar. 591.
Race. Manceau. 467.
Racing Savannah. Kenneally. 220.
Radio Girl. Brendler. 204.
Rags and Bones. Marr. 224.
Rain of the Ghosts. Weisman. 243.
Rappaport. To Dare Mighty Things. 253.
Raschka. Cosmobiography of Sun Ra. 592.
_____. Daisy Gets Lost. 234.
Raven and the Loon. Qitsualik-Tinsley. 
590.
Read Me a Story. Gay. 19.
Ready. Migrant. 584.
Real Boy. Ursu. 184.
Reality Boy. King. 98.
Really Awesome Mess. Cook. 80.
Rebel Belle. Hawkins. 406.
Red Caps. Berman. 349.
Red Knit Cap Girl to the Rescue. Stoop. 
285.
Red Madness. Jarrow. 408.
Reed, A. Over You. 48.
Reed, L. Neverwas. 368
Reedy. Divided We Fall. 280.
628 • the Bulletin
Reeve. Goblins. 111.
Reinhardt. We Are the Goldens. 538.
Relativity. Bishara. 257.
Revenge of the Flower Girls. Ziegler. 549.
Rex. Moonday. 112.
Reynolds, A. Carnivores. 49.
_____. Here Comes Destructosaurus! 538.
Reynolds, J. When I Was the Greatest. 373.
Reynolds, P. Going Places. 421.
Richardson. Call of the Klondike. 274.
Right Fight. Lynch. 324.
Ring and the Crown. de la Cruz. 510.
Ringwald. Secret Box. 421.
Rippin. Angel Creek. 112.
Riverman. Starmer. 379.
Road Rash. Parsons. 472.
Robinson, M. How to Wash a Woolly 
Mammoth. 280.
Robinson, S. Under the Same Sun. 330.
Robinson, F. Whale Shines. 234.
Rocco. Swim That Rock. 539.
Rockliff. Grudge Keeper. 474.
Rockwell. Hey, Charleston! 235.
Rogue. Miller-Lachmann. 40.
Romans, Gods, Emperors, and Dormice. 
Williams. 244.
Rooftoppers. Rundell. 177.
Roomies. Zarr. 245.
Rooting for You. Hood. 361.
Rose. Jimmy the Joey. 49.
Rose. Webb. 187.
Rose under Fire. Wein. 123.
Rosengren. What the Moon Said. 373.
Rosenstock. Noisy Paint Box. 330.
_____. Thomas Jefferson Builds a Library. 
50.
Rosenthal. Bobo the Sailor Man! 176.
Rosoff. Picture Me Gone. 235.
Roth, S. Parrots over Puerto Rico. 281.
Roth, V. Allegiant. 331.
Row, Row, Row Your Boat. Cabrera. 445.
Rowell. Fangirl. 176.
Rubin, A. Secret Pizza Party. 177.
Rubin, S. Everybody Paints! 374.
_____. Freedom Summer. 593.
Rule. Strange Sweet Song. 374.
Rule of Three. Walters. 383.
Rules of Summer. Tan. 599.
Run, Dog! Boyer. 444.
Rundell. Rooftoppers. 177.
Runt. Baskin. 6.
Rusch. Electrical Wizard. 178.
_____. Eruption! 50.
Rush. Silver. 54.
Russo. Sophie Sleeps Over. 539.
Russon. Only Ever Always. 51.
Rutherford B. Who Was He? Singer. 239.
Rutkoski. Winner’s Curse. 375.
Ryan. Tony Baloney. 51.
Rylander. Codename Zero. 375.
Sadler. Alice from Dallas. 422.
Sales. This Song Will Save Your Life. 236.
Salt. Frost. 18.
Salvage. Duncan. 512.
Sam and Charlie (and Sam Too) Return! 
Kimmelman. 461.
Samworth. Aviary Wonders Inc. 376. 
Sanderson. Steelheart. 281.
Sandler. How the Beatles Changed the 
World. 331.
Santat. Beekle. 540.
Sasquatch and Aliens. Harper. 457.
Saving Baby Doe. Vigilante. 382.
Saving Kabul Corner. Senzai. 334,
Saving Lucas Biggs, Teague. 568.
Saving Thanehaven. Jinks. 25.
Sax. War within These Walls. 282.
Say Hello Like This! Murphy. 326.
Say It Ain’t So. Berk. 502.
Sayre. Eat Like a Bear. 178.
Scaletta. Winter of the Robots. 236.
Scaly Spotted Feathered Frilled. Thimmesh. 
183.
Scan. Jury. 525.
Scar Boys. Vlahos. 338.
Scare Scape. Fisher. 88.
Schachner. Bits & Pieces. 237.
Schaefer. One Busy Day. 422.
Scheffler. Flip Flap Farm. 376.
Schindler. Junction of Sunshine and Lucky. 
332.
Schmid. Oliver and His Alligator. 52.
Schmidt. Bright before Sunrise. 377.
Schneider. Bedtime Monsters. 237.
_____. Princess Sparkle-Heart Gets a 
Makeover. 540.
School of Charm. Scott. 332.
Schools of Hope. Finkelstein. 517.
July/August 2014 • 629
Schrefer. Threatened. 377.
Schreiber. Game Over. 475.
Schumacher. End Times. 593.
Schwartz. Dee Dee and Me. 238.
Schwarz. Sleepwalkers. 52.
Scieszka. Battle Bunny. 199.
_____. Guys Read: Other Worlds. 239.
Scott, E. Heartbeat. 282.
Scott, L. School of Charm. 332.
Scraps Book. Ehlert. 354.
Screaming at the Ump. Vernick. 481.
Screaming Staircase. Stroud. 118.
Sea of Shadows. Armstrong. 393.
Sea Turtle Scientist. Swinburne. 480.
Seamon. Somebody Up There Hates You. 
179.
Searching for Sarah Rector. Bolden. 258.
Searching for Sky. Cantor. 505.
Searles. Lost Planet. 333.
Season of the Witch. Frederick. 211.
Second Star. Sheinmel. 594.
Secret Box. Ringwald. 421.
Secret Hum of a Daisy. Holczer. 578.
Secret of Ferrell Savage. Gill. 358.
Secret Pizza Party. Rubin. 177.
Secret Side of Empty. Andreu. 560.
Secrets and Lies. Green. 575.
Secrets of Lily Graves. Strohmeyer. 543.
Secrets of the Book. Fry. 356.
Secrets of the Sky Caves. Athans. 498.
Secrets of the Terra-Cotta Soldier. Compes-
tine. 401.
Sedgwick. She Is Not Invisible. 475.
Seeger. Bully. 53.
Seeing Red. Erskine. 210.
Sekret. Smith. 477. 
Sellier. What the Rat Told Me. 333.
Senzai. Saving Kabul Corner. 334,
Separate Is Never Equal. Tonatiuh. 600.
September 17. Lewis. 365.
Serafina’s Promise. Burg. 142.
Serle. Edge of Falling. 378.
Seven Wild Sisters. de Lint. 450.
Sex & Violence. Mesrobian. 226.
Shackleton. Bertozzi. 562.
Shadow Mother. Virgo. 602.
Shadows. McKinley. 225.
Shahan. Skin and Bones. 378.
Shannon, D. Bugs in My Hair! 113.
Shannon, G. Turkey Tot. 180.
Sharafeddine. Amazing Travels of Ibn Bat-
tuta. 594.
Sharpe. Far from You. 476.
She Is Not Invisible. Sedgwick. 475.
Shea. Buddy and the Bunnies in: Don’t 
Play with Your Food! 283.
Sheinkin. Port Chicago 50. 334.
Sheinmel. Second Star. 594.
Sheldon. One or Two Things I Learned 
about Love. 283.
Shelley. Gris Grimly’s Frankenstein. 113.
Sherman. The Finest Hours. 286.
Shields. Baby’s Got the Blues. 335.
Shine. I Become Shadow. 595.
Shinoda. Learning Not to Drown. 541.
Ship Out of Luck. Shusterman. 53.
Show Must Go On! Klise. 221.
Shulevitz. Dusk. 114.
Shultz. Darkworld. 595.
Shusterman. Ship Out of Luck. 53.
_____. Tesla’s Attic. 335.
Sick. Leveen. 223.
Sidekicked. Anderson. 4.
Sidman. What the Heart Knows. 180.
Silver Button. Graham. 154.
Silver People. Engle. 308.
Silver Six. Lieberman. 30.
Silver. Rush. 54.
Silver. Wooding. 428.
Singer. Rutherford B. Who Was He? 239.
Single Pebble. Christensen. 206.
Sís. Pilot and the Little Prince. 596.
Sitomer. Caged Warrior. 596.
Sittin’ Up. Moses. 276.
Skilton. High & Dry. 476.
Skin. Napoli. 107.
Skin and Bones. Shahan. 378.
Skinner. Game Slaves. 379.
Skovron. Man Made Boy. 181.
Sky Jumpers. Eddleman. 149.
Sky Raiders. Mull. 471.
Skylark. Cassidy. 505.
Slam! Stower. 381.
Slanted Worlds. Fisher. 404.
Sleepwalkers. Schwarz. 52.
Sloan. Counting by 7s. 54.
Slonim. Patch. 114.
Smallman. Bear’s Big Bottom. 336.
630 • the Bulletin
Smith, Alex. Claude at the Beach. 541.
Smith, Andrew. Grasshopper Jungle. 336.
Smith, C. I Am the World. 115.
Smith, J. Geography of You and Me. 477.
Smith, L. Sekret. 477. 
Smith-Ready. This Side of Salvation. 542.
Snicker of Magic. Lloyd. 466.
Snow. Bubble World. 55.
So Much for Democracy. Jones. 523.
Soccer Fence. Bildner. 397.
Soccer Star. Javaherbin. 522.
Some Monsters Are Different. Milgrim. 40.
Somebody Up There Hates You. Seamon. 
179.
Something Real. Demetrios. 263.
Somper. Allies & Assassins. 542.
Sones. To Be Perfectly Honest. 115.
Sonnenblick. Are You Experienced? 116.
Sophie Hartley and the Facts of Life. 
Greene. 212.
Sophie Sleeps Over. Russo. 539.
Sophie’s Squash. Miller. 106.
Sophie’s Terrible Twos. Wells. 384.
Sorrow’s Knot. Bow. 203.
Sorry You’re Lost. Blackstone. 303.
Sound of Letting Go. Kehoe. 362.
Sound of Your Voice, Only Really Far 
Away. Dowell. 14.
Space Rocks! O’Donnell. 371.
Space Taxi. Mass. 532.
Sparky! Offill. 371.
Spencer. Case of the Time-Capsule Bandit. 
181.
Spending Spree. Bix. 202.
Spinelli. Another Day as Emily. 597.
Spooky Friends. Feder. 87.
Sprout Helps Out. Winstead. 549.
St. Crow. Wayfarer. 478.
Stampler. Afterparty. 478.
Staniszewski. Dirt Diary. 284.
Stanton. Monday, Wednesday, and Every 
Other Weekend. 337.
Starbird Murphy and the World Outside. 
Finneyfrock. 572.
Starglass. North. 108.
Starmer. Riverman. 379.
Staunton. Who I’m Not. 182.
Stay Where You Are & Then Leave. Boyne. 
397.
Steelheart. Sanderson. 281.
Steffensmeier. Millie and the Big Rescue. 
116.
Stein. Dinosaur Kisses. 55.
Stella’s Starliner. Wells. 427.
Stemple. The Hostage Prince. 62.
Stern. Breakfast on Mars. 56.
Sternberg. Like Carrot Juice on a Cupcake. 
479.
Stevens. Faking Normal. 380.
Stewart, B. In-Between. 284.
Stewart, M. Feathers. 380.
_____. No Monkeys, No Chocolate. 56.
Stiefvater. Dream Thieves. 117.
Stills. Mice Mischief. 479.
Stone Giant. Sutcliffe. 480.
Stone Soup with Matzoh Balls. Glaser. 454.
Stoop. Red Knit Cap Girl to the Rescue. 
285.
Storm. MacHale. 414.
Storm. Napoli. 370.
Story of Buildings. Dillon. 511.
Story of Owen. Johnston. 391.
Stowaways. Marentette. 531.
Stower. Slam! 381.
Strand. I Have a Bad Feeling About This. 
543.
Strange & Beautiful Sorrows of Ava Laven-
der. Walton. 482.
Strange Sweet Song. Rule. 374.
Stranger Things. Lubar. 34.
Strasser. Fallout. 117.
_____. No Place. 285.
Strohmeyer. Secrets of Lily Graves. 543.
Stroud. Screaming Staircase. 118.
Struyk-Bonn. Whisper. 544.
Stuber. Girl in Reverse. 597.
Subramaniam. Fox and the Crow. 479.
Subway Love. Baskin. 500.
Sugar Hill. Weatherford. 426.
Suitcase of Stars. Baccalario. 394.
Sullivan, L. Love by the Morning Star. 598.
Sullivan, S. All That’s Missing. 240.
Sullivan, T. Golden Boy. 57.
Summer Experiment. Pelletier. 473.
Summer I Saved the World . . . in 65 Days. 
Hurwitz. 459.
Summer I Wasn’t Me. Verdi. 425.
Summer of Letting Go. Polisner. 372.
July/August 2014 • 631
Sunny Sweet Is So Not Sorry. Mann. 169.
Superworm. Donaldson. 354.
Sure Signs of Crazy. Harrington. 93.
Sutcliffe, J. Stone Giant. 480.
Sutcliffe, W. Wall. 118.
Swagger. Deuker. 147.
Swain. Hungry. 598.
Swann. Maggie Malone and the Mostly 
Magical Boots. 585.
Swiatkowska. Queen on Wednesday. 599.
Swift Boys & Me. Keplinger. 526.
Swim That Rock. Rocco. 539.
Swinburne. Sea Turtle Scientist. 480.
SYLO. MacHale. 35.
Table Sets Itself. Clanton. 206.
Taking. Derting. 510.
Taking Care of Mama Rabbit. Lobel. 322.
Talker 25. McCune. 534.
Tamaki. This One Summer. 493.
Tan. Rules of Summer. 599.
Tap Tap Boom Boom. Bluemle. 350.
Tapir Scientist. Montgomery. 41.
Taste of Freedom. Kimmel. 320.
Taylor, S. Goal! 600.
Taylor, L. Dreams of Gods & Monsters. 
544.
Teague. Saving Lucas Biggs. 568.
Teardrop. Kate. 270.
Tease. Maciel. 584.
Teen Spirit. Block. 257.
Templeman. Glass Casket. 337.
Ten Tiny Toes. Church. 352.
Terrill. All Our Yesterdays. 182.
Tesla’s Attic. Shusterman. 335.
Thanksgiving Day Thanks. Elliott. 150.
That’s a Possibility! Goldstone. 20.
Theo’s Mood. Cocca-Leffler. 79.
Theory of Everything. Luna. 223.
There Will Be Bears. Gebhart. 518.
There Will Come a Time. Arcos. 496.
There, There. McBratney. 104.
There’s a Name for This Feeling/Hay un 
nombre para lo que siento. Bertrand. 
563.
These Broken Stars. Kaufman. 320.
Thickety. White. 483.
Thimmesh. Scaly Spotted Feathered Frilled. 
183.
Thin Space. Casella. 144.
Thing about Luck. Kadohata. 26.
This Is Our House. Yum. 127.
This Is the Rope. Woodson. 126.
This One Summer. Tamaki. 493.
This Side of Salvation. Smith-Ready. 542.
This Song Will Save Your Life. Sales. 236.
This Wicked Game. Zink. 246.
Thomas. Burning Sky. 183.
Thomas Jefferson. Kalman. 318. 
Thomas Jefferson Builds a Library. Rosen-
stock. 50.
Thomas the Toadilly Terrible Bully. Levy. 
322.
Thomson. Ancient Animals. 57.
Threatened. Schrefer. 377.
Thumpy Feet. Lewin. 102.
Tickle. Patricelli. 419.
Tiernan. Darkest Fear. 286.
Tin Star. Castellucci. 351.
Tingle. House of Purple Cedar. 481.
_____. How I Became a Ghost. 240. 
To Be Perfectly Honest. Sones. 115.
To Dare Mighty Things. Rappaport. 253.
Tobin. Very Inappropriate Word. 119.
Toilet. Macaulay. 167.
Tonatiuh. Separate Is Never Equal. 600.
Tony Baloney. Ryan. 51.
Too Cool for This School. Tracy. 120.
Tools Rule! Meshon. 416.
Torday. Last Wild. 423.
Torn Away. Brown. 564.
Tortoise & the Hare. Pinkney. 277.
Tougias. Finest Hours. 286.
Townsend, M. Mr. Ball Makes a To-Do 
List. 423.
Townsend, W. Blue Iguana. 424.
Tracy. Hung Up. 381.
_____. Too Cool for This School. 120.
Train. Cooper. 41.
Transparent. Whipple. 59.
Treatment. Young. 428.
Tree Lady. Hopkins. 96.
Tregay. Fan Art. 601.
Trevayne. Flights and Chimes and Mysteri-
ous Times. 545.
Trick of the Light. Metzger. 39.
Trick-or-Treat. Leppanen. 28.
Trouper. Kearney. 219.
True Adventures of Nicolò Zen. Christo-
pher, Nicholas. 260.
632 • the Bulletin
True Blue Scouts of Sugar Man Swamp. 
Appelt. 71.
True Tale of the Monster Billy Dean telt by 
hisself. Almond. 255.
Trumbore. Parrots over Puerto Rico. 281.
Truth about Alice. Mathieu. 585.
Truth of Me. MacLachlan. 103.
Tucholke. Between the Devil and the Deep 
Blue Sea. 120.
Turkey Tot. Shannon. 180.
Turnage. Ghosts of Tupelo Landing. 382.
Turner, A. Circa Now. 601.
Turner, P. Dolphins of Shark Bay. 241.
Tweedles Go Electric. Kulling. 527. 
Twelve Minutes to Midnight. Edge. 403.
Twenty-Six Pirates. Horowitz. 24.
Two and Only Kelly Twins. Hurwitz. 97.
Two Boys Kissing. Levithan. 29.
Two Bunny Buddies. Galbraith. 453.
Two Lies and a Spy. Carlton. 143.
Two Speckled Eggs. Mann. 467.
Two Tough Crocs. Bedford. 500.
Twohy. Outfoxed. 121.
Tyrannosaurus Wrecks! Bardhan-Quallen. 
442.
Tyrant’s Daughter. Carleson. 305.
Ugly One. Ellis. 16.
Ukulele Hayley. Cox. 82.
Unbreakable. Garcia. 266.
Uncrashable Dakota. Marino. 224.
Under the Egg. Fitzgerald. 355.
Under the Same Sun. Robinson. 330.
Undercurrent. Blackwell. 139.
Underpants Dance. Zapf. 485.
Underwood. Bad Bye, Good Bye. 545.
_____. Here Comes the Easter Cat. 287.
Unhinged. Howard. 316.
Unhooking the Moon. Hughes. 159.
Unseemly Education of Anne Merchant. 
Wiebe. 289.
Unthinkable. Werlin. 188.
Until It Hurts to Stop. Hubbard. 158.
Urgency Emergency! Archer. 72.
Ursu. Real Boy. 184.
V Is for Villain. Moore. 470.
Valentine. Bad Birthday Idea. 287.
Valentino. Beast Within. 602.
Vampire Baby. Bennett. 7.
Van Leeuwen. Day My Father Became a 
Bush. 184.
Van Vleet. Eliza Bing Is (Not) a Big, Fat 
Quitter. 424.
Van Wagenen. Popular. 546.
Vanhee. Engines of the Broken World. 241.
Vaught. Insanity. 288.
Veggies with Wedgies. Doodler. 570.
Verdi. Summer I Wasn’t Me. 425.
Vernick. Bogart and Vinnie. 58.
_____. Screaming at the Ump. 481.
Very Inappropriate Word. Tobin. 119.
Very Nearly Honorable League of Pirates. 
Carlson. 143.
Very Tiny Baby. Kantorovitz. 461.
Vestergaard. Digger, Dozer, Dumper. 121.
Vicente. Missing Chancleta. 338.
Vigilante. Saving Baby Doe. 382.
Vigilante Poets of Selwyn Academy. Hatte-
mer. 457.
VIII. Castor. 9.
Virgo. Shadow Mother. 602.
Vitro. Khoury. 363.
Vizzini. House of Secrets. 10
Vlahos. Scar Boys. 338.
Voake. Hooey Higgins and the Tremendous 
Trousers. 603.
Voice inside My Head. Laidlaw. 464.
Voices from the Oregon Trail. Winters. 
340.
Voigt. Mister Max. 122.
Volcano beneath the Snow. Marrin. 415.
Waffler. Donovan. 84.
Waggoner. Neptune’s Tears. 58.
Waiting for the Queen. Higgins. 94.
Wake Up Missing. Messner. 171.
Wakefield. Friday Never Leaving. 185.
Waking Dark. Wasserman. 123.
Walden. Earthfall. 185.
Waldron. Panda-monium at Peek Zoo. 603.
Walker, M. Ashes to Ashes. 288.
Walker, S. Boundaries. 425.
Wall. Sutcliffe. 118.
Wallace, C. Ghost in the Glass House. 186.
Wallace, R. Babe Conquers the World. 482.
_____. Wicked Cruel. 122.
Wallace, S. Muckers. 186.
Waller. Mad, Wicked Folly. 289.
July/August 2014 • 633
Walters. Rule of Three. 383.
Waltman. Next. 383.
Walton. Strange & Beautiful Sorrows of 
Ava Lavender. 482.
Wanderville. McClure. 415.
War within These Walls. Sax. 282.
Ward. Mama Built a Little Nest. 384.
Ward. Frankel. 17.
Warning: Do Not Open This Book! 
 
Lehrhaupt. 28.
Washday. Bunting. 504.
Wasserman. Waking Dark. 123.
Watkins. Juvie. 242.
Watson. Loot. 604.
Wayfarer. St. Crow. 478.
We Are the Goldens. Reinhardt. 538.
We Shall Overcome. Levy. 272.
We Were Liars. Lockhart. 529.
Weasels. Dolan. 301.
Weatherford. Sugar Hill. 426.
Webb, H. Rose. 187.
Webb, P. Where the Rock Splits the Sky. 
426.
Wegman. Flo & Wendell. 187.
Weight of Water. Crossan. 11.
Weill. Mi Familia Calaca/My Skeleton 
Family. 339.
Wein. Rose under Fire. 123.
Weisman. Rain of the Ghosts. 243.
Weitz. Young World. 604.
Welcome to Dog Beach. Greenwald. 455.
Well’s End. Fishman. 405.
Wellington. Colors for Zena. 59.
Wells. Sophie’s Terrible Twos. 384.
_____. Stella’s Starliner. 427.
Werlin. Unthinkable. 188.
Wesselhoeft. Dirt Bikes, Drones, and Other 
Ways to Fly. 546.
West of the Moon. Preus. 537.
Westrick. Brotherhood. 243.
Whale Shines. Robinson. 234.
Whaley. Noggin. 547.
What Flowers Remember. Wiersbitzky. 
606.
What I Came to Tell You. Hays. 94.
What the Heart Knows. Sidman. 180.
What the Moon Said. Rosengren. 373.
What the Rat Told Me. Sellier. 333.
What We Found in the Sofa and How It 
Saved the World. Clark. 9.
What We Hide. Jocelyn. 410.
What’s In There? Harris. 155.
What’s New? The Zoo! Krull. 582.
Whelan. Queen Victoria’s Bathing Ma-
chine. 605.
When Elephant Met Giraffe. Gude. 313.
When I Was the Greatest. Reynolds. 373.
When Mr. Dog Bites. Conaghan. 566.
When the Beat Was Born. Hill. 95.
When You Were Here. Whitney. 60.
Where the Rock Splits the Sky. Webb. 426.
Where the Stars Still Shine. Doller. 148.
Where’s Mommy? Donofrio. 402.
While We Run. Healey. 576.
Whipple. Transparent. 59.
Whiskers, Tails, & Wings. Goldman. 91.
Whisper. Struyk-Bonn. 544.
Whispering Town. Elvgren. 452.
Whistle in the Dark. Long. 103.
White. Thickety. 483.
White Space. Bick. 350.
Whitney. When You Were Here. 60.
Who I’m Not. Staunton. 182.
Why We Took the Car. Herrndorf. 315.
Wicked Cruel. Wallace. 122.
Wiebe. Unseemly Education of Anne 
Merchant. 289.
Wiersbitzky. What Flowers Remember. 
606.
Wiesner. Mr. Wuffles! 124.
Wild Animal Neighbors. Downer. 264.
Wild Boy. Jones. 161.
Will in Scarlet. Cody. 145.
Willems. Big Guy Took My Ball! 60.
_____. My New Friend Is So Fun! 606.
_____. Pigeon Needs a Bath! 547.
Williams, C. Haven. 339
Williams, J. Drama Queens in the House. 
427.
Williams, M. Lizzy Bennet’s Diary. 548.
_____. Romans, Gods, Emperors, and 
Dormice. 244.
Williams-Garcia. P.S. Be Eleven. 61.
Willow. Hegamin. 360.
Wilson. Boys of Blur. 548.
Winnacker. Impostor. 124.
634 • the Bulletin
Winner’s Curse. Rutkoski. 375.
Winstead. Sprout Helps Out. 549.
Winter. Henri’s Scissors. 125.
Winter Horses. Kerr. 410.
Winter Is for Snow. Neubecker. 228.
Winter of the Robots. Scaletta. 236.
Winter Sky. Giff. 267.
Winters. Voices from the Oregon Trail. 
340.
Wise Young Fool. Beaudoin. 75.
With a Mighty Hand. Ehrlich. 85.
Wittenstein. For the Good of Mankind. 
188.
Woelfle. Mumbet’s Declaration of Indepen-
dence. 483.
Wolf. Dead Girls Don’t Lie. 189.
Wolff. Baby Bear Counts One. 125.
Woman in the House (and Senate). Coo-
per. 508.
Wood. Birthday Queen. 190.
Wooding. Silver. 428.
Woodrow. Pet War. 244.
Woods. Blossoming Universe of Violet 
Diamond. 290.
Woodson. This Is the Rope. 126.
Words with Wings. Grimes. 213.
Wounded Name. Hutchison. 25.
Wunder. Museum of Intangible Things. 
484.
Wysocky. Hidden Girl. 314.
Xander’s Panda Party. Park. 108.
Yancey. 5th Wave. 61.
Yang. Boxers. 190.
Year of Billy Miller. Henkes. 157.
Year of Mistaken Discoveries. Cook. 449.
Year of Shadows. Legrand. 101.
Year of the Fortune Cookie. Cheng. 565.
Year of the Jungle. Collins. 80.
Yolen. Hostage Prince. 62.
Yoon. Found. 484.
You Can’t Have Too Many Friends! Ger-
stein. 573.
You’re Wearing That to School?! Plourde. 
47.
Young, A. No Monkeys, No Chocolate. 56.
Young, J. My Blue Is Happy. 126.
Young, S. Just Like Fate. 109.
_____. Treatment. 428.
Young World. Weitz. 604.
Your Constant Star. Hasiuk. 520.
Your Skeleton Is Showing. Cyrus. 12.
Yovanoff. Fiendish. 607.
Yum. This Is Our House. 127.
Zafón. Marina. 607.
Zane and the Hurricane. Philbrick. 328.
Zapf. Underpants Dance. 485.
Zarr. Roomies. 245.
Zelkowicz. The First Book of Ore. 441.
Zettel. Most Dangerous Deception. 245.
Ziegler. Revenge of the Flower Girls. 549.
Ziggy’s Big Idea. Long. 466.
Zink. This Wicked Game. 246.
Zombie Baseball Beatdown. Bacigalupi. 73.
Zuppardi. Nowhere Box. 290.
Disseminate. Innovate. Collaborate.
Charting a vibrant new course to bring the beneﬁ ts 
of discovery to our global academic community of 
authors, readers, and publishing partners.
JHU Press Journals…
…break new ground 
…win awards 
…advance scholarship
The Johns Hopkins University Press is 
not just a publisher. We’re your partner in 
taking your journal beyond paper. JHUP 
has published scholarly journals for more 
than 130 years and combines a tradition 
of accomplishment with innovating 
publishing and marketing strategies. Our 
stewardship of original ideas and research 
since 1878 puts us at the forefront of 
publication and association management. 
Our staff simply helps you make ideas 
available to a world wide audience. We work 
with you to develop an online presence, 
publicize your work through Facebook 
and Twitter, share your message through a 
specialized list serv, and much more.
We invite you to join us as we continue to 
chart a vibrant new course in publishing. 
Please visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals 
for more information.
