T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
November 2013
Vol. 67   No. 3
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 67 (2014).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $60.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$100.00 (print); $110.00 (online);  
$140.00 (print & online)
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
November 2013
Vol. 67 No. 3
135  the BIg PICture
 
 Big Snow  written and illus. by Jonathan Bean
136  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
151 • Looks Like Daylight: Voices of Indigenous Kids  by Deborah Ellis
165 • Moo!  by David LaRochelle; illus. by Mike Wohnoutka
167 • Inheritance  by Malinda Lo
176 • Fangirl  by Rainbow Rowell
178 •  Eat Like a Bear  by April Pulley Sayre; illus. by Steve Jenkins
192  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
193  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Thaddeus Andracki, Reviewer (TA)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Kim Naples, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $100.00 or electronic $110.00; combined print & electronic $140.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.20. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2013 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Big Snow ©2013 by Jonathan Bean and used by permission of Farrar Straus 
Giroux.
November 2013 • 135
the BIg PICture
Big Snow
written and illustrated by Jonathan Bean
Snow is one of the most transformative experiences in the world, completely rede-
signing a landscape and changing its sound, scent, and feel overnight or even more 
quickly. For kids, it’s magic: it remakes the world into a sparkling toy, stops adults 
in their tracks, and prioritizes kid-important activities like sledding and goofing 
around over adult mandates like school and electricity. And picture books absolutely 
get it. There’s a long tradition, ranging from the classics such as the Haders’ The 
Big Snow and Keats’ The Snowy Day to recent titles such as Perkins’ Snow Music 
(BCCB 12/03) and Sakai’s Snow Day (BCCB 2/09), of celebrating the wonders of 
the snow-bedecked world.
Jonathan Bean’s Big Snow is a worthy addition to this frosty canon. Its 
protagonist, young David, is living the torture of every kid in a snowy clime as he 
waits impatiently for the first big snow of the year. His mother tries her best to keep 
him occupied (“Why don’t you help make cookies while you wait,” she suggests), 
but the power of snow is too strong (“But then the flour, white and fine, made 
David think of snow,” leading his creation of a fake snowfall and a floury mess), 
and he heads outside while his annoyed mother cleans up his mess. In fact, every 
task she tries to distract him with reminds him of snow—bathtub suds resemble 
mounds of snow, and making the bed entices him to set his toys up on the cool 
white sheets—and every time he escapes to the backyard, the snowfall is promis-
ingly increasing. Finally, he falls asleep and has a blizzardy dream; when he wakes, 
the snow has finally arrived in earnest, and he and his mother and newly arrived 
father escape out into the snow together.
Like snowfall itself, the book is a quiet marvel. Repetition gives the story 
the subtle structure of folklore, and the anticipation accumulates along with the 
snow. The text delicately supports David’s wishful interior play by using the same 
words to describe both his snow-enchanted imagination and the falling snow (when 
David leaves behind the mess of “white and fluffy” suds, for instance, he goes 
outdoors where “the flakes were lying, white and fluffy”). The domestic details of 
David’s work (well, “work”) around the house present in simple, straightforward 
sentences (“So David helped Mom clean. He put on the big yellow gloves. He 
sprayed the cleaner”) that bring as much lulling rhythm as they do information, and 
they provide a gentle contrast to the airier, more lyrical descriptions of the snow. 
The pencil and watercolor art similarly balances sturdy homeyness with 
touches of wonder. As in the illustrations of Bob Graham (see The Silver Button, 
reviewed below), the amiable, almost cartoonish simplicity of the figures makes 
them immediately accessible, while the intimate authenticity of their poses and 
136 • The bulleTiN
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
telling details bring them vividly to life. David’s ferocious attack on the shower stall 
as he helps his mother spray, his thorough tenting of his tiny bed with the clean 
sheet, and his reluctance to take his knitted cap off because he’s obviously going 
to need it any minute are all utterly recognizable. Unlike Graham, though, Bean 
imbues his scenes with soft, earthy pigments (the patterned ochre of the kitchen 
walls, the warm tans of the family’s skin tones). Punctuating the rhythm of the 
internal scenes are full-spread bird’s-eye views of the neighborhood, documenting 
the changes as snow begins to soften the town’s contours and emphasize its lines 
in overhead wires and streetside fences, and as the graying skies mute the colors 
of the landscape. It’s a down-to-earth winter wonderland, which draws much of 
its magic, as in life, from the friendly proximity of a contrasting warm interior (a 
contrast whose importance is emphasized by David’s blizzard-in-the-house dream). 
Overall, this is exactly what it’s like to restlessly anticipate the can’t-come-
too-soon first big snow of the year. Use this to honor the season in its absence or to 
welcome its arrival; either way, kids who know there’s no waiting like snow waiting 
will applaud. (See p. 137 for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
AvAsthi, swAti Chasing Shadows; illus. by Craig Phillips. Knopf, 2013 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96341-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86342-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89527-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Corey and his twin sister, Holly, and their friend Savitri take plenty of risks in their 
freerunning (a kind of parkour) on the south side of Chicago, but they keep out of 
danger by encouraging, limiting, and protecting one another. They can’t save one 
another from bullets, though, and in a random shooting both Corey and Holly are 
hit. Holly then finds herself in a wasteland, watching her brother being led away 
from her with a noose around his neck by a half-man, half-snake monster. She tries 
to go with him, but when she hears Sav’s voice calling to her she returns to the world 
of the living, finding that she has been in a coma and her brother is dead. In the 
aftermath of the tragedy, Holly continues to be haunted by what she has seen, and 
Sav, trying to be a supportive friend, misses the signs that Holly may be losing her 
grip on reality in her grief over losing her twin. Sav and Holly alternate narration, 
with Holly’s chapters also including graphic narrative. Both girls love comics, and 
the graphic novels they have read since childhood, especially Sav’s Indian ones, give 
November 2013 • 137
shape to Holly’s hopes and hallucinations, as does the boundary-crossing philosophy 
of freerunning. Phillips’ graphic insets express Holly’s anguish and her determina-
tion far more effectively than words could as she seeks to transform herself into a 
superhero and Sav into the goddess she was named for. The hybrid nature of the 
storytelling heightens the emotional impact of an already moving story that will 
appeal to indie kids as well as those who only freerun in their imaginations.  KC 
BeAn, JonAthAn Big Snow; written and illus. by Jonathan Bean. Farrar, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30696-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 4-8 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 135, for review.
BernArd, romily Find Me. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2013 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222903-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-222905-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
A new foster home and a new life haven’t changed Wicket all that much: she’s still 
engaging in criminal pastimes (using her computer to spy on people for money), 
and she’s still deeply suspicious of the cops. When a former friend, Tessa, commits 
suicide, her diary is mysteriously left for Wick with the tempting enticement “Find 
me.” She’s unable to resist the challenge and delves into Tessa’s diary, discovering to 
her horror that Tessa was being preyed upon by an unidentified older man—and 
that the predator’s next target is Wick’s little sister, Lily. This is a slick and fast-
paced genre thriller with both mystery and hard-boiled action, as well as a touch 
of romantic possibility with handsome Griff. While the plot leans heavily on the 
women-in-sexual-jeopardy theme, Wick, who broke loose from her criminal father’s 
hold to use her hacking skills for what she thinks of as good (women investigat-
ing suspicious partners and spouses), is an admirably tough-minded heroine. The 
who’s-watching-who enigma, complete with a collection of possible red herrings, 
adds some shivery creepiness, while the romance with Griff is pleasing and pleas-
ingly complicated. Reach for this when a patron needs a quick weekend crime and 
solution.  DS
Bernheimer, KAte The Girl Who Wouldn’t Brush Her Hair; illus. by Jake Park-
er. Schwartz & Wade, 2013 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-9687-5 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86878-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98787-8 $10.99  
Ad 6-8 yrs
Many an adult will recognize this little girl who loves her long, long hair but does 
not love to brush it. The girl’s tangled tresses eventually attract an amiable group 
of mice, which entertains their host at first—until they begin eating most of her 
food, refusing to let her take a bath despite her protestations, and keeping her up all 
night with their nocturnal antics. The final straw is when the girl’s teacher forbids 
her to bring her beloved doll to school anymore: “Each child may have only one 
friend for naptime, and it appears that by now you have one hundred mice in your 
hair.” Luckily, the mice understand, and the girl finally enjoys a long bath and a 
138 • The bulleTiN
good comb-through of her locks. The vocabulary and the tone of the narration are 
more suited to an adult audience, but the kid-friendly premise will maintain reader 
interest, and animal fans in particular may be entranced with the notion of having 
so many live-in furry friends. Parker’s illustrations, drawn in pencil and colored 
digitally, are smoothly stylized, and the little girl, with her increasingly towering 
heap of brunette hair, is a pleasant point of focus; the dreamy haze that uniformly 
overlays the scenes, however, is distracting. There are parents who will weep with 
joy at the prospect of a book that may encourage little Susie or Sam to finally brush 
that mane, while kids may enjoy the what-if speculation here.  JH
Beyer, rAmsey Little Fish: A Memoir from a Different Kind of Year; written and 
illus. by Ramsey Beyer. Zest, 2013 272p
ISBN 978-1-936976-18-8 $15.99  
R Gr. 9-12
Beyer was already a listmaker, zine creator, and blogger, but her experiences in art 
school turned her into a graphic storyteller as well. Here she collects the actual bits 
and pieces that she created during her transition years—the last few months of high 
school in her small town of Paw Paw, Michigan through the end of her first year 
in art school in Baltimore, Maryland—augments them with her newfound comics 
skills, and assembles it all into a collage narrative that speaks to the emotional highs 
and lows of leaving everything that is safe and comfortable and launching into the 
unknown. While her experience is personal and particular, the events and feelings 
she chronicles are common enough to resonate strongly with a broad spectrum of 
readers. She describes her small-town life and reflects on both its glories and its 
limitations as she realizes how sheltered she has been and laments her lack of politi-
cal commitment. As she details the realities of a demanding college schedule, her 
feelings oscillate between loneliness and connection; she misses her home friends 
when she’s at school and her school friends when she’s at home. There is some 
repetition in her collected artifacts and reflections, but that very repetition will feel 
familiar to readers who are contemplating closing one chapter of their lives and 
wondering and worrying about what the next chapter holds. Beyer is therefore a 
comforting guide, whose first year of college is marked by sure and steady growth 
in self-awareness, the cultivation of new friendships, and the realization that bigger 
ponds just mean that little fish have more room to swim.  KC 
BlAcK, holly The Coldest Girl in Coldtown. Little, 2013 419p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-21310-3 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-21311-0 $9.99 
 R Gr. 9 up 
As a child, Tana watched her mother go Cold, i.e., turn into a bloodthirsty, flesh-
crazed monster and succumb to the infection that turned much of the world’s 
population into vampires. A teenager now, Tana wakes up after a drunken night 
to the massacre of her fellow partygoers by vampires; fleeing with her infected 
ex-boyfriend and another mysterious boy, Tana is bitten herself. Refusing to put 
her family through more grief, Tana decides to go to Coldtown—a glamorous, 
quarantined city where vampires and their prey mingle in a seductive dance that is 
televised live to the rest of the world. Black has already revamped fairies (Valiant, 
BCCB 10/05) and sorcerers (White Cat, BCCB 9/10) with her innovative style, 
and she attacks the vampire genre with the same creativity and morbidity that 
characterize her earlier series. Coldtown is a twisted place, with humans acting 
November 2013 • 139
with as much depravity and cruelty as the supposed monsters, while the vampires 
are of the Anne Rice variety, as elegantly dressed as they are vicious. Horrified but 
strangely attracted to their violence, Tana comes to realize that these monsters don’t 
seduce in spite of their cruelty but because of it; the humans that come to them 
willingly (and watch them on live streams) long for both the immortality they can 
offer and their ability to casually destroy. This is a solidly paced adventure stud-
ded with the occasional steamy encounter, so readers familiar with Black’s mix of 
emotional depth and outstanding world-building will not be disappointed.  KQG 
BlAcKwell, PAul Undercurrent. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2013 312p
ISBN 978-0-06-212350-3 $17.99  
R Gr. 8-12
When Callum Harris wakes up in the hospital after a near-fatal tumble over a 
waterfall, he soon realizes that everything in his life is off-kilter. His parents refuse 
to talk about why his brother hasn’t come to visit; school bullies, usually intent on 
tormenting him, are eagerly anticipating his return to football, a sport he does not 
play; his best friend tries to smother him with a pillow. The hottest girl in school is 
hitting on him, while the nerdy girl he loves claims not to know him at all. Worst of 
all, the town sheriff suspects him in the disappearance of another local teen, and a 
strange, shadowy figure is lurking nearby. At first Cal rationalizes that his memories 
were scrambled, but he soon begins to wonder if perhaps maybe this reality isn’t 
his own. Before he can process what this means or puzzle out how to return to his 
own reality, though, he is forced to confront another part of this alternate world: 
this reality’s Cal, a vicious sociopath, is still around, and he’s anxious to pin his 
crimes on the innocent Callum. Offering an inventive take on the evil twin conceit, 
this novel is a convincing thriller. Callum’s confusion is palpable, and while the 
truth behind the situation is easy for the reader to recognize, the narrative deftly 
explores how hard it would be to believe if it was happening to you. This doesn’t 
go for the emotional richness of Valentine’s Double (BCCB 3/12); instead, this is 
a pure concept thriller, and the riveting opening and intense final scene will keep 
genre fans satisfied and breathless.  AM
BlAir, JAmie Leap of Faith. Simon, 2013 234p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4713-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4715-8 $9.99  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Faith is disgusted by her drug-dependent mother’s agreement to carry a child to 
term for a pair of her junkie acquaintances. Determined that this baby won’t fall 
into the family’s cycle of poverty and neglect, Faith stockpiles baby supplies and, 
as soon as the baby is born, swipes Mom’s money and car and makes a run for 
Florida with newborn Addy carefully strapped into a rear-facing car seat. The care 
and feeding of an infant is especially hard for a seventeen-year-old with limited 
funds, no childcare experience, and the likelihood that the police are hot on her 
trail. YA literature has been known, however, to shower improbable blessings on 
its heroines, and Faith ends up renting a tidy little room in the cozy home of a 
gorgeous, sensitive, caring young man with mad hot baby-soothing skills, an ex-
tended family that adores little ones, connections to a restaurant business in need 
of an evening waitress/cook, and, eventually, great sex that repressed Faith never 
expected to enjoy. While the books many clichés make Faith’s own assessment—“I 
think I’m falling for a guy who’s in love with my kidnapped baby. My life is a bad 
140 • The bulleTiN
prime-time drama”—more than accurate, plenty of readers will nonetheless enjoy 
this misbegotten escapade for the fanciful romance/caper that it is. Even after the 
police threaten to close in, and Faith ditches her dream man to face the music, a 
happy ending is still in sight. Who can resist a plot like that?  EB
Britt, FAnny Jane, the Fox & Me; tr. from French by Christelle Morelli and Susan 
Ouriou; illus. by Isabelle Arsenault. Groundwood, 2013 101p
ISBN 978-1-55498-360-5 $19.95 
 R* Gr. 5-8
Combining picture-book size and style with graphic-novel narrative sensibility, 
this elegant Canadian import chronicles the experiences of Hélène, a sensitive 
junior-high outcast shunned and bullied by girls who were once her friends. She 
takes refuge in her reading of Jane Eyre, hoping that she, like Jane, can emerge out 
of difficult circumstances into a slender, wise woman whom people admire. For 
now, though, the mean girls tease her for being fat, a judgment that is belied by 
both the illustrations as well as by her doctor in the end, but one that she takes 
to heart as she looks in the mirror and tries on bathing suits for the class camping 
trip. The camping trip lives up to all of her fears at first, as she bunks with the 
other social outcasts and gets tormented by the mean girls, but two nice things 
do happen: she has a transformative encounter with a fox, and a new girl named 
Géraldine rejects the mean girls and becomes her friend. Hélène’s emotional tangle 
is given poignant expression through Arsenault’s pitch-perfect mixed-media art; 
thin pencil-lined figures picked out against smudgy neutral grays and muted se-
pia tones highlight both the sharp-edged sources and limned echoes of Hélène’s 
everyday sadness, while the depictions of her imagined scenes from Jane Eyre are 
cleaner and more colorful, bringing in reds and greens, and even on occasion 
exploding into luminous watercolor landscapes. The contrast is striking and sets 
up the almost mystical tone of the encounter with the fox, who stands out in the 
red previously reserved for Hélène’s imaginary connection with Jane. The gradual 
emergence, accompanied by a progressively friendlier font style, into the full-color 
bloom of the final spread, assures readers that Hélène’s inner and outer worlds have 
been reconciled into a happier and more hopeful place. Hélène’s story is sweetly 
comforting and compelling on its own merits, and, as with Shaun Tan’s The Arrival 
(BCCB 1/08), the form in which it is presented also has value for those interested 
in analyzing and understanding the full aesthetic potential of the graphic-novel 
format in storytelling.  KC 
Brown, BArBArA Hanukkah in Alaska; illus. by Stacey Schuett. Holt, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9748-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 5-8 yrs
Winter in Alaska is a different experience, marked by limited daylight and fear-
lessly marauding moose, who enjoy the convenience of human-plowed streets and 
driveways. Even the promise of Hanukkah isn’t enough to cheer up the narrator, 
a young girl who’s worried that the moose hanging around her family’s backyard 
will wreck her beloved blue swing. She still manages to thrill to a splendid display 
of the aurora borealis (“Our very own Hanukkah Festival of Lights”), though, 
and the holiday celebrations give her an excellent idea for a moose-diverting treat: 
latkes. The text (adapted from a previously published short story) is an inviting 
November 2013 • 141
combination of matter-of-factness and vivid local detail (“When my friends and I 
are playing outside and a moose comes along, we have to hug a tree. A moose can’t 
step on you or knock you over if you’re hugging a tree”) that makes it sound like a 
real-life incident, and the gentle intermixing of holiday and unusual setting avoids 
didactic overfocusing on either. Schuett’s softly rounded and rosy-faced figures are 
particularly suited to the story, and the acrylic and gouache illustrations give the 
snow-mounded scenery a cozy domesticity with occasional comic touches (the 
scene of a pack of kids calmly and obediently clutching trees as the moose inspects 
them is quite adorable). For residents in the lower 48, this will be an enchanting 
new take on winter and winter holidays, a sound addition to a Hanukkah-themed 
storytime, and an invitation to discuss local wildlife encounters. An author’s note 
briefly describes the aurora borealis and the holiday of Hanukkah.  DS
BryAn, Ashley, ad. Can’t Scare Me; ad. and illus. by Ashley Bryan. Atheneum, 
2013 33p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7657-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7658-5 $12.99 
 R 5-9 yrs
An exuberant young boy (“only half past seven”) with a flute in tow and no fear 
in sight heads out into the fields with his grandmother. In spite of her warnings, 
the boy runs off to pick mangoes, and on his way home, he bumps first into a 
two-headed giant. Though he manages to soothe the giant with a “Too-de-loo-de-
loo-de-loot!,” he soon finds himself in over his head when the giant’s three-headed 
big brother’s flattery and his own bravado land him in a sack, ready to be cooked 
for dinner. The boy’s musical talent, though, charms the giant’s cook, Janey, a ma-
genta gal in a multicolored dress and yellow sunhat, and he’s able to sneak off back 
home. Bryan adapts this Antillean trickster tale with strong cadence and boisterous 
nonsense words (“He bumped into someone. Bong! Brugada-brugada-bop!/ It was 
a great big giant with two heads on top”) that make it a delight to share aloud, and 
the use of refrains, such as the boy’s claims that “Grandma’s stories can’t scare me,” 
helps make the length manageable and possibly encourages audience participation. 
Bryan’s celebrated tempera and watercolor illustrations are here thickly textured 
and rich with bold primary colors that contribute to the stained glass feeling in this 
mythical world. Panel pictures are framed by fabulously patterned borders, enhanc-
ing the storybook atmosphere. This would make a great Caribbean addition to a 
collection of world folktales, and it might be fun to use as a folkloric component 
for a monster-themed storytime. The copyright page includes a source note.  TA
Bunting, eve Big Bear’s Big Boat; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. Houghton, 
2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-618-58537-3 $12.99  
R 4-6 yrs
After growing into Big Bear and giving away his beloved little boat in Little Bear’s 
Little Boat, Big Bear decides its time to build himself a new boat to accommodate 
his new size. He’s content with the results of his labors until his friends start mak-
ing suggestions to add a mast, a top deck, and a cabin. After trying out all these 
ideas, he is dissatisfied with the cobbled-together boat he creates and realizes that 
he needs to stay true to his original plan. His boat and his peace of mind restored, 
Big Bear takes his boat out to the lake, reveling in the solitude and the occasional 
friendly wave from Little Bear. The problem of caving to others’ suggestions will 
142 • The bulleTiN
be a familiar one to many children, and Big Bear’s response offers a considerate 
and useful model of assertiveness and individuality. The gentle, simply worded text 
and childlike bear will appeal to fans of Minarik’s Little Bear series, and the short 
sentences and uncomplicated vocabulary may put this within range of the easy-
reader crowd as well. Carpenter’s pen and ink and digital art have an appropriately 
casual, slightly rustic feel to them and the woodsy browns and greens and pale 
lake-blues are effectively highlighted by the brighter cerulean of Big Bear’s boat 
and by touches of red in Little Bear’s boat. Pair this with the previous book, or 
perhaps pull it out when things get heated in the block corner as a reminder that 
there are many ways to build.  JH
Burg, Ann e. Serafina’s Promise. Scholastic, 2013 300p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-53564-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-54994-3 $16.99  
R Gr. 5-9
This verse novel details the dreams and longings of eleven-year-old Serafina, a young 
girl living on the outskirts of Port-au-Prince, Haiti. Serafina’s mother recently gave 
birth to a baby, Pierre, who died days after his birth; this event brought Serafina 
into contact with Antoinette Solaine, a doctor who attended to Pierre in his early 
days and who inspired Serafina to dream of becoming a doctor. Her dreams are 
thwarted, however, by the endless chores and familial obligations that keep her 
tied to her mother and unable to attend school. The novel’s events are inextricably 
connected to natural occurrences; first, a flood sweeps through their village, destroy-
ing the family’s home, then the devastating earthquake of 2010 ravages Port-au-
Prince, splitting apart the family members who are spread out all over the city at 
the time it hits. Burg (author of All the Broken Pieces, BCCB 5/09) has composed 
a thoughtful and lyrical examination of one girl’s inner struggles, and Serafina’s 
narration effectively captures her earnest determination. The verse format is well 
suited to Serafina’s thought patterns, as she moves in and out of present narration, 
snippets of memory, and sensory descriptions; it also makes the novel very acces-
sible to younger readers who will easily follow the short lines. Despite the hardships 
encountered along the way, Serafina’s story has a happy ending, and readers will 
likely champion her sweet success. A guide to the Haitian Creole alphabet and a 
glossary are included.  HM 
cAmmuso, FrAnK The Misadventures of Salem Hyde: Spelling Trouble. Amulet/
Abrams, 2013 [96p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-0803-9 $14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4197-0804-6 $6.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
In the opening pages of this graphic-novel-styled easy reader, young witch Salem 
Hyde accidentally turns a crossing guard into a dinosaur, unleashing terror at her 
school and almost blowing her cover as a normal (albeit mischievous) girl. The 
incident spurs her grandmother to get Salem an animal companion to guide the 
young girl’s budding magical powers and keep her propensity for troublemaking in 
check. Percival J. Whamsford III, aka Whammy, shows up for the job, and while 
the smart-aleck cat isn’t the unicorn Salem requested, he still manages to save the 
day when Salem’s spellcasting yet again goes awry at her school’s annual spelling bee. 
Cammuso evokes both the sarcastic spunk and gentle warmth of Calvin and Hobbes 
November 2013 • 143
in this humorous tale of unlikely pals, and the simple black and white illustrations 
reaffirm the parallel with their wide-eyed, big-headed figures and frantic energy. A 
few of the jokes may fly over the heads of young readers (a play on Moby-Dick is 
more likely to get chuckles from adults than developing readers), but the sequential 
paneling and spare dialogue in word bubbles offer a solid framework for young 
readers just discovering the graphic format.  KQG 
cArlson, cAroline The Very Nearly Honorable League of Pirates: Magic Marks the 
Spot; illus. by Dave Phillips. Harper/HarperCollins, 2013 344p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219434-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-219433-6 $8.99  
Ad Gr. 5-7
Refused entrance to The Very Nearly Honorable League of Pirates, Hilary Westfield 
is instead shipped off by the Admiral and Mrs. Westfield to Miss Pimm’s Finishing 
School for Delicate Ladies. Hilary remains determined, however, and she eventually 
bolts from school to join Captain Jasper Fletcher on his pirate ship, the Pigeon. 
Determined not to let her young charge go amongst pirates alone, Hilary’s govern-
ess, Miss Greyson, also tags along, as does one of Hilary’s father’s naval charges, 
the sneering Oliver; Hilary is further aided by the company of her beloved talking 
stone gargoyle. The mission of the Pigeon is simple—find the local hidden stash of 
magical objects and redistribute them to the common folk. Soon Hilary and the 
crew learn that Admiral Westfield and Oliver are also searching for the treasure, 
with more nefarious plans in mind. Can Hilary and the crew find the treasure 
first, and will doing so destroy her relationship with her father? Characterization 
is generally slender, and the plotting rambles, slowing the pace down more than a 
madcap adventure can really support. The setting, though, in which piracy exists 
as a semi-legitimate enterprise and the pirates themselves are more colorful than 
cruel, is a whole lot of fun, as are the endearing gargoyle and the surprisingly re-
sourceful governess. Frequent missives to and from various characters and excerpts 
from the VNHLP’s guide to “Treasure Hunting for Beginners” provide additional 
clever humor. Fans of Tanith Lee’s Piratica (BCCB 11/04) and those who like 
tongue-in-cheek pirate yarns may want to sign on with Hilary and company.  JH
cArlton, KAt Two Lies and a Spy. Simon, 2013 245p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8172-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8174-9 $9.99  
Ad Gr. 8-10
Kari Andrews gets a text during art class, an innocuous sounding message from 
her parents that signals her to collect her young brother Charlie from school and 
rendezvous at an established meeting place. Her parents don’t show, but two goons 
from their espionage agency do, and they attempt to kidnap the siblings. Kari’s 
martial arts skill takes the thugs down, but the kids are now on the run, worried 
sick about what might have befallen their parents, and dependent on the assistance 
of several classmates from Kari’s tony D.C. prep school to crack the case. The 
cardboard ensemble cast comprises the predictable vamp, hacker, fighter, and pair 
of rival hunks, plus one truly adorable little savant brother who calms himself with 
online research when things get tense. And they do get tense, as the team is lured 
into a maximum-security detention facility, and the Andrews parents prove to be 
not what they seem. Double-entendre-laced flirtation, devoid of finesse, makes the 
teen relationships sound steamier than they actually are, but it does add a dash of 
144 • The bulleTiN
spice to the action fare. By tale’s end, the Andrews family is in shambles, Kari and 
Charlie are off to train with a youth division of Interpol, and Kari’s love life is up 
in the air—a sure recipe for a sequel.  EB
cAsellA, Jody Thin Space. Beyond Words/Simon Pulse, 2013 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58270-435-7 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-58270-392-3 $9.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-6814-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 7-12
Plagued by more than just survivor’s guilt in the aftermath of a car accident that 
killed his twin brother, sixteen-year-old Marshall Windsor is obsessed with setting 
things right. Ignoring his girlfriend, barely speaking to his parents, picking fights 
with former friends, Marsh focuses entirely on finding a thin space, a rare window 
into the world after death where he hopes to reconnect with his brother. Only 
someone barefoot can cross a thin space, though, so he shuffles around town without 
shoes, unconcerned about frostbite and strange looks from friends and neighbors. 
When new girl Maddie moves into the house where a thin space most likely ex-
ists, Marsh is suddenly forced to be social again, and he is surprised to find her 
willing to help in his search. Maddie has her own reasons for seeking a thin space, 
of course, and Marsh hasn’t told her everything about his motivations either, but 
when all their truths are finally revealed, the door to death eventually helps them 
reconnect with life. While a fast-paced read with an intriguing premise, this novel 
ultimately suffers because it sacrifices characterization for the sake of the final big 
reveal. Marshall emerges as little more than his guilt and desperation personified, 
and since the reasons for his actions are left hidden until the end, he remains largely 
out of reach and unsympathetic, so fans of supernaturally touched novels about 
twin bereavement may prefer Warman’s Beautiful Lies (BCCB 9/12). Still, hints at 
the underlying secret are there for readers paying close attention, providing appeal 
for those who like to know the answer before they are told. Meanwhile, descrip-
tions of the Celtic belief in thin spaces are interesting, making this novel a possible 
pleasure for readers interested in stories about communicating with the dead.  AM
clArK, Kristin elizABeth Freakboy. Farrar, 2013 [448p]
ISBN 978-0-374-32472-8 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
Brendan has no idea what to make of the way he feels within his body: he’s jeal-
ous of girls with their easy communication, smooth skin and pretty clothes, but 
he’s undeniably happy with the way his body responds during sex with Vanessa, 
whom he genuinely loves. He knows he’s not like the flamboyant trans kids at 
LGBTQ teen center; nor is he like the quieter and more settled Angel, who has 
always known that she was meant to be a girl despite her birth sex. Three perspec-
tives—Brendan’s, Angel’s, and Vanessa’s—braid the story of Brendan’s frustration 
into a moving portrayal of two very different ways gender dysphoria can manifest 
itself. While Brendan oscillates between depression, denial, secret exploration, 
and thoughts of suicide, Angel is a warrior, having already emerged from a history 
of rejection, abuse, and life on the streets before she was taken in by a supportive 
foster mother. She is now enjoying life in a warm, loving community, studying to 
November 2013 • 145
be a social worker, and eager to help kids like Brendan, even if it means breaking a 
few rules to do so. Vanessa provides the voice of a heteronormative outsider in this 
drama, worrying about her depressed boyfriend, enjoying their newfound sexual 
relationship, sure that he loves her, but feeling helpless and rejected when he won’t 
talk to her. Each voice finds a distinct register in the well-made poetry of this verse 
novel that plays with font and shape on the page as lithely and effectively as it 
does with the language itself; the result is an effective visual and verbal echo of the 
poignant emotions that play out as Vanessa and Brendan, with Angel’s help, square 
their shoulders to face their new reality. Online support resources and suggestions 
for further nonfiction reading are included.  KC 
cody, mAtthew Will in Scarlet. Knopf, 2013 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86895-5 $16.99
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96895-2 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89980-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 5-7
With his father off crusading for King Richard, thirteen-year-old Will Shackley must 
leave childhood mischief behind him as he takes on the responsibility of governing 
the Shackley estate. He makes a fine start, slaughtering two wolves during a hunt 
with his father’s men, but when Prince John’s thugs later attack Will’s home in an 
attempt to force fealty, the boy flees the battle to survive. Finding refuge among 
a merry band of thieves (including a drunken archer named Rob) in Sherwood 
Forest, Will sets out to plan his revenge but is soon confronted with the possibility 
that injustice is not simply the fault of one bad man. The punches packed in this 
historical action tale are both physical and emotional, as Will discovers that the 
sheltered world he grew up in is a privilege for very few and a distant dream for 
most. Cody’s pacing is a clever construction of frenzied but focused fight sequences 
balanced with quiet, subtle moments of self-reflection on Will’s part. Rich charac-
terization does justice to each of the main players here, especially the villains: their 
motivations are made clear and understandable so that readers, like Will, come to 
realize the world is a complicated place with room for good and evil and much in 
between. Early scenes of wolf hunting and thrilling ambushes will likely draw even 
the most reluctant reader in, while the careful prose and likable hero will see them 
through to the satisfying conclusion.  KQG 
cooPer, susAn Ghost Hawk. McElderry, 2013 325p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8141-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8143-5 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 5-8
After surviving three solitary months in a harsh Northeast winter to prove himself 
a man, Little Hawk, an eleven-year-old Wampanoag boy of the late seventeenth 
century, returns home to find his tribe decimated by plague. Little Hawk rebuilds a 
life along with several survivors from surrounding tribes, but the tensions between 
white settlers and Native Americans reach a fever pitch, and he is shot dead while 
trying to rescue an injured white man and his son. Up until this point, Little Hawk 
has narrated his own life, but now as a spirit, he tells the story of John Wakely, the 
white boy he helped and with whom Little Hawk’s ghost can now occasionally speak. 
John grows up to follow the tolerant preachings of Roger Williams, and eventually 
he also loses his life attempting to broker peace between the native tribes and the 
146 • The bulleTiN
English settlers. The shift in focus after Little Hawk’s death is frustrating, as the 
character goes from a solid, developing protagonist to merely a placid observer, a 
mostly impotent engine by which John’s story is then told. The ghostly connection 
between the two, however, provides an opportunity for a cultural exchange that 
would likely not have otherwise happened, and Cooper explores the similarities 
and differences between the two communities while examining the dangerous 
concoction of greed, fear, and ignorance that drove the two factions to violence. 
Rich period detail makes for an immersive experience, but a more specific list 
of sources, particularly in regards to Little Hawk’s traditions, would have been 
appreciated. A closing timeline traces the multiple atrocities committed against 
Native Americans in the name of U.S. expansion, leaving readers with no easy 
answers, only a long, violent history, likely much different from the story told in 
their history textbooks.  KQG
cunnAne, Kelly Deep in the Sahara; illus. by Hoda Hadadi. Schwartz & Wade, 
2013 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97034-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-87034-7 $17.99 
 R 5-8 yrs
Young Lalla longs to wear a malafa, the headcovering and drape worn by Muslim 
women in Mauritania. The closely patterned narrative, hovering between poetry 
and lyrical prose, showcases the reasons for Lalla’s desire: she wishes to be beautiful 
like her mother, mysterious like her older sister, and to be grownup like her cousin, 
who “saunters away with the women through the dust.” She finally comes to realize, 
though, that a malafa is most of all a symbol of faith, telling her mother, “I want 
a malafa so I can pray like you do,” and earning the reward of her own malafa and 
prayer alongside her mother. The second-person narration (“You want a malafa so 
you can be a lady too”) perfectly matches the earnestness of Lalla’s desire, and the 
device effectively serves to make the listeners feel as if Lalla’s longing is their own. 
The text is economical yet evocative, partnering effectively with the art to convey 
the details of Lalla’s daily life. Full-bleed double-page spreads depict warm village 
scenes, with horizon lines adding a gentle geometry that contrasts with the lively 
groups of figures in the foreground; the women in colorful and often patterned 
malafas (vivid cut-paper collage with patterning and folds drawn on) take center 
stage, their large brown eyes and smiling faces framed by rather than hidden by 
the fabric. An author’s note describes how Cunnane, who herself spent two years 
in Mauritania, once perceived the veil as repressive to women but came to under-
stand it as a “colorful expression of their faith and culture.” In addition to being 
a beautifully written and relatable story of a young girl’s yearning, this could ef-
fectively introduce the tradition of religious cover to children new to it. A glossary 
of Hassaniyan words is included.  HM 
dAvey, owen Laika: Astronaut Dog; written and illus. by Owen Davey. Candle-
wick, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6822-8 $15.99  
M 4-7 yrs
In 1957 Russian scientists launched Sputnik 2 into Earth’s orbit, and perhaps the 
best-known legacy of that particular mission is the story of its doomed passenger 
Laika, the stray terrier whose vital signs were monitored to shed light on the reac-
tion of life forms to space travel. Here Davey pares down and anthropomorphizes 
November 2013 • 147
the tale for a young audience, outlining Laika’s experience from a little orphan 
longing for a family, to proud astronaut in training, to a space traveler who found 
her life in her capsule as lonely as life back on Earth, to the inevitable end: “Back at 
mission control, the screens went blank. Laika’s rocket no longer showed any signs 
of life.” Yes, the dog died. For those who find the sad truth just too hard to take, 
though, Davey weirdly rewrites a happier ending: “She had been rescued from the 
broken spaceship and taken far away from the lonely life she had known . . . by a 
loving family that she had always dreamed of finding.” And if you still have doubts, 
just trace the diagram that shows a UFO rendezvousing with Laika’s rocket ship 
and swooping out of the solar system to a land where a conspicuously blue-tinged 
happy family of aliens cuddles their new pet. This bizarre mash-up of history and 
fantasy comes attractively tricked out in a deftly composed homage to Soviet visual 
art design, and it could, in the hands of a creative teacher and a mature classroom 
of students, be repurposed as an object lesson on how and why researchers verify 
suspect information. This is, however, emphatically not the story of Laika.  EB
deuKer, cArl Swagger. Houghton, 2013 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-547-97459-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Point guard Jonas Dolan has thrived under good coaching and sound personal 
advice from his high school coach, but now his father’s relocation and a new school 
have him scrambling to keep his prospects bright for a Division A college. He 
makes friends with Levi, a preacher’s kid who struggles in school and avoids much 
social life, but whose skills on the court earn him enough respect to bring Josh into 
pick-up games at the local rec center and get his name out there. The games are 
being followed by Mr. Hartwell, a man who seems to know a thing or two about 
basketball and begins to informally coach the kids. Come fall, Hartwell turns up 
as assistant coach, challenging the sickly, aging head coach whose conservative 
playbook looks like a relic of bygone days. Hartwell’s popular with the guys, and 
when the coach suffers an accident on the court, Hartwell takes over and the team 
takes off. Hartwell’s definitely not on the up and up, though, and he proceeds to 
box Jonas into an ethical corner by helping him cheat in a science class, all the 
while making secret sexual advances on vulnerable Levi. Readers will easily catch 
the stench from Hartwell early on, and the pedophilia theme is clear well before 
the big reveal. Ever in the balance, though, is what will happen to Levi and whether 
Jonas will jeopardize his own basketball prospects by blowing the whistle on the 
man whose coaching ability has undeniably led the team to success. This is solid 
Deuker turf, populated by good kids trapped between conscience and goals. Expect 
fans to grab this title as soon as it hits the shelf.  EB
dicAmillo, KAte Flora & Ulysses: The Illuminated Adventures; illus. by K. G. 
Campbell. Candlewick, 2013 231p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6040-6 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 4-6
Ten-year-old Flora is a fan of comic-book superheroes, so it seems perfectly natural 
to her when a squirrel vacuumed up by the neighbor and revived by Flora develops 
intellectual and physical powers. Ulysses the squirrel can understand human speech, 
lift heavy objects, and fly, and Flora’s mother finds it all utterly unacceptable, plan-
ning to do away with the unnatural prodigy. Fortunately, with help from Flora’s 
148 • The bulleTiN
dad, a temporarily blind boy named William, and William’s aunt, Tootie (operator 
of the powerful vacuum), Flora manages to finally convince her mother of Ulysses’ 
worth and repair a bit of their own strained relationship. The premise of a squirrel 
with superhero powers is certainly an original and intriguing one. There is also 
palpable angst in Flora’s conflicts with her mother, genuine hope in her growing 
friendship with William, and a satisfying amount of humor sprinkled throughout. 
The twee voice and excessively quirky characters, however, frequently threaten 
to upend the story while Flora’s mother’s speedy transformation from attempted 
squirrel-murderer to apologetic and loving mother also strains credulity. Campbell’s 
attractive, soft-focus pencil illustrations, often appearing in comic-like panels, add 
individuality and depth to the characters and carry some of the narrative. Despite 
the book’s flaws, this may appeal to kids with a bent for graphic novels and com-
ics, or to those who wish they, too, could have a superhero squirrel for a BFF.  JH
diesen, deBorAh Picture Day Perfection; illus. by Dan Santat. Abrams, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0844-2 $16.95  
R 4-7 yrs
It’s class picture day, and it’s one of those days. First, bedhead, then a stained shirt, 
followed by a pancake syrup mishap. There’s trouble on the bus, uncontrolled glue 
in the art room, a gray background pre-order, and the stage is set for . . . disaster? 
No, for the narrator’s idea of a perfectly planned photograph. Unfortunately for 
him, a little glimmer of delight must have flitted across his mind just as the camera 
clicked: “Wasted! Useless! Ruined, in a moment of weakness, by an unexpected 
smile.” The result, of course, is a toothless, paint-smudged, wild-haired portrait that 
only a mother can and does love. Diesen spins out the nefarious plot in workman-
like fashion, but it’s Santat’s digital illustrations that carry the day. The narrator’s 
malleable features are in a perpetual state of contortion as he plans his photo disaster 
and reacts to the series of unfortunate events that conspire to bring him glory. 
Clever bits such as the scribbled emoticons on his September calendar page, and 
the sepia- and gray-toned faces that play in his imagination add to the fun. Kids 
who own a copy of the book can insert a personal 3 x 5 of their own lovely mugs 
in a slot provided on the inside back cover. It’s more likely, though, that primary- 
school teachers will make this a group read with the stern admonishment, “Don’t 
even think about it!”  EB
doller, trish Where the Stars Still Shine. Bloomsbury, 2013 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-144-1 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-145-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 9-12
One moment Callie and her mom are pulled over by the police for a burned-out 
taillight, and the next moment Mom is in handcuffs. It’s not really a surprise, since 
Mom absconded with her daughter over a decade ago when she feared her marital 
breakup would result in loss of custody. Within hours, Callie’s father takes her home 
to Tampa, where he lives with his second wife and two little sons, surrounded by 
his extensive Greek family. After years of life on the lam with her mercurial mother, 
Callie freezes under what feels like an assault of affection and material comforts, 
and her refusal to begin high school at seventeen, her tendency to wander at night, 
and her habit of casual hook-ups do nothing to contribute to stability. Fortunately, 
Dad is loving and persistent, second cousin Kat is patient enough to teach her the 
November 2013 • 149
ground rules of friendship, there’s a job opening in town she’d probably enjoy, and 
her latest sex partner, Alex, turns out to be a sensitive lover who helps calm her 
resurgent memories of sexual abuse by one of her mother’s past flings. Readers will 
be so involved in cheering Callie on toward the open arms of her recovered family 
that only after they’ve mopped away the final happy tears will they realize how 
carefully—dare we say manipulatively?—Doller has orchestrated the drama. While 
there are obvious connections to genre stalwarts like Cooney’s The Face on the Milk 
Carton (BCCB 2/90) and Pfeffer’s Twice Taken (BCCB 3/94), if you change out 
a few nineteenth-century elements for a twenty-first-century Borderline Personal-
ity Disordered mother, some steamy sex, and a cozily decorated Airstream trailer 
you can recognize the sturdy outline of an orphan story classic like Alcott’s Eight 
Cousins. Nonetheless, it’s an enduring theme for good reasons, and why shouldn’t 
YAs enjoy a mature riff on an old favorite?  EB
duFFy, chris, ed. Fairy Tale Comics; illus. by Bobby London, Emily Carroll, 
Gilbert Hernandez, et al. First Second/Roaring Brook, 2013 125p
ISBN 978-1-59643-823-1 $19.99 
 Ad Gr. 2-4
Seventeen folktales, mostly from the European tradition, are retold here by promi-
nent cartoonists such as Craig Thompson, Raina Telgemeier, and Charise Mericle 
Harper. The collection is heavily weighted toward the Grimms, but Br’er Rabbit 
and Baba Yaga make appearances, along with a Japanese tale, Perrault’s “Puss in 
Boots,” an Italian tale, some lesser known English stories, and one from the 1001 
Nights. Diversity is thus mostly left to artistic style, where it undeniably shines; the 
full-color comics demonstrate a wide variety of style in both figure and format, from 
the painterly richness of Brett Helquist’s rendition of Rumpelstiltskin to the retro 
Golden Book stylings of Gigi D. C.’s Little Red Riding Hood to Bobby London’s 
antic take on the magic porridge-pot story. “The Boy Who Drew Cats,” by Luke 
Pearson, is a brilliantly understated masterwork of the graphic-novel form, with a 
near perfect interplay of deadpan dialogue, suggestive illustration sequences, and 
just enough narration to help young readers distinguish inner dialogue and memory 
from present action. The sense of most of the other tales, however, suffers in these 
condensed retellings; many are missing important plot points that affect their 
coherence, leaving significant gaps not addressed in either picture or text. Readers 
will be familiar enough with most of the tales to fill in the gaps, but the renditions 
on their own are rather flat despite their energetic presentation. Nevertheless, 
emergent comics fans will enjoy seeing the familiar tales in a new format as well 
as relishing the introduction to so many of the artists and varieties of the graphic 
narrative form in one place.  KC 
eddlemAn, Peggy Sky Jumpers. Random House, 2013 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98128-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98127-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98129-5 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 4-7
The bombs of World War III spared pockets of citizens across the United States, 
and the community of White Rock, terraced in levels down the sides of a crater, 
has managed to thrive in a modest way. Most twenty-first-century technologies 
don’t work, thanks to distortion of metals and magnetism, but the inventiveness 
150 • The bulleTiN
of White Rock’s population compensates with ingenious labor-saving devices. 
Twelve-year-old Hope might be a washout as an inventor, but she has a valuable 
skill known only to her closest friends—she’s got the guts and the lung capacity to 
jump through bands of toxic air, known as Bomb’s Breath, that surround the town. 
When bandits hold the community hostage for its supply of antibiotics, Hope and 
her friends sneak out and make their way through a snow storm to bring in an 
armed militia from nearby Browning and save the day. The politics behind the war 
and the science behind the bombs and toxic air are given fairly short shrift, and the 
title is notably stronger on action scenes than character development. Although this 
is the first entry in a projected series, the bandit problem is so tidily wrapped up 
by the story’s end that, but for the escape of one villain, it seems complete in one 
volume. The lack of a cliffhanger, however, might make this all the more inviting 
for kids who want a quick, event-filled read in a cleverly crafted setting, without 
committing to a multi-title epic.  EB
edinger, monicA Africa Is My Home: A Child of the Amistad; illus. by Robert 
Byrd. Candlewick, 2013 [64p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5038-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
“It is hard to imagine, harder to remember,” says Magulu—also known as Margru 
and later as Sarah Kinson—of the time that her father was forced to pawn her to 
slave traders to continue to feed his family. Edinger fictionalizes this account of a 
girl who was aboard the Amistad, the ship that was the site of a slave rebellion in 
1839, and traces her life from Mendeland in West Africa, through her account of 
the revolt, to her life in America during and after the trial to decide whether the 
children aboard would remain free, and then to her return to Africa as a teacher. 
The prose is taut, and Magulu has a friendly voice, while Byrd’s sprightly, delicately 
lined ink and watercolor illustrations are filled with deep visual detail. A few archi-
val document reproductions are interspersed, captioned in Magulu’s voice, adding 
to the sense that readers are having a conversation with the past. Edinger glosses 
over the horrors of the Middle Passage, instead focusing on Magulu’s wonder at 
the unfamiliar things around her, but a general understanding of the slave trade is 
necessary to contextualize the voyage of the Amistad. This would therefore make 
a useful brief fictional complement to Myers’ Amistad: A Long Road to Freedom 
(BCCB 5/98) or an addition to an historical study of the history of slavery; it’s also 
a solid narrative choice to hand to a biography junkie. An author’s note explaining 
what’s fictional and what’s not, a bibliography for further reading, and source notes 
for photographs are included.  TA
elliott, lAurA mAlone Thanksgiving Day Thanks; illus. by Lynn Munsing-
er. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-06-000236-7 $17.99  
Ad 5-7 yrs
To celebrate Thanksgiving, Sam’s teacher asks her students to each write something 
they’re thankful for on a paper feather, and she also asks them to come up with a 
project of their own. Though initially stumped while his friends quickly make plans 
for their feathers and projects, Sam eventually comes up with an idea: a parade of 
animal-shaped helium balloons outside the classroom window. A windy day puts 
November 2013 • 151
a damper on Sam’s project, as three of his four balloons are lost, but Mary Ann, 
with her bow and suction-cup arrow, comes to the fourth balloon’s rescue, lead-
ing Sam to realize that he’s quite thankful for best friends. Although much of the 
book’s plot covers ground already well trodden by picture-book authors, Elliott’s 
focus on Sam’s love for the Thanksgiving parade’s balloons is a somewhat novel 
and entirely kid-friendly angle. The first Thanksgiving story is, as often is the 
case, oversimplified, and Mary Ann’s project of dressing up like Squanto remains 
problematic despite her relating of various Wampanoag facts. Still, this is an age-
appropriate and pleasant look at the holiday and Munsinger’s creates a cozy world 
of cute, clothed critters in her delicately lined, warm-hued illustrations (rendered 
in watercolor, pen and ink, and pencil). Chubby black bear Sam, with his furry 
tummy occasionally peeking out between his shirt hem and waistband, is a sweet 
little guy, and busy, clever Mary Ann is appropriately depicted as a lively little squir-
rel. A brief summary of the original Thanksgiving story and a list of “fun facts” 
about the holiday are included.  JH
ellis, deBorAh Looks Like Daylight: Voices of Indigenous Kids. Groundwood, 
2013 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-120-5 $15.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-55498-413-8 $14.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-10
Canadian author Ellis has collected brief interviews with forty-five young Indigenous 
people, ages nine to eighteen, from across North America in this accessible but wide-
ranging volume, foregrounding their voices in an overview of contemporary Native 
and First Nations lives and issues. Many of the interviewees have interfaced with 
foster-care systems and have lost family in one way or another to drugs or alcohol; 
many have also found ways in which their people’s traditions and cultures bring 
them life. They are skateboarders, environmental activists, totem carvers, detainees 
in juvenile justice facilities, horse trainers, budding scientists, artists, and lacrosse 
players; their lives have been altered by disability, sexual assault, gangs, powwows, 
Indigenous language classes, homophobia, pollution, pan-Indian activism, and 
racial epithets. Following an author’s note and historical introduction that focuses 
on residential schools, the interviews—often simultaneously heartbreaking and 
hopeful in the span of just a few pages—are each introduced with a brief note 
by Ellis that often offers historical facts, additional context, and tribal specificity 
for the chapter, in addition to information about the kid who’s talking. Although 
the interview responses leave traces of the questions that Ellis clearly asked, her 
voice does not distract from the subject’s, and both Ellis’ setup and the children’s 
knowledge make connections between current injustices and the violent legacies of 
colonialism and racism that prevent this from falling into the trap of sensationalism. 
Unflinching and informative, this volume will appeal to a broad range of readers, 
and it offers plenty of opportunities for incorporation of diverse viewpoints into 
curricula in social studies, writing, and even environmental science. A foreword by 
former ALA president Loriene Roy introduces the book; a list of resources includes 
information about organizations working on many of the issues raised in the book 
is included.  TA
152 • The bulleTiN
Feinstein, John Foul Trouble. Knopf, 2013 [272p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98246-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86964-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98454-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Feinstein puts his Sports Beat series on hold to offer a slightly older audience a 
page-turner on the underbelly of college basketball recruitment. Terrell Jamerson, 
a rising senior, is in the national spotlight, with scouting reports hyping, “There’s 
not a high school gym in America that can hold him.” Coach Wilcox, whose son 
Danny is a more modestly talented player and Terrell’s best friend, puts together 
a summer team to compete at a high-profile camp and promote his star player. 
Wilcox is far from naïve, but even he isn’t prepared for the onslaught of promoters, 
boosters, and hangers-on, many of whom could effectively derail Terrell’s career by 
showering him with illegal offers of pro riches in his future. By the time the real 
season is well underway, Danny is enjoying a few nibbles from college scouts and 
Terrell is under impossible pressure, complicated by some serious second thoughts 
after watching another star player become paralyzed after some showboating. 
There’s really nothing here that thoughtful readers of sports scandals haven’t heard 
before, but laying it all out in a work of fiction offers a visceral evocation of just 
how difficult it is for a highly recruited player to keep his grades up, his ego in 
check, and his moral compass steady. As always, Feinstein does a lot of real world 
name-dropping, but he assigns the most dastardly ploys to a fictitious basketball 
program. Readers, of course, can speculate on which college he really has in mind, 
while fans of Volponi’s The Final Four (BCCB 3/12) will find this to be a winner 
of a read-alike.  EB
FreedmAn, PAulA J. My Basmati Bat Mitzvah. Amulet/Abrams, 2013 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-4197-0806-0 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Tara Feinstein certainly isn’t the only ethnic minority at her New York City middle 
school, nor is she the only student at her Hebrew school with a racially diverse 
background—one of her pals is a Korean adoptee who’s currently prepping for his 
bar mitzvah. Nonetheless, Tara occasionally finds it difficult to mesh the Indian 
culture of her beloved grandfather with the traditions of Judaism, and her struggles 
to reconcile the two parts of her heritage (is her statue of Ganesha an idol? If her 
mother isn’t Jewish, can Tara really be Jewish?) become increasingly difficult as her 
own bat mitzvah approaches. On top of her crisis of faith, Tara is also having a 
serious crisis of adolescence, dealing with the sudden interest of not one, but two 
boys, navigating her relationship with her overbearing mother, and trying to con-
trol her own fiery temper. With a conversational and authentic tween voice, Tara 
invites readers into her world as she explores the larger issues of faith, compassion, 
and tradition while confronting the awkwardness that is puberty—her questions 
regarding God are poignant and relatable while her opinions on training bras are 
simply spot-on (“It fit like an infant bikini top—completely pointless”). The ethni-
cally diverse supporting cast is also deftly handled, affording each character a bit 
of depth without making them either a stereotype or a token. Warmth and humor 
pervade the story, but Freedman wisely refrains from making her happy ending 
November 2013 • 153
too happy, leaving Tara’s issues with her mother largely unsolved and her romance 
with her best guy friend more a possibility than a sure thing. A snapshot of mod-
ern adolescence, this deserves a spot next to Are You There God? It’s Me, Margaret 
(BCCB 2/71) and Naylor’s Alice series in the coming-of-age canon for girls.  KQG 
gerstein, mordicAi The First Drawing; written and illus. by Mordicai Ger-
stein. Little, 2013 40p
ISBN 978-0-316-20478-1 $17.00  
R 6-9 yrs
Gerstein’s second-person narration follows an imaginative stone-age child, who 
keeps seeing images of the local animals in firelight flickers on cave walls (“They 
call you ‘Child Who Sees What Isn’t There’”). The young artist keeps trying to 
share this artistic vision, but even the truthful account of a real mastodon viewing 
is dismissed as fantasy. In a triumphant burst of inspiration, the creative kid starts 
drawing the envisioned animals on the walls with a burnt stick, leading to initial 
consternation (“This is . . . MAGIC!”) and eventual celebration of the new art 
form. Though this is, according to a note, inspired by the Paleolithic era art in the 
Chauvet-Pont d’Arc cave in Southern France, it’s less about the stone age than it is 
about art, and the story offers a creative approach to get kids thinking about that 
paradigm shift into artistic representation. The illustrations enhance the connec-
tion between the young Paleolithic artist and young current artists by framing the 
stone-age visuals with a contemporary echo, a kid in modern blue jeans drawing 
away and producing a picture of the contemporary equivalents of the mastodons 
and wolves. Gerstein’s familiar blues are often steelier than usual, counterpointed 
with earthen taupes and ochres that emphasize the rocky scarcity of this imagined 
clan’s existence. Use this in an art class to spark consideration of the time before 
fingerpaints, refrigerator art, and even sidewalk chalk.  DS
goodmAn, cArol Blythewood. Viking, 2013 [496p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78476-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 Ad Gr. 7-10
An encounter with a sinister man in a cape on her sixteenth birthday brings mis-
fortune to Avaline Hall’s life: her mother falls into a deep depression and eventually 
commits suicide, Ava is then forced to find work at the Triangle Waist factory, where 
she loses her only friend to the massive fire, and her ravings about being saved from 
the fire by a handsome, winged boy land her in the insane asylum. Ava’s estranged 
grandmother eventually springs her from the asylum and then promptly sends Ava 
off to Blythewood, an elite and secretive boarding school for girls and her mother’s 
alma mater. There Ava learns that she is part of a long tradition of women who 
fight to keep evil—faeries, Darklings, winged boys—out of the mortal realm. All is 
going swimmingly for Ava until she spots the man in the cape again and begins to 
question—much like her mother did before her—the ideas that hold Blythewood 
together. An author of adult literary thrillers, Goodman is known for her elegant 
prose, but unfortunately here much of that style is stripped away, leaving only an 
unfocused plot and an overabundance of characters. Indeed, most of the girls Ava 
meets, be it at the factory or the school, act merely as transmitters of important 
information rather than full characters. More effective is the mystery behind Ava’s 
mother’s death and the involvement of the man in the cape, who casts a chilling 
shadow whenever he appears and reignites reader interest. This may therefore still 
154 • The bulleTiN
find an audience among fans of the historical fantasies of Libba Bray and Saundra 
Mitchell, but be sure to also point older readers looking for a spooky boarding- 
school story towards Goodman’s section in the adult collection.  KQG 
grAhAm, BoB The Silver Button; written and illus. by Bob Graham. Candle-
wick, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6437-4 $16.99  
R 4-6 yrs
In the span of a minute, as Jodie’s silver pen hangs in the air ready to put the last 
button on the boot worn by the duck she’s drawing, her baby brother tentatively 
pushes to his feet and takes his first wobbly step. Meanwhile, kids play on the side-
walk outside, and in the city a baby is born, a soldier says goodbye to his mother, 
a mother ties her son’s shoelaces for the second time that morning—and sunlight 
glows across the city and down on that remarkable family moment. Graham, always 
a gentle observer of the quotidian, regales audiences with a steadily zooming-out 
cross-section of city life to illustrate the millions of events packed into a minute. Gra-
ham’s prose is both simple and quietly lyrical (“Jodie and Jonathan’s mom began to 
play ‘Merrily Kiss the Quaker’s Wife’ on her pennywhistle”), with a focused present 
tense that enhances the book’s encapsulation of a moment, while his signature line 
and watercolor illustrations with their gentle hues and rounded features enhance the 
tenderness of this tale. The richly packed cityscapes and scenes of Jodie’s apartment 
from interesting (often birds’-eye) perspectives often hide clues to episodes that 
come before or after in the telescoping view, and these full spreads alternate with 
panels that focus on the connections that are continually occurring between people 
at any given time. The large trim size and appeal to community could make this a 
delicate addition to a storytime about cities, perhaps in partnership with Jenkins’ 
Water in the Park (BCCB 7/13), but it might find also find use in intimate sharing 
and contemplation of all the things happening in a single moment.  TA
grAy, Keith, ed. Losing It. Carolrhoda Lab, 2013 194p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2041-0 $17.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-2049-6 $12.95  
R Gr. 9-12
In this British import, ten stories of the anticipation, anxiety, and confusion over 
losing one’s virginity cover a surprisingly broad spectrum of possibilities, with the 
notable exception of “losing it” within the context of a long-term, committed, 
loving relationship. Two of the stories, Anne Fine’s and Jenny Valentine’s, feature 
an retrospective view, as older women, one a teacher and one on the edges of senile 
dementia, offer reflections on their own experiences that mingle humor, initial 
disappointment, eventual success, and hard-won wisdom. Patrick Ness serves up 
metafictional fun with his redacted version of sexual activity between boys who 
may, or may not, equate those acts with their gender identity, muddying the idea 
of what counts as a first time. Sophie McKenzie examines the stereotyped discon-
nect between male and female motives for sex, and when it’s okay to back out of an 
implied contract. A. S. King and Mary Hooper present sad tales, one contemporary 
and one historical, of sex as a commodity that young women have to exchange in 
order to get what they want and need, while Melvin Burgess and Andrew Smith 
explore the standard male fantasy of the nerdy fifteen-year-old boy who somehow, 
inexplicably, winds up in the capable hands of a beautiful, experienced older woman. 
Bali Rai relates the high stakes of perceived sexual purity for Punjabi girls, even 
November 2013 • 155
when they live abroad, while Keith Gray nods in the complete opposite direction 
by showing how utterly low the stakes are for contemporary teens. Most of the 
stories are thick with British slang and cultural references that a quick internet 
check will illuminate for the curious, and the more light-hearted entries are rife 
with laugh-out-loud moments. Despite their subject matter, only one or two of the 
stories drift into any level of erotic detail, being more concerned with exploring the 
social context of sex rather than describing its actual consummation; given that, 
it’s a fairly low-key collection about a fraught subject.  KC
guiBerson, BrendA z. The Greatest Dinosaur Ever; illus. by Gennady Spi-
rin. Holt, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9625-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
A dozen dino contenders vie for the honor of “the greatest dinosaur that ever 
lived,” and each is allowed only a few lines in which to make his or her case. You 
can predict that much of the boasting will come from the usual suspects—Tyran-
nosaurus rex, with its long teeth and ability to crush through massive amounts of 
meat; Stegosaurus, with its lethally spiked tail; Ankylosaurus, with its body armor 
and club tail. Others make a convincing case—Troodon’s eyesight and intelligence, 
Leaellynasaura’s super night vision, and Oviraptor’s parenting skills might, in the 
long run, argue for greater acclaim than the brute force of their rivals. While sta-
tus wrangling is the ostensible focus here, the real pleasure is in perusing Spirin’s 
full-bleed full-spread oil paintings, which bring an unusual beauty to a genre more 
notable for gory scenes of predation. Spirin’s pictures are intricately detailed, subtle 
in hue, and textured to resemble the finely crackled varnish of the Old Masters. A 
closing spread offers thumbnail portraits of the featured dinosaurs along with fast 
facts of name meaning, size, period, and location not explicitly covered in the main 
text. Pronunciations are also included, which will be mighty handy when arguing 
the relative merits of Therizinosaurus and Leaellynasaura. Whew.  EB
hArris, roBie h. What’s In There?: All About Before You Were Born; illus. by 
Nadine Bernard Westcott. Candlewick, 2013 40p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3630-2 $15.99  
Ad 3-6 yrs
Preschoolers familiar with Harris’s Let’s Talk about You and Me, and Who Has 
What? series will recognize the biracial siblings who observed and discussed family 
and gender differences in previous titles. Now Mom is having another baby, and 
the children are excited and fascinated by its prenatal development. Again, the 
children chat about the forthcoming event in speech bubbles, while a child-friendly 
narration rolls across each spread with the salient details. Stages of development are 
not coordinated with weeks or months, making it difficult for real life siblings-in-
waiting to compare the progress of their own newcomer; the pictorial turn of seasons 
from spring into late fall offer some sense of time passage, however, and cutaway 
views of what’s going on inside Mom provide a general, albeit sketchy, picture of 
growth. The description of birth is also oversimplified, but the short, comforting 
remarks that “soon the baby comes out” and “the cutting and sewing [c-section] 
does not hurt the mommy or the baby” are appropriate for most young listeners. 
A couple of details, like the definition of a cell, go unexplained, and the issue of 
adoption is brought up but glossed over. However, Westcott’s chummy, affection-
156 • The bulleTiN
ate multicultural cast will once again successfully open parent/child discussion on 
building a family—whatever the family.  EB
heldring, thAtcher The League. Delacorte, 2013 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99025-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74181-1 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98713-7 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Wyatt Parker’s having a difficult time standing up for himself. Dad is pressuring 
him to take golfing more seriously, when Wyatt would rather play football. The 
class thug, Spencer, is bullying him. He can’t quite make his true feelings known to 
his close female friend, Evan, who’s gone all moon-eyed over a high school football 
god, for whom she’s not even a blip on the radar. All this changes when Wyatt’s older 
brother Aaron, who’s concerned about losing face when his dorky-ish younger sib 
shows up at high school in fall, challenges Wyatt to skip out on pre-arranged golf 
camp sessions and join the older guys in a clandestine football series, the League of 
Pain—few rules, no protective gear. Spencer shows up at the games, too, as well as 
some other kids from Wyatt’s eighth grade class, and it’s throw down or get eaten 
alive by the bruisers on the Morons and the Idiots teams. Wyatt takes his lumps, 
and by the time he has to confront his parents about disobeying their strict orders 
against football, he’s developed the nerve to stand his ground. This is pretty standard 
middle-grade aspirational fare, but Heldring doesn’t take the obvious path of injury 
teaching Wyatt a valuable lesson to mind his parents. In fact, Wyatt comes through 
the League of Pain all the sturdier for a little scuffing up, and it’s his determined 
disobedience that actually allows him to grow. While this isn’t quite as deftly crafted 
as most Mike Lupica offerings, middle-grade kids who require a ball prominently 
featured in their cover art will pick this up and run with it.  EB
hemPhill, stePhAnie Hideous Love: The Story of the Girl Who Wrote Franken-
stein. Balzer + Bray, 2013 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-185331-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-220923-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
M Gr. 7-10
Mary Shelley’s well-documented life was marked by passion, scandal, travel, and 
loss. Her devotion to the married Percy Bysshe Shelley is legendary; when she 
ran away with him, she endured estrangement from her beloved father as well as 
repeated dalliances on her lover’s part while her own heart remained faithful. In 
this poetic biography, Hemphill adheres faithfully to the events of the lives of the 
famous pair, relating their travels, Mary’s suspicions of Percy’s unfaithfulness and 
her jealousy toward her half-sister, who traveled with them, the births of their four 
children and deaths of three, the writing and revisions of Frankenstein and Mary’s 
other novels, the couple’s attempts to forge intellectual community and outrun 
scandal, the exploits of Byron, and finally, the death and funeral of Mary’s beloved 
Shelley—all in under a decade. Unfortunately, only a few of the individual poems 
in this verse novel, written in a first-person impression of Mary’s voice, come close 
to conveying any sort of emotion; instead, Mary relates her feelings in affectless, 
workmanlike sentences with no discernible reason for the line breaks. For the most 
part, the language is stiff and halting, with intrusive and ill-fitting similes and dic-
November 2013 • 157
tion that is difficult to resolve even into readable prose, let alone evocative strains 
of poetry. The wooden, prosaic tone of the poetry is particularly disappointing in 
contrast with Mary Shelley’s vivid and emotional writing. Hemphill’s faithfulness 
to Shelley’s life is the work’s saving grace, as it provides readers a focused way to 
imagine how difficult living under the principles of free love was for Mary, as well 
as the compromises culture required of a woman of genius during the time period. 
End matter includes an author’s note, a character list, a bibliography of Mary Shel-
ley’s writing, and suggestions for further reading.  KC 
henKes, Kevin The Year of Billy Miller; written and illus. by Kevin Henk-
es. Greenwillow, 2013 [240p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-226813-6 $17.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-226812-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-226815-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
A school year in the life of second-grader Billy Miller is presented here in four 
complete episodes, with each set during a different time of year and focusing on a 
different relationship in Billy’s life. In “Teacher,” Billy struggles with his fear that 
he isn’t smart enough for second grade; “Father” finds Billy interacting with his 
stay-at-home artist dad; in “Sister,” Billy deals with sibling issues as he tries to get 
three-year-old Sal to stay up all night after a greatly anticipated sleepover with a pal 
is cancelled; “Mother” finds Billy working on writing and reciting a poem about his 
mom for a school performance. The action is fairly mild, but Billy’s second-grade 
thoughts and actions are solid and believable, and the relationships between Billy 
and the other characters (Billy’s father and sister are particularly dimensional) are 
warmly and credibly rendered. The large print, occasional black and white spot art, 
and strong story structure will bolster young chapter-book readers as well. Thought-
ful kids able to tackle a book of this length will enjoy reading this on their own, but 
it would also make a fine choice for reading aloud in the classroom or home.  JH
hoPKinson, deBorAh The Great Trouble: A Mystery of London, the Blue Death, 
and a Boy Called Eel. Knopf, 2013 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-94818-3 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84818-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81819-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-8
As an orphan in 1854 London, Eel is cautiously content with his present circum-
stances. He has work as a messenger at a brewery, and he supplements his scant 
income by sweeping up for a tailor and cleaning animal cages for Dr. Snow, who 
experiments on them with that new-fangled anesthetic, chloroform. Since he has 
a place to sleep, enough to eat, and just enough coin to keep his younger brother 
Henry in school, his only real worry is being found by his larcenous stepfather, who 
wants to put his stepsons to work as burglars. Widespread tragedy puts Eel’s own 
issues into perspective, though, when cholera breaks out near the brewery, and he 
persuades Dr. Snow to redirect his medical attention to easing the plight of Eel’s 
neighbors. There’s nothing that Snow can do for individual sufferers, but with Eel’s 
assistance, he makes a careful survey of the area and musters enough evidence to 
convince the town fathers that tainted water rather than “miasma” is behind the 
158 • The bulleTiN
outbreak and disabling the local water pump is the best strategy for disease control. 
Hopkinson crafts Eel’s storyline to lure readers into the real-life drama of the London 
cholera outbreak that earned Dr. John Snow credit as a public health pioneer. The 
fictional and informational threads often vie awkwardly for attention, though, and 
it’s likely that readers who avidly follow one line will become a bit impatient with the 
other. However, fictionalized accounts of historic epidemics (e.g., Anderson’s Fever 
1793, BCCB 10/00) have a robust following, and kids who want to know more 
about Dr. Snow and his innovative investigation will garner enough background 
to try Steven Johnson’s accessible adult work The Ghost Map.  EB
huBBArd, JenniFer r. Until It Hurts to Stop. Viking, 2013 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78520-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Four years after being the target of perpetual harassment and bullying in seventh 
grade, Maggie seems to have to gotten it together; she may not be welcome at the 
popular table, but she’s got her own friends, and she finds peace and empowerment 
when she and her best friend, Nick, go hiking together on weekends. Just when 
things seem to have settled, though, the return to school of her head tormentor, 
Raleigh, sends Maggie into a tailspin of memory-laced paranoia, and an awkward 
kiss with Nick leaves her reeling, so that even the rush she gets from hiking is tainted. 
Hubbard effectively plays her metaphors close to the surface here: Maggie’s painful 
past is the mountain she has to climb, and the rattlesnake she and Nick encounter 
is the anger and resentment that lie coiled inside her, waiting to strike. The insults 
and torture she endured at the hands of Raleigh and company have plausibly left 
her with a shaming inner voice that threatens her self-esteem and cocoons her into 
a self-protective shell that shuts out other people, not only when she needs them, 
but when they need her. When she recognizes how Nick struggles with the same 
problem, internalizing his father’s verbal abuse, the parallels to her own situation 
finally bring her perspective. If her self-involvement is a bit obvious, well, it might 
just need to be to make it clear to readers that being victimized can have damaging 
effects long after the abuse stops; Hubbard shows, with profound psychological 
insight, how Maggie’s recognizing in Nick what she can’t see in herself is a first 
step toward really putting her junior high past to rest. Readers will similarly see 
themselves in Maggie and, hopefully, stop punishing themselves with their own 
legacies of bullying.  KC 
huBer, rAymond Flight of the Honey Bee; illus. by Brian Lovelock. Candlewick, 
2013 29p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6760-3 $16.99  
R 6-10 yrs
“The cold is coming, and Scout must find the last flowers of the fall.” Scout the 
honey bee, the protagonist of this natural history picture book, then heads out in 
search of sustenance, ducking predators and hiding from the rain; once she finds 
flowers, she returns to the hive to alert her fellow workers. Directed by Scout, off 
they go to gather nectar and bring it back to the hive to turn into honey and feed 
the queen and her subjects through the winter. A new title in the venerable natural 
history sequence that has included titles such as Davies’ Bat Loves the Night (BCCB 
12/01), this follows the series’ traditional practice of counterpointing a simple, 
focused main narrative with secondary text providing additional details about the 
November 2013 • 159
featured species. The prose is polished and informative (“Here is sunken treasure: 
a cup of sweet nectar. The tip of her tongue, shaped like a miniature spoon, sips 
the syrup”) and the secondary tidbits are often quite fascinating (“Bees are charged 
with static electricity during flight, which attracts pollen to their bodies”). Lovelock’s 
mixed-media art is simply stunning, pairing compositions of vigorous graphic 
strength with delicate watercolor mottling and precise biological detail. In addition 
to rich autumnal and honey golds, the scenes are suffused with warm russets and 
even corals, with sharply geometric artificial beehives and slanting lines of rain add-
ing discipline. A brief note about protecting bees and an index are included.  DS
huey, lois miner Ick! Yuck! Eew!: Our Gross American History. Millbrook, 
2013 48p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-9091-6 $29.27
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1710-6 $21.95  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Eye-catching bookmaking is the draw in this quick overview of some of the nastier 
aspects of America before the arrival of hand sanitizer. Four short chapters should 
convince kids that the twenty-first century is a desirable place, if only for its hy-
gienic practices. The first chapter deals with odor from refuse-strewn streets and 
unwashed citizens; next come bugs, from disease bearing mosquitoes and flies to 
biting bedbugs, and lice. Then germs are on deck, with a focus on smallpox and 
early inoculations; tortuous clothing wraps it up, with stays, powdered wigs, layers 
of wool, and the dubious advantages of lye soap. Text is broken into browsable 
chunks under subheadings; artifacts and period illustrations, along with splashes of 
indeterminate goo and crawling critters, march across every spread. There’s not a lot 
of information here that isn’t readily available in other sources on early America, and 
the rust-red interjections (“Cramps! Mess! Gross!”; “Pain! Scars! Eew!”) get tiresome 
pretty fast. Seven pages of end matter—from index to glossary to reading lists and 
photo credits—are nearly as substantial as the text, and the annotated suggestions 
for further reading and online research will guide readers to their Ick! of choice.  EB
hughes, gregory 
Unhooking the Moon. 
Quercus/Random House, 
2013 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-62365-020-9 $16.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62365-021-6 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-8
After the sudden death of their father, twelve-year-old Bob and his little sister, Marie 
Claire (known as the Rat) decide to leave their beloved Winnipeg and head to New 
York, home of the uncle they’ve never met but who they’re sure will take them in. 
A journey via bike, freight car, and a lift from an affable cigar smuggler gets them 
to Manhattan, where they meet an assortment of colorful characters, ranging from 
Tommy the hustler to Ice the famous rap artist, all of whom who are smitten with 
the Rat’s unique creativity and audacity. Bob worries about his sister’s periodic and 
unexplained seizures, but he has greater fears when she’s apprehended by the police 
and put into a facility run by child abusers. The story is a mix of wild and realistic, 
old-school and contemporary; there’s a touch of Dickens in the gallery of quirky 
characters, while the absurdity with serious emotion underneath suggests Jack Gantos’ 
work. Hughes gives Bob’s narration a lively, plainspoken vigor (“Anybody who hit 
our dad was a goddamn pedophile. And that’s all there was to it”) while keeping his 
160 • The bulleTiN
reactivity a useful complement to the Rat’s leadership. The pacing, however, is way 
too slow for a plot this far-fetched, and most characterization is either overdrawn 
or flatly generic (including obligatory racial identifiers). Too many of the plot im-
plausibilities—repeated notes of child murder and rape, and Rat’s final medically 
vague incapacitation—have a somberness that’s at odds with the picaresque flair, 
undercutting both the emotional truth and the adventurous zest. Sloan’s Counting 
by Sevens (BCCB 9/13) is a much better story of an unusual displaced child who 
changes the lives of those around her, but the high-spirited escapade may appeal to 
readers who like old-fashioned adventure with a touch of modern darkness.  DS
isAdorA, rAchel, ad. Old Mikamba Had a Farm; ad. and illus. by Rachel Isa-
dora. Paulsen/Penguin, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25740-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 3-5 yrs
Old Mikamba may have a farm, but it’s a game farm on the African plains, and 
the animals on his farm are a far cry from the typical cow/pig/chicken that hang 
out with Old MacDonald. Here, baboons, zebras, and elephants share space with 
rhinos, giraffes, and cheetahs, each getting a verse in this adaptation of the traditional 
tune. This version lacks the original’s cumulative pattern, but there’s still a numbing 
amount of repetition, particularly because fourteen different animals making four-
teen different sounds are featured. Young listeners, though, may forgive the length 
in the name of acquiring a whole new lot of animal sounds to produce, from the 
“honk-honk” of the wildebeest to the “chirp-chirp” of the ostrich. Isadora’s collage 
work employs oil paints, printed paper, palette paper, ink, and pencil to compose 
the menagerie of wildlife; the cut paper is by far the most striking, incorporating 
elements of texture and pattern into the compositions; patterned borders are an 
element too many in some spreads, drawing focus from the intriguingly composed 
figures. There is still plenty of use here for animal-themed storytimes, and the list 
of facts about each animal at the end of the book may please young animal lovers 
looking to add to their arsenal of information.  HM 
JoFFo, JosePh A Bag of Marbles; ad. by Kris; illus. by Vincent Bailly, tr. by Edward 
Gauvin. Graphic Universe, 2013 126p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-0700-8 $29.27
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1516-4 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1651-2 $21.95  
R Gr. 6-10
This graphic-novel adaptation of Joseph Joffo’s 1973 memoir recounts the experi-
ences of the Joffos, a Jewish family that tried to stay one step ahead of the Nazis 
in occupied France. Mr. Joffo, a successful barber, at first placates the occupying 
soldiers who frequent his establishment, but this doesn’t last, and the pragmatic 
Joffo sends his two youngest sons, Jo and Maurice, off to join their older brothers 
in the free zone. His faith in the stamina and smarts of the two boys is justified; 
they’re careful with their money, wary of giving themselves away, and circumspect 
with their trust. After the boys begin going to school, working, and enjoying “pre-
cious freedom” in Menton, news arrives that their parents have been arrested by 
authorities, and now family life turns into a serious game of cat and mouse. Their 
older brother manages to free his parents, but a summons to “compulsory work 
service” puts them on the run again, and Mr. Joffo splits the family into three 
November 2013 • 161
teams of two to evade the Nazis. The focus remains steadily on Jo and Maurice, 
whose cleverness and good luck pull them through close calls on trains, at work, 
in a boys’ camp, and even in jail until the family reunites at the end of the war in 
Paris—all but the good-natured Mr. Joffo, who cheerfully rallied his family to safety 
but couldn’t save himself. Dense watercolor and scratchy line artwork is strongly 
reminiscent of Mordicai Gerstein, and careful attention to geographic detail lends 
immediacy to the boys’ odyssey. A map, glossary, and historical note (as well as 
footnoted translations) are included, but the brothers’ exploits alone make a thrill-
ing story that needs little pedagogical support.  EB
Johnston, Julie Little Red Lies. Tundra, 2013 340p
ISBN 978-1-77049-313-1 $19.95
E-book ISBN 978-1-77049-314-8 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-9
Adolescence isn’t sitting well with Rachel, whose drama-queen propensities amplify 
her reaction to every perceived trouble or slight—and life isn’t particularly trouble-
free in her family at the moment. Her beloved brother Jamie is just home from 
World War II, recovering well from his physical injuries, but he’s jobless, at odds 
with his girlfriend, and now diagnosed with leukemia. While the family turns the 
lion’s share of attention to Jamie, Rachel tries to establish herself in the school drama 
department, where she proves to be ineffectual as an actress. She does, however, 
catch the attention of the young teacher/director, Mr. Tomkins, who seems to 
know just which girls are in distress and preys on their vulnerabilities. Although 
this Canadian import is a work of historical fiction, readers who favor domestic 
drama will be the audience most appreciative of Rachel’s social missteps. Driven by 
her own over-emotional nature and casual attitude toward deceit, Rachel is often 
as shameless as the Little Red Lies crimson lipstick she sports to make herself ap-
pear sophisticated. Her mistakes have a way of making her sympathetic, though, 
and by the end, she’s a bit more self aware; her growth—and potential for further 
wising up—is credibly portrayed. Secondary characters are robustly drawn, and 
the unpredictability of the plotline should keep readers engrossed through each of 
Rachel’s cringe-worthy blunders.  EB 
Jones, roB lloyd Wild Boy. Candlewick, 2013 295p
ISBN 978-0-7636-6252-3 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 5-8
Unnamed and abandoned in a Victorian workhouse, a hair-covered little boy reaches 
the age of eight with nothing but a history of abuse from the other orphan boys and 
uncanny observational skills, honed by watching life pass outside the workhouse 
windows. Showman Augustus Finch, to all appearances even more menacing than 
the workhouse staff and residents, offers to take the boy off the charity rolls and 
put him to work as a freak in a seedy circus, a move the newly dubbed “Wild Boy” 
welcomes as a change in scene and opportunity. However, apart from a friendship 
with his legless fellow performer, Sir Oswald, Wild Boy is not one jot better off. In 
fact, while hiding from an imminent storm of abuse from Finch, Wild Boy is framed 
for a pair of murders that are somehow connected to the circus and a mysterious 
stolen “machine,” and his only sources of support are Clarissa, a tart-tongued acro-
bat with whom Wild Boy shares a mutual loathing, and Sir Oswald. It isn’t giving 
much away to reveal that Sir Oswald isn’t all he appears to be, since most readers 
will work this out handily on their own. This is all about the chase—the relentless 
162 • The bulleTiN
dashing and dodging through London sewers and secret passages and creepy mad-
scientist-style labs, with Wild Boy hobbled by his perpetual anger and his need to 
hide his freakish condition. The plot is largely implausible: it seems pretty obvious 
(if, admittedly, somewhat insensitive) to suggest that many of Wild Boy’s short-term 
problems could have been solved by shaving soap and a decent razor, allowing him 
to hide in a London is on the lookout for a hirsute human anomaly. The book 
therefore slides past any serious consideration of human oddities and exploitation, 
but those who simply want atmospheric action and loads of it can queue up for a 
peek at this title and wait for the forthcoming sequel.  EB
KAhAney, AmeliA 
The Brokenhearted. 
HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2013 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-223092-8 $17.99
E-book ISBN 978-0-06-223094-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Seventeen-year-old Anthem Fleet falls for artsy Gavin at an illicit underground 
party, and soon she’s breaking up with her wealthy boyfriend, skipping her ballet 
practices (once the focus of her life), and sneaking out at night from her parents’ 
high-rise penthouse to hang out on the seedier sides of Bedlam with her new lover. 
The criminal element of the South Side, however, takes notice of the rich girl in 
their midst, and one night Gavin is kidnapped by thugs and Anthem is killed 
when she falls into an icy river trying to save him. A good Samaritan and a black- 
market surgeon rescue and revive her, implanting in her chest a mechanical heart 
that gives her superhuman powers—the perfect weapon against Gavin’s captors, 
an underground crime ring that threatens to ruin Bedlam. From the similarities 
in name and crime statistics between Bedlam and Gotham to more subtle refer-
ences, like Anthem’s shady father referring to his tuxedo as his “penguin suit,” the 
parallels to Batman are hard to miss here, and fans of that franchise will feel right 
at home with the wicked chase scenes and broody protagonist of this superhero 
origin story. Streetwise readers will likely catch a whiff of something foul the mo-
ment Gavin appears, but even they will be shocked by his ultimate betrayal and 
Anthem’s willingness to do what needs to be done to rid herself and the city of 
him. A subtly woven-in backstory involving the death of Anthem’s older sister 
and a former crime-fighting legend comes to the forefront in the surprising final 
pages, ensuring a sequel, while Anthem, with her unwillingness to be just another 
brokenhearted girl, will likely inspire legions of teenage girls to forget the guys and 
go kick some butt.  KQG 
Knowles, Jo Living with Jackie Chan. Candlewick, 2013 372p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6280-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6716-0 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Josh may have openly bragged about his one-hour stand with Ellie in Jumping Off 
Swings (BCCB 9/09), but inwardly, he’s disgusted with his behavior and haunted 
by its aftermath, so much so that he can’t face returning to his high school and 
decides to spend his senior year with his karate-obsessed bachelor uncle, Larry. 
Larry genuinely believes in the character-building principles he has his karate 
November 2013 • 163
students recite, and while Josh is grateful for Larry’s willingness to give him a 
home, he is both attracted to and put off by his uncle’s perpetual good cheer and 
earnest dorkiness. Josh has a long way to go, however, to work through his guilt 
and grief, especially at two o’clock every morning when the baby in the apartment 
above him starts crying and reminds him that he, too, has a son somewhere out 
there. Enshrouded in shame, he struggles with his feelings for Stella, a girl who 
lives in the same apartment building; she is in the clutches of an overly possessive 
boyfriend, but Josh doesn’t feel he deserves a girlfriend after the way he treated Ellie. 
With dexterous character and relationship drafting, Knowles pulls Josh’s parents 
through their own reactions to Josh’s mistakes to a fresh start, and Josh is credibly 
resentful in his initial understanding that his absence seems to be the catalyst for 
their healing. Stella’s damsel-in-distress persona is a bit clichéd, but Knowles makes 
it work for Josh’s character arc as he slowly learns what it means to treat someone, 
especially a damaged, vulnerable someone, with integrity. Real grace comes through 
Larry, however, whose goodness, couched as it is in genial goofiness, helps Josh 
move from silent but perpetual self-recrimination to ownership of his faults and 
forgiveness. Continuing from Jumping Off Swings, Knowles traces the ripple effect 
of Josh’s fateful action; here she shows how it leads to necessary and positive change 
for Josh and his family.  KC
Kohuth, JAne Anne Frank’s Chestnut Tree; illus. by Elizabeth Sayles. Random 
House, 2013 [48p] (Step into Reading)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81255-6 $12.99
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-97115-0 $14.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-307-97579-9 $3.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98113-5 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
“I firmly believe that nature can bring comfort to all who suffer,” Anne Frank wrote, 
and while in hiding in the now-famous annex in Amsterdam during World War 
II, she would occasionally sneak up to the attic for a peek out the window at the 
chestnut tree growing outside to track the seasons. This easy-reader introduction to 
Anne Frank’s life effectively uses that theme of nature to offer an abbreviated and 
accessible overview of Anne’s tragic and remarkable life. The summary of life events 
is appropriately succinct without being oversimplified; major historical factors are 
included, anti-Semitism is explained (“The Nazis blamed the world’s problems on 
Jewish people”), and the fear of living in hiding is effectively presented. The tree is 
an effective central symbol in a story about a young adult holding onto hope, and 
occasional quotes add further depth to the narrative. Sayles’ acrylic paintings offer 
plenty of visual support for the story; the portraits, possibly based on photographs, 
effectively capture the historical figures. A final chapter provides additional informa-
tion about the Annex and the tree’s cultural impact; there is a brief author’s note, 
and a few suggestions for further reading, but no source notes are provided. That 
aside, this would be a useful text to have on hand for struggling upper-elementary 
readers involved in Holocaust units or those needing an accessible title for a biog-
raphy assignment.  HM 
164 • The bulleTiN
KristoFF, JAy Kinslayer. Dunne/St. Martin’s, 2013 442p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-00141-2 $25.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-02294-3 $12.99  
R* Gr. 9-12
In this follow-up to the Japanese-inflected adventure fantasy Stormdancer (BCCB 
10/12), Yukiko’s assassination of the Sho¯gun has emboldened the people to rise 
up against the evil empire, whose dependence on energy derived from the blood 
lotus plant has destroyed their environment and kept them in a constant state 
of war to provide the human fertilizer needed to grow the deadly flowers. Her 
gift for hearing the thoughts of animals, which has enabled her to form a bond 
with Buruu, her thunder tiger, is intensifying to dangerous levels due to her rage, 
however, giving her debilitating headaches and causing destructive environmental 
anomalies. Meanwhile, Kin, the former guildsman who has joined Yukiko, begins 
to turn against the rebels’ project and toward one of his own; Hiro, whom Yukiko 
thought was dead, has been revived by the Lotus Guild and is trying to claim the 
Sho¯gun’s throne and plot deadly revenge against Yukiko herself. Beginning with a 
“character refresher” list of the key players introduced in Stormdancer, this action-
packed sequel plunges headlong into the machinations involved in the lead-up to a 
complex civil war while further exploring Buruu’s past, wherein he somehow earned 
the name Kinslayer. The hostility of a female thunder tiger toward Buruu piques 
Yukiko’s curiosity, but the pressures of surviving an attack from a newly revealed 
enemy while staging a rebellion to defeat Hiro’s plans put that mystery on hold, 
presumably until the next book. Teeming with sex and secrets, torture and gore, 
intense loyalties and crushing betrayals, this is an expansive tale constructed on a 
complex, fully realized world; it requires and rewards complete immersion.  KC
Kyi, tAnyA lloyd Anywhere but Here. Simon, 2013 [320p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8070-4 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8069-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
To Cole, the small Canadian town of Webster is essentially a prison, and he can’t 
wait until he can graduate and escape. He’s already detached from his father, who’s 
a mostly sedentary and self-pitying drunk since the death of Cole’s mother, and 
Cole further cuts ties by breaking up with his longtime girlfriend, Lauren. Hoping 
to go to film school in Vancouver, he begins work on a short sample documentary 
for admission, all about the ways that Webster traps and limits its residents. As 
major changes happen with Lauren (who’s pregnant), his father (who’s suddenly 
getting married), and even Cole’s new no-strings girlfriend Hannah (who turns 
out to be much smarter than she pretends), he begins to realize that Webster may 
be more of a part of his life than he realized. The conviction that all their obstacles 
are situational drives many a teen to distant college, and Kyi perceptively explores 
the ways that this conviction is and isn’t true. Cole’s gradual understanding that 
he’s projected onto the town his frustrations and his isolation following his mother’s 
death credibly accrues (“I thought there were plenty of people in Webster wishing 
they could escape. It turns out I might be the only one”), and the book is unusually 
clear-eyed in its depiction of both the negatives and the positives of a close-knit small 
town. While Cole’s relationships are dramatic, there’s an underlying nuance to the 
dynamics and a pleasing lack of villainy to the characters, so events are emotional 
rather than melodramatic. Readers on the verge of flying the coop will empathize 
with both Cole’s restlessness and his ambivalence.  DS
November 2013 • 165
lAnge, erin JAde Dead Ends. Bloomsbury, 2013 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-080-2 $17.99
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-61963-081-9 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 9-12
Dane Washington, a sixteen-year-old with serious anger management issues, is just 
a detention away from alternative high school, but he finds his last best hope in 
the unwanted friendship of Billy D., a student with Down syndrome who latches 
onto Dane for protection. The administration cuts Dane a deal: keep Billy D. safe 
and content, and they’ll blink at his past offenses. The problem is that Billy D. is 
no dummy; he’s a master manipulator and a skillful if judicious liar, and he has 
his own important agenda—to locate his missing father, whom Billy D’s mother 
is determined to keep him from finding. Dane’s also curious about the identity of 
his own dad, a man who is probably somewhere in the neighborhood, and whom 
he’d enjoy the opportunity to punch out. Billy D. essentially blackmails Dane into 
helping him trace the clues in an old atlas he’s sure will lead to his father, and on 
a mission that culminates in a dangerous road trip, the boys figure out there’s a 
very good reason why Billy D.’s father should not be found. The odd-couple story 
deftly pairs Billy D.’s cleverness with Dane’s inability to keep his itchy fists out of 
trouble, and it gains considerable momentum from the atlas clues and the myster-
ies behind each of the boy’s fathers. Dane, however, fails to become the likable, or 
even redeemable, character readers are expecting, and the romance plot between 
Dane and an edgy, skateboarding blonde never quite gets off the ground. Still, it’s 
a fast-moving tale tailor-made for reading in study hall, when a road trip of any 
kind sounds really good.  EB
lArochelle, dAvid Moo!; illus. by Mike Wohnoutka. Walker, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-3409-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* 4-7 yrs
In this lively picture book limited almost entirely to a single word, an adventur-
ous cow takes the farmer’s shiny red car for a joyride, but her initial glee turns to 
horror when she fails to negotiate a sharp turn and ends up pancaking a police car. 
Sent back to the farm in disgrace, the cow must then defend herself to the angry 
farmer—but how? The readaloud’s the real fun here, since all this adventure is 
conveyed by various iterations of the word “Moo”—and what a lot of possibilities it 
offers. A long-drawn moo follows the escaping cow up and down hills, an alarmed 
“Moo-moo . . . ” (clearly Cow for “Uh-oh”) marks her doomed voyage into the sharp 
turn, and she explains herself to the cop with an excited pell-mell moo-nologue. 
The punchline (after a “Who, me?” moo, she disguises herself with a “Baaaaa!”) 
isn’t as rollicking as the adventure, but the silliness of the scenario will definitely be 
enough to entertain in its own right. Wohnoutka’s gouache illustrations have group 
viewing in mind, with every scene a full-spread, full-bleed streamlined image that 
possesses the subject focus and simple backdrops of old-school animation. Sturdy 
cheer is the order of the day for the figures, with solid outlines, saturated colors, 
and big eyes standing out against pale blue-sky backgrounds. Kids could also read 
this independently with only a quick acquaintance, and it would offer a great op-
portunity for energetic group mooing in storytime.  DS
166 • The bulleTiN
lAsKy, KAthryn The Extra. Candlewick, 2013 314p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-3972-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-6712-2 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Lilo Friwald, whose father is a highly skilled watchmaker, and her Sinti Gypsy family 
tend to look upon the Roma Gypsies with a degree of derision, but now that Hitler 
has tarred all Gypsies with the same brush, they can no longer afford to indulge in 
social distinctions. Mr. Friwald is separated from his wife and daughter and is since 
presumed dead, Mrs. Friwald has been sterilized at Buchenwald, and now she and 
her daughter find themselves plucked from their Austrian camp to mill around as 
Spaniards in Leni Riefenstahl’s new film. They are still prisoners, penned up under 
guard and given little better rations and clothing than in the other camps, but Lilo 
gains a friend in Django, a Roma teen veteran of several camps who has become 
expert at “organizing” food, information, and perks, and who wisely advises Lilo to 
become indispensable to the film. Even Django’s advice is not enough to save Lilo 
and her family from deportation once the filming is done, but she manage to escape 
and survive to liberation, surgically sterilized but alive and with hope of finding 
Django at the war’s end. Lasky bases her fictional story on available information 
concerning Riefenstahl’s filming of Tiefland, and her portrayal of the auteur as a 
brilliant but jealous, mercurial, and devious powerbroker is chilling indeed. The 
war’s Gypsy genocide is undertreated in literature for youth, and this brings the 
plight of the Zigeuner during the Holocaust (or, in their terms, the devouring) 
into sharp relief; the irony of the layers of deception and fiction that drove the Nazi 
regime will not be lost on YA readers. Historical notes are appended.  EB
levine, sArA Bone By Bone: Comparing Animal Skeletons; illus. by T. S. Spooky-
tooth. Millbrooke, 2013 32p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-8464-9 $26.60
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1701-4 $19.95  
R 5-8 yrs
This engaging introduction to vertebrate anatomy encourages children to regard 
themselves as close kin to fellow vertebrates and imagine the results of small tweaks 
to their own bony framework. When the text asks, “What if you didn’t have any 
arm or leg bones?”, a little girl’s skeleton, sans limbs, morphs on the next page into a 
snake. The question “What kind of animal would you be if your finger bones grew 
so long that they reached your feet?” results in the little girl with pink shorts and 
sneakers looking rather alarmed as she drags her fingertips along the ground, and 
the next page reveals that she has developed the finger bones of a bat. “Could you be 
an animal if you didn’t have any bones at all?” A sad little puddle of sloughed skin 
and loose eyeballs, topped with a baseball cap, is one result, but you could also be 
an invertebrate, and the closing pages discuss the contrast between vertebrates and 
invertebrates. The Q & A format of this title lends itself well to group sharing and 
discussion, and perhaps even some acting out by the less inhibited members of the 
class. Spookytooth’s humorous artwork supports the imaginative musings over each 
transformation, while his diagrams have both depth and texture to assist viewers 
in understanding the structures beneath the skin. Additional facts, a glossary, and 
a few kid-friendly print and online sources for further reading are included.  EB
November 2013 • 167
lo, mAlindA Inheritance. Little, 2013 470p
ISBN 978-0-316-19800-4 $18.00  
R Gr. 9-12
Picking up right where Adaptation (BCCB 9/12) left off, Inheritance finds David 
and Reese on the front porch, ready to announce to the world that they’ve been 
genetically modified after a near-fatal car accident to become hybrid with the Imria, 
a species of aliens who look remarkably like people from Earth and who have secretly 
been in contact with the United States government since 1947. Reese and David 
must deal with the repercussions of this perspective-shattering announcement and 
learn how to control their new abilities to share and read consciousness with other 
people, all while trying to figure out whom they can actually trust. Meanwhile, 
Reese, reeling from a betrayal of trust from Amber, her Imrian ex-girlfriend, and 
reconciling that with her feelings for David, tries to come to terms with the pos-
sibility that she may be able to love—and openly date—them both. Lo’s layers 
of conspiracy that were so effective in Adaptation continue to surface here, and 
the development and revelations of what’s lurking under the surface of this alien 
encounter will continue to set readers on edge; Reese’s internal struggles with her 
newfound fame, her love life, and her parents possible reunion provide additional 
compelling aspects of the story. The gritty climax and final reveal of who’s really 
not to be trusted bring this chapter of David’s and Reese’s transformations to a 
close that answers all of the necessary questions but leaves open a possibility for 
following their exploits in a new world.  TA
mAcAulAy, dAvid Toilet: How It Works; by David Macaulay with Sheila 
Keenan; illus. by David Macaulay. David Macaulay Studio/Roaring Brook, 
2013 [32p] (My Readers)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-779-1 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-780-7 $3.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 2-4
Macaulay adds to his fine and growing collection of nonfiction easy readers with 
a topic everyone can and does use. The toilet is a water bowl for the pet dog, an 
interment site for the dead goldfish, a planter of dubious aesthetic value for home 
gardeners, and of course, a vital part of the waste disposal system that advances 
public health. First Macaulay explains the mechanics of a simple standard tank 
model, showing the interplay between lever, stopper, float, and refill. Ending the 
story there, however, would leave readers stranded on a pile . . . well, in sore need 
of information on the further adventures of flushed waste. Macaulay accommodates 
the reader with separate discussions of the septic tank system and the community 
waste treatment plants, and the ultimate return of solid-waste fertilizer to the fields 
and purified water to the water cycle. There’s no cheating on the vocabulary—
mastery of the terminology presented here will prepare kids to discuss disposal 
problems with parents and plumbers. The watercolor illustrations, though, do 
the heavy lifting, and kids who pore over carefully marked diagrams will find the 
text can serve simply as support to a largely visual experience. Information and 
illustrated waste flow smoothly in tandem across the page turns, with pipes color 
coded and arrows directing movement through the facilities. Macaulay fans will 
surely be alert to his signature humor, which catches an alarmed man in the shower 
who’s just discovered himself in a cutaway, and which adds disembodied eyes and 
168 • The bulleTiN
hands to “complete” the portrayal of the digestive system. A glossary, index, and 
bibliography are included.  EB
mAcdonAld, ross Henry’s Hand; written and illus. by Ross MacDon-
ald. Abrams, 2013 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0527-4 $16.95  
Ad 5-8 yrs
Henry, a Frankenstein’s monster kind of guy who’s always struggling to keep track 
of all of his parts, has a best friend in Hand, his aptly named right hand. Hand’s 
detachability means that he’s well suited to take care of minor tasks for Henry, but 
the appendage soon feels that he’s being taken advantage of and runs away to the 
city. When Hand prevents a wealthy socialite from being hit by a car, he’s hailed as 
a hero and thrust into a life of means. Henry’s left alone to struggle to get every-
thing done without Hand’s help and writes a letter of apology; Hand, who chafes 
at his new luxurious existence, returns, and the pair are joyously reunited. Though 
a fresh and quirky tale about the bumps that occur even in the best of friendships, 
this unfortunately suffers from a lengthy text filled with unnecessary asides, as well 
as a story that never quite surmounts its contrivance. The goofy flair may still be 
compelling for some audiences, however, and MacDonald’s glowing illustrations in 
watercolor and pencil crayon evoke classic 1950s picture books with their softened 
lines, facial details and mildly yellowed tint; Henry’s a friendly-looking guy gruff 
guy in a green and navy striped shirt and white sneakers, while Hand’s a mint-
colored version of the Addams Family’s Thing. This is a strange but amusing new 
take on an age-old plot, and it may beckon to kids who appreciate the offbeat.  TA
mAder, c. roger Lost Cat; written and illus. by C. Roger Mader. Houghton, 
2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-547-97458-3 $17.99  
R 4-6 yrs
Slipper the cat enjoys her cozy life with “Mrs. Fluffy Slippers,” the owner of the 
fluffy bedroom slippers Slipper loves to snuggle with. When Mrs. Fluffy Slippers 
moves away, Slipper is accidentally left behind. After chasing the moving van to 
no avail, she finds herself in the big, wide world where she encounters a dog, a big 
horse, a smelly truck, and a kid who tries to catch her; when she decides to follow 
a pair of shiny girl’s shoes down the street, she’s delighted to be led to a house that 
holds a warm welcome—and her beloved fluffy-slippered owner, who’s the grand-
mother of the little girl in shiny shoes. There are dozens of lost pet stories but this 
one skillfully utilizes an intriguing cat’s-eye-perspective, vivid illustrations, and a 
happy (if unrealistic) ending to satisfying effect. Succinct, sonorous text (“Slipper 
felt a flash of fear, and in a heartbeat, she fled”) also makes for smooth reading 
aloud. Mader’s almost photorealistic illustrations (done in deftly blended pastels on 
paper) are compelling in their detailing, composition, and lighting. Scenes range 
from close-ups of the green-eyed, tabby tuxedo Slipper and the feet she encounters 
on her adventures to occasional shots of the cat from a distance; especially dramatic 
is the spread in which Slipper discovers she is lost, a tiny silhouette against a sunset 
sky, surrounded by dark forest. The attractive cat pictures and the circular storyline 
make this a fine addition to a cat- or pet-themed storytime; providing a real cat for 
furry snuggles will undoubtedly enhance the reading experience.  JH
November 2013 • 169
mAnn, JenniFer Ann Sunny Sweet Is So Not Sorry; written and illus. by Jennifer 
Ann Mann. Bloomsbury, 2013 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-977-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Fifth-grader Masha wakes up with a crown of plastic flowers glued to her hair and 
knows it’s the work of her six-year-old sister, Sunny, who is, according to Masha, 
“the devil.” The day goes from bad to worse when Masha spots her neighbor, Mrs. 
Song, passed out on the driveway. What follows is a madcap adventure at the 
hospital involving false identities, impersonation, a public head-shaving, secret 
meetings in the basement, and a narrow escape. The dynamic between the two 
sisters is both complicated and authentic; Sunny is generally perceived as adorable 
and brilliant and subsequently never gets in trouble for her antics, which drives 
Masha completely crazy as she is often at the receiving end of one of Sunny’s 
experiments. In her defense, Sunny doesn’t mean to upset her sister and generally 
has sincere motives (she put the crown on her sister’s head to help Masha get the 
attention she wants from the popular girls). Masha is hyperreactive to Sunny, lead-
ing to elevated tensions and lots of yelling, but readers will definitely relate to her 
frustrations (“If only they could all see her crispy little black heart like I could”). 
The plot, however, is contrived and implausible, especially in the hospital scenes 
(Masha receives both a full arm cast and a dose of pain medication intended for 
another patient), so the book loses touch with the sharp-eyed realism that makes 
the characterization effective. The dynamic between the sisters mostly manages to 
carry the story, however, and readers may warm to the intricacies of their relation-
ship. Final illustrations not seen.  HM
mArciAno, John BemelmAns The 9 Lives of Alexander Baddenfield; illus. by Sophie 
Blackall. Viking, 2013 [144p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01406-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-5
Inheriting a legacy passed down from ridiculously wealthy misanthropes who died 
from bizarre causes at young ages, Alexander Baddenfield—a rich, mean, and 
self-centered twelve-year-old—is effectively and stiflingly guarded from harm by 
his hypervigilant servant Winterbottom. Then Alexander gets the bright idea to 
transplant the extra eight lives from his cat into himself and revels in living reck-
lessly, wastefully throwing away lives by exploits such as touching the third rail 
on the subway to prove that it really will electrocute you. After finding himself 
prematurely down to one life, he retreats into a protective bubble, only to die of 
an allergy—to the cat whose extra lives he took. Marciano has a wry voice in this 
darkly comic tale, but the exposition is somewhat clumsy; the narrative asides and 
sarcastic commentary are reminiscent of Lemony Snicket but unfortunately aren’t 
as witty. Blackall’s black and white watercolor illustrations—mostly full-page, with 
a few splashes of spot art—add to the book’s atmosphere with their soft cartoonish-
ness and their creepy content (each of the later chapters is capped by an full page 
of the grim reaper hovering over a negative picture illustrating Alexander’s death), 
making this an original story that could please young fans of wicked humor.  TA
170 • The bulleTiN
mArKle, sAndrA The Case of the Vanishing Honeybees: A Scientific Mystery. Mill-
brook, 2013 48p illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-0592-9 $29.27
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1700-7 $21.95  
R Gr. 3-6
This brief but superbly organized title explores the sudden disappearance of 
worker bees during the mid 2000s. After a short overview of honeybee hierarchy 
and specialized tasks, Markle lays out the various hypotheses for Colony Collapse 
Disorder. Could it be a change in habitat, with fewer wildflowers and longer flights 
across monoculture farms? Maybe the bees are overworked, moved by professional 
beekeepers to pollinate fields without enjoying adequate rest periods. Perhaps cell 
phones interfere with bee navigation. Are varroa mites weakening the bees and 
leaving them susceptible to disease? Could Nosema ceranae fungus be the culprit, 
or neonicotinoid pesticides? Sadly, the exact reason for the disappearance is still 
unknown, but Markle discusses the ideas of scientists who favor a combination 
of causes. Diagrams, photos of scientists and beekeepers at work, and crystal clear 
close-ups of the bees (dead and alive) draw readers steadily through the five chapters, 
and subheadings assist in breaking a global mystery down to manageable concepts. 
Notes on rescue organizations, index, glossary, reading list, and miscellaneous facts 
round out the title, which stands as a fine example of science writing for newbie 
science readers—and teachers extending their use of trade books under Common 
Core.  EB 
mcdonAld, megAn Ant and Honey Bee: A Pair of Friends in Winter; illus. by G. 
Brian Karas. Candlewick, 2013 [64p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5712-3 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 1-3
Best bug buds Ant and Honeybee (from Ant and Honey Bee: What a Pair!, BCCB 
2/05) are back, getting ready to hunker down for winter in their respective houses. 
Ant, however, is too antsy to settle down: “It was not even lunchtime, and Ant was 
already out of one-person things to do.” Although a quick email exchange indicates 
that Honey Bee wants solitude, Ant heads out to “rescue her friend from being all 
alone.” Disregarding a sign on the door that says “EEP O T,” Ant enters her pal’s 
abode to find a contrarian Honey Bee who reluctantly but eventually gives into 
Ant’s request for a snack, an enormous sandwich made from the items in Honey 
Bee’s pantry. After this, a lengthy nap is in order, and the two friends snuggle up to 
hibernate together. The interplay between the two insect pals is engaging, while the 
humorous text is accessible and appropriately jokey. A large, clear typeface, repeated 
words and phrases, and short, direct sentences will help support novice chapter book 
readers. Karas’ gouache, acrylic, and pencil art is as charming as always, with muted 
tones effectively evoking the winter setting. Piquant artistic details—Honey Bee’s 
fluffy slippers, for example, or the hexagonal shape of her home’s windows—will 
delight sharp-eyed youngsters, and Ant in particular is a winsome little critter, es-
pecially in her artist’s beret when painting a picture. Educators may want to point 
out the many puns (“bee-mail”) or guide students to use context to figure out the 
sign on Honey Bee’s door; kids will enjoy the cozy friendship story.  JH
November 2013 • 171
messner, KAte Wake Up Missing. Bloomsbury, 2013 [272p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-2314-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8
Ever since twelve-year-old Cat Grayson fell from a tree while birdwatching, the 
lingering effects of a concussion have left her dizzy and confused, easily tired and 
forgetful. So when Cat and her family hear about the revolutionary treatment for 
brain injuries available at the I-CAN clinic, deep in the Florida Everglades, they 
jump at the chance to participate, even if it means leaving Cat alone in the care of 
the clinic’s mysterious if friendly doctors. Before long, though, odd things about the 
clinic start to make Cat nervous, and with the help of a new friend, she uncovers 
a dangerous secret: the clinic is part of a covert government program designed to 
implant the DNA of famous scientists into the minds of children and raise a new 
team of super-geniuses who will develop weapons for the military. Soon Cat and her 
fellow patients are on the run through swampland infested with poisonous snakes 
and enormous alligators, desperate to save their minds and themselves by finding 
an adult who will believe them. This fast-paced, compelling science thriller offers 
up plenty of suspense and action designed to keep readers on the edge of their seats. 
Regular but subtle references to unsuspected traps create an undertone of lurking 
danger and, alongside Cat’s early suspicions, allow the tension to build from the 
very beginning. At the same time, Cat’s desperation to return to her old life makes 
it believable that she would maintain hope, even in the face of the increasingly 
undeniable truth. The DNA plotline heads toward over the top, but the underlying 
science of concussions is fascinating and likely to be of interest to young readers 
who have been warned about the dangers of not wearing a helmet.  AM
morgAn, KAss The 100. Little, 2013 323p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-23447-4 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-23451-1 $9.99  
Ad Gr. 7-12
Ever since a nuclear cataclysm rendered Earth inhabitable, the last of humanity 
have been orbiting the planet in a rapidly decaying space station with dwindling 
supplies. Desperate to determine if enough time has passed for a safe return, the 
space station’s leaders give one hundred convicted juvenile delinquents a choice: 
die for their crimes or take a chance at survival as part of a scouting team. When 
their dropship tears apart before impact and crash lands in the wilderness, though, 
the teens quickly realize that earning a pardon simply by surviving will be harder 
than they anticipated. They quickly scramble to build shelters and care for the 
injured, but they face setbacks as their medical supplies mysteriously disappear, a 
suspicious fire tears through their camp, and they confront the distinct possibility 
that Earth isn’t as deserted as they thought. Conveyed in four interwoven narratives, 
the story follows four young people (three on the ground and one in space) as they 
struggle with their past choices and attempt to forge a future for themselves. This 
novel, conceived as a companion piece for a television show, reads like a pilot: all 
set-up and no resolution. Short chapters play out like single-event scenes, while a 
significant portion of the text is dedicated to backstory in the form of flashbacks. 
The post-apocalyptic survival narrative emerges as little more than a thin cover for 
the story’s teen-drama heart, complete with love triangles, secret pregnancies, family 
dysfunction, and class-based rivalries. Still, the action here is absorbing, and the 
172 • The bulleTiN
large cast provides readers with plenty of characters to love, despise, root for, and 
sigh over. Despite its limitations, this is ultimately entertaining, and it’s likely to be 
a hit with readers who want their Pretty Little Liars mixed with Lord of the Flies.  AM
morPurgo, michAel Meeting Cézanne; illus. by François Place. Candlewick, 
2013 [64p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4896-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-5
In this novel adapted from a BBC radio broadcast, ten-year-old Yannick is sent 
to stay with relatives at their inn in Provence in the 1960s. To convince Yannick 
that he will enjoy his time there, his mother shows him a book of paintings of 
the Provence area by the great artist Cézanne. Despite the dismissive attitude of 
his beautiful older cousin Amandine, Yannick does enjoy his stay in Provence, at 
least until the night that a famous guest comes for dinner at the inn. After the 
guest finishes his meal, Yannick, in his role as helper at the inn, crumples up the 
paper tablecloth and tosses it into the fire, not realizing that he has just destroyed 
a drawing by, as Amandine announces, “the most famous painter in the world.” 
To make up for his mistake, Yannick seeks out the artist, solicits a replacement 
drawing, and discovers to his surprise that the man he assumed was Cézanne is 
actually Picasso. The simple yet elegant narrative makes this a compelling choice 
for reading aloud while the relationship between Amandine and Yannick is likely 
to resonate with middle-graders who are besotted with their cooler teenage elders. 
Place’s frequent monochromatic, mixed-media illustrations are as clear and refined 
as the text and bring to life the French countryside of the 1960s. This might be 
useful in conjunction with an art class or a unit on artists, or hand it to the kids 
who love to draw more than they love to read—they’ll appreciate both the artistic 
connection and the brevity of the book.  JH
murdocK, cAtherine gilBert Heaven Is Paved with Oreos. Houghton, 
2013 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-547-62538-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 5-8 
At the end of her eighth-grade year, Sarah’s life is becoming complicated. She and 
her best friend, Curtis, have been faking coupledom because it keeps them from 
being teased about their friendship; now, though, the very pretty Emily is showing a 
strong interest in Curtis, and Curtis doesn’t want to have a fake girlfriend anymore. 
But if they are not fake boyfriend/girlfriend, can they still be best friends and work 
on science projects together? And why does it bother Sarah to think of Curtis and 
Emily together? When Sarah’s grandmother invites Sarah to go with her to Italy, 
Sarah is both scared and excited; her grandmother is wild and irresponsible, but 
Sarah appreciates the opportunity to get away from the fake boyfriend who seems to 
have really broken up with her. Sarah tells her story in the form of journal entries, 
and her voice is authentically tween as she tries to sort through the complicated turns 
her life is taking. The exploration of her relationship with her grandmother (who 
insists, much to Sarah’s dismay, that Sarah is just like her) is nuanced and reflective, 
allowing Sarah both to grow and to encounter complexities of adult romance that 
she’s not quite ready for. Murdock fans will be additionally delighted at Sarah’s 
friendship with D. J. Schwenk, protagonist of Dairy Queen (BCCB 9/06) and 
November 2013 • 173
Curtis’ sister. Like D. J., Sarah is practical, witty, and observant, but she’s younger 
and more wide-eyed, while still being grumpy and eye-rolling enough to be utterly 
credible as a Midwestern tween. Give this to fans of Frances O’Roark Dowell and 
the younger siblings of those who enjoyed the Dairy Queen trilogy.  KC
myers, wAlter deAn Invasion. Scholastic, 2013 212p
ISBN 978-0-545-38428-5 $17.99  
R Gr. 7-10
In this prequel to Fallen Angels (BCCB 4/88), Myers follows narrator Josiah 
“Woody” Wedgewood as his Army unit prepares to storm Omaha Beach in June 
of 1944. On hiatus from college to “do his duty,” Woody is an acquaintance of 
Marcus Perry from his hometown of Bedford, Virginia, but although their paths 
cross in Normandy, skin color dictates their disparate views of the action. Perry, 
whose son and nephew will figure in Myers’s later chronological novels, is black 
and relegated to transport services; Woody is white and is flung headlong into the 
crossfire, scrambling inland from the beach landing, fighting for position across 
dense hedgerows and open fields, and ultimately helping to take the coveted town 
of St. Lo, which has been effectively demolished by the time they stake their claim. 
Again, Myers undertakes the onerous challenge of putting “a face on war that 
reveals its horrors, but in a way that doesn’t repulse the reader,” as he states in his 
informative but heartfelt author’s note. He ably conveys Woody’s distorted sense 
of time and territory and how little land the Allied forces actually gain over weeks 
of brutal battle, and he balances the action scenes with quieter moments of equal 
power, such as when Woody takes part in prisoner interrogations that reveal an 
enemy as terrified and confused about the value of the mission as he is himself. 
Certainly established fans of Fallen Angels (BCCB 4/88) and Sunrise over Fallujah 
(BCCB 5/08) will scoop up this latest title, but a new generation of YA readers 
can now begin their six-decade march from Europe to the Middle East and ponder 
how little has changed.  EB
myrAcle, lAuren The Infinite Moment of Us. Amulet/Abrams, 2013 316p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0793-3 $17.95 
Ad Gr. 9-12
A model student and obedient daughter, Wren Gray has gotten used to putting 
the needs of others, particularly her parents, before her own, but as the end of 
high school approaches, she thinks it’s time she started making decisions for her-
self. Neglected as a child and subsequently bounced from foster home to foster 
home, Charlie Parker is simply glad to have made it through high school mostly 
unscathed, but he’s beginning to wonder if holding everyone at an arm’s length 
is worth the resulting loneliness. While they’ve been circling each other for years, 
the two teenagers finally act on their romantic feelings for each other at a gradu-
ation party and fall headlong into a passionate and lusty affair, one that changes 
both the way they see the world around them and themselves. The premise of an 
underprivileged, broken boy falling in love with an overindulged, broken girl isn’t 
terribly new, and Myracle falls back on a few too many tired tropes—the virginal 
heroine, the sexed-up ex of the hero, etc.—for this to stand out from the genre. The 
single-focus intensity of Wren and Charlie’s feelings is spot-on for the age group, 
however, and chapters move between both their perspectives as they grow into 
the relationship, offering readers of both sexes a rather compelling example of the 
how-to’s of intimacy. The descriptions of sex are vivid and erotic while still making 
174 • The bulleTiN
room for the awkwardness and insecurities that Charlie and Wren experience as 
they get to know each other’s bodies. An angsty misunderstanding, a last-minute 
plane ticket, and a happy ending ensure that Charlie and Wren, as well as romance 
readers, get exactly what they came for here.  KQG 
nowrA, louis Into That Forest. Skyscape, 2013 [160p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-1725-4 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4778-6725-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
In the early twentieth century Tasmania, six-year-old Hannah’s life takes a dramatic 
turn when her family’s boat capsizes on a river during a storm, killing her parents 
and stranding Hannah and her slightly older friend Becky in the bush. A pair of of 
Tasmanian tigers adopt the girls as their cubs and provide them with food, shelter, 
and warmth and the two girls quickly come to think of the animals (dubbed Dave 
and Corinna by Hannah) as family as they themselves grow increasingly feral. Becky’s 
father tracks the girls down, using Hannah as bait to catch and kill Dave, and then 
separates the girls in an attempt to recivilize them. When Becky runs away into the 
bush after a disastrous school experience, her father turns to Hannah to find her, 
but the reunion between the two girls ends in tragedy. Nowra doesn’t sugarcoat this 
survival story at all, and the loss of Hannah’s parents, the girls’ behavioral trans-
formation into predators (complete with bloody repasts), and the tragic deaths of 
Dave and Becky all carry visceral and emotional weight. Descriptions of the animal 
skills that Hannah and Becky develop are fascinating, as is the general immersion 
in the Tasmanian setting. Authorial notes would have been helpful, particularly to 
indentify the “tigers” as thylacines, large, striped, predatory, dog-like marsupials 
native only to Tasmania and now extinct. This nonetheless is a gripping exploration 
of survival, grief, and animal vs. human mindsets; hand it to kids who enjoyed The 
Life of Pi or to those intrigued by stories of feral children.  JH
PeñA, mAtt de lA The Living. Delacorte, 2013 [320p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98991-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74120-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-983435-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-10
It sounded like a great summer gig for a rising senior—pool boy and water server 
aboard a luxury liner shuttling rich vacationers between California and Mexico and 
Hawaii—but Shy Espinoza is finding the job isn’t as fun-filled as he’d thought. Yes, 
the tips are great and the coworkers, especially luscious Carmen, are as good-looking 
as he is, but on the first voyage out he is stuck listening to the drunken ramblings 
of a man who later throws himself overboard, and by the second voyage, he’s being 
tailed and interrogated by a black-suited man who seems to know a little too much 
about him—and that’s just for starters. A massive earthquake on the West Coast 
unleashes tsunamis that capsize the liner, leaving Shy stranded at sea in a lifeboat 
with a spoiled rich girl whose father is clearly key to the suicide mystery. They are 
rescued and brought to a hidden island where the full extent of a deadly pharma-
ceuticals cabal is revealed, and Shy and a couple of rescued crewmates (including, 
of course, luscious Carmen) fight for their lives. There’s an awful lot going on 
here, and the pile-up of tragedies and evil plots could strain the credulity of even 
November 2013 • 175
hardcore thriller fans. Peña takes the time to establish some solid rapport among 
his characters before unleashing the mayhem, though, and the central disease and 
drug scam is so viciously immoral that readers will probably book passage on the 
upcoming sequel, to learn whether Shy and his two smokin’-hot love interests will 
bring the bad guys to their knees.  EB
Pincus, greg The 14 Fibs of Gregory K. Scholastic, 2013 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-439-91299-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-58440-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 3-6
Gregory’s family is full of mathematicians, but unfortunately, eleven-year-old 
Gregory doesn’t like math—he’d much rather be making up stories or penning 
poems. When his best friend Kelly announces that she’s moving away at the start 
of the next school year, Gregory must find a way to convince his math-obsessed 
parents to let him join her at Author’s Camp for a summer to have one last hur-
rah together. He figures that entering the citywide math competition will get him 
in their good graces and distract them from his slipping math grade. Meanwhile, 
his math teacher has agreed to give him extra credit if he completes an additional 
assignment—a journal chronicling the way math appears in his day-to-day life. 
Gregory becomes intrigued by the Fibonacci sequence of numbers, realizing that 
the sequence’s pattern makes for an interesting poetic form; filling his journal 
with poems he calls “Fibs,” he figures out that he might just have a project for 
City Math after all. This rather cerebral story is gently silly, with details like an 
eccentric brother adding a humorous counterpoint to the surprising amount of 
mathematical information coded into the plot. Although Gregory’s father’s initial 
disappointment after Gregory’s “coming out” as a poet rather than a numbers guy 
stretches almost into ludicrousness, Gregory’s difficulties with being different from 
his parents, living in his older brother’s shadow, and feeling inadequate compared 
to a smart younger sister will strike a familiar chord with middle-graders struggling 
to define themselves. There’s a lot of space for this book to open up cross-curricular 
opportunities in math and literature, and it might also spark interesting book club 
conversations about how to deal with families whose interests diverge drastically 
from our own.  TA
Pyle, Kevin c. Bad for You: Exposing the Campaign against Fun: A Graphic Inves-
tigation; by Kevin C. Pyle and Scott Cunningham; illus. by Kevin C. Pyle. Holt, 
2013 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9289-9 $12.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 6-9
Although the term ephebiphobia, fear of youth, doesn’t appear until well into this 
title, it is the controlling idea behind Pyle’s exploration of buzzkill, past and pres-
ent. The presentation is organized into five chapters—Comics, Games, Technology, 
Play, and Thought—but these headers offer only rough clues to the exact issues, 
many of which overlap throughout the book. The comics chapter, for instance, also 
includes discussion of horror in folklore and how fantasy play (and reading) can help 
kids master fear; “Games” focuses primarily on video gaming but also introduces 
the concept of moral panic, which Pyle cites in further topics. The technological 
exploration reviews current pseudoscientific ideas on how technology might be 
176 • The bulleTiN
impacting the brain and processing activity; the look at play treats evolving demands 
for child safety in public play spaces; and the final chapter covers topics related to 
the education system. Pyle acts as provocateur, encouraging readers to think criti-
cally about adult critiques of kid culture, and to be particularly aware of the trap of 
conflating correlation with causation. It’s great advice, and it’s best when packaged 
in Pyle’s own comics-formatted arguments. Too often, though, clever and pithy 
discussion is interrupted by less effective prose rants, and Pyle even slips occasionally 
into the correlation mire as he sidesteps finesse. Still, he opens up a Pandora’s box 
of devilries sure to raise kids’ blood pressure, and the thorough online references 
on the Bad for You website offer a supplement to his print end matter and make it 
easy for middle-schoolers to click up myriad arguments to support or refute their 
own contentions. This may not be quite what the more high-minded Common 
Core folk had in mind, but you can bet that teachers will recognize a springboard 
to persuasive essay-writing lurking within these covers.  EB
rosenthAl, eileen Bobo the Sailor Man!; illus. by Marc Rosenthal. Atheneum, 
2013 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4443-0 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-4444-7 $12.99  
R 3-5 yrs 
Little boy Willy, Bobo the stuffed monkey, and Earl the cat (I Must Have Bobo!, 
BCCB 2/11) are back again, this time as explorers of nature. Tromping through 
the woods, Willy delights in his finds, including mushrooms, acorns, and a fuzzy 
caterpillar, but when he spies a bucket and a river, things really get exciting. Willy 
dubs Bobo “a sailor man,” places him into the bucket, and sets him adrift in the 
water, but soon Bobo and his bucket become stranded, lodged against a fallen log 
in the river. While Willy runs for something to help, Earl calmly trots across some 
stepping stones and retrieves Bobo from the bucket. Willy misses this, however, 
and uses a fishing pole to pull out the bucket with such a flourish that lands it 
on top of Earl and the already-rescued Bobo. Willy’s narration and his actions are 
authentically those of an exuberant young child, as he expresses amazement at the 
natural world or impetuously puts Bobo in the river without thinking about the 
consequences. The retro comic-like art, drawn in pencil on cream-colored pages 
and colored digitally, is as simple and childlike as the text. Much of the drawn 
backgrounds are colored only minimally, if at all, putting the focus on the more 
intense colors of Willy and his clothing, Bobo, and the bright red bucket. Pair this 
with any of Helen Oxenbury’s wonderful Tom and Pippo books for a satisfying 
toy-story session or read prior to a similar nature expedition.  JH
rowell, rAinBow Fangirl. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2013 [448p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-03095-5 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-03096-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R* Gr. 8-12
Confronting the quandaries of real life has never been easy for eighteen-year-old 
Cath Avery. Socially awkward and riddled with anxieties, she only feels confident 
in the imaginary World of Mages, setting of a bestselling children’s fantasy series, 
and as one of its most popular fanfic authors, Cath has ruled that world with 
ease. Now she must confront the very real world of dorm life, and to make mat-
ters worse, her twin sister has decided that she doesn’t want to room with Cath. 
November 2013 • 177
Suddenly facing the social whirl of college alone, Cath finds allies in unexpected 
places: her strange, seemingly unfriendly roommate, a cute guy from her writing 
class, and her roommate’s goofy ex, Levi, who turns from a possible friend into 
a boyfriend. With their help, Cath finds a way to face not just college but family 
crises, the demands of her fanfic readers, and the pressure from her teacher to create 
non-fanfic work, and in the end to balance while standing on her own. An engag-
ing read, this funny, heartfelt novel conveys a touching personal journey toward 
self-confidence and romance. The sizable length leaves room for the introduction 
of many memorable characters, but this is really Cath’s story, and readers will find 
her worth the attention. As the supportive boyfriend, Levi is perhaps too perfectly 
ready-made for reader crushes, but the romance as a whole is grounded and real. 
Rowell treats fanfic writers and readers with respect, making this book a treat for 
anyone who appreciates fan culture, but also offers a nuanced perspective of the 
values and challenge of striking out on your own in writing and in life. This is the 
perfect next-read for fans of Stephanie Perkins (Anna and the French Kiss, etc.) who 
wanted to follow her characters to college.  AM
ruBin, AdAm Secret Pizza Party; illus. by Daniel Salmieri. Dial, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3947-5 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 5-8 yrs
“Poor Raccoon. All he wants in life is some pizza.” Unfortunately for Raccoon, 
it’s hard to get your paws on a slice when you have a rep for stealing food and 
digging through trash cans. An unnamed narrator (and ally) comes up with the 
suggestion of a secret pizza party (“Regular pizza party: Get that raccoon off the 
table!! Secret pizza party: Get that raccoon another slice of pizza, he’s the guest of 
honor”), and Raccoon takes to the idea immediately. He manages to steal a pizza, 
escape the raccoon-sniffing broom-bots, and hole up safely in his tree; rather than 
stopping while he’s ahead, he then crashes the neighbors’ secret pizza party and 
gets caught red-handed fully reclined on a table full of pizzas. Secret eating is an 
appealing notion, but the joke is taken too far for the story to support, and some 
of the humor is outside the audience range. The watercolor, gouache, and colored 
pencil illustrations make the starring raccoon crafty but loveable, veering between 
anthropomorphism (he’s bipedal and trenchcoated when he’s in the pizza parlor) 
and authentically animal (in escape, he darts like the wild creature he is). The palette 
effectively contrasts the raccoon’s monochromatic markings with the yellows and 
reds of the pizza throughout, and the lively, slightly offbeat compositions bring a 
welcome helping of energy. The story doesn’t quite deliver, but listeners will empa-
thize with the misunderstood protagonist who just wants a piece of the pie.  HM 
rundell, KAtherine Rooftoppers; illus. by Terry Fan. Simon, 2013 [288p]
ISBN 978-1-4424-9058-1 $16.99 
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-7
Baby Sophie is found floating in a cello case after the passenger ship she was on 
sinks in the English Channel. She’s adopted and raised by Charles, a fellow survi-
vor, but when she is twelve, the authorities determine that as a single man Charles 
is not a fit parent for the young girl. Sophie and Charles flee to Paris, where they 
plan to seek Sophie’s mother; official channels for the search prove hopeless, but 
then Sophie meets Matteo, a “rooftopper,” one of several homeless children in Paris 
178 • The bulleTiN
who make their abode on top of the city’s buildings. With Matteo’s help, Sophie 
begins a nighttime campaign of listening from rooftops in hopes of hearing her 
mother’s cello, as well as conducting a search of the police’s top-floor archives to 
find more information about the sunken ship and its survivors. There’s certainly 
appeal and humor in the way Charles and Sophie turn some of the more stuffy 
Victorian traditions on their ear, but their behavior and dialogue occasionally tip 
towards the anachronistic. The hard-knock world of the rooftoppers is intriguing 
in both its grit and detail, and Matteo is an especially strong character as he refuses 
to cut Sophie any slack or to compromise his own rules for living. Unfortunately, 
the highly implausible happy ending, reuniting Sophie and her mom but giving 
no explanation of what will happen to Charles’ role in Sophie’s life, is abrupt and 
unsatisfying. Most readers, however, will still rejoice that Sophie has found what 
she has sought, so hand this to kids who like their historical fiction with a creative 
edge.  JH
rusch, elizABeth Electrical Wizard: How Nikola Tesla Lit Up the World; illus. by 
Oliver Dominguez. Candlewick, 2013 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-5855-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 3-4
This picture-book biography focuses on two of Nikola Tesla’s important undertak-
ings—establishing alternating current as the standard in a rapidly electrifying world, 
and harnessing the power of Niagara Falls for hydroelectric power. Rusch first offers 
a bit of background, presenting Tesla’s fascination with electricity during his child-
hood in Serbia and his eureka moment in college when he understood the practical 
advantages of AC. Then she turns to Tesla’s attempt to bring his ideas forward in 
America, where he expected an open-minded reception. Thomas Edison, whom 
Tesla had hoped would be his promoter, pretty much brushed off his ideas, and the 
direct vs. alternating current battle briefly raged, with the personal rivalry between 
the two great electrical innovators heading into science history. Matching this title 
to an audience is likely to be a challenge, since the tone of the text is aimed at a 
young crowd, while the science itself, which is essential to understanding the Tesla/
Edison story, is far more daunting and relegated to substantial notes at the end. The 
electrical trials at Niagara Falls play out here as little more than an afterthought, 
condensed into a single page, but the appended explanations of how AC and DC 
are generated, as well as how Tesla pulled off some of his more theatrical electrical 
demonstrations, could be of value to students all the way into middle school, who 
will be interested in a more comprehensive biography. Dominguez’s mixed-media 
paintings ably set the historical scenes for several of Tesla’s milestone encounters, 
and his technical diagrams in the back matter are genuinely helpful. Quotation 
sources and a list of resources for further reading and viewing are included.  EB
sAyre, APril Pulley Eat Like a Bear; illus. by Steve Jenkins. Holt, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8050-9039-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
 R* 5-9 yrs
“Can you eat like a bear?” this early nature study book asks. It’s harder than you 
may think: the melodic text follows the practical bear month by month from 
November 2013 • 179
spring wakeup to winter sleep as she digs through the spring snow for horsetails, 
makes do with a frozen bison hide, licks up escaping ants from a torn-up tree, 
gulps down cutworm moths, and digs up squirrel-left pine cones rather than just 
dining sumptuously on elk (the calf gets away) and trout (she does catch one, but 
it’s hardly the bulk of her diet). The lilting text hovers between poetry and prose, 
avoiding metrically structured lines but drawing on gentle internal and end rhymes 
and repetition to provide shape and rhythm. The present-tense second-person 
(second-bear?) narration is swift and conversational (“Wait. What was that?/ Tilt 
your head./ Use your ears./ Dig in. Dig down”), with evocative sound and detail  
(“ . . . ants!/ Chew them, sour and squirming./ Lick your lips”) and the relentless 
pulse of the hunt for food (“Find food/ But where?” opens every month’s pages) 
adding vitality. Adult explanation could help flesh out specifics about “talus slopes” 
and “cutworm moths,” but they’re clear enough in context to avoid impairing 
the narrative flow. Jenkins’ paper-collage art is superlative here; compositions are 
creative, dramatic, and even comical (a page turn after the elk chase reveals the 
disappointed bear peering out at the audience), and the textured blend of bristle and 
fur is aptly conveyed (by, according to the note, a Mexican bark paper). A spread of 
end matter provides compact and solid additional information about bears, their 
diet, and their habits and habitats. Kids who think that eating like a bear means 
roaring around and nomming everything in sight are in for a surprise.  DS
seAmon, hollis Somebody Up There Hates You. Algonquin, 2013 [256p]
ISBN 978-1-61620-260-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 8-12
 “Somebody Up There Hates You,” aka SUTHY syndrome, is seventeen-year-old 
Rich’s explanation for having terminal cancer that’s landed him in hospice with no 
more than thirty days to live. Though beaten down by disease and chemotherapy, 
Rich isn’t dead yet, and in fact he’s completely fallen for another hospice patient, 
fifteen-year-old Sylvie. Sylvie is determined that she and Rich will lose their virgin-
ity together before they die, and while Rich takes a quick diversion (on an illicit 
Halloween outing, he’s delighted by oral sex from a mysterious Marie Antoinette) 
and fears the wrath of Sylvie’s furious father, he’s as eager as she is. Will they man-
age to take this one last life-affirming step, and how much life do they have left 
to affirm? Seamon is particularly acute at balancing the average teenage lascivious 
longings with the running down of the hourglass; there’s some resemblance of the 
issues and emotional dynamics to Green’s The Fault in Our Stars (BCCB 5/12), 
while the inevitability of the coming end stage also recalls Downham’s Before I 
Die (BCCB 10/07). Richie’s paradoxical blend of checked out (he’s pretty much 
stopped eating) and still here is believable and poignant, and his adoration of will-
ful, indulged Sylvie brings additional dimension. The book takes a strange turn in 
the final third, however, after Rich’s successful sex with Sylvie leads to bleeding that 
may kill her; it’s also not clear whether readers are meant to accept as literal Rich’s 
poker game with Sylvie’s father for more days of life and what change the game 
actually causes, which muddies and undermines the conclusion. The situation and 
the ironic vitality of Rich’s narration are still compelling, though, and readers will 
appreciate the particularly modern take on doomed young romance.  DS
180 • The bulleTiN
shAnnon, george Turkey Tot; illus. by Jennifer K. Mann. Holiday House, 
2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2379-8 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys  
R 4-7 yrs
“Fat blackberries hanging overhead” are quite the temptation for Turkey Tot and 
his pals Pig, Hen, and Chick, but the critters simply can’t reach the dangling fruit. 
Inventive Turkey Tot keeps coming up with berry-grabbing possibilities based on 
items he finds in the barnyard, but his friends complacently accept the situation 
and dismiss his efforts (“He’s been different since the day he hatched,” grumbles 
Hen). Unfazed, TT continues his experiments and devises his own version of the 
classic Romper Stompers, tin cans on his feet that allow him to reach the berries; 
fortunately, the kindly bird is happy to share his spoils with his formerly skeptical, 
now appreciative friends. While there are clear echoes of “The Little Red Hen” 
here in structure and trajectory, this is no monitory parable but a happy tale of the 
pleasures of problem solving. The text’s simplicity and careful, folkloric structure, 
including audience-appealing phrases and plot patterns, will draw young audiences 
in; Turkey Tot’s gleeful, overoptimistic take on the possibilities of detritus will ring 
true to anybody who’s known an ambitious collector/tinkerer, and his enthusiastic 
exploratory approach is heroic as well as comic. Mann’s art assembles pencil and 
watercolor figures in layered digital collage; there’s a breath of Jules Feiffer to her 
vigorous scrawls but also a sly contemporary edge to the critters’ wide, dubious 
eyes and slightly skewed comic poses. Young inventors will appreciate this tribute 
to their skills and stick-to-it-iveness, and it’ll make everybody will want to try out 
some tin-can stilts, so roll out the carpets and get ready for mayhem.  DS
sidmAn, Joyce What the Heart Knows: Chants, Charms, & Blessings; illus. by 
Pamela Zagarenski. Houghton, 2013 65p
ISBN 978-0-544-10616-1 $16.99  
R Gr. 7-12
“We speak to send messages to the world,” says esteemed poet Sidman in her 
introduction to this collection of thirty poems designed expressly to send such 
messages. Four sections (“Chants & Charms,” “Spells & Invocations,” “Laments 
& Remembrances,” “Praise Songs & Blessings”) cover a range of emotions, from 
hopes (“Invitation to Lost Things”) and celebration (“Blessing on the Smell of Dog”) 
to confusion (“Where Is My Body?”) and regret (“Chant to Repair a Friendship”). 
While some entries are more incantatory than others, they’re all swift and intimate 
lyrics, sometimes rising to stellar levels of percipience and flow (as in “A List of 
Things That Will Set You Free,” “Illness: A Conversation,” and “Riding a Bike at 
Night”). The trim portrait-oriented volume frames the short lines of the poetry, and 
elegant design (including a silk-ribbon bookmark) adds to the appeal of the verses. 
Zagarenski’s dreamy, fantastical mixed-media illustrations are an apt complement; 
sometimes full bleed, sometimes spot art, they suggest Cirque du Soleil traveling 
through Chagall’s world, with slender crowned harlequins traversing landscapes 
and consorting with wild animals as the stars look on (keen-eyed readers will note 
additional recurring motifs, such as the steamy teakettle and the versatile wheels). 
Readers just edging toward adult poetry and those filling their notebooks with their 
own lyrics will find this elegant little title perfect for poetic dreams.  DS
November 2013 • 181
sKovron, Jon Man Made Boy. Viking, 2013 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78620-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Okay, Boy isn’t quite your average teen—he’s a bit larger, and most of his body is 
stitched together from spare parts—but he’s still got problems like any seventeen-
year-old kid. These problems include mustering up the courage to ask out his crush 
(who happens to be a troll), dealing with the expectations of his parents (who 
happen to be Frankenstein’s Monster and the Bride), and feeling like an outcast in 
his own community (which happens to be a theatre troupe made up of fantastical 
creatures, currently residing in vast caverns underneath Times Square). Spooked 
when his folks mention sending him off to school in Sweden, Boy takes off on a 
cross-country road trip with a host of other similarly displaced creatures (including 
the granddaughters of Jekyll and Hyde), but he’s hunted by VI, a sentient com-
puter virus designed by none other than Boy himself. Suffused with warmth and 
humor, this homage pokes fun more at the pop-culture tropes that have sprung 
up around Frankenstein than the actual classic work, with the digital version of 
a creation gone awry a particularly brilliant and contemporary twist. The plot is 
pieced together in episodic bits as Boy encounters different creatures at each pit 
stop, and both the various settings and the individual characters provide depth 
and complexity; the awe and wonder of the Southwestern desert, for example, is 
on full display here, while the painful loneliness of the Chupacabra, the last of its 
kind, is equally powerful. More comfortable behind the keyboard than in real life 
and wondering if he’ll ever fit in anywhere, Boy is a guy to whom plenty of teens 
will relate, and they’ll be pleased to discover that the big wide world has a place for 
just about everyone and every monster.  KQG 
sPencer, octAviA The Case of the Time-Capsule Bandit; illus. by Vivienne To. Si-
mon, 2013 [224p] (Randi Rhodes, Ninja Detective)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7681-3 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7683-7 $11.76
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-6
Twelve-year-old Randi Rhodes is just hitting her stride as Glenn Street, vigilante 
detective and protector of her Brooklyn neighborhood, bringer of justice to plant-
stealing dogs and pigeon-nappers everywhere, when Randi’s dad decides to up 
and move the family to Deer Creek, a sleepy little town in the mountains. Certain 
that she’ll be bored to tears by summer’s end, Randi is therefore thrilled when the 
town’s time capsule goes missing her first week there, giving her the perfect op-
portunity to use that new fingerprint kit she ordered and maybe show off some of 
her Tae Kwon Do moves as she takes down the offending thugs. A host of quirky 
supporting characters (the town’s pudgy but productive town sheriff is particu-
larly delightful) provide warmth in this cozy little mystery while Randi herself is 
eminently likable, an appealing mixture of bravado and vulnerability as she tries 
to crack the case, negotiate her relationship with her dad, and come to terms with 
her mother’s recent death. Academy Award–winner-turned-author Spencer lays 
out an inviting mystery perfectly suited for younger readers: Randi occasionally 
recounts clues as the mystery gets more complex, giving readers an opportunity 
to put the pieces together themselves and guess the culprit. If the ending goes a 
182 • The bulleTiN
bit over the top with Randi and her two new pals using their martial arts to take 
down eight grown men, well, that just adds to the general feel of kid-empowered 
wish fulfillment here, and this will likely garner enough fans to follow Randi on 
to her next case.  KQG
stAunton, ted Who I’m Not. Orca, 2013 [208p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0434-0 $12.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-043604 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12
After a youth of foster homes, assumed identities, and scams, our narrator isn’t 
sure what his real name actually is. He knows who he plans to be, however: Danny 
Dellomondo, an Ontario boy who disappeared a few years ago, and who would 
now be fifteen. As the returning lost relative, he’s tearfully embraced by Shannon, 
“his” older half-sister, who moves him into her house and tries to integrate him 
into the life she thinks he should have. Danny’s mother, however, is apparently still 
struggling with substance abuse and keeps her distance, and Danny’s half-brother, 
Tyson, is dopesick and completely thrown by Danny’s return. Pseudo-Danny’s plan 
is to put some money together and get out of there and back to the U.S. as soon 
as he can, but it’s not that simple: there’s Gillian, a girl he’s starting to really like, 
and the detective from Danny’s case is unhealthily interested in Danny’s ostensible 
return. Staunton (author of Power Chord, BCCB 2/11) brings an engaging solidity 
to the currently popular impostor plot, and fake Danny is an intriguing character—
a genuinely talented, compulsive grifter who’s great at understanding everybody’s 
behavior but his own, and who’s more of a lost soul than he realizes. His relation-
ship with Gillian is realistically low key even as it’s pivotal, and she’s gently and 
specifically characterized as a bit of a drifting soul herself. The underlying family 
drama is sadly plausible, and the Dellomondos are a credible hardscrabble clan 
with a mixture of stability and defeat. Fans of McClintock’s amiably gritty Dooley 
Takes a Fall (BCCB 9/08) will appreciate this speedy, satisfying suspense tale.  DS
terrill, cristin All Our Yesterdays. Disney Hyperion, 2013 [368p] (Cas-
sandra Chronicles)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-7637-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8107-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 8-12 
“You have to kill him.” So reads the final entry in a note that Em fishes out of the 
sewer pipe in her prison cell, a note written by another version of herself whose 
attempt to travel back in time and prevent the dystopian future that Em now finds 
herself in obviously failed. Now she and her prisonmate/boyfriend Finn must break 
into the lab where the time machine is housed, travel back four years, and murder 
the “doctor,” the inventor of the time machine. Meanwhile, in a parallel storyline, 
sixteen-year-old Marina is romantically frustrated by her childhood pal James, 
whose usually eccentric personality takes a turn for the worse when tragedy strikes 
his family, and she’s forced to partner up with his annoying friend Finn in their 
attempts to help him recover. Terrill makes the wise decision to reveal Em as the 
future Marina and James as the hated doctor early on, making this more a story of 
the ways in which people change under duress than a guessing games of who’s who. 
The narration alternates between Em and Marina, accelerating the pacing and the 
tension as Em and Finn close in on their target. More significantly, it allows the 
November 2013 • 183
book to explore the connection between Em and her former self: Em’s palpable 
affection for and forgiveness of Marina’s insecurities and mistakes are bittersweet 
and heartbreaking, and her emotions will likely strike a chord with older teens as 
they come to terms with who they are instead of who they’re trying to be. Effective 
and thrilling, this will find an audience among fans of action sequences as well as 
those who enjoy a solid emotional drama.  KQG 
thimmesh, cAtherine Scaly Spotted Feathered Frilled: How Do We Know What 
Dinosaurs Really Looked Like?; illus. by John Sibbick, Greg Paul, Mark Hallett, et 
al. Houghton, 2013 57p
ISBN 978-0-547-99134-4 $17.99 
 Ad Gr. 4-7
Six paleoartists are featured here as they make informed decisions how to portray, 
in illustration and in three-dimensional art, what may be unknowable—what di-
nosaurs exactly looked like. Readers learn that all the artists, no matter how diverse 
the final outcome of their work, begin with at the same starting place—the most 
up-to-date research on dinosaur bones. As more fossils are discovered and better 
identifications made, the artists are then able to extrapolate from the skeletons to 
the musculature. The fossil record also yields clues to portions of skin texture and 
feathering and in some cases has even begun to give up hints to pigmentation. This 
is the kind of information that can lure in readers beyond the usual dino hounds, 
so casual museumgoers and kids with an interest in forensic reconstructions should 
find the topic of interest too. However, specialized vocabulary can be challenging 
for general readers (even the glossary and index aren’t much help if you don’t know 
what a dino frill is, or that Paul Sereno is something of a big deal) and terms such 
as “ginormous,” “colossal,” and “gigantic” are too imprecise to be useful. At their 
best the illustrations offer wonderful comparisons of dino reconstruction past and 
present, but too frequently pages must be flipped to locate the referenced images. 
Enthusiasts who are just stepping into longer works on their favorite subject can 
probably compensate for these glitches, however, and enjoy the renderings—until, 
inevitably, even newer information necessitates their revision as well.  EB
thomAs, sherry The Burning Sky. Balzer + Bray, 2013 449p
ISBN 978-0-06-220729-6 $17.99  
Ad Gr. 7-10
Trained as an elemental mage since childhood, sixteen-year-old Iolanthe Seabourne 
is aware that she’s a capable magician, but even she is surprised when she manages to 
call down lightning from the skies. Her performance is observed across the Realm 
and signals to Prince Titus that it is time to fulfill his mother’s prophecy: that Titus 
will sacrifice his life to protect a great elemental mage, who will then defeat Bane, 
the tyrannical and unjust ruler of the Realm. When Titus finds Iolanthe, however, 
he realizes his mother’s visions didn’t account for everything, most notably that 
Iolanthe is a girl, a fact that is going to make Titus’ plan to hide her in the non-
magical world at Eton College, where Titus is receiving his nonmagical education, 
problematic. The boarding-school setting completes this exercise in familiar fantasy 
tropes, along with the prophesied savior, the all-powerful enemy, and the magical 
quest. That the savior is this time a girl will likely appeal to readers who felt more 
of a kinship with Hermione Granger than Harry Potter, and Iolanthe is a likable 
heroine with a wry wit and strong sense of self. Of the two leads, however, Titus is 
more compelling; he’s had to constantly present a façade of an arrogant and spoiled 
184 • The bulleTiN
prince to seem no threat to Bane’s rule, and now he’s unsure of how to deal honestly 
with Iolanthe. The world is built mostly through dialogue, which avoids lengthy 
exposition, but the book fails to establish any real sense of atmosphere, either in 
the Realm or in Britain. Still, piecing together the prophecy will likely keep readers 
engaged, and the return of the thought-to-be-dead Bane ensures a sequel.  KQG 
ursu, Anne The Real Boy; illus. by Erin McGuire. Walden Pond/HarperCol-
lins, 2013 [352p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-201507-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-06-204925-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 4-7
Eleven-year-old Oscar isn’t adept at social interactions, so he’s quite content to 
prepare herbs and potions in the basement of Master Caleb’s shop, befriend-
ing the cats and mostly keeping to himself. When Caleb, one of the few magic 
workers left in the world of Aletheia, is suddenly called away on business and the 
other shop boy goes missing, Oscar is forced to deal with the demands of Caleb’s 
wealthy clientele, fielding requests for love potions and youth tonics and struggling 
to interpret people’s perplexing ways. If that weren’t enough, the shop is attacked 
one night by an enormous, shadowy creature and the children of the village begin 
to fall ill. With most of the magic workers missing or away, it’s left up to Oscar 
and his new friend, a healer’s apprentice, to figure out what’s going on. As she did 
with Breadcrumbs (BCCB 10/11), Ursu constructs an elegantly sophisticated but 
age-appropriate tale upon the bones of a well-known story, in this case, Pinocchio, 
though the hint in the title is the only allusion until the final reel. An underdog 
boy saving the people who ridicule him is a familiar premise, but here it unfolds 
organically, echoing the fairy-tale tradition of mixing darkly sinister themes with 
moments of true heroism and bravery. Although most adult readers will recognize 
Oscar as on the spectrum, his guilelessness and bewilderment at social customs will 
likely ring true with plenty of children who have found themselves perplexed by 
the grownups’ conversations. Wryly humorous narrative asides would make this a 
pleasure to read aloud, either in the classroom or at home, and the striking digital 
illustrations, populated with wide-eyed, angular figures, hint at some of the book’s 
more enigmatic themes.  KQG 
vAn leeuwen, JoKe The Day My Father Became a Bush; written and illus. by Joke 
van Leeuwen, tr. by Bill Nagelkerke. Gecko, 2013 104p
ISBN 978-1-8775-7948-6 $16.95  
R Gr. 4-6
Toda’s father, a pastry chef, has been called to war, and Toda’s city has become too 
dangerous for her to live in; she therefore must travel across the border to stay with 
her mother in a country where no one can even pronounce her full name. The 
setting here is contemporary but indistinctly European, with Toda having to learn 
an invented language that shares characteristics with Dutch, Flemish, and German 
as she adjusts to life in her new country. The main action of the story, however, is 
her rather harrowing journey to cross the border, during which she meets a slightly 
insane retired general and a deserting captain, who has found that his skills at com-
mand are limited to peace-time operations. Toda’s wide-eyed observations are laced 
with gentle humor that is always edged with a faint sense of dread, and the pen 
and ink drawings that augment the text have the same funny/creepy quality. This 
November 2013 • 185
tonal register indicates why van Leeuwen has won many awards in the Netherlands; 
she manages to effectively capture the late elementary sense of wary engagement 
in a dangerous and confusing world, maintaining a knife-edge balance between 
humor and terror. Toda wears her naïveté like body armor, and it gets her through; 
readers whose parents are in harm’s way will find in her a sturdy companion.  KC
wAKeField, viKKi Friday Never Leaving. Simon, 2013 322p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8652-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-8655-3 $10.99  
R Gr. 7-10
Friday and her mother are always on the move, so Friday’s sense of self and home 
comes from her mother’s stories rather than a place. From those stories she knows 
she’s loved but that she’s also cursed: all of the Brown women are destined to drown 
on a Saturday. When her mother’s lungs fill up one Saturday and she loses her battle 
with cancer, Friday ends up living with a group of street kids, whose leader, Arden, 
possesses many of the qualities Friday admired in her mother and desperately misses. 
Arden’s methods of keeping the group together, however, soon make Friday uncom-
fortable, and she tries to convince Silence, a selectively mute boy whose loyalties 
have transferred from Arden to Friday, to come away with her. Arden can’t allow 
this threat, and the entire group is put in danger by her warped need to maintain 
power. Artfully written, this story ranges from a sensitive portrait of broken kids 
trying to survive on their own and create the family they need, to depictions of life 
in urban and outback Australia, to a breathtaking action/adventure with outcomes 
both heartbreaking and chilling. Friday emerges as a character who is vulnerable 
to the machinations of others because she doesn’t yet understand her own needs 
or power, and Wakefield surely but subtly charts how Friday escapes the thrall of 
Arden to embrace the legacy of her mother, who has taught her many practical 
things as well as how to survive by staying mobile and knowing your own stories. 
Lyrical prose traces her path from lonesome grief to empowering connectedness, 
and it’s clear that coming to terms with the story of her past will ultimately free 
her to write the story of her future.  KC 
wAlden, mArK Earthfall. Simon, 2013 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9415-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9417-6 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
For the past year and a half, fifteen-year-old Sam Riley has focused on nothing but 
survival. Hiding by day from trawling alien-robot invaders and their brainwashed 
human slaves, he emerges only at night when desperate for supplies. Now, though, 
he’s been discovered by two other teenagers, who save his life and take him back to 
their secure compound deep in London’s complex network of sewers. There he joins 
a ragtag group of teens, led by a secretive scientist and a former soldier, who want 
to do more than survive; they want to fight back, and Sam is thrilled to help. Even 
as he leads forays against alien forces, though, Sam begins to suspect that the adults 
know more than they are saying. When a final mission into the alien’s stronghold 
leads to everyone’s capture aboard the mothership, Sam tries to discover the truth 
behind the aliens’ intentions and uncovers secrets about his own origins that just 
might save the world. A vivid page-turner from its opening scene, this fast-paced, 
action-adventure sci-fi blends the present-day science of nanotechnology, the 
186 • The bulleTiN
fantastic concept of distributed consciousness, and the mystery of secret societies 
to create an edge-of-your seat read. The focus is on action, so characterization is 
slight, but that doesn’t keep the central teens from emerging as likable, memorable 
individuals. The pace slows somewhat during the lengthy revelation of the alien’s 
and Sam’s histories, but it picks up rapidly for a stunning conclusion that sets up 
likely sequels. Packed with adventure but light on gore and gloom, this is the perfect 
choice for fans of the recent trend in robot combat (Rosenblum’s Revolution 19, 
BCCB 4/13 and Kade’s Bot Wars, BCCB 6/13) and alien invasions (Yancey’s 5th 
Wave, BCCB 9/13) who like their novels with a cinematic feel.  AM
wAllAce, cArey The Ghost in the Glass House. Clarion, 2013 229p
ISBN 978-0-544-02291-1 $16.99  
Ad Gr. 5-7
In the three years since her father’s death, twelve-year-old Clare has been forced to 
tag along behind her high-society mother, flitting from resort to resort as her mother 
uses her wealth and freedom to fully enjoy the height of the Roaring Twenties. At 
their latest temporary home, Clare finds comfort with Jack, a ghostly boy who haunts 
a mysterious locked glass house behind the estate. Unfortunately, even Jack’s kisses 
and tenderness can’t protect Clare from the cruelty of the town’s other privileged 
children, and Clare finds herself the target of Bridget, her former best friend, when 
she attracts the attention of not one, but two, well-off boys. The mystery behind 
Jack’s death and his haunting isn’t nearly as engrossing as the emotional warfare 
waged here by Clare’s other friends; basically abandoned by their wealthy parents, 
Bridget and her cohort mimic the selfishness and greed they’ve seen and give kudos 
to those who can be the most hurtful, all while playing the game with manners 
and postured civility. Their amorality throws Clare’s innocence into sharp relief, 
making her even more appealing as she attempts to negotiate the shark-infested 
waters between childhood and adulthood. The plot rambles quite a bit, however, 
with an ambiguously violent episode serving as the climax and a sudden, completely 
unmotivated turnaround by Clare’s mother providing an unexpected resolution. 
An odd but romantic ghost story, this might appeal to readers who were drawn to 
the darker undercurrents of The Secret Garden but who are not quite ready for the 
Brontë sisters.  KQG 
wAllAce, sAndrA neil Muckers. Knopf, 2013 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96754-2 $19.99 
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86754-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-307-98238-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
The copper mine is just about played out in the northern Arizona town of Hatley, 
and when the Eureka Company shuts down the operation, the local economy 
will collapse, most residents will disperse, and the schools will lock their doors. 
This means that 1950 is the last chance for the Hatley Muckers football team to 
resurrect its glory days, as the last generation of players cleans up the unfinished 
business left by their older siblings—taking the state title. As in all good sports 
stories, this is a raggedy, undersized team, and they are distinctive among big-name 
state high school teams in that the Muckers are integrated; Mexicans may be rel-
egated to the low-end mining jobs, visit the public pool only on designated days, 
and live in the searing Gulch during the week, but on game days they’re judged 
November 2013 • 187
and respected according to what happens on the slag gridiron. Based on events in 
the town of Jerome, Arizona in 1950, the fictional championship season is seen 
through the eyes of narrator “Red” O’Sullivan, the quarterback determined to win 
in memory of his older brother, killed in World War II; Red teeters between loyalty 
to his home town and best friend, Cruz, and the certainty that his only future lies 
far away from his hospitalized mother, his drunken father, and a dead end job in 
another mine. There’s no denying this sounds like a laundry list of familiar sports 
tropes, but Wallace makes them live and breathe through careful attention to the 
quotidian details of local geography and universal motivators—guilt, friendship, 
spite, encouragement, anger, and talent.  EB
weBB, holly Rose. Sourcebooks, 2013 [240p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-8581-3 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad Gr. 5-7
In this first title of a series imported from England, young Rose (who believes she’s 
“about ten”) is excited to exchange St. Bridget’s Home for Abandoned Girls for a 
housemaid position at the house of wealthy alchemist Mr. Fountain. Her magical 
powers, however, are making it difficult to keep her head down and make a living, 
and her abilities strike a nerve with Mr. Fountain’s young apprentice, Freddie, who 
is clearly not as naturally gifted as Rose in the magical arts. Gradually, though, 
Freddie and Rose come together to figure out who’s behind a rash of children gone 
missing. The glamorous and frightening Miss Sparrow, who has her sights set on 
Mr. Fountain as a spouse, has apparently been trying to discover the secret of eternal 
life by drinking a magical concoction that includes the blood of the kidnapped 
children. Calling upon a “mist monster,” Freddie and Rose rescue the children and 
leave Miss Sparrow to the hungry monster’s devices, but Mr. Fountain’s tidy wrap-
up of the situation reveals that she may not be completely gone after all. Webb 
pokes gentle fun at Victorian tropes here (“She knew no grand lady was going to 
sweep into the orphanage and claim her as a long-lost daughter”), and the plot 
offers both intrigue and adventure. Aside from Rose, however, the characters are 
fairly flat and predictable, and events whip by in order to tie the plot up before the 
end; the blood-sucking witch is also a rather jarring addition to what is otherwise 
a domestic historical fantasy. Still, kids who like a mix of magic and history with a 
dash of darkness (perhaps those not yet ready for Stroud’s Bartimaeus trilogy) may 
find this an entertaining read.  JH
wegmAn, williAm Flo & Wendell; written and illus. by William Wegman. Pen-
guin, 2013 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3928-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys  
Ad 4-6 yrs
Big sister Flo can read, write, tie her shoes, and paint, and she also likes to dress 
up. Little brother Wendell likes to play dress-up, too—as long as Flo doesn’t make 
him wear the bunny costume—but prefers soccer, or hide-and-seek, even though 
Flo is not always the most motivated seeker. Their parents “wish they would find 
something to do together,” like a game of badminton or setting up a lemonade 
stand, but there is one thing they do enjoy together: “At the end of each day, Flo 
likes to read and Wendell likes to listen. Sometimes.” The storyline lacks original-
ity, as Flo and Wendell, who appear with the photographic heads of Weimaraner 
188 • The bulleTiN
puppies and painted bodies, cover much of the same ground as other titles featuring 
siblings such as Ian Falconer’s Olivia series and Marie-Louise Gay’s Stella books. 
Fortunately, Wegman’s pithy narration and winning illustrations make this retread 
hard to resist. Using gouache on photographs, Wegman constructs an attractive, 
candy-colored world for the people-like puppies to inhabit, and scenes of Wendell 
chasing the soccer ball, ears flapping, or looking adoringly at Flo, or sleeping on 
a stack of books add variety. The poses are occasionally static, but most readers 
are going to be drawn to the clothes-wearing, serious-eyed pups no matter what, 
and viewers may also be intrigued enough by the construction of the illustrations 
to enjoy trying a similar technique on their own. Pair this with Falconer’s Olivia 
(BCCB 11/00) for a sibling storytime, or maximize the “aww”-factor by pairing it 
with another Wegman title.  JH
werlin, nAncy Unthinkable. Dial, 2013 [400p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3373-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
When Lucy Scarborough performed the three impossible tasks to break the centu-
ries-old curse of the Scarborough women (in Impossible, BCCB 9/08), her ancestor, 
Fenella, thought she would be released to the death she has sought for four hundred 
years; however, it was not to be. It turns out that to reverse the life-spell cast on 
her, Fenella must perform three tasks of destruction to balance out the three tasks 
of creation in the original curse. While Lucy had the help of her family, Fenella 
cannot even ask, because the acts of destruction must be committed against that 
same family; she must destroy safety, love, and hope with only the counsel of the 
brother of the Faerie Queen, who will enter the human realm with her as a cat. 
Weary of life, she is surprised to find herself charmed not only by the machines and 
technology of modern life, but by Walker, a family friend who awakens in her desire 
that she thought long dead. In addition to these pleasures, her family embraces 
her warmly, making her tasks more abhorrent than she could ever have imagined. 
Werlin manages to create in Fenella a character both prickly and sympathetic; even 
though she was unable to break the curse that destroyed generation after genera-
tion of her family, and her present actions are despicable and selfish, her backstory 
provides the necessary character development and motivation for readers to wish 
her success. Moreover, the plot twists reinforce the unfairness of the faerie bargain 
and the inevitability of seeing it through to its end. Complications hinted at in 
the Faerie Queen’s motives readjust the implications of Fenella’s success and make 
this ultimately uplifting tale as a reversal of the ecological dystopia genre—not 
a utopian vision, certainly, but one that carries forth hope in the possibility that 
creation can follow destruction.  KC 
wittenstein, vicKi orAnsKy For the Good of Mankind?: The Shameful History of 
Human Medical Experimentation. Twenty-First Century, 2013 96p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-0659-9 $35.93
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-1661-1 $26.95  
Ad Gr. 6-10
In the shadow of groundbreaking medical advancements are often harrowing tales 
of human subjects used in experimentation. Here Wittenstein offers a brief history 
November 2013 • 189
of this underworld of medical science and introduces past and contemporary efforts 
to balance the search for effective treatments with appropriate safeguards for the 
persons who test them. She opens with historical background on the development of 
the Hippocratic Oath and casual attitudes toward use of vulnerable populations for 
experimentation. Chapters Two and Three focus on the period around World War 
II, in Germany and in the United States, covering the medical atrocities conducted 
by Nazi doctors and the secret radiation experiments conducted on the homefront 
on human subjects. Chapter Four treats backlash from outrage following public 
exposes of unethical experimentation, and the formulation of the Common Rule 
that currently governs human experimentation in the U.S.; the concluding chapter 
focuses on current challenges surrounding for-profit pharmaceutical companies, 
conflict of interest, clinical trials, outsourcing trials to developing countries, and 
biospecimen ownership and research. The topic is timely and provocative, but the 
anecdotes are too often shallowly reported, creating more questions than answers, 
(e.g., how did eye injections come to be studied for tuberculosis treatment?), or 
they are inadequately sourced (such as the unauthorized use of blood samples from 
the Havasupai tribe). If used as a starting point for research, however, this title 
could be a valuable resource, particularly for students in the process of narrowing 
a topic within the broader issue. Source notes, a selected bibliography, lists for 
further reading, an index, discussion questions, and an array of black and white 
illustrations are included.  EB
wolF, JenniFer shAw Dead Girls Don’t Lie. Walker, 2013 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-8027-3449-5 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys  
R Gr. 7-10
Six months ago, a fight over a guy officially broke up the already disintegrating 
friendship between sixteen-year-old Jaycee and her best friend, Rachel. Now Rachel 
is dead, shot through her bedroom window, a drive-by victim in a gang war that 
has supposedly followed the Mexican migrant workers in Jaycee’s small farm town. 
Jaycee’s not buying any of it, however, and although she is initially driven mostly 
by her guilt over not answering Rachel’s last text message—a cryptic plea sent 
directly to Jaycee—she knows she’s onto something when her questions incur the 
wrath of the local football god and his sheriff brother. One of Rachel’s old friends 
from the migrant community warns Jaycee off, as does her own father, and soon 
Jaycee is left trusting only Skyler—the boy she ignored Rachel’s last text for and 
who is suddenly keeping secrets of his own. The players in Rachel’s murder are all 
fairly obvious from the beginning, but the ways in which they are involved and the 
motivations behind their actions remain ambiguous until the final reveal, making 
readers question along with Jaycee who they know and what the truth really is. Shaw 
wisely stays away from any climax that brings resolution to the obviously thick and 
long-held racial tensions that foreground this particular crisis; there is little redemp-
tion for the two communities, just the tentative connection between two former 
friends of a dead girl. Jaycee is a bit clueless at times, particularly when it comes to 
Skyler, but it’s an authentic adolescent naïveté that insists that the people she has 
known from childhood must be good people, if only for that reason. Mystery fans 
will find this a satisfying way to spend an evening.  KQG
190 • The bulleTiN
wood, Audrey The Birthday Queen; written and illus. by Audrey and Don 
Wood. Scholastic, 2013 32p
ISBN 978-0-545-41474-6 $17.99  
Ad 4-6 yrs
In the Birthday Palace, the Birthday Queen handles with aplomb all arrangements 
for birthday parties. She tests party games, auditions clowns, wraps gifts, decorates, 
and even bakes the birthday cake of your dreams. Nothing fazes her, it would seem, 
and when, post-birthday wish, you open your eyes and look at her, “she smiles, 
and when she does . . . she looks just like your mother.” This is a warm-hearted 
tribute to mothers who throw themselves into party-planning for their offspring, 
and scenes of white doves bearing birthday invitations and the Birthday Queen 
getting ready to whack a piñata are entertaining. There’s about as much substance 
to this, though, as there is to the birthday cake’s whipped buttercream frosting, and 
the gaudy and busy art detracts from the enjoyment of the story. The overly intense 
faces, particularly of the Birthday Queen and the clowns, are often unfortunately 
unattractive, if not downright creepy. However, the bright colors and festive text 
may suit a party at which the youthful audience is already sugared up on cake, ice 
cream, and soda, and the Pinteresting moms who obsess over favors and decorations 
will likely appreciate the acknowledgement.  JH 
yAng, gene luen Boxers; written and illus. by Gene Luen Yang, color by Lark 
Pien. First Second/Roaring Brook, 2013 328p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-359-5 $18.99  
R* Gr. 8-12 
   Saints; written and illus. by Gene Luen Yang, color by Lark Pien. First 
Second/Roaring Brook, 2013 170p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-689-3 $15.99  
R* Gr. 8-12 
In this set of companion graphic novels, two teens struggle to discern and fulfill 
their destinies as foreigners intervene in China’s affairs, and the Boxer Rebellion of 
1900 attempts to purify the homeland of alien influence. In the volume Boxers, Little 
Bao encounters the scowling face of a girl (whom readers will later come to know as 
Vibiana), and instead of seeing ugliness, he sees the beautiful mask of a god in the 
operas he loves. Romantic pursuits are not in his immediate future, however, and 
the first emperor god Ch’in Shih-huang demands that Little Bao wreak vengeance 
on foreign devils and their Chinese accomplices. The next time he encounters 
Vibiana is in the heat of the uprising, and he kills her for her adherence to the 
Catholic faith, shortly before his enemies toss him into a pit of corpses. Vibiana’s 
story unfolds in Saints as a despised fourth daughter, left unnamed by her family, 
who finds her identity through the kindness and tutelage of a Christian convert. 
She, too, has otherworldly guidance, and she becomes convinced that apparitions 
of Joan of Arc signal her fate to become a female warrior for her faith. Her final 
encounter with Little Bao, which plays out largely offstage in Boxers, is fully realized 
here, and in an act of sly but sublime compassion she meets her own death with 
dignity and restores for Little Bao a second chance at a better life. The interplay of 
the two stories is meticulously constructed and, despite the sober subject, liberally 
inflected with visual and verbal humor. Readers familiar with American Born Chinese 
(BCCB 11/06) will recognize the art’s innocent, childlike character renderings and 
formally bordered frames. A reader can easily piece together the plot by beginning 
with either volume, but powerful impact and narrative surprise are only experienced 
November 2013 • 191
by saving Saints for last. No historical notes are included on the Boxer Rebellion, 
an omission that is generally a grave annoyance but here seems to serve as a subtle 
directive to focus on universal themes of principles, compassion, and loyalty. Like 
all good hero stories, this transcends its historic setting.  EB
CorreCTion:
In our September review of Nora Raleigh Baskin’s Runt we mistakenly referred to 
her prior title as Anything but Normal; the correct title is Anything but Typical.  The 
Bulletin regrets the error.
Our September review of Kurt Cyrus’ Your Skeleton Is Showing described the art 
as digitally created; the publisher wishes to note that the colors are digital but the 
linework and textures are manually created.
192 • The bulleTiN
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
ABAte, michelle Ann Bloody Murder: The Homicide Tradition in Children’s Lit-
erature. Johns Hopkins, 2013 266p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4214-0840-8 $55.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4214-0841-5 $55.00
Plenty of scholars can attest to the fact that children’s literature is no stranger to 
death and/or mayhem, and in this volume Abate argues that lethal violence has a 
long and bloody standing in books for children and that its presence and various 
iterations in such books mirrors the conceptions of death, fear, victimhood, crime, 
and even childhood in society at large. Focusing each of her six chapters on a par-
ticular work, Abate examines the role of homicide in such classics as Alice’s Adventures 
in Wonderland and Tarzan of the Apes as well as more contemporary works such as 
Walter Dean Myers’ Monster and Stacey Jay’s My So-Called Death. In one of the 
more fascinating chapters, Abate convincingly argues that Snow White is not a tale 
of filial jealousy by which children can work through their feelings of powerlessness 
at the hands of adults but rather an opportunity for parents to indulge in the fantasy 
of infanticide. The Queen’s refrain of “Off with their heads” in Alice in Wonderland 
is linked to the antigallows movement in England while Myers’ Monster displays 
kinship with colonial execution sermons. The author’s second frame to her argu-
ment, that these books enjoy particular prominence and celebration in the United 
States, however, is less persuasive, and the correlation between WorldCat records 
of these titles and anecdotal evidence of their popularity to America’s culture of 
violence seems tenuous at best. Still this is a compelling study of the ways in which 
the specter of violent death looms large in books for children, both historically 
and in modern literature, making this a valuable resource for scholars of the field. 
Endnotes, a list of works cited, and an index are included.  KQG 
November 2013 • 193
Abuse–fiction: Blair
Adventure: Blackwell; Carl-
son; Carlton; Cody; eddleman; 
Hughes; Jones; Kahaney; Kristoff; 
Messner; Peña; terrill; Walden
Africa–stories: Isadora
Africa–fiction: edinger
Alaska–stories: Brown 
Aliens–fiction: Lo
Anatomy: Levine 
Animals: Levine; Sayre
Animals–stories: Isadora
AntHoLogIeS: gray
Appearance–stories: diesen
Art: thimmesh
Art and artists–fiction: Morpurgo
Art and artists–stories: gerstein
Babies: Harris
Babies–fiction: Blair
Basketball–fiction: deuker; Feinstein
Bears: Sayre 
Bears–stories: Bunting
Bees: Huber; Markle
Behavior–stories: Larochelle 
BIogrAPHIeS: Beyer; ellis; 
Hemphill; Kohuth; Kris; rusch
Biology: guiberson; Harris; Huber; 
Levine; Sayre 
Birthdays–stories: Wood
Bisexuals–fiction: Lo
Boarding schools–fiction: goodman
Books and reading–fiction: Britt
Books and reading–stories: Wegman 
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Avasthi
Brothers and sisters–stories: Wegman 
Bullies–fiction: Britt; Hubbard; Wal-
lace, C.
Cancer–fiction: Seamon
Cars–stories: Larochelle 
Cats–stories: Mader; rosenthal
China–fiction: Yang
City life–stories: graham
Clothing–stories: Cunnane
College: Beyer
College–fiction: rowell
Colonial life–fiction: Cooper
Concentration camps–fiction: Lasky
Cows–stories: Larochelle
Crime and criminals–fiction: Ber-
nard; Carlton; doller; Kahaney; 
Staunton; Wolf
death and dying–fiction: Avasthi; 
Marciano; Seamon
deteCtIve StorIeS: Spencer
dinosaurs: guiberson; thimmesh
disasters–fiction: Burg
dogs: davey
down syndrome–fiction: Lange
dystopias–fiction: eddleman; 
Morgan
engineering: Macaulay
Environmental studies: Markle
Ethics and values: Black; Cody; 
deuker; Feinstein; Johnston; 
Pyle; Wittenstein
Faith–stories: Cunnane
Families–fiction: Clark; doller; 
Henkes; Johnston; Pincus; 
Staunton 
Fandom–fiction: rowell
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
194 • The bulleTiN
FAntASY: Black; diCamillo; 
goodman; Kristoff; thomas; 
Webb; Werlin
Fathers–fiction: Heldring
Fear–stories: Mader 
Films and filmmakers–fiction: Kyi
FoLKLIKe tALeS: Shannon 
FoLKtALeS And FAIrY tALeS: 
Bryant; duffy
Food and eating–stories: rubin
France–fiction: Morpurgo; rundell
Freerunning–fiction: Avasthi
Friends–fiction: Feinstein; Mcdon-
ald; Wallace, C.; Wolf
Friends–stories: Macdonald
Future–fiction: eddleman; Morgan
gender identity–fiction: Clark
ghosts–fiction: Wallace, C.; Wallace, 
S.
grandparents–fiction: Murdock
grAPHIC noveLS: Beyer; Britt; 
Cammuso; duffy; Kris; Pyle; 
Yang
gratitude–stories: elliott
grief–fiction: Avasthi; Casella; Kyi; 
Spencer
guilt–fiction: Knowles
gypsies–fiction: Lasky
Hair–stories: Bernheimer 
Haiti–fiction: Burg
Health: Huey
HIStorICAL FICtIon: Cody; 
Cooper; edinger; Hopkinson; 
Johnston; Jones; Morpurgo; My-
ers; nowra; rundell; Yang
History, U.S.: Huey
History, world: davey
Holidays–stories: Brown 
Holocaust: Kohuth; Kris
Holocaust–fiction: Lasky
HuMor: Bernheimer; Carlson; 
diesen; Larochelle; Macdonald; 
Mann; Marciano; rosenthal; 
rubin; Shannon; Skovron
Identity–fiction: Blackwell; Clark; 
Freedman; Staunton; terrill
Identity–stories: Wegman
Illness–fiction: Hopkinson
Imagination–stories: Bean; gerstein; 
rosenthal
Indian Americans–fiction: Freedman
Individuality–stories: Bunting
Insects–fiction: Mcdonald 
Jews: Kohuth; Kris
Jews–fiction: Freedman
Jews–stories: Brown
Kidnapping–fiction: Blair; doller
Latinos–fiction: Peña
Language arts: Pincus
LegendS: Cody
Literature, English: Hemphill
Literature, world: ursu
London–fiction: Hopkinson
Magic–fiction: Cammuso; thomas; 
ursu; Werlin
Mathematics: Pincus
Mexican Americans–fictions: Peña 
Mice–stories: Bernheimer 
Monsters–fiction: Skovron
Monsters–stories: Bryant; Macdon-
ald
Mothers–fiction: diCamillo; Wake-
field
Mothers–stories: Cunnane; Wood 
Movies–fiction: Lasky
Music and musicians–stories: Bryant
MYSterIeS: Carlton; Spencer; 
Webb; Wolf
native Americans: ellis
native Americans–fiction: Cooper
natural disasters–fiction: Peña 
Natural history: guiberson
Nature study: Brown; guiberson; 
Huber; Levine; Markle; Sayre
nuclear war–fiction: eddleman 
orphans–fiction: Hughes; Jones; 
rundell; Wakefield; Webb
Paleontology: thimmesh
Parades–stories: elliott
Parties–stories: Wood 
Pets–stories: Mader 
Pirates–fiction: Carlson
PoetrY: Sidman
Poverty–fiction: Burg
Pregnancy: Harris
Prehistoric people–stories: gerstein 
Problem solving–stories: Shannon 
Quests–fiction: thomas
raccoons–stories: rubin
racism–fiction: Wolf
November 2013 • 195
Reading aloud: Henkes; Sidman; 
ursu; Wallace, S.
Reading, easy: Bunting; Cammuso; 
Henkes; Kohuth; Mcdonald
Reading, reluctant: Huey
relationships–fiction: Clark; Hel-
dring; Hubbard; Knowles; Kyi; 
Lange; Lo; Murdock; Myracle; 
Seamon; Wallace, C.
rHYMIng StorIeS: Isadora
robots–fiction: Walden
romance–fiction: Myracle
runaways–fiction: Blair
Sanitation: Huey
SCArY StorIeS: Wallace, S.
School–fiction: deuker; goodman; 
Henkes; Hubbard
School–stories: diesen
Science: Huey; Levine; Macaulay; 
Markle; Wittenstein 
Science and scientists: rusch
SCIenCe FICtIon: Blackwell; 
eddleman; Kahaney; Lo; Mar-
ciano; Messner; terrill; Walden
Self-image–fiction: Britt
Sex–fiction: gray
Sexual abuse–fiction: Bernard; 
deuker
SHort StorIeS: gray; Wallace, 
S.
Siblings–fiction: Hughes
Sisters–fiction: Mann
Slavery–fiction: edinger
Snow–stories: Bean
Social studies: Pyle
Soldiers–fiction: Myers
SongS: Isadora
Space travel: davey
Spies–fiction: Carlton
Sports–fiction: deuker; Heldring 
Squirrels–fiction: diCamillo
Storytime: Isadora
Street life–fiction: Wakefield
SuPernAturAL StorIeS: 
Casella; goodman
SurvIvAL StorIeS: Morgan; 
nowra; Wakefield
SuSPenSe: Bernard; Blackwell; 
Messner
tasmania–fiction: nowra
thanksgiving–stories: elliott
time–stories: graham
toilets: Macaulay
turkeys–stories: Shannon 
twins–fiction: Casella; rowell
uncles–fiction: Knowles
vampires–fiction: Black
verSe noveLS: Hemphill
voyages and travel–fiction: Lange; 
Murdock; Skovron
War–fiction: Kristoff; Lasky; Myers
Waste management: Macaulay 
Winter–stories: Bean
Witches–fiction: Cammuso
World cultures: Yang
World War II–fiction: Lasky; Myers
Writers and writing–fiction: Hemp-
hill; Pincus; rowell
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP,
MANAGEMENT, AND CIRCULATION, 10/1/13
Title: Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books. Pub. No. 0008-9036. Frequency: Monthly 
(except August). Eleven issues published annually. Subscription price: $98.00 institutions, $55.00 
individuals. Location of office of publication: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218. Headquarters of publisher: Same. Publisher: The Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218. Editor: Deborah 
Stevenson, University of Illinois, 501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Owner: 
University of Illinois, 501 E. Daniel Street, Champaign, IL 61820-6601. The purpose, function, 
and nonprofit status of this organization and the exempt status for Federal Income tax purposes 
have not changed during the preceding 12 months.
Extent and nature of circulation 
Av. no. copies 
Actual no. copies
 
each issue 
single issue pub.
 
preceding 12 months nearest to filing date
A. Total no. copies printed 
1,530 
1,327
B. Paid circulation, mail subscriptions 
983 
1,004
C. Total paid distribution 
1,034 
1,061
D. Free distribution 
30 
30
F. Total distribution 
1,064 
1,091
G. Copies not distributed 
466 
236
H. Total 
1,530 
1,327
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete. William M. Breichner,
Journals Publisher.
