T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by Johns Hopkins University Press
December 2014
Vol. 68   No. 4
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
BOOKBIRD
A Journal of International Children’s Literature
Roxanne Harde, E
Published by the International Board on Books for 
Young People (IBBY).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Amanda Cockrell, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Claudia Nelson, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please contact us for more information or to join.
Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
December 2014
Vol. 68 No. 4
191  the BIg PICture
 
 Blizzard  written and illus. by John Rocco
192  new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
 
 Reviewed titles include:
197 • And Then Comes Christmas  by Tom Brenner; illus. by Jana Christy
211 •  Simon and the Bear: A Hanukkah Tale  by Eric A. Kimmel; illus. by  
Matthew Trueman
230 •  Winter Bees & Other Poems of the Cold  by Joyce Sidman; illus. by  
Rick Allen
230 • The Yule Tomte and the Little Rabbits  by Ulf Stark; illus. by Eva Eriksson
233 • Here Comes Santa Cat  by Deborah Underwood; illus. by Claudia Rueda
239  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
240  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Jeannette Hulick, Reviewer (JH)
Alaine Martaus, Reviewer (AM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Melissa Albarran, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print $103.00 or electronic $115.00; combined print & electronic $144.00; 
multiple institutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, 
$55.00; students, $20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $17.60 per subscription for 
postage; subscribers in Canada and Mexico add $13.75. Single copy rate: $11.00. Volumes available 
in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes avail-
able in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription 
checks should be made payable to Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address 
should provide both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin 
of the Center for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. 
Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 
2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 410-
516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/journals/
advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2014 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Blizzard copyright ©2014 by John Rocco and used by permission of Disney 
Hyperion.
December 2014 • 191
the BIg PICture
Blizzard
written and illustrated by John Rocco
Being snowed in is a joy, until it’s not, and so it goes for the protagonist of this 
picture book, based on the author-illustrator’s own childhood experiences in the 
New England blizzard of 1978. What starts as a delightful school-closing snowfall 
accumulates and accumulates; as the days go by, the snowplows still don’t make it 
down the street and the family’s food supplies are dwindling (not in a starvation 
kind of way, but in a “cocoa made with water” kind of way). Our intrepid pro-
tagonist, an exploration junkie with a love of the arctic, fashions tennis rackets into 
snowshoes, preps a sled for hauling goods, and heads off to the local grocer on the 
main road, taking orders from neighbors along the way. He returns the conquering 
hero bearing grocery staples, and soon the plow opens up the street, to the relief of 
the adults and the annoyance of kids. 
Rocco spools out his text in deftly measured dollops, noting the day-by-
day effects of the family’s immurement; he mostly lets the details of the situation 
speak for themselves, with the occasional touches of dry humor in the kid’s slightly 
overdramatized heroism (“On day five, I realized it was up to me to take action”). 
The story here is a close modern repeat of Wetterer’s The Snow Walker (BCCB 
12/96), the chronicle of a boy in the great blizzard of 1888 who similarly trudged 
out in the snow with a sled to get neighborhood goods, and it’s amusing to see the 
tonal dissimilarities from the 100 years’ difference in the event timing and the nearly 
twenty years’ gap in publication. Where Wetterer’s book is deeply sincere, Rocco’s is 
keenly self-aware in a way that contemporary kids will find familiar and natural; the 
author knows that his protagonist’s outing to the store for a few comforting items 
isn’t exactly Balto’s hauling the diphtheria antitoxin through Alaska, but there’s still 
genuine celebration of a kid’s memorable achievement that’s undiminished by the 
fact that it was pretty good fun as well.
The pencil, watercolor, and digital art has a Norman Rockwell–esque 
character and solidity, and the storybook quality of the snowed-in town is perfectly 
in tune with kid perceptions of the experience. The layout is simultaneously elegant 
and clever: occasional speech bubbles add homely intimacy, the passing days are 
creatively identified (spelled out by critter footprints in the snow, or heading a 
grocery list), and the airy exterior vignettes contrast with the golden coziness of 
the interior scenes. The sheer engineering impact of life in snow that’s nearly over 
your head is dramatically conveyed in deep-walled trenches in icy blue, and funny 
details—the boy’s constant poring over his Arctic Survival book, the kids’ wannabe 
igloo off the driveway, the stop sign getting buried under the snow in a rhyme of 
192 • The bulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
the text’s “I thought it would never stop”—add colorful atmosphere. The tour de 
force is the foldout bird’s-eye view of the boy’s route to the store, vividly delineated 
by his snowshoed footprints and captioned at key points (“Went the wrong way,” 
“Joined a snowball fight”), that highlights snow as both obstacle and wonderland. 
The winter of childish imaginations doesn’t always match up to the  
actuality, but sometimes, splendidly, it does, and Blizzard celebrates that miraculous 
convergence of reality and dream. Those moving on from Bean’s Big Snow (BCCB 
11/13) will delight in this blizzardy tale of a kid’s accessible heroism. (See p. 227 
for publication information.)
Deborah Stevenson, Editor
AbirAched, ZeinA I Remember Beirut; tr. from the French by Edward Gauvin; 
written and illus. by Zeina Abirached. Graphic Universe, 2014 96p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-3822-4 $29.27
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-4458-4 $9.95   
R Gr. 10 up
Abirached offers episodic reminiscences from her childhood (she was born in 1981) 
in Beirut, where she grew up during intense fighting between Christians and Mus-
lims. An extremely brief introduction sets the stage, and then what follows are short 
passages that come together to form a large narrative arc, individual memories that 
build toward adulthood and the author’s current perspective as a grown woman far 
away from the region. The graphic novel format is effective, as the black and white 
artwork (mostly white against black backgrounds) is presented with a remarkable 
amount of crisp, unshaded detail that expands on the text. Some of the recollec-
tions are comparatively mundane, but the contrast accentuates the weight of the 
more haunting memories, such as her brother’s shrapnel collection that got too 
large to easily contain. The author offers a fond salute to French writer and film-
maker Georges Perec on the final page, a fitting link to her own creative approach, 
though a bit of context might have helped teen readers find a new inspiration.  AS
Ain, beth Starring Jules (Third Grade Debut); illus. by Anne Keenan Hig-
gins. Scholastic, 2014 165p (Starring Jules)
iSbn 978-0-545-44358-6 $14.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Jules Bloom’s third-grade year gets off to a rocky start, both at school and at work, 
December 2014 • 193
since she’s a child actor in a new television sitcom. At school, her new teacher, Mr. 
Santorini, has a card-turning behavior system (everyone starts on green but turns 
their card on a class chart to another color for each infraction) that has Jules and 
her friends worried about getting into trouble. Then there’s the Wax Museum 
project, which requires Jules to decide what figure to impersonate. On the set, Jules 
is challenged by slapstick physical comedy. Mr. Santorini eases Jules’ problems by 
introducing her to Lucille Ball’s work (which solves both the Wax Museum choice 
problem and the acting difficulties), and adding his own name to the behavior 
chart, holding himself accountable as well as his students. Many kids will identify 
with Jules’ school dilemmas, especially the ubiquitous card-based class behavior 
system, and they’ll be intrigued by the sitcom details. Ain’s writing is snappy and 
dynamic, while Jules herself is an amusing and likable (“It took me almost an hour 
to lay out my first-day-of-school clothes all because it is going to be 300 degrees 
outside, which isn’t corduroy weather at all. . . . It is very hard to get in a back-
to-school mood without corduroy”). The large font, frequent illustrations (the 
monochromatic art is inviting if unexceptional), and quick pace will also help keep 
young chapter-book readers focused and engaged. Hand this to budding thespians 
and Judy Moody fans.  JH
AlexAnder, WilliAm Ambassador. McElderry, 2014 222p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9764-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9766-5 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
One might think that being appointed Earth’s ambassador (by a purple blob, no 
less) to the known universe would be the main focus in a kid’s life, but Gabe has 
quite a lot of trouble with which to contend as well. His parents, it turns out, 
don’t have their immigration documentation in order, and now his mother, father, 
and oldest sister are targeted for deportation from the country where they’ve lived 
for years. Gabe struggles to absorb the news about his family while also trying to 
understand the rules and guidelines of his new role, and he quickly learns that be-
ing stretched out of your comfort zone into new achievements is better than being 
a passive observer of life. The melding of realistic deportation policies (and their 
devastating, family-uprooting consequences) and space adventuring is an uneasy 
combination at times, but as it all ultimately boils down to a wish for tolerance, 
generosity, and kindness, there is a core of longing that pervades the hybrid plot. 
Much is left to be resolved in a sequel, and readers will likely be eager to see what 
Gabe does with his developing diplomatic (and sometimes world-saving) skills.  AS
Anders, lou Frostborn; illus. by Justin Gerard. Crown, 2014 317p (Thrones 
& Bones)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38779-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38778-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38780-4 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-6
Karn, a reluctant farmer-to-be, and Thianna, a half-giant determined to prove her 
worth even if she is only seven feet tall, agree to help each other when they’re forced 
to leave their homes; a friendship emerges as they bond over shared danger and a 
game that they both enjoy, Thrones and Bones. Karn wants to save his father from 
his undead captors and make his uncle pay for his betrayal, and Thianna needs 
to learn more about her late human mother and a strange tool that her mother 
stole; both would also very much like to stay alive despite all that conspires against 
194 • The bulleTin
them. From the start, the book creates a rich and elegant land, with diverse cul-
tures explained well enough to provide tantalizing glimpses into a setting that is 
massive, well imagined, and carefully detailed. Karn and Thianna are both likable 
protagonists, flawed but intensely loyal, and quick on their feet in distinct ways that 
mesh well together. Readers will certainly be pleased to note that this is the first 
novel in an anticipated series, and they’ll happily find many leads to frost giants, 
Nordic folktales, and Viking history that could easily keep them occupied until 
the next volume comes along. Extensive extras include a map, song lyrics, game 
instructions, and an author’s note that offers a bit more insight into exactly what 
cultures and folkloric elements were borrowed from to construct this original yet 
familiar setting.  AS
becker, helAine Dirk Daring: Secret Agent; illus. by Jenn Playford. Orca, 
2014 196p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0683-2 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0685-6 $7.99   
R Gr. 4-6
As a fifth grader, Darren Dirkowitz seems pretty ordinary, which is a foolproof cover 
for his (pretend) identity as Dirk Daring, spy extraordinaire and international man 
of mystery. Unfortunately, even Dirk’s sleek ninja moves can’t keep his stepbrother 
Jason from getting hold of Dirk’s top-secret spy journal, and when Jason threatens 
to show the notes to the whole school, Darren is forced to do his stepbrother’s 
bidding, spying on other kids at school and helping Jason push through various 
referendums as school president. As the operation continues, however, Darren 
begins to realize that Jason might not be such a bad guy after all and that there 
might be a rat amid Dirk’s cadre of sources. This is both a sophisticated and ac-
cessible middle-grade read, balancing potty humor with irony and witty sarcasm 
while offering a nicely complicated noir-like plot in a straightforward style. Darren/
Dirk makes an appealing narrator, confident in his espionage abilities but less so 
in his social graces. The various twists in the story keep the pages turning, while 
the last chapter suggests that perhaps Dirk’s identity isn’t so pretend after all. Oc-
casional spot art and wide leading offer a bit of visual reprieve, while the sometimes 
challenging vocabulary and mystery that requires serious deduction make this an 
attractive puzzle that will leave reluctant readers feeling triumphant both in their 
reading and sleuthing skills.  KQG
bergin, VirginiA H2O. Sourcebooks Fire, 2014 [336p]
ISBN 978-1-4926-0654-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
Ruby’s entire life comes crashing down, all because of a drop of rain (well, lots of 
them), and this diary-style novel captures every minute from a teen party to the end 
of the world. It turns out that the asteroid that was blown up several years ago still 
brought unwanted gifts to Earth, in the form of bacterial baddies that deal quick, 
horrifying death and that are now coming down in the rain. Since it’s a beautiful 
London weekend with lots of outside barbecuing going on when it suddenly starts 
raining, the result is devastating. Ruby doesn’t even have time to absorb the tragic 
losses she has personally suffered, because she’s too busy surviving; there are hints 
of the rawness and desolation she feels interspersed throughout, though, and they 
are exemplified in her spacey approach to keeping herself alive (even she rolls her 
December 2014 • 195
eyes at how many times she simply leaps out of a car or house without checking the 
cloud cover). It’s a gripping concept, and there’s something particularly terrifying 
about the end of the world coming in something as sweet as a misty drizzle. Ruby’s 
narrative voice is exceptional—it is absolutely authentic that, even at the end of the 
world, an indulged, sheltered teen with very few survival skills would still be sort 
of a brat. The fact that she is beginning to see that in herself as the book progresses 
is probably enough for a girl who went from social queen to thirsty loner in the 
space of a few vile days.  AS
binghAm, kelly Circle, Square, Moose; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. Greenwil-
low, 2014 40p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229004-5 $18.89
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-229003-8 $17.99   
R 3-7 yrs
Having mastered—or at least done battle with—the alphabet in Z Is for Moose 
(BCCB 4/12), Moose has returned now to dive into another concept book. Despite 
the narration’s firm reminder that “this is not an animal book. It is a shape book,” 
Moose’s zeal for participation (“I love shapes!”) can’t be quelled; as the bland text 
points out where you might find different shapes, Moose leaps in to chow down 
on the sandwich that is modeling a square. His zebra pal, the director from Z Is for 
Moose, volunteers to corral the miscreant, who’s running riot (along with his cat 
buddy) through square checkerboard scenes and lengths of curvy ribbon. When 
Zebra gets trapped in the ribbon, Moose uses a circle to make an escape hole into 
the dark sky, and he brings the book back on topic by plucking out a star (the final 
shape) and handing it to his “very good friend,” Zebra. Moose’s gleeful anarchy and 
his blatant disrespect for the cheerfully anodyne concept book again makes him an 
instant audience favorite, and the book effectively paces his mischief, allowing it 
to swell, rest, and then crescendo, for maximum impact. The mixed-media art is 
stylistically simple but deeply, thoughtfully clever in its balanced (and unbalanced) 
and carefully varied compositions, maximizing the ridiculousness of Moose’s frenetic 
capers and playing his robust speech balloons against the smooth sans serif of the 
official text. For those who can’t get enough of moosey hijinks, use this with its 
predecessor and with Morris’ This Is a Moose (BCCB 9/14).  DS
blAck, Peter JAy Urban Outlaws. Bloomsbury, 2014 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-61963-400-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
From their lair under London, five young people enact a modern day Robin Hood 
scenario: they hack into bad guys’ bank accounts and spread the money around to 
deserving organizations. They also do some hands-on good deeds, too, like delivering 
much-needed groceries, but for the most part, these kids are using their technology 
savvy to pull off bigger heists. The kids stumble into something much more dan-
gerous than they expected, however, when they follow a trail (intentionally left for 
them) toward Proteus, a supercomputer that, until recently, most people thought 
was just a tech legend. It turns out it’s real, and Jack and his gang inadvertently 
repair a virus that had been planted by the creator to keep anyone from using it. 
Now the group is in danger, as is the world, depending on who gets control of 
Proteus. The setup—five teenagers who are brilliant enough and equipped with 
enough life skills to build a perfectly happy life underground that allows them to toss 
196 • The bulleTin
millions of other people’s dollars at charities—is movie-ready rather than plausible, 
but readers will certainly enjoy envisioning themselves in this situation. Even when 
the danger ramps up, it is clear that at the end of the zippily paced story, all will 
end well for this earnest crew. The necessary world-building and establishment of 
key individuals of the first entry in a series are all present, but there is still plenty of 
action here, with character development (often poignant, given the orphan status 
of almost all of the key figures) effectively worked in around the world-domination 
plots and spy cameras.  AS
boone, mArtinA Compulsion. Simon Pulse, 2014 [448p] (Heirs of Watson 
Island)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1122-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1124-0 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The death of Barrie Watson’s shut-in mother forces the seventeen-year-old girl to 
relocate from San Francisco to her mother’s small South Carolina hometown—where 
people believed that Barrie’s mother died in a fire twenty years ago and had no 
idea of Barrie’s existence. Aunt Pru nonetheless welcomes Barrie into the expansive 
but crumbling Watson plantation with open arms, but she has less enthusiasm for 
talking about the past. Handsome Eight Beaufort and the stunning but mercurial 
Cassie Colesworth, however, are more than happy to fill Barrie in on the details of 
a curse brought down upon all three of their families by the spirit of a Cherokee 
witch, leaving each generation with its own unique tragedy. Barrie’s not especially 
surprised by the supernatural goings-on—she’s always had a knack for finding lost 
things and she can see the yunwi, the Cherokee spirits that haunt Watson land-
ing—but she’s more concerned with the various secrets her forebears kept and how 
they might relate to her mother’s life and death. The atmosphere trades too heavily 
in stereotypical aspects of Native American mysticism and elements of voodoo, 
while the storytelling leans too much on expository dialogue from conveniently 
knowledgeable characters to move the plot along. That’s not to say the story isn’t 
compelling, and readers may forgive the book’s flaws as murder, mayhem, and lost 
loves take center stage. Fans of Moore’s Amber House trilogy (Amber House, BCCB 
12/12), another tale of a cursed home with some serious secrets, will likely feel right 
at home here amid the Spanish moss and ghostly spirits.  KQG 
bottner, bArbArA Miss Brooks’ Story Nook (Where Tales Are Told and Ogres Are 
Welcome); illus. by Michael Emberley. Knopf, 2014 34p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81329-4 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81328-7 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-449-81330-0 $11.99   
R 5-7 yrs
Missy, from Miss Brooks Loves Books (and I Don’t) (BCCB 5/10), enjoys attending 
Miss Brooks’ Story Nook first thing each morning at the school library, but she 
often takes a roundabout route so that she can avoid her teasing neighbor Billy, 
who steals her hat. Given a chance to tell her own story, Missy rises to the occasion 
with a tale about an ogre neighbor, Graciela, who keeps a menagerie of dangerous 
animals, including a boa constrictor that happens to encounter the exasperating 
Billy. Bottner writes with humor and authenticity about Missy’s primary-grade 
experiences, and Missy’s problem-solving storytelling usefully illustrates the ways in 
December 2014 • 197
which story invention can empower people. Emberley’s clever illustrations enhance 
the storyline, and straggly-haired, bespectacled Missy, with her perpetual overalls, 
her skull-printed jacket, and her array of headgear, is an original. Hints for the 
inspiration for Missy’s story are seen on the posters on the wall of her home (and 
in her snake-shaped scarf). Fans of Missy’s first book will want to follow along with 
her adventures here as well, and her storytelling experiences could also prompt a 
class session of oral story creation.  JH
brenner, tom And Then Comes Christmas; illus. by Jana Christy. Candlewick, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5342-2 $15.99   
R 5-7 yrs
Brenner uses lyrical language and a repetitive “When . . . / Then . . .” structure 
(“When the days barely start and they’re over again, and red berries blaze against 
green shrubs, and bare branches rake across the sky. . . . Then hang boughs of 
fir or spruce or pine, dotted with cones and bits of holly, welcoming winter”) to 
portray a family’s preparations for the celebration of Christmas. Since the events 
don’t really build this is more of a list, but the lyrical journey through the pleasures 
of holiday anticipation is a rewarding one, with gratifyingly savory descriptions 
of winter rituals. Christy’s digital art has a soft-edged, painterly look; the gently 
textured candy-colored clothing and holiday décor stand out pleasingly against the 
subdued background tones of interiors and wintry landscapes, and the attractive 
family and their little black dog are welcoming figures. This would make a cozy 
readaloud selection, perfect for a pre-Christmas story hour for school-age kids or 
for a snuggle session at home on a snowy day.  JH 
brett, JAn The Animals’ Santa; written and illus. by Jan Brett. Putnam, 
2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25784-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 4-6 yrs
Little Snow, a young snowshoe rabbit, doesn’t believe the stories about the “animals’ 
Santa” that he hears from his brother, Big Snowshoe, and the other forest animals. 
Since no one has actually seen the animals’ Santa, no one knows what he looks like, 
nor can they prove his existence to Little Snow. Big Snowshoe cleverly sets an alert, 
stringing up some chimes (made from ice) on Christmas Eve. When the animals 
investigate, they see not only the gifts the animals’ Santa has dropped for them but 
also catch a glimpse of the benevolent creature himself—a snowy owl—and Little 
Snow finally believes that the animals’ Santa is real. While the idea of animals hav-
ing their own Santa is an appealing one, the story as a whole tends to the contrived 
and predictable, and the syrupy ending is hard to swallow: “Little Snow waved at 
the snowy owl and whispered into the night, ‘Animals’ Santa, now I know that you 
are truly, truly, true.’” The watercolor and gouache illustrations, in Brett’s standard 
style, are detailed enough to be absorbing, and the Nordic-wear-clad animals are 
generally pretty cute (especially the porcupine) though occasionally a bit stiffly 
posed. Inset pictures of rodent-elves crafting animal gifts are hard to read visually 
(and the gifts they are making do not seem to be the ones that the Santa drops for 
the animals), but the borders, based on Native American quillwork, are rustically 
attractive. Despite the book’s flaws, fans of Brett’s other animal-centric stories may 
find this an entertaining holiday diversion.  JH
198 • The bulleTin
brimner, lArry dAne Strike!: The Farm Workers’ Fight for Their Rights. Calkins 
Creek, 2014  172p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-1-59078-997-1 $16.95   
R Gr. 9-12
How do you organize workers who move from job to job? How do you assure the 
civil rights of workers who are not United States citizens? How do you bring an 
overlooked crisis into public view? In this history of the 1960s agricultural laborers’ 
movement, Brimner addresses the personalities and organizations that stoked the 
efforts toward unionization, first Filipino activist Larry Itliong and the Agricultural 
Workers Organizing Committee, and later the household names Dolores Huerta 
and César Chávez. Brimner covers not only the easy-to-grasp issues of farm and 
agribusiness owners vs. disenfranchised migrant workers, but also the far messier but 
equally important tensions between the AWOC and Chávez’s National Farm Work-
ers Association; the merger that resulted in the United Farm Workers union; the 
relationships between the UFW and the AFL-CIO and the ever-suspect Teamsters 
Union; and the intervention of such notable politicians as Robert Kennedy. This 
is a dense work, made more accessible with a heavily illustrated layout and the use 
of color blocks to provide visual breaks and organizational cues. In a closing note 
well worth reading, Brimner admits that “to read books about the fight in the fields 
usually means reading the biography of César Chávez.” Therefore, he makes every 
effort to craft a balanced presentation that respects the contributions of all players 
and investigates Chávez’s roles as both organizer and icon. Middle-schoolers with 
background in the movement may find this title manageable, but it will be a better 
match for high school students conducting American History research projects. A 
timeline, bibliography, source notes, photo credits, and an index are appended.  EB
burns, loree griffin Beetle Busters: A Rogue Insect and the People Who Track It; 
illus. with photographs by Ellen Harasimowicz. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 
2014 64p (Scientists in the Field)
ISBN 978-0-547-79267-5 $18.99   
R Gr. 4-7
The Asian long horned beetle (known as the ALB) arrived uninvited in several 
American cities in the 1990s; when the invader later appeared in the lush canopied 
arborscape of Worcester, Massachusetts, scientists and citizens were faced with a 
problem: how to keep the pest from spreading through the tree population with-
out destroying the very trees that they were trying to save. This new entry in the 
Scientists in the Field series follows Clint McFarland, the federal project manager 
of the attempt to eradicate the ALB, but the title focuses even more strongly on 
“citizen scientists,” those residents who were the first spotters of the infestation 
and who tramp through woods identifying its spread. Burns, herself a native of 
the afflicted town, often turns the narration to the reader (“If cutting trees in one 
community today would save the trees in your backyard tomorrow, would it be 
worth it?”) and brings the problem even closer. Photos tell a grim yet interesting tale 
of ravaged trees and changed landscape (aerial shots provide a particularly telling 
before and after contrast), providing a blend of informative documentation and 
dramatic images. The subject and the youth of many of the participants give this 
title an immediacy unusual even in this excellent series, bridging the gap between 
scientist and reader in a way that invites kids into the process. Consequently, there 
is considerable opportunity to tie this to local fieldwork defending against invasive 
species and to invite young people into the front lines of scientific challenges in 
December 2014 • 199
their own area. End matter includes a glossary, suggestions for further reading, a 
bibliography, and an index.  DS
byrd, robert, ad. Brave Chicken Little; ad. and illus. by Robert Byrd. Viking, 
2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-670-78616-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-7 yrs
Classic in both its text and its illustrations, this retelling of the famous tale generally 
sticks to the original’s course and the traditionally rhymed names for the characters. 
Alliteration, occasional rhyming, and poetic language add richness to the storytell-
ing and strengthen the readaloud potential: “Together, the animals took pots and 
pans, sacks of potatoes, pieces of wood, broken furniture, buckets, barrels, bricks, 
and baskets and piled them up as high as they could.” Kids will particularly relish 
the way in which Foxy Loxy and his kin get their comeuppance (Chicken Little, 
hidden in a tree, pelts them with apples, making them also believe that the sky is 
falling). Byrd’s careful, intricate hatching and the vintage costuming and coloring 
of his figures make the pictures attractive and engaging in a manner slightly remi-
niscent of Jim Aylesworth’s style. Chicken Little and his pals are a plucky crew of 
clothes-wearing critters, and Foxy Loxy and his family are appropriately creepy, 
with extra-elongated heads and grins that, seen in profile, are exceptionally wide 
and sinister. This will be a useful addition to the 398s section and might also inspire 
a readers theater or other performance.  JH
byrne, richArd This Book Just Ate My Dog!; written and illus. by Robert  
Byrne. Holt, 2014 32p
iSbn 978-1-62779-071-0 $16.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Books may look safe, but beware: when Bella takes her dog for a harmless “stroll 
across the page,” she’s alarmed when the pooch disappears into the book’s gutter. 
The same thing happens to a friend who goes to investigate, followed by several 
emergency services vehicles, and finally Bella herself. A note flies out of the maw 
that asks the viewer to help by shaking the book, and when the viewer apparently 
obliges, all the book’s victims fly back out unharmed (if not completely unaltered). 
While this doesn’t have the interactive inventiveness of Schwarz’s There Are Cats in 
This Book (BCCB 12/08) or Lehrhaupt’s Warning: Do Not Open This Book! (BCCB 
9/13), the visual joke is funny in its abruptness, and the notion that the book itself 
is the villain and the audience the savior is novel and gratifying. The digitally cre-
ated art balances neutral, vaguely geometric backgrounds with the hand-drawn 
absurd style of the figures of round-headed girl and ginormous hairy pooch. The 
disappearing red line of Bella’s now-dragging leash and the sketchy sidewalk edge 
provide horizontal impact that contrasts effectively with the vertical gutter, which 
is usually treated as transparent but here suddenly looming large. One hopes the 
book’s binding will be extra-reinforced to withstand the shaking; if it is, this will 
offer a lively physical slant on the interactive picture book.  DS 
200 • The bulleTin
cAmPbell, isAiAh The Troubles of Johnny Cannon. Simon, 2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0003-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-0005-3 $10.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9 
Johnny Cannon is a generally underachieving sixth-grader living in Cullman, Ala-
bama in 1961. With his mom dead and his dad disabled, his older brother Tommy 
is the family’s anchor, but soon Tommy, a talented military pilot, is sent on a top-
secret mission to Nicaragua. Johnny’s father has set up a ham radio operation in the 
shed, and he’d rather listen to transmissions than, say, pay the mortgage. Seeking 
a way to earn fast money, Johnny goes to a savvy African-American boy, Willie, 
embarking on a friendship that’s problematic in their segregated town. This is the 
least of Johnny’s problems, though, when he realizes that both his brother and his 
father are caught up in the Bay of Pigs affair, possibly on different sides. The story 
takes on action-adventure dimensions as Johnny is kidnapped and taken to Cuba, 
where he finds out uncomfortable truths about his past and has to use all the skills 
a plucky kid might plausibly have, as well as few implausible ones, in a harrow-
ing escape. The pacing of this lively plot, as well as the daredevil heroism of both 
Johnny and Willie, takes dead aim at middle-school sensibilities, while the truth 
of Johnny’s past and the circumstances of his present have a more mature slant. 
Johnny’s witty, down-home narrative voice interrogates the racism of his classmates 
while maintaining a Huck Finn–like innocence with regard to its own, and his fas-
cination with history as well as his own past provide a clever way of working in the 
complex backstory that led up to the Bay of Pigs, giving readers a real taste of what 
poverty, patriotism, and boyhood looked like in the early sixties in the South.  KC
chuPeco, rin The Girl from the Well. Sourcebooks Fire, 2014 265p
ISBN 978-1-4022-9218-7 $16.99   
R Gr. 8-10
Inspired by the Japanese folkloric onry¯o, a vengeful spirit that haunts the living, this 
book offers a close examination of what happens when, after 300 years, one of those 
spirits evolves into something that kills evil people. Okiku knows that by killing 
murderers, she can set the ghosts of those trapped with them free. She doesn’t spend 
too much time thinking about whether it is more satisfying to see their released 
spirits or to destroy the bad guy, but either way, she is doing a service. While it was 
never her intention to dabble with the living, Tark, a half-Japanese teen who shares 
a body with a ferocious demon who wants to devour the world, makes her break 
her rule. Tark’s mother tried to quell the demon, who was her friend long ago, but 
the best she could do was use her own son as a sacrifice of sorts, binding the living 
with the undead. What’s clear to all is that the two are truly bound, and killing the 
spirit may mean killing Tark as well. Fans of Japanese horror films will find many 
familiar elements here, and they’ll already know some of folkloric history of these 
stories; background sprinkled throughout ensures that even those who’ve never 
heard of, for example, The Ring will still sort out all the details. There is genuine 
suspense in the extremely long odds faced by the group of folks trying to save Tark, 
and in the stark glimpses of what the world will resemble if this evil is released. 
Okiku is complex as a murderer with a strong moral compass, and she isn’t always 
successful at escaping the vengeful rage her own death inspired. Ultimately, there is 
a melancholy note to the novel that will linger even after the fear factor has faded; 
there are losses from which none of the characters will ever recover.  AS
December 2014 • 201
cole, tom clohosy Wall; written and illus. by Tom Clohosy Cole. Templar/
Candlewick, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7560-8 $16.99   
Ad 5-9 yrs 
“My mom said that while the wall was being made, our dad got stuck on the other 
side.” Thus begins a young boy’s spare narration of how many people on his side 
(East) tried and failed to escape to the West, and how in desperation he dug a tunnel 
under the wall. The night he and his mother and sister made a run for the tunnel, a 
guard took pity on them and looked the other way as they crossed. When the family 
tracked down the father, they found him on the verge of entering his own tunnel 
eastward to find them. Artwork dominates the simple plot, with the nightmare-
inducing, razor wire–topped wall looming over the boy’s town, and perspectives 
are oriented so that viewers share the sightlines of rifle-wielding soldiers. The only 
indication that this is specifically about the Berlin Wall, though, is relegated to the 
dust jacket, limiting the title’s usefulness as a stand-alone historical tale. As it is, 
readers are left wondering how the dad “got stuck” on the far side of a wall that 
clearly took some time and effort to build, and how a child could, as this story 
implies, dig a tunnel from the woods to freedom in the first place. Peter Sís’ picture 
book The Wall (BCCB 10/7) is a more satisfying exploration of crossing the Iron 
Curtain, and Shaun Tan’s wordless The Arrival (BCCB 1/08) a more challenging 
exploration of emigration under duress, but this could be a thoughtful companion 
to more informative early explorations of this piece of history.  EB
cromPton, lAurie boyle Adrenaline Crush. Ferguson/Farrar, 2014 [192p]
ISBN 978-0-374-30061-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Dyna’s life has been about charging ahead and challenging herself, whether it’s climb-
ing a sheer rock face or pelting down a rocky trail on her bike. When an accident 
shatters her ankle, possibly leaving her with lifelong limitations, her confidence 
takes a hit as well, so she focuses on her budding romance with Jay, the serious 
boy who was with her when she suffered her injury and who is determined to care 
for her in her recuperation. At her therapy group, however, seventeen-year-old 
Dyna encounters people who are facing their fears—including Pierce, a handsome 
young ex-soldier, who doesn’t let the loss of a leg keep him from the active life he 
loves. Brash, vibrant Dyna (named by her biker family for a line of Harleys) is an 
unusual and invigorating character in realistic fiction, a girl who may not be “some 
psycho chick with a death wish” but who does love life best when her adrenaline 
is pumping. The book’s matter-of-fact respect for her nature is refreshing, and its 
acknowledgement of what a physical limitation might mean to her is perceptive 
and plausible. Her interesting personality is somewhat overshadowed by a more 
formulaic “torn between two boys” romance plot, but the guys are both solidly 
appealing, and it’s pleasing that Dyna’s physicality and assertiveness are part of a 
relationship rather than proof against it. The book’s swift writing and brevity may 
entice reluctant readers who’d rather be climbing, or romance fans seeking a strong, 
unorthodox heroine.  DS 
202 • The bulleTin
de fombelle, timothée Vango: Between Sky and Earth; tr. from the French by 
Sarah Ardizzone. Candlewick, 2014 421p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7196-9 $17.99   
R* Gr. 8-12
It’s 1934, and nineteen-year-old Vango, a young man who has only incomplete 
knowledge of his own family background, has found his calling on a secluded island 
monastery. Now, on the day of his ordination to the priesthood in Paris, he’s be-
ing chased by the police, shot at by a Russian assassin, and (unbeknownst to him) 
tracked down by a love-smitten girl whom he met in his childhood. But why? He 
finds a partial answer quickly: a priest has been murdered and he’s the suspect. The 
identity of the sniper, however, is more perplexing, and the existence of the girl, 
Ethel, isn’t even on his radar. As Vango dodges arrest and death by scaling the walls 
and running the rooftops of Paris, stowing away on the Graf Zeppelin, and looking 
for answers from Mademoiselle, the devoted woman who raised him, he and read-
ers gradually piece together some of the backstory that brought him to this crisis. 
Playwright de Fombelle is a master of the perfectly honed scene, and the action 
speeds by with theatrical flair and crafty sleight of hand that will be particularly 
appreciated by teens who relish foreign and indie films. Although Vango eventu-
ally discovers a hint of his own identity, several cliffhangers remain provocatively 
unresolved—not the least of which is Joseph and daughter Svetlana Stalin’s roles in 
this multi-layered mystery. This intriguing imported thriller demands a sequel.  EB 
delAney, JosePh A New Darkness. Greenwillow, 2014 340p (The Starblade 
Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-06-233453-4 $17.99   
R Gr. 8-10
This first novel of an anticipated trilogy builds from the narrative arc of the extensive 
Last Apprentice series (The Last Apprentice: Revenge of the Witch, BCCB 10/05, et 
al.), and focuses on former apprentice Tom Ward, who is now a spook in his own 
right, battling creatures of the dark and still mourning the loss of his master. The 
last thing Tom needs is an apprentice of his own, especially a girl (fighting ghastlies 
is work for men), but Jenny’s persistent, and she eventually claims her spot. The two 
face enormous danger almost from the start in the form of monsters from Kobalos, 
who are infinitely more treacherous than most of the minor local troublemakers 
like boggarts or even witches; an uneasy alliance with a witch leads to a quest to 
learn more about these vicious Northern inhabitants. The narration’s switching 
between Jenny and Tom is used to good effect, as the two view almost everything 
from different perspectives, and the mix offers a more balanced view than either 
narrator would alone. The terrifying battle scenes and mesmerizing descriptions 
of various horrors Tom and Jenny encounter are star scenes, and readers will abso-
lutely be swept quickly into this world. While fans of the previous series may have 
a richer experience here, the author expertly offers enough subtle world-building 
clues that even newbies will find this a compelling standalone outing; luckily for 
them, they’ll have plenty of Tom’s adventures to go back and read while waiting 
for the next installment.  AS
durAnd, hAllie Catch That Cookie!; illus. by David Small. Dial, 2014 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42835-0 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
The holidays have brought a week of stories about runaway gingerbread men in 
December 2014 • 203
school, but skeptical young Marshall “didn’t believe a word of it.” When the class 
makes their own gingerbread men and the oven in which the cookies had been placed 
mysteriously turns up empty, Marshall remains the cynical holdout as the kids go 
on a gingerbread chase, with scavenger-hunt-type rhymed clues leading them from 
point to point in the school. Marshall’s analysis soon changes him from skeptic to 
believer, and it also allows him to figure out where the gingerbread escapees have gone. 
Cookie now safely in hand, Marshall rides home with his dad, leaving gingerbread 
mayhem behind in the schoolyard. The text is enlivened with an unassuming wit, 
and Marshall is an endearing figure as the young detective on the gingerbread case. 
Durand and Small play a clever game here, too, with a sequence of events that could 
still be Marshall’s teacher outsmarting Marshall (Marshall never sees a gingerbread 
man in motion), but with Marshall’s dad witnessing the gingerbread men running 
amuck in his rear-view mirror. Small gives fizzy red-headed Marshall a splendid 
backing cast in the illustrations; lithe, variable lines give life to the whole classroom 
of kids, who cavort, cheer, and careen as Marshall, sometimes spotlit against a 
two-color background, converts from scoffing to accepting and runs the cookies to 
ground (okay, to doll bed). Ultimately, the book cunningly manages to celebrate 
both Marshall’s critical analysis and the magic of free-running cookies. Yum.  DS
durst, sArAh beth Chasing Power. Bloomsbury, 2014 366p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3755-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-8027-3756-4 $12.99   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Sixteen-year-old Kayla has long ignored her mother’s admonitions to hide her magi-
cal power, preferring to believe that her apparently murderous father won’t really be 
able to track her little instances of telekinesis. A boy named Daniel does spot her, 
though, and he begs Kayla to add her ability to his power of teleportation in the 
hopes of finding his missing mother. Adventure ensues, as the two begin to unravel 
a complex tale of three magical stones that, in the wrong hands, could offer untold 
abilities. Kayla had no idea how magically gifted her mother really is, that her sister 
(long assumed dead) is actually alive, or that so many people are hiding their true 
powers under guises of New Age charms or voodoo tourist traps. The pace of this 
book is insistent, quickly revving up to flashy scenes of magical danger that the teens 
face with snarky aplomb. Unfortunately, the inevitable romance between Daniel 
and Kayla, a pairing that starts with blackmail and draws energy from near-death 
experiences, varies between predictable and uncomfortable. In addition, there’s a 
whole lot of plot twisting and a slight overreliance on cliffhanger chapter endings, 
both of which draw focus away from the character development, which is one of 
the stronger points in Durst’s earlier work. Nevertheless, teens seeking more of 
the sardonic chick who has to figure out, on the fly, how to best use her innate 
powers,may find this to be a solid addition to the supernatural mix.  AS
feinstein, John The Walk On. Knopf, 2014 359p (The Triple Threat)
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75347-0 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75346-3 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75349-4 $7.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75348-7 $10.99   
Ad Gr. 6-9
It starts the way so many kid-lit sports books start—with a talented new kid ar-
riving in high school to knock a starter off his position. There will be a girlfriend. 
There will be a clash of loyalties. There will be a championship run-up. Every box 
204 • The bulleTin
is checked in the debut volume of the Triple Threat series, but Feinstein manages to 
add a couple of fresh twists to the old plot. Freshman Alex, aspiring quarterback, is 
almost immediately dubbed Goldie for his powerful passing game, and even Matt, 
head coach Gordon’s son, knows this kid has some skills he lacks. The coach himself, 
though, is having none of it, and he benches Alex. Assistant coach Hiller, who is 
also advisor for the student newspaper, advocates for some playing time for Alex. 
His efforts are for naught, but he does allow two of his best sportswriters to publish 
criticisms of Coach Gordon’s coaching decisions, and he is therefore fired from 
his own coaching position. This freedom of speech subplot adds some complexity 
to the overworked, predictable storyline, and Alex’s quarrels with his sportswriter 
girlfriend air some weighty issues concerning team loyalty and player interviews. A 
second intriguing thread involves Alex being framed for doping, but it arrives far 
too late to be thoroughly explored, culminating only in a tear-evoking confession 
from the actual culprit. Feinstein is a reliably entertaining writer, however, and 
fans of his previous Sports Beat series will enjoy catching a shout-out to its teen 
journalist protagonist.  EB 
fitZPAtrick, beccA Black Ice. Simon, 2014 392p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7426-0 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7428-4 $12.99   
Ad Gr. 8-10
While the rest of their friends are heading to Hawaii for some spring break fun, 
high school senior Britt and her best friend, Korbie, plan on backpacking a forty-
mile trek through Wyoming’s Teton Range. Britt’s thrown when she learns that 
Calvin—Korbie’s older brother and Britt’s ex—plans on meeting them, and she’s 
wary about the recent rumors of a spate of murders in the mountains; she’s deter-
mined, however, to put the intense hiking training she’s be doing for a year now 
to the test. And tested she is, when a freak blizzard blows in, forcing the girls to 
find shelter with two strange men along the route. Shaun and Mason are on the 
run and Britt suspects she knows what they’re running from when she discovers a 
dead body in the small cabin they occupy. The two men force Britt at gunpoint to 
lead them off the mountain, but Britt’s certain she can buy some time until Calvin 
finds them. Fitzpatrick utilizes the treacherous terrain and weather to chilling ef-
fect, with the snow-covered mountains seemingly as villainous as the murderer that 
stalks them. The actual mystery itself, however, is deeply flawed: the killer is both 
obvious and clichéd, while the red herrings thrown into the mix aren’t nearly as 
convincing as they should be. The developing romance between Mason and Britt 
is steamy, though, and Britt does at least ponder the implications of falling in love 
with her captor. Of course, by the end, any hint that Mason (real name Jude) is 
actually a bad guy is extinguished, the villain is rightly institutionalized, and Britt 
and Jude have their chance at a happy life together with no snow in sight.  KQG
gAimAn, neil The Graveyard Book Graphic Novel: Volume 2; ad. by P. Craig 
Russell; illus. by Scott Hampton, David Lafuente, Kevin Nowlan, et al. Harper/
HarperCollins, 2014 164p
 ISBN 978-0-06-219483-1 $19.99   
R* Gr. 6-12
The adventures of Nobody Owens continue in this second volume (first volume, 
BCCB 11/14) of the graphic novel adaptation of Neil Gaiman’s award-winning 
novel, The Graveyard Book (BCCB 10/08). Picking up after the original novel’s 
December 2014 • 205
Interlude, this volume follows graveyard-raised Bod into adolescence, as he defends 
classmates against school bullies, reunites with childhood friend Scarlett Perkins, 
fights off the Jacks-of-All-Trades, and finally defeats Jack Frost, the man who 
killed his family. With him throughout are his ghostly friends and family, who 
still support and educate him but slowly realize the time is coming when Bod 
must leave the graveyard for the wider world. All the strengths of the first volume 
carry forward under the direction of established Gaiman collaborator and adaptor 
P. Craig Russell. Full-color panels by a variety of artists convey Gaiman’s prose 
faithfully, with all its eerie and emotional impact. Only Bod and Scarlett appear 
to have aged, and illustrations render the grownup Bod as more confident and 
more moody as he strains against the limitations of his graveyard life. The graphic 
structure also remains the same, with each chapter illustrated by a different artist, 
including observable but undisruptive shifts in color palate, shading, and detail. 
All but one artist illustrated a chapter in the previous volume, creating additional 
continuity between the volumes. Perhaps the only drawback to these wonderful 
graphic novels is that they only work successfully as a set—readers who pick up this 
volume without having read the first or the original novel will immediately find 
themselves lost. Still, the dual-volume structure gives readers a chance to consider 
Bod’s childhood adventures and adolescent struggles as intriguingly different stages 
of life, and those who thrilled to the quality, fidelity, and artistry of the first volume 
will eagerly take up this one.  AM
gAimAn, neil, ad. Hansel and Gretel; ad. by Neil Gaiman; illus. by Lorenzo Mat-
totti. Toon Graphic, 2014 53p
iSbn 978-1-935179-62-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 3-5
In this measured, forthright retelling of the familiar tale, Gaiman draws on the 
features originally told to the Grimm brothers by Dortchen Wild, who later 
became Wilhelm Grimm’s wife. That means that there is neither stepmother nor 
witch; instead, Hansel overhears his mother presenting her logical argument to 
abandon the children in the forest so that she and her husband might have some 
hope of surviving the famine caused by the war. He reluctantly agrees, but he is 
happy when the children outsmart the plan. However, as conditions worsen, their 
mother persuades their father to abandon them a second time, this time without 
sufficient warning to collect the stones that will lead them home. Happening upon 
the gingerbread house, they are fooled by the benign appearance of the old woman 
who lives there, and she drugs and enslaves them, fattening Hansel in a cage and 
chaining Gretel to a table leg while forcing her to cook and clean for her. The two 
escape in the usual way, returning home to find their mother dead and their father 
quite happy to see them (and the riches they have brought from the old woman’s 
home). Gaiman’s text eschews any sort of theatrical embellishments in the telling, 
leaving the grim story to play out its own horrors in a smoothly understated way, 
but his quiet, sure-footed prose makes for a haunting tale nonetheless. Every other 
opening is a full-bleed brush ink illustration that hints at the action while more 
fully evoking the gloomy atmospherics of the tale. The trim size suggests more 
graphic novel than picture book, which amps up the appeal for older readers and 
makes for an elegant addition to the 398.2 section. An editorial note follows the 
text, tracing the likely roots and historical progression of the story from the Great 
Famine of 1315 to Wild’s 1812 version to the drawings Mattotti created in 2007, 
which provided Gaiman’s inspiration for this retelling.  KC 
206 • The bulleTin
gehl, lAurA One Big Pair of Underwear; illus. by Tom Lichtenheld. Beach 
Lane/Simon, 2014 34p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5336-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5338-8 $10.99   
R* 2-5 yrs
It may start like an ordinary, if underwear-themed, rhymed counting book, but 
when two brown bears (“who hate to share”) battle over the titular briefs, one 
losing bear is left briefless and unhappy. Each time the number of things goes up 
(“TWO small sacks of salty snacks”), there’s always one more critter (“THREE 
young yaks with black backpacks”), leaving one critter out (“ONE mad yak yelps, 
‘Where’s my snack?’”). One of the four seals goes without a scooter, one of the five 
greedy goats must go without a jar of candy bars, and so on. Finally, twenty pigs 
want a ride on “TEN tall, twisty playground slides” and happily (if illicitly) share 
by going piggyback so everybody can play at once; the sharing notion catches on, 
and now nobody’s left out on candy bars, scooters, or underwear. It’s a cunning 
concept that enlivens the standard counting book with a soupçon of subtraction 
and a touch of tongue-twisting in the tightly packed rhymes, and it brings some 
welcome comedy to the venerable but often unexciting topic of sharing. Lichten-
held’s pencil and digital color illustrations are robust yet helter-skelter, with pages 
rife with motion lines and expressions cinematically exaggerated. The animals are 
neatly and countably arrayed in tidy tripartite layouts that are effectively counter-
balanced with airy spot art. The figures are no dull clones, though: position, dress, 
and even commentary subtly distinguish them, and the poor excluded animals 
range from the thunderously angry to the melodramatically sad. The bounce of 
the verse will keep the interest even of youngsters not ready for the math, and kids 
who’ve progressed beyond basic counting books will be intrigued by the challenge 
and delighted by the comedy.  DS
griffin, bethAny The Fall. Greenwillow, 2014 420p
ISBN 978-0-06-210785-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Griffin’s revision of “The Fall of the House of Usher” begins inside the coffin in 
which eighteen-year-old Madeline finds herself buried alive, screaming her throat 
raw hoping her brother Roderick—who entombed her—will relent. The follow-
ing chapters flash back to Madeline’s perspectives at various ages—eighteen, nine, 
fifteen, eleven—as she grapples with the family curse that eventually drives both her 
parents (and, apparently, her brother) insane. Roderick refuses to believe in the curse 
and goes away to school, leaving Madeline alone to deal with a seemingly sentient 
and malevolent house that prevents her exit by increasingly violent means (a suit 
of armor throws an axe when she considers a garden walk, the drapes attempt to 
smother her as she looks longingly out a window). Although her health continues 
to fail, Madeline insists she’ll find an escape—until Roderick returns and succumbs 
to illness himself. The terrifyingly claustrophobic feel of the first chapter becomes 
malicious as it extends to the rest of the book; the house is not only a tomb for 
Madeline but an abusive guardian, offering her love and comfort in one instant 
(providing her a canine companion out of the blue, for example) and then viciously 
ripping it away (drowning the dog in the surrounding tarn). The disjointed timeline 
and chapter lengths track along with Madeline’s level of lucidity—she’s clearest at 
fifteen, taken with the house’s adoration at nine, and both furious and resigned at 
December 2014 • 207
eighteen, making her overall narration fascinatingly untrustworthy. Griffin layers 
in allusions to the original story without being derivative, so this would make an 
excellent companion in a Poe unit; it also, however, works just as well on its own 
as an exquisitely wrought gothic tale for a stormy night.  KQG
hendrix, John Shooting at the Stars: The Christmas Truce of 1914; written and 
illus. by John Hendrix. Abrams, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-1-4197-1175-6 $18.95   
R Gr. 3-5
It is now the hundredth anniversary of the storied outbreak of peace among enemy 
soldiers facing each other across World War I trenches. Hendrix recreates that spon-
taneous truce through a letter from a fictional Charlie to his parents back home, 
which tells of the events of the day. First, a jam jar tossed like a grenade into the 
opposing trench breaks the ice, and soon the soldiers meet in No Man’s Land. The 
first grim task is to bury their dead, and then the socializing turns merrier: “There 
was also much trading of biscuits and puddings. . . . There were two soldiers in such 
a good mood they started kicking around an old biscuit tin like a football, using 
two battered tree stumps as a goal.” A closing note snaps readers back to reality, as 
officers threaten charges of treason should hostilities be interrupted again. Soldier 
Charlie is affectionately depicted as a freckle-faced youngster among war-worn 
older men, and his status as a newcomer to battle lends credibility to the combi-
nation of playfulness and awe with which he regards the truce. Similarly, scenes 
of camaraderie are tempered with the sadder reality of a commander blustering in 
outrage and fallen soldiers hastily laid in frozen graves. Hendrix notes that “Charlie’s 
descriptions come from letters and interviews with actual soldiers who were there 
that day,” but no specific sources appear among the appended introduction, end 
author’s note, brief bibliography, and index. There is, however, a reproduction of a 
snapshot to remind readers that Charlie’s incredible story has its roots in fact.  EB
hePPermAnn, christine Poisoned Apples; illus. with photographs by Regina 
Belmonte, Ashley Gosiengfiao, Lissy Laricchia, et al. Greenwillow, 2014 114p
ISBN 978-0-06-228957-5 $17.99   
R* Gr. 10 up
Heppermann begins this slim but potent volume of fairy-tale inspired poems with 
a grim reminder that girls’ experience of growing up in our culture means that the 
woods where dangers lurk are everywhere, and sticking to the path of unwritten 
societal rules guarantees neither safe passage nor happy endings. Forcefully sug-
gesting that it is the legacy of the wicked queen that “now all mirrors chatter,” the 
poems seethe with witty anger against the daily onslaught of messaging from media, 
mothers, frenemies, boyfriends, and inner voices regarding how girls should look 
and behave. Deft deployment of fairy-tale motifs and sharp-edged humor ensures 
that the book’s countermessages reach deep, yanking out entrenched fantasies with 
surgical precision and pinning them to readers’ attention with familiar imagery 
twisted in uncanny and yet oh so intimately recognizable ways. When might a 
hundred-year nap be too short? Who is the beauty and who is the beast? How can 
innocuous punctuation turn vindictive? What do girls gain when they “lose” their 
virginity? Accompanied by stylized fantasy photographs as piercing as the poems 
themselves, this is sure to be passed around among readers thoroughly tired of being 
picked, prodded, pimped and primped to achieve an impossible perfection.  KC
208 • The bulleTin
high, lindA oAtmAn Teeny Little Grief Machines. Saddleback, 2014 [243p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62250-883-9 $9.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-61247-998-9 $12.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Sixteen-year-old Lexi hates her life. She lives with her alcoholic father (when he’s 
not in jail), her high school dropout stepmother, and her eight-year-old brother 
Blaine, who is autistic and has ADHD and developmental delays. Their family 
would also include her infant sister, but she died at three weeks old from SIDS. 
Lexi is still processing her grief over her sister’s death when her beloved guidance 
counselor leaves and Lesi is forced to take care of one of those almost-real electronic 
babies for her Life Skills class; added to everything else, these stressors prove too 
much for her and she ends up hospitalized for depression. The attention of caring 
adults prompts her recovery, and she ends her year with renewed hope and the 
promise of a boyfriend. This hi-lo verse novel employs carefully crafted figurative 
language gauged for accessibility. Internal rhymes, short lines and stanzas, concrete 
sensory images, and intentional manipulation of spacing and fonts spin reluctant 
readers through Lexi’s grief spiral, tracing her struggles with guilt and feelings of 
anger and abandonment, and highlighting responses that many teens will relate to 
as she acts out through self-harming and inappropriate behavior. Her talent for art 
allows for the use of color symbolism to carry throughout the book, introducing 
yet another layer of literary reading in an accessible way. Teachers and counselors 
looking for a redemptive read for troubled, low-achieving students will have much 
to work with here.  KC 
horáˇcek, Petr The Mouse Who Ate the Moon; written and illus. by Petr 
Horáˇcek. Candlewick, 2014 25p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7059-7 $15.99   
R 2-4 yrs
When Little Mouse yearns to have her very own piece of the beautiful moon, she 
gets her wish: “A piece of the moon had fallen from the sky.” The yellow crescent 
is so delicious that Little Mouse can’t stop herself from nibbling on it, until she 
realizes with horror that she’s wrecked the moon and “it won’t be round anymore.” 
Her friends Rabbit and Mole may not recognize a banana when they see it, but they 
know their friend hasn’t eaten the moon; they invite her out to watch the moon 
rise, and the relieved Mouse shares her remaining bits of banana with her friends in 
the moonlight. Though this doesn’t go the same conceptual distance as Thurber’s 
Many Moons, it’s a sweetly written story with some enlivening spirit in the text (each 
time a friend tells Mouse that “nobody can eat the moon,” she says flatly, “Well, I 
just did”). Mixed-media art glows with saturated colors (and that banana really is 
as bright as the moon), while mottled resist effects add texture and the patterned 
charm of batik to backdrops and vegetation. Horáˇcek’s animals have a thoughtful 
scruffiness that recalls John Burningham’s work, while their thick, painterly solidity 
is all their own. The die-cut effects (a hole for the moon and shaped-edge pages) 
don’t particularly enhance the story, but they give little fingers more to explore. 
The lunar theme and nocturnal mood make this a soothing bedtime read, and it 
could pair with Thurber’s title for a poetic look at the moon.  DS 
December 2014 • 209
hosie, donnA The Devil’s Intern. Holiday House, 2014 229p
ISBN 978-0-8234-3195-3 $16.95   
R Gr. 9-12
Mitchell has gotten used to Hell over the last four years. Sure, it’s hot and over-
crowded and as miserable as one might expect, but as long as you aren’t one of the 
truly horrible residents, you are mostly just left to do your job and live your . . . 
unlife. Mitchell’s lucky in that he has found three very good friends, and he’s luckier 
still that they are loyal enough to embark on a dangerous quest with him through 
time (using a device Mitchell stole) to try to reverse their deaths. Of course, time 
travel always results in paradoxes, and this novel quickly becomes complex as the 
teens realize that they can’t undo their deaths—in fact, their presence across history 
(a Viking battle, the 1666 London fire, 1960s San Francisco, and present day D.C. 
are the four death sites of the protagonists) actually has irreversible consequences. 
There is a wry snark throughout that is effective for a teen describing hell, and the 
frequent narrative wandering into two very important things on Mitchell’s mind, 
namely getting enough food and battling eternal hormones (the curse of dying as 
a seventeen-year-old), is plausible and funny as well. While the time-travel path 
does become convoluted, all is impeccably explained by the end, even if the whole 
concept of a death caused by a future version of you remains a bit muddy. Within 
the abstractions, there is clarity, and the sharp focus on the four friends, who are 
endearing and carefully developed, will keep readers engaged with trying to figure 
it all out.  AS
Jeffers, oliVer Once upon an Alphabet; written and illus. by Oliver Jef-
fers. HarperCollins, 2014 [112p]
ISBN 978-0-00-751427-4 $26.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6 
Jeffers (author of This Moose Belongs to Me, BCCB 1/13, etc.) now brings his quirky 
sensibilities to the alphabet, allowing each letter to prompt a minuscule, often sur-
real, sometimes tragicomic story, vignette, or poem gently laced with the relevant 
initial. For instance, A tells of Edmund the astronaut (“For ages he’d been training 
to go on an adventure up into space to meet some aliens”), who unfortunately 
suffers from a fear of heights; C tells of Cup, who lived in a cupboard but dared to 
reach for the windowsill (unfortunately, “the counter was a long way down, and 
made of concrete”). A few linkages add a touch of cohesion (O’s problem-solving 
owl and octopus discover the purloiner of Xavier’s x-ray spectacles in X), but such 
connections seem more sweet serendipity than anything so logical as a plot. This is 
less a concept book than a gentler stepping stone to Gorey’s Gashlycrumb Tinies, and 
its pokerfaced absurdity echoes Edward Lear as well as contemporary practitioners 
such as Douglas Florian and Jon Agee. While not every entry succeeds in the tidy 
achievement of ridiculousness, the cumulative effect is peculiarly pleasing. There’s 
also a bit of Lear in Jeffers’ childishly scrawled figures, who exude an oblivious in-
nocence as they laugh at Death (literally) and spy on iguanas; the restrained palette 
limits most spreads to one or two spots of accent color to contrast with the black 
lines and gray washes, but the spot art sequences and droll bits of text are enjoyably 
zippy. Elementary schoolers with a taste for offbeat humor will glom onto this, 
and it will be a perfect readaloud for them to share with their delighted if slightly 
puzzled younger siblings.  DS
210 • The bulleTin
kAin, JAmie The Good Sister. St. Martin’s Griffin, 2014 [304p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-250-04773-1 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-250-04778-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
The specter of Sarah’s possible death has defined the Kinsey family since Sarah’s 
first diagnosis of leukemia when she was eight, but after two remissions and a 
bright outlook, her fall from a cliff into the Pacific sends them all reeling in this 
book narrated in turns by each of the Kinsey sisters. Asha, the youngest sister, who 
worshipped Sarah and twice donated bone marrow, can’t figure out how to live in 
a world without her hero. Rachel, the middle sister, who felt abandoned and left 
out of the family fight to save Sarah, simmers with resentment that all eyes are 
once again on a sister she knows was not the saint everyone thought she was. Sarah 
herself has a voice in this tragedy as well, spooling out meditations on life, guilt, 
and grief from beyond the grave. Their former flower-child parents had long since 
divorced and become twenty-first-century sellouts, leaving the girls ill equipped to 
process their grief with any kind of emotional integrity and making them vulner-
able to boys who want to damage them as well as boys who want to save them. 
Fortunately, the steadfastness of two very different young men with very different 
agendas refocuses Rachel and Asha away from what they’ve lost and toward what 
they still have, namely, each other. While the emotional wrench of early death is 
nothing new in young adult fiction, this book stands out for its unflinching honesty 
and lyrical intensity; there are no John Green–style heroes here, just selfish, flawed 
people muddling through, making a thorough mess of things but managing to 
hang on to just enough love to move forward.  KC
kArAs, g. briAn As an Oak Tree Grows; written and illus. by G. Brian 
Karas. Paulsen/Penguin, 2014 [32p]
iSbn 978-0-399-25233-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 5-8 yrs
On a hill overlooking a bay, a young boy plants an acorn not too far from the family’s 
wigwam in the year 1775. Subsequent spreads revisit the scene every twenty-five 
years, noting the departure of the young planter and the replacement of his wigwam 
with a settler’s farmhouse, the growth of the population, the coming of electricity 
and automobiles, all while the oak grows and expands and weathers tough times. 
Finally, in the autumn of 2000, a massive lightning strike splits the tree in two and 
kills it; it’s cut down (and its wood repurposed), but in spring a sprout grows from 
one of its acorns. Text is simple and descriptive, often noting the tree as biosystem 
(“Birds perched in the oak tree to rest from long migrations”) as well as focal point 
for depicting manmade change. The sweep of Karas’ pencil and gouache full-bleed 
spreads has all the majesty of good landscape, with the stately tree firmly rooted 
in the center of every scene, but his homey and accessible draftsmanship keeps the 
details human as well as intricate. A bar along the bottom documents the progress 
of time in quarter-century increments, allowing audiences to track the years. The 
hilltop prospect provides a particularly fine vista, and audiences will appreciate the 
small dramas (a guy valiantly shoves a Model T along in the snow in 1925) and 
subtle alterations (powerboats replace sailboats in the bay) as well as the significant 
changes (the settlers’ cabin obliterates the wigwam that was there before). If you’re 
near any large trees, this could spark your own local trip through history, or use 
December 2014 • 211
it to inspire kid versions on their own or their family’s timelines. A few additional 
facts about oak trees close the book.  DS
kimmel, eric A. Simon and the Bear: A Hanukkah Tale; illus. by Matthew True-
man. Disney Hyperion, 2014 36p
ISBN 978-1-4231-4355-0 $16.99   
R 6-8 yrs
Simon sets out for America aboard the HMS Atlantic, but the ship collides with an 
iceberg mid-journey. Saving himself by leaping onto the menorah, he decides (since 
it is the first night of Hanukkah) that he will light the first candle in the menorah 
he has brought from home, in hopes of inviting a similarly miraculous salvation. 
His miracle shows up—a huge polar bear—and Simon feeds her some of the latkes 
his mother has packed. The kindly bear allows Simon to sleep next to her, keeping 
him warm, and brings him fish the next day, and the next, until Simon has lit all 
eight of his Hanukkah candles and used up all of his food supply. On the eighth 
night, rescue comes from a ship, sent to investigate the source of the mysterious 
light on the iceberg. Picturesque but pithy details add nuance and readaloud value 
to this original and inventive Hanukkah tale. Strong artistic compositions and an 
atmospheric use of a range of shadowy blues and whites effectively capture the wintry 
seascapes and night skies, and Trueman brings a masterful hand to textures ranging 
from the bear’s thickly stippled coat to the craquelure of the ice. Simon’s crimson 
hat provides a note of contrast and cheerful hope against the starker backgrounds, 
and the bear is both cuddly-looking and realistically intimidating in her size and in 
her triangular claws. This has multiple use possibilities, from holiday celebrations 
to polar bear storytimes to immigration-themed units, but it could also simply add 
some light and inspiration to a cold, dark winter’s night.  JH
kuderick, mAdeleine Kiss of Broken Glass. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 
2014 208p
ISBN 978-0-06-230656-2 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Based loosely on the experiences of the author’s daughter, who was involuntarily 
committed to psychiatric care as a result of Florida’s Baker Act, this novel in free 
verse frankly explores the allure of cutting. Fifteen-year-old Kenna feels alienated 
in her family; she’s B-listed by her pretty, popular, smart older sister, but she readily 
admits that she has suffered no great trauma that would motivate her to self-harm. 
Instead, she was simply drawn into the competitive cutting clique at her school 
in sixth grade by a girl named Rennie, and she’s ratted out by a girl who wants to 
move up in the group. The girls call themselves the Sisters of the Broken Glass 
and spend their time comparing scars and stories of the many ways they sneak 
opportunities for self-harm. While in treatment, Kenna meets others who have 
been Baker Acted, some of whom wish to recover, while some want to continue as 
they are and offer her strategies to beat the system. The dangers of eroticizing self-
harm are ever present in these sorts of stories, and this one treads carefully along 
that fine line, giving a full and honest account of possible weapons and triggers, 
as well as distractions that might work for those willing to be diligent. In the end, 
though, Kuderick is clear-sighted about the nature of cutting as an addiction that, 
once acquired, takes on a life of its own and may never quite go away. While the 
seductive poetry may be as enticing as it is cautionary, the message of consequences 
and exposure of the truth are also highlighted. Resources for readers involved in 
self-harming are included.  KC
212 • The bulleTin
kulPer, kendAll Salt & Storm. Little, 2014 398p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40456-3 $27.00
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40451-8 $18.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-40450-1 $9.99   
R Gr. 8-10
Hoping to assume the traditional role of island witch on her rocky Atlantic is-
land, Avery has been learning the old magic ways from her grandmother. She’s 
therefore horrified by the decision of her mother, an orthodox member of their 
nineteenth-century whaling community, to keep Avery from her destiny. Enter 
Tane, an off-islander covered in magical tattoos, who offers to break her free of 
her mother’s Victorian constraints and help her get back to what Avery believes she 
wants. It’s a complex island, built on generations of magic, and once the witching 
stops, things fall apart socially—and literally, as many of the whaling ships were 
held together with spells. Avery’s understanding of what power means is one of 
the most intriguing and memorable elements in the novel; though people tell her 
multiple times that all is not as ideal as she believes, she doesn’t accept the truth 
until the town turns against her. The well-developed romance between Tane and 
Avery is searing, all the more so because readers will spot rather early on that no 
happy ending awaits them. An author’s note offers a bit about American whaling 
history and the convergence of multiple cultures on whaling ships, but enough 
context is given within the novel that this glimpse into the realistic elements isn’t 
necessary but is merely a nice bonus.  AS
lAuren, christinA Sublime. Simon, 2014 318p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1368-8 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-1370-1 $10.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Lucy wakes up in a forest blazing with autumn—when she’s certain it was just spring 
yesterday. She stumbles her way to the nearby grounds of Saint Osanna’s boarding 
school, where some people see her and some people don’t, where she discovers she 
doesn’t need to eat or sleep, and where she realizes she is, in fact, dead. Colin is able 
to see her and is immediately smitten; even after discovering the gruesome details 
of her death and the fact that she is one of St. O’s infamous ghostly “Walkers,” he 
pursues her and the two fall into a romantic relationship. A near-death experience 
for Colin allows them to be physically closer, and he begins to take increasingly 
dangerous risks to get into a coma-like state that allows them to have sex, while 
Lucy begins to wonder what all this might be costing Colin. The flowery prose and 
steamy scenes will draw traditional romance readers, but the conventional will-they/
won’t-they tension is resolved relatively early, as is the mystery behind Lucy’s death. 
What’s left, then, is really a cautionary portrayal of a toxic relationship: focalization 
alternates between Lucy and Colin, allowing readers to see their vulnerability and 
desperation and how they heedlessly throw themselves into a romance that becomes 
both possessive and dangerous. Lucy is particularly intriguing, as she slowly comes 
to realize that she’s essentially draining Colin’s life force and wrestles with what to 
do next. The ambiguous ending can be read as either the ultimate romantic sacrifice 
or the outcome of a relationship gone horribly awry.  KQG 
leVine, kristin The Paper Cowboy. Putnam, 2014 333p
ISBN 978-0-399-16328-9 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 5-8
In the autumn of 1953, Senator Joseph McCarthy is making waves with his Com-
December 2014 • 213
munist witch hunt. Tommy Wilson, a twelve-year-old fixated on championing 
law and order in the tradition of the movie cowboys he idolizes, gets carried away 
with the issue and, on an impulse, plants an old copy of the Daily Worker on the 
stack of newspapers an immigrant storekeeper uses to wrap customer purchases. 
That’s just the latest bad decision among many Tommy’s been making ever since 
his older sister was badly burned doing a chore he neglected himself. His mother, 
mentally unstable, takes her anger out on him, often beating him mercilessly, while 
his father keeps his distance. Tommy also faces abuse at school as his bullying by 
another boy gets further out of hand, but he does find strength, support, and guid-
ance from neighbors he meets on his sister’s paper route, and he slowly realizes 
that cowboy-style bravery will require a change of attitude on his part. The story is 
heartfelt, but it is strung out longer than necessary, never paying much more than 
lip service to Tommy’s cowboy aspirations. The shiny goodness of the neighbors, 
each of whom has some talent or contribution to make at a critical moment, also 
wears thin. Tommy, though, has been dealt a difficult hand, and readers, including 
fans of Blakemore’s similarly themed The Spy Catchers of Maple Hill (BCCB 9/14), 
will be relieved to see him set his life back in order.  EB
leWis, r. c. Stitching Snow. Hyperion, 2014 [336p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8507-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4231-8797-4 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
For eight years, the frozen tundras of the planet Thanda have been Essie’s home, 
and the seventeen-year-old girl is mostly content to tinker with her seven drones 
and serve as impromptu mechanic for the local mines. Her desire to help trumps 
her usual self-preservation instincts when a mysterious boy, Dane, crashes his 
spaceship near her home, and soon she finds herself kidnapped and brought to 
Candara, Dane’s home planet. There Essie admits to being Princess Snow, whom 
everyone thought was kidnapped years ago, but who really ran away from King 
Matthias, her father and rapist, and Queen Olivia, her stepmother and attempted 
murderer. Now Dane and his planet’s ruling council plan to use Essie to end Mat-
thias’ reign of terror—whether she’s a willing participant or not. Several of the 
Snow White motifs are satisfyingly turned on their head here, and fans of Marissa 
Meyer’s The Lunar Chronicles (Cinder, BCCB 2/12, etc.) will feel right at home 
with the combination of sci-fi and fairy tale elements. The pacing is lightning quick, 
with our planet-hopping heroes moving from one obstacle to the next, and while 
that may at first cause readers a bit of whiplash, it also allows the story to wrap up 
in one installment. Lewis doesn’t sacrifice world-building for plot, either, deftly 
incorporating details about both the interplanetary conflicts and Essie’s history as 
the action moves swiftly along. Essie’s got the wit and strength to compete with any 
YA heroine, but it’s her conflicted feelings toward her father and her willingness to 
finally save herself that make her memorable. This will certainly ease the wait for 
readers anxious for Meyer’s next installment.  KQG 
lu, mArie The Young Elites. Putnam, 2014 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-399-16783-6 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
When a mysterious plague swept through the country of Kenettra, young Adelina 
Amouteru and hundreds of other children became malfettos: physically altered 
214 • The bulleTin
outcasts, cursed with fearful powers and hunted by the powerful Inquisition Axis. 
Now sixteen, Adelina stands accused of murder, only to be saved from execution 
by a secretive group of rebel malfettos who seek to use their powers to fight injustice 
and bigotry. Anxious to prove her worth, Adelina seeks to harness her dark power 
more completely, working under the tutelage of Enzo, their charismatic leader, and 
his closest confidant, the high-priced consort Raffaele. However, Teren Santoro, 
the Inquisition’s pitiless leader with dangerous secrets of his own, forces Adeline 
to secretly betray Enzo, and soon Adelina must decide whom she can trust and 
how much she is willing to sacrifice. Moving fluidly between chapters narrated by 
Adelina and snippets from other characters, this well-crafted fantasy strikes a perfect 
balance between emotion and action. The taut, tightly packed narrative provides an 
engaging mix of pulse-quickening fight scenes, heart-stopping near escapes, touching 
interpersonal interludes, and devastating betrayals. An intriguing heroine, Adelina 
thrills to the power that comes from fear and fury but wants only to experience 
kindness. Secondary characters are equally memorable and complex, particularly 
the self-hating villain Teren and the enigmatic Raffaele. Using unexpected deaths, 
plot-twisting treachery, and multiple perspectives to subvert what might otherwise 
by a conventional narrative of rebellion against tyranny, this novel is an excellent 
fit for fans of Cashore’s Graceling (BCCB 1/09) and Bunce’s Thief Errant series 
(Starcrossed, BCCB 10/10, etc.). An epilogue sets up expected sequels with promises 
of international intrigue.  AM
luPicA, mike Fantasy League. Philomel, 2014 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25607-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
If a spare moment worms its way into Charlie Gaines’ life, he’s sure to fill it with 
football. He runs several fantasy football teams, many of which are crushing the 
competition; he plays—not necessarily well—on the middle-school team; his 
best friend, Anna, is a football freak and granddaughter of the L.A. Bulldogs pro 
team owner. Anna is also Charlie’s producer for a weekly fantasy football podcast, 
which has been picked up as a side feature by the sportscaster dad of a teammate. 
Now Charlie’s football jones leads to something bigger when Bulldogs owner 
Joe Warren realizes Charlie can read the field like nobody’s business, and he acts 
on a couple of Charlie’s recruiting tips, which end up giving the sorry Bulldogs 
their first real chance at a playoff. Charlie’s riding high on celebrity, but it comes 
at a price when the Bulldogs’ new players don’t shine as brightly as the manager 
had hoped, and when Anna smarts under her best buddy’s sudden ascent in her 
grandfather’s regard. There’s more than a hint of Moneyball here, but whereas the 
Billy Beane story stresses objective analysis, numbers are only part of Charlie’s skill 
set, and his tale is laden with sentimentality. Even the flexible boundaries of kid 
sports books are strained by the string of heart-to-hearts, the regained youth of 
the ailing old owner, Charlie’s longing for the father who abandoned the family, 
Charlie’s newfound prowess on his own team, and of course the nail-biting run-up 
to the playoffs. There is, however, something here for young football fans of every 
stripe—those who take to the field and those who take to the couch—if they can 
squeeze in a little time for reading.  EB
December 2014 • 215
mAckintosh, dAVid Lucky; written and illus. by David Mackintosh. Abrams, 
2014 32p
iSbn 978-1-4197-0809-1 $17.95   
R 5-8 yrs
When Mom hints that there’ll be a surprise tonight at dinner, our protagonist’s 
imagination runs wild. He and his brother Leo mull possibilities—tickets to the 
Amazing Yo-Yo Supershow? a swimming pool in the backyard?—but reject them, 
until they conclude that the folks have won an all-expenses paid trip to Hawaii. 
They tell everybody at school the exciting news, whipping the whole place up to 
a frenzy, and get home to find the surprise is . . . pizza. Our narrator is mortified, 
but he’s jollied into better spirits when Leo adds pineapple to make dinner into 
Hawaiian pizza and the family has a little island evening in their own dining room. 
It’s the revved-up narrative voice and its counterpoint in Leo’s occasional comments 
that bring the comedy here, and kids will immediately grasp the upcoming doom 
when the boys’ Hawaii notion accelerates into headline news with schoolmates 
and administrators (“To celebrate, we’re all given ten minutes of free time”). The 
artwork combines thick crayonish scrawls, spidery linework, and collaged photog-
raphy and other digital elements on creamy matte pages; there’s a casual disorder 
to the visuals that’s counterbalanced by careful, rhythmic layout and the oversized 
text in a crisp, dramatic font. Kids will get a “there but for the grace of God go I” 
kick out of the imaginations run amuck, and adults will be reminded of the perils 
of sparking unlimited expectations.  DS
mAcy, sue Roller Derby Rivals; illus. by Matt Collins. Holiday House, 
2014 32p
ISBN 978-0-8234-2923-3 $16.95   
Ad 6-8 yrs
This reimagining of a December 5, 1948 Roller Derby competition highlights the 
rivalry of two stars on opposing women’s teams: glamorous redheaded powerhouse 
Gerry Murray and, playing to the press in a villain role, Midge “Toughie” Brasuhn. 
Macy covers not only the furious, body-slamming action of the race, but also its 
significance as one of the first sports to be aired on television, laying the groundwork 
for the plethora of events that would follow. Rules are covered within the text, and 
even in a signboard incorporated into an illustration, and whatever else kids need 
to know is probably to be found in the four pages of concluding notes. Collins’ 
action-packed scenes are often at odds with the text, though, adding an unfortunate 
degree of confusion. Toughie, described early on as shorter than Gerry, is portrayed 
throughout as approximately the same height, and the hair color that is often cited to 
distinguish Gerry is not much in evidence. When Toughie is flipped over the guard 
rail and according to the text “climbs back on the track quickly,” she instead is shown 
hanging limply over the rail with a decidedly defeatist expression. With resurgent 
interest in Roller Derby, though, this topic is bound to get plenty of play, and kids 
may enjoy watching these old-school mamas in rough-and-tumble contact sport.  EB
mArney, ellie Every Breath. Tundra, 2014 335p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-77049-772-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-77049-774-0 $10.99   
R Gr. 9-12 
It’s only been a few months since Rachel Watts moved in two doors down from 
James Mycroft, and already their high school friends have teased them about the 
216 • The bulleTin
Conan Doyle name connection. The two pals play right along, partly because they 
admit it’s funny, and partly because they really do align somewhat to the famed 
characters. Mycroft is a thinker, an experimenter, and a lost soul who’s emotionally 
standoffish after the death of his parents and his own injuries in a car accident. 
Watts, a writer who polishes Mycroft’s Diogenes blogs, is smart and supportive 
and ready for adventure. Adventure does indeed find them when the friends make 
a late-night food delivery to a homeless man Mycroft knows, only to discover him 
dead beneath a secluded tree. His throat has been slashed, but evidence shows 
he had been murdered before the cut was made. Working parallel to the police 
investigation, the pair uncover connections between Homeless Dave, a seductive 
graffiti artist, and a herpetologist, and end up fighting for their lives in a lion enclo-
sure—and falling in love. Yes, that is a clear tip-off that despite the broad Sherlock 
Holmes references scattered throughout the mystery, Mycroft and Watts are not 
modern day incarnations à la Sherlock, and despite Mycroft’s cri de cœur, “I want to 
be Sherlock-bloody-Holmes!”, he’s his own man. The Melbourne setting and raft 
of Aussie-isms of this Australian import add further interest, and readers will be 
pleased to know that two more titles are in the transoceanic pipeline. Patience.  EB
mArtin, Ann m. Rain Reign. Feiwel, 2014 [240p]
ISBN 978-0-312-64300-3 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
“No one is sure what to do with me in school,” says eleven-year-old Rose, whose 
high-functioning autism challenges her teachers and classmates and also her hard-
drinking and defensive single father. Rose’s favorite things are homonyms (she 
keeps an ongoing list to which she delights in adding) and rules (her unwillingness 
to tolerate deviation from any rule has gotten her banned from the school bus for 
yelling about too many driver errors), and her main supports in life are her kind 
uncle Weldon and her beloved dog, Rain, a stray her father picked up eleven months 
ago. When a hurricane floods Rose’s small town, Rain disappears; a desperate Rose 
is relieved to be reunited with her adored dog, but her discovery that Rain was 
actually lost from another loving family’s home before Rose got her precipitates 
a difficult decision for Rose and an upheaval in her family. Rose narrates with a 
thoughtful gravity that marks her atypicality (her cherished homonyms pop up as 
frequent echoes) but also makes her endearing as she negotiates tough situations at 
home and school. There’s an old-fashioned quality to the story, especially the family 
elements (Rose’s borderline abusive father finally leaves Rose with her affectionate 
uncle, and Rose discovers that her mother didn’t abandon her daughter but in fact 
died), that makes the book sturdily accessible. This is therefore a book that will 
have broad appeal as a readalone or an older readaloud, and readers will embrace 
plucky Rose as somebody they’d like to know.  DS
mArtineZ, JessicA Kiss Kill Vanish. Tegen/HarperCollins, 2014 422p
ISBN 978-0-06-227449-6 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Seventeen-year-old Valentina Cruz is on the run: from Emilio, her hit-man boy-
friend; from her father, the drug kingpin who ordered the hit; and from her luxu-
rious Miami life built on his crimes. Now, finding herself destitute in Montreal, 
Valentina earns her rent modeling for rich wannabe artist Lucien, while enduring 
the innuendos of his playboy brother Marcel. When a seemingly chance encounter 
December 2014 • 217
with her former love brings her two lives crashing together, though, her hope for 
an anonymous new start suddenly vanishes. Even as Emilio begs her for a second 
chance, she begins to suspect that he’s still keeping dangerous secrets, and when 
another death occurs, she finds herself drawing closer to the person she least expects: 
Marcel. Strong writing and an unusual premise provide this fast-paced novel with 
added depth and drama. The plot moves steadily, with plenty of intrigue and surprise 
revelations to keep the reader engaged. The real draw here, though, is Valentina’s 
personal journey, as she struggles to emerge from her father’s violent shadow and 
define herself on her own terms. Readers get a front row seat as Valentina transitions 
from pampered, ignorant socialite to self-pitying waif to self-reliant, resourceful 
young woman. Teen readers coming to terms with imperfect parents and those who 
want their action novels with a little more emotional and psychological depth will 
find a lot to love here.  AM
mcbride, susAn Very Bad Things. Delacorte, 2014 225p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90704-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73797-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-37102-5 $10.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Returning for the spring semester of her senior year at boarding school, shy schol-
arship student Katie Barton wants nothing more than to revel in her passionate 
romance with popular hockey star Mark. She finds herself distracted, though, by 
her best friend’s angry disapproval, her own haunted dreams, and the sense that 
someone is watching from the shadows. Things only get worse when pictures of 
Mark, naked with a townie girl, start being passed around school. Mark proclaims 
his innocence, but when the girl goes missing and then turns up murdered on 
school grounds, Katie’s faith begins to waver. Then a gruesome package is left on 
her doorstep, and Katie is forced to consider that she might just be the next target. 
Determined to discover the truth behind her dreams, Mark’s betrayal, and her best 
friend’s anger, Katie investigates, only to discover that everyone has secrets they 
might be willing to kill to protect. This fast-paced, thoroughly enjoyable read offers 
a clever, provocative mystery wrapped in an eerie psychodrama shell. The characters 
and resolution aren’t particularly original, but that’s not what the book’s for: it’s a 
solid potboiler with a well-crafted plot that heightens the tension and just enough 
hints to clue in the observant. Readers who appreciate a heroine who fights for what 
she wants will enjoy rooting for the feisty Katie, while fans of Pretty Little Liars and 
The Phantom of the Opera who like a spooky page-turner will get a thrill here.  AM
mcclintock, norAh About That Night. Orca, 2014 238p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0594-1 $12.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4598-0596-5 $9.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Jordie’s ex-boyfriend, Ronan, stops by for a front porch conversation on a freezing 
winter’s night, insistent that she return a bracelet he had given her. Current boy-
friend Derek observes their discussion through the window and isn’t at all happy 
that she returns distracted and even moon-eyed over her ex. He stomps out to his 
own home to bring back a bracelet he had recently purchased for her, confident 
he will outclass Ronan in the gift department. He never returns though, and his 
body—head smashed in—is eventually found in the snow. That isn’t the only death 
that night—early onset Alzheimer’s sufferer Elise Diehl, wife of a police lieutenant, 
218 • The bulleTin
is also found frozen to death, and the blood on her knuckles is overlooked as the 
town’s attention focuses on the teen’s obvious murder. Connection? Most certainly; 
this is a YA mystery, after all. However, wrapping up the identity of the perp (or 
possibly perps) is anything but tidy, and McClintock spins the tale and its read-
ers off to a messy and deliciously troubling conclusion that will confound many 
expectations. Scenes focalized through a single character’s perspective enrich the 
cast personalities, and Jordie’s emotional tug-of-war between late good guy Derek 
and live brooding Ronan adds a dash of romantic angst. Love and murder: a great 
combination for teen reading on a cold winter’s night.  EB 
mccully, emily Arnold Strongheart: The World’s First Movie Star Dog; written 
and illus. by Emily Arnold McCully. Holt, 2014 36p
ISBN 978-0-8050-9448-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 2-4
One early silent star whose fame has since faded is Strongheart, the German Shep-
herd, who dazzled audiences in the 1920s with his emotive acting. McCully gives 
a brief overview of the quadruped actor’s life, starting with his birth and police 
dog training in Germany, moving on to his discovery by Larry Trimble, a movie 
director searching for a new canine star, and culminating in the dog’s film career. 
While the story skips over the fact that Strongheart was actually Trimble’s second 
star (though his fame easily eclipsed that of his predecessor), it’s a lively tale of doggy 
achievement as Strongheart captivates audiences, lives the high life, and fights off a 
bogus journalist; indeed, it’s a story that itself would make a fine film. The casual 
style of McCully’s line and watercolor art emphasizes Strongheart’s goofiness more 
than his nobility, and his real-life dark eyes are depicted as being quite pale, which 
gives him a wild-eyed look at times; scenes of his exploits are nonetheless appeal-
ing, and the art effectively captures the flair of the period in costume and décor. 
The text’s energetic style is suitable to reading aloud as well as reading alone, and 
animal-loving audiences will appreciate learning about an old-school canine star. 
An author’s note tells more about Strongheart’s life, and a brief bibliography (sadly 
missing YouTube links to Strongheart’s only surviving movie) is included. Endpapers 
add interest with celluloid frame-by-frame images of Strongheart’s movie action.  DS 
mcdonnell, PAtrick A Perfectly Messed Up Story; written and illus. by Patrick 
McDonnell. Little, 2014 33p
ISBN 978-0-316-22258-7 $17.00   
R 3-5 yrs
Pint-sized Louie is merrily gamboling through a meadow (“‘Tra la la la la,’ he 
sang”), when his idyll is disrupted by a big splodge of jelly on the page. Things get 
worse when a big dollop of peanut butter (“the chunky kind!”) hits right across 
his face, greasy black fingerprints mar the scenery, orange juice dribbles along 
the horizon, and big scribble marks disrupt the view. A disheartened Louie bows 
out of the book (when the text cheerfully persists with “This is Louie’s story,” he 
sighs, “Who cares?”). When the narration points out that everything is fine, Louie 
reconsiders and then philosophically agrees that “it is a pretty good story, messes 
and all.” This doesn’t have the same sparkle as recent self-aware narratives such as 
Willems’ We Are In a Book (BCCB 10/10), but it’s a funny treatment for younger 
audiences. McDonnell’s take has some great kid-level elements, and Louie’s melo-
dramatic renunciation of his story is solid comedy. The illustrations contrast the 
deliberate bland sweetness of the landscape with the exuberant minimalism of the 
December 2014 • 219
swift, cartoonish ink strokes that define Louie, while the photorealism of the mess 
adds additional texture and a well-judged touch of grossness. Similarly, the layout 
neatly contrasts Louie’s energetic speech balloons with the serene stiffness of the 
narration’s Schoolbook font. Youngsters just learning about the pleasures of self-
referentiality may find this a humorous introduction.  DS
mcghee, Alison Star Bright: A Christmas Story; illus. by Peter H. Reyn-
olds. Atheneum, 2014 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-5858-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-7714-8 $10.99   
Ad 4-6 yrs
As angels in the heavens and gift-bearing travelers on earth await the birth of a 
special baby, the newest angel ponders what she can give to the imminent infant. 
Wind, rain, and music seem like good options, but all belong to the provenance 
of other powers (the sky, the clouds, the songbirds). As the little angel observes the 
puzzlement of the lost camel-riding travelers below, she finally decides to become 
a guiding light in the sky as her gift, because “a light in the darkness” is “the best 
gift of all.” Original details and concise yet poetic language make this an engaging, 
albeit predictable, take on the Christmas story. A couple of textual and illustra-
tive mismatches keep this from being as successful as it might have been; “In the 
heavens, angels turned light with joy,” for example, is accompanied by pictures of 
angels who do not look noticeably different from—or more joyful than—the angels 
on other pages. Overall, though, Reynolds’ illustrations—digitally enhanced line 
and watercolor—are concretely accessible to the young audience. The winged little 
angel, clad in white aviator gear, is an attractive heroine, and her size and obvious 
youth make her relatable to youngsters. The light-filled, pastel-toned skies of the 
heavens offer pleasing contrast to the star-spattered darker, purply-blue skies closer 
to earth, and Reynolds’ envisioning of the heavens as a place of interconnected 
ladders and platforms is an intriguing one. Those who enjoy a fanciful touch in 
their nativity narratives may find this perspective enjoyable.  JH
mesrobiAn, cArrie Perfectly Good White Boy. Carolrhoda Lab, 2014 293p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-4677-3480-6 $17.95   
R Gr. 10 up
High school junior Sean Norwhalt hooks up with pretty, popular senior Hallie, who 
wants to have a summer fling and lose her virginity before she heads off to college. 
Thinking they’re in love, Sean is thrown by her inevitable brush-off, but he adds 
it to the host of crappy things in his life, like his father’s loss of their home (Dad’s 
now in rehab) and his older brother’s verbal abuse. When he sees his convenience-
store coworker, Neecie, hanging out with a guy Sean knows to have a girlfriend, 
she begs him to keep their secret, and this awakens in him a protective instinct 
that he didn’t know he had. The shared pathos of their compromised sex lives 
draws them together, and they become friends, even when they each break their 
promises not to have sex with partners who clearly don’t respect or love them. As in 
her debut, Sex and Violence (BCCB 12/13), Mesrobian explores the moral malaise 
of contemporary culture through characters who, though they long for something 
meaningful, have neither inner resources nor worthy models to follow. Sean’s nar-
rative voice is deliberately artless, focusing on the small details of moving through 
each day and avoiding narrative shape or deliberate writerly elevation. Mesrobian’s 
subtle theme of the disposable nature of contemporary objects and relationships 
220 • The bulleTin
is reinforced through literal details that have metaphoric impact, such as Sean’s 
narratively labored disgust at having to watch someone trim his nails and his rage 
over Hallie’s revelation that she had an abortion. This carefully crafted thematic 
makes the book more likely to be favored by literary critics than casual readers, 
but some teens will extrapolate from raw tedium of Sean’s daily experience to the 
emotional reality beyond.  KC
milford, kAte Greenglass House; illus. by Janie Zollars. Clarion, 2014 373p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-544-05270-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-544-05555-1 $17.99   
R Gr. 4-7
This novel offers a bountiful mix of mystery, folklore, ghost stories, fantasy, and real-
istic fiction musings on identity and adoption. Milo is at the center of it all, secretly 
wondering about his Chinese heritage even while it makes him feel disloyal to his 
lovely adoptive parents, who run an out-of-the-way inn that often does business with 
irreputable sorts (though they mostly keep their bad deeds off site). Milo is eager for 
a quiet Christmas season, but a flurry of guests bring unexpected excitement; the 
arrival of Meddy (a girl who turns out not to be the daughter of an employee that 
she’s presumed) gives Milo a close ally and new friend to help unpack the thefts, 
mysteries, and connections with the old house that brought all of these rogues to 
his door. There are a lot of stories told by characters that eventually relate to the 
main narrative; while these tales within a tale require a bit of patience to unpack 
and connect, they are intriguing in themselves. The book has a complex plot and a 
large cast of characters, but they’re negotiable by patient readers, and the story itself 
will be fascinating to a wide range of kids who may think they don’t like one or 
more genres represented in here but will likely be instantly engaged nonetheless.  AS
morAles, yuyi Viva Frida; illus. with photographs by Tim O’Meara. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2014 [40p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-603-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 2-5
In this exploration of the imagery of artist Frida Kahlo, brief two- or three-word 
sentences provide dreamlike narration, and mixed-media images follow Frida as 
she discovers and opens a bright yellow wooden chest, releasing a fantasy in which 
playfulness leads to knowledge, love, creativity, and ultimately, to her embrace of 
life. English text appears in a heavy font, with Spanish translation hovering behind 
in delicate whisper of script. For many readers, the spare stream of consciousness 
may add a level of perplexity that impedes immersion into the stunning visual 
reverie, which can be enjoyed as a wordless adventure. Stop motion “puppets” 
of Frida, husband Diego Rivera, and various pets interact with objects before a 
painted backdrop; scenes then segue into a dreamlike world, and finally return to 
three dimensional figures. Even the youngest viewers will sense that this luminous 
woman with the joyous expression is deeply in love with her art, her life, and her 
man. However, darker images, such as the arrow-pierced deer, hint at the more 
turbulent side of Frida’s life which remains unexplored and unexplained. It is this 
complete lack of context, which endnotes in English and Spanish do little to miti-
gate, that is likely to limit the audience to readers with at least passing recognition 
of the content of Frida’s paintings as well as an understanding of the infidelity and 
passion that culminate in Frida’s ecstatic reception of Diego’s tender kiss: “que amo/
December 2014 • 221
that I love.” It therefore would be best used in conjunction with more traditional 
biographies of the artist, or with older readers of Catherine Reef’s Frida & Diego 
(BCCB 9/14), who will have the requisite background to parse both the pleasure 
and pain within the imagery and who may be inspired to head to a studio or maker 
space to embody their own dreams in visual medium.  EB 
nelson, JAndy I’ll Give You the Sun. Dial, 2014 [384p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3496-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-10
Twins Noah and Jude sublimate their rivalry through a game where they playfully 
trade unownable things—the sun, the stars, the flowers—for the concrete things 
they want from each other, but when their mother displays an obvious preference 
from Noah’s talent over his sister’s, no game can take away Jude’s hurt. Their story at 
thirteen is narrated by Noah, who feels weird with his obsessive passion for drawing 
and his desire for boys, especially their next-door neighbor; while he works furiously 
on his entrance portfolio so that he can attend a prestigious art high school, Jude 
turns her attention to surfing and collecting boys. Jude’s narration begins when 
they are sixteen; their mother has died in a car crash, but something more profound 
has happened to reverse their roles, so that Jude is enrolled in the art school, hid-
ing in shapeless hoodies, while Noah has become outwardly normal, occasionally 
veering off course by drinking too much and diving off a precariously high cliff 
into the ocean he always feared. As their alternating stories unfold, seemingly fated 
encounters with particular people weave the narratives together in surprising ways, 
creating a messy human drama of oversized emotions rendered both concrete and 
metaphorical through superstitious aphorisms from their grandmother’s “bible,” 
sculptures created by Jude and her mercurial mentor, and titles of the paintings 
that Noah is forever creating in his mind. Nelson’s prose is replete with moments 
of stunning emotional clarity, and her characters are as irresistible to the reader as 
they are to each other, particularly young Noah, whose vulnerability is laced with 
an enviable sense of the aesthetic raptures of everyday life. The controlling ethos 
throughout, though, is love: no matter how they hurt each other, the love among 
all the characters is huge here—huge enough to destroy, huge enough to forgive, 
and huge enough to put their broken world back together again.  KC
nolAn, dennis Hunters of the Great Forest; written and illus. by Dennis No-
lan. Porter/Roaring Brook, 2014 40p
ISBN 978-1-59643-896-5 $17.99   
R* 4-7 yrs
In this wordless picture book, a small hunting party, lightly equipped but deeply 
determined, departs from its quaint village. As the multicultural, mixed-gender 
band of seven makes its way through the countryside, it becomes clear that these 
hunters are only thumb-size, so evading marauding dragonflies and hungry toads 
adds danger to their mission. Finally they spot their quarry: a bag of marshmallows, 
carelessly placed near a child who’s toasting her own over a campfire. The intrepid 
crew snatches one away, carrying the to-them-humongous cylinder of sweetness 
back to their rejoicing village, where their trophy provides fodder for a marshmallow 
roast for everybody. The theme of the tinies that live in a world where we’re giants 
is perennially amusing, and there’s solid comedy in the notion that the prey they’re 
stalking like a huge beast is a jet-puffed confectionery. Nolen’s line and watercolor 
222 • The bulleTin
illustrations (touched in spots with colored pencil) have the smooth, poker-faced 
realism familiar to fans of David Wiesner in the landscapes and animals. The 
little people, however, are a comic contrast, with a look that’s simultaneously elfin 
and Kilroy-esque, a multitude of exciting hairstyles and fashion choices on men 
and women alike, and a village that hints at Moominland in its bulbous organic 
shapes and love of shingled peaks on everything. While you may need to curb kids 
from leaving treats around to lure the hunting party out again, they’ll certainly be 
delighted with this alternative take on hunter/gathering. Don’t miss the last page’s 
half-page illustration showing the fate of the party’s equipment.  DS 
nolen, Jerdine Irene’s Wish; illus. by AG Ford. Wiseman/Simon, 2014 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-689-86300-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-9323-0 $10.99   
Ad 4-7 yrs
Irene loves her father, who can make things grow like nobody else, but she wishes 
he’d spend less time nursing vegetation and more time staying home and playing 
with her and her brother. She unexpectedly gets her wish when Papa accidentally 
swallows a mouthful of seeds, and their sprouting turns him into a tree. The family 
places him in “the center of everything” in the yard, where he becomes the always 
available playmate that Irene had longed for (“We played hide-and-seek in and 
around his roots and branches. And . . . he would laugh and laugh, right along 
with us”). A tree-Papa just isn’t the same, though, and Irene finally manages to wish 
her father back to a human daddy—but one who might be able to spend a little 
more time with his family. Though Irene’s yearning for a father who’s always there 
to play with her will strike a chord with many kids, the story isn’t very clear about 
Irene’s initial wish and its reversal, and the treatment of father-as-tree is too flat to 
carry the emotional weight of the story. The figures are a touch waxen at times, but 
Ford’s acrylic and oil illustrations are rhythmically composed, with a low viewpoint 
often giving the scenes a folklorically appropriate monumentality amid the oth-
erwise straightforwardly realistic treatment. Irene is an appealing protagonist, and 
her warm African-American family remains the centerpiece of the book even when 
the patriarch is in his arboreal phase. A slightly fantastical family drama, this may 
elicit sympathy from many kids who wish for more time with beloved parents.  DS
PArenteAu, shirley Ship of Dolls. Candlewick, 2014 258p
ISBN 978-0-7636-7003-0 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Eleven-year-old Lexie has just recently come to live with her strict paternal grand-
parents in 1926 Portland while her widowed flapper mother, a singer in a jazz 
band, goes off to live in San Francisco and perform with her sax-playing boyfriend. 
When Lexie finds out that a trip to San Francisco is the prize for the student who 
writes the best letter to accompany the “friendship ambassador” dolls her class is 
sending to Japan, she tries to enter her letter in the contest in an effort to see her 
mother. Unfortunately, the class mean girl steals Lexie’s letter and passes it off as 
her own, winning the contest and the trip. Lexie’s grandmother rises to the chal-
lenge and purchases tickets for herself and Lexie to ride aboard the same ship to 
San Francisco to visit with Lexie’s mother; unknown to her grandma, Lexie plans 
to stay once she’s there. Her mother has different plans, however: to take Lexie on 
a trip to Japan with the dolls, some photographer friends, and the ship captain who 
is clearly enamored of Lexie’s mom. That Lexie ultimately chooses to be with her 
December 2014 • 223
grandparents will surprise no one, as this ending and much of the book’s plot is 
entirely predictable, while the writing often tells rather than shows. Still, the 1920s 
setting is nicely rendered through dialogue and descriptive details, and Lexie is a 
sympathetic heroine. The doll “ambassadors of peace” premise is also interesting 
and historically true, and an author’s note on the real story is provided. Despite 
some shortcomings, this book might be of particular interest to historical fiction 
fans and those tweens who still (secretly or otherwise) play with their American 
Girl dolls.  JH
PArker, nAtAlie c. Beware the Wild. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 327p
ISBN 978-0-06-224152-8 $17.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Residents of Sticks, Louisiana have always regarded the swamp that surrounds their 
small town with a mix of reverence and fear, so when Sterling’s older brother Phin 
stomps off in a rage into the swamp, she’s terrified he’ll end up eaten by a gator 
or taken by one of the many spirits rumored to haunt the bog. She’s not wrong: 
eight hours later, there’s no sign of Phin, and a girl named Lenora May shows up 
at Sterling’s house—a girl whom suddenly everyone refers to as Sterling’s sister. 
No one in town seems to remember Phin at all, and even Sterling’s memories are 
clouding as she begins to recall a childhood with Lenora May instead of Phin. 
Sterling’s only ally is a boy named Heath Durham, who claims to have also lost 
someone to the swamp, but Sterling knows if she’s to save Phin, she’ll have to go 
through Lenora May, a spirit who is unwilling to give up her newfound freedom 
from the swamp. Parker hits all the right notes here, from the oppressively hot but 
chillingly creepy atmosphere to the slow-burn pacing to the cast of eccentric but 
believable characters. Sterling’s voice is a blend of gentle folksiness (“There are a 
hundred ways to die all cloaked in the twist of pale trees—gators fast enough to 
catch a grown man . . . nasty cottonmouths all filled with spite and patience”) and 
steely determination; her altered memories lend just a bit of unreliableness to her 
narration and prove that she is not totally immune to the swamp’s dark magic. Her 
relationship with Heath adds a nice touch of romance, while best friend Candy 
puts in a stellar performance as comic relief. Fans of Yovanoff’s Fiendish (BCCB 
7/14) and Quinn’s Another Little Piece (BCCB 7/13) will delight in this folklore-
inspired Southern gothic.  KQG 
PAtent, dorothy hinshAW Super Sniffers: Dog Detectives on the Job. Blooms-
bury, 2014 48p illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8027-3618-5 $17.99   
R Gr. 3-5
Following faithfully on the heels of Castaldo’s Sniffer Dogs (BCCB 9/14) is this 
olfactory canine exposition in more compact, slightly browsier photoessay form. 
Master of the format Patent treats young audiences to the details on dog selection 
and training and canine work in fields ranging from the military to ecological 
detecting to medical alerts, with each spread features a specific line of work or 
dog. The layout is somewhat dated, but it’s largely clean and accessible, with the 
photography of dogs (from Malinois to mutts) nicely balanced by the text. The 
easygoing format and inviting subject make this a natural choice for animal-loving 
reluctant readers, and it’s also a good fit for advanced young dog fans reading above 
their grade level. A list of books and websites for further exploration is included, 
as well as an index.  DS
224 • The bulleTin
Pinkney, AndreA dAVis The Red Pencil; illus. by Shane W. Evans. Little, 
2014 308p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24780-1 $17.00
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-316-24781-8 $9.99   
R Gr. 6-9
Amira’s life on her South Darfur farm is sweet—she has a loving mother and father, 
an adoring little sister, and a close-knit community. Then the Janjaweed invade 
Amira’s village, killing her father, and leaving her remaining family and friends 
no choice but to flee with only what they can carry. They travel the safe roads for 
many punishing, parched nights to Kalma, a displaced people’s camp. There, with 
food and water still scarce, her house a pitiful structure of plastic bags and brittle 
tree branches, and people everywhere, grief takes its toll on Amira, and she loses 
her voice. Hope seeps its way back into her heart when a relief worker gives her 
pad of paper and a red pencil, and her elderly neighbor teaches her (despite Amira’s 
mother’s resistance to education for her daughter) to read and write. In short, 
image-rich lines of free verse, Pinkney organizes Amira’s story with care, drawing 
out the simple happiness and everyday joys Amira had before the attack, patiently 
taking readers along on the tortuous journey, and highlighting the strangeness of 
Amira’s experiences in the camp, which include seeing colors she has never seen 
before on the camp television. The poetry thrums with the rhythms of African praise 
forms and laments, making for an engaging readaloud. Evans’ accompanying line 
drawings effect a warm, naïve style to suggest Amira’s own drawings, first in the 
dust with a twig, then with her precious red pencil. Readers will be surprised and 
humbled by what they take for granted as they compare their lives with Amira’s. 
An informative author’s note on the Darfur conflict and a glossary are included at 
the end, but they are worth reading first for context.  KC
PoPe, PAul The Rise of Aurora West; by Paul Pope and by JT Petty; illus. by David 
Rubín. First Second, 2014 [160p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-62672-009-1 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10 
Before she fought alongside Battling Boy for the safety of Acropolis (in Battling 
Boy, BCCB 1/14), Aurora West was a teenaged apprentice to her own father, the 
monster hunter/science detective Haggard West, as chronicled in this graphic novel 
prequel. Practicing her martial arts drills, learning the art of the deep trance, and 
following her father on patrols, Aurora works to unravel the secret behind monster 
Sadisto’s dastardly plot. At the same time, she’s started digging into the murder of her 
mother many years ago, an unsolved mystery that has nearly destroyed her father. 
As she searches her own memory for clues, she finds a surprising connection to Mr. 
Wurple, her childhood imaginary friend who may have been less imaginary and 
more dangerous than anyone realized. Rendered in grayscale panels that combine 
wide-shot contemporary action scenes, flashbacks, and close-up emotional mo-
ments, this well-crafted title gives Battling Boy’s comrade-in-arms her own worthy 
origin story. Aurora shows hints of her future powerhouse self but also emerges 
as a typical teen, torn between wanting her father’s approval and establishing her 
independence. Evocations of the past provide glimpses of the West family in happier, 
pre-monster times and provide insight into Aurora’s childhood as the daughter of 
brilliant, loving, but distracted parents. Though not the crisp and colorful work of 
the previous volume, the artwork here is detailed, giving readers plenty of reasons 
December 2014 • 225
to linger over pages or return for multiple readings. Likely to please Aurora fans 
from the earlier title, this graphic novel also stands alone, giving readers a bright 
new heroine to admire.  AM 
QitsuAlik-tinsley, rAchel Skraelings; written by Rachel and Sean Qitsualik-
Tinsley; illus. by Andrew Trabbold. Inhabit, 2014 87p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-927095-54-6 $10.95   
R Gr. 4-6
This brief novel that draws from traditional oral storytelling elements features 
Kannujag, a fictional Inuit hunter who may know nothing of the modern life the 
reader experiences a thousand years later (as the narrator explains), but who is deeply 
informed about the nomadic hunting life of the Inuit. Mostly the Inuit and Tuniit 
people in his region steer clear of one another (to the extent that legends in each 
group suggest the others aren’t quite human), but Kannujag’s ethics don’t allow him 
to just ignore a scene he stumbles upon: a Tuniit village under siege by ominous 
men in boats. His involvement will leave him permanently changed. The story’s 
conclusion offers insight into the fact that the invaders were Vikings, the location 
was Greenland, and Kannujag’s fears that there would never be peace again in his 
life weren’t quite borne out, but future generations would certainly suffer under 
colonization. The authors adroitly balance fiction, legend, and nonfiction, and 
they package it all with the perfect knowing narrator who has plenty of asides to 
keep readers on track and up to speed, while never breaking the flow of the story 
itself. Most chapters are accented with a brooding black-and-white illustration 
that primarily emphasizes the stark gravity of what the protagonists face. While a 
deep understanding of this text will certainly be enhanced by cruising through the 
glossary or knowing at least a bit about Inuit cultures, the story itself is gripping, 
haunting, and elegantly told, and it can stand alone even for readers who resist all 
efforts at contextualization; it could also partner interestingly with Dorris’ Morn-
ing Girl (BCCB 10/92). End matter includes a pronunciation guide and extensive 
glossary.  AS
reed, Amy  Damaged. Simon Pulse, 2014 377p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5699-0 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-5701-0 $10.99   
R Gr. 9-12
In the aftermath of her best friend Camille’s death in a car crash, eighteen-year-old 
Kinsey Cole is drowning in a sea of self-hatred and remorse. Unable to accept that 
she wasn’t responsible, she cuts herself off from everyone. The only person she can’t 
avoid is her mother, whose emotional state swings unpredictably from depressed 
but compassionate to viciously abusive. Kinsey is also haunted by Camille’s ghost, 
who plagues her with nightmares and cruel taunts. Camille’s boyfriend, Hunter, 
who also survived the crash, invites Kinsey on a road trip to San Francisco; on the 
journey, Kinsey finds Hunter, who drinks to escape his own demons, to be even 
more self-destructive than she is. Even as the two battle each other and their inner 
selves across the United States, though, they find their best chance of redemption 
may be in an unexpected friendship. The strength of this emotionally raw, captivat-
ing novel lies in the relationship between its two primary characters. It is largely 
Kinsey’s story and entirely her narrative voice, but Hunter is a first-rate foil, bitter 
and angry but unwilling to let Kinsey wallow. Each has been damaged by family 
and tragedy, and the novel carefully explores the ways that friendship and affection 
226 • The bulleTin
can help repair broken psyches, but it also manages to avoid suggesting that love 
cures all wounds. Camille’s ghost is suitably terrifying, the perfect externalized 
manifestation of Kinsey’s self-doubt. Readers will appreciate this novel’s mixture of 
strong characters dealing with loss, love, and personal growth, making it a strong 
read-alike for Sarah Dessen fans.  AM
richArds, c. J. The Junkyard Bot; illus. by Goro Fujita. Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt, 2014 [192p] (Robots Rule!)
ISBN 978-0-544-33936-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-5
Robots are a part of daily life in the tech town of Terabyte Heights, but few residents 
take the time to get to know the machines that drive them around, make their 
food, and generally meet their every need. Eleven-year-old George Gearing and his 
robot Jackbot are different: they’re best pals, so George is horrified when Jackbot 
is mangled after getting hit by a car. In a stroke of luck, however, the car’s owner 
happens to be the daughter of Terabyte Heights’ resident tech genius and offers to 
allow George, a pretty accomplished gearhead himself, use of her dad’s state of the 
art lab to rebuild Jackbot. George gets Jackbot up and running again, with major 
improvements, including some advanced Artificial Intelligence. Jackbot’s new abili-
ties draw the attention of Dr. Micron, a not so subtle bad guy looking to use robots 
for nefarious purposes. The science in this series opener is light with just a bit of 
engineering and programming jargon thrown into the mix, while the various robots 
are amusing, almost Jetsons-like creations whose tendency toward literality make 
for several humorous moments. The snappy pace and straightforward storytelling 
give this accessibility to a younger crowd, while Fujita’s occasional digital artwork 
complements the story’s techy underpinnings and adds a bit of visual interest. 
Aspiring mechanics will be inspired by what Jackbot and his cohorts can do.  KQG 
roberts, Jeyn The Bodies We Wear. Knopf, 2014 353p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75410-1 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75412-5 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75411-8 $10.99   
R Gr. 8-10
Sometimes seventeen-year-old Faye wishes she hadn’t survived the drug overdose 
that nearly killed her. However, she has undergone years of training to enact revenge 
on the men who forced her to take Heam, a designer drug that essentially kills the 
body temporarily while people have vivid dreams (or realistic glimpses, depending 
on who you ask) of heaven or hell. She tries to ignore the hunky, slightly familiar 
boy who is following her and seems determined to save her from herself (he is all 
too aware that murdering those who harmed you doesn’t actually fix your life), 
but she feels such a tug toward him that they wind up as allies, and she learns he is 
actually the soul (in a borrowed body) of an important figure from her past. Faye 
wears just a bit thin in her obsession with revenge that trumps love, loyalty, and 
any consideration of a happier life, but it’s believable in a teen who lost so much at 
such a young age. The societal intolerance of Heam, while it rages through poor 
neighborhoods unchecked, mirrors realistic drug hypocrisy, even while this is set in 
a not-quite-real-life environment. If anyone ever desperately needed a happy ending, 
it’s Faye; even if the conclusion isn’t quite all perfect, it’s a lot better than where 
she started, and readers will breath a sigh of relief once they get there with her.  AS
December 2014 • 227
rocco, John Blizzard; written and illus. by John Rocco. Disney Hyperion, 
2014 40p
ISBN 978-1-4231-7865-1 $17.99   
R* 5-9 yrs
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 191, for review.
roy, kAtherine Neighborhood Sharks: Hunting with the Great Whites of California’s 
Farallon Islands; written and illus. by Katherine Roy. Macaulay/Roaring Brook, 
2014 42p
ISBN 978-1-59643-874-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 3-6
If autumn brings visions of bountiful harvests to land bound humans, it brings the 
promise of an elephant seal feast to great white sharks that migrate to the coastal 
islands near San Francisco each September. Roy explores how this region became a 
popular dining venue for sharks, considering such factors as the seasonal arrival of 
young seals packed with a fifty-percent body mass of tasty blubber; the physiological 
attributes that make sharks apex predators; and the ocean current and weather pat-
terns that draw the krill, that draw the seals, that draw the sharks. She also discusses 
how the sharks, in turn, draw the scientists, who use this annual opportunity to study 
the elusive predators, luring them with decoy seals made of carpeting and tagging 
them with ultrasonic transmitters. Roy supplies the watercolor illustrations, which 
are a successful melding of gory hunting scenes and effective diagrams. A closing 
note offers more information about the protected Farallon Islands and her own 
experience at sea with a scientific team. A short list of adult sources and a handful 
of more child-friendly multimedia resources are also included.  EB
rusch, eliZAbeth The Next Wave: The Quest to Harness the Power of the 
Oceans. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 72p illus. with photographs (Sci-
entists in the Field)
iSbn 978-0-544-09999-9 $18.99   
R Gr. 5-9
Managing water movement for conversion into power is as old as the mill race, 
but depletion of fossil fuels lends hydroelectric development fresh urgency. Here 
Rusch follows teams of scientists and entrepreneurs as they experiment with gen-
erating systems that can withstand the turbulent, unpredictable battering of the 
oceans. The science behind harnessing wave movement to produce electricity is 
fairly simple, as the early device created by Mike Morrow and Mike Delos-Reyes 
demonstrates with milk dispenser bags and a plastic spoon turbine, powered by 
waves that pass over the inflated bags. The reality of the ocean, though, calls for 
heavy engineering, and here the narrative switches to scientists like Annette von 
Jouanne, who has worked on academic teams and alongside commercial develop-
ers to invent buoys, platforms, and other contraptions that will hopefully survive 
tsunami height waves and deliver enough wattage to be financially viable. Rusch 
(Eruption!, BCCB 9/13) does well to open with the garage-style tinkering of the 
“two Mikes,” which allows readers to digest the relative simplicity of their device, 
and then transfer this understanding to the more complex models under develop-
ment. She also turns attention to the role grants and investments play in scientific 
developments, and the concerns of environmentalists who fear ocean species may 
become collateral damage in the pursuit of promising new technologies. Source 
notes and bibliographies are provided, a glossary stands at the ready, and plentiful 
228 • The bulleTin
diagrams supplement the color photographs. Kids who imagine an engineering 
career in their future will want to explore this timely work.  EB
segel, JAson Nightmares!; written by Jason Segel and Kirsten Miller; illus. by 
Karl Kwasny. Delacorte, 2014 355p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-99157-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74425-6 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-385-38403-2 $10.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Charlie Laird can’t sleep. Ever since his mother died and his father remarried and 
moved him and his little brother into the house of his stepmother, Charlotte, he’s 
been plagued by nightmares. His fear is enough to open a portal to the Nether-
world in the tower room of Charlotte’s house. The open portal allows the sinister 
President Fear to freely come and go between the Netherworld and the Waking 
World, and he’s planning to overthrow the Waking World unless Charlie can face 
his fears. Braced by his three worthy friends and aided by some unexpected help-
ers in the Netherworld, Charlie braves its terrors and proves, once and for all, that 
facing your fears is a far better plan than running from them. While the plot has 
some unexpectedly deep symbolic resonances regarding the source of fear and the 
loss of faith in contemporary culture, this book also has all the classic elements of 
a benignly scary fantasy for middle-graders: a sympathetic protagonist, a dastardly 
villain, trusty friends, comical horror figures, a misunderstood benefactor, chase 
scenes, mild grossness, and explicit psychology. The deployment of these tropes 
is fresh, ranging from engagingly sad to funny; there are just enough imaginative 
hooks to induce some shivers, but the genre predictability of a happy outcome keeps 
things from being too scary, and spot art adds to the comic tone. Readers who shy 
away from celebrity authors will be pleasantly surprised by this solid entry from 
How I Met Your Mother’s Segel.  KC
sheA, bob Kid Sheriff and the Terrible Toads; illus. by Lane Smith. Roaring 
Brook, 2014 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-975-7 $17.99   
R* 5-8 yrs
Drywater Gulch is beset by black-hearted varmints who not only steal the gold, 
but kiss the cattle and insult the chili. Fortunately, there’s a new sheriff in town. 
Unfortunately, he can’t shoot, rope, or stay up past eight. Because he’s a kid. A 
kid who rides a tortoise. Very slowly. He is, however, a kid with a plan, and he 
immediately sets about confusing outlaws and townsfolk alike by explaining his 
theory that much of the local crime spree has been perpetrated by dinosaurs—a 
T. rex broke into the bank; a Velociraptor robbed a stage coach, mistaking it for a 
Protoceratops; a Stegosaurus panned the meaty chili. The real criminals, the Toad 
Brothers, are so incensed that credit for their bad deeds is being misplaced that 
they confess to everything. Still, the sheriff taunts them with the suggestion the 
dino-sized jail is too big for them, and to prove their fitness for incarceration, the 
Toads step right inside. The day is saved. The townsfolk rejoice. The sheriff rides 
out of town. Very slowly. Shea’s broad parody of matinee Westerns is a readaloud 
delight: disputing the pinning of the crime on a Triceratops, a Toad protests, “And 
weren’t no try-lollipops kissin’ them cattle neither. Why I smooched them beefy 
lips my own self!” In Smith’s mixed-media illustrations, plug-ugly varmints and 
the diminutive sheriff are rendered with risible delicacy—almost daintiness—and 
December 2014 • 229
softly stippled textures in trendy coffee house hues bring upscale gentility to the 
seedy Wild West. This is, without question, the best dinosaur book with no dino-
saurs in it. Ever.  EB 
sherry, keVin Meet the Bigfeet; written and illus. by Kevin Sherry. Scholastic, 
2014 122p (The Yeti Files)
ISBN 978-0-545-55617-0 $8.99   
R Gr. 2-4
Blizz Richards, a yeti, narrates this short, heavily illustrated chapter book, introduc-
ing his extended family of yetis and a number of other cryptids (animals whose 
existence has never been proven). When Blizz gets an invitation for a yeti family 
reunion, he knows that he must find Brian, Blizz’s cousin who went into serious 
hiding after being seen and photographed by the villainous cryptozoologist, George 
Vanquist. The yeti family tracks Brian (an exceptional cook) by his large footprints 
and dropped sprigs of rosemary, and the reunion commences; but Vanquist has 
tracked them down, too, and photographs the yetis in action. Luckily, Vanquist’s 
much put-upon dog defects to the yetis’ side and hands over the camera to them, 
while Blizz’s pet arctic fox and a friendly raccoon lead Vanquist into a desert and 
abandon him. The plot is contrived at points, but the absurdity of the fantastical 
characters doing ordinary and not-so-ordinary activities offers some irresistible fun. 
The monochromatic art is executed in Sherry’s usual tidy, cartoonish style, and 
shaggy, noseless, rubber lipped Blizz, his equally fuzzy kin, and his other-species pals 
are appealing in their friendly simplicity. Larger illustrations alternate with spreads 
of comic-like panels; a series depicting the arctic fox’s responses to commands (in-
cluding not only “Sit!” and “Fetch” but also “Do my taxes!”) is particularly amusing, 
as is Sherry’s tidily labeled diagram of Blizz’s backpack, in which a meatball sub is 
tucked into a pocket next to “Nolen,” a small, hamsterlike critter. This will appeal 
to reluctant readers, cryptid lovers, and fans of the absurd.  JH
shrAyA, ViVek God Loves Hair; illus. by Juliana Neufeld. Arsenal Pulp, 
2014 110p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-55152-543-3 $18.95
E-book ISBN 978-1-55152-544-0 $8.96   
R Gr. 11 up
In this reprint of a self-published Canadian book from 2011, a man looks back on 
his youth with wit, grief, anger, and a keen eye about how he became the adult he 
now is. As a kid, the author was an Indo-Canadian boy negotiating efforts at fitting 
in even with all the ways he clearly did not, from his long hair to his interest in 
things that have traditionally signaled girlhood. Some passages are short, describ-
ing a particular incident, while longer essays summarize eras of his childhood and 
adolescence. All sections are titled and accompanied by a single illustration. There 
is clear collaborative effort between the author and the illustrator, Neufeld, and the 
drawings are indeed one of the strongest elements, sharpening what are occasionally 
long passages into one searing image that captures the same tone. For the most part, 
however, Shraya has edited this carefully, using each multi-page story to add to 
the ones before, resulting in a volume that is clearly written by retrospective adult, 
but one who still carries the scars of his childhood and adolescence with him. This 
may resonate most with older teens who may have also seen enough glimpses of 
life beyond high school to fully appreciate the evolution of the trapped, bullied kid 
represented to the sharp, poetic man who remembers being him.  AS
230 • The bulleTin
sidmAn, Joyce Winter Bees & Other Poems of the Cold; illus. by Rick Al-
len. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 32p
iSbn 978-0-547-90650-8 $17.99   
R* Gr. 5-8
Previously partnered on the Newbery Honor title Dark Emperor & Other Poems of 
the Night (BCCB 9/10), Sidman and Allen return here with a new poetic treatment 
of natural history. Twelve poems treat subjects ranging from moose and snakes to 
snowflakes and skunk cabbage, each entry partnered with a prose paragraph giving 
more factual detail behind the subject of the verse. Sidman is a master at retain-
ing overall momentum while giving the individual poems their own form and 
style; they range from the rollick of “Big Brown Moose” to the Yeatsian melody of 
“Dream of the Tundra Swan” (“When we woke, we were covered with snow/ We 
rose in a billow of white”) to what may be the only poem, yet alone triolet, on the 
topic of skunk cabbage. Her informative paragraphs are written with a brio that 
lifts them above the merely explanatory, and their focus is tuned perfectly to the 
poems they complement. Allen’s intricate and exquisite linocuts are here digitally 
layered, giving a crisply outlined collage feel to some compositions, enhancing the 
impact of the horizontal linework that constitutes many of the visual elements. 
The delicate detailing is at its best in more muted spreads, as in the flock of tundra 
swans or the snowflake-sugared pine grove, but there’s plenty of drama in the rus-
set intensity of the fox leaping after the vole or the inky in-your-face black of the 
ravens. This would be an obvious pairing with Dark Emperor, but it would also be 
a brilliant opportunity for some spontaneous poetic sharing as the flakes begin to 
fall. A glossary is included.  DS 
sisson, stePhAnie roth Star Stuff: Carl Sagan and the Mysteries of the Cosmos; 
written and illus. by Stephanie Roth Sisson. Roaring Brook, 2014 31p
ISBN 978-1-59643-960-3 $17.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
This picture-book biography paints the life of astronomer Carl Sagan in broad 
strokes, focusing on his childhood interest in outer space, in which science and 
science fiction played formative roles, and his adult career not only as a researcher, 
but also as a communicator of scientific knowledge to the general public. The child/
adult coverage is unfortunately off balance here, with so much space accorded to 
Sagan’s budding curiosity that not enough is left for the specifics of his work that 
could prove fascinating to children, particularly his work on the Voyager missions, 
his Cosmos television series, and his investigations into the temperature of Venus 
and the possibility of extraterrestrial life. With its informal scratchy-lined figures, 
Sisson’s mixed-media artwork has a cozy vibe that works well for a subject who 
integrated science and imagination throughout his work. End matter (in pain-
fully small font) includes notes for each spread, source notes for all quotations, an 
adult-oriented bibliography, and an author’s note on Sagan’s influence on her own 
interest of science.  EB
stArk, ulf The Yule Tomte and the Little Rabbits; tr. from the Swedish by Susan 
Beard; illus. by Eva Eriksson. Floris, 2014 101p
ISBN 978-1-78250-136-7 $24.95   
R 5-8 yrs
This Swedish import, offering a short chapters for each night of Advent, tells the 
story of a gruff tomte (a gnomelike character who, in Swedish tradition, brings 
December 2014 • 231
Christmas gifts to children) and his encounter with a family of rabbits. This 
particular tomte, Grump, is grouchy enough to live up to his name but might be 
hiding a tender heart. One windy day Grump’s mittens and his red pointed cap 
blow away, as does a sign reading “Tomte Co” (originally “Tomte Cottage,” before 
a squirrel nibbled off a corner). Two rabbit children, Binny and Barty, find the hat, 
mittens, and sign; from the local owl, the bunnies and their family learn about 
tomtes, and they excitedly decide that the sign indicates that a tomte is coming 
to visit. When the tomte fails to arrive as expected, Binny and Barty go off in a 
blizzard in search of Grump, who grouses when they find him but takes care of the 
cold, tired children, and they all return to the rabbits’ home to celebrate Christmas 
together. The narrative voice is smooth and sometimes wryly amused, and though 
the story meanders just a bit, it is nonetheless captivating. Soft linework, delicate 
texturing, and a gentle palette of pastels and russets make Eriksson’s illustrations 
irresistibly cozy and inviting. The figures, both tomte and animals, are adorable 
and dynamic, and the members of the rabbit family are delightfully individual in 
their expressions and activities. This will have broad appeal as an enchanting secular 
Advent readaloud.  JH 
sternberg, Julie The Top-Secret Diary of Celie Valentine: Friendship Over; illus. 
by Johanna Wright. Boyds Mills, 2014 [160p]
ISBN 978-1-59078-993-3 $15.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
For her tenth birthday, Celie receives from her loving father the gift of a punching 
bag (to take out her frustrations about her older sister, Jo) and a diary. Celie takes 
to the journal immediately, pouring out her grievances, pasting in assignments 
from her spy notebook, and sketching the events of her day. What’s she’s mostly 
concerned about, though, is her best friend Lulu’s sudden shunning, and the 
indications (gleaned largely from spying) that her beloved grandmother, living in 
the South, is starting to develop health problems. Sternberg (Like Pickle Juice on a 
Cookie, BCCB 3/11, etc.) is a natural at the popular diary-format genre, and she 
brings her impressive perceptivity and lively humor to a sparky new protagonist. 
Where Pickle Juice’s Eleanor was uncertain, Celie is indignant, constantly seeking 
information and leverage to heighten her authority and keep up with the adults and 
her sixth-grade sister (readers will sympathize with her complaint of “Everybody 
excluded me from everything! It wasn’t fair”). Her split from Lulu is one of those 
elementary-school rifts that seems inexplicable until closer examination reveals 
the cause, and while the girls’ move toward rapprochement involves some wishful 
maturation, it provides good relationship modeling. The scribbly artwork is nicely 
balanced between plausible and effective, and the layout—often bedecked with 
tape sporting Celie’s beloved narwhals—is invitingly browsable and undemand-
ing. Sternberg fans will leap on this, but it’s also an excellent entry for readers who 
love peeking into fictional diaries and are looking for a spirited new elementary-
schooler heroine.  DS
232 • The bulleTin
stiefVAter, mAggie Blue Lily, Lily Blue. Scholastic, 2014 [400p] (The 
Raven Cycle)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-42496-7 $18.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-545-66290-1 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 7-12
Since her mother disappeared, Blue is more dogged than ever in her determination 
to find Glendower, the Welsh king believed to have been interred on the ley line that 
she and her beloved group of “raven boys” have awakened in Virginia (The Raven 
Boys, BCCB 9/12, etc.). Their leader, Gansey, while not having second thoughts 
about the project, is nevertheless beset by fears—fears that people he loves will get 
hurt or killed in the quest, fears that it won’t live up to his expectations, and fears 
that he won’t know who to be when the task is complete. His old mentor, Malory, 
has come from England to join the search, and the boys’ power, augmented by Blue’s, 
blooms into a full-fledged necessity as they discover that there are three sleepers on 
the line—one who must be awakened, one who must not be awakened, and one who 
remains a mystery. As she has with each installment of the Raven Cycle, Stiefvater 
introduces intriguing new characters that serve to heighten suspense, inspire dark 
comic relief or sympathetic heart-tugs, and complicate the action while provid-
ing opportunities to shine new light into the recesses of existing character’s souls. 
They worry that their dark secrets make them unlovable, but what gets revealed 
only deepens affection for these fully realized, fully engaging characters. Snatches 
of memory and carryover business deftly remind readers of what has happened in 
previous books, but no detail is extraneous or labored as Stiefvater expertly marries 
the quotidian with the supernatural so that the reality effects of, say, breath that 
smells like tuna effectively ground the surreal enchantment of finding an angry, 
annoying person buried alive for 600 years. Their discoveries here only heighten 
the mystery which, thankfully, will carry over into the next installment, since we 
have not yet finished loving these characters and exploring their world.  KC 
theule, lArissA Fat & Bones and Other Stories; illus. by Adam S. Doyle. Car-
olrhoda, 2014 103p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-4677-0825-8 $16.95   
R Gr. 5-8
In this sequence of seven short stories, Bones is the understandably despised adult 
son of a despicable farmer, whose death Bones unceremoniously welcomes by 
telling his mother to “put a sock” in her grief and fix him some pig-foot stew. Fat 
is an unlikable fairy who lives perpetually at odds with Bones. When Bones tries 
to cut down Fat’s tree home, Fat responds by tipping a potion into the pig-foot 
stew; unfortunately, Bones’ hapless mother tastes the stew and winds up boneless, 
puddled on the floor amid her never-ending stream of tears. The interlinked stories 
go on to relate the tales of the pigs whose feet wind up in the family’s favorite dish, 
a mouse who braves the cat to traverse the sea of tears in search of true love, a spider 
whose fondness for poetry saves the life of a beautiful stranger, a philosophical dog 
with a cold, and a savage tulip who meets her just reward. Each tale has its own 
sinister twist and rich vein of dark humor, making the ultimate reveal of the nar-
rator seem particularly apt. Adam S. Doyle’s mixed-media illustrations, reproduced 
in grayscale, range from warm picture-book solidity in the creatures to the creepy 
grotesque; both text and illustrations will unseat bucolic expectations with snarky 
shades of the gothic.  KC 
December 2014 • 233
tullet, herVé 10 Times 10; written and illus. by Hervé Tullet. Tate, 
2014 112p
ISBN 978-1-84976-247-2 $15.95   
R 3-6 yrs 
     Mix It Up!; written and illus. by Hervé Tullet. Handprint/Chronicle, 
2014 64p
ISBN 978-1-4521-3735-3 $15.99   
R 3-6 yrs
These stylish concept books bring fresh pizzazz to a pair of well-worn topics, 
counting and colors. 10 Times 10 offers ten different ways to get from one to ten, 
from the simplest (the requisite number of numerals written on each of ten pages), 
to inventive stories that play out largely in images. Finger counting, for example, 
begins by sequentially lifting five fingers on one hand, and then continuing to ten 
fingers on that same hand, which results in a coral-like organism through which 
fish can swim. A wordless retelling of the Genesis creation story adds elements of 
nature through to Adam, Eve, and the serpent. Cubist-inspired art is achieved by 
adding multiple body parts to a giant pink head. Mix It Up! invites kids to interact 
with the book and predict what will happen when they imaginatively smear, shake, 
drip, or press blotches and streaks of colors together. For example, swaths of yellow 
and blue face each other across the gutter, while the narrator encourages, “So shake 
the book really hard. What do you think will happen?” The page turn reveals a 
messy marbling of green where the imaginary paint has dripped. Both titles sug-
gest oversized board book format with their chunky covers and square trims, but 
the relatively large page count necessitates paper pages, which, though sturdy, are 
not as hefty as cardboard. Holiday shoppers who rightly suspect their preschool 
recipients probably already have Pat the Bunny and The Very Hungry Caterpillar 
can put these on their lists.  EB
underWood, deborAh Here Comes Santa Cat; illus. by Claudia Rueda. Dial, 
2014 [88p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-4100-3 $16.99   
R 5-7 yrs
It’s Christmas Eve, the sign-wielding Cat from Here Comes the Easter Cat (BCCB 
1/14) is back, and this time he’s got his eye on a certain red suit and hat. When the 
unseen narrator asks Cat why he wants to be Santa, Cat mutely explains (via signs, 
facial expressions, and a helpful pie chart) that he wants to give himself a gift, since 
he believes his naughty behavior will prevent the real Santa from doing so. The 
narrator suggests that Cat instead use his limited time left to try to make good, but 
gift-giving to children (who are unappreciative of Cat’s proffered fish) and a failed 
community tree-trimming attempt dampen Cat’s holiday spirit. When Cat shares 
one of his two cans of fancy cat food with a little kitten, Santa finally appears with 
a gift for Cat—an “official Santa’s Helper suit”—and, after giving Santa a present 
(a sign reading “Ho Ho Ho”), Cat and Santa head off together in Santa’s sleigh. 
Cat’s expressive wordless communications and the narrator’s voice—by turns kindly, 
jovial, and exasperated—are as diverting as they were in the first tale. Rueda’s ink 
and colored pencil illustrations on clean white paper effectively and expertly carry 
much of the dramatic and humorous weight of the story, and kids will easily relate 
to Cat’s childlike demeanor and his grumpiness at the thought of going presentless 
on Christmas. This would make an excellent selection for holiday gift-giving, for 
Christmas-themed story hours, or perhaps even for a class performance piece.  JH
234 • The bulleTin
WAltmAn, keVin Slump. Cinco Puntos, 2014 [304p] (D-Bow’s High 
School Hoops)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-941026-00-7 $16.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-941026-01-4 $11.95
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-941026-02-1 $9.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10 
Derrick “D-Bow” Bowen is now a sophomore and, after his flirtation with upscale 
Hamilton Academy (in Next, BCCB 3/14), he’s fully committed to his Indianapolis 
public school, Marion East. His starting position on the basketball team is unas-
sailable, but the same can’t be said for the team as a whole. One starter is nursing 
an ankle sprain, and although a long, tall freshman is trying to plug the gap, it’s 
just not working. Coach Bolden continues to read his antsy players his old-school 
playbook, and Derrick in particular is chafing under the discipline of a slow-paced 
game. Finally, the team starts grinding out wins. Perhaps Derrick should have tried 
a slower approach with his girlfriend Jasmine, too; he’s been raised too well by his 
parents to pressure her for sex, but it’s getting difficult for both of them to kiss and 
say goodnight, and after some heavy action in a parked car that leads nowhere, he 
makes a crude remark that sparks a break-up. Also getting between him and his 
game is his father’s slow rehab after a seizure, which has left the family cash-strapped, 
edgy, and beholden to shady Uncle Kid for financial help. As in the series debut, 
Waltman wrings drama from believable day-to-day trials and triumphs, and he 
spikes the plot with extended play-by-plays called in Derrick’s voice, putting read-
ers on court in the middle of the action. Things are far from settled with arch-rival 
Hamilton, or with Jasmine, for that matter, and teens who have now reached series 
halftime will certainly be back for third period.  EB
Webb, holly The Case of the Stolen Sixpence; illus. by Marion Lindsay. Hough-
ton Mifflin Harcourt, 2014 164p (The Mysteries of Maisie Hitchins)
ISBN 978-0-544-33928-6 $14.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Neither her youth nor her position at the boarding house run by her grandmother 
prevents twelve-year-old wannabe-detective Maisie Hitchins from practicing her 
skills of observation and deduction in her Victorian London neighborhood. In this 
first entry in a series, Maisie tries to puzzle out who is stealing money from the 
local butcher shop. She knows the culprit wasn’t George, the delivery boy she has 
befriended who gets the sack for the crime, so Maisie goes undercover in disguise 
to get to the bottom of the mystery. She and George eventually identify the thief, 
but it’s not that easy: the young female bookkeeper who took the money to pay 
for a doctor for her ill sister has since repaid it but is now going to be fired, and 
Maisie feels terrible. Characters and plot are fairly formulaic, and the message that 
poverty and illness can make people do desperate but understandable things is 
incongruent with the book’s romantic treatment of Victorian London. However, 
the mystery and its solution are carefully established, and Webb does a good job 
of leading young readers through the deduction process. The setting, while not 
entirely realistic, is cozily old-fashioned, and Maisie is an intrepid and thoroughly 
likable heroine. Frequent black and white illustrations add interest and appeal; large, 
widely-spaced eyes and biggish heads give the human figures a slightly doll-like look. 
Mystery-loving kids who have moved beyond Cam Jansen and kids who prefer their 
historical fiction on the light side may find Maisie’s escapades to their liking.  JH
December 2014 • 235
Whitney, dAisy The Fire Artist. Bloomsbury, 2014 [272p]
ISBN 978-1-61963-132-8 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys    
R Gr. 7-10
At the age of thirteen, Aria Kilandros learned to harness fire with her body and 
hands. Now seventeen, she uses her power to dazzle tourists with fire tricks in her 
backwater south Florida town. Even as she plays dutiful daughter and talented fire 
artist, though, Aria plots her escape from the performer’s life and from the clutches 
of her abusive, fame-obsessed father, who will do anything to see his daughter on 
the world stage. She also harbors a dangerous secret: she stole the powers she wields, 
a crime punishable by a lifetime ban from performing. Increasingly desperate to 
save herself, her younger sister, and their fragile mother before she’s caught, she 
risks everything by turning to Taj, a granter who can make the powers legitimately 
her own, but only at a terrible price. When she starts to fall for Taj and learns 
he is himself a prisoner, she must decide if she will gain her own freedom at the 
expense of someone else’s—and understand that that unexpected love might be 
the trick that saves them all. This genuinely suspenseful fantasy will have readers 
on the edge of their seats as they marvel at Aria’s daring gambles and root for her 
to win. Magical elements are imaginatively crafted, yet the narrative is also com-
pellingly grounded in a sense of realism, since the mundane world is where the 
most frightening dangers lie. The novel likewise offers clever world-building that 
combines strange magic, genie folklore, and a real-world foundation, and it uses 
the weirdness of Florida’s natural world to its full effect, including lightning storms 
and snake-infested swamps. Ultimately, the novel is both satisfying and, like Aria’s 
fire art, a real crowd-pleaser.  AM
Wilson, rAchel m. Don’t Touch. HarperTeen/HarperCollins, 2014 415p
ISBN 978-0-06-222093-6 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
It’s going to be a new life for Caddie, who’s finally attending an arts high school 
now that her father, who disapproved of the plan, has separated from her mother. 
Caddie’s delighted to find her old friend Mandy there, and she’s even more thrilled 
to have a shot at playing Ophelia in the school’s production of Hamlet. Unfortu-
nately, she’s also riddled with anxiety about her family, believing that somehow if she 
plays by the obsessive compulsive rules she’s created, her parents will reunite. The 
biggest rule is that no one can ever touch her bare skin to bare skin, a rule that’s a 
problem with a new group of huggy theatrical friends, physical scenes to play with 
Hamlet, and the attentions of very appealing Peter, who’s playing Hamlet and who’s 
definitely interested in touching Caddie. Wilson takes what could be an expository 
problem novel and turns it into a vulnerable, moving, and often witty story about 
the terrible price of self-protection (“I’m a wreck, and I hide it too well,” Caddie 
confesses to herself), with Caddie ultimately damaging her relationships not with 
her disorder but with her refusal to share the truth about it with her friends. The 
Ophelia overlay provides an enlightening dimension as it allows Caddie ways to 
work through how desperate she is and isn’t, and the drama-school crowd is drawn 
with affectionate authenticity. Plenty of readers, OCD or no, will feel a kinship 
with Caddie, who finally acknowledges her inability to “control everything by 
controlling myself.”  DS
236 • The bulleTin
Winter, JeAnette Malala, a Brave Girl from Pakistan; Iqbal, a Brave Boy from 
Pakistan; written and illus. by Jeanette Winter. Beach Lane/Simon, 2014 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2294-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4814-2295-6 $10.99   
Ad 6-8 yrs
This picture book, which features two stories linked back to back in the same vol-
ume, highlights two powerful advocates for children’s rights, each a young person 
of exceptional courage. Iqbal Masih, a child indentured to a carpet factory owner to 
secure his family’s modest debt, spoke out among fellow child laborers concerning 
the illegality of the Peshgi loan system and gained international attention. Known 
to be in the crosshairs of the carpet factory owners, he was shot to death in 1995 
at age thirteen while riding his bicycle. Malala Yousafzai, an outspoken proponent 
of children’s right to education, was shot through the head by a Taliban fighter, was 
evacuated to Great Britain for treatment, and currently continues to advocate for 
civil rights back in Pakistan. Winter begins each story with an introductory note in 
prose considerably more sophisticated than the ensuing text. The two biographies 
share a scant forty pages, and the abridgment of the complex tales leaves notable 
gaps: for example, how does a child like Iqbal, who has been chained to a loom 
since early childhood, learn to read the public notice about the outlawed Peshgi 
system? Why is Malala wearing a uniform when “the brave girls of Swat Valley 
outwit the Taliban fighters by wearing everyday clothes to school”? Muted tones 
and doll-like representations of the two heroes soften the tragedy of the stories, and 
the inclusion of kites as symbols of freedom are used to advantage as the ghostly 
Iqbal and vibrant Malala exchange kites on the transition spread between stories. 
With Malala’s recent Nobel Peace Prize award (made after this title’s publication), 
this work will fill demand for material at a primary-grade level.  EB
Winters, cAt The Cure for Dreaming. Amulet, 2014 352p illus. with 
photographs
ISBN 978-1-4197-1216-6 $17.95   
Ad Gr. 7-10
At the turn of the twentieth century, suffragists across the U.S. are fighting for the 
right to vote, and seventeen-year-old Olivia Mead is determined to help the women 
of Portland, Oregon have their voices heard. Unfortunately, her conservative father 
finds the whole effort unseemly and hires young Henri Reverie, an up and coming 
hypnotist, to entrance Olivia into more docile and ladylike behavior. Henri and 
Olivia’s session, however, instead forges an irresistible connection between the two 
and leaves Olivia with the ability to see people as they truly are, though she’s un-
able to speak her thoughts; thus, when she sees her father and his wealthy pals as 
bloodsucking, deranged vampires, she’s unable to utter anything other than “All 
is well.” As with her previous work, In the Shadow of Blackbirds (BCCB 4/13), 
Winters pulls from historical tensions and struggles to create atmosphere and 
mood, effectively using both the battle for women’s rights and the popularity of 
spiritualism and mysticism in 1900 as a backdrop to Olivia’s story. The included 
archival black and white photos are not quite as creepy as those in Blackbirds, but 
they do provide visual interest. Olivia’s character, though, remains disappoint-
ingly undefined, wavering between timid or bold as the plot requires; her father, 
meanwhile, is a total caricature of cruelty and misogyny, and her vision of him as 
a vampire is more laughable than chilling. Still, the ending holds a refreshing twist 
December 2014 • 237
that stays true to the underlying theme of women’s independence, and readers will 
cheer as Olivia strikes out on her own, finally free of her father’s control.  KQG 
yelchin, eugene Arcady’s Goal; written and illus. by Eugene Yelchin. Holt, 
2014 234p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8050-9844-0 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-62779-291-2 $9.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Arcady Olenin is a soccer prodigy stuck in an orphanage for children of “enemies 
of the state”; Ivan Ivanych, a grieving widower, is an inspector who sees in the 
bull-headed boy the child he never had. This should be the stuff hankie-soaking 
orphan stories are made of, but in Stalinist Russia, the road to a happy ending is 
anything but straightforward. Arcady is happy to be out from under the thumb 
of the orphanage director, but he assumes that Ivan is only interested in using 
Arcady’s skills to further his own career. That’s still okay with Arcady, who’ll do 
whatever is required to make it to the Red Army youth league. Ivan, with every 
intention to support his new son’s dreams, teaches himself the rudiments of the 
game and organizes a local team, only to be outed as a fraud by some fathers who 
realize that Arcady is the offspring of state criminals. An opportunity to try out for 
the Red Army team brings the pair to a perilous crossroads, at which Ivan’s own 
backstory is revealed and his best chance for courage and personal redemption is 
at hand. Yelchin bases his novel on the experiences of his father, whose 1945 team 
photo with the Red Army Soccer Club leads off the text. Closing notes discuss how 
the “terror inflicted upon the Russian people by Stalinism did not die with those 
who experienced it firsthand but continued on from one generation to the next.” 
Evocative black and white artwork, with textured hatching and shadowy depths, 
offers a literal depiction of plot points while highlighting the exact details of the 
complex world to which Arcady must adjust. As with Yelchin’s Breaking Stalin’s Nose 
(BCCB 11/11), the subtext of this deceptively simple work challenges readers to 
look beyond the characters’ situation and consider the historical implications of 
their dilemmas.  EB
Zehr, e. PAul Project Superhero; illus. by Kris Pearn. ECW, 2014 [224p]
ISBN 978-1-77041-180-7 $13.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Comic-book aficionado Jessie is stoked when she learns that the capstone project 
for her eighth-grade year is about superheroes; she and her classmates are expected 
to spend the year researching the nature and characteristics of superheroes and then 
select a single superhero to defend as the ultimate superhero at an end of the year 
debate. Jessie chooses Batgirl, and over the next nine months, she chronicles in diary 
entries her efforts to better understand what exactly a superhero is, which results in 
Jessie’s own personal growth. She learns karate from her aunt; writes letters to (and 
receives responses from) her own real life heroes, including Olympian Clara Hughes 
and 9/11 first responder Mike Bruen; discovers the science behind nutrition, brain 
activity, and fear; and negotiates changing dynamics among her best friends and 
family. There’s an authenticity to Jessie’s voice when she’s dealing with her peers or 
reflecting upon her family experiences, but the authorial hand comes down hard 
in the interview sections and the scientific tidbits, making the narrative uneven 
and the shifts awkward. Despite this disjointedness, the interviews are compelling 
238 • The bulleTin
(Hughes’ response about her depression is both sensitive and interesting), the science 
is appealing (the metaphor used to explain diabetes is concrete and accessible), and 
the multiple approaches give this multiple audiences. The black and white art that 
breaks up most spreads brings an amusing note of cartoonish exaggeration. Comic 
book fans, science geeks, history buffs, and fans of realistic fiction may all find a 
piece of this to enjoy, and Jessie’s cheerful narration is enjoyable throughout.  KQG 
ZhAng, Amy Falling into Place. Greenwillow, 2014 296p
ISBN 978-0-06-229504-0 $17.99   
R Gr. 8-12
Liz Emerson’s calculated plan, to commit suicide in a way that looks like an accident 
by driving off an icy curve on the road, goes awry when she doesn’t die instantly 
but instead ends up in the ICU with her mother, friends, and classmates devastated 
by this shocking turn of events. Flashbacks to Liz’s earlier years and third-person 
focalizations through her friends reveal what brought Liz to this point, where the 
charismatic class alpha has gradually developed enough conscience to be filled with 
self-hatred about the horrible things she’s done to friends and foes alike. Zhang’s 
smooth, cool prose makes even the soapiest bits of the story—the medical drama, the 
boy who forgives Liz her abuse and loves her for who she really is—feel insightful. 
The detached tone, often coming from a narrator who turns out to be Liz’s childhood 
imaginary friend, adds gravitas: “Liz Emerson felt that she was forever looking up 
at people who were much, much better than she ever could be, and the only thing 
she was really good at was pulling them down to her level.” It’s ultimately still a 
romantic portrait, since even in her awfulness Liz remains absolutely omnipotent 
and magnetic, but it’s interesting to see the mean girl through the eyes of the people 
who love her, despite (and sometimes because of) her flaws.  DS
correction:
In our November review of Mary Losure’s Backwards Moon, we at one point 
mistakenly refer to the character Bracken as “Bramble.” We were confused by 
vegetation, and we apologize.
December 2014 • 239
kliPPer, bArbArA Programming for Children and Teens with Autism Spectrum 
Disorder. ALA Editions, 2014 152p
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8389-1206-5 $45.00
A 2013 Center for Disease Control study reported that one in fifty children born 
in the U.S. falls on the autism spectrum. Citing that statistic, Klipper begins her 
concise but comprehensive guide to library services for patrons with ASD, arguing 
that while autism has been on the rise, libraries are often woefully underprepared 
to serve these particular patrons. In a conversational and friendly tone (“Feeling 
overwhelmed? Relax”), Klipper, who has worked with the American Disabilities Act 
Committee of the Connecticut Library Association and served on several ALSC 
committees regarding people with disabilities, goes onto to describe how profes-
sionals can develop and adapt traditional library programs to meet the needs of 
patrons with ASD. She offers an accessible and technical definition of the disorder 
in Chapter 1, providing the DSM (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Illnesses) definition of autism along with specific examples of how patrons, par-
ticularly children, with the disorder may behave in libraries. Chapter 2 is a brief 
but valuable list of best practices, while the remainder of the book gets into the 
concrete details of planning programs for specific age groups, from storytimes for 
preschoolers to book discussion groups for tweens and teens. Sample programs are 
included, and Klipper makes a point to provide sound reasoning behind various 
modifications (e.g., involving a prop that can be passed around in a book discus-
sion group to communicate to participants whose turn it is to speak). Appendices 
include resources; lists of book titles, rhymes, and sensory related activities; and 
a parent’s guide to a successful library visit. Practitioners looking to make their 
services more inclusive would do well to start here.  KQG  
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
240  •  The BulleTin
Actors and acting–fiction: Ain; 
Wilson
Addiction–fiction: Kuderick
Adoption–fiction: Milford; Yelchin
Adventure: Black; Campbell; 
de Fombelle; Lu; Martinez; Pope; 
rocco
African Americans–fiction: Waltman 
African Americans–stories: nolen
Afterlife–fiction: Hosie
ALPHABet BOOKS: Jeffers
Angels–stories: McGhee
Animals–stories: Brett; Byrd
Art and artists: Morales
Art and artists–fiction: nelson
Astronomy: Sisson 
Athletes–fiction: Crompton
Autism–fiction: Martin 
Backpacking–fiction: Fitzpatrick
Basketball–fiction: Waltman
Bears–stories: Kimmel
BedtIMe StOrIeS: Horáˇcek
Behavior–stories: Byrd
BILInGuAL BOOKS: Morales
BIOGrAPHIeS: Abirached; Jaeckel; 
Macy; McCully; Morales; Shraya; 
Sisson; Winter
Books and reading–stories: Bottner; 
Byrne; Mcdonnell
Brothers–fiction: Campbell
Brothers and sisters–fiction: Griffin; 
nelson
Bullying: Shraya
Bullying–fiction: Zhang
Cats–stories: underwood 
Celebrations–stories: Brenner 
Christmas–fiction: Hendrix
Christmas–stories: Brenner; Brett; 
McGhee; Stark; underwood 
Cold War–stories: Cole 
Color: tullet
Communism–fiction: Levine; 
Yelchin
COnCePt BOOKS: Bingham; 
Jeffers; tullet
COuntInG BOOKS: Gehl; tullet
Crime and criminals–fiction: Black; 
Chupeco; Condie; Fitzpatrick; 
Marney; Martinez; McBride; Mc-
Clintock; Pope; roberts; Webb
Crime and criminals–stories: Shea
Cuba–fiction: Campbell
Current events: Pinkney; Winter
Curses–fiction: Boone
death–fiction: Kain; reed
depression–fiction: High
detectives–fiction: Webb 
diaries–fiction: Sternberg
disasters–fiction: Bergin; Martin
divorce–fiction: Wilson 
dogs: McCully; Patent
dogs–fiction: Martin
dogs–stories: Byrne
dolls–fiction: Parenteau
drugs–fiction: roberts
dystopias–fiction: Bergin; Condie
engineering: rusch
Environmental studies: Burns; 
rusch
ePIStOLArY nOveLS: Sternberg
Subject and uSe Index
Keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
DecemBer 2014  •  241
Ethics and values: Alexander; Brim-
ner; Lupica; nolen; Winter; Zehr
Families–fiction: High; Kain; Kulper; 
Levine; Mesrobian; Parker; Pope; 
Sternberg; Waltman; Zehr
Families–stories: Brenner
FAntASY: Anders; delaney; Gaiman 
Graveyard; Hosie; Kulper; Lu; 
Segel; Stiefvater; Whitney
Farms: Brimner
Fathers–fiction: Martin; Winters
Fathers–stories: Cole; nolen
Fear–fiction: Segel
Fire–fiction: Whitney
FOLKLIKe tALeS: Kimmel
FOLKtALeS And FAIrY tALeS: 
Byrd; Gaiman Hansel; Hepper-
mann; Lewis
Food and eating–stories: durand; 
nolan
Football–fiction: Feinstein; Lupica
Friends–fiction: Anders; Kuderick; 
Lupica; Mesrobian; reed; Stiefvater
Gender: Shraya
Germany–stories: Cole
Ghosts–fiction: delaney; Gaiman 
Graveyard; Lauren; Milford; reed
Giants–fiction: Anders
Gifts–stories: Brett; Stark 
GrAPHIC nOveLS: Abirached; 
Gaiman Graveyard; Jaeckel; Pope
Grief–fiction: Kain
Growth–fiction: Karas 
Hacking–fiction: Black
Hanukkah–stories: Kimmel
Hell–fiction: Hosie
Heroes–stories: rocco 
Heroes–fiction: Zehr
HIStOrICAL FICtIOn: Campbell; 
de Fombelle; Levine; Little; Paren-
teau; Qitsualik-tinsley; Webb
History, European: Cole; Hendrix
History, U.S.: Brimner; Karas
History, world: Jaeckel; Qitsualik-
tinsley
Holidays–stories: Brenner
HOrrOr: Griffin; theule
Hotels–fiction: Milford
HuMOr: Bingham; Bottner; Byrne; 
durand; Gehl; Jeffers; Mackintosh; 
Mcdonnell; nolan; Shea; Sherry; 
Sternberg; underwood 
Hunting–stories: nolan 
Hypnotism–fiction: Winters
Illness–fiction: Bergin; Kain
Imaginary creatures–fiction: Sherry 
Imagination–stories: Bottner; Mack-
intosh
Immigrants–fiction: Alexander
Injuries–fiction: Crompton
Insects: Burns
Inuit–fiction: Qitsualik-tinsley
Islands–fiction: Kulper
Kidnapping–fiction: Lewis
Labor unions: Brimner
Latinos–fiction: Martinez
Libraries–stories: Bottner
Literature, English: Griffin; Marney
Magic–fiction: durst; Kulper; Lu; 
theule
Mental illness–fiction: Wilson
Mice–stories: Horáˇcek
Middle east–fiction: Little
Middle east: Abirached
Moon–stories: Horáˇcek
Mothers–fiction: Parenteau; Stiefvater
Movies: McCully
MYSterIeS: Boone; de Fombelle; 
Fitzpatrick; Marney; McBride; Mc-
Clintock; Milford; Webb 
nativity–stories: McGhee
Nature study: Karas; roy; Sidman
nature–poetry: Sidman
neighborhoods–stories: rocco
neighbors–fiction: Levine 
Obsessive-compulsive disorder–fic-
tion: Wilson
Oceans: rusch 
Orphans–fiction: Yelchin 
Parents–fiction: Gaiman Hansel
Persecution–fiction: Lu
Physical education: Feinstein
POetrY: Heppermann; Sidman
rabbits–stories: Stark
racism–fiction: Campbell
Reading aloud: Gaiman Hansel; Hep-
permann; Jeffers; Martin; McCully
242  •  The BulleTin
Reading, easy: Ain; richards; Sherry
Reading, reluctant: Becker; Cromp-
ton; High; Patent 
relationships–fiction: Little; Marney; 
Martinez; McBride; McClintock; 
Mesrobian; Sternberg; Whitney; 
Zhang 
revenge–fiction: roberts
risk-taking–fiction: Crompton
robots–fiction: richards
romance–fiction: Crompton; durst; 
Kulper; Lauren
royalty–fiction: Lewis
russia–fiction: Yeltsin
SCArY StOrIeS: Segel
School–fiction: Ain; Feinstein
School–stories: durand
Science: Burns; rusch; Sisson
Science and scientists: Sisson
SCIenCe FICtIOn: Alexander; 
Lewis; richards; roberts
Secrets–fiction: Becker; de Fombelle
Self-harm–fiction: Kuderick
SHAPeS: Bingham 
Sharing–stories: Gehl
Sharks: roy
Ships and sailing–fiction: Kulper
SHOrt StOrIeS: theule
Sisters–fiction: Condie; Kain
Smell: Patent 
Snow–stories: rocco
Soccer–fiction: Yelchin
Soldiers–fiction: Hendrix 
Soviet union–fiction: Yelchin
Space travel–fiction: Lewis
Spies and espionage–fiction: Becker; 
Lu
Sports: Macy
Sports–fiction: Feinstein
Stepfamilies–fiction: Becker
Sudan–fiction: Pinkney
Suffragists–fiction: Winters
Suicide–fiction: Zhang 
Superheroes–fiction: Zehr
SuPernAturAL StOrIeS: 
Boone; Chupeco; delaney; durst; 
Lauren; Parker; Stiefvater
Surprises–stories: Mackintosh
SuSPenSe: Chupeco; Griffin; Mc-
Bride; Parker
teachers–fiction: Ain
television–fiction: Ain
time travel–fiction: Hosie
trees: Burns 
trees–stories: Karas
twins–fiction: nelson
verSe nOveLS: High; Pinkney
voyages and travel–fiction: Anders; 
Fitzpatrick; Little; reed
War: Abirached
War–fiction: Pinkney
West, the–stories: Shea
Winter–poetry: Sidman
Wishes–stories: nolen
Witches–fiction: Kulper
Women’s studies: Macy; Winter
WOrdLeSS BOOKS: nolan
Workers’ rights: Brimner; Winter
World cultures: Pinkney
World War I–fiction: Hendrix
 
To order
Call 800.548.1784 or 410.516.6987; fax 410.516.3866;  
e-mail: jrnlcirc@press.jhu.edu; or visit us online at  
www.press.jhu.edu/journals
essential.
Deborah Stevenson, Editor 
UniversiTy of illinois aT Urbana-Champaign
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books provides 
concise summaries and critical evaluations of current 
children’s books. This invaluable resource assists 
readers with questions regarding the ever-evolving 
children’s literature field. Reviews give an in-depth 
look at a selected book’s content, reading level, 
strengths and weaknesses, and quality of the format, 
as well as suggestions for curricular use. 
Published monthly (except August). Volume 68 (2015).  
ISSN 0008-9036; E-ISSN 1558-6766.
the Bulletin of the Center  
for Children’s Books
annUal individUal sUbsCripTions
$55.00 (print); $62.00 (online)
annUal insTiTUTional sUbsCripTions
$103.00 (print); $115.00 (online);  
$144.00 (print & online)
Disseminate. Innovate. Collaborate.
A global community of authors, readers, and 
publishing partners align to discover and share 
new knowledge.
