I LLJNOJ
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
S
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
"[An] emotion-charged account of a
little-known chapter in American history."*
SEMINOLE DIARY
Remembrances of a Slave
By Dolores Johnson
Illustrated in full color by the author
"Written in diary form by a young slave, Libbie, this is the account
of her family's escape from slavery in 1834....Carefully researched
and beautifully written, Seminole Diary reveals a seldom-told
story of slaves who escaped and joined Native American groups,
where they found safety and acceptance....An attractive, unusual
offering for any collection." -- School Library Journal
"Throughout, there's a strongly individualized voice and specificity
of detail....The story has tension and truth, matched by...oil paint-
ings that show a pastoral community of blacks and Seminoles
working together." -Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books
"Inspired by the author's research for Now Let Me Fly: The Story of
a Slave Family, this is an equally trenchant tale....Johnson's
softly focused, vividly hued paintings affectingly illustrate this
emotion-charged account of a little-known chapter in American
history." -*Publishers Weekly
Ages 5-8/0-02-747848-3/$14.95
MACMILLAN BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS
An imprint of Simon & Schuster Children ' Publishing Division
866 Third Avenue * New York, NY 10022
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
January 1995
Vol. 48 No. 5
A LOOK INSIDE
155 THE BIG PICTURE
Winter Poems compiled by Barbara Rogasky; illustrated by Trina Schart
Hyman
156 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
162 * Walk Two Moons by Sharon Creech
163 * Shadow ofa Hero by Peter Dickinson
172 * The Exiles at Home by Hilary McKay
173 * Virginia's General: Robert E. Lee and the Civil War by Albert Marrin
174 * The Fear Place by Phyllis Reynolds Naylor
178 * Cat Running by Zilpha Keatley Snyder
182 
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1994
184 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin ofthe Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
STAFF
Roger Sutton, Editor (RS)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Susan Dove Lempke, Reviewer (SDL)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Heather McCammond-Watts, Editorial Assistant
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS ADVISORY BOARD
Leigh Estabrook, Dean, GSLIS, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Selma K. Richardson, Professor, GSLIS
Christine Jenkins, Assistant Professor, GSLIS
Richard C. Anderson, Director, Center for the Study of Reading, UIUC
Jean Osborn, Associate Director, Center for the Study of Reading
P. David Pearson, Dean, College of Education, UIUC
Violet J. Harris, Associate Professor, College of Education
Nancy O'Brien, Education Subject Specialist, Library, UIUC
Peggy Miller, Associate Professor, Department of Speech Communication, UIUC
Ann D. Carlson, Associate Professor, GSLIS, Rosary College
Janice Harrington, Head of Children's Services, Champaign Public Library
Elizabeth Huntoon, Director Systemwide Children's Services, Chicago Public Library
Janie Schomberg, Librarian, Leal Elementary School, Urbana, Illinois
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $35.00; individuals, $29.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont St., #105,
Chicago, IL 60622
Second-class postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1995 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Trina Schart Hyman, from Winter Poems ©1994 and used by permission of
Scholastic Inc.
JANUARY 1995 
* 
155
THE BIG PICTURE
Winter Poems
compiled by Barbara Rogasky; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman
Face it: in this country winter means Christmas, Hanukkah, and, more recently,
Kwanzaa. Presents. What a challenge, then, to compile an anthology of poems
about winter that don't mention any of these. And what an accomplishment that
these omissions don't call attention to themselves, that so complete an evocation
of the season is Winter Poems that you don't realize what's missing.
Rogasky's compilation and Hyman's illustrations follow the winter cycle
from first warning ("Something Told the Wild Geese," by Rachel Field) to spring's
beginning (an excerpt from "Blossom Themes," by Carl Sandburg). In between
come twenty-three poems or excerpts from poems that celebrate or ruminate upon
the cold, the dark, the snow, and the stars in voices that range from Edgar Allan
Poe's tintinnabulating "The Bells" to Elinor Wylie's sensuous "Velvet Shoes" to
Ogden Nash's "The Germ," an ode to a frequent winter visitor. The predominant
mood is lyric; the theme, mystery. The snow falls "quietly/ From some invisible
blossoming tree" ("Snow toward Evening," Melville Cane) as well as with determi-
nation, as in John Clare's "Snow Storm": "What a night! The wind howls, hisses,
and but stops/ To howl more loud, while the snow volley keeps/ Incessant batter at
the window-pane."
It's a conservative selection of poems, at the same time almost daring in
its claiming of such poets as Shakespeare, Wordsworth, and Wallace Stevens as
appropriate voices for the children's arena, and its intense atmospherics make for a
welcome balance to the more frolicsome collections that brighten up our shelves
with zippy rhymes and poems written in the form of a snowflake or skiing hill.
While the selections might not have the immediate accessibility of some other
compilations, they have the kind of glorious sounds and images that make poetry
poetry, the "miracle of words" that Rogasky describes in her introduction.
Rogasky says of her chosen poems, "The rhythm is there"; it's there, too,
in Trina Schart Hyman's acrylic paintings, as she almost unerringly moves from
late fall to spring, and from mood to mood. (The one glitch is the pairing of
Richard Wright's "Laughing Boy," illustrated with a picture of Hyman's grand-
son, with Millay's "The Buck in the Snow," about a dead deer, on the opposing
page.) The light changes, the snow changes, the night changes, and while inset
paintings reflect the particular content of a poem, each border shows the same
country view as the season wears on. Winter is at least as much about being warm
indoors as it is about the frosty outside, and Hyman finds the homely spaces in the
kitchen (in her introduction Rogasky generously admits that it is she "keeling the
pots" as Shakespeare's Greasy Joan) as well as the more melancholy minutes in the
cold gray window light (a self-portrait illustrating a selection from Stevens' "Thir-
teen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird"). As acknowledged in the introduction, all
156 
* THE BULLETIN
of the pictures depict Hyman's and Rogasky's home and family, an artistic choice
that explores the personal in the poetry, and gives a unified landscape to the whole.
It's easy enough to convey the motifs of the season, particularly when
you can hang them like ornaments, but Rogasky and Hyman go one better by
making us feel like we're there, cold or cozy, and looking towards spring.
Roger Sutton, Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
AGEE, JON 
So Many Dynamos! and Other Palindromes; written and illus. by Jon
Agee. 
Farrar, 1994 
74 p
ISBN 0-374-22473-0 
$12.21 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Having first delved into the world of palindromes with the high-spirited Go Hang
a Salami, I'm a Lasagna Hog (BCCB 10/92), Agee returns here to explore further.
These entries have a more narrative bent than those in the last volume: "Nate bit
a Tibetan" shows a bemused dog standing on a cliff watching the aftermath of,
presumably, the said Tibetan's descent; another dog, lifting his leg, announces "As
I pee, sir, I see Pisa!" as he stands above the city of the leaning tower. (Further
earthy invertibles include "Sewer ewes," for sheep in a storm drain, "Emu fume,"
for a flatulent feathered friend, and "Snot or protons?" for a scientist trying to
decipher matter under his microscope.) The words are patterned lunacy; Agee's
sturdy black-and-white illustrations, as always, have a pragmatic and helpful air
that underscores the absurdity of the text; the price and ISBN, of course, are
palindromic too. Kids who loved the first volume won't want to miss "Remark-
able Melba Kramer" and her cohorts. DS
ALEXANDER, SALLY HOBART 
Taking Hold: My Journey into Blindness. Macmillan,
1994 
[128p]
ISBN 0-02-700402-3 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-12
Sally Hobart Alexander, author of photoessays My Mom Can't See Me and Mom's
Best Friend(BCCB 11/90 and 2/93), here turns to more straightforward autobiog-
raphy, chronicling the advent of her blindness thirty years ago and its effects on
her life. In clear and heartfelt language, she discusses the ineffective treatments,
the agonizing uncertainty, and the final result; particularly emphasized are her
pain at leaving her teaching job, the importance of her support from family and
friends, and the increasing deterioration of her relationship with her then-fiance.
The second half of the book, where she attends a residential rehabilitation center,
is the liveliest, and the details both of her education and her adjustment make for
intriguing reading (Alexander's frankness about her fear of being physically
offputting is particularly thought-provoking). It's not quite clear who this autobi-
ography is for, since readers of Alexander's previous books aren't quite old enough
JANUARY 1995 
* 
157
for either the length or the adult focus of this volume; those fans of the earlier
books who do stretch to this volume will be disappointed that it ends long before
the "characters" of Alexander's husband, kids, and guide dog, prominently fea-
tured in her other books, appear. There's still plenty of inherent drama in the
situation, and Alexander's quick humor and vivid writing makes this an absorbing
account of a young woman's dealing with an unexpected obstacle in her life. DS
ANDRONIK, CATHERINE M. 
Prince of Humbugs: ALife of P. T Barnum. Atheneum,
1994 
136p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31796-4 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Andronik, biographer of the rather different subject L. M. Montgomery (BCCB
11/93), here chronicles the life of the showman, circus impresario, museum owner,
and politician, P. T. Barnum. Young readers who may only know the man as a
name on a circus marquee will hear about his peculiarly American genius for mar-
keting and how it led him from shopkeeping to publicizing and profiting from the
famous, whether it was Jenny Lind, Tom Thumb, or Jumbo the elephant. Al-
though she starts out a bit slowly, Andronik does a good job of evoking the drive
and imagination of the man, and she displays a healthy skepticism for the veracity
of many Barnum anecdotes while using his autobiography to set the record straight
on others, such as his oft-reported but probably apocryphal remark about the birth-
rate of suckers. While speculation occasionally intrudes on fact, this is overall a
competent portrait of an important contributor to American popular history, one
whose legacy is still felt today in more ways than we often realize. Black-and-white
pictures appear throughout; endnotes and a bibliography are included. DS
ARONSON, BILLY 
Scientific Goofi: Adventures along the Crooked Trail to Truth;
illus. by Lynn Brunelle. 
Scientific American/Freeman, 1994 
100p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7167-6537-3 $14.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-7167-6553-5 $7.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Columbus goofed, all right-but his mistaking America for Asia did open up the
seas to further European exploration, and Aronson's energetic if excessively silly
text explains that and how other great mistakes of science led eventually to truth.
The study of alchemy led to an understanding of the elements; the discovery of
"canals" on Mars led to farther-ranging astronomical observation; and "Piltdown
man taught scientists to be extremely careful when they make models from fos-
sils." It's a good side-slip into a consideration of the scientific method, but the
humor is often heavyhanded ("Their proof blew the roof off Ptolemy's goof") and
the frequent cartoon sketches are pretty lame (such as a sketch of an Indian asking
Columbus, "Hot enough for ya?"). Students ready for the subject are probably
beyond the jokes, but the anecdotes themselves have enough of human curiosity
and folly that they may engender the sympathetic skepticism required of good
research. A glossary/index and skimpy reading list are appended. RS
BAUER, JOAN 
Thwonk. 
Delacorte, 1995 
[2 40p]
ISBN 0-385-32092-2 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
"I've had four, count them, four boyfriends with definite dream potential turn
into Swiss cheese in one year," laments A. J. McCreary, who's a whiz photographer
but finds that doesn't help much in getting a date for her Valentine's Day dance.
158 
* THE BULLETIN
A. J. really yearns for fellow senior Peter Terris, who is heart-stoppingly gorgeous
but runs with a cooler crowd than does A. J. A. J. then encounters a genuine
cupid, named Jonathan, who "thwonks" Peter with his cupid's arrow and makes
him fall completely, utterly, goopily in love with A. J.-who then needs to decide
if that's what she really wanted after all. Bauer's forcefully funny writing remains
stylish from start to finish, and A. J. is an entertaining wisecracking heroine; she
deserves both the more suitable boyfriend and the respect she acquires by the end
of the book. The cupid device, although clever, is a little obviously contrived, so
that this book is not quite as focused as Bauer's Squashed (BCCB 10/92), but
readers will still relish the traditional motif of wish-granting gone wrong, and they'll
understand A. J.'s horror at her sentimental-and, well, stupid-worshiper ("I
think that I shall never say/ A name as lovely as A. J.," he writes her in tribute).
Booktalk it as an anti-romance of sorts; it will be a tonic for kids with a low toler-
ance for Valentine's Day. DS
BERRY, S. L. 
E. E. Cummings; illus. by Stasys Eidrigevicius and with
photographs. 
Creative Education, 1994 
48p 
(Voices in Poetry)
ISBN 0-88682-611-X 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-10
e. e. cummings is one of the most visual and most inviting of American poets, and
this biography-cum-moodpiece makes for an evocative introduction. The neatly
boxed, smoothly written text traces cummings' life through his childhood, service
in World War I, two failed marriages, happy common-law marriage, and popular-
ity as a poet; fifteen pages out of the total forty-eight are devoted to cummings'
poems or pieces of prose, many of them particularly likely to appeal to young
readers. The book has a strong visual impact: full-page bleeds of photographs-
cummings, his home, his artwork-provide a pictorial background and frame-
work for the biographical text, giving it the lush and atmospheric flavor of a picture
book, although the portraits are occasionally confusing. Is that uncaptioned photo
a picture of cummings' daughter? Why is there a picture of his wife from an
unhappy second marriage but not of Marion Morehouse, with whom he spent
thirty contented years? The poems are illustrated by Eidrigevicius' customary cre-
atively masked people; the images are offbeat and visually arresting, but their som-
ber stillness often clashes with the nimbleness of cummings' verse. This isn't a
substitute for a traditional biography, but kids better able to look than to listen
may find it an intriguing opening into poetry, especially cummings' poetry; you
also might use this book to inspire similar multimedia projects. A list of selected
cummings works and an index are included; there are no notes. DS
BORAKS-NEMETZ, LILLIAN 
The Old Brown Suitcase: A Teenager's Story of War and
Peace. Ben-Simon, 1994 
148p
Paper ed. ISBN 0-914539-10-8 
$9.50 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Alternating between an account of her life in the Warsaw ghetto (and subsequent
escape and hiding) and her experiences as a refugee in Canada, Boraks-Nemetz
writes a fictionalized version of "Slava's" childhood and adolescent years. The
prose is clean, and Slava's story is moving but never lugubrious, evoking emotion
through event rather than hindsight, with the account of the war years (and the
disappearance of Slava's little sister) rendered in the present tense. Shuttling be-
tween the story of that time and the story of adjustment to Canadian life gives the
JANUARY 1995 
* 
159
book a moderated suspense: we know Slava and her parents did in fact escape, we
just don't know how they did it. The details of refugee life in Quebec provide a
complement to books that describe Holocaust survivors in the U.S., and the teen-
life anecdotes (forbidden lipstick and a nice boyfriend) show how ordinary life can
arise from terrible circumstances. You may need to do some booktalking to get
past the drab title and cover, but girls, especially, will like Slava and will follow her
story with interest and empathy. RS
BROWN, MARGARET WISE 
The Days Before Now: An Autobiographical Note; ad.
by Joan W. Blos; illus. by Thomas B. Allen. 
Simon, 1994 
34 p
ISBN 0-671-79628-3 
$15.00 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
"This is to say that I was born in a brick city on a wide street of cobblestones,"
begins this abridgement of Margaret Wise Brown's entry for the 1951 Junior Book
ofAuthors. The text, arranged on the page like free verse, reads poetically as Brown
gives glimpses of her city home, her family, her later country childhood on Long
Island, and her adult life in New York and Maine. In some ways this resembles
another account of day-to-day childhood life, Alison Lester's My Farm (BCCB 7/
94), but where Lester's activities were exciting and enviable for young readers,
Brown's life seems less desirable than aesthetically memorable, and Brown's fame
is unlikely to be sufficiently widespread among youngsters to overcome that dis-
tance. Allen's smoky pastels on rough paper evoke a hazy sense of nostalgia that
will impress adults but will probably leave children, for whom "the days before
now" have little sentimental appeal, cold. Brown's gravely beautiful words may
inspire more efforts to revive her lesser-known writings, which would be a good
thing; this book, however, is likely to be treasured more by librarians than their
patrons. Blos adds a note about her source and adaptation at the end. DS
BROWN, TRICIA 
L'Chaim: The Story of a Russian mmigrd Boy, illus. with photo-
graphs by Kenneth Kobrd. 
Holt, 1994 
4 8p
ISBN 0-8050-2354-2 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
In the foreword, author Brown introduces us to Zev Tsukerman and tells us a little
about the former USSR and its breakup. The remainder of the book is told in the
first person as if by Zev himself, beginning "Hello, America!" Despite its subtitle,
L'Chaim is almost entirely about the life of an Orthodox Jewish boy, with very
little relating specifically to the adjustments and insights of a Russian immigrant.
Zev, now living in San Francisco, shows us his family, his Jewish day school, and
his Kung Fu classes, as well as the Russian store with its shelves of matrioshka
dolls, and the kosher butcher. The last section takes us through the high holidays
from Rosh Hashanah to Yom Kippur, and he concludes that "I feel very lucky that
I now live in America and am able to live my life proudly and freely as an Ortho-
dox Jewish boy." Brown clearly explains information on Jewish life and holidays,
but never quite captures the tone of a ten-year-old. The book is profusely illus-
trated with large color photographs, which are crisp and well-composed; however,
many of the subjects hold themselves a bit stiffly or mug for the camera. Those
looking for a more personal view of life in America compared with life in Russia
will need to look elsewhere, but for those looking to put a face with the details of
orthodox Jewish life, Zev's story will prove helpful. A glossary and short bibliog-
raphy are included. SDL
160 
* THE BULLETIN
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH, ad. 
The Girl Who Married the Moon: Talesfrom Native North
America; ad. by Joseph Bruchac and Gayle Ross; illus. by S. S.
Burrus. 
BridgeWater, 1994 
127p
ISBN 0-8167-3480-1 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Two veteran storytellers have collaborated to produce a collection of sixteen Na-
tive American tales dominated by themes of strong women and organized into
four sections to represent groups from the northeastern, southeastern, southwest-
ern, and northwestern United States. A general description of cultural settings
precedes each section, and the stories themselves show unusual variety, from myths
("The Girl Who Married the Moon") and pourquoi tales ("Chipmunk Girl and
Owl Woman") to traditional coming-of-age rites ("The Beauty Way-The Cer-
emony of White-Painted Woman") and legendary historical incidents ("Where
the Girl Rescued Her Brother"). There's also a broad tonal range, including some
great scary tales and eerie encounters with the supernatural. Although a few are
commonly anthologized ("The Poor Turkey Girl," for instance), a number of oth-
ers would be hard or impossible to come by. It's perhaps unfair of the authors to
compare these female characters to "such European heroines as Sleeping Beauty or
Little Red Riding Hood, who need strong men to rescue them"-the selection
here is more akin to Molly Whuppie and company in Minard's Womenfolk and
Fairy Tales, Lurie's Clever Gretchen, Phelps' Maid ofthe North, or Riordan's Woman
in the Moon-but this will certainly find a comfortable place alongside those vol-
umes. The adaptations are clean, and the sources respected in an afterword, ac-
knowledgments, and bibliography. Intricate and stylized black-and-white line
drawings head up each section. BH
CARTER, ALDEN R. 
Dogwolf 
Scholastic, 1994 
[272p]
ISBN 0-590-46741-7 
$13.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
It's been a hot, dangerous summer in Pete's northern Wisconsin town, and
everyone's tense fear of fire is exacerbated by the howling of the "dogwolf" that
one of the town drunks has penned up in his yard. For reasons that aren't entirely
clear to him (or the reader), Pete lets the creature go, bringing a new menace to the
beleaguered town and nearby Indian reservation. While his stepfather goes off
every day to fight the fires that keep springing up in the forest, Pete (part white and
part Chippewa) watches from a fire tower for new outbreaks, and keeps an eye out
for the maybe-marauding animal. The book has a lot of plot and subplot, and its
focus is fuzzy, with the dogwolf, for example, remaining a thematic abstraction
that never generates the narrative pull of the fiercely realized firefighting scenes.
Best is the candid treatment of reservation life, with characters such as Mona, a
lonely girl who finds escape in sex, and "Chief" Joe Harney, who charges the tour-
ists five bucks per photograph, with all proceeds going to the Chief Joe Harney
Indian Relief Fund. But crowded with too much talk and too much going on,
such central themes as Pete's questions about his dead father and his Metis heri-
tage become obscured in the smoke. RS
CECH, JOHN 
Jacques-Henri Lartigue: Boy with a Camera. Four Winds,
1994 
32p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-02-718136-7 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
In his biographical note, Cech describes Lartigue's photographs as "the most vivid
JANUARY 1995 
* 
161
documents of that supremely creative time before the tragedy of World War I
changed the face and mood of Europe." Here Cech focuses on the early days of
Lartigue's photographic career, which began in 1902 when he was seven: the
young photographer snapped pictures of family, friends, and himself, playing with
images involving double exposures, unusual perspectives, stop-action aerial shots,
and blurs of speed. The book unfortunately never becomes a portrait of Lartigue
or of his era or of the photographic techniques he explored, which means the
photographs seem mostly like someone else's family pictures-intriguing, but not
compelling. One wishes, for instance, that Cech would have included more from
Lartigue's diary, or explained more about the technical side-did Lartigue develop
his own pictures, for instance? If not, who did? The photographs of actual flight
(France's first public airplane flight) and of apparent flight (various relatives bound-
ing from the ground and now frozen in the air for all time) are likeliest to get the
book youthful attention, and kids will enjoy the tinkering that runs through both
Lartigue's technique and his subjects (his family seemed to enjoy playing with self-
invented gizmos); budding photographers will appreciate this look at one of their
own. DS
CHRISTIANSEN, C. B. 
I See the Moon. 
Atheneum, 1994 
116p
ISBN 0-689-31928-2 
$14.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Bitte assumes that her older sister Kari plans on getting married
and keeping her unborn child. Fifteen-year-old Kari, however, knows that mar-
riage and children would not be the best choice for herself or for her child, and she
has carefully selected adoptive parents Hope and Jacob. When Bitte tries in small
ways (such as making a schedule of when she would be available to babysit) to
persuade Kari to keep the baby, she is sent to stay with Uncle Axel until the baby's
birth. Through the course of her visit, Bitte gradually learns to adjust to Kari's
plans, to her own changing body (with some helpful advice from Uncle Axel, who
offers metaphoric but reassuring counsel), and to her new ideas about love. The
book, written in the first person, becomes her gift to Kari's baby as she describes
the events surrounding her birth. Christiansen writes quietly but poetically of this
transitional time in a coming-of-age story, and she presents a heroine who works
gradually and believably through her confusion. SDL
COOKE, TRISH 
So Much; illus. by Helen Oxenbury. 
Candlewick, 1994 
4 2p
ISBN 1-56402-344-3 
$14.95 
R 
2-5 yrs
Life turns into a big bouncy party one day when Mom and the baby are home
alone until, one by one or two by two, all the relatives start showing up, each of
them happy to play: "Oooooooh!" Auntie Bibba says. "I want to squeeze him, I
want to squeeze the baby, I want to squeeze him SO MUCH!" In turn come
Uncle Didi, Nannie and Gran-Gran, Cousin Kay-Kay and Big Cousin Ross, each
with a new chant for the baby ("I want to fight him, I want to fight the baby, I
want to fight him SO MUCH," says boisterous Kay-Kay) that keeps him enter-
tained until Daddy arrives just in time for a surprise: 
"HAPPY BIRTHDAY,
DADDY!" There's not much plot (although what there is works better than Cooke's
Mr. Pam Pam and the Hullabazoo, BCCB 11/94) but there's plenty of noise and
rhythm and tinges of Caribbean patois that lend a gentle lilt. Oxenbury's paint-
ings of this cozy black family are big and affectionate, culminating in a rich word-
less double-spread page of the party in full gear. Much to Baby's disappointment,
162 
* THE BULLETIN
bedtime does eventually come, but he knows that his family loves him SO MUCH
and falls asleep content. This is a little long for kids young enough to identify with
the hero, but the book has the reassuring tone and lulling chant that make it a
good choice for baby-bedtimes everywhere. RS
COOPER, FLOYD 
Coming Home: From the Life of Langston Hughes; written and
illus. by Floyd Cooper. 
Philomel, 1994 
[32p]
ISBN 0-399-22682-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Smoothly linked vignettes form a somewhat impressionistic biography of Langston
Hughes, whose poetry collection The Sweet and Sour Animal Book is reviewed
below. Cooper chronicles Hughes' childhood in a warm and intimate tone that
conveys both the deprivations and sources of strength in the poet's early life, but
the thematic emphasis on Langston's looking for "home" never quite sinks into
the story. When Cooper writes, "Langston never had a home like most people,"
he is speaking metaphorically, but kids who have just read how Langston, after
separations from his parents and grandmother, finally found a home with loving
neighbors, will be confused. There is also no mention in the text (although it is
stated in an author's note) that when he was thirteen Langston moved to Nebraska
to live with his mother: was that "home" or not? It's not a very straightforward
account but it does have an emotional appeal; grainily realistic paintings have warm
golden colors but are marred by perplexing expressions on characters' faces. RS
CREECH, SHARON 
Walk Two Moons. 
HarperCollins, 1994 
280p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-023337-0 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-023334-6 
$16.00 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
Salamanca-Sal-grew up in Kentucky, but she and her father moved to Ohio
after her mother's death; she and her grandparents are currently taking a road trip
to Idaho, where her mother is buried. As they travel, Sal relates to her grandpar-
ents the story of her friend Phoebe, whose unhappy mother left Phoebe's family;
Sal finds that recounting Phoebe's story helps her understand the desertion of her
own mother, who was later killed when the bus taking her away from her family
crashed. Creech skillfully keeps these layers separate but makes their interrelation-
ship clear, and the plot moves along amid all this contemplation with the aid of a
mysterious note-leaver, a local "lunatic," an eccentric English teacher, and Sal's
budding romance, not to mention Mount Rushmore, Old Faithful, and a poison-
ous snakebite along the road of Sal's trip with her grandparents. The style is smooth
and imaginative but cheerfully plain-spoken ("I wanted to jump up and say,
'Phoebe's mother has disappeared and that is why Phoebe is acting like a complete
donkey,' but I didn't"), and the folksiness of Sal's grandparents (Sal's grandfather
calls Sal his "chickabiddy" and his wife "gooseberry") is warm and uncontrived.
Readers who enjoyed Barbara Hall's Dixie Storms (BCCB 7/90) will appreciate
this strong and tender novel about all kinds of gain and loss. DS
DANZIGER, PAULA 
Thames Doesn't Rhyme with James. Putnam, 1994 
[14 4 p]
ISBN 0-399-22526-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Kids who haven't read Remember Me to Harold Square (BCCB 11/87) may be lost
in this sequel, which takes young lovebirds Kendra and Frank and their families to
JANUARY 1995 
* 
163
London, where Kendra's father insists the kids go another round of the cultural
scavenger hunt they played in New York in the previous book. All Kendra and
Frank want to do is be alone and kiss (and kiss and kiss) and while their romance
seems pretty tame for a pair of fifteen-year-olds, Danziger certainly captures the
obsessive clinging of first love. There's lots of kissing, lots of London trivia, but
not much atmosphere in the book, which is narrated by Kendra in brief (often
one-sentence) present-tense paragraphs, a style that soon grows monotonous: "I
put on the makeup that Bethany gave me for Christmas. SI want to look special
tonight. lIt's almost going to be like a date for Frank and me." Aside from a few
glances at museums and musings about her ambition to be an artist, Frank, Frank,
Frank is all Kendra thinks or talks about, and fellow lovestruck codependents may
enjoy the endless-if too true-hopes and anxieties. RS
DAVIS, DEBORAH 
My Brother Has AIDS. Atheneum, 1994 
186 p
ISBN 0-689-31922-3 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Estranged from his family for the past several years, Lacy's older brother Jack has
come home to die; although Lacy enthusiastically welcomes him back, she soon
learns that his illness (contracted from his partner, Lincoln, who has recently died
of AIDS) affects even the most mundane aspects of her life. Friends falter in
loyalty, parental patience wears thin, and Jack deteriorates with shocking rapidity.
Lacy's longstanding commitment to the relay swim team crumbles as anxiety and
sleepless nights spent listening to Jack's vomiting and her parents' ministrations
exact their emotional and physical toll on her. While the unromanticized por-
trayal of Jack's disease and inevitable death is commendably honest, the family's
successive outbursts of fear, anger, denial, self-doubt, and guilt occur with clinical
predictability. The reconciliation between Jack and his father is a little too smooth;
the swim coach's tolerance of Lacy's erratic attendance at practice is difficult to
credit. Despite these flaws, however, Davis' narrative is a cut above the disease-of-
the-week melodrama which the lackluster title suggests. EB
DICKINSON, PETER 
Shadow ofa Hero. 
Delacorte, 1994 
29 4 p
ISBN 0-385-32110-4 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Scenes from thirteen-year-old Letta's life in London with her Varinian exile family
alternate with legends from Varinian history, putatively chapters (complete with
footnotes) from a book Letta's grandfather is using to teach Letta her country's
language and heritage. The book is set in 1989, just as Varina, a tiny country
broken up in the aftermath of World War I, is beginning to press for indepen-
dence from its Eastern European overseers. Dickinson mixes fiction and fact with
confidence (the execution of the real-life Ceausescus plays a large part in the fate of
the fictional Varina) and while Varina is his own creation, parallels with the cur-
rent Balkan conflicts are manifest. The legends, which all tell of the exploits of
national hero Restaur Vax and his fight for Varina's independence from the Turks
in the 1820s, are filled with gallantry and guile, with the latter winning as many
battles as the former. (They are also filled with betrayal, bloodshed, and revenge,
inevitable sidekicks of even the noblest of causes.) These stories, in fact, have a
dramatic appeal and conciseness of structure that are sometimes lacking in the
present-day events, and too often Letta and her grandfather (briefly Varinian prime
minister, named for his ancestor Restaur Vax) seem as much tools for Dickinson's
point-making as they do for some unscrupulous Varinians seeking personal profit
164 
* THE BULLETIN
from the region's instability. While the beginning of the novel is too expository,
the pace picks up when Letta goes to Varina, where she watches her hitherto feck-
less older brother become converted to the cause, bringing danger to the entire
family. On the whole, it's more a novel of ideas than of intrigue, but Dickinson's
nation-building is convincingly filled out and will bring home what's behind the
headlines. RS
DRAPER, SHARON MILLS 
Tears ofa Tiger. Atheneum, 1994 
16 2p
ISBN 0-689-31878-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 8-12
After the school basketball star is killed in a drunk-driving crash, his teammate and
best friend Andy-who was driving-is left not only to lead the team but to wrestle
with the devils of guilt, culpability, and loss. Draper uses a collage of conversa-
tions, school lectures and homework, and transcripts of Andy's sessions with a
psychologist in a way that at first seems insurmountably didactic, but is increas-
ingly dramatic as it becomes apparent that despite the best intentions of family,
friends, teachers, and the psychologist, nothing is working. Andy eventually kills
himself, and rather than a tidy summary of suicide symptoms and "ways to help,"
readers instead get a grave portrait of unceasing despair-and a larger picture of
how young African-American men like Andy get lost in a system that will not trust
or reach out to them. There's a political message at the heart of this problem
novel, and it's refreshing to see a wider perspective brought to a genre that too
often relies on cliches of pop psychology. Beginning with some salty locker room
conversation among the team after a big win, the changes in format, style and
perspective give readers a new point of view every few pages; the conversations
(unlabeled and uninflected, a la Avi's Who Was that Masked Man, Anyway.) are
vivid and effective in their shifts between standard English and hip teen-talk. Sure
to provoke lots of thought and debate among young adults, this is one of the more
challenging novels we've seen about teen suicide. RS
GAUCH, PATRICIA LEE 
Tanya and Emily in a Dance for Two; illustrated by Satomi
Ichikawa. 
Philomel, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-399-22688-5 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
Tanya, of Dance, Tanya and Bravo, Tanya, returns here to find a new star in her
ballet class: "Emily was a ballerina in every way." One day Tanya and Emily run
into each other in the park, where Tanya's verve and imagination prompts both
young Pavlovas to impersonate animals ("Tanya danced a leopard. And Emily
danced an antelope"), and they form a friendship that leads to a zoologically themed
pas de deux at the winter recital ("And together they were wonderful"). This is a
sweet book of ballet and friendship; the general absence of conflict may make the
tone too gentle for some, but energetic Tanya's unskilled enthusiasm for dancing
keeps things from being excessively serene. Ichikawa's line-and-watercolor art deli-
cately captures both Emily's grace and Tanya's vigor, with Emily's neat hair-bun,
sharply defined shoulder blades, and infallible fluidity contrasting nicely with
Tanya's motion lines, acute angles, and playfulness. Pair with Kate McMullan's
Nutcracker Noel (BCCB 12/93), another look at a junior ballet performance. DS
GERRARD, ROY 
Croco nile; written and illus. by Roy Gerrard. 
Farrar, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-374-31659-7 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
Once you've deciphered its hieroglyphs, the jacket flap reads "Roy Gerrard ex-
JANUARY 1995 
* 
165
plores the wonders of ancient Egypt from A to B," which isn't giving the author/
illustrator much credit (nor any to Dorothy Parker). While this doesn't have as
compelling a story as some of Gerrard's previous adventures-in-verse (see Miks
Mammoth, for example) it's still a lot of fun to watch Hamut and Nekatu (brother
and sister) as they stow away on a boat down the Nile, find their artistic talents
honored and celebrated by the King and Queen, and, with the help of an old
crocodile pal, narrowly escape capture by kidnappers and a subsequent shipwreck.
Despite the title, the croc doesn't have all that much to do with the story, but
there's enough of a tale upon which to hang the pictures, which are tidy little
wonders of meticulous watercolor peopled with Gerrard's signature dumpling-
children, with Nekatu looking like a Theda Bara jazz baby in ancient dress. RS
GETZ, 
DAVID 
Frozen Man; 
illus. 
by 
Peter 
McCarty. 
Holt,
1994 
6 8p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-3261-4 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Like Lessem's The Iceman (BCCB 9/94), this is an account of the mummified
stone-age corpse who was found in Austria in 1991. The relative paucity of gory
photos here (there are only three really worthy of nightmares) and the emphasis
upon the forensic side of things, as scientists reconstruct the stone-age man's life
and death, gives this book a slightly different appeal than Lessem's. While the text
occasionally seems to contradict itself (about the man's death, the book at one
point says he couldn't have been freezing but goes on to say he froze) and relies a
bit too heavily on exclamation points, Getz's generally well-organized information
and smooth exposition makes the effort to understand the Iceman, as this book
calls him, into an intriguing detective story. This could well stimulate the interest
of kids who didn't think they liked science or archeology. Black-and-white draw-
ings include useful maps and diagrams; a glossary, bibliography, and index are
included. DS
GREENWALD, SHEILA 
Rosy Cole: She Walks in Beauty; written and illus. by Sheila
Greenwald. 
Little, 1994 
83p
ISBN 0-316-32743-3 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Rosy Cole looks at her beautiful friend Christi, the pre-teen model, and decides
that "1. A Beautiful Person has a different life. 2. A Beautiful Person has a better
life," so she sets out to be beautiful. After a few initial setbacks, she does indeed
undergo a wondrous transformation with the aid of a home-permanent kit and a
trip to the art museum. Everyone, including Rosy, is entranced with her new
loveliness, until it turns out that being beautiful interferes with doing homework,
getting along with friends, and, finally, having fun. Greenwald has put a fresh
twist on an old story here: Rosy really does become beautiful and discovers it's not
worth it, making the story much sharper and more original than if she had merely
accepted her inner loveliness. Rosy's matter-of-fact, funny narration and its peri-
odic revisitation of Byron's lyric (Rosy's teacher "didn't know one thing about
beauty in the long run or even the short run. She had never walked in it. She
hadn't even sat in it") will entertain young readers, who will covet Rosy's transfor-
mation even as they get the point. Greenwald's free-flowing, cheerfully approxi-
mate ink sketches appear throughout. DS
166 
* THE BULLETIN
GRIFFIN, PENI R. 
The Maze. 
McElderry, 1994 
120p
ISBN 0-689-50624-4 
$13.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
So far, eight-year-old Caroline's first visit to her father's new home with his wife
and stepson is being spoiled by busy adults and rainy weather. Her new older
stepbrother, Hector, enjoys hollering at the wrestling on television and barely no-
tices when Caroline disobeys an order not to look at a new painting her father's
student has dropped by the house. The painting, which shows a twisted maze of
paths going up a rocky mountain, includes "brightly painted monsters: a man
with a head like a bull, a one-eyed giant, a cat-woman with wings-and a mer-
maid." Leaning closer to hear the mermaid's faint song, Caroline enters the paint-
ing, where Hector soon joins her in time to rescue her from the first of a series of
traps. In using their wits to escape the minotaur, the tree that catches people who
steal its fruit, and the sphinx with her potentially deadly riddles, Hector and Caroline
become friends and gain insights into each other's positions in their new family.
Though lacking originality in its theme of familial resolution, Griffin's story nicely
combines the fantasy elements with realistic childish emotion, easy reading, and a
hefty dollop of humorous informality (Hector and Caroline stump the sphinx with
an elephant joke, for instance). She maintains a quick pace throughout, and her
tale of children outwitting monsters is likely to appeal greatly to her readers. SDL
HANEL, WOLFRAM 
Mia the Beach Cat; tr. by J. Alison James; illus. by Kirsten
H6cker. 
North-South, 1994 
4 8p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-315-7 
$12.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-314-9 
$12.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Sated by sandcastle building and shell-collecting, Maggie is slightly bored and lonely
at the beach, where her parents remain content to snooze and sunbathe. She's
delighted, then, to find a stray cat (who says "mia" rather than "meow," thus her
name), and the two have a great time chasing the waves and cuddling. Of course
Maggie wants to bring the cat home; of course her mother says no; but time, a little
drama, and some surreptitious help from Mia's father bring things to their fore-
gone conclusion. Like the same publisher's Where's Molly? by Uli Waas (BCCB
12/93), this is a light breeze of an early-reader book, coaching new readers' skills
with a story close enough to real life to be comfortable, but spiked with sufficient
suspense to be interesting. The format is clean and open, and amiable, unbabyish
pencil-and-watercolor illustrations appear on every page, giving plenty of clues to
the text. RS
HARRISON, JOANNA 
Dear Bear; written and illus. by Joanna Harrison. 
Carolrhoda,
1994 
32p
ISBN 0-87614-839-9 
$14.21 
R 
3-7 yrs
Katie suffers from the age-old childhood fear that something is going to grab her-
in her case, she believes a bear lives in the closet under the stairs. Although during
the day she can forget or even laugh about it (in the illustration, Katie acts out the
bear for her friends and chases them), at night her fears intensify. Taking her
mother's advice, Katie writes a letter: "Dear Bear, please go away. Love from
Katie." She gets a letter in return: "Dear Katie, I have taken your advice and gone
away. I am much in need of a vacation from sitting in the closet all day. Love from
Bear. P. S. Back Monday." On the bear's return, they communicate more by
letter until the bear has completely won Katie's sympathy. At the end, when Katie
JANUARY 1995 
* 
167
goes to meet with the bear, she finds a tea party set up with a large stuffed teddy
bear sitting by a note which reads, "I'm fed up with living under the stairs. Can I
come and live with you instead?" Children will enjoy this story on different levels
depending on their ages: preschoolers will not know who wrote the letters, but
will still find the story and its resolution highly satisfying, while older children will
delight in being in on the secret with Katie's parents. Harrison's experience in
animation (as mentioned on the jacket flap) probably influenced her storytelling
style, as, for instance, Katie imagines the bear packing for his trip in a series of
eight pictures on one page. Careful observers will enjoy spotting Eeyore and Bugs
Bunny among Katie's toys and catching the family cat in a variety of background
mischief. Parents may like the gentle reminder that some problems can be faced
using creativity instead of confrontation. SDL
HARTMAN, GAIL 
As the Roadrunner Runs: A First Book ofMaps; illus. by Cathy
Bobak. 
Bradbury, 1994 
32p
ISBN 0-02-743092-8 
$14.95 
M 
5-8 yrs
To convey the concept of mapping via the daily migrations of animals is a fresh
idea, but here it confuses more than it explains. A lizard creeps on a path between
two saguaros, past a barrel cactus, and to a red boulder for a little ray-catching. A
jackrabbit hops by a railroad station and an old well to reach a tasty meadow. The
same pattern follows for a roadrunner, a trail mule, a deer, and-somewhat more
fancifully-the wind. Each trip is pictured in its stages, and maps of the same
follow, but because they employ no symbols and have the same three-dimensional
perspective employed in the previous pictures, they don't look like maps, they just
look like summing-it-all-up illustrations. The rock on the map looks like the rock
in the previous picture. Understanding maps means understanding symbols, which
aren't used here, although the breezy, spacious, and blithe line-and-watercolor
pictures of the southwestern setting are in themselves engaging. There is also the
problem of readers inferring that animals (and the wind) do indeed map their
surroundings by visual landmarks, something that is only part of a complex matrix
of signals. Still, the book would be a good hook to encourage children to map
their own comings-and-goings, an activity that would be more elucidating than
the book's somewhat muddled presentation. RS
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT, comp. 
Hand in Hand: An American History through
Poetry; illus. by Peter M. Fiore. 
Simon, 1994 
14 4 p
ISBN 0-671-73315-X 
$19.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-7
This seems to be a banner season for celebrating America through its poetry-
we've had Panzer's Celebrate America and Whipple's Celebrating America (BCCB
12/94), and now we have Lee Bennett Hopkins' Hand in Hand. This volume is
more overtly historical than the others, with chronologically progressing sections
focusing on specific periods ("Come, Ye Thankful People, Come" on the Pilgrims,
and "Ring! Oh, Ring for Liberty!" on the Revolution, for instance) and poems
that focus on individual events and people (Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's "Paul
Revere's Ride" is here in its entirety, as is John Greenleaf Whittier's "Barbara
Frietchie"). Hopkins draws from a variety of sources: traditional ballads ("John
Henry" and "The Erie Canal"), music lyrics ("The Battle Hymn of the Republic";
"John Brown's Body"), classic American poetry (by Walt Whitman, Langston
Hughes, Gwendolyn Brooks, Carl Sandburg), and contemporary children's po-
168 
* THE BULLETIN
etry (Lee Bennett Hopkins, Charlotte Zolotow, Myra Cohn Livingston). While
there are some worthy classics and fresh new poems included, the reliance on older
poets, long ballads, and verse more notable for its subject than its quality gives this
collection a textbookish flavor. Young readers may also find that some poems,
such as "What Shall We Do for the Striking Seamen?" and "Un-American Inves-
tigators," require further explanation in order to be understood, and the relevance
of a particular poem to its section, especially in the latter part of the book, is not
always clear. This is still a useful resource, however, helpfully containing all the
verses of "The Star-Spangled Banner" and many other classic works usually found
only in dribs and drabs; the spacious format and agreeable watercolor illustrations
make paging through an appealing prospect. DS
HORWOOD, WILLIAM 
The Willows in Winter; illus. by Patrick Benson. 
St. Mar-
tins, 1994 
295p
ISBN 0-312-11354-4 
$18.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Generations have passed since Mole, Rat, Badger, and Toad made their first ap-
pearance in The Wind in the Willows, but here at last comes a sequel. In a novel
that catches Grahame's cozy and boyish tone surprisingly well, Horwood has of-
fered a new group of adventures for the beloved old characters: Mole has disap-
peared in a blizzard and must make his way back to his concerned friends, and
Toad has abandoned cars for airplanes. This last invention of Horwood's is a
stroke of great cleverness, as Toad seems suited for both the notoriety of early
aeronauts and also the legal entanglements that come from crashing into people's
houses (and yes, he ends up in court again in this book). The Mole plot is a bit less
successful: his friends eventually presume him dead and plan a funeral service,
which lends a certain somberness to the book despite the reader's knowledge of his
survival; he's also no longer the reader-surrogate neophyte on the riverbank, so
youngsters encountering him for the first time here may not find him endearing in
quite the same way. The atmosphere, animal dynamics, and appreciation for the
natural world of riverbank and wild wood are still compelling; this is also a good
excuse to dust off the original volume for a booktalk or a readaloud. Although
their individual details are sometimes difficult to make out, the frequent pen sketches
have, unsurprisingly, a Shepard air with their informal crosshatching and respect-
ful anthropomorphism. DS
HUGHES, LANGSTON 
The Sweet and SourAnimal Book; illus. by students from the
Harlem School of the Arts. 
Oxford, 1994 
4 8p
ISBN 0-19-509185-X 
$15.95 
M 
4-7yrs
"Completed in 1936, [this book] was revised in 1952 and 1959, but was rejected
over and over again by publishers." Well, there just may have been a reason for
that. Unlike Hughes' often superb children's poems that saw publication in his
lifetime, the rhymes collected here in an A-to-Z arrangement are flat, often awk-
wardly metered, and perilously close to doggerel: "What use/ Is a goose/ Except to
quackle?// If a goose/ Can't quackle/ She's out of whackle." Once, this is kind of
cute, but almost every one of the verses is similarly slight: "A little white kitten/
Got caught in the rain./ The mud and the wetting/ Caused him great pain." The
poems are brief, all the better to leave room for the marvelous constructions by
children from the Harlem School of the Arts, which illustrate every page with
fanciful mixed-media images of the animals the poems portray with less imagina-
tion. RS
JANUARY 1995 
* 
169
KIMMEL, ERIC A. 
One Good Tern Deserves Another. Holiday House, 1994 
188p
ISBN 0-8234-1138-9 
$14.95 
R Gr. 6-9
Peebee (who won't let anyone use his given name, Pretty Boy) Floyd has landed on
the Oregon coast after a cross-country car trip with his mother, who felt the need
to get out of Tennessee after her husband, Peebee's beloved stepfather, was killed
in the Gulf War. Oregon holds its own possibilities-a pretty girl named Lani-
and problems, such as the fact that Peebee's good ol' gal mother and Lani's father
seem at least as interested in each other as are their offspring, and the last thing
Peebee wants is a new stepdad. While Kimmel has written many stories for younger
kids, this is his first novel for older ones and by and large it is a deft blend of
adolescent romance and family comedy, with the pleasures of the land- and sea-
scape providing a sure and particular setting, a welcome break from the many teen
books set in Anytown, U.S.A. There's plenty of plot in the unfolding of character
and relationships, so the somewhat unlikely conclusion-Peebee and Lani find
Spanish treasure and a sea monster-seems superfluous as well as contrived, but
kids may well like the dash of adventure seasoning the domestic drama, just as they
will enjoy the touches of sophistication (a funny safe-sex talk between Peebee and
his mother) surrounding the innocent romance. RS
KNIGHT, 
MARGY 
BURNS 
Welcoming Babies; illus. by Anne Sibley
O'Brien. 
Tilbury House, 1994 
[34p]
ISBN 0-88448-123-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Beginning with its endpapers covered with babies in their amazing variety, Wel-
coming Babies is a celebration of the beginnings of life for humans. Ways of saying
hello to new babies in different cultures are portrayed, from the Igbo village women
singing when they hear Afam's first cry, to the Hopi grandmother lifting the blan-
ket from Kasa's face at dawn, to Korean baby Ok-hee's first birthday when she gets
symbolic gifts. Other welcomings include naming, holding, honoring, announc-
ing (an adopted baby), and playing, and the book ends with explanations of each
depicted ceremony, noting similar ceremonies in other cultures as well. O'Brien's
soft pastels are tender, warm, and glowing, showing many different ethnicities and
ages of people. Her babies vary in age, some showing the slightly smooshed faces
of the very newest born and others the vivacity and charm of the older babies.
Besides being an excellent multicultural title, expectant families can use this as a
read-aloud which, like Vera Williams' More More More Said the Baby, presents a
more hospitable view of babies than do the many "dethronement blues" books.
SDL
KRISHER, TRUDY 
Spite Fences. 
Delacorte, 1994 
283p
ISBN 0-385-32088-4 
$14.95 
M 
Gr. 7-12
With some thematic parallels to Bette Greene's Summer of My German Soldier
(BCCB 2/74), this is the story of a thirteen-year-old girl as much an outcast from
her family as she is from her southern town. Maggie Pugh is physically abused by
her mother, beaten and nearly raped by a violent neighbor, and reviled for her
championship of African-American friends who, during the summer of 1960, are
challenging rural Georgia racism with sit-ins and other forms of protest. It's a
heavy plot load to pull, and not all of the cast is up to it. Virgil Boggs, the neigh-
bor, is particularly stereotypical of white-trash villains, with none of the complex-
170 
* THE BULLETIN
ity that can make such characters realistically tragic. Conversely, both heroes-the
black civil rights worker who gives Maggie a cleaning job, and the old black junk-
dealer who's tortured by a gang of whites for trying to use a segregated bathroom-
are saintly. Maggie's presence during several crises is heavily coincidental, and the
device of her imagining-and later using-a camera to record the scenes she sur-
vives seems forced ("Snap quickly, Maggie. Things are moving fast. Advance the
film. Click. Advance. Click again. Snapshot 3"). There's even some unconscious
narrative condescension in Maggie's spying on a church civil-rights rally: "They
were shouting things like 'Say it, Cinda,' and 'Hear her, now.' 
I wished Pert
Wilson could be here. She always appreciated free entertainment." Some indi-
vidual components of the novel show promise, but all together they blur into
melodrama. It's Maggie's portrait that comes out strongest, and her understand-
ing of the "red world" she sees from her perch in a pecan tree: "The children to the
east in Fenwick Acres played in it, and the dead to the west in the cemetery slept in
it. The red earth of Kinship seeped into crevices and soaked into cracks. And I
was beginning to see that the Pugh family lay in its ruins." BH
KUKLIN, SUSAN 
After a Suicide: Young People Speak Up; written and illus. with
photographs by Susan Kuklin. 
Putnam, 1994 
125p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-399-22605-2 
$15.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-399-22801-2 
$8.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Interviews with families of suicide victims and with persons who attempted sui-
cide probe survivors' struggles to cope with grief and guilt and their efforts to find
some single, definitive reason why the suicide chose death. With sadness, anger,
or detachment, siblings, friends, and children of victims speak of the stages of
mourning, the benefits (and failures) of support groups, and their ultimate inabil-
ity to discover a compelling motivation behind the death; other interviewees ad-
dress the psychological turmoil that brought them to make a suicide attempt and
the road back to stability and recovery. A skilled interviewer and sensitive photog-
rapher, Kuklin allows the personalities as well as the situations of the subjects to
emerge, which results in a credible and eminently readable diversity of voices.
Although the text is accessible to middle-grade readers, the range of interviewees'
ages-late teen to adult-tends to limit the interest level of the work to a junior-
high audience and above. Addenda on the operation of a crisis hot line, sugges-
tions for further reading, and a generalized outline on "where to get help" (whether
for survivors or potential suicides is unclear) are included. EB
LEE, TANITH 
Gold Unicorn; illus. by Mark Zug. 
Atheneum, 1994 
14 9p
ISBN 0-689-31814-6 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 7-12
This sequel to Black Unicorn (BCCB 11/91) balances the heroine Tanaquil's ear-
lier journey to a perfect world with a trip through one much worse. Following the
death of their father, the deposed Prince Zorander, Tanaquil finds that her half-
sister Lizra has assumed his throne. Drunk on her new power, Lizra leads her army
on a mission to conquer the world, which she intends to forcibly "perfect." But
Lizra needs Tanaquil's sorcery to bring to life a huge gold-plated unicorn, a fiery
war machine which will terrorize enemies into surrender. This unicorn, at once
weapon and idol, is the gateway to an alternate desolate world of endless warfare,
which Tanaquil, Lizra, and Lizra's lover, Honj, are forced to explore. Lizra returns
from the ordeal chastened and longing to free her conquests, but duty demands
JANUARY 1995 
* 
171
that she "rule what she's got and rule it damned well." Although darker in vision
than Black Unicorn, this title retains the humor ("We spit on your Empress ... No
offense.") and inventiveness (ooh, those nasty little mousps) of the first novel. A
brief foreword serves as a memory-jogger for readers who met Tanaquil several
years ago; newcomers to the series, however, should be guided to the original vol-
ume first. EB
LEVINSON, NANCY SMILER 
Turn of the Century: Our Nation One Hundred Years
Ago. 
Lodestar, 1994 
134p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-525-67433-0 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
As the twenty-first century approaches, Levinson takes a look at the United States
from the late 1800s into the first decades of the 1900s to gauge "how much our
nation has changed." Organization is topical rather than chronological, and, as
chapter headings such as "The Iron Horse" and "Souls of Black Folk" suggest,
social history dominates political history. The tone is informal and engaging, and
the egalitarian attention to ordinary people as well as to textbook Big Names is
refreshing. But the range of topics and their treatment is predictable, and in sev-
eral chapters Levinson introduces more examples than she adequately develops.
Two important events-the massacre at Wounded Knee and the resurgence of the
KKK-are awkwardly relegated to inserts rather than integrated into the text. Plen-
tiful black-and-white period photos, an index, and a nicely balanced list for further
reading are included, but notes on Levinson's own sources are not. EB
LIVINGSTON, MYRA COHN 
Flights of Fancy and Other Poems. McElderry,
1994 
40p
ISBN 0-689-50613-9 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-8
Forty poems range in style, theme, and quality from rhymed verse that leans to-
ward the jingly, as in "Elegy for a Dog" ("I sit and stare/ into the sky./ I try to think
of reasons why/ he couldn't live/ and had to die") to the cleverly metered "In the
Popper," with its exploding-kernel rhythm. Of the two concrete poems included,
the seven-line "Deer in November" devolves into a shape only marginally deer-
like, and the eye chart concept in "20/20" is visually broken by asides. The dozen
poems that deal with travel are among the collection's best-Livingston's images
economically evoke the landscape speeding past windows of buses, autos, and
planes-but the arrangement of entries, alphabetical by title, interrupts any the-
matic continuity. Overall, readers can expect several delightful views along a some-
what bumpy flight. EB
Low, ALICE, comp. 
Spooky Stories for a Dark 6- Stormy Night; illus. by Gahan
Wilson. 
Preiss/Hyperion, 1994 
128p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2008-X 
$19.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0012-7 
$19.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Nineteen spooky stories, some reprinted from other sources (Laurence Yep's "Bed-
time Snacks," Penelope Lively's "Uninvited Ghosts," for instance) and some adapted
for this volume (Wendy Wax's retelling of "The Golden Arm," Della Rowland's
adaptation of "Wiley and the Hairy Man") offer a nice ghostly gallimaufry for
younger haunt fans. While the big-print stories include the humorous, such as
Bruce Coville's "Duffy's Jacket," they all have some genuine eerie atmosphere, and
there's a pleasing absence of disappointing "fake" ghost stories where there turns
172 
* THE BULLETIN
out to have been no ghost at all (although Jeanne B. Hardendorffs retelling of
"Rap! Rap! Rap!" does play out as a play on words). Gahan Wilson's illustrations
are occasionally somewhat softened from his usual creepy acerbity and sometimes
make too much of the story literal, but there's enough electric weirdness in his
portraits of the headless horseman, the uninvited ghosts, and others to bring kids
back for a second look. While this isn't the most stylish or original of the spooky-
stories anthologies, it has a good combination of high accessibility and real bite
that will make it usefully frightening for youngsters ready to move up from Alvin
Schwartz' In a Dark, Dark Room. DS
McKAY, HILARY 
The Exiles at Home. McElderry, 1994 
[208p]
ISBN 0-689-50610-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 5-9
The Exiles (BCCB 11/92) are-heaven help their poor parents-back; Ruth,
Naomi, Rachel, and Phoebe, the Conroy sisters, are at home in Lincolnshire when
Ruth rockets them into a new dilemma by signing up to sponsor a foster child in
Africa. Since Mr. and Mrs. Conroy disapprove of such arrangements, the girls
can't confess to their parents but must earn the money (£10 a month) themselves,
and their various schemes include babysitting, selling snacks at school, marketing
pavement art, and withdrawing funds from the bank. These are the Conroy sis-
ters, however, and such ordinary enterprises are lit with a mad glow: Ruth teaches
her babysitting charge revolting behavior so that his mother will continue to rely
on her help; Rachel and Phoebe's dog-kennel-made (in contrast to home-made)
sandwiches have bits of dog hair ("from a very clean dog"); Ruth gets arrested for
drawing on the sidewalk; and Rachel, unclear on the rules of deposit and with-
drawal, "robs" the bank of her ten pounds and runs away in panic. Most signifi-
cant of all is Naomi's gardening job for Toby and Emma, a couple in their nineties
who relish the Exiles' peculiar but energetic approach to life. This sequel has the
giggles-becoming-guffaws charm of the original, with touches such as Phoebe's
zoo (a sort of voodoo prison, where pictures of the ill-wished are imprisoned) as
compellingly entertaining as ever. McKay sounds a few new notes here, too, with
the sisters' friendship with Joseck, their African pen-pal, depicted gently (although
there's a strong hint that his friend Mari is spiritual kin to the Conroys) and the
death of Emma convincingly treated. The ending, where Emma's legacy funds a
trip to Africa for the Conroys, is a bit overly coincidental, but if it were to happen
to anyone it would happen to them. It's to her credit that McKay successfully
blends these more serious moments in with the girls' more riotous adventures; the
result is another very funny, very smart, and in its own way very touching book.
DS
MACKINNON, DEBBIE 
What Size?; illus. with photographs by Anthea
Sieveking. 
Dial, 1995 
[18p]
ISBN 0-8037-1745-8 
$10.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
1-4 yrs
A multiethnic cast of children work busily at a variety of toddler tasks that illus-
trate differences in size. For Thick and Thin, for example, "Taran is making Play-
Doh shapes. He has rolled the pink the thinnest" and on the right the reader is
asked to pick "Which shape is the thickest?" from an assortment of Play-Doh cut-
outs. Other comparisons include Long and Short, High and Low, Wide and Nar-
row, Tall and Small, and Same Size. Each concept is demonstrated clearly, and
JANUARY 1995 
* 
173
the book concludes with six children standing together so the differences in their
own sizes can be measured against a pair of rulers, one showing feet, and one
showing centimeters. Thick pages will help keep this book in one piece through
its many readings. SDL
MARRIN, ALBERT 
Virginia's General: Robert E. Lee and the Civil War. Atheneum,
1994 
[192p] 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-31838-3 
$19.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 7-12
This is Marrin's counterpart to his excellent Unconditional Surrender (BCCB 3/
94) about Ulysses Grant; here he takes on arguably the most beloved figure on
either side of the Civil War, Robert E. Lee. Marrin chronicles Lee's upbringing
and early career, but, as he did in the previous volume, really uses his subject as a
lens through which to view the Civil War. There is limited overlap between the
two books, since Lee's war differed very much from Grant's. Lee dominated the
Confederate Army from the beginning of the war (after turning down command
of the Union Army), his battles such as Sharpsburg/Antietam and Gettysburg,
were often not Grant's, and finally he had to bear the crushing disappointment of
loss and surrender. Again Marrin paints a vivid picture of the war, its participants,
and its effects: he describes battle scenes where stampeding cows and swarms of
angry bees played roles as pivotal as military strategy, soldiers of both sides writing
home letters of halting spelling and tangible longing, and the moments when Union
and Confederate soldiers pulled together in attempts to rescue wounded comrades
of both. Over all the details is the constant, exhausting bloodshed, fighting over
the same ground again and again, and the increasing inevitability of defeat for
Lee's forces. Marrin makes it clear what a feat Lee accomplished by staving off the
Union with its vastly superior resources as long as he did; he also makes it clear
what a terrible price that prolongation of the war exacted. Throughout the book
shines the portrait of General Lee, apparently respected by the Union army as well
as nearly deified by the Confederate, as a principled and astute leader and a proud
and honorable man. Black-and-white period art and photos appear throughout;
endnotes demonstrate the wide variety of sources Marrin employed to paint this
vivid picture; a necessarily selective bibliography and an index are included. DS
MILLS, CLAUDIA 
The Secret Life ofBethany Barrett. Macmillan, 1994 
163p
ISBN 0-02-767013-9 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Sixth-grader Bethany is a worrier. She's worried about her older sister, who's torn
between college opportunities and the boy she loves, and about her little brother,
whose language skills seem slow to develop, and about her status at school, where
she's afraid to openly befriend an unpopular girl she likes for fear of losing her
social standing. Worst of all, her satiric poem about a mean librarian was posted-
unsigned-at school, and the authorities are hunting for the culprit. The charac-
ters, ranging from Bethany's carefree friend Jane to Bethany's queen-of-worriers
mother, give the story authenticity, and Bethany's ambivalence, as she's repeatedly
torn between doing the right thing and doing the easy thing, gives it poignancy.
As she previously demonstrated in Hannah on Her Way (BCCB 4/91), Mills has a
knack for conveying the intensity of the pressures on the middle-grades crowd; she
treats their all-too-real problems with respect. Kids will appreciate her empathy
and recognize Bethany's story. DS
174 
* THE BULLETIN
NAYLOR, PHYLLIS REYNOLDS 
The Fear Place. 
Atheneum, 1994 
118p
ISBN 0-689-31866-9 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
For two years now, Doug's big brother Gordon has been taunting him about the
time Doug became paralyzed with fear when the two boys and their parents were
hiking along a perilously narrow mountain ledge ("six hundred feet high and the
earth did not just peel away, it dropped." Despite Gordon's jeers, Doug avoided
the frightening trail last summer, but now, with the family back in the Rockies
where the parents conduct their annual scientific fieldwork, Doug must face it
again when Gordon disappears. The ever-versatile Naylor is just as capable here in
the boys'-adventure genre as she is in the family-life comedies of her Alice books.
The rivalry between the brothers is mean and rough and real, if somewhat too
neatly paralleled with their mother's problems with her own brother; while both
the tension and the story are predictably resolved when Doug rescues Gordie, the
suspense is as sure as Doug's footing across the "fear place." While you know-
you know--he's going to make it, it's still hard to breathe until he does. RS
PFEFFER, SUSAN BETH 
Sara Kate, Superkid; illus. by Suzanne Hankins. 
Holt,
1994 
6 0p 
(Redfeather Books)
ISBN 0-8050-3147-2 
$14.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
Sara Kate is eight and her big brother Stevie is eleven, which seems to mean he can
do all kinds of things she can't. When Stevie signs up for the basketball-throwing
contest, Sara discovers she has inherited the family superpowers (only given to
women born on Tuesdays or Thursdays) and can throw the basketball farther than
anyone ever dreamed. The plot, especially the pulled-punch ending (Sara Kate
becomes a local celebrity but loses the contest on a technicality), is pretty con-
trived, but as she did in The Riddle Streak (BCCB 11/93) Pfeffer has the sibling
dynamics down pat, including Stevie's horror when his little sister outstrips him at
his chosen metier. The dialogue is lively and easy, both between the siblings and
between Sara Kate and her understanding grandmother (who can fly, and some-
times leap tall buildings in a single bound), and fans of other middle-grades fiction
in the series will enjoy this undemanding but energetic read. Pen-and-ink draw-
ings personify Sara Kate and her family without interfering with the story. DS
PINKWATER, JILL 
Mister Fred. Dutton, 1994 
211p
ISBN 0-525-44778-4 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 5-7
After their beloved teacher leaves them for a chance to teach in Argentina, Anya
Murray and the rest of her sixth-grade class devote themselves to being as unteach-
able, undisciplinable, and just plain incorrigible as they can. They succeed beauti-
fully, driving away substitute after substitute, until the peculiar Goldberg Fred
arrives. Mr. Fred, not your typical teacher, cows the students with his academic
challenges, his mindreading abilities, and his very weirdness: in fact, the class
designs its research project, the Spaceman Challenge, to prove that Goldberg Fred
is really an alien. They eventually grow so fond of Mr. Fred, the alien teacher who
made them think, that they are quite distressed when he returns to his own planet
(the U.S. government hot on his heels), although their new new teacher seems
promisingly and familiarly bizarre... While the rather obvious message (embrace
intellectual curiosity or, as Goldberg Fred's huge sign says, "THINK") doesn't blend
too well with the gossamer lightness of the fantasy, this is a cheerful classroom
romp. Anya's narration, particularly of the class' outlaw antics, will provoke giggles
JANUARY 1995 
* 
175
from young readers; the extraterrestrial-teacher concept will have them disappointed
by their own all-too-mundane substitutes. Fans of either Pinkwater will enjoy the
ebullient humor and eccentricity. DS
REGAN, DIAN CURTIS 
Monster ofthe Month Club; illus. by Laura Cornell. 
Holt,
1994 
152 p
ISBN 0-8050-3443-9 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 3-5
Rilla Harmony Earth lives in a bed-and-breakfast with her mother, Sparrow (for-
merly Donna Pinowski) and her Aunt Poppy. She is homeschooled and misses the
companionship of the children at her old school, until the first box from the Mon-
ster of the Month Club mysteriously arrives. January's monster is grumpy, seven-
eyed Icicle from Botswana, whose instructions say he likes popsicles, frozen yogurt,
and iced lemonade. Something of a chore to take care of in their no-junk-food-
allowed household, Icicle is joined the next month by pink, fluffy Sweetie Pie, who
comes from New Zealand. Rilla struggles to keep her monsters out of trouble and
to keep them a secret from the B&B guests and from her mother as she anxiously
waits for the next installment on March 1. The more thoughtful side of the book,
where Rilla grapples with her sense of loss at the continuing departures of the B&B
guests and wonders about her absent father, doesn't always blend well with the
lighter-hearted whimsy of the monster story. Rilla is a cheerful and resourceful
heroine, however, and the monsters have entertainingly distinct characters (Sweetie
Pie turns out to be a country music fan, though not as sweet as first thought). The
story's resolution, which may leave some readers sad, allows room for hopeful
speculation, and the characters, both human and otherwise, remain sympathetic
to the end. SDL
RICE, BEBE FAAS 
The Year the Wolves Came. Dutton, 1994 
[160p]
ISBN 0-525-45209-5 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
In a novel that's somewhat uncomfortably situated between folktale, historical
fiction, and pulp horror, ten-year-old Therese and her family are frightened and
wary when wolves intrude upon their snowbound Canadian prairie home in 1906.
The scariest reaction is that ofTherese's mother, who came Melisande-like, bereft
of both shoes and memory, to the town during a blizzard thirteen years ago... the
last time the wolves had appeared. Now she sleepwalks through the house, pro-
voking uneasy looks from the Russian hired man, Pinky, who fingers the religious
medallion around his neck and recalls the old tales of werewolves. It's snowy and
spooky and sinister enough, but the ending, in which Pinky kills Therese's mother
in her wolf-shape, is too strong for the story and the author's rather flat writing
and simplistic characterization. Unlike Napoli's unforgettable The Magic Circle
(BCCB 4/93), which matched the equally horrifying death of a mother with depth
in the prose, this is pretty much formula fiction that can't match the power of its
folkloric inspiration. It does, however, pack a thrill. RS
ROGASKY, BARBARA 
Winter Poems; illus. by Trina Schart Hyman. 
Scholastic,
1994 
4 0p
ISBN 0-590-42872-1 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
See this month's Big Picture, p. 155, for review.
176 
* THE BULLETIN
Ross, STEWART 
Shakespeare and Macbeth: The Story Behind the Play; illus. by
Victor Ambrus and Tony Karpinski. 
Viking, 1994 
4 8p
ISBN 0-670-85629-0 
$16.99 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Combining necessary conjecture with known facts, Ross tells of the writing and
first performance of this turbulent Shakespeare play in 1605 London, including
smoothly written information about patronage, historical sources, and habits of
theatergoers. He gives the real Macbeth a fair shake too, explaining the differences
between Shakespeare's version and known history and suggesting reasons for the
playwright's changes. Some of the book will baffle young American readers-
Ross doesn't explain terms such as "the Gunpowder Plot" and the picture of a
plague-quarantined house may be confusing to some as well. The recounting of
the plot of Macbeth is occasionally somewhat flat and fails to convey the power and
fascination of the original play, and it's a shame Ross doesn't go more into the
Macbeth curse, which would fascinate young readers. Karpinski's art, generally
dark, candlelit oils in period style, is sometimes stiff and distant but often dra-
matic, as with the picture of the boy who plays Lady Macbeth putting on his wig,
or with one of the witch's hands clutching the spoon with which she stirs the
cauldron; Ambrus' freer style of line and line-based drawings decorate the retelling
of the play. You could pair this with Stanley's Bard ofAvon (BCCB 12/92) for a
fuller look at Shakespeare, use this book to illuminate the history of the theater
generally, or, of course, read it before a trip to a production of The Scottish Play
itself. A chronology of Shakespeare, a general note on the play, a list of Shakespeare's
works, an index, and a brief bibliography (in unfortunately small print) are in-
cluded. DS
RUBY, Lois 
Skin Deep. 
Scholastic, 1994 
[2 2 4 p]
ISBN 0-590-47699-8 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 7-10
A failed attempt to join the school swim team ("Principal says I gotta save two
spots for the my-norities," says the coach) and a frustrating search for an afterschool
job ("We're an affirmative action shop, son") make high school senior Dan ripe for
plucking by a local racist skinhead gang, and his inadvertent involvement in an
attack on an Iranian college student threatens to bind him to the gang forever.
Alternating between Dan's point of view and that of his girlfriend, Laurel, with
occasional omniscient intrusions, the story often switches direction mid-chapter.
This contributes to the tense atmosphere Ruby is clearly trying to create, but it also
contributes to the confusion, exacerbated by a dispensable subplot about Laurel
and her friends running a campaign to elect a pet ferret Homecoming Queen.
While the theme is timely, the treatment is didactic, with dinner-table conversa-
tions, classroom lectures, and consciousness-raising exercises baldly presenting all
sides of the issue: "He [Laurel's father] pounded the table. 'I say Fascist propa-
ganda is not free speech!'" Although such topics as racism, the First Amendment,
and school dress codes are addressed clearly enough, some of the descriptive writ-
ing is overwrought, with metaphors that can be hard to sort ("loneliness poured
through her and was only pushed out in a thin stream, like sugar from a funnel, by
the growing calcification of her heart"). While the circumstances that ready Dan's
conversion to racism seem contrived (is society really that tough on white guys?),
his downward spiral is compelling, and the dark deeds of the gang provide a swash-
buckling counterpoint to the sermon. RS
JANUARY 1995 
* 
177
RUSSELL, CHING YEUNG 
First Apple; illus. by Christopher Zhong-Yuan
Zhang. 
Boyds Mills, 1994 
127p
ISBN 1-56397-206-9 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
When nine-year-old Ying hears that her grandmother has never tasted an apple,
that they are "rich people's fruit," she becomes determined to buy one for her
grandmother's upcoming seventy-first birthday. By working hard in her cousin's
garden, she is able to earn the necessary sixteen cents, but on the way home with
the precious apple, she is accosted by the class bully, who steals half and knocks the
other half into the storm drain. Trying again to earn the money, she pulls up some
plantains to sell, not realizing they were part of a garden. She escapes from the
angry gardener but feels so guilty that in a few days she confesses, making a new
friend who then, as a reward for her honesty, helps her get an apple. While the
author, who has based this story on her childhood in China in the 1940s, conveys
the rural Chinese village setting and details of everyday life well, third and fourth-
grade readers may find it a little confusing. Many names are similar, such as Ah
Pui and Ah Pau, and instead of a glossary in the back, definitions integrated into
the text might have been clearer. Illustrations are black-and-white reproductions
of watercolors, giving them a soft, misty look. Although the story inclines toward
didacticism, Ying is a likable, energetic young heroine, and this is an acceptable
choice for libraries looking for middle-grades fiction out of the current-day Ameri-
can classroom mold. SDL
Sfs, PETER 
The Three Golden Keys; written and illus. by Peter Sis. 
Doubleday,
1994 
6 2p
ISBN 0-385-47292-7 
$22.50 
Ad 
Gr. 5 up
In an introduction addressed to his young daughter, Madeleine, Peter Sis writes
that this book is to explain to her where her father came from, to give her the keys
to the mystery of Prague. In the book's text, the narrator's hot-air balloon is blown
off course and lands in Prague, where he finds his old house but is unable to
unlock the three padlocks on the front door. He roams, and a librarian made of
books, an emperor made of foliage, and a robotic baron each give him a scroll
containing a folktale from Sis' childhood and a golden key; when he returns to the
house, the keys admit him and Madeleine to the house of his youth. Sis' illustra-
tions are framed in textured yellow borders on a rough-looking cream surface; his
precise and delicate linework, in subdued and occasionally monochromatic tones,
is frequently overlaid with images of cats, fanciful spirits, and zodiacal personages
in a way that won't show in the far back of a classroom but is eerie and absorbing
at closer distances. The length of the book, especially with the interpolated folk-
tales, makes it rather tedious and too protracted for most of the usual picture-book
audience; the dense penmanship of the tales (and the quotes from Camus and,
untranslated, Gide) renders the book above the level of unsophisticated readers;
few youngsters of any age will identify with an adult's search for the key to return
to his childhood. What Sis does best here, in fact, is to create his fantasy vision of
the city-the most successful use for the book might be with middle-school and
older kids who have an interest in art and fantasy and who don't mind the too-
young-for-them plot; the picture-book crowd may enjoy peeking over their par-
ents' shoulders at an illustration or two as the adults page through a book more for
them than for their children. DS
178 
* THE BULLETIN
SMITH, JANE DENITZ 
Mary By Myself 
HarperCollins, 1994 
152p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024518-2 
$13.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024517-4 
$14.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
Still reeling from the SIDS (Sudden Infant Death Syndrome) loss of their baby,
Felicity, Mary's parents are in no shape to help her through the summer between
fifth and sixth grade and decide to send her to camp. At Camp Pine Grove, Mary
bunks with Celeste, who is pudgy, wears too much bug spray, and has allergies,
and with Laura, who is intriguingly standoffish and always wears black. Laura
eventually befriends Mary, and they periodically sneak off to a hunter's cabin where
they make voodoo dolls and have a seance. Mary finds herself behaving nastily to
Celeste while not really wanting to, but when Laura betrays her, Celeste is her
comforter and helps her face the loss of her sister as well. Except for Celeste, who
is as insightful as a highly skilled therapist and is exceptionally forgiving, the char-
acters are complicated and realistically unsympathetic at times. Laura is particu-
larly interesting as the mean-spirited girl who then runs joyfully into her parents'
arms at Parent's Weekend. While the camp story is perhaps formulaic, the writing
is clear and fresh, particularly in its sensitive portrayal of a family who must con-
tinue despite their grief. SDL
SNYDER, ZILPHA KEATLEY 
Cat Running. Delacorte, 1994 
16 8p
ISBN 0-385-31056-0 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 5-8
In this novel set during the Depression in California's Central Valley, sixth-grader
Cat won't be participating in this year's Play Day races; while acknowledged to be
the fastest runner in her school, Cat won't run unless she's allowed to wear slacks
like the other girls, and her strict father won't allow it. Shut out-by her father
and her own stubbornness-from her certain triumph, Cat finds solace in a secret
grotto by a river near their house, building a playhouse and filling it with her
favorite things, only to find that her private paradise has another visitor: Sammy,
a impoverished little "Okie" girl (disguised by her family as a boy for barely dis-
cernible reasons) who has found and come to love the doll Cat has brought there.
And since Sammy is as lovable as her big brother Zane (who won the cherished
race in Cat's absence) is infuriating, Cat is in a storm of conflict, with her anger at
her father, her hard-won sympathy for the Dust Bowl emigres, and her own fierce
spirit fighting for justice. Although Sammy and Zane's family is rendered some-
what picturesquely in their dialect and stolid pride, and Sammy's near-death of
pneumonia (which nets a race between Cat and Zane) takes a dip into sentimen-
tality, Cat's an honorable, prickly heroine in a girls'-book tradition that stretches
from Alcott's Jo March to Cynthia Voigt's Dicey. RS
SPARIOSU, MIHAI I., ad. 
Ghosts, Vampires, and Werewolves: Eerie Tales from
Transylvania; ad. by Mihai I. Spariosu and Dezs6 Benedek; illus. by Laszlo
Kubinyi. 
Orchard, 1994 
104 p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-08710-7 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-06860-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 5-9
If you have some smart-alecky kids who think folktales are wimpy, lay this one on
them. In fact, those who laugh at folklore are at high risk here: in "The Forest," a
woodcutter who's disrespectful of the local trees' spirits sees one son bleed to death
in a bear trap and the other suffer a fatal blow from an ax; finally, a pile of logs
pursues the woodcutter down a river until he's "impaled on the tree branches with
JANUARY 1995 
* 
179
the logs rushing underneath him, tearing his legs off. The white foam of the river
soon turned red with the blood of the unfortunate soul." Ghosts, vampires, and
werewolves aren't even the half of it. Two other sections on haunted treasures and
eerie fairy tales bring to a total of sixteen these Halloween specials for year-round
consumption. Generous source notes identify informants (most of them acquain-
tances or relatives of the authors), as well as providing cultural context and descrip-
tive background. This makes the book a first-hand collection-unusual in juvenile
publishing, where most folklore is culled or adapted from previously published
sources. Kubinyi's formal and richly textured line drawings, filled with intricate
hatch and crosshatch reminiscent of engraving, are generally not as terrifying as
the text, but maybe a little reassurance is not amiss in this case. There are some
romantic threads and even a few happy endings, so junior high readers will find
the book an apt blend to read alone or hear aloud in cases of those classroom
doldrums that call for a dose of literary adrenalin. BH
VELASQUEZ, GLORIA 
Juanita Fights the School Board. Pifiata/Arte Publico,
1994 
[152p]
ISBN 1-55885-119-4 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
After getting into a fight with another girl, Juanita, a sophomore, is informed that
she is going to be expelled from Roosevelt High for the rest of the school year-
but a feisty Latina counselor, Ms. Martinez, happens into the case and with the aid
of a lawyer works to reverse the decision. The novel's first-person viewpoint switches
between Juanita and the counselor, and the "fight" referred to in the title is actu-
ally entirely among adults, leaving Juanita with a rather passive role in the story's
main action. What readers will enjoy most are the subplots about Juanita and her
friends, her budding romance, and her attempts to get around her father, a mi-
grant farmworker who wants to raise his children according to strict Mexican ways.
Ms. Martinez's story is of interest in an Up the Down Staircase kind of way, but
readers would probably prefer fewer of her problems ("It had been another one of
those long, stressful mornings") and more about Juanita's love trouble ("I'm glad
when he stops kissing me, 'cause I'm beginning to feel very warm all over. It scares
me"). This is first in a projected series about the teens of Roosevelt High with a
particular focus on Hispanic characters. RS
WANGERIN, WALTER, JR. 
The Cryingfor a Vision. 
Simon, 1994 
279p
ISBN 0-671-79911-8 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 6-10
Moves Walking is a virtual outsider in Slow Buffalo's band; fatherless, and appar-
ently deserted by his mother, the youngster has incurred the wrath of the band's
moody warrior Fire Thunder, who severs his ear in a fit of rage and labels the boy
Atkuku wanice, bastard. But the boy soon discovers he is the offspring of a star and
the mortal woman who once spurned the courtship of Fire Thunder. As the warrior's
growing fury and arrogance explode into a rampage of territorial aggression and
slaughter, Moves Walking acknowledges his messianic mission to sacrifice his own
life to restore the balance of natural relationships Fire Thunder has destroyed. It's
all a bit self-conscious and pretentious, but the yarn itself is exciting and the pseudo-
mythological elements, loosely based on Lakota legends, are meticulously crafted.
True to his hero role, Moves Walking remains a dreamy, remote figure, while the
fully human characters of his aging grandmother, the failing chief Slow Buffalo,
180 
* THE BULLETIN
and the deranged Fire Thunder elicit the readers' empathy. Wangerin's portrayal
of intra- and inter-tribal relations extend the novel's appeal to those whose tastes
run more to historical fiction than to myth or fantasy. An extensive, detailed
glossary of Lakota terms is a welcome addition to this ambitious work. EB
WELCH, SHEILA KELLY 
A Horsefor All Seasons: Collected Stories; illus. by Sandy
Rabinowitz. 
Boyds Mills, 1995 
159p
ISBN 1-56397-415-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
Except for two previously published in Cricket, these twelve horse tales make their
first appearance in this book. Stories of kids and horses include acts of equestrian
heroism, as in "Hand-Me-Down Horse"; wishes of horse acquisition fulfilled, as
in "Mulberry Magic"; and accounts of riding triumphs, as in "Costume Class."
Protagonists include boys and girls, Arabians and Quarter Horses, good riders and
bad, in a variety that adds appeal to the mix. While the plots are predictable and
the tone frequently sentimental, Welch has a good understanding of horses and of
horsey readers who suffer from pony privation. These stories don't have the subtlety
or insight of Jessie Haas' or Lynn Hall's equestrian writing, but they're sweet and
briefly satisfying; genre fans will down 'em like sugar lumps. Small friendly head-
piece sketches precede each story. DS
WELSCH, 
ROGER 
Uncle Smoke Stories: Nehawka Tales of Coyote the
Trickster. 
Knopf, 1994 
91p
ISBN 0-679-85450-9 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
The author's adult book about the fictitious Nehawka tribe has been praised for
spiritual fidelity to the groups on which he based his stories (Welsch has been an
adopted member of the Omaha tribe for twenty-seven years). Perhaps it's the
explanatory context that diminishes this set of four coyote tales, or maybe it's the
confusion attendant to made-up folklore, which is self-contradictory by its very
nature. Following an introduction describing Welsch's own background, each
story is preceded by a framework scenario in which Uncle Smoke appears, with
"news of Coyote," in the Big Belly Lodge. There he's welcomed, fed, and made
comfortable, as readers learn from a combination of dialogue and exposition on
Nehawka customs. It's a tough format to pull off, though the stories themselves
are energetic and neatly patterned ("Where have you been?" asks Coyote's angry
Grandmother after each of his adventures. "Nowhere," answers Coyote. "And
what have you been doing?" she asks. "Nothing"). The trickster himself manages
to be both clever and stupid, true to form, and kids who can manage the three
fictional levels of a tale within a tale within a tale (Coyote, Uncle Smoke, the
Nehawka)-and still keep their bearings on real Native American folklore, which
is being generously published these days (see Bruchac in this issue)-will glean
some cross-cultural insights. BH
WISLER, G. CLIFTON 
Mr. Lincoln's Drummer. Lodestar, 1994 
131p
ISBN 0-525-67463-2 
$14.99 
R 
Gr. 4-8
As enlistment fever sweeps St. Johnsbury, Vermont, men and boys jump at the
opportunity to put the Rebels in their place. Willie Johnston, too young to bear
arms, totes a drum instead for the Third Vermont Infantry Regiment, and for the
first few months of duty, army life is a lark--decent rations, amiable companions,
leisurely drills, and a spiffy uniform. But winter and combat deliver a harsh dose
JANUARY 1995 
* 
181
of reality, as General McClellan's bungled engagements result in a series of re-
treats, and Willie's comrades steadily fall to wounds and disease. So depleted are
the ranks that, at the Union stand at Malvern Hill, Willie is the only regimental
musician who still has a drum to beat assembly, a feat which earns him the Con-
gressional Medal of Honor in 1863. Based on historical accounts of the real Willie
Johnston and his fellow soldiers in Company D, Wisler's tale succinctly docu-
ments the failure of Union strategy early in the Virginia campaign: "We rush
halfway around Virginia so we can surprise the rebs, and then we sit here, wait-
ing." Lively dialogue, vivid battle scenes, unsentimentalized heroism, and a fair
amount of wry humor make this an especially good choice for history-shy readers.
EB
WONG, JANET S. 
Good Luck Gold and Other Poems. 
McEiderry, 1994 
4 2p
ISBN 0-689-50617-1 
$13.95 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
This is a quiet collection of poems from Asian-American points of view; while the
author generally employs the first person, the voices vary in experience, culture,
and opinion. Wong uses free verse, rhymed verse, haiku, and cinquains to address
various subjects: family ("Watch out./ Mad, he snaps/ like a turtle"-from "Dad"),
food ("Noodles for breakfast,/ Noodles for lunch,/ Noodles for dinner,/ Noodles
that crunch"-from "Noodles"), culture ("Smoothing her fingers,/ Popo shows
how, back in China, long ago/ they used to roll young girls' feet"-from "Bound
Feet"), and racism ("Ching ching Chinaman/ Those kids over there/ are laughing
at me./ My hair./ My nose./ My skin"-from "Noise"). While "Bound Feet," for
instance, has a certain pared-down intensity, most of the poems tend toward the
simple and obvious, with playful sounds or dramatic moments but little subtlety.
It's still a pleasing collection understandable to readers of all backgrounds; coupled
with another poetry book such as Arnold Adoffs IAm the Darker Brother or on its
own, it might provoke some interesting classroom consideration. DS
YORINKS, ARTHUR Whitefish Will Rides Again; illus. by Mort Drucker. di Capua/
HarperCollins, 1994 32p
ISBN 0-06-205037-0 
$15.00 
R 6-9 yrs
Whitefish Will is "about the best danged sheriff that ever lived." Will is such an
effective sheriff that all crime disappears from Whitefish, Montana, and the towns-
people therefore pension Will off. Eventually, of course, the town is besieged by
villains and Whitefish Will is recalled, whereupon he routs the bad guys in his own
inimitable way-by playing his godawful harmonica. This is even broader than
Remkiewicz's western spoof The Bone Stranger (BCCB 6/94), with Yorinks' glee-
ful wordplay ("Dash dang dingle darn it, Will was so good at rassling rustlers that
soon there were no more rustlers left to rassle") obviously at home on the range.
Drucker, the famed cartoonist of Mad magazine, employs a palette occasionally
rather clashingly vivid (and dependent on chartreuse accents) but offers entertain-
ingly goofy and sophisticated caricatures of bad guys and townsfolk alike. This is
a natural companion to the Remkiewicz; one might also want to pair it with
McCloskey's Lentil (or even William Steig's latest, reviewed last month) for a har-
monica-themed duet. DS
a0p #
182 
* 
THE BULLETIN
BULLETIN BLUE RIBBONS 1994
Books. In 1994 we saw thousands and reviewed hundreds; this is a list of the ones
we like the best. Some of these titles were asterisked as "books of special distinc-
tion" when we first reviewed them; others slowly, insistently, revealed their dis-
tinction as the year progressed. Are they the year's "best" books? No-that kind
of judgement is best left to each professional (not to mention each child) and his or
her own conscience. Instead these are books that one Bulletin reviewer or another
adored and then managed to make the rest of us love too. And with this particular
ship of fractious fools, that's not easy.
PICTURE BOOKS:
Bernier-Brand, Carmen T., ad. Juan Bobo: Four Folktales from Puerto Rico; illus.
by Ernesto Ramos Nieves. HarperCollins. (July)
Gershator, Phillis, ad. Tukama Tootles the Flute: A Tale from the Antilles; illus. by
Synthia Saint James. Jackson/Orchard. (April)
Han, Suzanne Crowder, ad. The Rabbit's Judgment; illus. by Yumi Heo. Holt.
(May)
Isaacs, Anne. Swamp Angel; illus. by Paul O. Zelinsky. Dutton. (November)
Lester, Alison. My Farm; written and illus. by Alison Lester. Houghton. (July)
Lester, Julius. John Henry; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. Dial. (October)
McDermott, Gerald, ad. Coyote: A Trickster Tale from theAmerican Southwest; ad.
and illus. by Gerald McDermott. Harcourt. (November)
Meddaugh, Susan. Martha Calling; written and illus. by Susan Meddaugh. Hough-
ton. (September)
Moser, Barry. Tucker Pfeffercorn: An Old Story Retold; written and illus. by Barry
Moser. Little. (June)
Priceman, Marjorie. How to Make an Apple Pie and See the World; written and
illus. by Marjorie Priceman. Knopf. (February)
Rathmann, Peggy. Good Night, Gorilla; written and illus. by Peggy Rathmann.
Putnam. (May)
Sabuda, Robert. The Christmas Alphabet; written and illus. by Robert Sabuda.
Orchard. (October)
Winter, Jeanette. The Christmas Tree Ship; written and illus. by Jeanette Winter.
Philomel. (December)
JANUARY 1995 
* 
183
FICTION:
Creech, Sharon. Walk Two Moons. HarperCollins. (January 1995)
Farmer, Nancy. The Ear, the Eye and the Arm. Jackson/Orchard. (March)
Friedman, Carl. Nightfather. Persea. (December)
Hickman, Janet. Jericho. Greenwillow. (November)
Koertge, Ron. Tiger, Tiger, Burning Bright. Kroupa/Orchard. (May)
Lynch, Chris. Gypsy Davey. HarperCollins. (November)
Quattlebaum, Mary. Jackson Jones and the Puddle of Thorns; illus. by Melodye
Rosales. Delacorte. (March)
Reaver, Chap. Bill. Delacorte. (May)
Shoup, Barbara. Wish You Were Here. Hyperion. (November)
Waugh, Sylvia. The Mennyms. Greenwillow. (May)
NONFICTION:
Carlson, Lori M., ed. Cool Salsa: Bilingual Poems on Growing Up Latino in the
United States. Holt. (September)
Davidson, Rosemary. Take a Look: An Introduction to the Experience ofArt. Vi-
king. (February)
Drucker, Malka. The Family Treasury ofJewish Holidays; illus. by Nancy Patz.
Little. (November)
Harris, Robie H. It's Perfectly Normal: A Book about Changing Bodies, Growing
Up, Sex, and Sexual Health; illus. by Michael Emberley. Candlewick. (Octo-
ber)
Kuklin, Susan. From Head to Toe: How a Doll Is Made; written and illus. with
photographs by Susan Kuklin. Hyperion. (May)
Lavies, Bianca. A Gathering of Garter Snakes; written and illus. by Bianca Lavies.
Dutton, 1993. (February)
Lester, Julius, ad. The Last Tales of Uncle Remus; illus. by Jerry Pinkney. Dial.
(February)
Marrin, Albert. Unconditional Surrender: U. S. Grant and the Civil War. Ath-
eneum. (March)
Rosenberg, Maxine B. Hiding to Survive: Stories of ewish Children Rescued from
the Holocaust. Clarion. (July)
Tripp, Nathaniel. Thunderstorm!; illus. by Juan Wijngaard. Dial. (April)
7
184 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
ADVENTURE STORIES: Naylor
African Americans-fiction:
Draper; Krisher
African Americans-stories: Cooke
African Americans: Cooper
AIDS-fiction: Davis
Animals-fiction: Horwood
Anthropology: Getz
Art: Sfs
Asian Americans-poetry: Wong
Babies: Knight
BEDTIME STORIES: Cooke:
Harrison
BIOGRAPHIES: Alexander;
Andronik; Berry; Brown, M.;
Cooper; Marrin
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Davis;
Pfeffer
Brothers and sisters-stories:
Gerrard
Brothers-fiction: Naylor
California-fiction: Snyder
Camp-fiction: Smith
Canada-fiction: Boraks-Nemetz;
Rice
Cats-fiction: Hanel
Child abuse-fiction: Krisher
China-fiction: Russell
Cities-fiction: Sis
Civil rights-fiction: Krisher
Civil War-fiction: Wisler
Civil War: Marrin
CONCEPT BOOKS: Hartman;
MacKinnon
Coyotes-fiction: Welsch
Dance-stories: Gauch
Death-fiction: Creech; Smith
Death: Kuklin
Depression Era-fiction: Snyder
Disasters-fiction: Carter
Dogs-fiction: Carter
Drama: Ross
Eastern Europe-fiction: Dickinson
Egypt-stories: Gerrard
England-fiction: McKay
Ethics and values: Mills; Ruby
FANTASY: Griffin; Horwood;
Lee; Pfeffer; Pinkwater; Regan;
Rice
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Creech
Fear-stories: Harrison
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Bruchac;
Spariosu
Friends-fiction: Mills; Smith
Friends-stories: Gauch
FUNNY STORIES: Agee; Bauer;
McKay; Pinkwater
Georgia-fiction: Krisher
Grandfathers-fiction: Dickinson
Grandmothers-fiction: Russell
Grandparents-fiction: Creech
Guidance: Kuklin
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Boraks-Nemetz; Snyder; Wisler
History, English: Ross
History, U.S.: Andronik;
Hopkins; Levinson; Marrin;
Wisler
Homosexuality-fiction: Davis
Horses-fiction: Welch
JANUARY 1995 
* 
185
Jews-fiction: Boraks-Nemetz
Jews: Brown, T.
Language arts: Agee
Latinos-fiction: Velisquez
Literature, American: Cooper
Literature, children's: Brown, M.;
Horwood
Literature, English: Ross
London-fiction: Danziger
LOVE STORIES: Bauer; Boraks-
Nemetz; Danziger; Kimmel;
Ruby
Maps: Hartman
Monsters-fiction: Regan
Mothers and sons-fiction: Kimmel
Native Americans-fiction: Carter;
Welsch
Native Americans-folklore:
Bruchac
Nature study: Hartman
Oregon-fiction: Kimmel
Parties-stories: Cooke
Photography: Cech
Physical disabilities: Alexander
POETRY: Berry; Gerrard;
Hopkins; Hughes; Livingston;
Rogasky; Wong
Pregnancy, teenage-fiction:
Christiansen
Prejudice-fiction: Ruby
Reading aloud: Hopkins; Low;
Spariosu
Reading, easy: Greenwald; Hanel;
Mills; Pfeffer; Welch
Reading, family:. Cooke; Harrison;
Knight
Reading, reluctant: Agee;
Vel:squez
Romania-folklore: Spariosu
Rural life-fiction: Rice
SCARY STORIES: Low; Rice;
Spariosu
School-fiction: Mills; Pinkwater;
Ruby; Velasquez
Science: Aronson
SHORT STORIES: Welch
Sisters-fiction: Christiansen;
McKay
Stepfamilies-fiction: Griffin
Story hour: Bruchac; Gerrard;
Yorinks
Storytelling-fiction: Welsch
Suicide-fiction: Draper
Suicide: Kuklin
Survival-fiction: Naylor
Toys-stories: Harrison
Uncles-fiction: Christiansen
Vacations-fiction: Danziger
Vacations-stories: Hinel
West, the-stories: Yorinks
Wisconsin-fiction: Carter
Wolves-fiction: Carter; Rice
186 
* THE BULLETIN
STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT AND CIRCULATION
OF THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS (ISSN
0008-9036), as required by 39 U.S. Code 3685.
THE BULLETIN OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS is pub-
lished eleven times a year (monthly except August); annual subscription price is
$35.00 (domestic), $40.00 (foreign).
The owner and publisher is the University of Illinois Press acting for the Graduate
School of Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois, a non-
profit organization. Office of publication is located at 1325 South Oak St., Cham-
paign, IL 61820. The managing editor is Roger Sutton, The Bulletin of the Center
for Children's Books, 1512 N. Fremont, Chicago, IL 60622. There are no stock-
holders, bondholders, mortgages, or other security holders.
The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of this organization and the ex-
empt status for Federal income tax purposes have not changed during the preced-
ing 12 months.
Average number of copies printed per issue (net press run) during the preced-
ing twelve months: 6530; number for single issue nearest filing date: 6572. Av-
erage number of copies of each issue distributed by mail to paid subscribers during
preceding twelve months: 5571; number for single issue nearest to filing date:
5453. Average number of copies distributed for free per issue during preceding 12
months: 72; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 91. Average number of
total copies distributed during preceding 12 months: 5643; number for single
issue nearest to filing date: 5544. Average number of copies of each issue not
distributed (office use, unaccounted, spoiled after printing) during preceding 12
months: 887; number for single issue nearest to filing date: 1028.
I certify that the statements made by me above are correct and complete.
Ann Lowry
Journals Manager, University of Illinois Press
October 1, 1994
*"Perceptive"*
*"Especially moving."t
JERICHO
IANIET HICKMAN
*"Hickman evokes the strong
bonds of family across generational
lines in this haunting coming-of-
age novel. . . . The pages turn over
like rocks on the beach, disclosing
multiple treasures underneath."
-tHorn Book (starred review)
"Understated yet compelling,
the emotional narrative
sweeps readers along ....
An engaging, thought-
provoking novel to absorb
and reflect on."
-School Library Journal
"Perceptive and beautifully
written. . . . A delicate
evocation of two well-spaced
generations."
-Kirkus Reviews
Ages 10 up. 144 pp.
RTE $14.00/0-688-13398-3
*Bulletin of the Center for Children's
Books (starred review)
Greenwillow Books
A division of William Morrow & Co., Inc.
1350 Avenue of the Americas New York NY 10019
-
Starred in ALA Booklist and Publishers Weekly
THE SEQUEL TO THE NEWBERY MEDAL-WINNING
JULIE OF THE WOLVES
qULIE
C 
JEAN CRAIGHEAD GEORGE
ILLUSTRATED BY WENDELL MINOR
As they close in on her family's herd of musk-oxen, Julie-now
reunited with her father and his new non-Eskimo wife-vows to
save from certain death the wolves who protected her on the
tundra. Picking up "precisely where Julie of the Wolves ends,
Julie must find her own path between the Eskimo ways she loves
htA 
4-1, 
A 
I... 1, -- 
; -, , 
. .A 
-
-41-, 
d-, 
d. 
-A
aCll1 
Lle I 
rIIout woI l
An unusually fine sec
"The magnificent wild
is again vividly exploi
sequel." -Publishers V
"This is that rare thing,
worthy of its original.'
-The Bulletin of the C
for Children's Books
Ages 10 up.
$15.00TR (0-06-023528-4
$14.89LB (0-06-023529-2
Also available
from HarperCollins
JULIE OF THE WOLVI
Winner, 1973 Newbery Medi
Notable Children's Books
of 1971-75 (ALA)
Ages 10 up.
$15.00TR (0-06-021943-2)
$14.89LB (0-06-021944-0)
$3.95PB (0-06-440058-1)
For a free Jean Craighea(
biographical brochure wr
L HarperCollinsChildr
10 East 53rd Street, New York
Two DELIGHTFUL NEW BOOKS
by VIRGINIA KROLL
Pink Paper Swans
Written by Virginia Kroll
Illustrated by Nancy L. Clouse
"Kroll's story of an interracial,
intergenerational friendship comes
alive in Clouse's full-color, cut-paper
collages.... An absolute delight that
will catch kids' eyes and spark their
imaginations."
imaginations." 
Booklist, boxed review
"Clouse's collage illustrations glow
with colors and patterns of origami
paper." 
-
School Library Journal
"Kroll's story... is gentle and
affecting." 
-
Publishers Weekly
Ages 5-8 * Illustrated
* 8V2"x 10/2" 
32 pages
* ISBN 0-8028-5081-2
Stuck-Like-Glue Friends
Written by Virginia Kroll
Illustrated by Rose Rosely
This enchanting picture book
presents the many-faceted theme of
friendship with bouncy lyrics that
will hold kids captive from cover to
cover. Featuring zany, colorful
gouache illustrations that teach the
value of friendship by showing kids
of all ages interacting together in
playful settings, this inviting book
will delight youngsters and their
parents again and again.
Ages 3-5 * Illustrated
* 10"x 9" * 32 pages
* ISBN 0-8028-5085-5
* Cloth
* $14.99
*Cloth 
To order, call 800-253-7521 FAX 616-459-6540
$14.99 
M 
WM. B. EERDMANS PUBLISHING CO.
486 A 
255 JEFFERSON AVE. S.E. / GRAND RAPIDS, MICHIGAN 49503
1 S, 
Starred in The Bulletin 
Highlighted in ALA Booklist
a nd .crhnnl 
.ihrnriv .lnrnnl
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
I
Chris Lynch's other YA novels
ICEMAN
$15.00TR (0-06-023340-0) $14.89LB (0-06-023341-9)
SHADOW BOXER
A 1994 ALA Best Book for Young Adults
A 1994 ALA Recommended Book for Reluctant Young Adult Readers
$14.00TR (0-06-023027-4) $13.89LB (0-06-023028-2)
_ 
I 
I II 
I 
FI 
-
-L- 
-- 
--il~C--···-
*Kirkus Reviews pointer
Stranded
--
at-
Plimoth
Plantation
.-1626-
words and woodcuts by
Gary Bowen
Introduction by
David Freeman Hawke
SHarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
_ 
__ 
__
"In this beautifully illustrated work,
Bowen provides a well-researched,
fictional diary of a young Plimoth
settler named Christopher Sears,
who documents the trials and
tribulations of the year 1626. His
diary is decorated with woodcuts
... rich, powerful images inked
with colors suitable to the time."
-ALA Booklist
"An enthralling account ....
Bowen's reputation rests secure
as the crafter of scrupulously
researched, beautifully illustrated
stories."--Kirkus Reviews
"Will be widely used and enjoyed
for many years to come."
-The Horn Book
Ages 8-12. $19.95TR (0-06-022541-6)
1iq 8~T R (nnf-_n99,a49 _
i-"- The Horn Book stars"a triumph."
The ANNOTATED
CHARLOTTE'S WEB
by E. B.WHITE
Pictures by GARTH WILLIAMS
Introduction and Notes 6y PETER F. NEUMEYER
"If Charlotte's Web
is E. B. White's
masterpiece, then
surely The Annotated
Charlotte's Web is
Peter Neumeyer's.
It is at once readable
and scholarly...
as handsome as
it is informative.
Neumeyer's intro-
duction is incisive
and telling, a superb
combination of
biographical detail
and critical analysis
which ably prepares
the reader for the
detailed, page-by-
page examination
[of Charlotte's Web]
which follows. An
illumination as well
as an examination,
the book is fasci-
nating to read, difficult
to nut as~idp It is an
invitation to a feast!"-The Horn Book. "Adult fans of
Charlotte's Web, teachers, and librarians are in store for a treat."
-ALA Journal of Youth Services in Libraries
$35.00TR (0-06-024387-2)
i HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York 10022
* "Stunnming...Myers brings to life an entire history of
a people.. .A must read for absolutely everyone."
--Kirhus, pointed review
*r "Emotionally charged...Readers will come away from
this novel with a more profound understanding of the past."
-
Publishers Weekly, starred review
'Roots for young adults... beautifully written, powerful."
-- School Library Journal
"Myers allows the reader to vicariously touch the soul
of this strong, vibrant family." 
-
Voice of Youth Advocates
0-590-45897-3 
Ages 10-up 
$14.95
University of Illinois Prss 
SECOND CUSS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A. 
CHAMPAIGN, IL
RrruRN POSTAGE GUARANTEED
Ninety-nine
More Maggots,
Mites, and
Munchers
MAY R. BERENBAUM
Illustrated by John Porker Sherrod
Combining a naturalist's keen observation of the
with witty wordplay and amazing anecdotes, Be
has provided a uniquely Informative and enterti
book. "May Berenbaum has again shed a warr
on a part of the animal world that Is usually oi
circle of understanding." -
Bayard Webster, ret
York Times science writer and freelance nature '
Illus. Cloth $32.50; Paper, $12.95
Order toll free 800/545-4703
* 
5· 
4 
:
^ 
-' 
'*
¸
7
*
University of Iinoi Pes -IiS 
,1- 3t(U. -Chmpig, 
[ 
1,l
.10 
A:<
0,
.It 
0
