I L 
I NO
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
i-- 
-
I 
.
....*^ **i9 
.,,:,* ..y v fc --' .'*' 
''M
' Starred in Kirkus Reviews and School Library Journal
Terry Pratchett
THE AMAZING MAURICEAND
"HI EDUCATED RODENTS
The Pied Piper of... Discworld?
A talking cat named Maurice, intelligent rats, and a strange boy
cooperate in a Pied Piper scam until they try to con the wrong town
and are confronted by a deadly evil rat king.
^ 
"In this laugh-out-loud fantasy, his first 'Discworld' novel for younger
readers, Pratchett rethinks a classic story and comes up with a winner...
A not-to-be-missed delight." 
-Starred 
review I School Library journal
-
"Pratchett hasn't blunted his wickedly funny pen for younger readers.
[But] a lot is packed in amidst the humor: ruminations on good and evil,
dreaming and doing, leadership and compromise. Excruciatingly funny,
ferociously intelligent." 
-Starred 
review / Kirkus Reviews
Ages 12 up. $16.95 
Tr (0-06-001233-1);
$16.89 Lb (0-06-001234-X) 
1_
THE
BULLETIN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
March 2002
Vol. 55 No. 7
A LOOK INSIDE
231 THE BIG PICTURE
Bronx Masquerade by Nikki Grimes
232 NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
233 
* The Big Cheese of Third Street by Laurie Halse Anderson; illus. by David
Gordon
246 * Stoner and Spaz by Ron Koertge
249 * Walt Whitman: A Biography by Milton Meltzer
252 * The Frogs Wore Red Suspenders by Jack Prelutsky; illus. by Petra Mathers
255 * Island Boyz: Short Stories by Graham Salisbury
262 * Hush by Jacqueline Woodson
263 
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 2002
265 SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Publications Office of the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and distributed by the University of Illinois Press,
1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor (JMD)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Jeannette M. Hulick (JMH)
Fern Kory, Reviewer (FK)
Kate McDowell, Reviewer (KM)
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
OFFICE STAFF
Sabrina Austin
Jennifer DeBaillie
Natalie Hoyle
Jeannette Hulick
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $66.00; individuals, $50.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $5.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road,
Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson Associates, P.O.
Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to the University of
Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new address.
Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, University of
Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
All inquiries about subscriptions and advertising should go to University of Illinois Press, 1325 S.
Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903, 217-333-0950.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The
Bulletin ofthe Center for Children's Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email:
bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/pubofflbccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 2002 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Christopher Myers from Bronx Masquerade ©2002. Used by permission of
Dial Books.
MARCH 2002 
* 
231
THE BIG PICTURE
Bronx Masquerade
by Nikki Grimes
Young adults exist in an in-between kind of space: they are not completely adult
yet they are often mature; they are aware of the world yet they don't always see
themselves as part of it; they shield themselves within self-forged armor yet they
are capable of risky compassion. Conveying this liminality can be a difficult liter-
ary challenge: sometimes a young adult protagonist's voice is too naive, too shel-
tered to be believable; sometimes the adult author's own voice takes over, and
suddenly the adolescent voice is too informed, or too arch. Grimes' novel balances
gracefully on the tightrope of young adult characterization, and the result is a class
of student poets easy to believe and difficult to forget.
In Grimes' ambitious choir of character voices, members of a high-school
English class write poems and read them aloud in Friday Open Mikes. Eighteen
students-boys and girls, black and white, Latino and mixed-at a Bronx high
school each talk about their lives in a brief chapter of prose and a relevant poem.
They examine the public lives of others as well as their own private existences,
often commenting on perceived public personae in the prose and then using the
poems to hold the mirror up to truth. In poetic forms ranging from free verse to
rap, the students expose their emotional throats: Chankara describes her feelings
upon seeing the bruise her older sister's boyfriend has left on her cheek ("'I bruise
easily'/ is one of the lies/ she sprinkles like sugar./ But I'm fifteen,/ not brainless.
Besides,/ I knew the truth at ten"); Ramon witnesses his mother's unsung courage
("Mami's beauty is better than a movie star's. It survives a kind of life where
pamper is a noun, not a verb").
The novel is not without flaws: Grimes tips her adult hand in an anach-
ronistic reference to Richard Nixon in an improvised rap, and the resultant toler-
ance that develops among the classmates after a semester of self-revelatory poetry
smacks a bit ofwishful optimism. Generally, though, authenticity prevails. Grimes
writes the poems of her young adult characters the way young adults would write
them, each poem true to that hard-to-capture young adult voice, each poem strik-
ing just the right chord between self-restraint and raw emotion.
Some characters write to escape psychic pain: "at the center of loneli-
ness/ we dip into a pool/ of tears/ and thrash around/ desperate not to drown"
("Common Ground"); "One day at Far Rockaway/ is all it took./ One look at
rocks in water/ decided me:/ I want to be stone./ I want to be marble./ Dressed
up in limestone/ never looked so good" ("Ode to Stone"). Other characters seek
to escape limits imposed upon them by their bodies, their gender, their peers, as in
the title poem by public jock/secret poet Devon Hope: "I woke up this morning/
exhausted from hiding/ the me of me/ so I stand here confiding/ there's more to
Devon/ than jump shot and rim./ I'm more than tall/ and lengthy of limb./ I dare
232 
* THE BULLETIN
you to peep/ behind these eyes,/ discover the poet/ in tough guy disguise./ Don't
call me Jump Shot./ My name is Surprise" ("Bronx Masquerade").
Grimes' novel is a surprise, too. Her character sketches, seemingly only
loosely connected, accumulate to powerful emotional effect. In the end, the stu-
dents' poetry and the prose reveals a community of young adults full of promise,
whose voices, although individual and distinct, ultimately meld together in blended
but discernible harmonies. (Imprint information appears on p. 240.)
Janice M. Del Negro, Contributing Editor
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ALMOND, DAVID 
Counting Stars. 
Delacorte, 2002 
[17 6p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90034-1 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72946-4 $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 8-10
In this collection of eighteen short stories Almond revisits episodes from his child-
hood, merging "memory and dream, the real and the imagined, truth and lies."
Readers familiar with his other offerings (Skellig, BCCB 3/99, et al.) will probably
find this shift in genre, with its autobiographical overtones, less of a departure
from his novels than they may expect. Somber mood and ethereal atmosphere
again overshadow plot, and although each story may carry its own internal logic,
wild leaps forward and backward in time result in a fractured view of events that
some readers may view as dreamlike and others dismiss as random or incoherent.
Almond creates a milieu similar to Robert Cormier's fictional Monument, in which
adolescents become privy to dark secrets roiling behind the neighbors' doors; here
a bereaved mother keeps her miscarried fetus in a jar, pilgrims to Lourdes take
sexual advantage of a retarded epileptic teen, and playmates writhe under shameful
burdens of abandonment and bastardy. A thread consistently connecting the dis-
parate tales is the narrator's attempts to reconcile his growing knowledge with the
rigid, pre-Vatican II catechism that has informed his world view. The struggle,
though, doesn't play out in childhood terms, instead being viewed through a lens
of embittered adulthood: "I soon saw through this subterfuge: the attempts of an
old Irish priest to stifle the liberating effects that education might have on our
minds, to keep us in a state of obeisance and fright before his worn-out religion."
Middle-graders newly captivated by the airy imagery of Skellig probably won't be
quite up to this yet, but older readers prepared to ponder darker dreams will follow
where Almond pipes them. EB
I
MARCH 2002 
* 
233
ANDERSON, 
LAURIE HALSE The Big Cheese of Third Street; illus. by David
Gordon. Simon, 2002 [32p]
ISBN 0-689-82464-5 $16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-7 yrs
Third Street is the home of the Big Antonellis and their Big Friends ("Bus-sized
women. Skyscraper-sized men. Kids taller than streetlights"), so Little Benny, "no
bigger than a peanut butter sandwich," is at rather a disadvantage. He's the ball in
games of keep-away, the minnow in games of shark, and the eluder of big kids at
every step ("He shinnied up street signs. He crawled up fire escapes. He climbed
fences and trees, drainpipes and telephone poles"). Come the Third Street block
party, the Sorensons of Second Street crash the party and challenge the Antonellis
to the pole climb, the first one to the top of the slippery structure to win the cheese
at the top. "Not one Antonelli or Sorenson could reach it" until Little Benny
confounds expectation by putting his long experience to work, clambering to the
top of the pole, and victoriously seizing the cheese, earning himself the nickname
"The Big Cheese of Third Street." Yeah, okay, it's no surprise that the pipsqueak
is victorious, but as the text says, "Geeeesh, what did you think this story was
about?" This is a spirited interpretation of the real feelings of little kids in the face
of the behemoth older kids and grownups, and it's also got some of the folkloric
pleasures of Momotaro and other teeny little super guys. Anderson is wryly witty
and particularly inventive with the details of Benny's ignominy ("His worst sister
pinned him to the clothesline along with the Big Antonelli underpants"). Gordon's
cell vinyl and pencil art has the rich fresco-y solidity of Will Hillenbrand's early
material; he appropriately exploits perspective to the hilt, with buildings and fam-
ily towering over Little Benny as he scuttles resentfully through a highly disre-
spectful world and the city spread out beneath him as he rises above his friends and
family. Every kid's smaller than somebody, and they'll all take heart from the
victory of Benny the formerly downtrodden. DS
ANNE 
FRANK 
HOUSE, comp. 
Anne Frank in the World. 
Knopf,
2001 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-9177-4 
$20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81177-X 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
This photographic compilation presents page after page of photographs of Anne
Frank and the world she inhabited during the terrible times of World War II,
accompanied by brief text that situates the photographs in the context of the war.
Because they are compiled from a wide variety of sources, the pictures vary widely
in sharpness of focus, quality of composition, and clarity of subject matter. Nev-
ertheless, there are many vivid images here, and young readers who have already
been introduced to Anne's diary may find this volume an enlightening pictorial
supplement to the characters and history with which they are already familiar.
Unfortunately, the text gives only basic descriptions of events and people as an
accompaniment to the photographs rather than an informative look at Anne's life
and times, and both newly interested readers and report writers will be disap-
pointed. Although libraries specializing in Holocaust materials may want to pur-
chase this as a visual supplement to their other books about Anne Frank, most
readers will find all they need in volumes such as van der Rol's Anne Frank: Beyond
the Diary (BCCB 11/93). KM
234 
* THE BULLETIN
AUCH, MARY JANE 
The Princess and the Pizza; written and illus. by Mary Jane and
Herm Auch. 
Holiday House, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8234-1683-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-9 yrs
Princess Paulina, relegated to a "humble shack" ever since her father gave up his
throne to become a woodcarver, misses princessing (walking peacocks, surveying
the kingdom, doing the princess wave, etc.). When word gets out that Queen
Zelda is seeking a "true princess" to marry her son, Drupert, Paulina figures this is
her chance. She "rummaged through her trunk of ex-princess stuff, brushed the
wood shavings from her best ball gown, and blew away the bits of sawdust that
clung to her diamond tiara" and sets out for the palace. The competition (twelve
other princesses) falls to the princess-and-the-pea trick ("Oh, for Pete's sake....
That's so once-upon-a-time"), and the glass-slipper test (" . .. you never heard of
sneakers?"). The final test is a cooking contest, but circumstances leave Paulina
with nothing but "flour, yeast, water, three overripe tomatoes and a hunk of stale
cheese." Cooking for her life, she puts everything together and bakes the winning
dish-pizza. Auch and Auch carry off this funny fractured fairy tale with style,
complete with an unexpected conclusion that's as satisfying as a slice with every-
thing on it (Paulina dumps Drupert and returns home to open Paulina's Pizza
Palace, doing the princess wave from her pizza delivery cart). The storytelling is
quick, the jokes are funny, and the pastiche of princess particulars is winning with-
out being coy. The illustrations have a Shrek-like clumsy perfection that makes
them just a touch too cartoony to be pretty, and the caricatured faces suit the
parodic nature of the piece. More than just a pretty face, Princess Paulina is a deep
dish who realizes that making a successful business is more satisfying than making
an aristocratic marriage. Invite this princess to your next pizza party. JMD
BANKS, JACQUELINE TURNER 
A Day for Vincent Chin and Me. 
Houghton,
2001 
119p
ISBN 0-618-13199-X 
$15.00 
R Gr. 4-6
Tommy's a keep-your-head-down guy, so when his mother announces she is orga-
nizing a political event commemorating Vincent Chin, the twelve-year-old resents
the fact that now he and his family will be seen as Plank, Kentucky's "Japanese
Americans with Attitude." Already uncomfortably self-conscious when a teacher
gives his classmates background information about Chin (a Chinese American who
was beaten to death in Detroit in 1982 by two drunks who blamed Japan for a
downturn in the car industry), he wonders how his African-American friends "man-
aged to sit through so many lessons about slavery and the underground railroad
without wanting to dig a hole to crawl into." Tommy slowly works through his
anxieties about the family's safety and identity by focusing on a project that feels
closer to home: he and his friends secretly construct a speed bump in front of his
house in response to a near-miss involving a deaf neighbor and a speeding car, and
follow the example of Tommy's mother by using the media to call attention to
their concerns. These parallel acts of age-appropriate activism are played out in
realistic detail, giving readers a chance to think through both abstract and practical
issues in the contexts of their own grass roots: school and family. While betraying
some telltale purposiveness, Tommy's well-paced narration offers a multifaceted
experience, and readers will enjoy re-encountering "the Posse" from Banks' previ-
ous novels (Egg-Drop Blues, BCCB 5/95, etc.). Thought-provoking but not pushy,
this should resonate with a variety of readers. FK
MARCH 2002 
* 235
BONNING, TONY, ad. 
Fox Tale Soup; illus. by Sally Hobson. 
Simon, 2002 
26p
ISBN 0-689-84900-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
A traveling fox stops at a prosperous farm and asks the barnyard denizens, "Can
you spare a little food for a hungry traveler?" The animals refuse him; only the
sheep, "who was slightly kinder than the others," brings him some water in a bucket.
Fox lights a fire, takes a pot from his backpack, adds the water to the pot, and,
when the water is boiling, drops in a stone to make soup. Those familiar with the
traditional tale of stone soup will recognize this story (despite its absence of source
note), but they may wonder at the faulty logic of its anthropomorphism: the farm
animals have varying degrees of human agility (Goat carries his offering of cabbage
on his horns while the hens hold bowls of corn in their wings; Fox uses a spoon to
eat his soup, while everyone else eats out of a bowl), and the juxtaposition of Fox
with the domestic animals that are his natural prey is odd. Wee listeners may find
the simplified story enough to hold them, however. Hobson's figures have a Jack
Kent-like openness in their cartoony forms and dot-eyed expressiveness, but while
Kent's figures sometimes float on the white page, Hobson's are securely anchored
to the color-saturated, mostly grass-green backgrounds. This would make a ser-
viceable flannelboard story for younger children; teachers may also find it useful
for assignments in comparing and contrasting different versions of the same folk-
tale. JMD
BOWEN, NANCY 
Ralph Nader: Man with a Mission. Twenty-First Century
Books, 2002 
14 4p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-2365-1 
$24.90 
R 
Gr. 7-10
While Nader's profile is somewhat lower since the 2000 elections (a fact that the
book discusses), he's still a significant figure both on the current political scene
and in the development of consumer legislation. Bowen traces Nader's own devel-
opment from his youth in his civic-minded Lebanese-American family to his early
against-the-popular-grain inclination towards public interest law and his blossom-
ing, in the 1960s and '70s, into America's foremost consumer advocate. The book
then explores Nader's subsequent dip in prominence and return to the forefront in
the 1990s with his move into presidential candidacy. Material here comes not just
from earlier Nader biographies but also from current periodicals and sites and
from interviews with Nader, his sister, and friends, which results in a compact but
insightful chronicle of this unusual life. While the approach is somewhat adula-
tory (Nader's judgment is never treated as anything but infallible, so it's particu-
larly ironic that the photograph ofNader watching an air-bag demonstration displays
an air-bag configuration now considered unsafe), there's enough detail and depth
here to make this a strong biography nonetheless, useful for readers interested in
legislation and consumer-protection issues as well as the man himself. Black-and-
white photos are sparsely scattered, but they provide a view of the man at various
stages in his career; end matter includes a timeline, source notes, books and web-
sites for further information, and an index. DS
BRETT, JAN 
Daisy Comes Home; written and illus. by Jan Brett. 
Putnam,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23618-X 
$16.99 
R 5-8 yrs
A small hen named Daisy, driven from her roost by pushy chicken companions,
takes refuge in a basket sitting on the river bank. Rain causes the river to rise, and
236 
* THE BULLETIN
the unsuspecting sleeping hen floats off downriver. She bumps into various things
on her voyage-a houseboat with a barking dog, a water buffalo, monkeys in a
banyan tree, and finally a fisherman, who scoops her up to sell at the market.
Meanwhile, back at the roost, Daisy's owner Mei Mei has discovered her absence.
At the market, a friend alerts Mei Mei to the presence of her hen at the fisherman's
stall; the girl goes to retrieve Daisy, but "finders, keepers," the fisherman growls.
Fortunately, a hen call from Mei Mei ("Gu-gu-gu-gu-gu!") causes Daisy to run
"toward her friend Mei Mei as fast as her legs could go," and the two return home.
Daisy's voyage on the river has toughened her up, however, and she claims her
rightful place in the roost. Brett's story, inspired by Flack's The Story of Ping and
a recent trip to China, is suspenseful and the girl-hen reunion satisfying. The
watercolor and gouache compositions (with airbrushed backgrounds by Joseph
Hearne) are sometimes crowded, but their intricate detail invites perusal, with
inserts offering views of peripheral events as the main plot unfolds across the spreads.
The humans are stiff and ungainly, but the varied indigenous fauna are personable
without being overly anthropomorphized, and the hens are a perky brood with
fluffy feathers that communicate their flustery feelings. This will lend itself easily
to reading aloud and storytelling to preschoolers and primary graders. JMD
BRUCHAC, JOSEPH 
Navajo Long Walk: The Tragic Story ofa Proud People's Forced
March from Their Homeland; illus. by Shonto Begay. 
National Geographic,
2002 
[4 8p]
ISBN 0-7922-7058-4 
$18.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
In the 1860s, thousands of Navajo were forced to relocate from their sacred land
in western New Mexico to the Bosque Redondo Reservation hundreds of miles to
the east; the story of that relocation is recounted here through text fiercely sympa-
thetic to the Indians' plight and through a gallery of metaphor-rich paintings ren-
dered in powerful jabs and swirls of densely applied acrylics. Bruchac and Begay's
intensely personal bond of empathy with the Navajo victims is manifested in their
emotionally charged prose and picture captioning: "Carson's armies were cutting
through the heart of Dinetah like a sharp blade through corn. All of the Navajos'
old enemies were against them. There was no place to hide"; "I can feel the cold
chill in the bones of these battered and subdued people living on the brink of
nonexistence." This passion alone, however, cannot entirely satisfy readers who
may desire a contextually longer view of cultural collision or require more back-
ground than underexplained references such as "The United States had just fought
a one-sided war with Mexico," or "the Dine Ana'i, or Enemy Navajos ... were led
by an ambitious, intelligent, and ruthless Navajo man named Antonio Sandoval."
No source notes or list to guide further reading are provided, and direct quotes are
uncited. This therefore falls short as history, but it will still serve as a compelling
look at a piece of America's past. EB
CHILD, LAUREN 
What Planet Are You From, Clarice Bean?; written and illus. by
Lauren Child. 
Candlewick, 2001 
30p
ISBN 0-7636-1696-6 
$16.99 
Ad 
7-10yrs
Clarice Bean (from Clarice Bean: Guess Who's Babysitting?, BCCB 4/01) has been
partnered with Robert Granger for a class project on "The Environment" ("which
is nature, really"). She is not pleased, since she doesn't want to partner with Rob-
MARCH 2002 
* 
237
ert, and she doesn't want to do a project on "who can walk faster: a snail or a
worm?" Thoughts of Robert and worms are driven from her head, however, by
the anxiety of her brother, Kurt, who is in a tizzy over municipal plans to cut down
his favorite tree. A protest ensues, with Kurt, his grandfather, and his friend Morten
camping out beneath the branches of the old tree. Clarice and cousin Noah (and
Clarice's "squirty younger brother" Minal) make signs ("Free the Tree") for the
protest, and eventually the entire family (plus Robert Granger) wind up in the
branches of the tree in time to get their picture in the local paper; Clarice then
produces a science report about trees, recycling, and oxygen instead of the respec-
tive speed of worms and snails. The mixed-media images are a combination of
photo-collage and line drawings, and while the compositions are haphazard and
disorganized, they teem with an energy that suits Ms. Bean's running first-person
narrative. The text is as haphazard as the compositions, with an approach more
rambling than spontaneously pell-mell and an overfussy multiplicity of fonts.
Clarice has a strong (if not formidable) narrative voice, however, and her storytell-
ing is attention-getting if not always organized. 
Fans may close this book and
head for the ecowarrior recruitment office, since Clarice makes it all seem like such
fun. JMD
CLEMENTS, ANDREW 
The Jacket. Simon, 2002 
[80p]
ISBN 0-689-82595-1 
$12.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-5
When Phil sees a black classmate wearing his brother's jacket, he immediately
accuses the classmate, Daniel, of stealing the jacket, thereby starting a fight. How-
ever, as the school principal investigates the altercation, it becomes clear to Phil
that his own mother gave the jacket to Daniel's grandmother, who works for Phil's
family as a cleaning lady. Although Phil relents and drops his claim to the jacket,
Daniel is offended by the entire exchange and refuses to speak to Phil. Phil comes
to understand that his accusation was based on prejudicial thinking, and that in
fact there are many examples of subtle prejudice in his school, among his friends,
and even in his own home. Clements' characteristically light narrative tone isn't
always successful in dealing with the many heavy issues in the short space of eighty
pages. Phil's thought processes occupy much of the book, and his wonderings
often seem more mechanical than heartfelt (Phil exclaims to himself: "I've known
tons of black kids all my life, and I never knew they could live in houses and
neighborhoods just like mine!"); the book is also strangely silent on the equally
relevant issue of class. Despite these shortcomings, the novel does offer early chap-
ter book readers a well-meaning story about some important ethical issues in an
accessible format. KM
CURLEE, LYNN 
Seven Wonders of the Ancient World; written and illus. by Lynn
Curlee. 
Atheneum, 2002 
40p
ISBN 0-689-83182-X 
$17.00 
R Gr. 4-7
Curlee's recent forays into monumental architecture have remained close to home
(Rushmore, BCCB 3/99, Liberty, 5/00, Brooklyn Bridge, 6/01), but now he ven-
tures across time and two continents to consider extant descriptions of the Seven
Wonders (those from the widely accepted sixteenth-century list) and make some
educated guesses about their appearance and construction. Each structure receives
two pages of text-remarkably informative despite the brevity-and two full-page
238 
* THE BULLETIN
renderings in Curlee's coolly polished, flat-planed signature style. The hypostyle
depiction of the Artemis' Temple at Ephesus does not precisely match the text
(nor does the second view of the same temple clearly correlate with the first), and
space devoted to an anglicized pharaoh, love-struck Babylonians Nebuchadrezzar
and his wife, and a team of sprinting Olympians might have been better used for
what Curlee portrays best, majestic architecture. Still, this is a perennially popular
topic, and readers acquainted with his previous titles can trust that Curlee will do
the subject credit. EB
DEPAOLA, TOMIE 
What a Year; written and illus. by Tomie dePaola. 
Putnam,
2002 
[8 0p]
ISBN 0-399-23797-6 
$13.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad Gr. 2-4
The fourth entry in Tomie dePaola's cumulative autobiography covers four months
in 1940, the year he turned six. The high points of an eventful autumn (celebrat-
ing a birthday, dressing up as Snow White for Halloween, suffering through chicken
pox, acting a key role in the school Christmas play, staying up on New Year's Eve)
crowd the pages of this densely packed little book. Unlike the earliest entries in
this series (26 Fairmount Avenue, BCCB 6/99 and Here WeAllAre, 9/00), which
emphasized the child's point of view, this title leans more toward adult nostalgia
than childlike reminiscence; the multitudinous retrospective details also slow the
narrative. Beneath those details, however, are moments with which many young
listeners will empathize, and fans of earlier entries in the series are older now and
perhaps more willing to wade through the reminiscence to get to the holiday high
ground. Black-and-white illustrations on nearly every page are sometimes overly
sweet, but they evince dePaola's traditional chipper charm. JMD
EMMETT, JONATHAN 
Dinosaurs After Dark; illus. by Curtis Jobling. 
Golden,
2002 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-307-41179-6 
$14.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
3-5 yrs
Bobby can't sleep, so he gets up and takes a look out the window, where he sees "a
huge enormous dinosaur!" He follows the critter and its prehistoric friends to the
city square, where they threaten to eat him unless he promises not to tell about
their existence; he promises, and they let him join in the fun. The story echoes
Where the Wild Things Are (and Bernard Most's Ifthe Dinosaurs Came Back) a little
too closely, and the text's attempts to capture a similar sense of poetic playfulness
are marred by overly purposeful rhymes at ends of phrases ("sliding down the
rooftops above the city hall,/climbing up the office blocks, then jumping off them
all"), which tend to break up the otherwise engaging narrative rhythm. Bobby and
the dinosaurs are drawn with sturdy lines which gleefully burst out of the frame
from time to time, and the mottled textures of both the biggest green dinosaur and
Bobby's robe will have young viewers reaching to pet the pages. While the dino-
saurs' voracity may disconcert a few youngsters (they do threaten twice to eat Bobby),
most will be ready to join the romp, and all will be reassured by seeing the big
green dinosaur carry Bobby tenderly to bed. There's nothing particularly original
about this simple nighttime adventure, but the youngest dinosaur fans won't mind
a bit. KM
MARCH 2002 
* 239
FLEMING, CANDACE 
Muncha! Muncha! Muncha!; illus. by G. Brian
Karas. 
Schwartz/Atheneum, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83152-8 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Poor Mr. McGreely: after years of waiting, he's finally planted a vegetable garden,
only to discover that it's also an irresistible lure for "three hungry bunnies"
("Muncha! Muncha! Muncha!"). In a move many gardeners will recognize, he
fights back, but night after night the clever rabbits get around all his obstacles,
leaping over the wire fence, digging under the wooden fence, and swimming through
his moat. The now-enraged Mr. McG. seals the place off like a prison yard with
concrete blocks, wire, and padlock, which finally stops the critters-until they
find the weak spot in his arrangement. Fleming's text is lilting and deftly paced,
with sound effects (the marauding rabbits creep towards the garden with a "Tippy-
tippy-tippy,/ Pat!") strategically and enjoyably employed; the revenge-of-Peter-
Rabbit plot (is Mr. McGreely a cousin of Mr. MacGregor?) will satisfy youngsters
always ready to root for the critters against the grownup. Karas' mixed-media
(gouache, acrylic, and pencil) illustrations offer a cornucopia of plot-enriching
details. The perky-eared rabbits secretly spy on all Mr. McG.'s labor (viewers will
get a kick out of finding the fetching trio tucked into various spreads), and their
final cunning solution-to sneak into the basket the gardener himself carries in-
is strictly a visual joke. While the rabbits are nattily attired in sweaters, they're
otherwise pretty authentically rabbity, and this is close enough to reality for any
kids in touch with backyard agriculture to get the joke on more than one level. DS
FRANK, E. R. America. Jackson/Atheneum, 2002 
[256p]
ISBN 0-689-84729-7 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
At fifteen, America finds himself in a psychiatric hospital after a lifetime of adver-
sity and abuse. At first he's largely silent, resisting his therapist, Dr. B., but he
begins to mentally explore and finally share his past: his rejection by his adoptive
family, his informal placement with his adored Mrs. Harper and her brother, Brown-
ing; his return to his mother's care, resulting in his fending for himself with his
half-brothers for years; his return to Mrs. Harper's, now a troubled young man,
anguished further by Browning's shift from protector to sexual abuser; his flight
from there and several-step bounce through the system that finally brought him to
the hospital. As his past unfolds, it becomes clear his present offers him the possi-
bility for change but that he's deeply conflicted about this possibility, unsure of
Dr. B.'s trustworthiness and his own value after a life wherein he's been persis-
tently devalued. This is a dramatic and heart-tugging story, all the more appealing
for its rescue-fantasy satisfactions. Frank wisely avoids too much symbolic empha-
sis on the identity of America, the mixed-race child who's everybody's alien,
everybody's victim, and possibly everybody's problem. Instead, she focuses on his
struggle to create a coherent, solid self out of his fragmented past, making him less
a distinct personality than a resonant, anguished voice simultaneously seeking and
dreading a self to be and someone with whom to connect ("You spend a whole life
wanting real bad for someone to find you. But then when they do, you wish they
would just leave your ass alone"). Though Dr. B. is a tad on the saintly side, the
therapy sessions are narratively and emotionally effective as they offer clues to
America's turmoil and interleave with flashbacks of his past. There's some of the
240 
* THE BULLETIN
compulsive magnetism of I Never Promised You a Rose Garden here, so this is just
right for readers drawn to gripping tales of recovery. DS
GAY, MARIE-LOUISE 
Stella, Fairy ofthe Forest; written and illus. by Marie-Louise
Gay. 
Groundwood, 2002 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-88899-448-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-7 yrs
Stella (from Stella, Star of the Sea, BCCB 5/99, and Stella, Queen of the Snow, 1/
01) is back. This time she and her brother Sam are in search of fairies, and to that
end they go for a walk in the woods. Stella is as generous with her wisdom as ever,
but Sam, grown up some since his last literary foray with his big sister, now has
quite a bit to say himself: "'Do butterflies eat butter?' asked Sam. 'Yellow butter-
flies do,' said Stella. 'Then I guess blue butterflies eat pieces of the sky,' said Sam.
'How do you know that?' asked Stella. 'I know a lot of things,' said Sam." In a
dialogue ripe for a two-person readaloud, brother and sister talk back and forth in
fact and fancy, commenting on the woodland wonders and emphatically cement-
ing their connection to forest, fairies, and each other. The watercolor illustrations
show a slightly older Stella and Sam than in the previous books-longer legs, less
babyish faces-hiking through a bucolic countryside complete with meadow, brook,
and wood. The wide-open white spaces that suited the sea and snow backgrounds
of the previous titles are not as effective here, and the colors seem a bit washed out.
Stella's hair flames against the forest, however, and fans will happily follow her red
head through the green woods. JMD
GREENE, RHONDA GOWLER 
Eek! Creak! Snicker, Sneak; illus. by Jos. A.
Smith. 
Atheneum, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-83047-5 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 5-8 yrs
Greene tells in rhyme of the things that go bump in the night, the creepy Bugbear
and his smaller friend, Bugaboo, who love to make spooky sounds that send kids
diving under the covers while misguided adults "calmly try to explain" despite
their ignorance of the true situation ("When grown-ups look, they disappear!").
This isn't the most polished of verse, but the pulsing tetrameter is a great stalking
rhythm, and the opportunities for lively performance and spooky noisemaking are
almost as cheering as the tale's turnabout end (when the kids scare the bugacritters
off). Smith keeps to an important balance in his line-and-watercolor art-there's
enough sinister mischief in the sprites to legitimize nocturnal worries, but they're
also concrete and silly enough (Bugbear is kind of a pointy-headed dweeb in striped
red shorts, and Bugaboo resembles an irascible green koala bear) to avoid provok-
ing further chills. The illustrations make effective use of twilight shadows, flutter-
ing leaves, and other nocturnal atmospherics, and the sibling pair's alarm is
amusingly depicted (though most kids will see hiding under the bed as a serious
strategic error). 
While this has obvious Halloween possibilities, it would also
make a deliciously shivery readaloud in front of the fireplace on a dark winter's
night or at a library sleepover. DS
GRIMES, NIKKI 
Bronx Masquerade. Dial, 2002 
167p
ISBN 0-8037-2569-8 
$16.99 
R 
Gr. 7-10
See this month's Big Picture, p. 231, for review.
MARCH 2002 
* 
241
HAAS, JESSIE 
Appaloosa Zebra: A Horse Lover's Alphabet; illus. by Margot
Apple. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
[36p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17881-2 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17880-4 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
The premise is simple: a young girl contemplates the horse farm she'll have some-
day, and since she's an organized sort, she itemizes the equines alphabetically. Haas
wisely eschews rhyme and instead emphasizes horsey details in this gallery of eques-
trian delights, tucking in tidbits alliteratively whenever possible ("My Lipizzans
will perform lively leaps, the lightest of lengthenings, lovely levades"); X is of course
no problem, because of the fame of ur-horseman Xenophon, and only the purest
purists will object to the presence of fictional unicorns (the text does acknowledge
that "usually Unicorns lurk unseen") for the letter U. Apple endows just about all
the herd with arched necks, flowing manes, and near-human expressions, but her
breed types and colors are accurate enough to pass horsey youngsters' rigorous
scrutiny. The soft colored-pencil textures add a suitably dreamy feel, and as she
rides, drives, and pets her menagerie, the dark-haired young narrator (identified as
"Leelin Chao" on one of her school projects) functions as an Everygirl suitable for
viewer projection. This isn't exactly general interest, but it will elicit the undying
affection of the kids cantering circles into the library carpet and bringing their
Breyers to Show and Tell. A "More about Horses" endnote gives additional infor-
mation about the terms in the text. DS
HALL, KATY 
Dino Riddles; by Katy Hall and Lisa Eisenberg; illus. by Nicole
Rubel. 
Dial, 2002 
40p 
(Dial Easy-to-Read Books)
ISBN 0-8037-2239-7 
$13.99 
R Gr. 1-4
The jocular duo of Hall and Eisenberg is back again, this time with a Jurassic-
themed joke book in which prehistoric puns and plays on dinosaur names abound
("What do you call a sleeping dinosaur? A Stego-snore-us"). Though a few of the
riddles don't really integrate the dinosaur theme into the joke itself ("What should
you do if you see a blue dinosaur? Cheer him up!"), the.majority of them are
clever, funny, and fresh enough to satisfy novice readers/comedians, even if they
make grownups groan. Rubel's informal ink-and-marker illustrations are suitably
silly whether depicting a pair of lavender and orange Raptors kicking back in a
lagoon with a couple of exotic drinks while watching a volcano erupt ("What a
lavaly day!" they exclaim) or a nightgown-clad Brontosaur reading Pecos Duckbill
to her youngsters (dinosaurs prefer "tall tails" at bedtime). Her electric hues and
the dinosaurs' goofy facial expressions emphasize the ridiculous tone of the text.
This will be just right for joke-book junkies, beginning readers, and teachers look-
ing to breathe new life into staid dinosaur units. JMH
HANTMAN, CLEA 
Heaven Sent. 
Avon, 2002 
[192p]
Paper ed. ISBN 0-06-440875-2 
$4.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
Zeus may be king of the gods, but he can still make mistakes; he meant to exile
daughters to ancient Greece but sent them to modern America instead. Now
sisters Era, Polly, and Thalia, three of the Muses, are stuck in an Athens, Georgia
high school until each learns a well-needed lesson. The three sisters (two are fresh-
men, one is a sophomore, leaving lots of room for sequels if this proves to be a
242 
* THE BULLETIN
marketable hit) adjust to modern life with scarcely a bump: their dad provides a
more than adequate house (apparently mortgage-free), credit cards (apparently bill-
free), lots of cash, and closets full of clothes. Helpful hints for living in the modern
world are supplied in notes from Mercury, and the teaser for the next volume
assures additional assistance as Apollo comes to Earth to give them a hand. The
author knows her way around the YA series genre: the sisters are formulaic charac-
ters defined by formulaic character traits, adults are handily absent, and the premise
is securely based in pop-culture favorites such as television's Charmed and Sabrina,
the Teenage Witch. Lightweight though this title may be, it has a sly humor, an
amusing narrator (in muse Thalia), and a fast pace that wannabe goddesses will
find enchanting. JMD
HATTON, CAROLINE 
VWro andPhilippe; illus. by Preston McDaniels. 
Front Street/
Cricket, 2001 
120p
ISBN 0-8126-2940-X 
$14.95 
R 
Gr. 4-6
It's 1964, and nine-year-old VWronique ("Vro") Vo is unhappy about her Franco-
Vietnamese family's move from verdant Normandy, where she was born, to gray
Paris, where they know no one and "the streets were lined with tall buildings that
all looked the same, like raindrops." Her big brother, Philippe, the family's "Great
Scholar," is pleased, however; he plans to "get good grades and learn English and
build airplanes with real motors." The grownups--an austere, overprotective mother
and a slight, precise father-run a pharmacy; an affectionate maid-of-all-work named
Francine does the housework and cares for the children-until she is caught kiss-
ing her fiance and fired, at which point Maman puts Philippe in charge. V6ro's
narration provides a lively insider account of her tragicomic misadventures under
Philippe's regime and includes well-chosen homely details about this household,
in which both French and Vietnamese food and language are part of daily life and
children who misbehave are told to bow their heads and ask for forgiveness-not
spanked as other French children are. McDaniels' irreverent full-page line draw-
ings provide an outsider's view of the family that usefully undercuts V6ro's naive
belief in the infallibility of her elders. Read aloud or independently, this compact
novel offers a poetic language and fresh perspective that should engage readers at
both ends of this psychic tug-of-war, offering child readers a glimpse of the unfa-
miliar and insights into the familial. FK
HAYLES, MARSHA 
He Saves the Day; illus. by Lynne Cravath. 
Putnam,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23363-6 
$15.99 
R 
3-5 yrs
A hyperenergetic, carrot-topped little tyke bounds through a morning in the
backyard, imagining himself, in rhyming text, the hero of the many and varied
scenarios suggested by his toys. He's a pilot making a glorious recovery from engine
failure ("'Oh, no!' he cries./ A spiraling spin./ It's do or die"). He's a race car
champion (in his sandbox), vanquisher of pirates (in his splash pool), a tiger-fighting
jungle explorer (in his tree house). Finally, as a would-be tamer of dragons he
meets his match, and it's Mom who finally scrapes him off the ground following
his fateful encounter with a purple lawn chair: "SHE SAVES THE DAY!" There
are numerous clues in the high-powered, whooshing and swooshing gouache scenes
that let viewers know just what the boy's dreams are made of; curiously, though,
the climactic dragon battle is the most difficult to predict and interpret, since the
MARCH 2002 
* 243
lawn chair bears no resemblance to the imaginary monster, apart from its color.
Still, this demonstrates that there's lots of action to be found at a comfortable
distance from the back door, and there are some inviting opportunities for adult
readers to give it their histrionic best. EB
HOPKINS, LEE BENNETT, ed. 
Hoofbeats, Claws & Rippled Fins: Creature Poems;
illus. by Stephen Alcorn. 
HarperCollins, 2002 
[32p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-17943-6 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-17942-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 3-6
Fourteen poems (four appearing for the first time here) from as many poets treat
creatures from the lowly iguana to the lofty owl, the common cat to the exotic
anteater. The thematic spread is a little broad for such a small selection of poems,
and some of the entries are on the pedestrian side, but most of the verses are apt
and intriguing. Kristine O'Connell George's "Here's Frog" is rife with alliterative
playfulness ("pebbled blob, a rippled pod,/ just a lump of tucked-in frog"); Beverly
McLoughland's "Easy Living" is a pithy paean to your basic bovine ("She'll chew
and chew,/ And make good milk/ And have a moo"); Ann Whitford Paul's "Full
Moon and Owl" offers a succinct lyricism ("Full Moon and Owl together stare./
But owl's cold gold warns Beware"). Alcorn's woodcuts are more impressive than
engaging, but every creature evinces fascinatingly intricate and stylized detail, set
off by elegantly patterned borders and tastefully muted colors; the layout is attrac-
tive if sometimes somewhat overdesigned (the mixing of font sizes within poems is
occasionally distracting and inexplicable). This is nonetheless an elegant poetic
sampler for animal (and animal-art) lovers. DS
HUGHES, DEAN 
Soldier Boys. 
Atheneum, 2001 
162p
ISBN 0-689-81748-7 
$16.00 
R Gr. 8-12
Dieter Hedrick, son of a Bavarian farmer, rises to a responsible position in the
Hitler Youth because he believes what he has been told about the nobility of the
Fiihrer and Germany's national interests. Spencer Morgan, son of a Mormon
farmer, joins the U.S. paratroopers to defend his country arid impress, or perhaps
forget, a girlfriend he is losing to the local banker's son. Both teenagers train hard
and make their way irrevocably toward the Battle of the Bulge in January of 1945,
where they encounter what they never expected in the way of warfare. While the
first part of this story is almost generically predictable, it lays crucial groundwork
for the second part, which is galvanizing and ultimately surprising though it evolves
credibly out of the characters' individual trajectories. Without sensationalizing
the gory details, Hughes has bluntly depicted the fate of ordinary humans under
artillery and machine-gun fire; their impulses, both terrible and admirable; and
the relationships they develop in the face of chaotically violent circumstance. Such
scenarios are not new in the world of adult battle narrative, but they are uncom-
mon in young adult literature and they bring home the fact that many of those
who fight in wars are young adults, something it has been natural for a generation
of American adolescent readers to forget in the last decades. Hughes' conclusion,
especially, is moving enough to serve as a strong reminder. Pair this with Don
Wulffson's Soldier X (BCCB 3/01), set on the Eastern Front during World War
II, or contrast it with a disparate but equally unglorified portrayal of war in Walter
Dean Myers' Fallen Angels (BCCB 4/88) about U.S. troops in Vietnam. BH
244 
* THE BULLETIN
HURST, CAROL OTIS 
In Plain Sight. Lorraine/Houghton, 2002 
[160p]
ISBN 0-618-19699-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 3-6
Miles Corbin, bon vivant of his farming community and idol to his three children,
has convinced his neighbors to stake him the money for a trip to the California
gold fields, where he's bound to scoop up enough nuggets to make them all wealthy.
Eldest daughter Sarah is particularly distraught, for she knows all too well that his
absence means not only harder work keeping up the farm but also being left to the
stern discipline of their capable but emotionally undemonstrative mother. Cir-
cumstances rapidly go from bad to worse as cash runs out and Mrs. Corbin is
forced into factory work, a letter arrives stating that Miles died at Cape Horn, and
a barn fire leaves Sarah and her brother cruelly burned and unable to keep up their
end of family responsibilities. This is a thoughtful look at the price Forty-Niner
families paid for their adventurers' California dreamin', and the theme of fun par-
ent/responsible parent is a sturdy bridge to an earlier age. Its power is considerably
sapped, however, by the convenient aid of a well-to-do nearby grandfather and a
contrived ending in which Sarah discovers her father alive (his prospecting failure
has left him too ashamed to return home) and arranges his reunion-and implied
rapprochement-with the family he deserted. There's enough drama to keep the
pages turning, though, and Sarah's gradual appreciation of her mother's affection
and strength is thoroughly satisfying. EB
IIJIMA, GENEVA COBB 
The Way We Do It in Japan; illus. by Paige Billin-
Frye. 
Whitman, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8075-7822-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
Gregory's father, Hidiaki, has received a job transfer to his homeland, Japan, and
he packs up his son, American wife, and household goods for the big relocation.
There's no moving-day angst here-the family accepts the transfer with enthusi-
asm that borders on simple-minded ("We'll all go,' said Mom. 'We will live like
Japanese and eat with chopsticks"'). A whole field of concerns begins to sprout for
Gregory as lifestyle changes become evident, from ubiquitous meals of fish (which
he dislikes), to the absence of chairs in the living room, to the restricted colors for
book bags ("The girls all wear red ones, and the boys wear black ones"). There's
no sustained plot, simply a catalog of Gregory's experiences and observations, con-
cluded with a surprise pb&j sandwich feast hosted by his fish-eating classmates,
who cheer the newcomer with the curiously random accolade, "Amerikawa sugoi!"-
"America is wonderful!" Still, exoticism is clearly the draw, and Iijima's details of
bedding and soaking tubs and school-hall shoe cubbies are intriguing, Billin-Frye's
gently humorous line and watercolor cast of individuated Japanese classmates is
alluring, and thoughtfully included pronunciation guides for Gregory's first Japa-
nese phrases will have listeners happily expanding their linguistic horizons. EB
KANEFIELD, TERI 
Rivka's Way. 
Front Street/Cricket, 2001 
137p
ISBN 0-8126-2870-5 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
This educational tale begins in Prague's walled Jewish quarter in 1778, two years
before the "Toleration Edict" that led to increased contact between Czechoslova-
kian Christians and Jews. Rivka-fifteen years old, relatively well off, and "the
prettiest girl in the entire Jewish quarter"-is deeply ambivalent about her engage-
MARCH 2002 
* 245
ment to a nice Jewish boy, feeling compelled to see the outside world before she
fulfills her culturally and historically determined destiny. So, though she has al-
ways been a dutiful daughter, she dresses up in her brother's clothes and visits the
wonders of town and country outside the wall, fighting against her social training,
looking people boldly in the eye and reminding herself that "boys did not depend
on their smiles to get along in the world." Throughout, Rivka is depicted as a girl
compelled by psychological forces to act out of character (again and again, she is
"stunned by the audacity of what she had done"), which device conveniently evades
the charge of anachronism while making it difficult to know Rivka's true person-
ality; the book's contemporary sympathies also strain credulity at times. Rivka's
changing perspective is thoughtfully depicted, however, as she begins to see the
ghetto as neither a "safe haven" nor "prison" and as she eventually finds her fiance
unexpectedly understanding of her yearnings and desirous of sharing these experi-
ences with her. Stylistically as unobtrusive and conventional as Rivka herself, this
accessible walk through history may entertain and inform readers who are not
ready for more complex explorations. FK
KENTLEY, ERIC 
Story of the Titanic; illus. by Steve Noon and with
photographs. 
DK, 2001 
32p
ISBN 0-7894-7943-5 
$17.95 
R Gr. 3-6
It hardly matters that kids already know the ending. The final days and hours of
the doomed ship are a bottomless source of fascination, and here oversized hori-
zontal spreads stoke viewers' interest with elevations and cross sections detailing
activities at various stages of Titanic's construction, embarkation, cruising, and
sinking. A short paragraph with dateline serves as caption to each scene, and all
illustrations are bordered with running snippets of data and limp suggestions for
finding Where's Waldo-styled details. The randomness of this border data results
in some near-ludicrous strings: "Bruce Ismay receives a wireless message warning
of ice ahead"; "There are 5 elevators"; "Spot who is playing hide-and-seek." For-
tunately, there are loads of cool quotables, too, including enumeration of aspara-
gus tongs (400), ventilator funnels (1), and priciest passenger accommodation
($4230). Kentley ties up the tale with a couple of photoillustrated pages concern-
ing the aftermath of the disaster, subsequent inquiries, and Robert Ballard's redis-
covery of the wreckage. Poring over the pictures is clearly the main event, though,
and this visual approach is excellent for presenting simultaneous activities aboard
ship at pivotal moments. Libraries can probably expect a short shelf life from the
ungainly size and binding, and kids who can take ownership of a copy will happily
thumb the pages thin. EB
KOCHENDERFER, LEE 
The Victory Garden. Delacorte, 2002 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-385-32788-9 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-7
Eleven-year-old Teresa Marks is an active participant in her father's friendly gar-
dening rivalry with neighbor Tom Burt; the competition to grow the best toma-
toes helps keep Mr. Marks' mind off of Teresa's brother, Jeff, who's a bomber pilot
in the war. When Mr. Burt suffers an injury that prevents him from gardening,
Teresa, inspired with the Victory Garden spirit, convinces her classmates to take
over his garden and sell the vegetables in order to earn money for the war-bond
drive. This is an old-fashioned story with a few corny touches (such as the subplot
246 
* THE BULLETIN
about the troubled boy whom Teresa gradually befriends), but there's a drive to
the plot that matches Teresa's. Her ardent absorption in both gardening details
and war strategy gives the book a concrete core that lifts it beyond a mere feel-good
drama; the specifics give an immediacy to the kids' weeding-and-watering slog and
to their distanced Midwestern-homefront war experience. Kids with their own
outdoor summer chores will sympathize with the horticultural labor, and they'll
be intrigued by the hometown effects of the distant war. DS
KOERTGE, RON 
Stoner and Spaz. 
Candlewick, 2002 
[17 6p]
ISBN 0-7636-1608-7 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 9-12
Ben's cerebral palsy and absentee mother have landed him in the care of an over-
protective grandmother, and he lacks friends or any social life beyond a weekly trip
to see classic movies on the big screen. One Saturday at the theater he sees Col-
leen, whom he recognizes from his high school as a flamboyant druggie who is
"nothing but trouble." She sits next to him at the movie, and the two begin a
strained and initially one-sided friendship (Colleen gets Ben to do her homework),
which Ben finds alternately exhilarating and crushing. Ben's grandmother is dis-
pleased with his choice of friends, and Ben finds, much to his own surprise, that
her displeasure is a welcome change of pace. Meanwhile, a new neighbor, Marcie,
moves in across the street, and she not only shares Ben's interest in films but has
made a film herself; she offers Ben access to her computer so that he can make a
film of his own, with which Colleen agrees to help. While the characters (espe-
cially Ben's grandmother and Colleen) sometimes teeter between archetype and
stereotype, Ben is a believable and involving narrator. Koertge has an amazing
ability to infuse dark situations with humor while not losing emotional depth, and
despite a few moments that seem over the top, the story retains a successful balance
between the comical and the compelling. Ben's movie receives some local acclaim,
and although a relationship between Ben and Colleen doesn't work out, by the
end of the book Ben is finding other young film aficionados with whom he can
look forward to broadening his social world. KM
KUSKIN, KAMA 
TheAnimals and theArk; illus. by Michael Grejniec. 
Atheneum,
2002 
32p
ISBN 0-689-83095-5 
$16.95 
M 
4-7 yrs
In this newly reillustrated version of a 1958 text, Kuskin retells the story of Noah
and the Ark sans God, sans women, and sans sinners. This bland rhyming tale
reduces the epic flood to a crowded cruise with insufficient cabin room that results
in crabby animals spoiling for a spat. The lack of tension throughout is epito-
mized in the conclusion: "when the fighting and crying/ were awful and fearful/
and all the small animals/ seemed to be tearful,// when Noah was helpless/ and so
was his crew// At precisely that moment/ the sun broke through!" Grejniec's wa-
tercolors provide some reinvigoration with their appealing naivete and additional
detail (despite Kuskin's oversight, he even sneaks in a picture of Mrs. Noah early
on, cooking for her ark-building menfolk), but not even the vivid palette and kid-
pleasing coloring-book animals are enough to float this lightweight boat. By elimi-
nating the divine reason for and human consequences of the flood, the author has
essentially eliminated any reason for reading this tale. If you need a Noah's-ark
MARCH 2002 
* 247
story, try those illustrated by Peter Spier (BCCB 9/77) or Lisbeth Zwerger (12/
97). JMD
LAMM, C. DREW 
Gauchada; illus. by Fabian Negrin. 
Knopf, 2002 
[33p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91267-3 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81267-9 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
6-9 yrs
An Argentinian gaucho carves a crescent moon from bone and sets it in silver to
make a necklace, choosing to give it away to "a grandmother sharp and alive be-
hind old eyes" rather than to sell it. After a time, she gives it to "a mother listening
to leaves of a lone ombu tree as they touch in the breeze," who eventually gives it to
"a girl who smiles when she dreams," and so on through different owners to its
current possessor, who contemplates her choice for the next upholder of the
passalong tradition. The story is based on a real necklace and custom, and it's
prettily and lyrically told, with internal rhymes and other soundplay giving the
text a poetic feel. Unfortunately, the lyricism substitutes for concrete interest,
since there's an idea rather than a plot, and the language too often devolves into a
forced whimsicality that's more attractive than effective. Negrin offers a pictur-
esque Argentina in full-bleed pages, with vast green pampas and stolid teatless
cows parts of a semi-fantastical vision; while the otherworldly visual touch comple-
ments the text, the carved, dreamy faces contribute to rather than mitigate the
distance of the story. The slightly slumberous feel may make this a suitable bed-
time story for youngsters intrigued by travel and physical connections to distant
places and times. DS
LANDAU, 
ELAINE 
Smokejumpers; illus. with photographs by Ben
Klaffke. 
Millbrook, 2002 
4 8p
ISBN 0-7613-2324-4 
$23.90 
R 
Gr. 3-5
The qualifications, training, and typical routine of this elite cadre of airborne
firefighters are examined in this photoillustrated essay. Readers are introduced not
only to the incredible danger of parachuting into a wildfire but also to the unro-
mantic, exhausting tasks involved in transporting gear in and out of the site and
cold trailing "every inch of ground in the burn area" to extinguish lingering hot
spots. 
Landau's prose is well gauged to a middle-grade audience, and burnt-
orange captioning for the multitude of color photos alerts browsers to the high
points of the text. While this offering isn't quite as comprehensive in coverage or
as photogenic in either illustrations or layout as Karen Beil's Fire in Their Eyes
(BCCB 4/99), the combination of solid exposition and incendiary thrills is none-
theless informative and satisfying. A glossary of "Smokejumper Talk," an index,
and bibliographies of children's books and authoritative websites are included. EB
LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH 
Hiawatha and Megissogwon; illus. by Jeffrey
Thompson. 
National Geographic, 2001 
[32 p]
ISBN 0-7922-6676-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 4-6
This excerpt from "The Song of Hiawatha" tells the story of Hiawatha's defeat of
Megissogwon the Magician. While a battle is always of interest and Longfellow's
248 
* THE BULLETIN
words retain their poetic grandeur, the text is long and stultifyingly dense, essen-
tially unsuited for the format and audience. Thompson computer-enhances his
scratchboard images, using digitized textures to provide a diffuse light that con-
trasts with the thicker and rougher lines of printed ink. The effect is stately and
appropriately epic without seeming static, but it's not enough to leaven the text
and it's too finely drawn to accompany a readaloud; the faces are also often unsub-
tly and stiltedly drafted, and the digital mist sometimes clashes with the detailed
linework rather than combining effectively with it. A note from Joseph Bruchac
explains the history of the poem and Longfellow's mix of European narrative struc-
tures with Native American figures, and Thompson details the sources for his
motifs (Ojibway for Hiawatha, Winnebago for Megissogwon). Although academic
collections may want to acquire this for its new look at a classic, it's unlikely that
young readers will be similarly engaged. KM
LYONS, MARY E., comp. 
Feed the Children First: Irish Memories of the Great
Hunger. Atheneum, 2002 
4 8p illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-689-84226-0 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 4-8
"Photographs help us understand the horrors of American slavery and the Holo-
caust. Yet no photograph of Ireland's worst famine is known to exist," says Lyons
at the opening of this historical compilation. To capture the immediacy of this
missing primary source record, she assembles a gallery of paintings, lithographs,
and photos from later famine years and the family stories (largely culled from the
Irish Folklore Commission of the 1940s) of descendants of famine survivors. The
volume follows the course of the natural and political siege in roughly chronologi-
cal order, beginning with background on the people and the land, through the
blight itself and resultant starvation years, to the heart-wrenching options for the
victims-public relief works, soup kitchens, poorhouses, emigration. Lyons does
not attempt the type of comprehensive history undertaken by Susan Campbell
Bartoletti in Black Potatoes (BCCB 10/01); indeed, the only formal background
offered is condensed in three opening pages. The memoirs, however, are potent
and emotionally charged, and though they offer secondhand testimony filtered
through one or more generations, they bespeak sorrows and resentments too vivid
to fade much over time. Sources are given for memoirs and illustrations, and a
bibliography (adult-oriented) is appended. EB
MARCUS, LEONARD S. 
Side by Side: Five Favorite Picture-Book Teams Go to
Work. 
Walker, 2001 
64p 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-8027-8779-7 
$23.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-8027-8778-9 
$22.95 
R Gr. 4 up
Marcus goes behind the scenes to describe a selection of successful partnerships:
Arthur Yorinks and Richard Egielski; Alice and Martin Provensen; Jon Scieszka,
Lane Smith, and Molly Leach; Julius Lester and Jerry Pinkney; and Joanna Cole
and Bruce Degen. Each section traces the history of the featured partnership,
focusing on a specific title and showing details of the work in progress, finishing
with a list of selected works by the pair/trio. While this title may snag more profes-
sionals than kids, there will be plenty of youngsters interested in the workings
behind books that they've enjoyed; tidbits ranging from Bruce Degen's struggle to
get the Magic Schoolbus over the sunglasses of a motorcycle cop to Jon Scieszka's
letters from readers who insist there's something wrong with their copy of The
MARCH 2002 
* 249
Stinky Cheese Man as a consequence of the upside-down dedication page make this
a lively series of accounts rather than a theoretical exploration. There are also
plenty of insights about the process of collaboration, which may inspire readers to
their own creative teamwork. A glossary and index are appended. DS
MEDINA, TONY 
Love to Langston; illus. by R. Gregory Christie. 
Lee & Low,
2002 
35p
ISBN 1-58430-041-8 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-8
One of several titles issued for Hughes' 100th birthday (see also Perdomo and
Rhynes), this offers a treatment of Hughes' life in a sequence of fourteen poems
narrated by Hughes himself. The book devotes several poems to incidents and
periods in Hughes' youth, then branches out to his travels, his love of jazz, and his
work and philosophy. This is only a spottily informative treatment, and Medina's
verses are often unskilled and prosy; there is, however, a palpable enthusiasm and
energy in his lines, and there are some unforcedly eloquent turns of phrase ("Harlem
is the capital of my world/ black and beautiful and bruised like me"-"Harlem Is
the Capital of My World"). Ultimately, the book's merit lies in that enthusiasm
(which might be more readily conveyed in a readaloud, by adult or kid, or even
performance in order to fulfill the strong oral possibilities of these lines), in the
tasty slices of Hughes' life and quick glimpses of his world, which may lead readers
to the man's work itself. Christie's acrylic illustrations evince his usual oversized
emphasis on faces, with older subjects particularly benefiting from the angular,
intense draftsmanship: Hughes Senior is a man marked by years of rage, while
Langston himself is worn and weighted but unbowed. Extensive notes explain the
biographical background of each poem. DS
MELTZER, MILTON 
Walt Whitman: A Biography. Twenty-First Century Books,
2002 
160p 
illus. with photographs
ISBN 0-7613-2272-8 
$31.40 
R Gr. 7-12
With his innovative embrace of demotic American language and forms and his
deep concern for his country during its time of greatest crisis, Whitman is perhaps
the quintessential American poet. Meltzer looks at the writer in this context, ex-
amining political and cultural influences and ramifications of Whitman's work,
describing the difference between Whitman and other writers of his era in simple
and straightforward terms. While there's some discussion of Whitman's personal
life, the emphasis is on his labor, whether it be his work on his poems or his
tending to injured Civil War soldiers (as Meltzer says, "ministering to the wounded
body of the republic, almost literally"), and on its meaning. Though there are
some biases in the book's assumptions (and occasionally unresolved internal con-
tradictions), the book honestly explores Whitman's character and actions, includ-
ing his racial prejudice and his tendency to write anonymous (and effective) praises
of his own writing. Ultimately, this has a definite edge and relevance that gives it
more resonance than blander overviews of the poet and that may well evoke inter-
est from readers who'd been prepared to dismiss Whitman as an uninteresting
eminence grise. Photographs of Whitman and his family, images of his work, and
reproductions of period illustrations (all captioned in a rather offputtingly ornate
font) liven up the formatting. There are unfortunately no source notes, but a
timeline, list of materials for further reading, list of sites real and virtual, and an
index are included. DS
250 
* THE BULLETIN
MOORE, CATHY 
The Daring Escape of Ellen Craft; illus. by Mary O'Keefe
Young. 
Carolrhoda, 2002 
[48p] 
(On My Own History)
Library ed. ISBN 0-87614-462-8 
$21.27
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-787-2 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
RANSOM, CANDICE F. 
Rescue on the Outer Banks; illus. by Karen Ritz. 
Carolrhoda,
2002 
[48p] 
(On My Own History)
Library ed. ISBN 0-87614-460-1 
$21.27
Paper ed. ISBN 0-87614-815-1 
$6.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 1-3
Newly independent readers with a penchant for true adventure will welcome these
new entries in the On My Own History series. Escape recounts the 1848 flight
from slavery of Ellen Craft and her husband William, who boldly made their way
to precarious freedom in Philadelphia by posing as a manservant (William) escort-
ing his invalid master (Ellen, in disguise) on a trip North. Moore presents the
Crafts' tale with careful attention to accuracy (all quotations, she notes, are drawn
directly from William Craft's own writings) and incorporates considerable tension
even within the confines of limited vocabulary. However, Young's pedestrian
watercolor scenes, on which many novice readers will depend for context clues,
portray top-hatted, bandaged Ellen as too obviously feminine and downright pretty
to fool a disinterested observer, much less a sharp-eyed defender of slave-owners'
rights lurking along her way. Rescue focuses on a 1896 mission carried out on
North Carolina's Outer Banks by the first African-American Life-Saving Service
team. Unable to reach the foundering E. S. Newman by conventional means of
breeches buoy or rowboat, keeper Richard Etheridge's surfmen swim out to the
wreck and carry her nine survivors back to safety. They are assisted by local boy
Sam Deal and his horse Ginger, neither of whom is mentioned in the Afterword or
at the appended websites, and who therefore seem to be fictional flourishes intro-
duced to make a direct connection with a child audience. Plentiful steely gray
watercolor scenes of surfmen fighting the raging breakers compensate for the few
less successful renderings of the self-consciously posed, grinning rescue crew. Each
title concludes with a photograph of its subject and sources for further informa-
tion. EB
O'NEILL, ALEXIS 
The Recess Queen; illus. by Laura Huliska-Beith. 
Scholastic,
2002 
[3 2p]
ISBN 0-439-20637-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Mean Jean the Recess Queen is really a bully: "Nobody swung until Mean Jean
swung. Nobody kicked until Mean Jean kicked. Nobody bounced until Mean
Jean bounced." That is, not until the arrival of teeny new girl Katie Sue, who
doesn't scare easy. When Mean Jean tries to set the record straight, "Katie Sue
talked back! Just as sassy as could be, she said 'How DID you get so bossy?'"
Mean Jean chases after the irrepressible Katie, and, while the other kids stare in
horrified fascination, Katie pulls a jump rope from her backpack and calls Mean
Jean out: "I like ice cream, I like tea, I want Jean to jump with me!" Readers will
see the end coming from way across the school yard-Mean Jean gives up her
bullying ways because she's having too much fun with her friends. O'Neill's rhyming
text bounces right along, however, and it should make a rousing readaloud. Huliska-
MARCH 2002 
* 251
Beith's acrylic and collage illustrations have the same rousing tone as the text: the
neon palette is lively, and the riotously distorted figures keep things safely and
entertainingly unreal. Whether the message will be lost or heard is something else
again. Get 'em young and they may decide early just which side of the playground
they want to be on. JMD
PEARSALL, SHELLEY 
Trouble Don't Last. 
Knopf, 2002 
[160p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-91490-0 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-81490-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
Samuel, an eleven-year-old slave in northern Kentucky, is snatched off his kitchen
pallet in the middle of the night by an elderly slave, Harrison, and quite against his
will the boy finds himself a "rider" on the perilous Underground Railroad. This is
Harrison's second attempt to run away, and he musters years of patiently collected
runaway lore and hard-won knowledge from his previous mistakes, determined to
get himself and Samuel to Canada or die. Whereas other escape novels tend to
focus on the dangerous road between stations, Pearsall concentrates on the pair's
various encounters with the stationmasters, exploring the motives that drove blacks
and whites to aid the escapees, and the runaways' natural hesitation to trust any-
one along the way. Samuel and Harrison are no innocent, compliant lambs in this
venture. Indeed, Harrison often resists his saviors' attempts to bring him to safety,
and Samuel, who has not yet experienced all the brutalities of slavery, would frankly
rather be back home with Lilly, the slave who raised him. While the stationmasters
are occasionally a bit broadly drawn, they are a far cry from the patient, saintly do-
gooders of much U.R. fiction. Widow Taylor's not exactly in her right mind,
Reverend Pym uses runaway narratives to keep his congregation in religious thrall,
peddler Green Murdoch is in it for the cash, the no-nonsense Miz Kettle simply
gets the job done without a lot of introspection ("You don't follow us, you get
handed over to them crackers who's after you, you hear what I'm sayin', old man?").
There's a hoped-for ending here, but it's clear that Samuel and Harrison's happi-
ness will always be tinged with grief for those who never reached their Promised
Land. EB
PERDOMO, WILLIE 
VisitingLangston; illus. by Bryan Collier. 
Holt, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-8050-6744-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
After a paragraph of introduction to Langston Hughes, this tribute to Hughes'
legacy uses the voice of an enthusiastic young girl from "Harlem world," excited
about visiting Hughes' historic house with her father. Herself a poet in tune with
everyday expressions of art ("I love hip-hop/ Hop-scotch/ And double-dutch"),
she speaks in simple verse of her understanding of Hughes' life ("Wrote poems/
Like jazz") and his legacy ("I write poetry/ Just like Langston Hughes"). The verse
is so simple, in fact, there's not much to it beyond its appealing idea-there's little
information or emotion, and the details seem chosen for rhyme capacity rather
than any atmospheric effectiveness. Collier's art has considerably more power: his
watercolor portraits feature a shining young girl capable of fulfilling any destiny
but also perkily recognizable from any playground, exploring under her father's
affectionate eye; the collaged textures and patterns depict a vibrant Harlem that
echoes Bearden's mosaic city views and suggests the rich world of the Harlem
252 
* THE BULLETIN
Renaissance. Despite the shortcomings, this might make an interesting readaloud
(or even a shared read or recitation, since the verse will trip easily off of young
tongues) to introduce youngsters to Hughes' more accessible poems. DS
PLACIDE, JAIRA 
Fresh Girl. Lamb, 2002 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90035-X 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-32753-6 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 8-12
Mardi Desravines was born in America, but she lived with her grandmother in
Haiti until she was twelve, when the political situation overheated and an uncle's
activism made the family a target. Now she's fourteen and living in Flatbush,
Brooklyn with her parents, her older sister, an aunt, and her grandmother. Furi-
ously self-centered (and secretly self-destructive), Mardi lives in an intense and
surreal private routine of schoolwork, journal writing, hiding from the bully Ike,
dreaming about handsome Santos, reopening and rebandaging small wounds, and
sleeping on a rock-filled mattress in order to make her dreams "choppy and forget-
table." The reality that she can't bear to remember-or speak of, or forgive her
family for not realizing-is that she was raped by a soldier in a cornfield on the
chaotic day she left Haiti, but with the exception of an empathetic ("crazy") aunt,
family members see only a good student whose muttered backchat marks her as
too much of a "fresh girl" at home. After a slightly disorienting opening full of
backstory and foreshadowing, readers enter a richly diverse community whose clearly
evoked characters have roots in Haiti, Dominica, and the American south. Mardi's
relationships with friends and family evolve subtly and believably. Gradually, as
Mardi comes to trust her uncle, the reader hears more about her trauma and,
finally, her revelation of her secret and the difficult but eventually hopeful after-
math. With unselfconscious naivete and hard-won insight, Mardi tells a story
readers will find both accessible and memorable. FK
PRELUTSKY, JACK 
The Frogs Wore Red Suspenders; illus. by Petra Mathers.
Greenwillow, 2002 
[6 4p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-16720-9 
$16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-16719-5 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
Perennial poetic performer Prelutsky returns here with twenty-eight new poems,
featuring various people ("Peanut Peg and Peanut Pete," "Granny Gooding") and
animals ("One Old Owl," "Seven Snails and Seven Snakes") in various locations
("In Indianapolis," "Down in the Grand Canyon"). The anthology is easygoing
and meandering, roaming from a winter meadow where "snowshoe hares are run-
ning/ softly through the snow ("Winter Meadow") to Seattle, where "without an
umbrella/ it's hard to stay dry" ("One Day in Seattle") to Fort Myers, where "there's
a flock of puzzled penguins/ looking high and looking low" ("Every Morning in
Fort Myers"). The result is a lower-key collection than his monster poems (Monday's
Troll, BCCB 3/96, etc.) or larger compendia (A Pizza as Big as the Sun, BCCB 9/
96); the language and verse forms are simplified (octets predominate), and the feel
is more gently playful and sometimes even lyrical. Mathers' watercolors offer a
sense of serene but well-anchored wonder that plays effectively off of the verses.
Her subtly iridescent landscapes quietly emphasize the breadth of geographical
beauty in the world, while her animals are always sweetly personable (the monkey
MARCH 2002 
* 253
in spats fleeing Winnemucca and the bundled-up mice gleefully romping in a
North Dakota snowstorm are sure to be favorites); she's also got a nice line in
additional detail, whether it be the sunburned penguins who are starting to be
black and white and red all over or the green-faced bear who clearly ate too many
"plates of apple pies." 
Primary-graders who've been coveting their older sibs'
Prelutsky will be happy to have this suitable volume. DS
QUALEY, MARSHA 
One Night. Dial, 2002 
[176p]
ISBN 0-8037-2602-3 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 7-10
Kelly's a nineteen-year-old recovering addict, working for her aunt, Kit Carpenter,
a charismatic and mercurial radio-show host who returned to her home state of
Minnesota in order to provide a solid base for her niece. While mollifying a movie
star Kit had snubbed, Kelly runs slap into a chance to repay her aunt with an
eminently desirable guest for Kit's show; this chance appears in the person of young
Tomas, the media-shy crown prince of the war-torn country of Lakveria, in town
for a special world forum on the troubles of Eastern Europe. Kelly convinces
Prince Tom first to duck his security and slip out in the company of the movie star
and then, bit by bit, to make a night of it, from dinner to movies (a singalong
double feature ofJudy Garland films) to an exchange of personal stories, fears, and
ambitions-but will it be enough to convince Tom to appear on Kit's radio show?
As usual, Qualey creates a strong, interesting heroine (YA literature is surprisingly
bereft of protagonists in substance-abuse recovery) and puts her in an unusual
situation. While the plot develops pretty much as expected, with Kelly and Tom
being drawn together, Kelly unburdening herself and reconnecting to the mother
and sister she'd almost lost, and Tom doing the radio interview and obtaining
substantial support for his country, the Roman Holiday escapades of a commoner
and prince's very common night on the town together are the stuff of seriously
satisfying fantasy (and Tom is even deeper and more soulful than Audrey Hepburn).
The result is a lighthearted spree with enough ballast to keep it from being sheer
froth, a de-guilted guilty pleasure. DS
RANSOM, CANDICE F. 
Rescue on the Outer Banks; illus. by-Karen Ritz.
See review under Moore, p. 250.
RHYNES, MARTHA E. I, Too, SingAmerica: The Story ofLangston Hughes. Morgan
Reynolds, 2002 
[14 4p] 
illus. with photographs 
(World Writers)
ISBN 1-883846-89-7 
$20.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-10
Unlike the other celebrations of the centenary of Hughes' birth (see Medina and
Perdomo), this is a straightforward biographical overview suitable for junior-high
and high-school research. Rhynes traces Hughes' life from his unsettled child-
hood to his blossoming in the Harlem Renaissance to his later struggles to find an
ideological and artistic place. The prose is often awkward, and there are occasional
glitches in names of people and works, but this is nonetheless an effective compact
exploration of Hughes' life. The book is particularly good at addressing Hughes'
political convictions, especially his interest in communism, and their relationship
to his writing; the author treats more than Hughes' famous poetry, also mention-
ing work ranging from his newspaper columns to his libretti to his books for young
254 
* THE BULLETIN
people. There's plenty of context here as well, with discussion not only of Hughes'
famous Harlem Renaissance connections but also of his views, sometimes nega-
tive, of later contemporaries such as James Baldwin and Le Roi Jones. This isn't
the most evocative account (Osofksy's Free to Dream, BCCB 6/96, is more artis-
tic), but it's a lot of good information in an accessible package. Black-and-white
photographs of Hughes and his contemporaries are scattered throughout; exten-
sive end matter includes a detailed timeline, endnotes, a glossary, a list of Hughes'
major works, a bibliography, a brief list of websites, and an index. DS
ROTTMAN, S.L. Stetson. 
Viking, 2002 
[25 6p]
ISBN 0-670-03542-4 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 9-12
Stet's mother left the family years ago and his father is constantly drunk, leaving
sixteen-year-old Stet to find his own money for food and anything else he needs
beyond the bedroom in the trailer that his father provides. Stet enjoys some in-
come from a job at the local salvage yard, but he also picks up a few bucks at
school, where kids pay him to disrupt class and postpone quizzes. Despite his
behavior, Stet hopes to leave high school with a diploma, but after his most recent
escapade he's being threatened with expulsion. As if things weren't difficult enough,
out of the blue appears Stet's fourteen-year-old sister Kayla, of whom neither Stet
nor his father had knowledge. (Years ago, when Stet's mother left the family, she
was pregnant; now she has died suddenly, leaving Kayla with no place to go.)
There's a lot going on here, and the novel is often overly crowded with characters
and their respective crises; not only does Kayla appear to be a budding alcoholic,
but Stet's friend Jason, owner of the salvage yard, is dying of cancer. Nevertheless,
Stet is a strong and likable character, and his frank manner of grappling with his
own problems propels the story admirably. Readers will be glad to see him survive
and begin to succeed despite a surfeit of impossible odds. KM
Russo, MARISABINA 
House ofSports. 
Greenwillow, 2002 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-623804-8 
$15.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-623803-X 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
Jim Malone's entire seventh-grade existence revolves around basketball and his
single-minded determination to play on a prestigious "travel team." Despite his
relatively short stature, he lands a coveted position as point guard. His new view of
the game, from both the court and, all too often, the bench, gives him plenty to
think about-the coach's pressure on his talented daughter (the only girl on the
team) to excel, his longed-for growth spurt that doesn't seem to be forthcoming,
his grandmother's constant admonitions that he explore some facet of life apart
from basketball. In a plot twist that sports-novel fans will see coming from clear
across the court, Jim does in fact find another talent lurking deep within his ob-
streperous adolescent self, a knack for public speaking that takes him all the way to
Washington D.C., where he delivers his now-paralyzed grandmother's autobio-
graphical speech to a symposium on Holocaust survivors. There's nothing much
new here in terms of big plays and big games, and the thinly veiled be-more-than-
a-jock exhortation will probably be left unregarded by true basketball enthusiasts.
Jim himself, though, is a thoroughly credible junior-high guy-self-absorbed, twist-
MARCH 2002 
* 255
ing with embarrassment at his hopelessly obtuse (in his view) parents and garru-
lous grandmother, and just catching his first glimpse of a wider world and a larger
self. EB
SALISBURY, GRAHAM 
Island Boyz: Short Stories. 
Lamb, 2002 
[260p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-385-90037-6 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-385-72970-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Eleven short stories chronicle pivotal episodes in the lives of teenage boys growing
up in the Hawaiian islands, leeward of the tourist gale that shapes popular percep-
tion of that state. Tales range in mood from the bi-level humor of "Forty Bucks,"
which packs a second twist for readers with a rudimentary knowledge of Spanish
(or a little curiosity and a bilingual dictionary), to the emotional turbulence of first
love in "Angel-Baby," to the flat-out nastiness of prep school life in "Mrs. Noonan"
and "The Doi Story Monkey." Themes are timeless in their appeal-guys testing
their mettle against hurricanes and bullies and the irresponsible dares of their best
friends, against fear of sharks and fear of failure and fear of war-and plotting is
exceptionally well crafted to maximize suspense and to meticulously develop a
teen narrator's frame of mind and state of conscience. Readers who resist Salisbury's
full-length novels should be enticed by these compact offerings, and kids with a
well-developed taste for Gary Paulsen works might latch onto a second "favorite
author." EB
SAYRE, APRIL PULLEY 
Army Ant Parade; illus. by Rick Chrustowski. 
Holt,
2002 [3 2 p]
ISBN 0-8050-6353-6 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-7 yrs
Inviting listeners to imagine themselves as lone campers awaking in a Panama
forest, Sayre describes the atmosphere charged with anticipation and the sudden
arrival of a sortie of army ants swarming the forest in search of food: "First a
trickle, then a stream, then a river of ants flows outward.... Are you standing in
the swarm? Don't run. Just step aside. Ants may march up your boots-but not
far." As the ants claim their prey, from tiny crawlers to a hapless frog, other forest
residents feast among the insects stirred up in the flurry. Chrustowski's colored-
pencil and watercolor wash spreads depict a forest so tidy and orderly that the
palm fronds seem to strike poses and scuttling critters obligingly face forward to
offer the audience a good view; however, this mannered composition and the neat
delineation of each creature and object with black outline make the scenes practi-
cal and effective for group sharing. The you-are-there approach has the tingly
immediacy to keep kids riveted, and young nature buffs will cautiously shake out
their pants legs and ask for more. EB
SEIDLER, TOR 
Brothers Below Zero. 
Geringer/HarperCollins, 2002 
[14 4 p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-029180-X 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-029179-6 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 3-6
Nearsighted, unathletic, unacademic Tim is tired of unfavorable comparisons with
John Henry, his overachieving year-younger brother, but he doesn't see any way
256 
* THE BULLETIN
around them. He generally finds solace with his independent and eccentric great
aunt, Winifred, who lives near the family's Vermont home; their bond grows closer
when Tim begins to emulate his aunt's artistic ways and takes up painting, demon-
strating a considerable talent. An envious John Henry resents the shift of the
spotlight to his brother, however, and sabotages Tim's Christmas painting for their
parents, putting an unexpected chain of events into action. Seidler's style is acces-
sible in its simplicity, and Tim's sorrow at his apparent inadequacy (and at the
death of Winifred, the one person who favored him) is situationally credible.
Unfortunately, the book is otherwise driven by narrative necessity rather than real-
istic developments or insight: characterization is either sparse (John Henry doesn't
offer many options between being mean or loving) or cliched (Great-Aunt Winifred
is a Hallmark-card old lady overflowing with folk axioms), and events unfold for
reasons more sentimental than logical. The narration's constantly shifting point
of view interferes with its emotional impact, and the relegation of the below-zero
survival story (Tim gets lost in the snow outside of Winifred's old house and John
Henry keeps him warm until they're saved) to the last third of the book leaves little
time for the most gripping part of the book. Turn instead to more satisfying
familial survival stories, such as Hill's Toughboy and Sister (BCCB 11/90). DS
SHANNON, DAVID 
Duck on a Bike; written and illus. by David Shannon. 
Blue
Sky/Scholastic, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-439-05023-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
3-5 yrs
"One day down on the farm, Duck got a wild idea," which prompts him to pick
up a bike that's been left in the barnyard and start to ride. Along the way, he
encounters various animals, each of whom responds with a species-appropriate
sound, but Shannon also tells us their inner thoughts ("Hello, Cat!" said Duck.
'Meow,' said Cat. But what she thought was, 'I wouldn't waste my time riding a
bike!'"), often disdainful of the two-wheeled contraption. When a group of kids
leaves a pile of bikes in the barnyard, however, all the animals give bike riding a try.
The payoff doesn't quite match the buildup, since the animals' secret longing isn't
adequately foregrounded. Nevertheless, this turn of events is likely to please young
listeners, particularly when they see the wordless spread wherein the wide-eyed
animals stare out at the viewers with wild surmise when the opportunity presents
them with a chance for a bicycling spree. Shannon's art is solidly humorous, using
muted colors and textured surfaces that enliven the bold and simple shapes of
these expressive barnyard dwellers and their surrounding countryside. This book
will be a great hit at preschool story hours; young listeners won't mind the slight
narrative hiccup, and they'll quickly be quacking, neighing, and mooing right along.
KM
SILVERSTONE, MICHAEL 
Winona LaDuke: Restoring Land and Culture in Native
America. 
Feminist Press, 2001 
112p 
illus. with photographs 
(Women
Changing the World)
Library ed. ISBN 1-55861-260-2 $19.95
Paper ed. ISBN 1-55861-261-0 
$10.95 
Ad 
Gr. 4-7
LaDuke may be best known for her Green Party candidacy for Vice President
alongside Ralph Nader, but Silverstone makes it clear there's much more to her
career than that. He chronicles her life from her youthful loyalty to her father's
MARCH 2002 
* 257
people on the White Earth reservation in Minnesota while living as an outsider
with her mother and stepfather on the West Coast, to her early activism (speaking
before the UN at the age of eighteen) and education at Harvard, to her later work
on behalf of environmental causes (as a director of Greenpeace and in organizing
the Honor the Earth tours) and indigenous peoples (in connection with the Indig-
enous Women's Network and other organizations). It's a worshipful rather than a
warts-and-all portrayal, with language inclined towards sweeping, unsupported
generalization and significant details (like LaDuke's marriages) occasionally diffi-
cult to pin down because of vagueness or contradiction. This is a thoughtful
picture, however, not just of a particular activist but of green and indigenous activ-
ism in the contemporary world, giving information about specific movements and
projects hardly mentioned elsewhere in literature for youth. Sidebars offer com-
pact and often helpful assessments of relevant concepts ranging from the Iroquois
Confederacy to civil disobedience; occasional black-and-white pictures are dimly
reproduced and sometimes illogically placed, but they add a visual dimension. No
source notes are provided, but a timeline, glossary, list of resources for further
reading, viewing, and research, and an index are included. DS
SIMMONS, JANE 
Ebb & Flo and the Baby Seal; written and illus. by Jane
Simmons. 
McElderry, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-689-84368-2 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-6 yrs
Canine Ebb (from Ebb & Flo and the New Friend, BCCB 11/99) is bored with
listening to the rain and the wind ("Pitter, patter, pitter, patter, pitter, patter,
whoosh!"), and she wants to play. Everyone is busy, so when Ebb hears a sound
from the beach, she goes to investigate: "It was a baby seal! 
At last Ebb had
someone to play with. They played on the sand. They played in the waves. They
played in the rock pools. Ebb and the baby seal played all day long." When Ebb
wants to go home, however, the baby seal cries in distress. Ebb brings help in the
form of owner Flo and her mother, and they all row out to Seal Island to reunite
the baby with its mother. Like the other Ebb and Flo titles, this is a warm and cozy
outing. Simmons' watercolors have a fluid ease and an ocean-influenced palette
that will draw viewers into her windy seascapes. The smiling Ebb will remind
viewers of their favorite mutt, and redheaded Flo and her warmly helpful mother
are an attractive familial dyad. While the lost-seal plot is a little farfetched, it has
the sort of tension that preschoolers can appreciate, despite (or perhaps because of)
the predictable happy ending. JMD
SIMON, SEYMOUR 
Seymour Simon's Book of Trains. HarperCollins,
2002 
[4 0p] 
illus. with photographs
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-028476-5 $16.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-028475-7 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 4-8 yrs
Opening spreads introduce the three main power sources for locomotives (steam,
diesel fuel, electricity), followed by a veritable pageant of burly beauties-sleek
high-speed bullet trains, muscular gondolas and hopper cars, sun-burnished tank
cars, sweet, petite mountain trains. Each full-page glamour shot is accompanied
by a paragraph or two of text with just enough data to justify the moniker of
photoessay rather than photo album. Photo reproductions are, in general, more
258 
* THE BULLETIN
than satisfying, although undercarriage detail is occasionally lost in the shadows.
Who cares? These are exactly the cool pictures for which the younger nonfiction
set clamors. Consider tucking a copy under the seat to ease the tedium of a long
car trip or to pass the time in rudimentary train-spotting when it seems as if those
crossing gates will never go up again. EB
SOTO, GARY 
Ifthe Shoe Fits; illus. by Terry Widener. 
Putnam, 2002 
32p
ISBN 0-399-23420-9 
$15.99 
R 6-9 yrs
Rigo hates wearing his brothers' hand-me-downs, so when he finally gets a brand
new pair of penny loafers, he's delighted. A bully's denigrating words take the
metaphorical shine off the shoes, however, and the loafers wind up in the back of
his closet, unworn. A party invitation finally causes Rigo to pull out the shoes, but
alas, several months have gone by, and the loafers are now unbearably tight. A
waste of good shoes? No, because Rigo is a good kid, who ends up giving the
footwear to his uncle: "'You don't mind if they're hand-me-downs?' Rigo asked.
'Hand-me-downs, nothing!' Uncle said. 'These are brand-new! I can go to work
in style!'" Soto again demonstrates his knack of making simple events into the
stuff of drama, and he communicates the frustrations and joys of family life and
the humor and pathos of Rigo's dilemma with ease and elegance. Widener invests
his figures with solid personalities: their expressive faces, with dramatic eyes and
mobile mouths, will draw viewers into this warm family story. JMD
SOUHAMI, JESSICA, ad. 
Mrs. McCool and the Giant Cuhullin: An Irish Tale; ad.
and illus. by Jessica Souhami. 
Holt, 2002 
[28p]
ISBN 0-8050-6852-X $16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
The giant Finn McCool is shivering in his big boots because bigger giant Cuhullin
is bound and determined to cut him down to size. Finn goes to his wife for
comfort and help, and she devises a plan to save her husband from disaster. Mrs.
McCool tricks Cuhullin into believing that Finn, dressed in a baby bonnet and
reclining in a cradle, is her baby boy; through a series of humorous deceptions she
convinces her husband's foe that Finn is undefeatable. This retelling is marred
somewhat by excessive dialogue, which, while sometimes humorously on the mark,
is mostly just whiny, lacking the understatement necessary to get the most out of
the humor of this trickster tale. Souhami's illustrations employ large, intensely
colored cut and torn paper shapes set against subdued hues of beige and blue; they
take advantage of contrasting scale to visually reinforce the humor of her text, with
the giants dominating the compositions and amusingly dwarfing the compara-
tively tiny Mrs. McCool. While finer retellings of this tale are available (such as
dePaola's Fin MCoul), the big advantage of this dialogue-driven story is its suit-
ability for readers' theater in library or classroom; adults seeking to expand their
groups' repertoire should look here. JMD
STREISSGUTH, TOM 
Daniel Boone; illus. by Loren Chantland. 
Carolrhoda,
2002 
4 8p 
(My Own Biography)
Library ed. ISBN 1-57505-520-1 
$21.27
Paper ed. ISBN 1-57505-532-5 
$6.95 
Ad Gr. 2-4
This beginner biography plods through the life of trailblazer Boone, offering read-
ers a methodical glimpse of the pioneer's achievements through his settlement at
MARCH2002 
* 259
Boonesborough, but lacking the spark to ignite imagination. Read-alone text de-
livers the facts efficiently enough ("Squire Boone had heard there was good land
everywhere, waiting for the farmer's plow. After the long journey, the Boones
reached the Yadkin River Valley. Daniel helped Squire Boone clear the land"),
but even Boone's spectacular feats and perilous adventures receive only barebones
treatment: "In one good season, he killed 99 bears"; "The Indians were fighting to
protect their land. Kentucky seemed too dangerous. Most of the settlers turned
back. But the Boones stayed near Kentucky for the winter." Scratchboard illustra-
tions in deep earth tones have a raw appeal that sets the proper mood for wilder-
ness journeying, and an afterword (with a portrait reproduction) briefly alludes to
further moves and Indian conflicts that peppered Boone's days until his death in
1820. A list of important dates is appended. EB
TANG, GREG 
Math forAll Seasons: Mind-Stretching Math Riddles; illus. by Harry
Briggs. 
Scholastic, 2002 
[40p]
ISBN 0-439-21042-9 
$16.95
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. K-3
Tang again offers a high-order thinking-skills approach to arithmetic (The Grapes
ofMath, BCCB 3/01), this time concentrating on addition and a dash of subtrac-
tion. Sixteen double spreads feature seasonal images that invite readers to group
objects rather than simply count them and a rhyme that offers a hint on how to
cluster images for shortcut calculation. Pancake-flat computer artwork in a satu-
rated palette has the compositional sophistication of a dime-store coloring book.
It's really function that's at issue here, however, and pertinent Easter eggs, jack-o'-
lanterns, drippy ice cream cones and icicles are carefully deployed for visual bun-
dling and manipulation. Tang concludes with four pages of solutions to his riddles,
with reduced scenes displaying his groupings, and although he intends to help
"kids to think through problems rather than relying on formulas and memoriza-
tion," his one-solution approach is unnecessarily limiting. This volume's real merit
will depend on children's motivation to devise approaches of their own. EB
TARPLEY, NATASHA ANASTASIA 
Bippity Bop Barbershop; illus. by E. B.
Lewis. 
Tingley/Little, 2002 
[32p]
ISBN 0-316-52284-8 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
Ready for his first grownup haircut, Miles and his father take a trip to the barber-
shop early one morning. Miles likes the barbershop just fine-the smells, the
noise, the conversations of the men waiting for haircuts-until Mr. Seymour, the
barber, approaches him with the electric clippers: "Will the clippers hurt? What if
Mr. Seymour accidentally cuts off my ear? The loud buzzing noise is coming closer.
Then I feel a tickle creeping up the back of my head. I get so scared, I duck down
as low as I can go in the chair and throw the cape over my head!" A quiet interven-
tion by his father helps Miles regain his composure, and "when Mr. Seymour is
through, there is a brand-new me staring back from the mirror!" Tarpley (author
of LoveMy Hair!, BCCB 4/98) is true to both Miles' emotional point of view and
to the social significance of the barbershop, drawing the relationships within the
community of African-American men there as affectionately as the relationship
between Miles and his father. Lewis' compositions vary in effectiveness, and the
occasional blotchy texture results in uneven highlighting. Still, the illustrations
260 
* 
THE BULLETIN
capably communicate the emotional subtext (the picture of Miles, wrapped in a
cape and staring out at the viewer as the barber picks his hair, is especially priceless)
and evoke the warm masculine milieu of the barbershop (with images of a hand-
some variety of men of all ages, waiting, playing checkers, and watching televi-
sion). Most effective, however, are the scenes of Miles and his father-their affection
for and pride in each other is palpable. This will make a somewhat scary rite of
passage a snip-er, snap. JMD
VAN LEEUWEN, JEAN 
Lucy Was There... 
Fogelman, 2002 
[176p]
ISBN 0-8037-2738-0 
$16.99
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 5-7
Morgan's life changed last November, when her mother left on a trip with Morgan's
little brother, Ben, and never came back. Since then, Morgan's family has lived a
life of quiet desperation, with her older sister, Cassie, throwing herself into social
life and after-school activities, her father silent, sad, and distant, and Morgan her-
self lonely and adrift. She's comforted by nocturnal visions of "Lucy the magic
dog," a soft brown presence ("Whatever was there felt big and it felt warm and I
wasn't the least bit afraid which I usually am"), and she slowly, achingly slowly,
begins to come to terms with her mother's absence. The basic tale of a girl's
adjustment to loss is sweetly but compellingly told, with Morgan's narration dip-
ping effectively into a stream-of-consciousness style and into realistic questions of
guilt ("I'm afraid it is all my fault she is gone"). The mechanisms are less effective,
however: the twist that Morgan's mother didn't walk out on the family, despite
Morgan's clinging to this belief, but was in fact killed in an airplane crash along
with Ben is unnecessarily melodramatic, and the Lucy device never fully realizes its
potential, remaining instead a sideline. Wallace-Brodeur's Blue Eyes Better, re-
viewed below, is a more cohesive story of adjustment to loss, but this is still a
tender and affecting tale of a survivor's struggle. DS
WALLACE-BRODEUR, RUTH 
Blue Eyes Better. 
Dutton, 2002 
[128p]
ISBN 0-525-46836-6 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R* 
Gr. 4-6
Tessa is ten when her older brother, Scott, dies in a car accident and her world
changes forever. She finds comfort in her father, in good friends, in a beloved
music teacher, and in Mrs. Hirsch, a paper-route customer she adopts as a grand-
mother, but she's distressed that she's become essentially invisible to her devas-
tated mother, who's unable to let go of her beloved firstborn and kindred spirit.
She's also tormented by the possibility that she could have saved Scott if she'd
tattled that he was going out with a forbidden friend, a possibility she doesn't dare
mention to anyone. Though thematically reminiscent of VanOosting's The Last
Payback (BCCB 6/97), this takes a very different tone and approach. Tessa's simple,
quiet narration reveals the day-to-day impact of bereavement as well as the familial
upheaval in the face of different responses (her mother and father begin to drift
apart as well), and there's authenticity in her expanding awareness of loss ("I'd
been noticing that lots of people who seemed perfectly normal had had someone
die on them") as well as in her conflicted recollections of her brother ("Scott could
be a real jerk sometimes. I was tired of thinking about him"). Overall, this is
hopeful but unsentimental, an honest chronicle of the kind of experience that isn't
real until it happens to you. DS
MARCH 2002 
* 
261
WARING, RICHARD 
Hungry Hen; illus. by Caroline Jayne Church. 
HarperCollins,
2002 
[2 6p]
ISBN 0-06-623880-3 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 3-6 yrs
There's a voracious hen ("She ate and ate, and grew and grew, and the more she
ate, the more she grew") who, unbeknownst to her, is being observed by a hungry
fox from his perch on a nearby hill. Torn between the bird in the hand and the
bird in the bush, as it were, the fox keeps putting off dinner today in the expecta-
tion of an even bigger chicken tomorrow; finally he cracks and makes his assault
on the chicken house, only to find that a huge hungry chicken is not exactly easy
pickings. The ending twist is somewhat weakly delivered, but Waring's text has
the concise exposition of folklore and all the suspense a preschooler could desire.
Church's streamlined figures are strangely personable despite their minimalist style:
the rotund, dot-eyed hen (who looks to be close kin with Stoeke's Minerva Louise)
seems less abstract than enigmatic, and the thick quivery lines give the increasingly
rawboned fox an air of comic desperation. The illustrations gain some scope from
the use of textured papers, which stipple the fox's hill with newsprint and make the
hen not only classically red but also endearingly speckled. This enjoyably glutton-
ous tale gives new meaning to the phrase "oral tradition." DS
WITTLINGER, ELLEN 
The Long Night ofLeo and Bree. 
Simon, 2002 
[128p]
ISBN 0-689-83564-7 $17.00
Reviewed from galleys 
Ad 
Gr. 7-12
Two years ago, Leo's sister, Michelle, was murdered by her boyfriend, sending
Leo's mother into a spiral of alcoholic depression and abuse of her surviving child.
When she celebrates the anniversary of Michelle's death by forcing Leo to look at
pictures of her lifeless body, he snaps and flees, thinking if only he can find a girl
who deserves Michelle's fate he can somehow substitute a brazen stranger for his
sweet sister as a murder victim. He encounters Bree, a high-school senior from the
rich neighboring town, who's out for a small show of independence and rebellion
in the face of a stiflingly predictable existence; selecting her as his victim, he kid-
naps her, beginning a night where the two change from assailant and victim to two
seventeen-year-olds struggling with their own-and each other's-problems. This
is an undeniably dramatic setup, and Wittlinger effectively unfolds the strange
relationship between her two protagonists, using alternating first-person narra-
tions; timestamps at the heads of sections add to the suspense of the briskly paced
story. The story lacks the realism of Wittlinger's other novels (Razzle, BCCB
10/01, etc.), however, and there's more contrivance than authenticity in Leo's plot
and a fair chunk of romanticism in the treatment of the connection between the
two. This is nonetheless a quick read likely to keep readers gripped from start to
finish. DS
WOODS, RON 
The Hero. 
Knopf, 2002 
[192p]
Library ed. ISBN 0-375-90612-6 
$17.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-375-80612-1 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-9
With great reluctance, fourteen-year-old Jamie West and his daredevil older cousin
Jerry admit Jamie's dorky neighbor Dennis Leeper into their raft-building project.
262 
* THE BULLETIN
The cousins grudgingly admit that Dennis has good ideas to offer, but they keep
him at arm's length and even hold his neediness for friendship in contempt. The
raft is scarcely afloat before they become bored with drifting in the shallows while
tethered to the shore, and the boys defy Mr. West's safety admonitions and go for
a downstream cruise that results in Dennis' death. Now Mr. Leeper, the surly
community misfit, is out to avenge his son's death, and Jamie concocts a whop-
ping lie about Dennis's heroism in order to keep Mr. Leeper from injuring Jamie's
father. Woods divides his tale neatly in two-the escalating danger of the raft, and
the rising tension regarding Leeper's threats-and each is fraught with palpable
suspense. There is a definite thematic connection with Marion Dane Bauer's On
My Honor (BCCB 10/86), but here redemption is purchased for a lie rather than
the truth, raising this tragedy to a higher order of moral complexity. Even as
readers herald the resolution with relief, Jamie reminds them of the price he's paid.
"I had to wonder what kind of boy I'd become. One thing I knew, and I didn't
like it: I was now a boy who could stand up and tell a lie right in front of every-
one." EB
WOODSON, JACQUELINE 
Hush. Putnam, 2002 
181p
ISBN 0-399-23114-5 
$15.99 
R 
Gr. 6-9
Thirteen-year-old Toswiah doesn't know who she is anymore. After her police-
man father's testimony sends two white fellow officers to jail for killing an un-
armed black youth, the family enters the witness-protection program and finds
themselves in a strange city. There Toswiah becomes Evie, her mother finds reli-
gion, her father sinks into suicidal depression, and her older sister plans her escape
to college. Toswiah/Evie's efforts to recreate herself after the loss of everything
that has previously defined her is the heart of Woodson's novel, and the action is
internal and intense. In first-person narration, Evie mourns her past, feeling the
loss of her best friend, her grandmother, and her now distant mother and unreach-
able father as if they are deaths. Each friendly word, each small kindness is balm to
Evie's lost soul while she struggles to find out who she is. When an understanding
coach puts her on the track-and-field team, she finds something that she can claim
as hers alone, something no one can take away from her-speed. Names and
naming achieve a supreme importance, as when a girl named Toswiah is friendly
to Evie in class, and a teammate in track and field christens Evie "Spider" because
of her long legs. This unusual novel has an emotional arc that carries the reader
through the protagonist's transformation from Toswiah to Evie, from a girl de-
fined by her past to a girl defined by her present. Woodson has given readers a
finely tuned character study that is certain to provoke self-examination and per-
haps discussion about what it is that makes us who we are. JMD
&1
MARCH 2002 
* 263
CHILDREN'S BOOK AWARDS 2002
The Newbery Medal will be awarded to Linda Sue Park for A Single Shard (Clarion).
The Newbery Honor Books are Everything on a Waffle, by Polly Horvath (Farrar);
and Carver: A Life in Poems, by Marilyn Nelson (Front Street).
The Caldecott Medal will be awarded to David Wiesner for The Three Pigs, text by
the illustrator (Clarion). The Caldecott Honor Books are The Dinosaurs of
Waterhouse Hawkins, illus. by Brian Selznick, written by Barbara Kerley (Scholas-
tic); Martin's Big Words, illus. by Bryan Collier, written by Doreen Rappaport
(Jump at the Sun/Hyperion); and The Stray Dog, written and illus. by Marc Simont
(HarperCollins).
The Coretta Scott King Award for writing will be presented to Mildred D. Taylor,
author of The Land (Fogelman), and the award for illustration goes to Jerry Pinkney
for Goin 'Someplace Special, written by Patricia C. McKissack (Schwartz/Atheneum).
The King Honor Books for writing are Money Hungry, written by Sharon G. Flake
(Jump at the Sun/Hyperion) and Carver: A Life in Poems, written by Marilyn
Nelson (Front Street). The King Honor Book for illustration is Martin's Big Words,
illustrated by Bryan Collier, written by Doreen Rappaport (Jump at the Sun/Hy-
perion).
The American publisher receiving the Mildred L. Batchelder Award for the most
outstanding translation of a book originally published in a foreign language is
Cricket Books/Carus Publishing for Karin Giindisch's How I Became an Ameri-
can; the honor award goes to Viking Press for A Book of Coupons, written by Susie
Morgenstern and illustrated by Serge Bloch.
The Michael L. Printz Award for a book that exemplifies literary excellence in
young adult literature goes to An Na forA Step from Heaven (Front Street). Honor
books are Heart to Heart: New Poems Inspired by Twentieth-Century American Art,
edited by Jan Greenberg (Abrams), Freewill, by Chris Lynch (HarperCollins); The
Ropemaker, by Peter Dickinson (Delacorte); and True Believer, by Virginia Euwer
Wolff (Atheneum).
The Robert F. Sibert Award for most distinguished informational book for chil-
dren goes to Susan Campbell Bartoletti for Black Potatoes: The Story of the Great
Irish Famine, 1845-1850 (Houghton). Honor books are Surviving Hitler: A Boy
in the Nazi Death Camps, by Andrea Warren (HarperCollins); Vincent van Gogh:
Portrait ofan Artist, by Jan Greenberg and Sandra Jordan (Delacorte); and Brook-
lyn Bridge, written and illustrated by Lynn Curlee (Atheneum).
264 
* THE BULLETIN
The Pura Belpre Award for narrative goes to Pam Mufioz Ryan for Esperanza
Rising (Scholastic, 2000) and the award for illustration goes to Susan Guevara for
Chato and the Party Animals, written by Gary Soto (Putnam, 2000). Author Award
Honor Books are Iguanas in the Snow, by Francisco X. Alarc6n, illustrated by
Maya Christina Gonzalez (Children's Book Press, 2001); and Breaking Through,
by Francisco Jimenez (Houghton, 2001). The Honor Book for illustration is Juan
Bobo Goes to Work, illustrated by Joe Cepeda, retold by Marisa Montes (Harper-
Collins, 2000).
The 2003 May Hill Arbuthnot Honor Lecture will be delivered by Maurice Sendak.
Paul Zindel is the 2002 winner of the Margaret A. Edwards Award for Outstand-
ing Literature for Young Adults honoring an author's lifetime contribution in writing
books for teenagers.
The Scott O'Dell Award for Historical Fiction goes to Mildred D. Taylor for The
Land (Fogelman).
The Canadian Library Association's Best Book of the Year for children is Nan
Gregory's Wild Deer and Gran (Red Deer). The Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon
Illustrator's Award goes to Laura Fernandez and Rick Jacobson for The Magnifi-
cent Piano Recital; written by Marilynn Reynolds (Orca). The Young Adult Cana-
dian Book Award goes to Beth Goobie for Before Wings (Orca).
The Carnegie Medal was awarded to Beverley Naidoo for The Other Side of Truth
(HarperCollins).
The Kate Greenaway Medal was awarded to Lauren Child for I Will Not Ever
Never Eat a Tomato (Candlewick).
t^-=<
MARCH 2002 
* 
265
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Abuse-fiction: Frank; Wittlinger
Activism: Bowen; Silverstone
Activism-fiction: Banks
ADVENTURE: Moore; Ransom
African Americans: Moore; Ran-
som; Rhynes
African Americans-fiction: Pearsall;
Placide; Woodson
African Americans-poetry: Medina;
Perdomo
African Americans-stories: Tarpley
Alcoholism-fiction: Rottman
ALPHABET BOOKS: Haas
American Indians: Bruchac;
Silverstone
American Indians-poetry:
Longfellow
Animals-poetry: Hopkins
Animals-stories: Bonning; Kuskin;
Shannon
Ants: Sayre
Architecture: Curlee
Argentina-stories: Lamm
Art and artists: Marcus
Art and artists-fiction: Seidler
Asian Americans-fiction: Banks
Aunts-fiction: Seidler
Basketball-fiction: Russo
BEDTIME STORIES: Lamm
BIBLE STORIES: Kuskin
Bicycles-stories: Shannon
BIOGRAPHIES: Anne Frank
House; Bowen; de Paola; Marcus;
Medina; Meltzer; Moore;
Ransom; Rhynes; Silverstone;
Streissguth
Books and reading: Marcus
Brothers and sisters-fiction: Hatton;
Rottman; Wallace-Brodeur;
Wittlinger
Brothers and sisters-stories: Gay
Brothers-fiction: Seidler
Bullies-stories: O'Neill
Catholicism-fiction: Almond
Careers: Landau
Chickens-stories: Brett; Waring
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Placide; Wittlinger
Death and dying-fiction: Van
Leeuwen; Wallace-Brodeur;
Wittlinger; Woods
Dinosaurs-riddles: Hall
Dinosaurs-stories: Emmett
Disabilities-fiction: Koertge
Disasters: Kentley; Lyons
Dogs-fiction: Van Leeuwen
Dogs-stories: Simmons
Ducks-stories: Shannon
Ecology-stories: Child
Ethics and values: Clements;
Woods
Families-fiction: Hatton; Woodson
Families-stories: Anderson; Soto
Famine: Lyons
Farms-stories: Shannon
Fathers and sons-stories: Tarpley
Firefighting: Landau
Floods-stories: Kuskin
FOLKTALES AND FAIRY TALES:
Auch; Bonning; Souhami
Food and eating-stories: Auch;
Bonning; Fleming; Waring
Foster care-fiction: Frank
Foxes-stories: Bonning; Waring
266 
* THE BULLETIN
Friendship-fiction: Koertge; Woods
FUNNY STORIES: Anderson;
Auch; Fleming; Hantman;
Shannon
Gardeners and gardening-fiction:
Kochenderfer
Gardeners and gardening-stories:
Fleming
Gold Rush-fiction: Hurst
Grandmothers-fiction: Russo
Hair-stories: Tarpley
Hawaii-fiction: Salisbury
HISTORICAL FICTION: Hatton;
Hughes; Hurst; Kanefield;
Kochenderfer; Pearsall
History, U.S.: Bruchac; Moore;
Ransom; Streissguth
History, world: Anne Frank House;
Curlee; Lyons
Holocaust, the: Anne Frank House
Horses and ponies-stories: Haas
Immigrants-fiction: Placide
Insects: Sayre
Ireland: Lyons
Ireland-folklore: Souhami
Japan-stories: lijima
Jewelry-stories: Lamm
Jews-fiction: Kanefield
Literature, American: Grimes;
Medina; Meltzer; Perdomo;
Rhynes
Literature, children's: Marcus
Latinos-stories: Soto
Make-believe-stories: Hayles
Mathematics: Tang
Monsters-stories: Greene
Mothers-fiction: Wittlinger
Mothers-stories: Simmons
Movies-fiction: Koertge
Moving-stories: lijima
Mythology, classical-fiction:
Hantman
Nature study: Sayre
Night-stories: Emmett; Greene;
POETRY: Grimes; Hopkins;
Longfellow; Medina; Perdomo;
Prelutsky
Politics: Bowen; Silverstone
Poverty: Lyons
Prejudice-fiction: Clements
Princesses-stories: Auch
Rabbits-stories: Fleming
Racism-fiction: Clements
Rape-fiction: Placide
Readers' theater: Souhami
Reading aloud: Grimes; Hatton;
Medina
Reading, easy: Hall; Moore;
Ransom; Streissguth
Reading, reluctant: Clements;
Grimes; Hantman; Simon;
Wittlinger
Religion-fiction: Almond
RHYMING STORIES: Emmett;
Greene; Hayles; O'Neill
RIDDLES: Hall
Royalty-fiction: Qualey
School-stories: lijima; O'Neill
Ships and sailing: Kentley; Ransom
Shoes-stories: Soto
SHORT STORIES: Almond;
Salisbury
Sisters-fiction: Hantman
Slavery: Moore
Slavery-fiction: Pearsall
SPORTS STORIES: Russo
Storytelling: Brett; Souhami
Storytime: Bonning; Fleming;
Greene; Perdomo; Prelutsky;
Simmons; Waring
SURVIVAL STORIES: Seidler
SUSPENSE: Wittlinger; Woods
Therapy-fiction: Frank
Trains: Simon
Trees-stories: Child
Uncles-fiction: Placide
Voyages and travel: Bruchac;
Kentley; Moore
Voyages and travel-fiction: Pearsall
War-fiction: Hughes
Women's studies: Silverstone
World War II: Anne Frank House
World War II-fiction: Hughes;
Kochenderfer
Writers and writing: Marcus;
Medina; Meltzer; Perdomo;
Rhynes
Writers and writing-fiction: Grimes
Picture Perfect-
August House LittleFolk!
RR'S ALL-NIGHT PARTY
L HARLEY
strated by Melissa Ferreira
irdback $15.95 0-87483-572-0
ges: 4-7
Bear wants to throw a party, but
will anyone come? As Bear is
fond of saying, "You never know
what might happen."
STONE SOUP
HEATHER FOREST
S........ 
..
rAKt LHUILt 
AWARD 
I lusuie 
y ySusan Go erU
BANK 
STREET 
COLLEGE: 
Hardback $15.95 0-87483-498-81
THE BEST 
CHILDREN'S 
BOOKS 
OF THE 
YEAR Poperback $6.95 0-87483-602-6
Ages: 4-7 3
TLE JOHNNY BUTTERMILK
FTER AN OLD ENGLISH FOLKTALE
N WAHL 
SELECTED 
AS
ustrated by Jennifer Mazzucco 
BY 
PARENT 
C
oardback $15.95 0-87483-559-3
Ar- A.-
-yG 
-. 
r- u
'**********"***** 
ISeream'n'"
_ _ _ 
_ 
- ._ 
-. _ _„ 
-
-- 
_ __ i 
v ^ ^ < 
-
^Y"
I
OUTSTANDING
OUNCIL
I SCREAM, YOU SCREAM: A FEAST OF FOOD RHYMES 
'"u 
rea
SELECTED 
AS ONE OF THE NEW 
YORK 
LILLIAN MORRISON
PUBLIC 
LIBRARY'S 
100 BEST 
CHILDREN'S 
Illustrated by Nancy Dunaway
BOOKS 
FOR 
READING 
AND 
SHARING 
Hardback $12.95 0-87483-495-3
Ages: 4+=• 
1•
HE DANCING TURTLE: A FOLKTALE FROM BRAZIL
ETOLD BY PLEASANT DESPAIN
lustrated by David Boston
Hardback $15.95 0-87483-502-X
Ages: 4-7 
A T T/r 
TTrm
SELECTED 
AS OUTSTANDING 
BY PARENT 
COUNCIL
BANK 
STREET 
COLLEGE: 
THE BEST 
CHILDREN'S 
BOOKS 
OF THE 
YEAR
SELECTED 
FOR ELEMENTARY 
SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 
COLLECTION
HAUSE
www. augusthouse. cor
P.O. 
Box 3223 / Little Rock, AR 
72203 / 201 East Markham 72201 / 501-372-5450 / FAX 
501-372-5579
r
"A powerful and practical guide to changing classrooms...."
-Richard 
L. Allington, University of Florida
If you want to deepen your students' comprehension, look no further than Moving Forward
with Literature Circles. It presents the hows and whys of book discussions to help students
get the most out of what they read.
The authors believe that modeling is crucial to the success of literature circles. So the
book begins with a five-step plan for guiding students to independence-from whole-class,
teacher-led discussions to small-group, student-led discussions. From there, the authors offer
methods for:
* choosing books and grouping students 
* supporting students who struggle
* promoting "real" discussion 
* assessing participation & comprehension
Grades 4-8/0-439-17668-9/ 176 pages/paperback/$18.95
SC0 
LASV 
I
To purchase copies, call 1-800-Scholastic.
C0oose Rigt, Read!
Writing Fictioin for Cildreil
Stories Only You Can Tell
JUDY K. MORRIS
"[The exercises] will help both novices and seasoned authors gain
insight and move forward with their writing." -
Jane Leslie Conly,
author of Crazy Lady!, a Newbery Honor Book
www.press.uillinois.edu/f01/morris.html
-
Hardcover, $19.95
Choosing 
o, |I
Books for
Belsy Hearne 
I,, i 
iL ILLINOIS 
www.press.
qU -
-
-- 
-
* T^S 
www.press.uillinois.edu
Ava~~~ialfo 
h
Grdat 
coo 
fibay& 
nomainScec
L 
ulcain ft'e
STORY: FROM FIREPACE TO CYBERSPACE
Connecting Children and Narrative
EDITED BY BETSY HEARNE, JANICE M. DEL NEGRO,
CHRISTINE JENKINS, AND DEBORAH STEVENSON
Papers Presented at the Allerton Park Institute
Sponsored October 26-28, 1997, by the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois
In our interest in children's welfare, we often forget that
children are not simply passive receptacles for whatever
treasure or trash the adult world throws at them but are
lively agents who are continually interacting with their
environment. Children actively create meaning as read-
ers, viewers, and listeners. The 39'1 Allerton Park Insti-
tute papers emphasize the critical need to connect chil-
dren and narrative as a way to affect their develonment
S--J .
.. .
.
.. 
.. 
. .
.. 
--
"- .......
ISBN 0-87845-105-6; 
as listeners, readers, viewers, and evaluators of litera-
Number 39; 143 pages; 
ture-and information in all forms.
paper; $21.95*
The Bulletin Storytelling Review, Volume 1
Recommend-only reviews of storytelling
audio- and videotapes
EDITED BYJANICE M. DEL NEGRO AND DEBORAH STEVENSO
Add to your library this vital compendium of material
not regularly reviewed in other publications. Designed
to be a tool for selection and collection development,
the first volume of The Bulletin Storytelling Review contains:
* 162 alphabetically-arranged reviews of tapes by sto-
rytellers such as Joe Bruchac, Len Cabral, Donald
Davis, Barbara McBride-Smith, J. J. Reneaux, and
Laura Simms
Srlice, distributor, and grade level information for
each review
* Ordering information for each distributor listed
* An index that allows readers to search for tapes by
type of story or possible use 
ISBN 0-87845-106-4; 99 pages;
paper; $14.95*
Se dodr to (;Sli'sllubl(,tions•Bll 
IJI 
tiie 
loj 
1 51F 
aiel Stree, 
"iapaln11
6 82. 
reai~nnct itrqird 
isa.Nlater'and Amercm 
FT rcDicoermwid dieck
a hhml~l% 
lte.
/
University of Illinois Press 
PERIODICALS
1325 South Oak Street 
POSTAGE
Champaign, IL 61820 
PAID
U.S.A.
USACHAMPAIGN, 
IL
RETURN SERVICE REQUESTED
1111110008
111
0008-9036(200203)55:7; 1 -E
*~ 
s~ 
6g~~
You may now access The Bulletin Online with an individualized username
and password.
The Bulletin Online is available only to print subscribers, and includes the
1998-2001 volume years plus the current issues as they are published.
The online version allows you to search the current issue or the entire
database by author, title, age or grade level.
To access The Bulletin Online:
I. Go to http:/lwww.prairienet.org/ccbl
2. You will be asked for a username and password, both of which are set
as the four- or five-digit number printed in the upper left-hand corner
of the mailing label on your print copy. When entering, do not
include the letter at the end of this number sequence.
3. The first time you log in, you will be required to change your pass-
word to something other than your username.
Remember, The Bulletin Online is not licensed for public use; only indi-
vidual print subscribers and institutional subscribers' staff are granted
access, so please do not share your access codes. We are working to
expand The Bulletin Online's capabilities and therefore create broader
electronic subscription options for individuals and institutions. Look for
details later this year.
Non-subscribers can learn more about The Bulletin of the Center for
Children's Books and view a sample of The Bulletin Online at our homepage:
http://www.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb/
Please e-mail any feedback or questions to: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.
