Hl
ILLINOI
S
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT URBANA-CHAMPAIGN
PRODUCTION NOTE
University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign Library
Large-scale Digitization Project, 2007.
University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
University of Illinois Press
A
g·,i~~rsr~~
~:s~ 
.. ·
· ~· 
r$l"
il"lr
r
wc^" 
.y" 
C. 
W
School Library Journal stars
Marvin's Best
Christmas Present Ever
An I Can Read Book®
by Newbery Medalist 
Full-color pictures by
KATHERINE PATERSON 
JANE CLARK BROWN
irvin's family
oves the wreath
he makes for the
outside of their
trailer. And, after
a bird makes her
nest in it, Marvin's
Christmas present
is one his family
nay keep forever.
ients of giving and
s choice to he one of
the best presents of the season."-SLJ
"The holiday message of rebirth and renewal is part of the story
which Paterson tells in simple words without condescension.
Brown's pictures extend the family warmth and fun." -AIABooklist
Ages 4-8. $14.95 TR (0-06-027159-0) $14.89 LB (0-06-027160-4)
Katherine Paterson's earlier I Can Read Book about Marvin
THE SMALLEST COW IN THE WORLD
Full-color pictures by Jane Clark Brown
Ages 4-8. $3.75 PB (0-06-444164-4)
f HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022
I
THE
B UL LE T IN
OF THE CENTER FOR CHILDREN'S BOOKS
December 1997
Vol.51 No. 4
A LOOK INSIDE
115 
THE BIG PICTURE
Noah's Ark Adapted by Heinz Janisch and illustrated by Lisbeth Zwerger
116 
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
Reviewed titles include:
124 * I Was Born a Slave: The Story ofHarrietJacobs by Jennifer Fleischner;
illus. by Melanie Reim
131 
* What Do You Do When Something Wants to Eat You? written and illus.
by Steve Jenkins
133 * Rome Antics written and illus. by David Macaulay
133 * Unicorns! Unicorns! by Geraldine McCaughrean; illus. by Sophie
Windham
137 * Mouse Mess written and illus. by Linnea Riley
145 PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS
146 
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
___
EXPLANATION OF CODE SYMBOLS USED WITH REVIEWS
* 
Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R 
Recommended.
Ad 
Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M 
Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR 
Not recommended.
SpC 
Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR 
A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Centerfor Children's Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August
by the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and the University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
REVIEWING STAFF
Janice M. Del Negro, Editor (JMD)
Deborah Stevenson, Assistant Editor (DS)
Betsy Hearne, Consulting Editor and Faculty Liaison (BH)
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer (PM))
CENTER STAFF
Shirley Chan
Jennifer Sherwood DeBaillie
Linda Fenster
Kate McDowell
Reviewers' initials are appended to reviews.
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
1 year, institutions, $40.00; individuals, $35.00. In countries other than the United States, add
$7.00 per subscription for postage. Japanese subscription agent: Kinokuniya Company Ltd. Single
copy rate: $4.50. Reprinted volumes 1-35 (1947-1981) available from Kraus Reprint Co., Route
100, Millwood, NY 10546. Volumes available in microfilm from University Microfilms, 300 North
Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche from Johnson
Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be made payable to
the University of Illinois Press. All notices of change of address should provide both the old and new
address. Postmaster: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books,
University of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Subscription Correspondence. Address all inquiries about subscriptions and advertising to University
of Illinois Press, 1325 S. Oak, Champaign, IL 61820-6903.
Editorial Correspondence. Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to
Janice Del Negro, The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books, 51 E. Armory Ave., Champaign,
IL 61820-6601. E-mail: bccb@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu
Visit our homepage at http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/pubofflbccb
Periodicals postage paid at Champaign, Illinois
© 1997 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover illustration by Lisbeth Zwerger, from Noah's Ark ©1997 by Michael Neugebauer Verlag AG,
Gossau Zurich, Switzerland. Reprinted with permission of North-South Books.
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
115
THE BIG PICTURE
Noah's Ark
ad. by Heinz Janisch; illus. by Lisbeth Zwerger
The story of Noah's Ark has been retold countless times in countless ways. It is
one of those mystical tales with an awesomely cosmic element: God's chosen man
given the sweeping task of surviving impending universal devastation. This faith-
ful retelling for children eschews the warm and fuzzy feelings of some past rendi-
tions and allows readers glimpses into the cold reality of a doomed world: "I will
destroy them all," says God, "and cleanse the world of evil. Every living thing shall
perish." This is serious stuff, and Janisch never pretends otherwise.
Zwerger's restrained artistic tone complements Janisch's almost matter-
of-fact text. The graceful, spare illustrations give a powerful sense of antediluvian
place and time where unicorns, giants, and satyrs once co-inhabited the earth with
man and beast. As they wander by the shipbuilding site, one cannot help but
ponder their destiny. A particularly haunting pre-flood spread opens the book,
showing smoking towers dotting a barren landscape littered with weapons and
bones while storks hover overhead; the facing page seems to give heaven's view-
point, peering down at Noah's family who stand huddled together like homeless
refugees. Noah, looking like an old European grandpapa, receives his divine mis-
sion as his family surrounds him in a show of solidarity. Zwerger's rendering of
this solitary little group gazing heavenward serves to emphasize the gravity of the
situation and their singular involvement in it, as God tells them, "But with you I
will make a covenant. You will survive. With you life will begin again after the
flood."
"From all corners of the earth the animals streamed into the ark, and
there was room for all of them." Laudably, there is an absence of cuteness here.
Animal duos are often presented in a diagram style reminiscent of early bestiaries,
which is especially suited to the continental mood established throughout the book.
Other animal pairs are portrayed decorously proceeding toward the ark. They too
seem charged by a sense of the import of Noah's commission as they steadfastly
beat a path to Noah's great naval wonder. Foggy grays and earthtones serve a
subtle role as background for the deep pigment of the orange-red ark. The artist
uses this contrast to great advantage, as the brilliant color emphasizes the ark's
redemptive role. The ship eerily casts its pale red reflection in the falling rain while
umbrella-laden citizens rush by. The question begging an answer is, where are
they rushing to?
Scenes where desperate citizens cling to rooftops powerfully depict the
horror of being left behind. One affecting spread shows the ark above water with
occupants safely aboard ("But they had many, many days to wait, floating above
116 
* THE BULLETIN
the flooded world. It seemed the rain would never stop"), while below sea crea-
tures enjoy a swim through the windows of empty buildings. The human tragedy
is stark and palpable.
Finally, "Noah opened the great door of the ark, and the animals streamed
out. And Noah left the ark with his wife, his sons, and his sons' wives. God
blessed them, and said: 'Never again will I make a great flood to cover the whole
earth. The seasons will return: seedtime and harvest, summer and winter."' As
the released animals hurry to their future and the more ecstatic ones leap upon the
dry hills, the biblical absoluteness of this story reaches its climax. The jubilance of
the saved is especially potent following closely after such all-encompassing loss.
This is an extraordinary Noah's Ark: so somber, so beautiful, so clever, so worth
sharing. Do. (Imprint information appears on p. 130.)
Pat Mathews, Reviewer
NEW BOOKS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
ADLER, DAVID A. 
Chanukah in Chelm; illus. by Kevin O'Malley. 
Lothrop,
1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-09953-X 
$1593
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-09952-1 
$16.00 
R 5-7 yrs
Meet Berel the carpenter: "I walked away for a moment, and now I don't remem-
ber which end of the ladder is the top and which is the bottom. . .. If I set the
ladder against the apple tree and the ladder is upside down, then when I think I'm
climbing up the ladder, I'll really be climbing down. And when I think I'm going
down, I'll really be going up." Every Chelmite has a special take on confusion,
especially Mendel, the caretaker of the synagogue, who looks everywhere-under
the table, over the table, and behind the table-for a table on which to put the
menorah. This is the exuberantly funny story of his success, and it's a worthy
successor to Isaac Bashevis Singer's irreverent tales of the foolish Chelmites who
resemble no one so much as ourselves. Doubling Adler's inventive humor is Kevin
O'Malley's fine-hatched, skillfully drafted pen-and-wash art, which caricatures the
figures without stereotyping them, combines slapstick exaggeration (Rabbi
Nachman balancing a breakfast bowl on his head) with sly detail (a square-wheeled
bicycle in the storage closet), and scatters jokes and puns via cartoon bubbles with
special attention to a satirical cat ("How many Chelmites does it take to move a
table? One to hold the table and ten to move the earth"). On the last page is a
roadside sign for Chelm, with an arrow pointing in all four directions. However
you get there, it's worth the trip. BH
ARMSTRONG, JENNIFER 
Mary Mehan Awake. 
Random House, 1997 
1 1 9 p
ISBN 0-679-88276-6 
$18.00 
R Gr. 6-10
The close of the Civil War finds Mary Mehan (The Dreams ofMairhe Mehan,
BCCB 11/96) as emotionally traumatized as the demobilized soldiers around her.
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
117
During the past two years of nursing the broken and dying, Mary has hardened
her heart and closed her senses against those daily horrors, and she has now taken
a position in domestic service to retired naturalist Jasper Dorsett and his wife, a
loving and undemanding couple who live a quiet existence on the shores of Lake
Ontario. There she meets another "wounded chick," Henry Till, a family friend
of the Dorsetts who returned from war deaf and now works as their groundskeeper.
That Mary and Henry will fall in love is never in doubt; it is their mutual healing
and the slow reclamation of their dreams and passions that form the core of the
tale. Armstrong divides her work into five books, corresponding to the five senses,
and follows Mary's reawakening to the beauty of each. The powerful use of imag-
ery that distinguished Armstrong's previous novel is also much in evidence here;
the ethereal dreaminess, however, is not, making the sequel accessible to a slightly
younger audience. Readers of the first volume will be relieved to find Mary set
firmly on course to a brighter future. EB
BAILEY, LINDA 
Gordon Loggins andthe Three Bears; illus. by Tracy Walker. 
Kids
Can, 1997 
32p
ISBN 1-55074-362-7 
$14.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
When Gordon Loggins finds a doorway to a forest in his school library's book-
shelf, he can't resist going through it. In that forest he discovers a cottage, the
home of three bears who are waiting for Goldilocks but who are prepared to make
do with Gordon. In response to faraway chants of "WE WANT A STORY!"
from the kids in the library, the bears steer Gordon through the drama with only a
few deviations (Gordon can't stand porridge so the bears add chocolate chips, he
can't break the chair so Papa Bear does it for him, and instead of waking up in fear
to the bears he scares them). Finally he pops back out of the story into the library,
finding his friends raving about the book that was just read-and it's Gordon's
own story. This isn't quite as clever as other books of its ilk, and the text is a bit
wordy for most of those young enough to tolerate Goldilocks, but the reinvention
and the living-the-book fantasy are amiable and inviting. The line-and-watercolor
art gives a round and shiny solidity to the figures and furniture that keeps the story
grounded in reality, but the pop-eyed faces get a little cartoony and repetitious.
Rankin's Merl and Jasper's Supper Caper (BCCB 6/97) is a smoother life-enters-
book story, but kids just growing out of Goldilocks may enjoy using this as a
cockeyed final look at the old tale. DS
BANG, MOLLY 
Common Ground: The Water, Earth, and Air We Share; written
and illus. by Molly Bang. 
Blue Sky/Scholastic, 1997 
36p
ISBN 0-590-10056-4 
$12.95 
Ad 6-9yrs
In this well-meaning introduction to the necessity of conserving our natural re-
sources, Bang uses the example of the common ground, the commons, that be-
longs to all the inhabitants of a village. The villagers share the common grazing
space for their sheep, until there are too many sheep and not enough grass, so
"they agreed to keep the commons lush and green, and to do a better job of sharing
it. Each person could only put one sheep on the commons. Everyone had to
follow this rule. Other people chose to move away. There was always someplace
else to go." Bang then extends this simile, likening the world to the village, with
our common ground being parks, reserves, natural resources, etc., pointing out the
ways people shortsightedly use up such resources without thought to their replace-
118 
* THE BULLETIN
ment, telling readers, "Now we don't have anyplace else to go." This is a beauti-
fully designed little book from the dark sky-like endpapers to the lushly green,
naive interior paintings that include a green commons, fluffy white sheep,
farmscapes, seascapes, and cityscapes. While Bang's text makes the point that people
are wasteful, it offers no suggestions for action other than a generic call for coop-
eration ("We need to answer this question TOGETHER") that does little to en-
lighten young readers. Oddly enough, Bang's paintings have such charm that the
"after" paintings (of 'scapes without fish, trees, or clean water) are very nearly as
lovely as the "before" paintings. As a wake-up call to environmental action this
may leave something to be desired, but it will be very handy as a discussion starter,
as well as a useful beginning reader for those seeking some easy, attractive nonfic-
tion. JMD
BARRETT, JUDI 
Pickles to Pittsburgh; by Judi Barrett; illus. by Judi and Ron
Barrett. 
Atheneum, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-80104-1 
$16.00 
Ad Gr. 1-3
Readers who have visited Chewandswallow in Cloudy With a Chance ofMeatballs
(BCCB 2/79) will recall the meat-eorilogical peculiarities of that legendary land,
which was abandoned by its citizens when they were deluged with foodstuffs. Now
narrator Kate dreams that the residents have returned with an altruistic mission to
create the Falling Food Company and package and ship their bounty anywhere in
the world it is needed. The plot may be as thin as capellini and the dream sequence
set-up an unnecessary pretension, but the Barretts' meticulously detailed line-and-
watercolor foodscapes are delightfully inventive and they almost carry the day.
Striped drinking straws siphon cream from a reservoir of melting ice cream novel-
ties, ladle trucks scoop pea soup from gigantic bowls into waiting cans, pats of
butter are hoisted onto split baked potatoes, which are transported by (what else?)
a forklift. True, foisting TV dinners, Rink-L Kut fries, and mushroom pizza on
the "poverty and drought" stricken areas of the globe is somewhat politically prob-
lematic.., but lighten up and enjoy. EB
BENOIT, MARGARET 
Who Killed Olive Souffle? 
Learning Triangle/McGraw-Hill,
1997 
131p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-07-006310-9 
$10.95
Paper ed. ISBN 0-07-006275-7 $4.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-10
This new paperback mystery series introduces Angel Cardone, police detective,
solving the mystery of who killed chef Olive Souffle. The series recommends itself
by promising to include all sorts of scientific stuff about detective work-how to
do chemical analysis, how to preserve the evidence of a crime scene, and how to use
kitchen supplies as forensic tools. Angel and her faithful dog Miro, stranded in a
snowstorm, are sheltered and fed by the title character, and, in gratitude for her
terrific pea soup, they are determined to find her subsequent murderer. After some
forensic shenanigans in the country inn kitchen, with some obviously planted mis-
clues and even more obvious insinuations of romance between Angel and another
cook, the crime is solved. This portrays adult protagonists with adult concerns in
an adult setting involved in an adult's murder for adult motivations. As a result,
there is little to involve young readers here, except maybe the dog, who doesn't
have a big enough part to carry this mystery. JMD
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
119
BOND, ADRIENNE 
Sugarcane House and Other Stories aboutMr. Fat; illus. by Leuyen
Pahm. 
Harcourt, 1997 
86p
ISBN 0-15-201446-2 
$16.00 
R Gr. 4-6
DeWayne loves the stories about Mr. Fat that his great-grandmother Ma Minnie
tells him, and he takes every opportunity to sit at her knee and take them all in.
On her part, Ma Minnie uses Mr. Fat to tell DeWayne a thing or two about his
history, and to distract him from his often inattentive parents. Mr. Fat's real name
is John Fortune, and he is the African-American folk hero of Ma Minnie's humor-
ous tales. The frame of DeWayne listening to Ma Minnie's tales is an unintrusive
one, and the tales themselves have a lively gusto that belies their occasionally seri-
ous undercurrents. Mr. Fat is a folk everyman, both trickster and fool, who es-
capes slavery to live wild in the swamps rather than as chattel, saves a friend from
being taken in by a flimflam man, and starts a traveling grocery store business, all
with humor, grace, and a sense of dignity that make him an outstanding hero.
This title is deceptively simple in style, the chapters are self-contained and useful
for reading aloud, and the language is colloquial and accessible without falling into
a strained attempt at dialect. Black-and-white illustrations break up the text, and
while the humans are a bit unemotive, the animals are a caricaturist's dream. John
is a recognized folk hero in African-American narrative cycles, but there are no
notes to indicate sources used or adapted by the author. Bond's versions of these
tales are strongly folkloric in their presentation and impact, and they could be
easily adapted for use in the classroom or for storytelling. JMD
BUCK, NOLA 
Santa's Short Suit Shrunk and Other Christmas Tongue Twisters; il-
lus. by Sue Truesdell. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
[32p] 
(I Can Read Books)
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-026663-5 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-026649-X 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
Gr. 2-4
Tongue twisters have been the realm of kids forever, and in this seasonal set, youthful
lingual apparatuses will get a thorough workout. Some of the offerings here are
more of a mouthful than others. Try this: "Tall Tim trims thin twin trees" or this:
"Sarah says she's sure she saw Santa. Shy Sam Shaw saw the same Santa Sarah says
she saw." Come on, faster. Others are for more timid tongue twisterees: "See
Kate skate. Skate, Kate, skate!" It all adds up to a verbal spree that is not only fun
to say but fun to look at, with exuberant illustrations full of comical, long-nosed
kids, clumsy reindeer, scruffy mongrels, sneezy snowmen, and a rotund Santa do-
ing the holiday hustle in one zany wintry scene after the next. Don't wait for
Christmas-tackle these totally tickling tongue-twisters today. 
PM
BUNTING, EVE 
December; illus. by David Diaz. 
Harcourt, 1997 
33p
ISBN 0-15-201434-9 
$15.00 
R Gr. 3-6
In a cardboard-box room, a homeless boy and his mother celebrate Christmas with
a scrawny tree, some found ornaments, the December page of a calendar with a
golden angel on it, and two Christmas cookies earned by collecting pop cans. An
old woman with a fake rose pinned to her hat knocks on their cardboard door on
Christmas Eve. The boy's mother lets the old woman in, and the boy gives her one
of their only two Christmas cookies. "It's warm in here," the old woman says.
"Warm with love." The three of them sleep, but the boy awakens in the middle of
the night to find the old woman gone and, standing in the doorway, the glowing
120 
* THE BULLETIN
figure of the December angel. After that Christmas, the boy and his mother's luck
improves, and the tale closes with the boy celebrating the next Christmas in an
apartment, with same calendar angel on the wall, now with a faded rose in her hair,
This tale's effectiveness lies in its controlled brevity and the incorporation of strong
folkloric elements, epitomized by the motif of the unfortunate poor giving to the
stranger who turns out to be a divinity in disguise. Diaz' illustrations have his
trademark strengths: vigorous lines, tight compositions, and beautiful, expressive
faces. The text itself is contained in boxes set against what appears to be crumpled
brown paper. The painted, textured collage backgrounds (created by Daniel Renner)
are a distinct contrast to Diaz' paintings with their smooth, glossy surfaces, adding
greatly to the richness of the overall design. This story has all the elements of
generosity and magic found in traditional tales; that it reflects a reality of our
society is both its strength and its tragedy. JMD
BURNS, MARILYN 
Spaghetti and Meatballs forAll!: A Mathematical Story; illus. by
Debbie Tilley. 
Scholastic, 1997 
[40p]
ISBN 0-590-94459-2 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
The Comforts, a pair of empty nesters, invite the whole clan and a few friends over
for a spaghetti dinner. A rental company provides the extra tables and chairs needed
to accommodate all thirty-two diners, and Mrs. Comfort has the seating arrange-
ment precisely worked out in advance--eight tables with four persons at each.
However, when the guests arrive they begin to move the tables and chairs around
to sit in companionable groups, and Mrs. Comfort tries in vain to warn them that
these new arrangements just won't work. Nobody's listening, though, and as the
last guest arrives, somebody suggests her original arrangement. "'You see?' said
Mr. Comfort. 'It all worked out.' 'I see everything is back exactly the way I had it!'
said Mrs. Comfort." Burns employs this all-too-familiar family fuss to introduce
the concepts of area and perimeter, and she appends three blessedly cogent pages
of advice for arithmetically challenged adults on how to reinforce and expand the
theme. Best of all, she encourages readers to let listeners absorb concepts at their
own speed: "Some children may interrupt the story to express an idea.... Some
may want to talk about the illustrations. Other children prefer to listen until the
end... follow their leads!" The ink-and-watercolor art fulfills its comic potential,
depicting a diverse crowd in scratchy offhand lines; humorous details such as tip-
ping flower vases, loudly patterned dresses, and youthful crushes abound. This
funny, friendly cartoon feast may tempt even the math-shy to pull up a chair and
have a bite. EB
CHRISTELOW, EILEEN 
Not Until Christmas, Walter!; written and illus. by Eileen
Christelow. 
Clarion, 1997 
[40p]
ISBN 0-395-82273-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
4-8 yrs
All Louise's hard work is for naught when pet pooch Walter sniffs a dog biscuit in
a beribboned package and tears apart all her carefully wrapped, handmade Christ-
mas gifts for the family to get at it. At first tearful Louise would be happy to leave
Walter in his doghouse for good, but when she gets lost in the woods on the family
outing to cut a Christmas tree, she's mighty grateful Water's "stupid nose" is
nearby to sniff her out. All is forgiven, new gifts are procured, and Louise rigs a
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
121
bell to Walter's present, just in case he should jump the gun again. When Walter
begins his Christmas Eve package investigation, he is surprised by a bearded, red-
suited man who plops down in the fireplace. Santa's clearly no fool when it comes
to strange dogs, and he offers Walter a large dog bone biscuit from his pocket;
Louise, roused by jingling bells, is mystified by Walter's new treasure. "'So, where
did you get that biscuit?' asked Louise. 'Woomfl' said Walter." Line and water-
color cartoons are cheery and inviting, and the tail-thumping, soulful-eyed Walter
is as ingratiating a pup as you can find. The three chapter divisions and oversized
type may entice some novice readers to try this one solo. EB
COONEY, CAROLINE B. 
What Child Is This?: A Christmas Story. 
Delacorte,
1997 
[14 4p]
ISBN 0-385-32317-4 
$14.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-12
Seventeen-year-old Matt has bounced from foster home to foster home, and he
has finally ended up at the Rowans, where he hopes to remain. Eight-year-old
Katie is also being fostered by the Rowans, but they have decided they cannot keep
her-she is young and needy, and they are too old. Matt does something he
normally tries very hard not to do-he hopes. He secretly hangs Katie's Christmas
wish for a family on a gift tree in the restaurant where he works. Cooney moves
from point of view to point of view, keeping the narrative immediate and wrench-
ing as she shows the interior monologues of Matt and his acquaintances: Liz,
whose wealthy parents know a lot about Christmas decorations but not a thing
about Christmas; Tack, a good guy with a good heart who is about to realize the
blessings of his own life; and Katie, whose yearning for love is tangible and
heartwringing. Cooney weaves the threads of these young and fragile lives to-
gether in an involving, emotionally moving novel that will have readers sniffling
into their hankies and reconsidering their own Christmas agendas. Faith in God
has a central role in this Christmas story, as each character undergoes a crisis that
tests, evokes, or strengthens their beliefs. Cooney's characters reveal themselves
through their thoughts and actions, and, while not all of them are transformed by
the somewhat predictable but welcome Christmas miracle that concludes this book,
readers won't have any problem identifying who they want to be like in their own
Christmas drama. JMD
COSBY, BILL 
The Best Way to Play
Trade ed. ISBN 0-590-13756-5; Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-95617-5.
The Meanest Thing to Say
Trade ed. ISBN 0-590-69195-3; Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-95616-7.
The Treasure Hunt
Trade ed. ISBN 0-590-16399-X; Paper ed. ISBN 0-590-95618-3.
Each book: 
illus. by Varnette P. Honeywood. 
Cartwheel/Scholastic,
1997 
[40p] 
(A Little Bill Book) Trade ed. $13.95; Paper ed. $3.99.
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 2-4
The Cos, who has a doctorate in education, now turns his hand to early readers,
starring Little Bill. In The Best Way to Play, Little Bill is disappointed that his
family won't buy him an expensive videogame, but he finds better ways of enter-
taining himself anyway. In The Meanest Thing to Say, he's intimidated by an
122 
* THE BULLETIN
insulting new kid with a taste for playing the dozens, until his father's advice helps
him turn a foe into a friend. In The Treasure Hunt, Little Bill envies everyone
else's special collection, but a conversation with his great-grandmother makes him
realize that his gift for storytelling is his special treasure. These are a bit wordy (the
breaking down of each book into three chapters helps), and the messages at the
end are predictable, but there's a nice lively spirit to the proceedings. Parents tease
offspring (Dad's not above a deliberate comic belch), the interracial pack of kids
belt around the neighborhood at high speed, and great-grandmother Alice the
Great is a seriously significant household member. The acrylic art is crisp-edged
and solid to the point of resembling cut-paper collage; the abundance of brightly
contrasting colors occasionally looks more like design than narrative illustration,
but the full-bleed intensity is an energetic contrast to beginning readers' usual
watercolor spot art. There's a vulnerable commonality to Little Bill that many
young readers will warm to. DS
CREWS, NINA 
Snowball; written and illus. by Nina Crews. 
Greenwillow,
1997 
26p
Library ed. ISBN 0-688-14929-4 
$14.93
Trade ed. ISBN 0-688-14928-6 
$15.00 
Ad 
3-7 yrs
An African-American preschooler searches the sky each day for snow. Although
Monday's weather report promised snow, "the sky is blue and clear all day. It
doesn't snow on Tuesday either, and Wednesday's cold and gray." She awakens
on Friday from a dream of a perfect snowball and finds her wish has come true:
"Snow! It's everywhere. It falls up, down, and sideways all morning." The little
girl's city landscape is captured in photo collages, and she and her classmates and
their long-awaited snowballs are superimposed onto home, school, and playlot
backgrounds. The presumably deliberate fuzziness of much of the photo repro-
duction is often distracting, and the arty clutter of the compositions is somewhat
monotonous. It is refreshing, however, to watch the drab urban grays and browns
transformed, not into a fairy-dusted wonderland, but into a very real and equally
enticing winter playground. EB
DOHERTY, BERLIE 
Daughter of the Sea; illus. by Sian Bailey. 
DK Ink,
1997 
114p
ISBN 0-7994-2469-X 
$14.95 
R Gr. 4-6
Jannet and Munroe have long since given up hope for having a child of their own,
so it seems providential when Munroe finds a baby drifting in a rocky pool. They
name the child Gioga and raise her as their own, but Munroe fears to tell his wife
of the sealskin that slipped away from the infant as he picked her up; she fears to
tell him of Hill Marliner, a selkie who periodically returns as a man to pay her for
nursing his transformed child and to warn her that he will one day take Gioga
away. As Gioga grows, her increasing affinity for the ocean and her parents' esca-
lating fear of losing her threaten to become tragic contraries. While the folktale-
like story doesn't quite have the heft and rhythm appropriate for a longer narrative,
Doherty's atmospheric depiction of life surrounded by sea and story is effective
prose balladry. When old enough to be a character in her own right, Gioga is
sparely but sympathetically drawn, providing an interesting facet in the selkie child's
point of view. Fans of other selkie tales, the film The Secret ofRoan Inish, or songs
such as "The Great Silkie" will enjoy dipping into this account. A note mentions
the folkloric origin of the interpolated stories but gives no sources. DS
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
123
DRAGONWAGON, 
CRESCENT 
Bat in the Dining Room; illus. by S. D.
Schindler. 
Marshall Cavendish, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-7614-5007-6 
$15.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
A small bat takes a wrong turn and ends up in the posh dining room of a hotel
restaurant in this sometimes rhyming, very free verse picture book. The diners are,
to put it mildly, put out, and flee the dining room, making a number of sugges-
tions as to what to do with the bat-stun it, kill it, shoot it, chase it outside. But
Melissa ("at school they called her weird") has dropped beneath a tablecloth and is
considering her options. She opens the exit door and the frightened bat swoops
outside, to the general relief of all concerned who effusively congratulate the self-
deprecating Melissa. The text never falls into the precious, and the cool-headed,
clear-eyed, and compassionate Melissa is a most admirable character (especially
compared to the slightly hysterical supporting cast). Schindler's pencil and water-
color illustrations softly depict the cross-beamed dining room and a plethora of
characters right out of a kinder, gentler Altman movie, including the flustered
maitre d', the variously coiffed ladies who dine, and of course, Melissa, with her
curly hair and inquisitive eyes. This will make an engaging readaloud for large
groups as well as a painless introduction to the concept of narrative poetry. JMD
EDWARDS, PAMELA DUNCAN 
Dinorella: A Prehistoric Fairy Tale; illus. by Henry
Cole. 
Hyperion, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2249-X 
$15.85
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0309-6 $15.95 
R 
4-8 yrs
Cinderella is getting quite a going over lately, first with Deborah Nourse Lattimore's
Cinderhazel (BCCB 11/97), and now with Edwards' more successful effort. A
"dainty and dependable" diplodocus (shocking pink, with fluttery eyelashes) is the
victim of her lazy sisters' demands and verbal abuse. "Dora and Doris were dread-
ful to Dinorella" and considered her too dull to attend the dance at Duke Dudley's
den. Fairydactyl arrives just in time though, and Dinorella not only gets her guy
but saves him from the jaws of a carnivorous deinonychus to boot. The text stands
up well enough under the considerable alliterative strain, but Cole's deliberately
garish paintings provide the real hoot here with a wealth of details in the best
animated cartoon tradition. Dora draws her delicate hosiery over perfectly pedicured
claws while doe-eyed Dinorella looks on with a dripping toilet brush; the dastardly
deinonychus spreads the Duke's tail with condiments before sinking his teeth in;
dinos tool around the lava-lit terrain in 1950s classic cruisers (Pangea license plates:
JRASSC; X-TNKT). Listeners'll have a ball, right down to Dora and Doris' final
"Drat!" EB
EVANS, LEZLIE 
Snow Dance; illus. by Cynthia Jabar. 
Houghton, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-395-77849-2 
$16.00 
R 
5-7 yrs
Every child who has ever listened earnestly to the radio on a snowy morning hop-
ing for the announcement of canceled school will recognize the exuberant joy that
permeates Snow Dance: "Sun's rays streaming, white drifts gleaming, school is
canceled for the day!" Those poor kids living in temperate climates will be green
with envy as this wintry concoction revels in twenty-four hours of icy bliss: "Fro-
zen fingers, still we linger, having too much fun to go." The rhymes are a little
jingly, but they're simple and kidproof, teaming up effectively with energetic wa-
tercolor and gouache compositions where two little girls in multi-hued winter
124 
* THE BULLETIN
finery frolic with friends and family against a requisite snowy backdrop. The car-
toonish renderings capture all the snowy antics: snow angels, snowman-building,
snowball-making, sledding, and even the hot-cocoa ritual by the fire when the day
is spent. This is a lively seasonal readaloud sure to inspire some snow dances in
your area (just don't remind the kids about the makeup day in June). PM
FLEISCHNER, JENNIFER 
I Was Born a Slave: The Story of Harriet Jacobs; illus. by
Melanie Reim. 
Millbrook, 1997 
93p
ISBN 0-7613-0111-9 
$23.90 
R 
Gr. 5-9
Harriet Jacobs' autobiography Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl: Written by
Herself was published in 1861 and eventually became a classic piece of slave litera-
ture. Here Fleischner succeeds in adapting the story for young people, powerfully
articulating the ugly nature of slavery. Harriet's early awakening to the horrifying
meaning of her enslavement comes after her first mistress dies: "Her mistress had
given 'my negro girl Harriet' to her sister's three-year-old daughter, along with 'my
bureau & work table & their contents.'" This tragic drama continues to unfold in
the household of Dr. Norcom, the three-year-old's father, as Harriet's heartbreak-
ing story reveals the physical and mental cruelty she suffered at the hands of her
spiteful and inhumane master, whose lecherous advances were a constant source of
grief. Her subsequent escape, the unbelievable deprivation of hiding for seven
years in a stifling crawlspace, and her new life as a free woman are revealed in
eloquent, absorbing prose. The black on cream linocuts depict scenes as a patch-
work quilt, the black stitching fencing in the quilt squares like barbed wire and
evoking the somber mood of the story. Team this with The Middle Passage (BCCB
12/95) for a presentation charged with pain and triumph. PM
FLEMING, DENISE 
Time to Sleep; written and illus. by Denise Fleming. 
Holt,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8050-3762-4 
$15.95 
R 2-6 yrs
When it is time to hunker down for bed, this autumn offering won't let the young
ones sleep until they follow Bear, Snail, Skunk, Turtle, Woodchuck, Ladybug,
and-oops-Bear again, as they alert each other, one by one, that "winter is on its
way." Clues about winter's impending arrival are in every segment, providing
children with an easy accumulation of facts about summer's demise: frost on the
grass, yellow and red trees, shorter days, falling leaves, and flying geese. Fleming's
artistry with cotton rag fibers tinted in deep, autumnal colors provides a visual
feast chock-full of the season's trademark richness laid out on handmade paper.
Textured paper shapes create creatures and foliage in a panoply of fall hues. Read
this at bedtime, or gather a group and act it out for a pajama storytime romp. PM
FOREMAN, MICHAEL 
The Little Reindeer; written and illus. by Michael
Foreman. 
Dial, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-8037-2184-6 
$14.99 
R 4-8 yrs
A little reindeer inadvertently stows away on Santa's sleigh and ends up as a young
boy's Christmas present in this tale set in a wintry cityscape. The young African-
American boy houses the reindeer in a cage with his pet pigeons on the rooftop of
an apartment building, and "one day when the boy opened the door to let out the
pigeons, the reindeer flew out with them." The boy and reindeer fly over the city,
"every night of the long summer and over the golden leaves of autumn," but as
.DECEMBER 1997 
* 
125
Christmas comes around again the boy knows that the reindeer must return to his
home. On Christmas Eve, the deer departs, and Santa leaves a note thanking the
boy for taking care of his littlest reindeer; the next Christmas Eve, "when he heard
the real jingle bells coming down from the snowy sky, he was waiting on the roof
with milk and peanut butter sandwiches." Foreman's text never makes the mis-
take of falling into seasonal gushiness-the story is straightforwardly magical, and
therein lies its charm. The watercolor illustrations, in a heavily blue palette with
warm touches of red and yellow, avoid false sentimentality as well, with the scrawny
little fawn growing into one of the more realistic reindeer we've seen lately. Text
and illustrations work together nicely in this understated, effective tale of Christ-
mas magic. JMD
FORRESTER, SANDRA 
My Home Is Over Jordan. Lodestar, 1997 
[160p]
ISBN 0-525-67568-X 
$15.99
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 5-8
This sequel to Sound the Jubilee (BCCB 5/95) explores what freedom really meant
to post-Civil War ex-slaves with few resources and fewer sympathizers among whites,
who resented their new status and their migrations around the countryside in search
of a new life. Like the ex-slave saved by a patroness in Paulsen's Sarny: A Life
Remembered (BCCB 11/97), Maddie and her family find a protector, a white man
willing to sell them land and help fend off attacks by violent racists. Maddie's
family also adopts a motherless child who is as traumatized as the child Sarny
rescues in Paulsen's book. However, Forrester's plotting is tighter than Paulsen's,
the suspense is well sustained, and the characters take some surprise turns that
keep the story from becoming predictable. The tone is realistically balanced be-
tween Maddie's bitterness over unjust treatment and her hope that perseverance
will pay off; this fictional and fair-minded insight into history allows readers to
decide for themselves how her future might align with their past. BH
GANTOS, JACK Jack's Black Book. 
Farrar, 1997 
165p
ISBN 0-374-33662-8 
$16.00 
R 
Gr. 5-8
Jack, of Heads or Tails (BCCB 7/94) andJack's New Year (12/95), is back in Florida,
but his life hasn't gotten much easier. On the contrary-his test scores show him
as lacking the basic intelligence even to bypass shop, which doesn't bode well for
his dreams of being a famous writer. Shop, however, provides him with the op-
portunity to make a coffin for the family dog, BeauBeau, after the creature plum-
mets to its death in a self-dug hole. The dog coffin provides an opportunity for
extensive humiliation and grossness when Jack has to dig it up to get shop credit,
and then possible riches when a pet-merchandising former neighbor wants to mar-
ket the product-which would entail digging the thing and its contents up yet
another time. Aside from that there are myriad painful and comic incidents, whether
it be Jack's first writing gig that ends up in the drowning of his typewriter, his
passionate and doomed romance with the "upside down leg" a fortune-teller warns
him about, or his helpless alliance with a truly crazy classmate resulting in an
erroneous toe tattoo and a vain attempt at sabotaging a mayoral campaign. Gantos
is comfortable with the serious pain in the rejections, harbingers of failure, and
cruelties, so that the humor is part guffaw, part sympathy, and part there-but-for-
the-grace-of-God-go-I. He plays particularly with the physical in this book, and
there's a heavy-duty guyhood to the explosions, bodies live and dead going awry,
126 
* THE BULLETIN
and general mayhem. The balance of accuracy and comedy will probably gratify
fans of Gary Paulsen's Harris and Me (BCCB 1/94) as well as readers of the first
two books. DS
GARNER, ALAN, ad. 
The Little Red Hen; illus. by Norman Messenger. 
DK Ink,
1997 
2 6 p
ISBN 0-7894-1171-7 
$8.95 
R 3-6yrs
This adaptation of the well-known tale has a rhythmically rendered text, some very
attractive spot art, and an engaging overall design. The story opens promisingly
with "Once upon a time, and a good time it was, a cat, a rat and a little red hen
lived together in a house," proceeding in the usual fashion to show off the selfish-
ness of the cat and rat and the industry of the little red hen. Then it takes an
unusual detour. Instead of the trio coming to a working compromise, as is the
standard progression of events, they are intruded upon by a wily fox, who sacks up
the hen with every intention of having her for dinner. The industrious fowl, how-
ever, cuts her way out of the sack and replaces herself with a stone, and the fox
family goes hungry: "And," said the little red hen to the cat and the rat, "that's
that." Messenger's illustrations are precisely detailed and whimsical without being
affected, the visual narrative just as strong as the written one. Garner's text is going
to be a successful, suspenseful addition for reading aloud or storytelling, but the
book's large, clear typeface, simple language, and uncrowded layout will make it a
dandy beginning reader as well. JMD
GEE, MAURICE 
The Fat Man. 
Simon, 1997 
[192p]
ISBN 0-689-81182-9 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 6-9
Twelve-year-old Colin is constrained by the limits of his pinched existence in De-
pression-era New Zealand, until Herbert Muskie-the fat man-catapults him
into a new and frightening situation. The Great Expectations-like initial encoun-
ter, where Muskie forces a solitary Colin into a secret burglary, gives way to quite
a different result when the fat man proves to be a famous prodigal son of the small
town. Muskie openly returns, making a splash with his foreign-earned money
(from bootlegging in Canada), his new wife and stepdaughter, and his displays of
cruel power. The adults, however, remain willfully blind to the fat man's vicious-
ness (out of need for his money and, it turns out, guilt for youthful bullying),
leaving only his stepdaughter, Verna, and Colin to see the increasing danger. As
usual, Gee spins a ripping good yarn, and the suspense and menace hang palpably
in the air. He doesn't stint on the undertones, either, with the grownups' ambiva-
lence, Colin's growing awareness of the wrongs of the past, and Muskie's deterio-
ration clear but never oversimplified. Involving and dramatic, this will energize
young readers who relish youthful heroism in the face of apparently unstoppable
evil. DS
GRIFFITH, HELEN V. 
Alex and the Cat; illus. by Sonja Lamut. 
Greenwillow,
1997 
[50p]
ISBN 0-688-15241-4 
$15.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 1-3
Seven chapters tell of the uneven relationship between dog Alex and the family cat:
Alex looks for a buried bone, rescues a baby bird, goes through a chewing phase,
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
127
and has a few other adventures while the cat offers wry commentary on Alex's
bumptious naivete. The dynamics between the two are subtly conveyed and make
a quiet statement about the difference between the species, with the cat occasion-
ally provoking and insulting but demonstrating a certain detached affection, while
Alex's eagerness is clearly a personality trait rather than a sign of stupidity. The
plotting can be a bit flat, but the humorous interplay is the point here, and Griffith
cleverly keeps the language pared down and repetitive without making it terse or
boring. Oversized type and a comfortable helping of white space on every page
will reassure timid readers; softly hued two-color illustrations with real character
appear one or two to a spread, showing a gangly Alex and a cat with expressively
arched eyebrows. New readers who prefer Mudge to Henry will appreciate this
chance to listen, if not talk, to the animals. DS
HADDIX, MARGARET 
Leaving Fishers. Simon, 1997 
211p
ISBN 0-689-81125-X 
$17.00 
R 
Gr. 7-10
Dorry is dreading her junior year of high school, since her family's been uprooted
from a small Ohio town to the outskirts of Indianapolis, and at first it's as terrible
as she fears. Then she finds a group of welcoming friends who make room for her
at lunch and invite her to a party, where she discovers they all belong to the same
church, Fishers of Men. Eager to please her new friends and enjoying the activi-
ties, Dorry spends more time with the Fishers and finally, half because she's em-
barrassed to back out in front of a crowd, she joins their church. With glamorous
friend Angela as her "discipler" (personal religious counselor), she plunges into the
world of the Fishers, trying to rise in the church and in Angela's estimation by
limiting her sins and bringing others to the faith-until the strictures become
stricter, her own opinions begin to get buried under Angela's version of religion,
and the rest of her life starts to fall apart, leading her finally to tear herself away.
This is a well-turned cult drama, with a sympathetic protagonist whose interest in
the group and desire to please them is both understandable and convincing. While
Haddix's portrayal of the other cult members is a bit programmatic, she doesn't
make the mistake of demonizing every aspect of the group, which makes the ex-
amination of Dorry's agonizing ambivalence more effective. Less TV-movieish
than Jones' The Believers (BCCB 9/89), this is a convincing exploration of a tricky
topic. DS
HEIDENREICH, ELKE 
Nero Corleone; tr. by Doris Orgel; illus. by Quint
Buchholz. 
Viking, 1997 
89p
ISBN 0-670-87395-0 
$15.99 
R Gr. 3-6
The eponymous protagonist is "a black tomcat, born on Friday the seventeenth of
November, in thunder and lightning at twelve o'clock, high noon-oh dear!" A
little background: Friday the seventeenth and the month of November are bad
luck in Italy. Throw a violent thunderstorm into this mix and "then it bodes very
ill indeed." Just ask the animals of the farmyard who soon become victims of the
aptly named Nero Corleone's threats and extortion ("The hens provided him with
one fresh egg daily of their own free will-this after he had opened his mouth up
wide, flashed his pointy teeth, and hissed: 'Or else I can chase you all over the
place for longer than you can imagine, and you won't even have time to lay an
egg.'" In this short novel, Heidenreich has a keen eye and ear for the ingratiating
arrogance of this feline menace, as Don Nero, the Mafia-cat, moves from terroriz-
128 
* THE BULLETIN
ing farm residents to living a life of ease (complete with new victims) in the city,
after he and his sister Rose are adopted by a visiting German couple. Kids will
relish this wisecracking, self-reliant little godfather as well as the various litterbox
references, the feline romance, and the cat machismo galore. Even though the
sentimental return-to-your-roots ending slows the pace, this will entice animal
lovers as a readalone or even a readaloud. Softly grainy colored-pencil illustrations
give Nero a pettably kittenish edge and keep the book gently fantastical. PM
HENKE, KEVIN 
Sun 6Spoon. Greenwillow, 1997 
135p
ISBN 0-688-15232-5 
$15.00 
R 
Gr. 4-6
"Spoon Gilmore's grandmother had been dead for two months when he realized
that he wanted something special of hers to keep." In a desperate attempt to come
to terms with his grandmother's death, Spoon steals her favorite deck of cards.
When Gramps mentions their significance to him ("I've taken to playing solitaire
with Martha's deck of cards-those old sun cards she loved. It's been a kind of
solace to me") and their sudden disappearance, Spoon finds a way to slip them
back into their rightful place. In a surprisingly lovely conclusion, Spoon discovers
a "sign" from Gram in the form of a handwriting sample ("M is always for Martha")
taken when she was Spoon's age, leading to the revelation of a family trait: "Formed
by the natural creases in each of his sister's hands was the letter M." In this short
novel, Henkes delivers a strong but tender narrative about the intensity of feeling
surrounding the death of someone loved by a child. Spoon is a ten-year-old learn-
ing about suffering, forgiveness, love, and mortality. His boyish voice is clear and
natural, whether he's annoyed with his little sister or confessing the card theft to
Gramps. This gentle tale of family love and dynamics provides lucid glimpses of
how anyone, at any age, copes with considerations of mortality. PM
HERBST, JUDITH 
The Mystery of UFOs; illus. by Greg Clarke. 
Atheneum,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-689-31652-6 
$16.00 
R Gr. 2-4
The kids who ask for UFO books are generally the kids who want to believe, and
without throwing scientific discretion completely to the wind, Herbst gives them
plenty of fuel to fire those beliefs. Legends, reported sightings, alien abduction
claims, government investigations, and alleged cover-ups (sorry, no alien autop-
sies) will tantalize the skeptical and send welcome shivers through the credulous,
while Clarke's retro cartoon artwork, dominated by muted rusts and blues, are just
comically bizarre enough to forestall any imminent nightmares. The book is bare
of documentation, and Herbst skips around a bit, discussing the 1964 Socorro,
New Mexico sighting before similar reports from Levelland, Texas in 1957. This
probably won't much trouble readers, though, since they'll be more intent on the
whats than the whens. Of course, Herbst concedes, all this could just be experi-
mental aircraft or Jungian mass imaginings. Nah! EB
HESSE, KAREN 
Out ofthe Dust. Scholastic, 1997 
227p
ISBN 0-590-36080-9 
$15.95 
R Gr. 6-9
At fourteen, Billie Jo is old enough to understand the grimness of life in the Okla-
homa panhandle in 1934. It's bad enough that the wheat won't grow and the dust
won't leave, but then a terrible accident with burning kerosene results in the death
of Billie Jo's mother, and Billie Jo's brand-new baby brother succumbs almost
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
129
immediately after that. Billie's burned hands prevent her from enjoying her one
escape, playing the piano, and the desolate existence, combined with the
unbreachable distance between her and her father, takes its toll on her until finally
desperation leads her to hop a freight train out of town. Family pulls her back,
however, and she and her father (and her father's kind new friend, Louise) start to
bring life-and music-back to their little farm. Billie Jo narrates in the form of
individually titled free-verse poems, each dated with the month and year (further
divided into one section per season, with the story passing through two years of
seasons). The poetry is conversational (if sometimes a bit obvious) and thought-
ful, with Billie Jo's reticence and understatement making the verses particularly
effective and individual. Hesse evokes the physical realities of the Dust Bowl con-
vincingly, adding details (the sheriff passing on sugar seized from bootleggers to
the school, the methodology for finding your way on the road in a dust storm) that
bring it to life. Depression-era Oklahoma is a strange but significant aspect of
U.S. history; this will help kids take it personally. DS
HEYNEN, JIM 
Being Youngest. 
Holt, 1997 
260p
ISBN 0-8050-5486-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
The lot of the youngest child is ridicule, misunderstanding, and mistreatment--or
so best friends Henry and Gretchen, who share that unenviable status, have con-
vinced themselves and would have their families (and readers) believe. After meet-
ing at the swimming pool, the pair become as inseparable as their respective farm
chores will allow, and they spend the summer developing a clandestine relation-
ship with people who appreciate them-an elderly couple that their community
alternately pities and shuns. The old man and his wife are, indeed, pretty weird,
sharing a single set of dentures that they pass to each other under the table, keeping
geese (their "children") upstairs, gifting Henry and Gretchen with a freak, six-
legged sheep, and possibly even running over a little boy who had maliciously
teased them. Heynen walks a thin line between humor and downright creepiness,
saving until the end any reliable confirmation that the old couple is strange, not
dangerous. The children's incessant grousing is undeniably annoying and the story
tends to get stuck on one note, but perceptive readers will measure the children's
testimony against the undemonstrative but real love of their parents. EB
HODGES, MARGARET 
Silent Night: The Song and Its Story; illus. by Tim
Ladwig. 
Eerdmans, 1997 
38p
ISBN 0-8028-5138-X 
$17.00 
R Gr. 3-6
"Silent Night! Holy Night!" There are few Christmas carols that have such an
illustrious reputation and are so fitting to the occasion. In this long picture-book
offering, readers will learn of the origin of this beloved hymn as well as little-
known facts about the song's travels from Europe to the audiences of America.
Hodges recounts the song's significance even in the bleakness of a Russian prison
camp: "Tonight," says a camp officer to the prisoners, "is the first time in more
than a year that I have been able to forget you and I are supposed to be enemies."
The appropriate sentimentality of the story is enhanced by Ladwig's paintings,
which evoke (in an idealized manner somewhat reminiscent of greeting cards) that
long-ago time in Austria and other emotional Christmases: snow-covered roofs,
shimmering windows, reverent carolers in candlelit sanctuaries, lonely soldiers in
the trenches. Golden browns, forest greens, and midnight blues suffuse the picto-
130 
* THE BULLETIN
rial with a seasonal glow befitting the glory of this musical masterpiece, making the
book a worthy addition to a holiday collection. The musical score is appended.
PM
HOLMAN, FELICE Real. Atheneum, 1997 
176p
ISBN 0-689-80772-4 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 4-6
Stuntman Matt Starter has just taken one too many falls, so he takes his movie-
obsessed son Colly away from the make-believe Wild West film sets of Depres-
sion-era Hollywood to the reality of the California desert, where they have an old
family cabin. There they find Benjamin Gray Fox, an American Indian friend of
Matt's father, in residence with his great-nephew Ozro. As the boys explore the
area and college professor Benjamin Gray Fox plays his cello and spouts regional
lore, a parallel story takes shape, revolving around long-dead Cohuilla Indians
Sparrow and his injured grandmother, who are doomed to repeat the tragic last
day of their life until their remains are given proper burial. Sparrow's story is at
once touching and tense, in contrast to Colly and Matt's tale, which is as trite and
predictable as the Hollywood oaters Holman implicitly criticizes. A subplot in-
volving the return of newly unearthed artifacts to the descendants of indigenous
people seems suspiciously anachronistic, especially with Holman's reference to the
Native American Grave Protection and Repatriation Act in her concluding notes.
In her laudable attempt to sort out authentic American Indian culture from its
Hollywood counterpart, Holman has unfortunately spun a fresh unreality, but
young readers might enjoy the ghost story enough to overlook the flaws. EB
HOLUB, JOAN 
Pen Pals; written and illus. by Joan Holub. 
Grosset,
1997 
48p 
(All Aboard Reading)
Library ed. ISBN 0-448-41613-1 
$13.99
Paper ed. ISBN 0-448-41612-3 
$3.95 
R 
Gr. 1-3
Daisy is excited about participating in the class pen-pal project, until she discovers
that her correspondent Becky is actually Bucky-and a boy. This is disconcerting
enough ("Dear Bucky," reads Daisy's next letter, "I do not want a boy for my pen
pal. But Mr. Perry says I have to keep you"), but then somebody swipes Daisy's
picture of her pet rat, labels it "Bucky," and sends it off to poor old Bucky. The
culprit turns out to be Daisy's classmate Booger, who is himself discombobulated
by discovering that his pen pal, Kirby, is a girl-but by this time, Daisy and Bucky
have decided that their epistolary relationship is satisfactory regardless of the gen-
der gap between them. Holub catches the classroom tone well, and her characters'
letters are authentic in tone and style (though their printing is, of necessity, preter-
naturally neat). Squiggly lines and watercolors in primary-school, if not primary,
colors depict a lively class of kids with strong ideas about sartorial self-expression.
The benefits of writing (and writing clearly) are subtly suggested, and kids may
well inquire about pen-pal projects of their own. DS
JANISCH, HEINZ, ad. 
Noah'sArk; illus. by Lisbeth Zwerger. 
Neugebauer/North-
South, 1997 
30p
Library ed. ISBN 1-55858-785-3 
$16.88
Trade ed. ISBN 1-55858-784-5 
$16.95 
R* 
4-10 yrs
See this month's Big Picture, p. 115, for review.
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
131
JENKINS, STEVE 
What Do You Do When Something Wants to Eat You?; written and
illus. by Steve Jenkins. 
Houghton, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-395-82514-8 
$16.00 
R 4-7 yrs
Although the title question is, hopefully, a hypothetical one for the picture-book
audience, it is a very real concern for the fourteen animals Jenkins features here. In
each full-page spread, he lays out the predator-prey relationship with a picture and
a sentence or two and presents each animal's physiological solution on the follow-
ing page. We learn that "when [the glass snake] is grabbed by the tail... its tail
breaks into many small, wriggling pieces," and "if a puffer fish is in danger... it
takes in water and swells up like a prickly balloon, making itself almost impossible
to swallow." Jenkins achieves remarkable anatomical detail in his boldly textured
cut-paper collages; simple backgrounds keep attention tightly focused on the ani-
mals and their survival strategies. The youngest animal enthusiasts will find this
an intriguing introduction to adaptation. EB
JONELL, LYNNE 
Mommy Go Away!; illus. by Petra Mathers. 
Putnam, 1997 
26 p
ISBN 0-399-23001-7 
$12.95 
R 
3-6 yrs
When Mommy's strictures ("Pick up your blocks," "No more TV," "Time for
your bath") become too much for young Christopher, he shrinks her and sends
her on a dramatic bathtub voyage. Now in charge, Christopher admonishes her
("Don't forget to brush your teeth! And no hitting the other mommies!") but also
promises to take care of her, finally permitting her to dry off and return to her
normal size. Sort of an inside-out Runaway Bunny, this will both tickle kids and
fulfill their wish that roles could sometimes be reversed so that Mommy could
know that "it is hard to be so small." The text is focused and clean, and Jonell
recognizably captures the rhythms of parent-speak. Mathers goes for a different
look here with her stylized crayonings, which depict Christopher and Mommy as
glorified and expressive stick figures; it's an open question, however, whether the
deliberately childlike look (which extends to the typeface) will make the audience
feel comradely or cheated. Pair this with Else Marie and Her Seven Little Daddies
(BCCB 2/92) for an incredible shrinking storytime. DS
KETTEMAN, HELEN 
Bubba the Cowboy Prince: A Fractured Texas Tale; illus. by
James Warhola. 
Scholastic, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-590-25506-1 
$15.95 
R 
6-9 yrs
Young Bubba lives on a ranch "with his wicked stepdaddy and his hateful and lazy
stepbrothers," and if this sounds familiar, you'll recognize the bones of the rest of
the story. Bubba trudges through a life of cowpat-ridden drudgery until Miz
Lurleen, owner of the spread down the road, throws a ball; Bubba's fairy godcow
enables him to attend in style, whereupon he wins the heart of Miz Lurleen. Yes,
he disappears at the end, but yes, she catches up with him and sets the lost boot on
his bare foot, and "he and Miz Lurleen rode off into the sunset." Upended fairy
tales are pretty familiar now, but this one has sass and pizzazz. Warhola's illustra-
tions are a far cry from elaborate fairy borders and foliage: the oils have a sturdy
solidity and an honest earthiness of color that makes the lavender-touched magical
scenes amusingly lurid. The people (and horses and cows) are broadly caricatured,
making them appropriately archetypal comic figures as well as folkloric ones. Pair
this one with Susan Lowell's Little Red Riding Hat (BCCB 6/97) for a sagebrush
fairy-tale storytime. DS
132 
* THE BULLETIN
LONDON, SARA 
Firehorse Max; illus. by Ann Arnold. 
di Capua/HarperCollins,
1997 32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-105095-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-205094-X 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
When Vermont peddler Grandpa Lev retires his old horse, he replaces her with
Firehorse Max, who's been made obsolete by a shiny new fire engine. Max is
beautiful and strong, but he finds it very hard to shed his old ways: whenever the
fire bell clangs, he dashes off to the conflagration as fast as he can, strewing Grandpa
Lev's wares behind him as he gallops. Grandpa Lev decides he needs to "think of
something Max loves even more than putting out fires," and he finds a solution in
music-Max would rather hear Grandpa play his violin than chase fire engines.
The plot's slightly contrived, but it has dash, romance, and a nice tight focus on its
central conflict. The line-and-watercolor art uses the book's oversized pages to
good advantage; Arnold enlivens her fluid shades of outdoor hues with floral mi-
nutiae and precise yet free-flowing line, resulting in bucolic lightness occasionally
reminiscent of Raoul Dufy. Youngsters will root for the Grandpa/Max partner-
ship and find the resolution of their problem most satisfying. DS
LOVEDAY, JOHN 
Goodbye, Buffalo Sky. 
McElderry, 1997 
[176p]
ISBN 0-689-81370-8 
$16.00
Reviewed from galleys 
M 
Gr. 5-8
Twelve-year-old Cappy's friend and mentor Burkhart is killed by the Sioux Long
Shadow. Long Shadow is pursuing Burkhart's young wife, Two Songs, and Cappy
appoints himself guardian of the beautiful widow. Although Cappy's friend Alice
and some of the townsfolk of Buffalo Sky are friendly toward the Mandan woman,
public sentiment eventually turns against her. First she is sexually assaulted by one
of their own citizens, then Long Shadow's campaign of terror against her threatens
the safety of the community. Finally the townspeople of Buffalo Sky collectively
decide she should return to the Mandan, both for their good and her own. Cappy,
Alice, and an itinerant salesman accompany Two Songs to find her people, and in
transit they hopelessly entangle their tale with uninvolving and/or unresolved sub-
plots involving an Army deserter, the salesman's mysterious identity, Alice and
Two Song's abduction, Alice's crush on an Army officer, and an Indian elder left
out to die. The sophomoric levity that often creeps into Cappy's and Alice's alter-
nating narration is jarringly out of sync with the seriousness of the main plot line,
and Lovejoy's lip service to the tensions between white settlers and the American
Indians they displace does little to defuse the "crazy injun" stereotype he creates in
Long Shadow. You can probably ride right past this one. EB
LOWELL, SUSAN 
The Bootmaker and the Elves; illus. by Tom Curry. 
Orchard,
1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33044-3 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30044-7 
$15.95 
R* 
5-9 yrs
You know the story--poor shoemaker with little talent is about to go under when
some generous elves save his business with their remarkably comfy shoes-but you
haven't seen it told quite like this. Lowell has taken the familiar Grimms' tale and
breathed some ornery new life into it by setting it in that peculiarly American land
of dreams come true, the Wild West: "Once upon a time there was a cowboy
bootmaker who was so poor that even his shadow had holes in it. Trouble was, the
DECEMBER 1997 * 133
boots he made were just plain ugly, and they pinched so hard that nary a cowboy
would buy them." The elves show up in long beards and overalls (looking like
Z.Z. Topp only with pointy ears) and proceed to make the fanciest boots that ever
fit a tenderfoot's foot, complete with embroidered roses, curlicues, lizard-skin toes,
and sparkling thread. All ends well with the elves getting some fancy duds from
the bootmaker and his wife before do-si-do-ing off into the sunrise, and "the
bootmaker and his wife stayed fat and sassy ever after. And the boots that he made
from leather and dreams were the best in the whole wide West." Lowell's text is a
bouncy readaloud, in which the bootmaker sells his magically made footwear to a
"rootin' tootin cowboy from the back of beyond," a cowgirl horse trainer who
"can teach a wild mustang to turn on a biscuit and never break the crust," and a
rodeo queen "all ruffles and curls." Curry's acrylic rendering of these western
characters is the perfect accompaniment to Lowell's laconically funny text, and it's
just bigger than life enough to make this a believable tall-tale fairy tale. The com-
positions provide visual variety with single and double-page spreads, spot art, and
detailing that's sure to please the eye and tickle the fancy. JMD
MACAULAY, DAVID 
Rome Antics; written and illus. by David Macaulay. 
Lorraine/
Houghton, 1997 
[80p]
ISBN 0-395-82279-3 
$18.00
Reviewed from galleys 
R Gr. 3-6
Soaring and swooping, dipping and diving his way through Rome, a carrier pigeon
on a mission has a unique view of the city's architectural highlights. The Pantheon's
oculus offers him ingress for a shortcut, terra-cotta-tiled roofs tempt him with
comforting respite amid flight, scrolled buttresses on the Church of the Jesuits
inspire some fancy aerobatics, and restaurants in the Piazza Navona pique his hun-
ger ("although the food is too expensive"). Unconstrained by gravity, the pigeon's-
eye-view, which also becomes our own, is frequently topsy-turvy, but Macaulay
discreetly provides landmark names just outside the lower left borders of his scenes
to help us regain our bearings, and he appends a map and brief notes on the fa-
mous structures for those who would sightsee along the way. Double-page spreads
in Macaulay's signature black line and hatching gloriously detail the jumble of
ancient edifices, and a single red crayon line traces the pigeon's capricious progress.
The pigeon arrives at the attic workspace of an artist (who is clearly working on
black line and hatching renderings of Rome) and his message is revealed-"Yes."
While some kids might not at first get the joke, there's a story starter, if ever there
was one. EB
MCCAUGHREAN, 
GERALDINE 
Unicorns! 
Unicorns!; illus. by Sophie
Windham. 
Holiday House, 1997 
[26p]
ISBN 0-8234-1319-5 
$15.95
Reviewed from galleys 
R 
5-8 yrs
God has sent the rain, and Noah, boarding the animals, is concerned that the "best
beasts of all" have not appeared. "Unicorns! Unicorns! Come aboard!" he calls,
but the unicorns are busy assisting other creatures-tortoises, monkeys, a deer, a
butterfly-and they believe that their speed will overcome all difficulties. It doesn't,
of course, and despite the entreaties of the animals Noah sails off sans unicorns.
Grief turns to joy, however, when the unicorns turn up in the sea after the flood
subsides-and in the sea they stay till this day, white tops on windblown waves.
134 
* THE BULLETIN
This version of the old legend about unicorn extinction will please listeners with
its vindication of the creatures, since here it's their very goodness that slows them
down, and the pourquoi-tale twist at the end provides a trim and satisfying finish.
McCaughrean's narrative is appreciative of fantasy but never becomes slick or
overornate, and the refrains of the call to the unicorns and their assurances to their
benefactees become effective and folkloric patterns. Windham's watercolor art has
a colored-pencil look to its soft shadings and flowing texture lines. The animal
pairs serve as decorative borders as well as dramatis personae, and Noah's
Vikingesque Ark is in the shape of an impressive red serpent. The unicorns are
lithe and lovely, with graceful mien and wavy abundant manes (which not only
foreshadow the end but also will enchant the My Little Pony crowd). The popular-
ity of unicorns means that they've been the subject of a great deal of schlock; it's
refreshing to be reminded that they can occasion very good books too. DS
MARINO, JAN 
Searching forAtticus. 
Simon, 1997 
182p
ISBN 0-689-80066-5 
$16.00 
R Gr. 7-10
Tessa Ramsey has always wanted a father like Gregory Peck's Atticus Finch in the
movie To Killa Mockingbird. Her own father, an accomplished surgeon, is preoc-
cupied and distant. He volunteers for a tour of duty in Vietnam, and he comes
home a broken man. He and Tessa leave on a car trip that lands them in Tessa's
aunt's hometown, where they stay the summer. Tessa makes a best friend, Selina,
and both girls work at a convent day camp where Dr. Ramsey takes a temporary
job as groundskeeper. Here Tessa comes under the spell of the dangerously attrac-
tive Caleb, a senior on his way to West Point. Several plotlines unfold simulta-
neously: Dr. Ramsey's hard-won recovery, the exposure of Selina's somewhat sordid
home life, and the revelation of the golden Caleb's dark, possibly even psycho-
pathic nature. After such well-paced expository chapters, the climax seems a bit
rushed-Caleb has gotten a young postulant pregnant and arranged for an abor-
tion; he believes that Tessa's knowledge of this can endanger his entry into West
Point, so he pushes her from a ladder-and has the tinge of 'fifties melodrama.
Characterization makes up for the somewhat hasty feeling of the conclusion, though.
Tessa is fully believable in her emotional confusion over her father and over the
handsome Caleb; Dr. Ramsey's struggle is sympathetically drawn; Selina's home
life is presented but not judged (her mother is apparently promiscuous); and Caleb,
handsome and dangerous, is both understandably attractive and frighteningly self-
involved. This is a solid work of fiction with some admirably drawn characters
who grow and change in realistic and satisfying ways. JMD
MAYNE, WILLIAM 
Hob and the Peddler. DK Ink, 1997 
128p
ISBN 0-7894-2462-2 
$15.95 
R* 
Gr. 4-6
Friendly house-boggart Hob has found a new home, albeit in a rather unorthodox
fashion: a crafty and not-quite-human peddler sells him to a family (and throws a
chattering magpie into the deal). His new home suits Hob fairly well, since he
enjoys the children, tolerates amicable bickering with the magpie, and appreciates
the family's understanding of a Hob's necessary comforts. He's increasingly dis-
turbed, however, by the ominous Thing that lives in the pond behind the house,
which results in the earth's heaving whenever anyone mentions the word "egg,"
and by the hungry sea's encroachment on his home ground; soon he realizes he
must solve the problem that generates these phenomena in order to keep his home
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
135
safe. Mayne is a masterful writer whose fictional worlds shine with internal logic,
and his humbly folkloric tone keeps the fantastical details here (a SlyMe lives in
the house drain, and Night gets holes ripped in it and starts to leak while constel-
lations escape) from becoming labored or cute, instead making them into a com-
pelling and well-rooted story. The Hob rules have been sufficiently clearly
established in legend and in Mayne's literature that we know them as well as Hob
does (Hob has to be invited in, and he'll leave if you give him clothes), and they
make perfect sense in context. There's something exhilarating about Hob's tri-
umphs against the dark things we suspect of existing, and kids will cheer the vic-
tory of the (literally) little guy. DS
NIKOLA-LISA, W. Shake Dem Halloween Bones; illus. by Mike Reed. 
Houghton,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-395-73095-3 
$16.00 
Ad 
4-7 yrs
Two opening spreads set a dark and mysterious Halloween mood, with witches
and monsters cunningly camouflaged in the grainy shadows of a moonlit cityscape.
Then, with "ah-one, ah-two, ah-one, two, three, four" the action erupts as a pump-
kin-headed deejay sporting dark blue shades and red high tops grabs the mike and
leads the monster dance "at the hip-hop Halloween ball." Fairy-tale characters in
unmistakable but wildly updated garb are the featured guests, and their emcee
welcomes each with a rap-style verse: "Hey, Li'l Red, so sweet, so good,/ you sure
can shake that ridin' hood;" "Tom Thumb's a-rockin'; he's a-shakin' dem bones./
For a tiny little guy, he can shake it on home." Ten characters are way more than
enough to get the joke across, and some verses are decidedly less clever than others,
but the rhythm is infectious. Though the compositions are occasionally unfo-
cused and the colors clashing, the sight of Red Riding hood in Doc Martens and
Snow White in wire rims and cowboy boots is good for a laugh. This should keep
the storytime set jiggling to the last "Scoo-bee-doo-bee-doo-wah. Yeah!" EB
NOLAN, HAN 
Dancing on the Edge. Harcourt, 1997 
24 4p
Trade ed. ISBN 0-15-201648-1 
$16.00 
Ad 
Gr. 7-10
Miracle McCloy was so named because she was born after her mother's death-
her birth, her grandmother Gigi tells her, was "an omen, a portent of great things
to come." Gigi's a minor medium, giving readings for a living and steeping her
house in talk of auras and seances, so it seems quite plausible to Miracle when her
father disappears and Gigi announces that he's melted. Miracle moves with her
grandmother to her grandfather's house, then, after a tornado levels the dwelling
and her grandmother moves in with her new boyfriend, she's packed off to her
aunt and uncle's. Finally her feelings of nonexistence (her grandfather tells her "if
your mama was dead when you were born, then you was never born") and unreal-
ity get the better of her and she ends up first in a hospital (burned from testing the
reality of the melting theory) and then in a mental-health facility, struggling with
the lies and self-disbelief that have plagued her life. The vigorous southern Gothic
tones of the beginning are offbeat and intriguing, but the book bogs down in the
extended focus on Miracle's internal turmoil and the lack of cohesion in the exter-
nal events. The long scenes with the psychologist are usefully explanatory, but
they undercut the bizarreness of the opening by making the inspiringly odd into
just another psychodrama. Miracle's agony is nonetheless vividly portrayed, and
Nolan deftly includes memorable details such as Miracle's constant erasing of her
136 
* THE BULLETIN
name from chalkboards and her unwillingness to shed her father's old bathrobe.
Thematically similar to Patrice Kindl's superior (but less clinical) The Woman in
the Wall (BCCB 3/97), this may intrigue fans of Lisa, Bright and Dark and INever
Promised You a Rose Garden. DS
NORMANDIN, CHRISTINE, ed. 
Echoes of the Elders: The Stories and Paintings of
ChiefLelooska; illus. by ChiefLelooska. 
Callaway/DK Ink, 1997 
40p
ISBN 0-7894-2455-X 
$24.95 
R* 
Gr. 4-6
A Cherokee adopted into the Kwakiutl tribe, Chief Lelooska retold and illustrated
these five Northwest Coast Indian tales before his death in 1996. An Owl Witch
turns disobedient children into mice, a boy receives shamanic powers from a Loon
Chief, Raven retrieves the daylight stolen by greedy Sea Gull, some fishermen
release a Merman and receive the blessing of a magic mask and song, and a girl
with a cleft palate saves her comrades from the cannibalistic Timber Giant (whose
ashes turn into mosquitoes, shades of the Windigo). The style is stately but not
stuffy for reading aloud, and tiny graphic motifs suggest pauses in the text that
reflect oral pacing for independent readers. The overall book design is striking in
its distinguished typeface, varied format, gracious space, and honed art. The use
of large traditional figures painted in flat, unlined color patterns creates a monu-
mental effect well suited to the larger-than-life characters that peer unnervingly
from these oversize pages. An editor's note and an introduction provide the cul-
tural and regional setting for the stories passed on to Lelooska by unnamed elders.
This title is accompanied by a CD, housed in an interior pocket, of Chief Lelooska
telling the stories. BH
O'LEARY, PATSY BAKER 
With Wings As Eagles. Houghton, 1997 
262p
ISBN 0-395-70557-6 
$15.00 
Ad 
Gr. 5-8
It's 1938 when twelve-year-old Bubba Harkins' father comes home from a stint in
prison, and disillusion follows close behind. Not only is Jed Harkins spurned by
their rural North Carolina community, he also seems to usurp the authority Bubba
has assumed as head of the family and to resent Bubba's closeness with African-
American neighbor Israel. A villainous schoolmaster, a class bully, and pervasive
racism complicate a plot that revolves on dramatic incidents and surprise revela-
tions. Occasional expository passages seem repetitious: a summation of Bubba's
woes, for instance, when the family is threatened with losing their land (after Bubba
has discovered Israel's role in Jed's imprisonment) is unnecessary in view of the
story's momentum. The large cast and plot twists stretch this to considerable
length, but the action will sustain readers' interest via moving moments such as the
death of Bubba's old dog and suspenseful scenes such as the climactic attempted
auction of the Harkins' farm. Some characters simply function as good or evil, but
others are more complex than they first appear, so that ultimately this offers young
readers a forceful depiction of the Depression-era South. BH
OSBORNE, 
MARY 
POPE 
Rocking Horse Christmas; illus. by Ned
Bittinger. 
Scholastic, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-590-92955-0 
$15.95 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
A young boy receives a rocking horse for Christmas, names it Shadow, and rocks
his way into imaginary adventures. When he outgrows the horse it is relegated to
the attic, to be discovered and retrieved years later by the boy, now grown, and his
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
137
young son: "'Hi, Shadow,' the boy whispered. Then he climbed on Shadow's
back. 'Giddyap,' he said. At first Shadow was creaky. But then his heart took a
leap . . . and he and the boy rocked away. And they flew through the sky all
Christmas Eve, and didn't come home until dawn." Osborne's sentimental, pre-
dictable tale has a linear narrative that will make it an easy readaloud. Bittinger's
gauzy oil paintings incorporate elements of imaginative fantasy, as bandits from
the American West, knights in shining armor, and a racehorse from the Kentucky
Derby appear in the boy's living room. The design of this book has all the flash
expected of a seasonal entry-the cover art shows Santa and his elves working on
the magical horse, framed in glossy red with the title in shiny gold letters, the title
page shows Santa delivering the horse down the chimney, and the endpapers are
an appropriately gifty gold. With its nostalgia-driven text and greeting-card visu-
als, this is certain to be a popular choice among grownups. JMD
QUATTLEBAUM, 
MARY 
Underground Train; illus. by Cat Bowman
Smith. 
Doubleday, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-385-32204-6 
$14.95 
R 4-7 yrs
It's a perennial picture-book plot-a trip to Grandma's-but here a hepped-up,
red-bereted moppet rides the rails of the Washington D.C. Metro. "The train
doors slip aside like silver drapes... Rrrruuuummm. Whoooosshh... I choose an
orange seat and watch the tunnel blurring by like a long, black night." On the
train, the little girl cranes her neck to check out passengers who variously come
and go and chat and doze, while in other spreads the above-ground scene speeds
by: foreign visitors consult their maps, lions snooze at the zoo, and city streets and
monument grounds teem with scurrying residents, tourists, and sedately suited
bureaucrats. Smith's watercolor cityscapes unroll with the pulsing energy of the
train itself, twisting and curving with text lines to follow the underground track
"until the driver calls out Cleveland Park" and "I step and sway onto the stairs,
which roll us up ... until the sunshine streams across the tangled streets." Hand
this to primary teachers preparing units on transportation or to any pitiable child
deprived the rush of underground travel. EB
RILEY, LINNEA 
Mouse Mess; written and illus. by Linnea Riley. 
Blue Sky/Scho-
lastic, 1997 
32p
ISBN 0-590-10048-3 
$15.95 
R 3-6yrs
It's nighttime. "On the stairs, the sound of feet!/ Mouse is up. It's time to eat!"
Shimmying up a string lassoed to the faucet, Mouse finds more than a meal: the
kitchen counter and cupboard is a virtual playground for his nocturnal antics.
"Crackle-sweep, he rakes corn flakes/ and jumps into the pile he makes"; "Tip-
ping, slipping, sugar falls./ Pour and pat, make castle walls." When he surveys the
wreckage, Mouse is astonished at "the mess he's found," and after a nice bubble
bath in a teacup, he happily retreats to his own bed behind the wall. Riley's paper
collages, in bright primary and secondary colors against glossy black, are cut with
such razor sharp precision and layered with so little shadowing that they appear at
first glance to be paintings. Matte and softly grained papers are pleasingly com-
bined, and the narrow bands of colored border are vivid but not eye-scorching.
The bold palette and ample size make this an excellent choice for sharing with
storytime groups, who will be charmed by Riley's enterprising mouse from the
moment he playfully "turns" the first page until he yawns a final good-night in his
sardine can. EB
138 
* THE BULLETIN
RIORDAN, JAMES, ad. 
The Twelve Labors of Hercules; illus. by Christina
Balit. 
Millbrook, 1997 
62p
ISBN 0-7613-0315-4 
$22.40 
R 
Gr. 4-6
There's nothing very admirable about Hercules except muscles, and his labors read
like a grocery list of conquest; Riordan's clear, unadorned prose deals honestly
with the hero's flaws (largely attributed to Hera's jealousy of Zeus' conceiving
Hercules with a mortal), however, while Balit projects designerly drama in por-
traying his deeds. From strangling serpents in his crib, to killing an invulnerable
lion and a regenerative Hydra, to capturing fantastical creatures, Hercules works
to redeem the terrible effects of his mysterious rages. Rhythmically patterned il-
lustrations dominated by shades of aqua, gold, and gray cross every spread like a
theater set, with stylized figures projected in scene after scene of frozen action.
This version beats Disney's comic antics all to pieces, but shoot for middle-grade
listeners and readers who can handle, if not relish, bits like Hercules burning up
his first wife and children-not to mention himself. BH
RYLANT, CYNTHIA 
Silver Packages: An Appalachian Christmas Story; illus. by Chris
K. Soentpiet. Jackson/Orchard, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-531-33051-6 
$16.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-531-30051-X 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 2-4
A wealthy man rescued from an automobile accident by Appalachian hill folk re-
turns annually with gift-wrapped packages for the children who wait by the rail-
road tracks for what may be their only present. Every year Frankie wishes for a
doctor kit, and every year he's disappointed, but the warm clothes and toys he does
receive eventually inspire him to remember his roots and return to the community
after he becomes a doctor. There are well-paced hints of grownup Frankie's pro-
fession before he helps a little girl who has fallen in her effort to catch a package
thrown from the train, so young listeners can savor what's coming. The fact that
Frankie isn't given what he wants but goes after it himself mitigates the sentimen-
tality of the story, so the cycle of gifting almost succeeds in overcoming the more
simplistic warm fuzzy message about benevolent humanity. Soentpiet's water-
color figures are photorealistic to the extent of seeming posed, with stiff stances
and undifferentiated faces, but the textured wintry landscapes are spontaneously
engaging and varied in perspective. Animating this pointed Christmas sermon
(which first appeared without illustration in Rylant's Children ofChristmas collec-
tion) is empathy for children's emotions of holiday anticipation, disappointment,
and irrepressible recovery, but the conclusion may require adult insight and hind-
sight for full satisfaction. BH
SALISBURY, GRAHAM 
Shark Bait. Delacorte, 1997 
151p
ISBN 0-385-32237-2 
$15.95 
R 
Gr. 6-9
It's one heck of a day in the life of Eric Chock, son of the island police chief-a
naval destroyer is due in the harbor, and all the locals know that means a fight will
erupt between seventeen-year-old hothead Booley Domingo and the first "milk
bottle" (seaman) who gets in his way. Eric, nicknamed Mokes, or "tough guy,"
and his friends intend to be there, but Mokes' father sets a six o'clock curfew for
his son's own safety. Ninth-grader Mokes idolizes Booley and is determined to
back him in the fight, but he's way out of his league with the pack of older brawl-
ers. His need to prove he's not a daddy's boy outstrips his good sense, and a day of
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
139
intensifying expectations, drinking, and bragging lands Mokes in the thick of the
evening's melee and Booley in the hospital with a gunshot wound. Salisbury has
the teens' jargon nailed, and he moves surefootedly through the teen milieu of fast
cars, faster girls, rivalries, and swagger. This is one Hawaiian port of call the cruise
directors prefer to miss, but readers will find it a lot more diverting than luaus and
ukuleles. EB
SANTORE, CHARLES 
William the Curious: Knight of the Water Lilies; written and
illus. by Charles Santore. 
Random House, 1997 
33p
ISBN 0-679-88742-3 
$18.00 
R 6-9 yrs
William is a curious frog living among the water lilies in the castle moat of the
Queen of Far and Wide. The Queen has a penchant for perfection and is con-
stantly looking out the castle window and giving orders to improve the distant
view. She does not, however, pay attention to that which is under her own nose
(i.e., the moat), and one day she demands that anything in the castle that is not
absolutely perfect be thrown out the castle window at once. This results in the
castle moat being turned into a junk moat, destroying its beauty and killing off the
water lilies. William dresses himself in the armor of a toy knight, besieges the
castle, and enlightens the Queen as to her thoughtless behavior; she knights him,
naming him "Protector of the Castle Moat," and the moat's original beauty is
restored. Santore introduces frog and Queen and sets up his premise in a whimsi-
cal series of events, deliberately understating the environmental message. His wa-
tercolors are romantically embellished, the soaring turrets, flying swans, and palace
grandeur enhanced by the comic liveliness of the small green hero. The reader gets
mostly a frog's-eye perspective, and the strong compositions are nicely balanced-
at floor level. This is a visual flight of fancy that, while text intensive and a bit
programmatic, delivers a gentle message that will be easily absorbed and easily
remembered. JMD
SCHULSON, RACHEL ELLENBERG 
Guns: What You Should Know; illus. by Mary
Jones. 
Whitman, 1997 
24p
ISBN 0-8075-3093-X 
$12.95 
M 
4-6 yrs
Requests for library books about weapons are not uncommon among quite young
patrons, but this title is probably not what they have in mind. A simplistic, dull
lecture on gun safety, it covers the predictable ground-the startling velocity of a
fired bullet, the inevitability and unpredictability of its landing, its capacity to
inflict serious injury or death, and tips for personal safety. These observations are
generally obvious to even the very young, and children in need of some stern words
on gun safety will find this pretty tepid and tame. Nor do the stiff, bland illustra-
tions drive the reality of danger home; in fact, the stray bullet that lands in the cat's
water bowl is likely to provoke more giggles than gasps. If, as Schulson suggests in
her text, children misunderstand the real-world impact of the fictionalized vio-
lence they encounter on TV and in movies, this cartoonish entry will do little to
set them straight. EB
SCHUR, MAXINE ROSE 
Sacred Shadows. Dial, 1997 
213p
ISBN 0-8037-2295-8 
$15.99 
R Gr. 6-9
Lena Katz has been raised with a firm allegiance to her German heritage, an alle-
giance tinged with bittersweet pride over her father's death at Verdun, for which
140 
* THE BULLETIN
he received official military honors: "Captain Katz was a soldier of the Kaiser and
is now an eternal son of Germany!" But as she grows to womanhood between the
World Wars, she watches her cultural identity unravel as her city of Poznan is
returned to a Poland resentful of its German residents and as the Fatherland gradu-
ally disowns its Jewish sons and daughters. In an accessible coming-of-age story,
Schur explores one of the perpetually baffling problems of the 1930s-why Jewish
citizens such as the Katzes remained in increasingly hostile lands as the Nazis gained
power-and her fictional cast offers a host of credible reasons. Lena's journalist
brother has unshakable faith in a German tendency toward dispassionate reason,
her aunt embraces the economic opportunities of Berlin, many of her friends are
simply unable to obtain exit visas, her mother evinces a patriotic optimism that
eventually petrifies into obtuse resignation to her fate, and Zionism is regarded as
radical betrayal in Lena's religious community. Lena eventually falls in love with a
handsome young Zionist, who proposes marriage and a new life in Israel; readers
know that the Holocaust looms just beyond the horizon and that Lena's choice
will dictate not only her chance for happiness but for her very life. Schur has
effectively intertwined the political complexities in a neglected era of historical
fiction with a compelling tale of family, friendship, and love. EB
SIMMS, LAURA 
The Bone Man: A Native American Modoc Tale; illus. by Michael
McCurdy. 
Hyperion, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-7868-2074-8 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-7868-0089-5 
$14.95 
R* 
Gr. 3-6
This tale of a young boy facing and conquering the fearsome Bone Man is retold in
powerful language and arresting visual images. Nulwee's grandmother tells him,
"On the day you were born ... Koklimalayas, the Bone Man, drank the river dry
and devoured all the people except you and me. When you are old enough to be a
warrior, you will bring the waters back and people will live here once again." This
seems an awesome task to the young boy, and he is understandably frightened. He
calls upon the strength of his mother, "a great medicine woman," and his father, "a
good warrior," and successfully defeats the gruesome Bone Man. Simms' text has
the ring of the spoken word and the immediacy of a told tale as she succinctly
delivers this tale of love, faithfulness, and heroism. McCurdy's hand-colored wood-
cuts are remarkably evocative, showing the gentle, sheltering affection between
Nulwee and his grandmother juxtaposed against the horrifically threatening Bone
Man, who grins a mirthless grin, his fleshless limbs part of the leafless, barren
landscape. The book itself is beautifully designed, with pale borders throughout
and framed text blocks contributing to the overall visual impact. Specific notes on
both the text and illustrations are included. JMD
SLEPIAN, JAN 
The Mind Reader. Philomel, 1997 
132p
ISBN 0-399-23150-1 
$15.95 
R Gr. 5-8
Conrad "Connie" Leondar steps into the family mind-reading act when his father
is too drunk to go on, and he reveals that he can actually read the minds of the
people in the audience. Annie Ellinger, Conrad's friend and fellow vaudevillian,
relates how Connie's ability exposes him to the dark side of human nature, forcing
the two of them to flee the theater in search of sanctuary with Crazy Joe, an eccen-
tric cousin. Taking the ferry to Berkeley, the two run into a hostile audience
member Connie has encountered before, a peculiar junk collector, and finally Crazy
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
141
Joe himself, Connie's cousin. They have arrived at a moment of crisis, for Joe's
son Jesse is missing, and Joe is beside himself with anxiety. Connie's abilities save
the day when he reads the mind of the kidnapper and he and Annie rescue the little
boy. Predictable? Sure, but it's fast-paced and lively just the same, with the vaude-
ville theater environment vigorously and colorfully depicted. This is an unusual
adventure story that has a little of everything, and it is rich and full as, well, a
vaudeville stage. JMD
TEWS, SUSAN 
Lizard Sees the World; illus. by George Crespo. 
Clarion,
1997 
32p
ISBN 0-395-72662-X 
$15.00 
R 
5-8 yrs
The canyon animals know all about the world. Fish's world is wet and bubbly,
Jackrabbit's world is green and leafy, Hummingbird's world is warm and windy,
but Lizard knows that the world is more than Fish, Jackrabbit, and Hummingbird
imagine it to be, and he wants to see it all: "Lizard was planning to climb to the
place where the sky meets the earth. When he reached the topmost edge of the
world, he would look down. He would see the whole world below him." Lizard
discovers the world doesn't end at the cliffs edge, "it only began there. The world
went on in every direction as far as he could see." Crespo's dapper, grinning green
lizard climbs his way out of the canyon with a sense of jaunty style, and the other
animals, from the smiling rainbow trout to the saucily slithery snake, have that
same flair. The red-throated green lizard shines against the golden canyon sand,
with splashes of blue water, hot pink flowers, and blue sky to enliven the desert
palette. This is an original tale, but the streamlined text has the earmarks of a well-
told folktale: concise language, spare but effective images, and a satisfying, prom-
ising conclusion. JMD
THOMAS, ROB 
Doing Time: Notes from the Undergrad. Simon, 1997 
184p
ISBN 0-689-80958-1 
$16.00 
R Gr. 9-12
Randall has to interview nine high-school students for his college sociology course
about their experiences doing a required two hundred hours of community service
in order to graduate. He explains his lack of interest by telling the story of his own
experience as the recipient of a renowned football player's two hundred hours as a
Big Brother, and what it meant when the man just dropped out of his life without
a word of explanation once his hours were up. Randall doesn't interview anyone
and there is no follow-up to the opening story, but none is really necessary. Many
of the stories have a shocking and immediate emotional intimacy that will draw in
readers: in "Loss of a Pet," a library volunteer sees the high school rich witch in a
different light when she tells the story of her mother's suicide and deliberate mur-
der of her pet; "Half a Mind" is an unsettling story in which the unpopular narra-
tor, a volunteer at a home for head-trauma victims, takes up with a former
high-school golden boy who has sustained serious, irreversible brain damage.
Thomas goes back and forth between cynicism and hope, giving some narrators a
singular, gritty edge and others a gentle sweetness or humor. The thematic frame
of forced volunteerism is present throughout if you want to look for it, but each
story stands on its own thanks to the individuality of the varied narrators. This
would make one provocative readaloud and an interesting starting point for char-
acter studies in English class. JMD
142 
* 
THE BULLETIN
TILLAGE, LEON WALTER 
Leon's Story; illus. by Susan L. Roth. 
Farrar,
1997 
107p
ISBN 0-374-34379-9 
$14.00 
R Gr. 5-9
This is the personal memoir of Leon Tillage, a black sharecropper's son who grew
up in North Carolina in the 1940s. Tillage is an eyewitness to an era of change.
He saw the United States changing from Jim Crow to Civil Rights, saw his father
deliberately run down and killed by a group of white boys, had dogs set on him by
his employer, and took a hand in changing an oppressive society by joining the
civil rights movement. The story of Tillage's life, edited from recorded interviews
conducted by Susan Roth, is simply and straightforwardly told. This is personal
history that does not shirk unpleasantries about lynching, the Ku Klux Klan, or
the ever-present danger of being black and without rights in the American South.
There is not a great deal of background information about the national civil rights
movement, but the fact that this is an individual's memoir makes some of those
big issues easier to grasp because they are presented in such a compellingly per-
sonal way. While the writing is not seamless, it has a documentary-style clarity
that adds to its effectiveness. Black-and-white collage art adds an elegant design
element to this stark but enlightening book. JMD
VOIGT, CYNTHIA 
Bad, Badder, Baddest. Scholastic, 1997 
26 6p
ISBN 0-590-60136-9 
$16.95 
R 
Gr. 4-7
Mikey and Margalo, heroines of Bad Girls (BCCB 4/96) are even badder than
Dennis Rodman wants to be, and in this volume their badness gets put in a larger
context as we see their lives out of school for the first time. In fact there's very little
school activity at all here-we're mostly focusing on Mikey's deteriorating family
life (her hard-edged, high-powered mother has had enough of Mikey's unexcep-
tional father) and Margalo's contrastingly eccentric but sound home (her mother's
on a happy third marriage, and a gaggle of stepchildren, not just from this mar-
riage, share the house with Margalo). Mikey insists that Margalo help her keep her
parents together, and the two master manipulators try everything they can (Mikey
even temporarily becomes her mother's perfect daughter, and they shop for train-
ing bras at the mall) to achieve Mikey's end. The introduction of Gianette, an
exotic interloper who shows signs of being criminally bad in a way Mikey and
Margalo have no real interest in, provides for some interesting scenes and con-
trasts, but ultimately what readers want is Mikey and Margalo themselves. And
there's plenty of them here, fighting, uniting, planning, self-analyzing, and pulling
strings-but they're ultimately the puppets of adult whim. There's a Louise
Fitzhugh flair to this installment, with its adults in a separate and often self-ab-
sorbed world, and many young readers may well consider the pair's machinations
merely a form of self-defense. DS
WALDRON, JAN L. 
Angel Pig & the Hidden Christmas; illus. by David
McPhail. 
Dutton, 1997 
24p
ISBN 0-525-45744-5 
$14.99 
Ad 
4-8 yrs
The piggies have just realized it's Christmas Eve and they haven't bought any
presents. It turns out they haven't any money, either, and they repair sadly to their
living room to mourn the lack of Christmas cheer. But wait-a Christmas Angel
appears: "'You think you need money? You don't!' said a voice./ 'You just need
each other and time to rejoice.'" Quicker then you can say "stuff my stocking,"
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
143
the little piggies are convinced they don't need anything but one another and some
homemade gifties to have a very nifty Christmas. While Waldron's text has a few
forced rhymes and an equally forceful message, it has a certain holiday ring to it, as
do McPhail's red, green, and gold enhanced watercolors. The inhabitants of the
pseudo-Victorian piggy palace cheerfully engage in a variety of Christmas crafts
(including lots of cutting, pasting, and baking) that is sure to inspire holiday cel-
ebrants to some creations of their own. The Angel Pig (a little pink piggy with an
ornately decorated robe, pre-Raphaelite golden wings, and red sneakers) adds a
merry note of Christmas magic. McPhail's illustrations have enough seasonal de-
tails and hidden quirks to make the message (you don't need lots of money and
lots of stuff to have a dandy Christmas) more than just palatable. JMD
WALLACE, BILL 
Aloha Summer. Holiday House, 1997 
168p
ISBN 0-8234-1306-3 
$15.95 
Ad 
Gr. 6-9
John is fourteen years old in 1925, the year his parents move to the island of Lanai
in pre-statehood Hawaii. The cultural shock to the Oklahoma farmboy is made
even more extreme by the apparent antagonism between the Hawaiians and the
haoles, most of whom are employed by the fledgling Dole Pineapple Company.
John makes friends with his beautiful Hawaiian schoolmate Kalola and her wise
old grandfather, Makalii, and learns some cultural lessons about the real meaning
of love, respecting your elders, and the importance of hospitality. Meanwhile,
John's parents have been observing the racist treatment of the non-white pine-
apple plantation workers by Dole management (in the bad-guy guise of Mr. Jacobs
and his wife) and have decided to quit and move back to Oklahoma. This is a
simple romance greatly encumbered by ahistorical '90s sensibilities regarding the
origins of the Dole pineapple empire, racism, and 1920s attitudes toward interra-
cial romance, to mention just a few. The affection between John and Kalola has its
moments; that and their relationship with Kalola's grandfather may be enough to
keep young adults reading until the end. JMD
WALLACE, RICH 
Shots on Goal. Knopf, 1997 
14 8p
Library ed. ISBN 0-679-98670-7 
$18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 0-679-88670-2 
$17.00 
R Gr. 7-10
Returning to the setting of his first novel, Wrestling Sturbridge, Wallace embraces
a new sport. Soccer is high school sophomore Barry "Bones" Austin's passion, and
he and his best friend Joey are two of the best players on their team. They have a
chance to win the league, and the novel revolves around the changes they undergo
as they pursue this goal. Bones has eyes for the elegant Shannon and thinks he has
a chance until she asks Joey out instead. He recognizes his second-place position
behind his older brother with his parents, his second-place position behind Joey
on and off the field, and his desire to move out from behind them both. He
contemplates Joey's need to be a one-man team and begins to develop relation-
ships with new friends, the most memorable being Herbie, who has a sarcastic,
smart remark for any situation. The soccer matches are fast, the interaction with
girls unromantically realistic, and the voice is engaging, as Bones tells his story as a
rueful eyewitness account. The novel is interspersed with excerpts from "Sturbridge:
An Insiders' Guide by Barry Austin" that give some background thoughts on the
town and its inhabitants, but they are not consistent or interesting enough to have
any impact on the main narrative. Bones is a fifteen-year-old kid with a little
144 
* 
THE BULLETIN
angst, but he doesn't let it get to him much. His equilibrium in the face of almost
everything makes him an effective, dispassionate narrator, and it's pretty believ-
able that the only thing that really gets him going is a good soccer game. JMD
YEP, LAURENCE 
The Dragon Prince: A Chinese Beauty & the Beast Tale, illus. by
Kam Mak. 
HarperCollins, 1997 
32p
Library ed. ISBN 0-06-024393-7 
$14.89
Trade ed. ISBN 0-06-024381-3 
$14.95 
R 
5-8 yrs
It would be fascinating to find out how much Yep has adapted this tale from the
Chinese source, and how much that source might have been influenced by non-
Asian versions of "Beauty and the Beast." Here daughter Seven is kind to a garden
snake, which turns into a dragon and demands her father's life or one of his daugh-
ters in marriage. Only Seven agrees, whereupon the dragon flies with her through
the air, dives into his undersea world, and transforms into a handsome prince; the
two live happily until Seven pines for home. During her visit there, sister Three
exchanges clothes with her and pushes her into the river, substituting herself for
Seven. The prince is perceptive enough not to be fooled and eventually tracks
down Seven through her beautiful embroidery sold at the market by the old woman
who rescued her from the river. The deep-hued, velvet-textured, full-page paint-
ings, most of which face an equally full page of text, are framed in white and
centrally focused on photorealistic main characters. And if ever there was a photo-
genic dragon, this is it, with fiery visage and golden scales radiating charisma and
reflected in the fine tracery of Yep's description ("It was a face of terror and a face
of beauty. It was a face of magic"). Not only does the Beast steal the show, as
always, but he does the rescuing, so stimulate some thought by reading this in
company with the many contrasting picture-book versions that feature Beauty as
journeying savior. BH
YOUNG, ED, ad. 
Mouse Match: A Chinese Folktale; ad. and illus. by Ed
Young. 
Silver Whisde/Harcourt, 1997 
26p
ISBN 0-15-201453-5 
$20.00 
Ad 
5-8 yrs
Ed Young turns his talents to the traditional tale of the mouse bride, whose family
searches for the greatest suitor. They first consider the sun, next the cloud, then
the wind, then the mountain, and finally mice again, once they realize that the
mice undermine even the most apparently powerful of phenomena. The text is
spare, with a tendency towards sentence fragments ("And together they decided
that the only acceptable suitor would be the greatest and most powerful on earth.
But they had no idea where to find them. So they thought, and they talked it over
and over for many days") that leave a choppy feel. The collage illustrations feature
dark silhouette mice, reminiscent of but livelier than those in Seven Blind Mice
(BCCB 3/92); the backgrounds display intriguingly tactile mixes of texture and
luminous washes of color, creating a dreamy fantasy world wherein a courtship of
mouse and cloud seems perfectly plausible. While the placement of the pages on a
foldout frieze of heavy cardstock is artistically intriguing, it's going to make using
the book a complicated endeavor: pages will be difficult to turn, and opening the
frieze up entirely leaves it standing rather precariously and diminishes the drama of
the unfolding story by unfolding the pages ahead of time. A note from Young
discusses the dissemination of the tale but provides no specific source for this ver-
sion; Chinese text appears on the back of the frieze. DS
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
145
PROFESSIONAL CONNECTIONS: RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS AND LIBRARIANS
Schon, Isabel. The Best of the Latino Heritage: A Guide to the Best Juvenile Books
about Latino People and Cultures. Scarecrow, 1997. 285p. ISBN 0-8108-3221-6.
$37.50.
Schon is one of the premier scholars in this area, and many readers will be familiar
with her earlier bibliographic titles on the topic. This is a bibliography of the
books on the topic she considers the best from the last forty years or so; they range
from picture books to novels to biographies to political analyses. The collection is
divided by country and region, and each entry includes necessary bibliographic
information and a pithy, well-turned annotation that often includes evaluative
comments. The result is a useful combination of advocacy and bibliography that
will be helpful to many people who don't know where to start, wish to expand in
this area, or want to see what they've missed. Author, title, and subject indices are
included. DS
West, Mark I. Everyone's Guide to Children's Literature. Highsmith, 1997. Paper
ed. ISBN 0-917846-90-7; $15.00. 101p. (Highsmith Press Handbook Series)
The title's a bit misleading, as this is more Everyone's Guide to Children's Litera-
ture Resources. And a useful resource guide it is too-West gives a quick overview
of reference works, journals and periodicals, organizations, Internet resources, spe-
cial collections, and books about the literature. Each entry includes a summary
and relevant information for acquiring, contacting, or visiting the resource in ques-
tion. Much of this information (particularly the awards lists) is available else-
where, but this is a streamlined and approachable reference source (though mistakes
in several significant author names suggest that more proofreading might have
been in order). West's particular intention is apparently to bridge the gaps be-
tween the different professional fields dealing with children's literature, and the
volume is indeed helpfully inclusive. This is a convenient and unintimidating
guide to expanding one's acquaintance with the world of words about children's
literature. Indices of subjects, titles, authors and illustrators, and organizations
mentioned are included. DS
SLIP OF THE FINGERS DEPARTMENT:
The trade edition for Megan McDonald's Beezy, published by Orchard and re-
viewed in the November issue of the Bulletin, was incorrectly listed as selling for
$3.95. The correct price is $13.95.
146 
* 
THE BULLETIN
SUBJECT AND USE INDEX
Keyed to The Bulletin's alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. Entries in regular type refer to
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS
refer to genres and appeals. In the case of subject headings, the subhead "stories"
refers to books for the readaloud audience; "fiction," to those books intended for
independent reading.
Adoption-stories: Salisbury
African Americans-fiction: Bond;
Loveday
African Americans-folklore: Bond
African Americans-stories: Crews;
Foreman
African Americans: Tillage
American Indians: Normandin
American Indians-fiction:
Holman; Simms
Angels-stories: Bunting; Waldron
Animals-fiction: Heidenreich
Animals-stories: Fleming; Garner;
Griffith; Tews
Animals: Jenkins
Architecture: Macaulay
Arithmetic: Burns
Bats-stories: Dragonwagon
BIBLE STORIES: Janisch
BIOGRAPHIES: Fleischner;
Tillage
Books and reading-stories: Bailey
Bullies-fiction: Cosby
Cats-fiction: Heidenreich
China-folklore: Yep; Young
Christmas: Buck; Hodges
Christmas-fiction: Cooney
Christmas-stories: Bunting;
Christelow; Foreman; Osborne;
Rylant; Waldron
Civil rights: Tillage
Civil War-fiction: Armstrong;
Forrester
Cowboys-stories: Lowell
Crime and criminals-fiction:
Benoit; Gee; Marino; O'Leary
Cults-fiction: Haddix
Death and dying-fiction: Henkes
Depression, the-fiction: Hesse;
O'Leary
Dogs-stories: Christelow; Griffith
Dragons-stories: Yep
Ecology: Bang; Santore
ESP-fiction: Slepian
Ethics and values: Marino
FANTASY: Doherty; Jonell;
Mayne; Osborne
Farm life-fiction: O'Leary
Fathers and daughters-fiction:
Hesse; Marino
Fathers and sons-fiction: Cosby;
Holman
FOLKTALES AND
FAIRYTALES: Adler; Bailey;
Garner; Ketteman; Lowell;
McCaughrean; Nikola-Lisa;
Normandin; Riordan; Simms;
Yep; Young
Food and eating-stories: Barrett;
Riley
Foster children-fiction: Cooney;
Doherty
Friends-fiction: Cooney; Cosby;
Haddix; Heynen; Holub;
Salisbury; Slepian; Voigt;
Wallace, B.; Wallace, R.
Frogs-stories: Santore
FUNNY STORIES: Gantos
Geometry: Burns
GHOST STORIES: Holman
Grandfathers-fiction: Wallace, B.
Grandfathers-stories: London
DECEMBER 1997 
* 
147
Grandmothers-fiction: Cosby
Grandparents-fiction: Henkes;
Nolan
Greece, classical: Riordan
Guns: Schulson
Halloween-stories: Nikola-Lisa
Hanukkah-stories: Adler
Hawaii-fiction: Salisbury;
Wallace, B.
HISTORICAL FICTION:
Armstrong; Forrester; Holman;
Schur; Wallace, B.
Homeless-stories: Bunting
Horses-stories: London
Jews-fiction: Schur
Jews-stories: Adler
Language arts: Buck
Letter-writing-fiction: Holub
Libraries-stories: Bailey
Mathematics: Burns
Mental illness-fiction: Nolan
Mice-stories: Riley; Young
Mothers and daughters-fiction:
Voigt
Mothers and sons-stories: Jonell
Music and musicians: Hodges
MYSTERIES: Benoit
MYTHS AND LEGENDS:
Riordan
Nature study: Jenkins
Oceans-fiction: Doherty
Pigeons-fiction: Macaulay
Pigs-stories: Waldron
POETRY: Hesse
Queens-stories: Santore
Reading aloud: Bon.; Bunting;
Heidenreich; Mayne; Simms;
Slepian
Reading, beginning: Bang; Buck;
Christelow
Reading, easy: Cosby; Griffith; Holub
Reindeer-stories: Foreman
Religion-fiction: Haddix
Restaurants-stories: Dragonwagon
RHYMING STORIES: Evans; Nikola-
Lisa; Riley; Waldron
Rome-fiction: Macaulay
Safety education: Schulson
School-fiction: Holub; Thomas
Seasons-stories: Fleming
Selkies-fiction: Doherty
SHORT STORIES: Thomas
Slavery-fiction: Forrester
Slavery: Fleischner
Snow-stories: Crews; Evans
Soccer-fiction: Wallace, R.
South, the-fiction: O'Leary
Space travel: Herbst
SPORTS STORIES: Wallace, R.
Storytelling: Bond; Simms; Tews; Young
Storytime: Bailey; Dragonwagon;
Fleming; Garner; Jenkins; Jonell;
Lowell; McCaughrean; Nikola-Lisa;
Riley; Tews
Toys-stories: Osborne
Trains-fiction: Rylant
Trains-stories: Quattlebaum
Transportation-stories: Quattlebaum
UFOs: Herbst
Unicorns-stories: McCaughrean
Urban life-stories: Crews
Volunteers: Thomas
West, the-fiction: Loveday
West, the-stories: Ketteman; Lowell
Writers and writing-fiction: Gantos
Teaig 
I8
Teaching
The Professional IdeaBook for Teachers
SEvery 
issue of Teaching K-8
S rovides informative articles on
T\ Cr 
., 
the cutting edge of education.
You'll also find insightful
columns and thoughtful
reviews written by some of
today's leading educators.
Teaching K-8 is filled with
hundreds of unique ideas and
activities that help teachers
present new challenges to
their students, learn new
concepts and develop new
skills.
Monthly columns include...
Children's Books
Teaching in the Library
The Parent Connection
Science, Math, Technology and more!
Plus, interviews with children's book authors and illustrators
rnn't 
rmice rutf oin thic 
ralunahl
resource for your library -
subscribe to Teaching K-8 today.
Teaching8
)x 54808, Boulder, CO 80322-4808
-8793
* Outside U.S. add $5.00 postage per subscription.
I 
I
"No one
I
[1
ti
in
th
tl
\i
Sdeprived of this gem."*
by Chris Raschka
bute
cian
the
is
lords
m fal
if yol
Ial*,
to
las
nter
S 
A Grolier Company 
OHABO
* "Philip Simmons, an African American blacksmith
is the subject of Lyons's new biography. The narrative
involves readers through its lively presentation of an
intriguing subject. ... A thoughtful layout contributes
to thegrace of this handsome book, which reflects its
subject i craftsmanship and attention to detail
Booklis* starred review
S"Readers will come away with respect for hard work
combined with creativ pursuits." -The 
Bulletin
Ages 8-110 0-395-72033-8 * $16.0
Houghrtozz 
-f 
*22Berkeley 
Street* Bosron, MA 02116
--
" 
School Library Journal stars
CIICLIEbCEAD bOV
By Richard Egielski
1987 Caldecott Medalist
Full-color pictures by the author
" 
I
An old nursery tavorite
vith a big-city twist. The
ingerbread Boy gets loose
New York City and is chased
e usual couple and [many
hers] into the subway and
through Central Park,
where the same wily fox,
as always, awaits him.
The illustrations adroitly
voke the city setting while
viduality to the Gingerbread
rs. A fine addition to
comes complete with a
inme." -SLJ
Ages 3-7. 
$14.95 TR (0-06-026030-0) A Laura Geringer Book
Also written and painted by Richard Egielski
BUZ
A 1995 New York Times Best Illustrated Book
Ages 3-7. $14.95 TR (0-06-023566-7)
$14.89 LB (0-06-023567-5)
A Laura Geringer Book
9 HarperCollinsChildren'sBooks
10 East 53rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10022
J.. 
" -SL 
.J. _
YKAk fiction on the cutting edge
"MESMERIZING"
no-'el, what beginsaý,.I portrait of.1
hi-fi-school drop-out is transformed
oItO ýl 1.1,6113till',tLIdV Of tIIC hLIII)JO
spirit ... 
Jhi, hauntitio, life-affirmI110
110%'el I'Lo1her burnishes ( 'Idlium"
"THOUGH T-PROVOKING
thollulit-PrOx Oking stoný fu 11 of rich,
1v 
well-developed characters." 
-11
"DEVASTATING"
adlium fOIIOW, L11) 
his Ih'JI-t-
breakim, Icro at Me Pon, Iý Ith
All e(jualk dcýastatiju'
encounter vNith IIIICI 11,11-Li
re1litI, ... 
that not oxvil the
most rational, well-
Ofdered I[% 
t-, I re '1111111 IHIC
to randoin iolenck"',
m 
0whael
Cadnum's
ED
LVIking-Childrens
Favorites Since 1933
University of Illinois Press
1325 South Oak Street
Champaign, IL 61820
U.SA
RETUaN POSTAGE GUARANTED
0008-9036(199712)51:4*;1-G
"'P
Ir
PERIODICALS
POSTAGE
PAID
CHAMPAIGN, IL
The Bulletin of the Center for Children's Books
invites you to visit our home page at
http://edfu.lis.uiuc.edu/puboff/bccb
Regular features include:
* Bulletin Stars-what we starred this month
* Bulletin Dozen-a genre- or theme-based list of tites
* Quote of the Month
* Bulletin Blue Ribbons 1990-1996
* the Baby Bulletin-a sample collection of recent reviews
Occasional features include:
* Rising Star-an examination of the work of a talented new author
or artist
* True Blue-reflections on a time-honored talent
* Dueling Reviews-a look at the discussion behind the scenes when a book
polarizes the editors
* And more... updated monthly!
#I 
Y.- I`·
I
*· *; ..
eSr 
..-- 
i
'-^ '*-. 
^ 
'„-
~· 
· ic-;i-
·. ·- .~
