T h e
B u l l e T i n
of The CenTer for Children’s Books
Published for the University of Illinois
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
by The Johns Hopkins University Press
October 2011
Vol. 65   No. 2
 N. Charles Street • Baltimore, MD  • ... • .. • www.press.jhu.edu/journals
The BULLETIN of the 
CENTER for CHILDREN’S BOOKS
Deborah Stevenson, E
Provides concise summaries and critical evaluations 
of current children’s books.
Published monthly (except August)
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE*
R. H. W. Dillard, E--C
Julie Pfeiffer and Michelle Ann Abate, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published annually
: - / -: -
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE 
ASSOCIATION QUARTERLY*
Katharine Capshaw Smith, E
An official publication of the Children’s Literature 
Association (ChLA).
Published quarterly
: - / -: -
The LION and the UNICORN
A Critical Journal of Children’s Literature
David L. Russell, Karin E. Westman, 
and Naomi J. Wood, E
An international theme- and genre-centered 
journal committed to a serious, ongoing discussion 
of literature for children.
Published three times a year
: - / -: -
*Please direct inquiries and orders to the ChLA: 
www.childlitassn.org.
The Johns Hopkins University Press Journals in 
CHILDREN’S LITERATURE
A Look InsIde
T h e B u l l e T i n
of the Center for ChILdren’s Books 
October 2011
Vol. 65 No. 2
67  the BIg PICture
   
Breadcrumbs  by Anne Ursu
68   new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
    Reviewed titles include:
72  •   Jefferson’s Sons:  A Founding Father’s Secret Children  by 
Kimberly Brubaker Bradley
80 • Dear Hot Dog  written and illus. by Mordicai Gerstein
83  •   Who Has What?: All about Girls’ Bodies and Boys’ Bodies  by 
Robie Harris; illus. by Nadine Bernard Westcott
103  • Following Christopher Creed  by Carol Plum-Ucci
109 • Wonderstruck  written and illus. by Brian Selznick
124  ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons
125  suBjeCt And use Index
exPLAnAtIon of Code sYmBoLs used wIth revIews
* Asterisks denote books of special distinction.
R Recommended.
Ad Additional book of acceptable quality for collections needing more material in the area.
M Marginal book that is so slight in content or has so many weaknesses in style or  
format that it should be given careful consideration before purchase.
NR Not recommended.
SpC Subject matter or treatment will tend to limit the book to specialized collections.
SpR A book that will have appeal for the unusual reader only. Recommended for the  
special few who will read it.
The Bulletin of the Center for Children’s Books (ISSN 0008-9036) is published monthly except August 
for the University of Illinois Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) by the 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
revIewIng stAff 
Deborah Stevenson, Editor (DS) 
Kate Quealy-Gainer, Assistant Editor (KQG)
Betsy Hearne, Professor Emerita
Elizabeth Bush, Reviewer (EB)
Karen Coats, Reviewer (KC)
Claire Gross, Reviewer (CG)
Hope Morrison, Reviewer (HM)
April Spisak, Reviewer (AS)
Reviewers’ initials are appended to reviews.
offICe stAff
Claire Gross, Editorial Assistant
suBsCrIPtIon rAtes 
1 year, institutions, print or electronic $93.00; combined print & electronic $130.00; multiple in-
stitutional subscriptions, $70 for the first and $50 for each additional; individuals, $55.00; students, 
$20.00. In countries other than the United States, add $16.50 per subscription for postage; subscrib-
ers in Canada and Mexico add $12.00. Single copy rate: $10.00. Volumes available in microfilm from 
ProQuest, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48106. Complete volumes available in microfiche 
from Johnson Associates, P.O. Box 1017, Greenwich, CT 06830. Subscription checks should be 
made payable to The Johns Hopkins University Press. All notices of change of address should provide 
both the old and new address. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to The Bulletin of the Center 
for Children’s Books, The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Division, 2715 N. Charles Street, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. 
All inquiries about subscriptions should go to The Johns Hopkins University Press, Journals Divi-
sion, 2715 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21218-4363. Telephone: 410-516-6987. FAX: 
410-516-6968. Toll-free 1-800-548-1784. For advertising information, visit www.press.jhu.edu/jour-
nals/advertising.html or phone 410-516-6984.
Review copies and all correspondence about reviews should be sent to Deborah Stevenson, The Bul-
letin of the Center for Children’s Books, 501 E. Daniel St., Champaign, IL 61820-6601. Email: bccb@
illinois.edu; phone: 217-244-0324.
Visit our homepage at http://bccb.lis.illinois.edu
Periodicals postage paid at Baltimore, Maryland and at additional offices.
© 2011 by The Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois
Drawings by Debra Bolgla. This publication is printed on acid-free paper.
Cover image from Breadcrumbs ©2011 by Erin McGuire and used by permission of Walden Pond 
Press/HarperCollins.
OcTOBer 2011 • 67
the BIg PICture
Breadcrumbs
by Anne Ursu
No matter where she goes, Hazel doesn’t quite fit in. She’s too imaginative, too dis-
tractible, a bit too in touch with all the hidden magic of the world—and not nearly 
concerned enough with her fifth-grade peers’ budding interest in popularity and 
dating. The fact that she was adopted from India as a baby isn’t a huge issue in her 
life or her relationship with her parents, but her growing awareness that “everyone 
else came in matching sets of one kind or another” contributes to her alienation 
and also subtly underlines her classmates’ sense of her difference.
Fortunately, she has her best friend and next-door neighbor Jack, her 
partner in imagination and whimsy, who has been there for her all her life. Just as 
he’s seen her through her parents’ divorce and her father’s recent departure, she’s 
supported him through his mother’s worsening depression. At school, however, 
Jack is now torn between Hazel and his other friends, and after he gets a sliver 
of glass stuck in his eye one winter day, he rejects her, then disappears altogether. 
Here’s where the plot gets twisty: he’s lured into the forest by the Snow Queen, and 
Hazel, deciphering this, embarks on a quest to retrieve him that leads her through 
the many perils the magical forest has to offer.
The world she enters, a sort of crossroads where numerous fairy-tale 
events and characters intersect and that exists outside of geography, is exactly the 
kind of twilight realm readers will love to imagine lurking just past the everyday 
boundaries of forest and river and horizon that they see every day but rarely cross. 
Ursu expertly weaves shivery magic throughout the mundane winter landscape of 
the book’s opening, so that the fairy-tale departure feels utterly possible. At the 
same time, she infuses the folkloric flourishes with urgent emotion, giving each 
dangerous magical lure modern resonance (and, quite often, delicious creepiness to 
boot). Occasional black-and-white full-page illustrations, artfully smudgy, heighten 
the atmospheric touches, providing a visual sense of the forest’s vastness and the 
blanketing snow’s eerie coziness. The folk and fairy tales featured (many of them 
lesser-known stories) play on the themes of parental longing, lost and lonely chil-
dren, changing identities, and escape from the world’s cruelties; all of their iterations 
rework conceptions of villains, heroes, and victims with thoughtful complexity, so 
that characters all subvert expectations in some way. With every encounter, Hazel 
learns new things about herself and her world, escaping perils that go far beyond 
mere physical danger. 
Richly referential, Breadcrumbs acknowledges its close kinship not just 
to the fairy tales it re-envisions but to a whole tapestry of classic and modern chil-
dren’s fantasy, from C. S. Lewis and Madeleine L’Engle to Philip Pullman and Neil 
68 • The BulleTin
new Books for ChILdren And Young PeoPLe
Gaiman, with well-chosen details of name, place, and character that will delight 
those in the know without alienating the uninitiated; it’s also akin to Rebecca 
Stead’s When You Reach Me (BCCB 9/09) in the way it delves into the confusing 
no-man’s-land between childhood and adolescence and all the pain of the transition 
through it. Hazel emerges from the ordeal stronger and more willing to engage with 
the real world, a result that cements the links between reality and fantasy that Ursu 
so richly explores. The evocative magical landscape, superbly developed characters 
(particularly dreamy, self-doubting, determined Hazel and lost Jack), and the pierc-
ing sadness of a faltering childhood friendship give this delicately written fantasy 
wide and lingering appeal. (See p. 114 for publication information.)
Claire Gross, Reviewer
AcAmporA, pAul Rachel Spinelli Punched Me in the Face. Roaring Brook, 
2011 [176p]
ISBN 978-1-59643-548-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
When his mother takes off, fourteen-year-old Zachary and his cop father pack up 
what little they own and head to the East Coast for a fresh start. As most small 
towns do, Falls, Connecticut offers its fair share of quirky inhabitants, from the 
hard-of-hearing old Polish couple that runs the local ice cream joint to the beautiful 
but ferocious Rachel Spinelli, who just happens to live across the street from Zach-
ary’s new home. Despite his efforts to remain aloof, Zachary finds himself drawn 
to Rachel’s older brother Teddy, a developmentally challenged young man with a 
knack for the trumpet, Zachary’s favorite instrument. As the two bond over shared 
jamming sessions, Zachary learns more about Teddy and Rachel’s past and discovers 
that family relationships are complicated and fragile things that require constant 
attention and, often, forgiveness. This is a plot that could have gone wrong, but 
Acampora keeps the schmaltz to a minimum by providing nuanced depictions of his 
flawed characters. Rachel’s penchant for violence is both a weapon to use against the 
school kids that bully Teddy and a direct reaction to being placed in the unwanted 
role of her brother’s protector; Teddy himself is not some simple-minded musical 
genius but rather an everyday adolescent with fears, insecurities, and sometimes, 
a serious stubborn streak. The banter between Zachary and the Spinelli siblings is 
light and clever, adding a welcome note of humor to an otherwise contemplative 
story about loss, rejection, and trust. Fans of small-town color and happy endings 
will take heart in this ultimately hopeful tale.  KQG 
OcTOBer 2011 • 69
Anderson, r. J. Ultraviolet. Carolrhoda Lab, 2011 306p
ISBN 978-0-7613-7408-4 $17.95   
R Gr. 7-10
When Alison was very young, her mother was so freaked out by her daughter’s 
synesthesia (experiencing the input of one sense as another) that Alison learned 
to keep it a secret. Now, at sixteen, she has experienced a psychotic break; her 
cross-sensory perception has become so intense that she is convinced she made a 
classmate disintegrate in a burst of anger, and it doesn’t help that the classmate has 
in fact vanished without a trace. Hospitalized, Alison concentrates her energies on 
keeping to herself and appearing as normal as possible, until a researcher named 
Faraday discovers her synesthesia and her ability to see beyond the ordinarily visible 
spectrum and helps her understand her powers. Unfortunately, it turns out that 
he is a not a neuropsychologist at all but a young reporter for a magazine special-
izing in the paranormal, a fact that has him speedily dispatched from the hospital. 
However, since he is the only one who believes her story, she seeks him out while 
home for a weekend, and the story takes a turn into Dr. Who territory as Alison 
finally gets the answers she needs to explain some longstanding mysteries. Indeed, 
Dr. Who fans are the perfect audience for this psychological drama with a science-
fiction twist, but readers who enjoy exploring non-normative neurological abilities 
will also find it appealing. Alison is a sympathetic protagonist whose synesthesia 
is presented as both enviable and uncomfortable, and her mistrust of medical care 
is as credible as it is wrong-headed. In other words, the realism here is very real 
indeed, and the plot turn to sci-fi will either delight or distract readers, according 
to their tastes. Everyone, though will stay on track with her bittersweet romance 
with Faraday and its promise that true love can break barriers and transcend even 
intergalactic dimensions.  KC 
Auxier, JonAthAn Peter Nimble and His Fantastic Eyes; written and illus. by 
Jonathan Auxier. Amulet/Abrams, 2011 381p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0025-5 $16.95   
R Gr. 4-6
For a ten-year-old, Peter is remarkably good at being a thief. It seems to come 
naturally to him, although the threat of beatings if he doesn’t deliver stolen goods 
is also strong motivation. All changes, however, when Peter steals a box contain-
ing three pairs of magical eyes; it is quite the find for a boy who has been blind 
since infancy, and he is keen to experiment with them. Even bold Peter, however, 
isn’t prepared for cursed castles, dead royalty, sand pirates, and enslaved children; 
fortunately, he remains unfazed, despite the odds against the partnership of one 
blind kid and one horse/cat/knight triumphing against a tyrant king and his massive 
talking-ape army. While Peter joins the ranks of literary children who are raised in 
horrific circumstances (no education, no love, forced to untie his own knots after 
being thrown in the river in a sack to drown as a baby) but miraculously turn out 
to be noble, well-informed, and amiable, he is aided in his quest by one of the most 
delightfully ridiculous sidekicks imaginable, and the tiny, irascible Sir Tode does 
much to keep the tone comfortably balanced between sweeping, heroic journey 
and madcap bumbling rescue. The lightning-fast pace and terrifically engaging pro-
tagonists (indeed, even fairly minor characters, like the zombie-esque brainwashed 
parents, are memorable) make this an ideal suggestion for reluctant readers and 
young fantasy fans. It is a touch disappointing that Peter regains his vision after all 
70 • The BulleTin
of the strong messages about children with physical disabilities being able to save 
the world just as well as anyone, but this plot development is at least well-integrated 
and explained carefully, and Peter is shown to be quite content—and definitely 
heroic—with or without sight.  AS
BArnhill, Kelly The Mostly True Story of Jack. Little, 2011 [323p]
ISBN 978-0-316-05670-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Twelve-year-old Jack has never been a fan of fairy tales, so it is with chagrin that 
he finds himself in the middle of one when his mother ships him off to spend the 
summer with estranged relatives in a small Iowa town. After spending much of 
his life ignored—even by his own parents—Jack is shocked when the people of 
Hazelwood not only notice him but also seem to expect some mighty big things 
of him: his uncle keeps going on about a magical Lady and Jack’s potential, his 
new friend Wendy looks at him like he is going to sprout corn out of his ears any 
minute; and the wealthiest man in town is intent on Jack’s demise. Indeed, even 
the land itself seems to be calling to him, and as he slowly begins to unravel the 
mysteries surrounding both his heritage and the town’s strange spate of missing 
children, he comes to realize he is connected to the town’s foundation—as either 
a savior or a sacrifice. Richly atmospheric, this folklorically flavored tale offers a 
strangely pleasing combination of midwestern charm and hauntingly creepy Tim 
Burton–like imagination. Barnhill reveals just enough of Hazelwood’s many secrets 
to keep the readers gripped, and the perfectly timed pacing makes for a quick and 
accessible read. Despite a touch of preachiness at the end, there is a wonderfully 
subversive element that runs through this tale, underscored by the bittersweet but 
utterly appropriate ending. While not quite as terrifying as Westall’s The Stones of 
Muncaster Cathedral (BCCB 4/93), this will still find an audience among fans of 
Gaiman’s Coraline (BCCB 11/02) and the like.  KQG
BecKer, Bonny The Sniffles for Bear; illus. by Kady MacDonald Denton. Can-
dlewick, 2011 [32p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4756-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Tragedy has struck—at least in the opinion of Bear, who languishes with a cold and 
who “was quite sure no one had ever been as sick as he was.” His friend Mouse, 
kindly visiting the sick, is determined to lighten Bear’s suffering, but Bear feels such 
cheering is an imposition (“When someone is dreadfully ill, you sing mournful 
songs,” he notes reprovingly). Eventually, Mouse helps Bear to bed, where he dic-
tates his will, dozes off, and wakes improved—to find Mouse having come down 
with the sniffles in turn. This is a particularly fine outing for the established duo: 
Bear’s comic sad-sack histrionics, couched in his formal phraseology (“Have you no 
decency?” cries a provoked Bear), and the contrast with Mouse’s perky attempts at 
assistance deliver bear-sized portions of humor. Since Mouse’s heedless intrusions 
are sometimes genuinely annoying (a raucous serenade of “She’ll Be Coming ’round 
the Mountain”), there’s sympathy generated for Bear despite his hypochondria, and 
Becker is inventive with the details of the comic situational mismatch. Denton’s 
got a firm hand both on the cozy world of these characters and their playful pos-
sibilities, with her watercolor, ink, and gouache art tender in palette (warm, gentle 
OcTOBer 2011 • 71
earth tones touched with coral) and clever in composition (careful geometry of the 
interior views locks Bear into place until the double-page-spread that focuses on his 
diagonal, shambling ascent to bed). Really, though, it’s the “acting” that kids will 
find irresistible here, with an irrepressible Mouse aquiver with attentive helpfulness 
while a blear-eyed Bear sprawls on couch and bed, obviously defeated by gravity. Kids 
won’t have to be sniffly themselves to appreciate the sickroom drama, but it could 
also lighten the burden of those sentenced to whining and high Kleenex use.  DS
BicK, ilsA J. Ashes. Egmont, 2011 [480p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-175-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-231-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
After an electromagnetic pulse destroys all electronic devices and billions of folks, 
the relative few remaining aren’t liking their odds. Apart from starvation, natural 
disasters, and marauding gangs of desperate survivors, there is also the fact that 
almost all of the young people are now turning into flesh-eating zombies. Bummer. 
Alex, Tom, and Ellie are three who, at first, escaped all of the possible hazards. Soon, 
however, Ellie is kidnapped for her bait potential—since children are rare, she’s 
valuable enough to get her abductors admitted to a safe haven. Tom ends up gravely 
injured, and Alex herself seems to have a range of options that are all actually worse 
than her life before the pulse (in which she was dying of a brain tumor, just to give 
some perspective). Readers seeking levity or happy endings are duly warned that 
this is a grim world and all of the paths are realistically horrific—there really are 
no quick saves or easy options after the end of the world as the characters know it. 
While it might have been more comforting had some survivors been heroes, it is 
to Bick’s credit that she sticks with her premise that epic, utter disaster would yield 
frightened, selfish, dangerous, and deranged individuals, and these are the folks 
with whom Alex, stubborn and brilliant and achingly relatable, must contend. The 
gorgeous (and disturbing cover) is sure to grab attention; an impeccable sci-fi/horror 
balance, quick pace, and risky storytelling all live up to the jacket’s promise.  AS
BlAcKAll, sophie Are You Awake?; written and illus. by Sophie Blackall. Ot-
taviano/Holt, 2011 40p
ISBN 978-0-8050-7858-9 $12.99   
R 4-6 yrs
Illustrator Blackall makes her writing debut with this amusing story about the 
nocturnal banter between a sleepless boy and his sleepy mother. The text is simply 
dialogue between the persistent son and patient mom: “Mom, are you awake?” 
“Mm-mm. No.” “Why aren’t you awake?” “Because I’m asleep.” “Why are you 
asleep?” “Because it’s still nighttime.” “Why is it still nighttime?” “Because the 
sun hasn’t come up yet.” Near story’s end, Edward is finally asleep, the clock reads 
7 a.m., and Dad (a pilot coming off a redeye flight) is sneaking in the door. The 
final page shows Dad, two hours later, asleep in his bed, with Edward climbing 
to his side and starting the interrogation anew with “Dad? Dad? Are you awake?” 
The sparely formatted text, with kid and mom alternating dialogue line-by-line 
and their words differentiated only by typeface, effectively conveys the hush of 
sleepy speech in a dark room, while the percussive persistence of the question-
ing kid is both funny and authentic; the text sometimes shifts to word bubbles, 
with illustrations comically conveying the facial expressions of the speakers. The 
72 • The BulleTin
book’s careful design—small, square trim size, controlled illustrative vignettes on 
a white background—adds to the safe and cozy bedtime flavor, while Edward’s toy 
elephant features in a flip-book sequence that puts him, too, to sleep. Blackall’s 
ink and watercolor compositions are both simple and sophisticated in their smoky 
tones and cunning touches. The near-monochromatic tones of the darkest scenes 
contrast amusingly with the wide-open eyes of mother and son, and the mother’s 
expressions convey the perfect blend of exasperation and affection. This will be 
best appreciated by youngsters with enough distance from the kid’s behavior to 
understand its implications; those kids and their parents will find plenty to identify 
with in this witty tribute to the world of “why?”  HM
BrAdley, KimBerly BruBAKer Jefferson’s Sons: A Founding Father’s Secret Chil-
dren. Dial, 2011 [368p]
ISBN 978-0-8037-3499-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
It is now accepted fact that, for much of his adult life, widower Thomas Jefferson 
had two families living side by side at Monticello—daughter Martha and her chil-
dren, and enslaved mistress Sally Hemings and her children. While other fictional 
treatments of the Jefferson family saga focus on Sally herself, or on the dilemma 
of reconciling Jefferson the freedom champion with Jefferson the slaveholder, 
Bradley concentrates on what the Hemings children’s ambiguous social status may 
have meant in their everyday lives. Oldest son Beverly not only craves his father’s 
attention, he is so devoted to his mother and siblings that he abandons his first 
attempt at life as a free man and returns to the estate, waiting until sister Harriet 
is of age to join him in permanently revoking all connection with the family and 
passing as white. Middle son Maddy, the only child too dark to pass, has a far more 
conflicted approach to his renowned father, failing at currying his favor, then try-
ing to shun him, but ultimately finding himself unable to shuck away filial ties, 
even in his heart. The children’s friend Peter, adored son of enslaved blacksmith 
Joe Fossett, simply enjoys the affection of family and Hemings friends until the 
Jefferson estate is dispersed to cover the deceased president’s debts and Peter is 
sold away. Rather than tidily dividing the novel into three sections, Bradley allows 
each featured character to step into the foreground just as he begins to question 
the complex relationships at Monticello, linger there until he’s begun to form his 
own opinions, and then give way to a new questioning voice. There’s inarguably 
some peril in assigning opinions, motivations, and emotions to historical figures 
about whom little is actually known, but Bradley’s sensitive and richly imagined 
vision pays respect to those who struggled for lives of stability and dignity, even as 
the whims and fortunes of the Jeffersons shifted beneath them.  EB 
cAstAn, miKe The Price of Loyalty. Holiday House, 2011 [160p]
ISBN 978-0-8234-2268-5 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
For narrator Manny, forming the Conquistadors with his friends Hernan and Cisco 
seems little more than a harmless way of staking a unique identity as they enter 
middle school, but Hernan and Cisco quickly bask in the respect and even fear 
accorded them by classmates, who consider them an organized gang. Loyalty to 
old friends convinces Manny to go along with some of their milder antics, such as 
OcTOBer 2011 • 73
class-cutting and head-shaving, but as the group steps up into serious pranks and 
then drugs, Manny’s conscience torments him. However, in the middle-school battle 
between peer pressure and conscience, conscience doesn’t stand much of a chance, 
and even as Manny tries to appease his girlfriend and hang with a skater from the 
neighborhood, he can’t withstand his old buddies as they alternately cajole and 
threaten him into purchasing weed for their constant partying. Castan ultimately 
graces Manny with a way out of his dilemma that is half benevolent authorial 
intervention and half genuine middle-school social histrionics, and readers will be 
relieved to see that Manny catches a lucky break that lets him wipe the slate clean 
and start again. There is much here in common with Walter Dean Myers’ vener-
able Scorpions (BCCB 7/88), particularly in its treatment of the authentic allure 
a gang can have for even a “good” kid. Middle-schoolers who consider Scorpions’ 
1988 copyright date to be old school, and anything with a shiny Newbery sticker 
suspect, can be directed to Castan’s debut novel.  EB
cAstle, Jennifer The Beginning of After. HarperTeen, 2011[432p]
ISBN 978-0-06-198579-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
When Laurel begs off participating in a family ice-cream run with neighbors, little 
does she know that her decision will save her own life while changing it forever: 
her parents, younger brother, and neighbor are killed in a car accident that leaves 
the driver, her neighbor’s husband, in a coma. Her grandmother comes to live with 
her, and the two of them walk softly around the empty house, with Laurel trying 
to reclaim as much normality as she can to finish her junior year. The neighbor’s 
disaffected teenage son, David, makes that difficult, however. He is mostly staying 
by his father’s side, but his intermittent visits are always upsetting, partly because 
Laurel blames his dad for the accident, and partly because she has conflicted feelings 
for David—pity, empathy, anger, and a little attraction. Laurel’s grieving process 
is depicted with sensitivity and realism; although she misses her family, she never 
idealizes them, and she focuses more on how her life will be different without them 
rather than mawkishly dwelling on their loss. Her good-girl tendencies and her 
essential pragmatism help her keep her life in balance as she gets a new job, focuses 
on school, and tries to develop a relationship with a kind boy from school, but 
they aren’t always adequate to keep her emotional turbulence in check. David, on 
the other hand, tries to avoid both grief and responsibility by taking off after a few 
weeks, quitting school and traveling cross-country, but it’s his honesty that helps 
Laurel clarify what she needs to move forward. Readers looking for a leisurely though 
absorbing story of a girl surviving unthinkable loss will find this engrossing.  KC 
chAri, sheelA Vanished; illus. by Jon Klassen. Disney Hyperion, 2011 [240p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-3163-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-6
Despite her ongoing issues with stage fright, eleven-year-old Neela is thrilled when 
her grandmother gifts her with a veena, the Indian instrument Neela plays, from 
her own collection at her home in India. When the veena mysteriously disappears, 
Neela discovers that her beloved new instrument is actually a priceless original 
from a famous craftsman, and that it is cursed: after bringing its owner bad luck, 
it disappears and eventually shows up back in the music store in India from which 
74 • The BulleTin
it originated. As Neela tries to find her missing instrument, she stumbles onto a 
mysterious web of connections involving friends, family, and even celebrities. Chari 
smoothly integrates Neela’s experiences as an Indian-American into her adventures 
without giving them undue weight within the lightly earnest mystery, allowing the 
story to be culturally specific without being didactic or tokenistic. The nuances 
of peer relationships are explored with gentle thoroughness, and readers will find 
much that is familiar and thought-provoking as Neela’s investigation tugs at ties to 
her best friend, her school nemesis, and the class weird girl. Though the pacing is 
a little slow at times, the scope and details of the mystery are laser-targeted at the 
appropriate age level. Neela is an endearingly awkward, heart-on-her-sleeve heroine 
who will readily elicit reader investment, and the supernatural mystery elegantly 
intertwines clues with cultural, musical, and historical details. Musically inclined 
readers may also be fascinated to learn the history and qualities of an instrument 
new to them, and an author’s note offers resources for further investigation.  CG
coBen, hArlAn Shelter. Putnam, 2011 [288p] (A Mickey Bolitar Novel)
ISBN 978-0-399-25650-9 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
A sophomore in high school may not be the ideal candidate for a noir hero, but 
Mickey Bolitar is the estranged nephew of Myron Bolitar, hero of Coben’s adult 
hardboiled mystery series, and he’s ready. He’s been all over the globe with his 
parents on humanitarian aid projects, he’s experienced significant personal trauma 
in the recent past (his father died in a car crash that he witnessed, and his mother 
subsequently spiraled into an addiction that landed her in rehab), and he’s just 
moved to a new town with a wealth of seedy secrets lurking in its alleys. One 
of these secrets causes his “preppy beauty” girlfriend of three weeks to disappear 
without a trace, and his investigation leads him into a web of mystery that inex-
plicably connects to Mickey’s father’s death, the past exploits of a local crazy lady, 
a prostitution ring, Greek myth, and Holocaust history. If this sounds like a bit 
much, that’s because it is: coincidences and fantastically capable sleuthing abound, 
and some action sequences are just plain unbelievable (if a guy has your friend at 
knifepoint, for instance, running him over with a truck probably won’t save her 
from being knifed). Furthermore, Mickey is too much a traditional laconic noir 
hero to be plausible as a high-school student: an affinity for texting and a tendency 
towards proclamations of “no fair” do not a teenager make, and Mickey frequently 
embarks on philosophical digressions and even situational summations that read 
far older than the character’s years. Nevertheless, the intriguing layers of mystery 
and connection, the strong human appeal of a quixotic quest to save the downtrod-
den, and the quick, sure pacing make this a plausible choice for mystery fans.  CG
colón, edie Good-bye, Havana! Hola, New York!; illus. by Raúl Colón. Wise-
man/Simon, 2011 32p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0674-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3484-4 $12.99   
Ad 6-9 yrs
Gabriella wakes up one morning in her Cuban home and learns from her grand-
parents that she is to leave Havana that afternoon to emigrate to New York. In 
the days that follow, Gabriella reunites with her parents (who have been scoping 
out living conditions in New York), arrives at her new home in the Bronx, and 
OcTOBer 2011 • 75
begins attending school. While the first few days at her new school are terrifying, 
Gabriella rapidly settles into the daily routine, learning English words, making 
friends, and trying out new American foods in the cafeteria. The story is based on 
the author’s own childhood experience, and its authenticity gives it useful author-
ity; early immigration is also an experience that many children have heard about 
from parents or relatives, and seeing a fellow youngster undergoing the process will 
help fill in the picture. The text, though, is flat in tone, laden with retrospective 
adult viewpoint masquerading as a child’s point of view; much of the factual info 
in the story is delivered awkwardly (Gabriella had heard about “something called a 
revolution” and “something called the Resistance”) and without sufficient context. 
Raúl Colón’s familiar watercolor and colored pencil compositions are wrought with 
abundant texture, both from the grainy paper upon which they are rendered and his 
scratchboard-like detailing. The figures are individualized and expressive, and the 
golden-toned palette imbues the illustrations with a vintage sensibility. In addition 
to the author’s note, a glossary of Spanish words is included.  HM
conKling, Winifred Sylvia & Aki. Tricycle, 2011 150p
Library ed. ISBN 978-1-58246-397-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-58246-337-7 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Set in the 1940s, this autobiographical novel follows the stories of two girls from very 
different backgrounds who each find themselves subject to racism. Aki Munemitsu’s 
world turns upside-down following the 1941 attacks on Pearl Harbor when her 
family receives a directive to leave California and report to an internment camp, 
where they will ultimately stay for more than two years. Sylvia Mendez’s family is 
renting the Munemitsus’ farm in their absence, and Sylvia’s parents are thrilled that 
they live in the vicinity of the well-reputed Westminster School. When they go to 
register their daughter, however, they are denied enrollment and directed to the 
“Mexican school.” The two girls finally meet when Sylvia accompanies her father 
on a trip to pay rent to Aki’s father, and thus begins a correspondence between the 
two. The protagonists alternate narration, with Sylvia’s story the more intriguing 
of the two, particularly in her father’s successful lawsuit against the school district 
leading the way for desegregation efforts across the nation. Much of the narration, 
however, is purposive, with factual material crammed into pedantic dialogue be-
tween the girls and their parents (e.g., “Do you know what an internment camp 
is?” Sylvia’s father asks her). The juxtaposition of two different cultures suffering 
from two different manifestations of racism stands out here, however, and there 
is plenty of opportunity for discussion about the girls’ experiences in this time of 
great social upheaval. An afterword, bibliography, and list of further reading are 
included.  HM 
cunnAne, Kelly Chirchir Is Singing; illus. by Jude Daly. Schwartz & Wade, 
2011 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96198-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86198-7 $17.99   
R 5-8 yrs
Chirchir, a young girl whose name means “Born Quickly,” sings all day: while she 
is helping her mother get water, while she is helping her grandmother build a fire, 
while she is helping her sister spread a new floor, while she is helping her father 
harvest vegetables. Despite her spirited participation and best efforts, however, 
76 • The BulleTin
Chirchir messes up each of these tasks and is each time sent on her way. Finally, 
Chirchir hears a new sound, that of her baby brother crying out; she runs to find 
him, picks him up, and sings him a song that mixes with “the sounds of water 
splashing into buckets and fires sizzling, brooms sweeping dirt floors and hoes 
digging potatoes” until he is calm. This snapshot of life in a rural Kenyan village 
offers a lyrical depiction of the day-to-day activities of the Kalenjin tribe. Chirchir’s 
role in the activities offers a perfect vehicle by which to travel through the daily 
rhythms of local life, and the poetic prose both describes and evokes Chirchir’s 
songs. Daly’s acrylic compositions offer pastoral images of family and village life, 
with airy and balanced compositions emphasizing the overall scene rather than 
individual expression; planes of pale green and beige play backdrop to the villag-
ers’ activities while splashes of color highlight homey details. An author’s note and 
glossary provide additional cultural information.  HM 
demi Joan of Arc; written and illus. by Demi. Cavendish, 2011 52p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-5953-8 $19.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-7614-5999-6 $19.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Demi recounts the tale of the fifteenth-century teen who, at the urging of heavenly 
voices, became military champion of the French dauphin in the Hundred Years’ War 
and witnessed his coronation as King Charles VII, and who was, upon her capture 
by the Burgundians, ultimately abandoned to her fate (burning at the stake) by the 
king. The success of Demi’s narrative depends largely on a reader’s expectations. 
There is little attempt to examine and explain the political web in which Joan would 
be ensnared (for that, see Diane Stanley’s picture book Joan of Arc, BCCB 9/98), 
the church/state relations that influenced her story from inquisition to canoniza-
tion, or even the nature of her visions of Saint Catherine of Alexandria and St. 
Margaret of Antioch, of whose very existence the Church is now most skeptical. 
Although this title lacks the solidity to earn it a place in the 900s, it may certainly 
find a home in the 200s as a reverent retelling of Joan’s long-standing legend. 
Opulent borders in the tradition of medieval illuminated manuscript are liberally 
embellished with Demi’s signature gold, with plenty of space on the faux-vellum 
pages to accommodate brief spans of text. Collections that support materials for 
young patrons’ “saint reports” will welcome this title, which respects the authority 
of Joan’s preternatural mandate and finds cause for triumph in her tragedy.  EB
dipucchio, Kelly Zombie in Love; illus. by Scott Campbell. Atheneum, 
2011 32p
ISBN 978-1-4424-0270-6 $12.99   
R Gr. 2-5
Despite the love zombies have been getting from books and cinema as of late, ap-
parently being undead is still a bit of a turnoff for most people, as poor Mortimer 
finds out in his attempts to secure a date for Cupid’s Ball. He tries everything 
from chocolates to roses to diamonds and while, sure, most of his offerings are 
worm-ridden or in some state of decay, his heart is in the right place—even if it’s 
not beating anymore. Just when it seems that all is lost and that even online dating 
and personal ads can’t bring Mortimer his ladylove, a beautiful and slightly rotting 
girl shows up and the two live—er, unlive? die?—happily ever after. DiPucchio 
(author of Grace for President, BCCB 3/08) treats this tale of undead courtship with 
the utmost sincerity, offering a rather straightforward text to pair with the visual 
OcTOBer 2011 • 77
stylings of Campbell, and the contrast is largely humorously effective: Mortimer 
freshening up his breath with some Death Mints is particularly amusing, as is the 
double-page spread of his hideous wide-eyed, gap-toothed grin. While the muted 
palette sometimes turns a little muddy, the watercolor art has an appropriate 
mood of gloom and grossness, and readers will enjoy picking out the weird details 
(Mortimer’s literal mouse pad, his missing arm at the gym, etc.). Young fans of 
the macabre will get a kick out of Mortimer’s awkward attempts at romance, so 
have this one ready for storytime around Halloween and Valentine’s Day.  KQG 
doWnhAm, Jenny You Against Me. Fickling/Random House, 2011 [416p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75161-2 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-75160-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98938-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-12
Eighteen-year-old Mikey, who keeps his family together as best as he can in the 
face of his alcoholic mother’s neglect, wants vengeance when his fifteen-year-old 
sister, Karyn, is raped at a drunken party. Ellie, sixteen, gave a statement to the 
police that covered for her brother, Tom (accused of Karyn’s rape), but is haunted 
by her protective lies. Mikey meets Ellie in the hope of getting to Tom, but soon 
Mikey and Ellie have fallen for each other. It’s always complicated being Romeo 
and Juliet, though, and they have to negotiate their mutual suspicion, Tom’s 
upcoming trial, and Ellie’s regret and eventual recantation of her original state-
ment. As she did in Before I Die (BCCB 10/07), British author Downham invests 
a melodramatic premise with perceptive complexity and authenticity as well as 
the expected high-running emotion. The lovers are thoroughly star-crossed, with 
Ellie a university-bound nerd from a wealthy family while Mikey’s restaurant job 
provides the only income other than state assistance in his household, but the book 
makes their connection believable as they both begin to break out of roles that have 
become ruts. The strained and shifting dynamics in Ellie’s family are particularly 
well explored, including the factors that led to Tom’s assault on a passed-out Karyn 
and the gradual transformation of Ellie’s mother from submissive supporter of 
her husband’s whims to champion of her daughter. Romance fans will relish the 
evergreen dilemma of seemingly doomed love.  DS
durst, sArAh Beth Drink, Slay, Love. McElderry, 2011 [400p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2373-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2375-6 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Unicorns are mythical, right? At least that’s what Pearl and her large family of vam-
pires believe until Pearl is gored and then healed by a mysterious unicorn, leaving 
her with a newfound tendency to cast a reflection, the ability to walk in sunlight, 
and the pesky beginnings of a conscience. Both her new abilities and her emergent 
morality are put to the test when she’s assigned to infiltrate the local high school in 
order to secure food (a.k.a. classmates) for an upcoming feast honoring the terrify-
ing vampire king of Connecticut (vampire society being hierarchical by state). As 
Pearl gets to know humans up close and personal and witnesses the aftereffects of 
her family’s feedings, her loyalties start to shift. The construction of Pearl as even a 
complex hero is problematic—she’s essentially a sociopathic, mass-murdering cult 
78 • The BulleTin
member with a speciesist superiority complex—but the bloodthirsty existence is 
made engaging with an Addams Family–esque sense of the whimsical grotesque. 
Faced with a group of children at play, Pearl drools rather than coos, and her first 
reaction to love-interest Evan is more akin to stomach growling than heart thump-
ing. At the same time, the details of the vampire world are ickily hilarious: a grocery 
shopping list includes “handcuffs for the meals,” and the more refined vampires 
relax with a spot of blood tea made from packets of dried B-positive. Pearl is, if 
not exactly likable, refreshingly self-aware and possessed of a sort of mad charm, 
and readers both vamp-crazy and not will enjoy her dry, unapologetic take on the 
genre that is at once pointed send-up and twisted celebration.  CG
english, KAren Nikki and Deja: Election Madness; illus. by Laura Free-
man. Clarion, 2011 [112p]
ISBN 978-0-547-43558-9 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 2-4
Third-graders and friends Nikki and Deja are back, and Deja’s got new ambitions. 
Their school has decided to elect a student body president, and she’s determined 
that the office will be hers. She quickly slots Nikki in as her campaign manager 
and guns for the position of class nominee; having secured the nod, she then 
girds her loins to compete not only against the other third-grade nominees but 
also fourth-graders and fifth-graders for the highest honor at Carver Elementary. 
The upcoming 2012 election makes this outing particularly topical, but it’s got 
the authenticity and sympathy that have made the earlier titles in the series such 
standouts. This time it’s Deja through whom the third-person narration focalizes, 
and English capably captures her drive and its negative aspects (“She thinks she 
can work well with others, as long as they don’t have a bunch of stupid ideas”), 
especially its effects on Nikki, whom Deja is basically using as a flunky. What’s 
interesting is that the book doesn’t resolve everything—there’s no big rapproche-
ment wherein Deja’s sorry for using Nikki (in fact, she realistically assesses that 
Nikki’s likely to let offense go after a sulky interlude), and the friction between 
Nikki’s parents seems likely to recur in future. It’s also a particularly fine portrait 
of a kid whose leadership ambitions outstrip her abilities, and there’s a touch of 
poignancy when Deja realizes that the skills that may have allowed her to win the 
nomination of her classmate simply don’t stack up to the smoothness of the older 
kids. While Freeman employs a cartoonish streamlining in her figures that gives 
them a particularly contemporary air, her monochromatic illustrations are dense 
with shading and textural details that provide additional depth to the images. New 
readers can happily meet the girls for the first time here and then go back to fill in 
the picture, while fans will be glad to see them back in fine form.  DS
evAns, richArd pAul Michael Vey: The Prisoner of Cell 25. Mercury Ink/Simon 
Pulse, 2011 326p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4516-5650-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4516-5822-4 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 8-10
Michael, who has Tourette’s syndrome, is tired of playing the role of typical bullied 
teen, especially since his electrical powers are growing at an apparently unstoppable 
rate. He can’t resist using his powers to lash out at the latest group of thugs, and 
that leads to a revelation: Michael is one of the last individuals to have survived 
OcTOBer 2011 • 79
a technical malfunction that left only a few young survivors, who, like Michael, 
have various electricity-connected abilities. He will, though, need the collaboration 
of the other teens, some of whom have been brainwashed and manipulated into 
helping an evil collective while others have been imprisoned for refusing to comply. 
The cool scientific exploration of all the ways the body runs on and responds to 
electricity is intricate and accessible. Unfortunately, even though a sequel is fairly 
obviously intended, there are still a number of disconcerting open-ended issues 
that will likely leave readers more frustrated than intrigued. In addition, the lack of 
subtlety in drawing the characters, many of whom are clearly deeply wounded and 
emotionally damaged, sets up a standard where readers are torn between rooting 
for the luckier guys or trying to interpret beyond the surface to connect with (or at 
least sympathize with) the baddies who really had no other options. Nevertheless, 
fans of action-driven adventure and science fiction may find the characterizations 
to be less important than the gripping pace and the unusual superpowers these 
teens are just learning to control.  AS
fAlKner, BriAn The Project. Random House, 2011 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN978-0-375-96945-4 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86945-7 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98350-4 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 6-9 
In this Australian import, two boys go from grouching about lame school-assigned 
reading to running for their lives after they stumble upon the most boring book 
in the world only to find it harbors incredible secrets.  The book in question has 
been long sought after, not only because it is assumed to be one of a kind, but also 
because buried within are instructions on building a bomb, which, when transported 
back in time by Nazi loyalists, could change Hitler’s (and the world’s) path in an 
instant.  It is a ridiculous, delirious plot that actually works quite well as Tommy 
and Luke snark about books, outrun the Nazis, travel through time, and save the 
world.  Unfortunately, the madcap adventuring quickly overshadows the boys’ warm 
friendship and Luke’s struggle to adjust to Iowa City from New Zealand, and this 
shifted focus makes the book as a whole feel unmoored.  In addition, there are a few 
too many convenient grownups changing their minds at the last minute, without 
which change the boys would not have succeeded, and this certainly undercuts 
the “kids saving the world” vibe.  Nevertheless, the notion that the most boring 
book in the world could still contain untold treasures (or horrors) is an amusing 
one, and Falkner glibly takes the plot beyond absurd with exactly the confidence 
necessary to leave readers content with the journey.  AS 
gAneshrAm, rAmin Stir It Up! Scholastic, 2011 167p
ISBN 978-0-545-16582-2 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Thirteen-year-old Anjali has a passion for food and cooking far greater than can 
be met working in her Trinidadian family’s roti shop in Queens, so when she is 
presented with the opportunity to try out for the Food Network’s “Super Chef 
Kids,” she jumps on it. Since her audition is at the exact same time as the admis-
sions test for the high school that her father is determined she will attend, Anjali 
goes behind her parents’ backs to audition and gets grounded as a consequence. 
Fortunately, Anjali’s family eventually comes around and allows her to compete 
80 • The BulleTin
(“She shouldn’t have lied…But we betray Anjali by not letting her have her joy”), 
and though she loses in the final round, her family is there to support her and 
celebrate with her. While there is no shortage of foodie kidlit reads these days, 
Ganeshram’s novel offers the perfect balance of fact-based description (she toured 
the actual Food Network set to prepare for the book) and passionate protagonist 
that will make this a surefire hit. The cultural details add extra zest, and the recipes 
sprinkled abundantly throughout (many of which are drawn from the author’s own 
cookbook) are nicely integrated into the storyline. Solid pacing, strong characters, 
a touch of family politics, and a heap of delicious food descriptions successfully 
come together in this debut novel that will appeal not only to the cooking-crazed 
but any who enjoy a good family drama.  HM 
gerstein, mordicAi Dear Hot Dog; written and illus. by Mordicai Ger-
stein. Abrams, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-0-8109-9732-5 $16.95   
R* Gr. 2-5
Better known for his prose, the estimable author-illustrator here turns to poetry, 
offering over a score of free-verse odes to elements of kid life so familiar as to be 
overlooked: the toothbrush, crayons, rain, socks, even air. The poems personify 
their subjects, sometimes even directly addressing them, and they’re written in the 
voice of the kid who wears the featured pants (“We go everywhere together/ except/ 
the washing machine”), pours cereal in the subject bowl (“You gurgle happily/ as I 
pour in milk”), and eats the celebrated ice-cream cone (“I hold you high/ against 
the sky/ like Liberty’s torch”). Gerstein skillfully balances the concrete with the 
abstract, keeping his imagery within reach of his young audience while gently 
stretching their imaginations by comparing leaves to “colorful, crispy cornflakes” or 
suggesting that the pillow “sleeps/ all day,/ dreaming it’s/ a cloud”; the observations 
are firmly rooted in kid experience and viewpoint (“Honestly!/ You’re nothing like/ 
worms”—“Spaghetti”), and the verses move in a subtle trajectory from morning 
wake-up to evening bedtime. The art employs Gerstein’s familiar slender, playful 
lines energized by scribbly hatchwork, with well-worked color blending in to smeary 
planes that give luminous rainbow auras to the featured elements. Illustrations, 
featuring a multicultural trio of kids, stay largely literal but are no less amusing 
for that; carefully clever compositions offer comic viewpoints (“Toes” shows their 
owner sitting with her bare soles in closeup for the viewer) and touches of humor-
ous exaggeration (the kid bounding above the ground in his humongous “Shoes”). 
This has considerable potential not just as a straight poetry readalone but also as a 
readaloud, a source for poetry recitation and performance, and an inspiration for 
kids’ own writing.  DS
grAy, clAudiA Fateful. HarperTeen, 2011 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-06-200620-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
When she boards the RMS Titanic, maidservant Tess Davies has big plans for her 
arrival in America: after saving up for years, she will finally be able to resign from 
her post under the despotic Lady Regina (also aboard) and make a life for herself 
as a free woman. Unfortunately, her intentions do not take into account the giant 
iceberg that she and fellow passengers will soon become acquainted with, nor does 
she make accommodations for the fact that there appear to be werewolves onboard. 
OcTOBer 2011 • 81
Yes, you read that correctly—werewolves on the Titanic, and yes, somehow it 
works. All the standard romance tropes, both paranormal and mundane, are here: 
girl (Tess) meets impossibly beautiful boy (Alec), boy turns out to be monster, girl 
and boy are inextricably drawn to each other and then viciously torn from each 
other by various machinations outside their control. Here, these obstacles happen 
to be, firstly, a sadistic Russian count (also a werewolf) who’s intent on bringing 
Alec under the control of the Brotherhood (the dominant mind-controlling pack) 
and, secondly, a rather large piece of frozen water. The plot is notably formulaic, 
but the chemistry between Alec and Tess is nearly flooding off the page, giving 
Kate and Leo a run for their money as Titanic’s most ardent couple. An admittedly 
kooky premise is nicely executed, as Gray delivers both an impressively detailed 
piece of historical fiction with nods to significant aspects of class and station as 
well as a swoonworthy romance sure to seduce lovers of all things were, vamp, and 
the like.  KQG 
greenmAn, cAtherine Hooked. Delacorte, 2011 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90822-1 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74008-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89888-4 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
At chance meeting during a fire drill at her New York public school, seventeen-year-
old Thea is immediately smitten. Her parents’ awful relationship has left its scars, 
however; she is constantly worried that her newfound love, Will, will disappear. 
He doesn’t, though, even when he graduates and starts at Columbia, even when 
she tells him she’s pregnant; eventually, they decide to keep the baby and set up 
housekeeping, with the reluctant help of both sets of parents. When Thea accidently 
injures the baby, however, Will is frightened by the fragility of their son and their 
inexperience, and he suggests that they give the baby up for adoption. Thea then 
turns to her father, who welcomes her and the baby into his home. His expectations 
for her are still aimed at a traditional path of college and career, but Thea is getting 
some ideas of her own, especially after the crocheted clothing she creates begins 
to sell for serious money. The narrative covers a lot of time and emotional ground 
but still manages to maintain a level of detail that sufficiently develops character. 
The story charts Thea’s growth from a cynical, insecure teenager to a young woman 
who figures out that her perpetual worries about her own worth and losing Will’s 
love were all in her head. The dream of making a living as an young crocheter is 
one that could only be realized in New York with a business consultant father 
with plenty of start-up cash, but what is credible are Thea’s struggles to grow up 
enough to appreciate the qualities of both her free-spirited mother and her rigid, 
buttoned-down father, and her learning to be humble enough to ask for and accept 
their help, even when it comes with strings attached.  KC
griffith, victoriA The Fabulous Flying Machines of Alberto Santos-Dumont; illus. 
by Eva Montanari. Abrams, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0011-8 $16.95   
R Gr. 3-5
Griffith zooms in on several episodes from the eventful life of historical Brazilian 
aeronaut/aviator Alberto Santos-Dumont. Readers meet him as he runs errands 
82 • The BulleTin
throughout Paris in his dirigible, tethering it to posts or allowing tradesmen to hold 
the line while he shops. On one outing he meets with friend and renowned jeweler 
Louis Cartier, who took to heart his complaints about the difficulty of checking a 
timepiece when both hands are occupied flying the dirigible. Voila! The first men’s 
wristwatch is born. Finally, Santos-Dumont shifts from airship to experimental 
airplane in 1906, only to find rival flier Louis Blériot on the field where he attempts 
his first demonstration. He graciously allows Blériot to make the first attempt (it’s a 
failure), and then successfully completes his own twenty-one-second flight: “Alberto 
had become the first man to take off in a plane using its own power!” Pause here 
for outraged readers to object, “Hey! What about the Wright Brothers?” Griffith 
slyly leaves her narrative right where much of the non-American world leaves 
Santos-Dumont: as victor. In an extensive author’s note, however, she tackles the 
thorny claims to first flight in detail, explaining that the Wrights’ 1903 flight had 
few witnesses and relied on high winds and a launch rail—not lookin’ good for 
Team USA. If the crowds of starstruck Parisians in Montanari’s pastel compositions 
often steal the scenes, it’s no more than appropriate emphasis on Santos-Dumont’s 
signature grabbing of attention. Strong vertical trim and layout, which one would 
expect to exploit sweeping skyscapes, are instead cleverly deployed to put viewers 
among the earthbound spectators, most often glimpsing the aviator in the distance. 
A bibliography and brief index round out the title, which will be a first choice for 
aviation enthusiasts.  EB
gustAfson, scott Eddie: The Lost Youth of Edgar Allan Poe; written and illus. by 
Scott Gustafson. Simon, 2011 201p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9764-1 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9766-5 $9.99   
Ad Gr. 3-6
After a brief introduction to the adult Poe, this adventure whisks readers through 
Poe’s early life with his actor parents, claiming that his drunken father literally 
passed one of his demons—an imp named McCobber that no one else can see—
onto young Eddie. Upon his mother’s death, Eddie is adopted by the Allans, but it 
is McCobber who proves the greatest influence on the boy’s life and imagination, 
inflecting every experience with a macabre and paranoid twist that is only slightly 
tempered by the perspective of Eddie’s other companion, a raven. When Eddie is 
blamed for a prank that’s clearly not his doing, he seeks to prove his innocence; his 
investigations lead him to a magician who helped his mother when she was sick, 
and Eddie is able to return a favor while clearing his name. There are a lot of gaps 
in the backstory here, including the single, unexplained mention of a sister, that 
will be difficult for younger readers to sort through, and no help is given via an 
author’s note or any other source material to explain to the uninitiated demon and 
raven are such evocative metaphors. The main story is compelling, though, and the 
language and illustrations are a treat. The magician’s dialogue in particular makes 
use of the storytelling diction of a vaudevillian showman, begging a readaloud, while 
the illustrations bring the adult Poe-worthy horrors to life with just the right touch 
of wide-eyed appeal. McCobber’s depiction is pitch perfect for an imp—enough 
like a decimated and bedraggled bat to be nasty but still bug-eyed enough to be 
adorable. Nascent fans of Poe, as well as readers who like their mysteries with a 
slight edge, may therefore still enjoy this.  KC 
OcTOBer 2011 • 83
hArris, roBie h. Who Has What?: All about Girls’ Bodies and Boys’ Bodies; illus. 
by Nadine Bernard Westcott. Candlewick, 2011 36p
ISBN 978-0-7636-2931-1 $15.99   
R 3-6 yrs
Harris has been bringing her comprehensive yet light-hearted approach to sex 
education to younger and younger children, and unless she has a prenatal audi-
ence in mind for the future, here she hits the end of the road. Preschooler Nellie 
and her younger brother Gus are off with their parents for a day at the beach. The 
siblings’ chatter turns to bodies, their similarities and differences, and as they make 
observations about the preponderance of commonality (with, of course, a few strik-
ing and important gender differences), the narrator’s voice supplies commentary 
on how internal and external genitalia may someday figure into motherhood and 
fatherhood. The particulars of conception are left for another day and another title 
(quite likely Harris’ own It’s Not the Stork!, BCCB 10/06), and the steady focus on 
identifying body parts makes the territory below the swimsuits seem little more 
mysterious or significant than eyes and elbows and ankles. Although the children’s 
remarks sometimes feel a bit clunky and forced, the beach provides a natural set-
ting for generating “the discussion”: the changing rooms afford the opportunity to 
check out everybody’s parts as they shimmy in and out of swimwear, while subtly 
underscoring the privacy altogether appropriate for the, well, altogether. Westcott’s 
bouncy cartoon cast is thoroughly multicultural, with Nellie and Gus the creamy-
skinned offspring of a biracial couple and beachgoers representing just about every 
demographic under the blazing summer sun. With this appealing new title, families 
can now choose from among an almost seamless step-up series.  EB
higgins, f. e. The Lunatic’s Curse. Feiwel, 2011 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-312-56682-1 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
Luridly illuminated cover art and a foreboding title should be enough to have 
eager hands grabbing for Higgins’ latest, but those who have already ventured 
into her dark lands of Pagus Parvus and Urbs Umida will recognize that these are 
comparatively gentle teasers for what lurks inside. This tale, now inscribed in Joe 
Zibbidou’s notorious black book (introduced in The Black Book of Secrets, BCCB 
11/07), relates the tragedy that befalls twelve-year-old Rex Grammaticus when his 
brand-new stepmother, Acantha, has his father, Ambrose, committed to a lunatic 
asylum. Ambrose makes his escape when the inmates stage a rebellion and breakout, 
but he only meets with his son long enough to take him on a mysterious trip to a 
shadowy business establishment where the boy is drugged and . . . who knows. That 
night Ambrose is carried off and killed, leaving Rex with a couple of cryptic clues 
and the duty of solving the crime. Acantha arranges for her troublesome stepson 
to work for the asylum’s new director, Dr. Velhildegildus, and that’s exactly where 
Rex wants to be—within the building where his father said the truth lies. Though 
Rex has the support and assistance of a young maid just hired on, he can’t know 
the enormity of the cabal he’s up against—The Society of Andrew Faye, which 
is actually his mishearing of (dun, dun, dun) the Society of Androphage, or can-
nibals. Higgins is a deft hand at grossout, maximizing shivers and yet cushioning 
the horror with fantastic details of a Perambulating Submersible, a voracious sea 
monster, and diamonds coughed up from the floor of an icy, impossibly deep lake. 
Newcomers can enter Higgins’ world via any of her titles, and an endnote directs 
84 • The BulleTin
readers to specific novels that tie in to plot points in this particular “polyquel.” 
This series is shaping up into an enticing, shadowy den where scary-story addicts 
can get their fix.  EB 
hirsch, Jeff The Eleventh Plague. Scholastic, 2011 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-545-29014-2 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
In this gritty, post-apocalyptic world, it is unclear whether the unlucky ones were 
the individuals who quickly died during war or a horrific strain of influenza (the 
titular plague), or the ones who escaped those fates only to try to survive in a world 
that offers little food, safety, or opportunities beyond another day of breathing and 
scavenging. Fifteen-year-old Stephen loses his remaining family over the course of a 
couple of gut-wrenching days, and he suddenly finds himself alone with plenty of 
survival knowledge but very little ability to actually engage with or trust people. He 
ends up at Settler’s Landing, a tight community that ultimately welcomes him, even 
as his arrival stirs internal troubles that have been long brewing. Stephen just wants 
something that looks and feels like home, and the harsh outside world, particularly 
in contrast with the almost eerily cozy baseball and family dinner–style haven that 
Settler’s Landing represents, is unrelentingly awful to such an extreme that read-
ers will likely be as relieved as Stephen that he lands anywhere at all still alive and 
certainly scathed but not broken. Pair this with Treggiari’s Ashes, Ashes (reviewed 
below) for compelling glimpses into the fragility of settlements in a dying world.  AS
humphrey, AnnA Mission (Un)Popular. Disney Hyperion, 2011 401p
ISBN 978-1-4231-2301-9 $16.99    
R Gr. 6-9
Margot Button has a hard time thinking before she speaks, so she always seems 
to be saying the wrong thing. She also has a hard time dealing with the mean girl 
at her school, Sarah J., but she has a really good best friend, Erika. After a dare 
issued by the cool kids and taken up by Margot’s impulsive agreement goes hor-
ribly awry, however, Erika’s parents decide Margot is a bad influence and send 
Erika to Catholic school, leaving Margot to face Sarah J. alone in seventh grade. 
A new girl, Em, appears on the scene and, in quick succession, befriends Margot, 
alienates Erika, and encourages Margot into open warfare with Sarah J. Behind 
Em’s charisma, generosity (to Margot, at least), and persuasive abilities, though, is 
a quality Margot doesn’t quite trust, but she doesn’t heed her instincts until it’s too 
late. Although this narrative features a common enough plotline in today’s bully 
lit, the story goes into more depth than most offerings of this type, highlighting 
Margot’s ambivalences toward the various people in her life in ways that fully flesh 
out her character. Unlike many girl characters dealing with insecurities and bullies, 
Margot doesn’t lapse into hyperbole and exclamation points; rather she emerges as 
thoughtful, self-reflective, and often confused, thus effectively capturing the nu-
anced experience of seventh grade in a credible and compelling way. Junior-high 
girls whose mouths sometimes get them into trouble, who suffer from bad hair and 
eyebrow days, and whose crushes are at odds with those who crush on them—in 
other words, all junior-high girls—will find much to relate to in Margot.  KC 
OcTOBer 2011 • 85
intriAgo, pAtriciA Dot; written and illus. by Patricia Intriago. Ferguson/Far-
rar, 2011 [36p]
ISBN 978-0-374-31835-2 $14.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R 4-7 yrs
Ever stop to consider what an expressive, malleable entity a dot can be? Graphic 
designer Intriago opens with an interplay of colors, simple lines, and dots that lays 
out some familiar conventions in contrasting pairs. A red dot is a “stop dot,” and 
a green dot is a “go dot”; speed lines imply a “fast dot” while a dashed line follows 
the trajectory of a bouncing dot. Then things get a little more surprising. A large 
wedge carved from a dot suggests a “loud” mouth while a little notch on a facing 
dot seems to be “quiet.” Scalloped toothmarks along the hollowed-out edge of a 
dot indicate it was “yummy,” but the missing chunk that appears to have been 
spit out along side its counterpart evidently “tastes bad.” The featured pairs float 
elegantly on clean white space, sometimes touched with a dab of color for requisite 
highlighting. The entries are clever or thought-provoking, and though Intriago 
pushes the envelope a page too far in a bland bedtime-story conclusion, the lovely 
penultimate spread that displays discrete white dots clustering ever more densely 
into a field of pure white makes a striking substitute conclusion. Kids will prefer 
to be wide awake to try out their own pencil and crayon explorations on the pos-
sibilities of the humble dot.  EB
JAy, stAcey Juliet Immortal. Delacorte, 2011 306p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90826-9 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74016-6 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89893-8 $17.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Shakespeare has a lot to answer for. Immortalizing Romeo and Juliet as the pinnacle 
of true love and tragic sacrifice, when in fact, according to this fantasy drawn from 
the play, Romeo sacrificed Juliet to gain immortal life for himself? Now Juliet is a 
servant of the Ambassadors of Light; she inhabits the body of a troubled soul for just 
as much time as it takes to unite two soulmates in her host’s proximity and improve 
her host’s life before returning to the Mists, where she floats with only the vaguest 
perceptions of time and self until her next assignment. Romeo, meanwhile, didn’t 
quite achieve immortality as planned; he is bound in service to the Mercenaries, 
subverting Juliet’s work at every turn and trying to lead soulmates down the path of 
selfish sacrifice that he took. This time around, though, with the lovers ensconced 
in a California high school, things are different. Both Ambassador and Mercenary 
higher-ups are inexplicably absent; Romeo is trying to convince Juliet that if she 
can love him again they can both escape to a real life without any supernatural 
obligations; and Juliet, so long numb to love, is falling for one of the soulmates 
she’s supposed to help pair off. Much of the action is bound up in the familiar teen 
tropes of school, theater productions, and the micro-dramas of friends and dates 
and parents, making this thoroughly accessible to fantasy skeptics. The romance 
won’t inspire undue swooning, but Romeo, driven mad from centuries on Earth 
without any tactile sensation, is a splendidly ambiguous antagonist, seesawing 
between relentless and almost animalistic malice and moments of what appear to 
be genuine regret and anguish. The twist ending should offer readers some genuine 
surprise, and while a sequel is not assured, readers may hope that the higher powers 
aren’t done with Juliet yet.  CG
86 • The BulleTin
JoBling, curtis Wereworld: Rise of the Wolf. Viking, 2011 [464p]
ISBN 978-0-670-01330-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
In this epic tale divided into six parts, Drew discovers the lycanthrope within him, 
and he is irrevocably changed by the adventure brought on by its awakening. He has 
barely begun to grieve for his murdered mother when he is thrown into a world of 
were creatures, longstanding alliances and enemies, and a secret about his own royal 
origins (he was raised as a shepherd’s son) that he could have never seen coming. 
While genre conventions make it likely that he can save the girl (a spoiled, though 
resilient and engaging shapeshifter), his family (both biological and chosen), and 
himself, the book makes it clear there’s no guarantee; the nail-biting pace and plot 
turns will keep the reader wondering exactly how Drew will resolve it all. Broken 
neatly into disparate adventures with a loyal cast that appears regularly, this evokes 
role-playing game quests, and fantasy fans who are also gamers will recognize the 
flow immediately. While there aren’t many of the buff, sexy Team Jacob–appeal-
ing werewolves in this world populated by therianthropes (shapeshifters who take 
the forms of all kinds of animals) there is enough romantic heat, girl power, and 
vulnerable tough guys to guarantee interest from the Twilight crowd.  AS
Johnson, mAureen The Name of the Star. Putnam, 2011 [384p] (Shades 
of London)
ISBN 978-0-399-25660-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
Even in contemporary times, it seems that Jack the Ripper is not yet finished 
with London. When seventeen-year-old Louisiana native Rory arrives in the city 
to attend a posh private school for her senior year, she expects the usual English 
novelties: tea, scones, plenty of rain, and maybe a couple of cute guys with hot 
accents. What she finds instead is a community gripped in “Rippermania” after 
an apparent copycat begins recreating Saucy Jack’s infamous murders. In an eerie 
twist, the CCTV footage capturing the crimes show the victims in plain sight 
but their attacker is nowhere to be seen. Rory, however, does see someone in the 
courtyard of her school, where a body is found the next day. She is soon approached 
by a member of an elite section of law enforcement and finds herself with several 
ghost-hunting bodyguards as it becomes clear that her life is being threatened by a 
potentially non-human entity. Ripper enthusiasts may be ultimately disappointed 
by the revelation of the murderous spirit’s true identity, but fans of dark, intense 
crime thrillers will find plenty of chills here. The notorious gruesomeness of the 
original Whitechapel murders provides plenty of titillating fodder as the story’s 
foundation, but Johnson effectively balances these more salacious aspects by an-
choring the story in the familiar structure of a boarding-school drama. The tension 
ratchets up to the nth degree when good old Jack strikes on the supposedly secure 
school grounds, and the story quickly becomes an exploration in fear and celebrity 
as much as a thriller. Rory and her crew do, of course, eventually dispatch Jack, 
but the streets of London offer plenty of more evil spirits, so be on the lookout for 
the future installments of this planned series.  KQG 
OcTOBer 2011 • 87
Johnston, tony Levi Strauss Gets a Bright Idea: A Fairly Fabricated Story of a Pair 
of Pants; illus. by Stacy Innerst. Harcourt, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-0-15-206145-6 $16.99   
R 6-9 yrs
From a few wispy threads of fact, Johnston weaves an original tall tale of how New 
York peddler Levi Strauss became outfitter extraordinaire for the 49ers (gold fields, 
that is, not Candlestick Park). The miners’ work pants were just not up to the job, 
and sooner rather than later they were reduced to tatters, or worse. Thus began 
the Great Barrel Rush, with miners grabbing up every hoop and stave they could 
find to keep the elements at bay. Into this sad state of affairs came Strauss, whose 
tent fabric was just the ticket for indestructible work clothes. Miners promptly 
abandoned their barrels and clamored for jeans faster than Strauss could stitch ’em, 
thus setting off the Great Pants Rush. And the barrels? Strauss just stacked ’em 
up to build San Francisco. Johnston antes up the readaloudability with traditional 
tall-tale banter and and a bold-faced “Dang!” every time Strauss gets a brainstorm. 
Innerst extends the fun by painting the sartorially challenged miners on, what else, 
blue jeans, craftily leaving the blue untouched for jeans, tents, chalkboards, ocean, 
and bay, and letting flat-felled seams do double duty as the floor of a covered wagon 
or the roadway of the Golden Gate Bridge. A final note sets the real story straight, 
at least as straight as the Strauss legend can be set.  EB
KephArt, Beth You Are My Only. Geringer/Egmont, 2011 [256p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-272-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-285-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
At fourteen, Sophie is starting to get fed up with her isolated life as the overprotected, 
homeschooled daughter of a single mother, and she illicitly develops a friendship 
with her new neighbor, Joey, and his guardian aunts. Her narration alternates with 
that of Emmy, a young woman who suffers a breakdown and hospitalization after 
her baby daughter disappears from the family backyard. Warmed by the affection 
of Joey’s family, an emboldened Sophie investigates her mother’s private papers and 
realizes that her life has been built on lies, a discovery that brings her story into 
conjunction with Emmy’s. This has a very different style from classic child-abduction 
melodramas such as Mazer’s Taking Terri Mueller (BCCB 6/83) and Ehrlich’s Where 
It Stops, Nobody Knows (BCCB 1/89); Kephart’s writing is a thing of beauty in 
its own right, and Sophie’s story earns its frequent and apt allusions to Rapunzel 
with its own fairy-tale quality. Emmy’s story is also compelling, but it’s effective 
mainly as a suspenseful counterpoint to Sophie’s journey toward recognition and 
reunion. There’s a Sleeping Beauty element as well in Sophie’s gradual awakening 
to the possibilities of life beyond her mother’s restrictions, and Joey’s aunts make 
excellent not-quite-fairy godmothers; Joey himself, whose wooing starts with a 
game of catch, is an appealingly accessible handsome prince. Readers will eat up 
this realistic variant of the youthful fantasy about finally finding one’s real parents 
and being properly appreciated.  DS
88 • The BulleTin
Krull, KAthleen 
Big Wig: A Little History of Hair; illus. by Peter 
Malone. Levine/Scholastic, 2011 48p
ISBN 978-0-439-67640-3 $18.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Krull races through the timeline of civilization, stopping every few millennia, then 
centuries, then decades to share a tidbit on the state of human hair somewhere 
on the globe. Beginning with the probability of mutual grooming during the re-
markably hirsute prehistoric times in Africa, she moves through the emergence of 
dreadlocks 5,000 years ago in present-day Nigeria, avocado hair treatments among 
the Maya 4,000 years ago, samurai topknots from 1200 c.e. Japan, a blond dye job 
in fifteenth-century Venice, Shirley Temple’s banana curls in 1936 California, and 
the world’s most expensive haircut (sorry, John Edwards, you don’t even come close) 
in 2007 England. Each several sentence factoid is flat-out fascinating, as are the 
coordinated entries, roughly matched by time period at the conclusion of the book. 
However, with nothing but a general list of sources (several for children), many of 
the entries beg for verification. How do we know about the emergence of blonds 
as an evolutionary advantage 11,000 years ago? Who exactly was this woman who 
converted her vacuum cleaner into the first blow dryer? And please tell us where 
to find out more about this surgically implanted snap that held on Andy Warhol’s 
wigs. Still, kids who just come for the pure pleasure of an entertaining browse will 
be more than delighted by Malone’s inventive paintings, which brashly incorporate 
clever anachronisms into literal renderings of Krull’s text: hominids under salon 
dryers, a teddy bear alongside its baby owner in a Mayan head press; a chalk-haired 
ancient Celt terrifying a bowler-hatted businessman in a pin-striped suit. If veracity 
is a concern, use this to start an exercise in fact-checking.  EB 
Krull, KAthleen Jim Henson: The Guy Who Played with Puppets; illus. by Steve 
Johnson and Lou Fancher. Random House, 2011 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95721-5 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85721-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-978-0-375-98914-8 $16.99   
R Gr. 3-4
Krull knows her audience and strikes the right balance in this picture book biog-
raphy, offering just enough cool facts about Henson himself and then getting on 
to his real claim to fame in kids’ eyes—Sesame Street. It’s hard to believe the guy 
who would reshape children’s television viewing grew up without a TV, but not at 
all hard to believe that his dedication to puppetry landed him a television gig at 
sixteen and that he graduated from a college Home Ec program, where he could 
pursue courses in puppetry, costume design, and advertising art. The real fun for 
readers lies in the didja-know? tidbits—that Kermit was named after a childhood 
friend and was fashioned from Mom’s old coat and ping-pong balls; that Henson 
wasn’t gung-ho to join the Sesame Street experiment, preferring to use his Mup-
pets for all ages rather than strictly children’s entertainment; that Henson’s funeral 
was a joy-filled affair with bright colors, a New Orleans jazz band, and lots of 
butterfly puppets. Johnson and Fancher’s paints feature soft stippling that hints at 
nostalgia, bright colors that are one hundred percent Muppet, and, most delight-
fully, a number of cleverly angled compositions that reveal how Henson and crew 
manipulated their puppets. A list of book and website sources is included, with 
young people’s entries denoted.  EB
OcTOBer 2011 • 89
lAfleur, suzAnne Eight Keys. Lamb, 2011 [224p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90833-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74030-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89905-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Middle school brings a whole host of changes for eleven-year-old Elise, and most 
of them are unwelcome: her lockermate is a bully, the piles of homework feel in-
surmountable, and her best friend, Franklin, has been dubbed a dork, which has 
ruined any chance for Elise to climb the social ladder. There is, however, one good 
event: after finding a key that opens a door in her uncle’s barn, Elise finds a message 
left to her by her late father. This is no ordinary message but rather the start of a 
scavenger hunt—like puzzle: seven more keys appear soon after, allowing Elise to 
open the remaining barn doors that lead to rooms containing further clues. When 
the message remains unclear, Elise realizes that she may need the help of both her 
old friend Franklin and a few new allies if she is to figure out what her father was 
trying to tell her. LaFleur depicts the transition from elementary school to middle 
school with tenderness and compassion, focusing on Elise’s utter bewilderment at 
the new social mores that seem to have sprung up overnight. Her general grumpi-
ness and often selfish behavior may make her terrifically unlikable at times, but 
these are the very traits that also bestow her with authenticity. Unfortunately, the 
surrounding characters, often stock and hackneyed, are less successfully drawn. 
While the premise of a father’s posthumously guiding his child through adolescence 
is undeniably a sweet one, the book’s lessons ultimately reflect a simplicity that fails 
to take into account the nuanced complexities that herald adulthood. Nonetheless, 
this offers a warm resolution to the dramatics of middle school, and it may be just 
the thing to remind readers that childhood is something to relish, not rush.  KQG 
lAreAu, KAren Otto: The Boy Who Loved Cars; illus. by Scott Magoon. Porter/
Roaring Brook, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-1-59643-484-4 $15.99   
R 4-7 yrs
Otto is completely obsessed with cars: he sleeps in a race-car bed, eats Wheelies 
breakfast cereal, insists on playing “Race around the Playground” every day at recess, 
and, when he can’t sleep, counts Jeeps. He is nonetheless completely taken aback 
when he wakes up one morning to find that he has become a shiny red convertible. 
To further complicate matters, no one else can see that Otto has become a car, so his 
unusual behaviors are perceived as rude and offputting (as when he tries to explain 
to his teacher why he is late but loudly honks instead). That night, poor snuffling 
Otto declares to his mother that he’s “sick of cars,” and the next morning a fully 
human but slightly wiser Otto jumps out of bed with a brand new appreciation 
for trying new things. Though it’s a little hard on youthful single-mindedness and 
the logic isn’t seamless, LaReau’s story is both cleverly executed and thoughtfully 
concluded. Otto is a wholly likable (and ridiculously familiar) little guy who is un-
able to see beyond his obsession, and the narrative is plucky and playful with lots 
of kid appeal. Magoon’s cartoonish compositions are chock-full of energy, featur-
ing bold black outlines and eyes full of expression. Otto the boy looks a little like 
Brown’s Flat Stanley, with a retro hairdo, a toothy grin, and a splashing of freckles 
across his cheeks, and the little red car is a convincing automotive variant of him. 
90 • The BulleTin
Car lovers in particular will enjoy Otto’s tale, but any kid who has ever dreamed 
of being something else will find lots of heart and humor in Otto’s story of new 
perspective.  HM
levithAn, dAvid Every You, Every Me; illus. with photographs by Jonathan 
Farmer. Knopf, 2011 [256p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96098-7 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86098-0 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89621-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 8-12
“Between us, we were supposed to know you,” says the narrator of this poignant 
novel. The “you” he addresses there is a girl named Ariel, whose lacerating absence 
is keenly felt; the “us” is narrator Evan, who loved her beyond anything but couldn’t 
have her to himself, and Jack, Ariel’s boyfriend, to whom Evan turns after Ariel’s 
departure. Evan narrates in tense, jagged sentences that bleed with raw emotion 
as he fights for control, often crossing out the most revealing utterances as he tips 
into stream of consciousness, and reveals piece by piece that the very troubled 
Ariel attempted to kill herself. Already haunted by guilt and grief, Evan is further 
tormented by the photographs someone has been strategically leaving for him, 
photographs that shadow his actions with Ariel and suggest there was someone in 
Ariel’s life about whom he knew nothing. Levithan creates an immersive emotional 
experience here, with Evan easily recognizable as the boy who was already settling 
for being a friend when he ached to be more. The mystery is poetically enigmatic, 
with the reproduced pictures tantalizingly ambiguous even as they fit into the 
narrative; on the way, however, there are other mysteries readers will be exploring, 
piecing together the answer to questions such as “What happened to Ariel?” and 
“Is this all in Evan’s mind?” The book manages to imbue a not-uncommon teen 
crisis and dynamic with the sharp significance of the rare, and the slight artifice 
of its approach will only enhance the draw of what is undoubtedly the Emo Book 
of the Year.  DS
leWis, steWArt You Have Seven Messages. Delacorte, 2011 [304p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90832-0 $20.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-74028-9 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89904-1 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
It’s been nearly a year since Luna’s mother died, hit by a taxi in Manhattan, and 
fourteen-year-old Luna is still having a hard time adjusting to the loss. She’s 
particularly disturbed that her father seems to be withholding information about 
the accident, a belief that’s only strengthened when she finds her mother’s cell 
phone and begins to listen to the messages stored on it. Spurred by the enigmatic 
messages, Luna begins to explore the hidden currents of her mother’s life and her 
parents’ marriage, even as she herself negotiates a first romance with her neighbor, 
Oliver. Luna narrates her story in fluid, thoughtful prose, and her unfolding of her 
mother’s story is absorbing and, despite the more contemplative pace, genuinely 
suspenseful; her growing understanding of her parents as people rather than icons 
is delicately traced. Lewis complements this realism with a fair amount of glamor-
ous unreality: Luna writes with adult sophistication, she’s the daughter of a famous 
OcTOBer 2011 • 91
film-director father and a famous and angelically beautiful model/author mother, 
she herself proves to be a photographer of such prodigy that she immediately gets 
a gallery show, and she hangs with Orlando Bloom and jets off to Italy. The result 
is a bit like a lovely contemporary fairy tale, with a sad Upper West Side princess 
at the heart of it, and that’s a kind of folklore that many readers will enjoy.  DS
linK, Kelly, ed. Steampunk!: An Anthology of Fantastically Rich and Strange Stories; 
edited by Kelly Link and Gavin J. Grant. Candlewick, 2011 [432p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-4843-5 $22.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 9-12
It is about time that steampunk short stories really got a focused and creative explo-
ration in YA lit, and this anthology of fourteen pieces (all original to this volume) 
is an excellent start. A brief introduction references the murky beginnings of the 
term itself, the key themes that make it what it is, and the one intentional common 
thread here: none of the stories is set in the well-worn venue of Victorian London. 
It’s a brilliant idea, and it has clearly led to some intriguing approaches, as readers 
will encounter steampunk elements woven into the old Wild West, as in “The Last 
Ride of the Glory Girls” by Libba Bray, all the way to ancient (perhaps) Rome in 
M. T. Anderson’s “The Oracle Engine.” Wistful efforts at trying to will clockwork 
and gears to somehow improve one’s dreary life are explored in pieces that inspire 
pathos even as they are gorgeously rendered to be more than their tragic parts, 
such as Shawn Cheng’s short graphic piece “Seven Days Beset by Demons” and 
the modern “Steam Girl” by Dylan Horrocks. The variety of storytelling styles and 
lengths and the inclusion of two graphic stories enhance the value of this collec-
tion and ensure that the common themes avoid samey repetition. While there are 
plenty of YA novels dipping into this area, this impeccable anthology can serve as 
either an introduction to much of what makes steampunk what it is or a creative 
take for established fans who will be intrigued by the authorial tinkering. And since 
tampering and tinkering is not only how steampunk evolved into a subgenre but 
also is very much part of each of these stories, that is a nice point of intersection 
indeed. Author biographies generally go beyond the requisite booklists to hint at 
contributors’ connections to or specific interests in the theme.  AS
littmAn, sArAh dArer Want to Go Private? Scholastic, 2011 330p
ISBN 978-0-545-15146-7 $17.99  
M Gr. 9-12
Despite having a supportive best friend, Faith, Abby is really insecure about enter-
ing high school. She prefers her virtual life at ChezTeen.com, where her avatar 
doesn’t have to worry about what she’s wearing or whether her hair and makeup are 
just right. As Faith embraces high school activities and makes new friends, Abby 
makes a friend online who calls himself Luke and claims to be twenty-seven. Luke 
supports her when she’s feeling insecure or misunderstood, but he also asks her to 
undress for him on the webcam while he masturbates. When her parents ground 
her for a bad grade, Luke suggests they go away together for a few days, a plan to 
which she readily agrees. She’s convinced that he loves her, but it turns out he’s a 
thirty-two-year-old sexual predator who has been posting pictures of her, including 
sex tapes of her losing her virginity to him, on child pornography sites. As agenda-
based fiction, the story clearly aims to show how even smart kids who’ve heard 
all the warnings can still be successfully groomed by sexual predators. However, 
92 • The BulleTin
Abby isn’t as sympathetic as she needs to be for readers to really identify with her 
to the point where they understand their own vulnerability, and her motives are 
never effectively conveyed. She’s got a real boy who likes her, a helpful best friend 
that she lies to, and a sister who presents an alternate site of identification and says 
the things that readers will likely be thinking about how stupid Abby’s being; her 
folly seems calculated to get her into trouble as fast as possible without regards to 
credibility, and the book’s extreme version of the consequences only undercuts its 
believability. While the subject matter is undeniably important, this treatment is 
more likely to convince readers of their imperviousness to such harm rather than 
caution them to take internet predation seriously.  KC 
lupicA, miKe The Underdogs. Philomel, 2011 [288p]
ISBN 978-0-399-25001-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Have you read the one about the short powerhouse kid with his eye on a champi-
onship football season? How about the coach dad who could have been a football 
great if not for his injury? Maybe the one about the have-not team taking on the 
well-funded kids across town? The kid whose father shouts criticism from the 
sidelines? The joking sidekick who comes through with a big play? Lupica, prince 
of the feel-good sports story, manages to bundle a string of shopworn tropes into 
a genuine kid-pleaser by tapping into a situation that, sadly, all too many readers 
will recognize: sports cutbacks in a dying post-industrial town. Seventh-grader 
Will Tyler, facing the termination of the twelve-year-olds’ football league, writes 
to New Balance for corporate sponsorship, and by golly, CEO Robert DeMartini 
comes through. Now all Will needs is to muster ten other players and a coach. Dad 
drags his tired body and bum knee to practice in support of his son, Will talks his 
teammates into accepting a girl onto the team as a kicker, and talented but shy 
Toby finally commits to signing up as well, despite the grief he knows he’ll catch 
from his big-mouthed father. With twelve players altogether, they chug their way 
toward a shot at the playoff until an injury and a sudden move reduce the gang to 
ten, just in time to face their arch-rival. No need to tell the ending; the title says 
it all. More surprising is how Lupica incorporates the New Balance company and 
its actual CEO into the tale—convincing detail or shameless product placement? 
Either way, readers will groan, worry, hope, and cheer in all the right places as the 
scrappy goats chew up the trash-talkin’ punks, and once again all’s right in middle-
grades sports fiction.  EB 
mAlKin, ninA Swear. Simon Pulse, 2011 [496p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2110-3 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2655-9 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 9-12
It’s been six months since Dice and Sin shared their night of perfect passion, which 
ended with Dice waking up alone (Swoon, BCCB 7/09). The only signs of Sin since 
have been twinges, atmospheric disturbances particularly noted when Dice sings 
in her sexy, bluesy contralto, which she’s been doing in a band. Now a bandmate, 
Crane, has disappeared, and his brother is worried that he’s literally been spirited 
away by a ghost into the bowels of their old Connecticut house. A romantic en-
counter between Dice and Tosh, another bandmate, prompts the jealous return 
OcTOBer 2011 • 93
of Sin in the flesh, and Dice is beset by conflicting emotions: despite a nascent 
interest in Tosh, she’s still obsessed with Sin and convinced he has something to 
do with Crane’s disappearance. Some sleuthing turns up confusing evidence that 
he does, but even Sin can’t figure out why Antonia, a girl he knew back in 1769, is 
convinced that Sin is her betrothed and has kidnapped Crane as a hostage until she 
and Sin can be wed. Nothing can be resolved until Dice embraces all of the super-
natural power that she has until this point denied and rejected. The complicated 
plot makes perfect, even elegant, sense if one has read the first book; otherwise, 
readers might be at sea as Sin manipulates everyone into an erotic frenzy on occa-
sion and Dice only reluctantly makes use of her considerable mystical abilities. As 
in the first book, however, Dice’s most compelling power may just be her narrative 
voice—spunky, hard-edged, irreverent, and sparkling with wit as she describes the 
sex appeal of her aptly named boyfriend and her own trials as a reluctant mystical 
adept. Sin has deepened as a character during his exile, becoming the best kind of 
romantic fantasy: a deliciously bad boy who has grown into a passionate yet ethical 
man. Fans of Swoon will definitely not want to miss this.  KC 
mArr, melissA, ed. Enthralled: Paranormal Diversions; ed. by Melissa Marr and 
Kelley Armstrong. Harper/HarperCollins, 2011 [464p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-201579-2 $17.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-201578-5 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
In this anthology born out of a tour featuring multiple female authors (Smart Chicks 
Kick It), sixteen fantastical stories treat journeys of various forms. In “Giovanni’s 
Farewell,” the journey is both literal and emotional, as a teen on a school trip to Italy 
experiences her first kiss and realizes that it was with a ghost only she can see. Carrie 
Ryan’s “Scenic Route” explores how the whisper of escape, the focus on planning 
for an unlikely trip, can keep hope alive even when you are one of few survivors of 
an all-out zombie apocalypse. In one of the more unusual outings, Jackson Pearce, 
in “Things about Love,” presents a genie who is determined to learn about human 
love, even if it means setting herself up for the almost inevitable equally human 
feelings of disappointment and heartbreak (it doesn’t help that her chosen subject 
is gay, not to mention deeply wary of genies and not interested in taking her on 
any voyage through love). Vampires, zombies, ghosts, and supernatural abilities 
all make appearances; horror, supernatural, and fantasy fans should all find plenty 
of authors they know and love, and they will also likely find a few newcomers or 
writers outside of their fave genres who they’ll find worth checking out elsewhere. 
Snappy author bios, the inclusion of all new stories, and the sheer enthusiasm and 
cool factor of the tour itself (now an annual event) make this a standout among 
the many paranormal-themed anthologies.  AS
mArtin, Jr., Bill Ten Little Caterpillars; illus. by Lois Ehlert. Beach Lane/
Simon, 2011 36p
ISBN 978-1-4424-3385-4 $17.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3386-1 $12.99   
R 4-7 yrs
From two classic children’s literature talents, previously partnered on Chicka Chicka 
Boom Boom, comes this well-crafted and informative introduction to ten different 
species of caterpillars, their habitats and diets, and the resulting butterflies/moths 
94 • The BulleTin
they become. Rhyming text offers a whimsical but realistic account of caterpillar 
life (“The third little caterpillar climbed a cabbage head/ The fourth little caterpillar 
found a melon bed”), concluding with the victorious transformation of the tenth 
caterpillar into a tiger swallowtail butterfly. True to Ehlert’s signature style, the wa-
tercolor collages are sprinkled with captions, so that flowers, bugs, plants, and other 
elements of nature are identified in the compositions; the final two spreads list the 
ten caterpillars by name, offer a single fact about their eating habits, and depict the 
butterflies and moths that they become. There are a lot of curricular opportunities 
for this attractive volume, particularly for the scads of elementary-school students 
who study the life cycle of a butterfly (there is a nod to such projects with the sixth 
caterpillar, a monarch caterpillar, who is stuck in a jar and “carried off to school”) 
but may not be aware of the diversity of species of caterpillars in nature. The play-
ful rhyme and bright, bold collages make this a fine choice for either a classroom 
readaloud or for youngsters with a love for the natural world.  HM
mcmAnn, lisA The Unwanteds. Aladdin, 2011 390p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0768-8 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0770-1 $9.99   
R Gr. 5-7
In this dystopia geared for a younger audience than many, very young children get 
sorted into two groups: Wanted and Unwanted. The unwanted kids are doomed 
fairly early on, as even small mistakes or divergences (like artistic interest) tally 
up quickly against them. Aaron and Alex are unusual in that they are twins, but 
they are fairly certain going in that they will not end up on the same list. Aaron, 
indeed, ends up with the bad kids, and he boards a bus that’s ostensibly carrying 
all of the unwanteds to their deaths. Happily, the children are instead introduced 
to a hidden world where their creativity, individuality, and resistance to arbitrary 
rules is celebrated and carefully nurtured. Most kids are happy to never look back, 
but Aaron longs for his brother, and he worries about some of the other children 
left behind; he knows that the government of Quill cannot be allowed to keep the 
citizens in such fear that they would reject their own kids each year. It’s a lot for 
one small novel, and the glowing descriptions of Artime (the hidden artistic com-
munity) occasionally cross into schmaltzy territory, but the genuine tugs between 
family and individuality, safety and ethics are compelling places on which to ground 
this novel. Readers will likely be so relieved that the first chapters don’t end with 
the mass killing of the flawed (and therefore interesting) kids that they will forgive 
the stark black and white division between the increasingly grim Quill and the 
always nifty Artime. While this is certainly a departure for McMann, it may hook 
some new fans who, in a few years, will find her other books worth pursuing.  AS
mcneil, gretchen Possess. Balzer + Bray/HarperCollins, 2011[384p]
ISBN 978-0-06-206071-6 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
Ever since Bridget’s father was brutally murdered, Bridget has been able to see 
and hear demons and, under the tutelage of one of the priests from her Catholic 
school, exorcise them. The number of possessions is escalating, though, and the 
demons seem to recognize Bridget, even attempting to pass on to her a message 
that may have had something to do with her father’s death. McNeil draws on the 
tried-and-true dynamic of a girl with secret abilities attempting to simultaneously 
OcTOBer 2011 • 95
save the world and maintain a semblance of normalcy. The demon possessions 
themselves lead to some inspired moments of camp, as when a wall full of pos-
sessed dolls escalates the hostilities from staring and winking (“plastic, porcelain, 
swaddled like infants, dressed like fairy queens and Disney princesses, Caucasian, 
black, Hispanic, Asian—a United Nations of horror”) to outright attack (“Bridget 
heard the smashing of glass and a series of bloodcurdling screams as . . . a Madame 
Alexander princess and two American Girls went flying past her head”). This falls 
short on emotional heft, though, failing to fully explore the issues of identity it 
raises or to imbue Bridget’s pivotal relationships (with friends, boyfriend, father, or 
brother) with much urgency. It also has a less complex mythology than Skovron’s 
Misfit (reviewed below), also built around a biracial Catholic schoolgirl trained by 
priests to fight demons. Still, the irreverent, teen-angsty narration, colored with 
Bridget’s snarky sense of the absurd, intrudes at all the right moments and twists 
the overblown plot into something with just enough self-awareness and snap to be 
more interesting than its premise.  CG
menchin, scott What If Everything Had Legs?; written and illus. by Scott 
Menchin. Candlewick, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4220-4 $15.99   
R 5-8 yrs
A little girl, “sooooooo tired” that she doesn’t think she can make it home, asks 
“Mom, why can’t the house have legs and walk to us?” Her silly proposition then 
leads to an inventive discussion between mother and daughter about what would 
happen if various inanimate objects grew legs, a discussion that gets them all the 
way home where the girl realizes she is no longer tired. There is abundant language 
play in the dialogue, making this an entertaining selection for a readaloud (“Leaves 
would leave!”, “Rocks wouldn’t roll. But rolls could rock!”), as well as plenty of kid 
appeal in the selected scenarios (particularly the one in which toys put themselves 
away). The girl’s imaginative romp is brought vividly to life in Menchin’s digital 
compositions, which playfully juxtapose his comically stylized, emphatically lined 
art with photographic elements. While the situations are chock full of silliness, 
the spreads are spacious and clean, with lots of bare space and large planes of solid 
color playing background to the fantastical foreground details. In most instances, 
photography provides the inanimate elements and the legs and other accoutrements 
are drawn in, so that a red Mini Cooper has an illustrated pair of brown plaid legs 
and a bread roll wears hand-drawn tie-dye bell bottoms and white go-go boots. 
Parents will readily recognize the scenario in which you take a conversation and run 
with it for the purpose of distraction; kids will just enjoy the playful exploration 
of possibility inherent in the little girl’s imagination.  HM
mills, clAudiA Mason Dixon: Pet Disasters; illus. by Guy Francis. Knopf, 
2011 154p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96873-0 $15.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86873-3 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89958-4 $12.99   
R Gr. 3-4
Chronicler of the middle grades Claudia Mills returns here with the first volume 
in a new series starring nine-year-old Mason Dixon. Mason is essentially a reverse 
Walter Mitty, a quiet, orderly guy who’d prefer to live under the radar but is re-
peatedly dropped into drama by his ebullient parents and impulsive best friend, 
96 • The BulleTin
Brody. In this outing, Mason has pets thrust upon him repeatedly, even though 
he doesn’t want them; after the goldfish dies, the hamster runs away, and the cat 
has to be returned, Mason gets a dog—or really, the wildly excited Brody gets a 
dog, which lives, to Mason’s annoyed acquiescence, at Mason’s house. The book 
makes Mason keenly sympathetic as the kid resignedly towed along in the wake of 
others, not because he’s afraid but because he doesn’t want to make a fuss or hurt 
anybody’s feelings; readers will particularly and ruefully relate to the way his life 
keeps careening out of his control, no matter how hard he tries to rein it in. It’s 
not surprising that he eventually bonds with Dog, the three-legged dog, but the 
situation is worked out with fairness to both Mason and Brody. There’s plenty of 
age-appropriate wit to add a little comic distance to the situation, keeping things 
from getting too angsty. Scratchy monochromatic line illustrations, shaded with 
scrawled hatchings, are a nice blend of rustic and cartoonish, adding another quiet 
touch of humor. Even kids with wider comfort zones will relate to Mason’s trials, 
and they’ll look forward to his future outings.  DS
morris, pAulA Dark Souls. Point/Scholastic, 2011 292p
ISBN 978-0-545-25132-7 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 7-10
The English city of York is reputedly one of the most haunted places on earth, and, 
unfortunately for sixteen-year-old Miranda, she is able to immediately confirm 
that fact upon her arrival. After coming close to death and losing her best friend 
in a car accident earlier in the year, Miranda can now see dead people, and York 
has plenty of them, often victims of terrible, violent ends. In just the first few days 
of her trip, Miranda meets the ghost of St. Margaret Clitherow, a Catholic martyr 
who was crushed to death in 1586, and the tortured spirits of several hundred Jews 
killed at York Castle in the twelfth century. Fortunately for her sanity, Miranda also 
meets Nick, a dark and brooding (and living) boy who shares her gift and offers 
his assistance in navigating this new reality. Soon, however, it becomes clear that 
Nick is the one in need of help: an evil spirit convinces him to commit a heinous 
act, and it seems that Miranda is the only one that can stop him. The cobblestone 
streets and shadowed alleys of York are vividly brought to life here, and the nods to 
actual historical events as fodder for ghostly happenings make for an atmospheric 
tale. Indeed, the city itself is the book’s best-drawn character, largely outshining 
Miranda as the bland but necessary protagonist. While the setting is deliciously 
absorbing, the descriptive language never quite translates to the more emotional 
aspects of Miranda’s life (e.g., her grief, uncertainty, etc.) and the scenes in which 
she is actually interacting with anyone come off as stiff and ineffective. Still, the 
sense of place is impressive, and Anglophiles who like their literary travel on the 
spooky side may very well seek to wander the streets of York with Miranda.  KQG 
murdocK, cAtherine gilBert Wisdom’s Kiss: A Thrilling and Romantic Adventure 
Incorporating Magic, Villainy, and a Cat. Houghton, 2011 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-547-56687-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-9
Since the kingdom of Montagne honors the tradition of female succession, Wil-
helmina, the conniving duchess of Farina, sends her son Roger to woo Montagne’s 
new queen so that Wilhelmina can access the throne and finally unite the duchy 
and the kingdom under her rule. Her plans are somewhat thwarted when her son 
chooses the queen’s sister, Wisdom, instead, but as the wedding party assembles, 
OcTOBer 2011 • 97
Wilhelmina sets her back-up plan in motion. Meanwhile, Wisdom, known affec-
tionately as Dizzy, is having a less satisfying adventure than she had hoped while 
traveling to her new home with her grandmother, Ben (seen first in Princess Ben, 
BCCB 5/08), and her unsatisfactory ladies-in-waiting. Bad oysters disable the 
latter, however, and the group acquires a beautiful kitchen maid named Trudy, 
who has a hidden motive for traveling to the duchy; she has long pined for her 
childhood friend Tips, who will be arriving in the duchy at the same time as the 
wedding party. When Dizzy meets Tips, though, everything shifts, and magic and 
mayhem prove the only path through entanglement to resolution. A complicated 
tale sometimes requires a complicated telling, and Murdock obliges by doling out 
present events and past context through letters, memoirs, diary and encyclopedia 
entries, and various acts of a play, all combining to create a satisfying whole. The 
deft craftsmanship of each section develops character and elegantly marries form 
and substance, as letters convey a record of experiences and pleading admonitions 
to the recipient, diary entries reveal intimate impressions and secret motives, and 
encyclopedia entries provide an official, if considerably editorialized, record of 
events. Readers who enjoy fairy-tale romance and intrigue with multiple strong 
heroines, an enigmatic cat, and a bit of reading challenge will adore this, and those 
who are already acquainted with Princess Ben will be glad to see her again.  KC
the nAtionAl children’s BooK And literAcy AlliAnce The Exquisite Corpse 
Adventure: An Episodic Story Game. Candlewick, 2011 [288p] illus.
ISBN 978-0-7636-5149-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 4-7
Twenty children’s fiction luminaries, beginning with Jon Scieszka and ending with 
Katherine Paterson, contribute their considerable talents to this exquisite corpse 
storytelling game, with the writing changing hands chapter by chapter. The story 
begins with twins Nancy and Joe traveling on a train rushing toward a bridge that 
has been wired with dynamite. The children, who have been reared in a circus, 
think themselves to be orphans until they receive a birthday card from their parents 
instructing them to follow the clues and piece together something called the exqui-
site corpse, which they presume to be a robot of some kind. As the story is picked 
up by different authors, an array of stereotypically hyperbolic but inept villains 
and unlikely helpers appear to either assist or thwart their quest, which involves 
harrowing escapes, daring feats that make use of their circus training, and time 
travel. Such round-robin storytelling seems threatened from the outset by the risk 
of one-upsmanship, and the limits of the game are evident here as the piling on of 
odd, grotesque characters and the whiplash effect of new devices and plot twists 
result in a forced feeling of zaniness. However, the undeniable skill of the authors 
keeps the narrative mostly coherent from beginning to end, and the only really 
noticeable stylistic shift comes from Lemony Snicket’s arch, world-weary tone that 
is distinctly and jarringly different from headlong eagerness of the other autho-
rial voices. Likewise, most of the illustrators providing compact black-and-white 
images faithfully illuminate their chapter authors’ prose, but a few veer off into 
surreal fantasies of their own. The literalized metaphor of using the exquisite-corpse 
method to piece together a story about a robot that needs to be pieced together 
was surely a conceit the authors enjoyed, perhaps even more than their audience 
will, but this may have appeal for readers who like stories jam-packed with bizarre 
creatures behaving in unaccountable ways to achieve a strange goal.  KC 
98 • The BulleTin
nolAn, hAn Pregnant Pause. Harcourt, 2011 [352p]
ISBN 978-0-15-206570-6 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
After years of acting out, Elly is going straight: no more drugs, smoking, drinking, 
or rule-breaking. Unfortunately, the motivation for all this is that she’s pregnant. 
Stranded at a fat camp run by the family of her now-husband Lam (it was the only 
way to avoid living with her judgmental family), Elly tries on parenthood and 
responsibility as she bonds with the troubled young campers. Meanwhile, Lam is 
stoned, indifferent, and cheating; his hostile parents and Elly’s self-righteous sister 
both want the baby; and Elly starts falling for the music counselor. Through it all 
she struggles with the physical and psychological pressures of pregnancy and the 
decision she must make: keep the baby or give it away? The combination of camp 
story and problem novel give the book high appeal, and the characters are complex 
and sympathetic, particularly Elly as she works through her issues and grapples 
believably with the forced onset of adulthood. The sheer amount of dramatic inci-
dent, encompassing past infant death and miscarriages as well as body issues, drug 
use, suicide, and finally a chromosomal disorder, almost overbalances the central 
teen pregnancy and forced marriage plot. Nolan marshals all the threads into an 
orderly line and mostly avoids outright melodrama, though, and the story will 
engage readers who like their plots piled high with tribulation. The more skeptical 
among them may doubt the hopeful message that Elly’s sheer stubbornness and 
love can trump her dearth of financial and educational resources in providing 
sterling care for her baby, but after the book’s thoughtful and painful exploration 
of the damage wrought by various forms of parental disregard, it’s a relief just to 
leave the baby in the hands of someone whose good intentions and big heart the 
reader has grown to trust.  CG
nye, nAomi shihAB There Is No Long Distance Now: Very Short Stories. Green-
willow, 2011 [208p]
ISBN 978-0-06-201965-3 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7 up
Noted poet Nye takes a different tack here with a collection of nearly forty petite 
short stories, averaging a compact five pages in length apiece. They are stories of 
a poetic imagination, appropriately enough, and the events are small—a girl sees 
her grandmother in a different light, a boy sits next to a former teacher on an air-
plane, a girl attends a movie after her parents’ divorce—the focus instead being on 
quick glimpses of lives (though occasionally returning to the same lives at different 
moments), sometimes at significant times, sometimes at reflective instances, and 
sometimes just at occasions that reveal larger truths about the teenaged protagonists 
and their struggles. Certain subjects and themes—the war in the Middle East, the 
experience of being Arab-American, and general attempts to meet across differ-
ences—thread their way through several of the stories, but the real similarity lies in 
the feel and viewpoint throughout. Though the narrations are all third person, the 
evocations of individual sensibilities are keen, delicate, and heartfelt, the portrayals 
reflecting the way thoughts and observations flicker through a human mind and 
aggregate into a conscience and identity. The writing is fluid and supple but never 
overlofty in expression, whether speaking politically (“Extremists never wanted 
things to improve. They just wanted to win”) or existentially (“Basically, when you 
OcTOBer 2011 • 99
are a teenager, that is your main business, to discover if you are on a path you want 
to be on, or can stand being on, or if you are still jumping to find another one”) or 
even humorously (“Sylvia grew up mad at the Easter bunny”). Prospective writers 
will be particularly intrigued by the possibilities of this short form; they may find 
interest in using the entries here as writing prompts for further exploration or com-
ing up with their own candid literary snapshots of human lives.  DS
o’dell, KAthleen The Aviary. Knopf, 2011 [352p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95605-8 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-85605-1 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98935-3 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 4-7
Mrs. Glendoveer’s house has been home to eleven-year-old Clara for years, ever 
since her mother began to work for the old lady. When Mrs. Glendoveer dies, 
Clara is deeply saddened by the loss of her confidante, and she’s also alarmed by 
the prospect of having to leave the place when it’s sold. The quartet of birds long 
treasured by Mrs. Glendoveer attracts Clara’s attention, and she begins to explore a 
mystery involving the late Mr. Glendoveer’s career as a magician, the tragic long-ago 
death of the Glendoveer children, the strange words uttered by the birds, and the 
enigmatic prospective buyer of the house. With its isolated girl, historical myster-
ies, and period flavor (the events are set at the end of the nineteenth century), this 
is old-style domestic fantasy, filled with appealing conventions: the protagonist’s 
burgeoning friendship with an outgoing new neighbor, the hints at family secrets, 
and the uncertain but inexorable oncoming threat. There are some inventive ad-
ditional twists as well, especially in the true identity of the supernaturally touched 
birds. What will really sell this outing is the accessible style—though occasionally 
a little talky, the prose has an amiable confidentiality that reduces the keenness of 
some horrific events and brings both the past and its magic within easy reach of 
contemporary young readers. Fans of Eva Ibbotson’s work, Jacqueline West’s Books 
of Elsewhere (The Shadows, BCCB 9/10, etc.), and other fantasies with classic ele-
ments and padded corners will enjoy the spooky mystery here.  DS
offill, Jenny 11 Experiments That Failed; illus. by Nancy Carpenter. Schwartz 
& Wade, 2011 36p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-95762-8 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-84762-2 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-98384-9 $16.99   
R 5-8 yrs
In a similar vein to their 17 Things I’m Not Allowed to Do Anymore (BCCB 12/06), 
Offill and Carpenter document the adventures of a young scientist who’s more 
notable for her zeal than her rigorous approach. Each “experiment” begins with a 
question (“Can a kid make it through the winter eating only snow and ketchup?”), 
a hypothesis (“Ketchup and snow are the only food groups a kid needs”), and list 
of what you need; it then goes on to outline the steps and the results (“What Hap-
pened: Stomachache. Brain freeze. Love of ketchup wavering”). The book derives 
maximum humor from the contrast between the dryly technical format and the 
high-level mischief of “experiments” such as glittering up the dog and flinging bo-
logna at a classmate. The subjects of the experiments are pleasingly broad (they’re 
neatly categorized, of course) but they’re mostly plausible domestic home-and-school 
100 • The BulleTin
malfeasances—er, research. Carpenter’s art is again a delicious hybrid of photogra-
phy and digitally colored ink linework. The sparely realistic drawing style, which 
includes helpful step-by-step diagrams, enhances the comedically serious approach, 
and it’s filled with telling detail such as the protagonist’s ubiquitous white lab coat. 
Photographic elements densely populate the spreads, adding additional poker-faced 
touches of scientific realism as well as designerly impact. Between this and 17 Things, 
Offill and Carpenter have established themselves as the official documentarians of 
misbehavior, and kids will revel in exploring their research.  DS
orr, Wendy Lost!: A Dog Called Bear; illus. by Susan Boase. Holt, 2011 112p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-8050-8931-8 $15.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-8050-9381-0 $5.99   
R Gr. 2-5
Logan loves Bear, his dog; Hannah wants a dog more than anything. Logan’s and 
Hannah’s stories interweave as Bear goes missing and Hannah’s dad discovers a 
stray dog in the back of his pickup. While the reader knows that Hannah’s new 
dog is actually Logan’s missing Bear, the characters only discover this fact when 
they finally meet each other in class on the first day of school. The plotting in this 
Australian import could have gone into implausibility overdrive, but it is actually 
remarkably gentle and understated. The heart of Logan’s story is actually his parents’ 
separation, which necessitated the move from farm to town that resulted in Bear’s 
loss; Logan is thus hurting on multiple levels as he longs for both his dog and his 
father. Readers will be pleased that Hannah doesn’t end up dogless—her parents 
end up sufficiently impressed with their daughter’s responsibility in working at the 
animal shelter to get her a dog of her own. The storytelling is crisp and clean, and 
the focus is squarely on the child-animal relationships, with a bit of family dynam-
ics worked in. The story will thus appeal to fans of pet fiction as well as those who 
love happy endings to sad stories. Soft pencil illustrations, sketchily informal but 
thoughtfully modeled, add interest to the pages.  HM 
pAterson, KAtherine The Flint Heart: A Fairy Story: Freely Abridged from 
Eden Phillpotts’s 1910 Fantasy; by Katherine and John Paterson; illus. by John 
Rocco. Candlewick, 2011 288p
ISBN 978-0-7636-4712-4 $19.99   
R Gr. 3-6
An ancient tussle for power has ramifications thousands of years later in this en-
chanting retelling of Eden Philpotts’s The Flint Heart, originally published in 1910. 
During the Stone Age, the powerful Thunder Spirit created a heart-shaped charm 
to harden the heart of its wearers, often bringing them great power but at the cost 
of their kindness and ability to love. Initially, Phutt, a Stone Age tribesman, used 
the charm to overthrow his chief—centuries later, the stone is found by Billy Jago, 
a generally good-natured man who soon after turns into a beast who berates his 
children and scams his neighbors. Fortunately, young Charles and Unity Jago, acting 
on the advice of fairies, are able to save their father, but the stone finds its way into 
the forest where it wreaks havoc among animals and fairies alike until Charles can 
finally destroy it. A distinctive English setting, complete with windswept moors 
and a magical forest, is paired with whimsical humor to make a cheerfully vibrant 
tale that simply begs to be read aloud in a family setting. Rocco’s digitally rendered 
drawings match the story’s warmth with rich golden hues and deep jewel tones, and 
the depictions of the fairies themselves with their bluebell hats and seedpod suits 
OcTOBer 2011 • 101
elicit an immediate sense of wonder. Simple, blackout spot illustrations complete 
the fairy-tale charm, making this a perfect gift book for children ready to move 
beyond the Tinkerbell version of fairyland.  KQG
peArce, JAcKson Sweetly. Little, 2011 [310p]
ISBN 978-0-316-06865-9 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 8-12
Twelve years ago, Gretchen lost her twin sister to what she could only describe as a 
witch: the shadowy thing chased the twins and their older brother Ansel through 
the forest, snatching up one of the girls and leaving the other in a world of grief. 
Now eighteen, Gretchen is on a cross-country trip with Ansel after being kicked 
out of their stepmother’s house when their car goes kaput and the siblings end up 
stranded in the dilapidated town of Live Oak. Fortunately, the local candymaker 
kindly takes them in for what turns into the entire summer as Gretchen and Ansel 
fall under the beautiful Sophia Kelly’s spell. Despite her new friendship (and Ansel’s 
budding romance with Sophia), Gretchen remains uneasy, especially when she 
realizes that local girls have recently gone missing during Sophia’s annual chocolate 
festival—disappearances that seem vaguely similar to her own sister’s vanishing. 
Pearce reprises her terrifically menacing villains from Sisters Red (BCCB 9/10) in 
this companion novel: the werewolf-like Fenris return here with a vengeance, set-
ting up a sick little ritual in Live Oak to slake their thirst for young female flesh. 
Unfortunately, even a brilliantly conceived bad guy can’t make up for the novel’s 
mostly languid pace, and the lack of action allows the reader too much time to 
ponder the more implausible aspects of Live Oak and its residents. Although she’s 
likable enough, Gretchen is a bit slow on the uptake, and her instant friendship 
with Sophia feels unconvincing in its convenience. Still, the climatic battle in the 
final scene rivals those in Sisters Red, and the hints regarding the origins of the Fenris 
and their powers will probably be enough to satiate hungry fans.  KQG
peArson, mAry e. The Fox Inheritance. Holt, 2011 [304p] (The Jenna 
Fox Chronicles)
ISBN 978-0-8050-8829-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
In this sequel to The Adoration of Jenna Fox (BCCB 4/08), Jenna’s two best friends, 
whose memory banks have long been presumed destroyed, get their own chance 
to live 260 years later. Jenna, critically injured after a car accident, was given a new 
long-living body immediately, and she made the choice to erase her friends because 
she didn’t know when they could be revived, in what form, and if they would want 
to be. Unfortunately, the erased copies weren’t the only ones, and Locke and Kara 
spent more than two centuries aware of themselves and clinging to sanity. Now that 
the two are embodied again, Kara is obsessed with murdering Jenna for abandon-
ing them, for living when Kara could not, and, in smaller part, for occupying so 
much of Locke’s memories and heart. The time between the two novels’ events is 
insignificant, as Jenna can live hundreds of years and the dramatic differences in 
the world with which Kara and Locke must contend are downplayed in favor of 
their emotional struggles. This is a desperately painful story of three people who 
are all cheated of their original lives, handed badly flawed new existences, and sent 
on their ways emotionally unprepared. Fans of the previous novel may be anxious 
102 • The BulleTin
to get to the part where Jenna turns up again to see how she has fared, but the 
slow path to her side of the story allows for compelling character development of 
Locke and Kara, who are both disturbing and intriguing in their own rights. The 
ethical debates around whether science should be limited by conscience and not 
just ability are well integrated into a story that is equally strong as an exploration 
of home, identity, and the meaning of survival.  AS 
pfeffer, susAn Beth Blood Wounds. Harcourt, 2011 [256p]
ISBN 978-0-547-49638-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-12
“We’re a happy family,” states Willa’s stepfather, Jack, and Willa agrees. Or she 
thinks she does at the time, but soon her blended family is thrown into chaos: 
Budge, the father that sixteen-year-old Willa barely remembers, goes on a murderous 
rampage, killing Willa’s never-met half-sisters and finally being shot dead himself 
by the police. Willa horrifies her family by traveling back to small-town Texas for 
the memorial and to learn about the relatives she never knew, and in the process 
she finds herself questioning the price of her seeming family happiness. Pfeffer’s 
had some interesting science-fiction explorations lately (Life As We Knew It, BCCB 
12/06), but this is a return to her classic form, with headline-worthy melodrama a 
vehicle for exploring family dynamics widespread even in more ordinary households. 
Willa’s dawning understanding that she’s been “Quiet-Never-Make-A-Fuss Willa,” 
going along with her mother’s acceptance of the fierce inequities of her household 
in order to keep the family together, unfolds subtly but effectively. Pfeffer avoids 
reductivity, however, making it clear that Willa’s mother and stepsisters have paid 
their own price for the family bargain, with unfairness being spread around so 
thoroughly the situation almost comes back around to being fair. There’s also the 
looming tacit reminder, in Budge’s truly horrific crime, that there are worse things 
than having fewer advantages than one’s stepsisters. The sheer drama of the plot 
will draw readers, and they’ll stay for an insightful exploration of the way families 
go both right and wrong.  DS
phelAn, mAtt Around the World: Three Remarkable Journeys; written and illus. 
by Matt Phelan. Candlewick, 2011 237p
ISBN 978-0-7636-3619-7 $24.99   
R* Gr. 5-9
Whether Jules Verne’s Phileas Fogg served as direct inspiration or simply an icon 
for the late nineteenth-century zeitgeist, a host of real-life adventurers followed his 
lead and undertook their own record-setting round-the-world treks. In this graphic 
novel Phelan recounts three such journeys. In 1884 Thomas Stevens traded life as 
a miner for a cross-country trip on a newfangled bicycle—the big front-wheeled 
job, no less. His initial success impelled him to secure the patronage of Colonel 
Albert Pope of the League of Wheelman, and Stevens promptly extended his trip 
around the globe, regularly tipping over the front of his Columbia high-wheeler 
along the way. His adventure was followed by the better-known exploits of Nellie 
Bly, who took Verne’s challenge seriously enough to parlay it into a stunt for the 
New York Globe. Outfitted with little more than a couple of dresses and a plaid 
coat and cap, intrepid Miss Bly beat her own goal of seventy-four days by sea and 
rail, only to receive a tepid reception and no bonus from her employers. Finally, 
retired sea captain Joshua Slocum rebuilt an old sloop and sailed it in the world’s 
OcTOBer 2011 • 103
first solo circumnavigation. Phelan invests each tale with its own distinct mood 
and style—the humor of Stevens’ bumbling machine, the quick cuts between 
Bly’s travels and her employers’ journalistic maneuvering, the heart-aching loneli-
ness and eerie hallucinations of Slocum’s peril-ridden voyage. Deftly controlled 
splashes of translucent watercolor tease along the outlines of Phelan’s spidery ink 
lines and sure-handed pencil dashes; the buttoned-down neatness of frames and 
gutters is an effective counterpoint to the daring and uncertainty of the adventures 
themselves.  EB
plum-ucci, cArol Following Christopher Creed. Harcourt, 2011 [416p]
ISBN 978-0-15-204759-7 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
The disappearance of bullied Christopher Creed (The Body of Christopher Creed, 
BCCB 4/00) four years previously sparked nationwide empathy among similarly 
mistreated teens, who followed the story on the internet. Now a body has been 
discovered in a field near Chris’ home, and one of those former blog readers, these 
days a college reporter, is desperate to get the story. He and his girlfriend travel 
to Steepleton, eager not only to find out if the body belongs to Chris but also to 
interview the townsfolk and trace what happens to a small town in the aftermath of 
a sensational and widely publicized tragedy. He finds that Chris’ brother Justin has 
become a “loadie,” using recreational drugs as well as prescribed ones to manage his 
bipolar disorder, while his mother has become a sad, occasionally manic alcoholic. 
The most interesting thing that Mike discovers, however, is the dysfunctionality 
of the town itself; it suffers from what Mike calls “bad frequency,” a condition 
where negative things happen with a regularity that seems to have nothing to do 
with any inciting event, but somehow are all connected on a deeply unconscious 
level. Mike’s own disability—partial blindness due to an accident—adds a layer 
of metaphoric complexity to his quest to see through the anguished bluster of the 
locals and uncover the truths that haunt the town, and his well-wrought, self-
reflective narrative style makes him an integral part of the story he seeks to tell. 
The end result is a satisfying psychological exploration of a social milieu as well as 
a sense of closure to a case that left readers wondering what ultimately happened 
to Christopher Creed.  KC 
poWell, lAurA The Game of Triumphs. Knopf, 2011 [288p]
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-375-96587-6 $19.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-375-86587-9 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89774-0 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
A late-night run for dinner turns into something far more complicated when 
fifteen-year-old Cat stumbles into a dive bar where four imposing figures appear 
to be playing a simple card game. Introducing themselves as the Game Masters of 
Arcanum, they inform Cat that she has now entered play in the Game of Triumphs 
as a Fool. Initially, sensible, practical Cat thinks this is all a load of role-playing 
hooey and hightails it out of there, but her curiosity gets the better of her when she 
later receives an invitation to an Arcanum event. There Cat realizes that the Game 
is, in fact, very real and offers winners unbelievable prizes from fame to glory to 
justice—the last one being Cat’s own aim, as she is desperate to uncover and punish 
104 • The BulleTin
her parents’ killers. The risks are great, but Cat finds herself more than willing to 
face mortal danger to attain her goal. Tarot comes alive in this cleverly conceived 
thriller that delivers action, humor, and mystery in spades. With its complex rules 
and structure, the Game itself will surely please fans of fantasy-based role-playing 
games, although a few of the more lengthy expositions on the rules do slow the 
pace a bit; this, however, is an easily forgivable flaw in light of how compelling 
the Game itself actually is. Prickly and defiant, Cat is the perfect protagonist to 
challenge the forces behind Arcanum, and her role in the Game Masters’ demise 
makes for a stunning conclusion. This British import promises a sequel, but until 
then, have your tarot cards on hand because teens will most certainly be looking 
for their own chance at triumph after reading Cat’s story.  KQG 
priestley, chris Mister Creecher. Bloomsbury, 2011 [320p]
ISBN 978-1-59990-703-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
Since the death of his mother, Billy has lived by his wits on the streets of London, 
chiefly as a pickpocket. Now the year is 1818, and he is saved from a beating at the 
hands a rival group of thugs by a huge, grotesque, foul-smelling but well-spoken 
man who, though squeamish about thievery, seems to have no compunction about 
murder. Billy hears the man’s name as Creecher, and the two form a mutually ben-
eficial relationship—in exchange for Creecher’s help in stepping up his thievery 
through intimidation, Billy follows two men, a Mr. Frankenstein and a Mr. Clerval, 
through the streets of London. At first Billy cooperates with Creecher out of fear, 
but soon he begins to enjoy his company and value him as a friend. Little by little, 
both of their stories emerge, and Billy is distressed to hear that Creecher intends to 
run away with the companion he is forcing Frankenstein to make for him, a plan 
that leaves no room for Billy. The evolving relationship between boy and creature 
drives the engine of this sometimes horrific, sometimes tender tale, as Billy gradually 
discovers more and more points of affinity between himself and Creecher: they are 
both alone and despised, and as a result, they both loathe and long for the society 
which has rejected them. Cameo appearances by Mary and Percy Shelley reinforce 
Billy’s pain, as he watches their domestic bliss through their window; their screams 
when they spot him with Creecher looming behind him foreshadow the isolation 
that will follow him throughout his life. Both Billy and Creecher often respond to 
their conflicting emotions with anger and violence, but while Creecher’s conscience 
seems to grow more acute through his relationship with Billy, Billy’s trends toward 
a slow disintegration; his ultimate fate will be especially haunting for those read-
ers who recognize his later-life role in Oliver Twist. Readers who like their horror 
stories embedded in the classic tradition that includes the subtle and perceptive 
exploration of character psychology will relish this.  KC 
reed, mK Americus; illus. by Jonathan Hill. First Second/Roaring Brook, 
2011 216p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-768-5 $18.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-601-5 $14.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Quiet, bookish Neil is a bit on the fringe in his Oklahoma town of Americus, where 
half the town is rallying to get a young adult fantasy book series removed from the 
public library. Neil is on his own after his best friend, Danny, is sent to military 
OcTOBer 2011 • 105
school, but he slowly learns to reach out to a few key peers who are as peripheral 
in the high school scene as he is; although the fight over censorship is the main 
thread, Neil’s gradual development is effectively portrayed in this graphic novel. 
Reed carefully adds depth to the antagonists, showing their moments of fear and 
doubt even as they threaten access to materials or shout mainly irrelevant Scripture. 
Danny’s mother is particularly nuanced, as she mourns the loss of connection with 
her children’s affection as a necessary sacrifice to save their souls. The black-and-
white illustrations, lush and dark during the visual sequences that represent the 
fantasy series, and sparer with more realistic shading for the rest, mainly reflect 
the text, although there are eyerolls and poignant glances caught only in the art 
that enhance the overall story. While this remains primarily an anti-censorship 
manifesto, there are plenty of genuine, subtle relationships and life changes going 
on in the town to keep readers intrigued even after it becomes clear the books are 
going to stay on the shelves.  AS
reeve, philip A Web of Air. Scholastic, 2011 [304p] (Fever Crumb)
ISBN 978-0-545-22216-7 $17.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
In this sequel to Fever Crumb (BCCB 6/10), Fever is now sixteen and doing her 
best to care for orphans Ruan and Fern, whose father was killed and reanimated 
as a warrior in the army of London’s new ruler. The kids and Fever are far away, 
journeying with a traveling barge-theater, where Fever, in spite of her obvious 
distaste for something as impractical as theater, uses her engineering skills to rig 
up electric lights for performances. This routine works until they reach Mayda, 
a small town where Fever meets Arlo, a brilliant, tortured boy who will show her 
new possibilities of flight (a sharp contrast to the clunky, impossibly slow-moving 
city still being pursued back in London) and inspire uncomfortable (non-sensible) 
feelings of love in the previously distant protagonist. Fever is still very much herself, 
all sharp edges and moments of vulnerability, and the addition of Arlo, orphaned 
and consumed with the unlikeliest of obsessions, is an intriguing contrast: they are 
brilliant but so dissimilar in terms of what drives them. There is a curious heaviness 
to the novel, an occasional flatness that belies the gorgeous, often ethereal quality 
of the new town, of Arlo, and even of the stolid but secretly romantic Fever. Fans 
who hoped to see how London is faring or wanted more engineers will have to 
settle for brief glimpses, but readers who returned for more Fever will, in spite of 
the minor aforementioned issue, be richly rewarded.  AS
sAndler, KAren Tankborn. Tu/Lee & Low, 2011 [384p]
ISBN 978-1-60060-662-5 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 7-10
As a GEN, or genetically engineered non-human, Kayla has always faced isolation, 
but she has also always questioned the assumption that she’s inferior just because 
she was grown in a tank rather than being directly descended from the humans 
who came from Earth hundreds of years before. An unexpected assignment lands 
her in dangerous and wondrous territory as she is exposed to potential love, ac-
tive (though still early stage) rebellion, and other folks who also believe that using 
GENs as slaves and controlling them through a fabricated religion is unethical. The 
descriptions of the way GENs were initially created, using a mix of human, animal, 
106 • The BulleTin
and artificial elements are compelling, if scientifically rather sketchy. Unfortunately, 
Kayla is rather flat as a protagonist, with the author relying overmuch on a few 
key characteristics (like her clumsiness or her extreme stubbornness) in too many 
situations to move the plot forward. In addition, there is little to distinguish this 
planet from Earth—the potential for newness is lost under what reads mostly as an 
Indian caste system set in an artificial location. Nevertheless, Kayla is undeniably 
intriguing, and the flaws are less memorable than the subtle optimism that she, 
unlikely enough, clings to, and the same quiet hopefulness that runs throughout 
this novel.  AS
sAyre, April pulley Rah, Rah, Radishes!; written and illus. with photographs by 
April Pulley Sayre. Beach Lane/Simon, 2011 32p
ISBN 978-1-4424-2141-7 $14.99   
Ad 4-7 yrs
This vegetable chant celebrates all sizes, shapes, and colors of vegetables at a well-
stocked farmer’s market through rhymed verse and crisply reproduced full color 
photography. The simple pattern introduces a pallet of different veggies, each 
accompanied by a celebratory phrase (“Root for rutabagas. / Bounce for beets! / 
Pile up parsnips. / Turnip treats!” The language is energetic but the text ultimately 
lacks flavor; the general pro-vegetable cheerleading doesn’t provide much actual 
use, since there’s no help in correlating items mentioned in the text with the veggies 
in the photos. Ultimately, it is the photographs that stand out here; the produce 
closeups offer a veritable cornucopia of appealing visuals, from the juxtaposition 
of tiny red radishes along side slender stalks of celery to the smooth, shiny skins of 
an assortment of squashes. The vegetables are both artistically and, in many cases, 
surprisingly captured, with Brussels sprouts depicted still on the enormous stalk, 
multicolored carrots piled together, and peapods opened up to reveal the tiny peas 
inside. The layout is clean and controlled and the splashy backdrop colors offer 
additional visual allure. A final shout-out to farmers and bees would help this kick 
off discussions of the life cycle of vegetables, but mostly viewers will enjoy reading 
about and reflecting on personal experiences with the many veggies included. A 
final page offers information about vegetables as well as a note encouraging readers 
to learn about and to try new produce.  HM
schmAtz, pAt Bluefish. Candlewick, 2011 [240p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7636-5334-7 
$15.99
E-book ed ISBN 978-0-7636-5614-0 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 6-9
Travis misses his dog, Rosco, who has been Travis’ family since his parents died 
when he was three. But Rosco is gone, and Travis and his grandfather had to leave 
their beloved home in the woods and move to a town where Grandpa could get 
a job and attend his AA meetings. On the first day of school, an offhand act of 
kindness on Travis’ part attracts the attention of the outspoken Velveeta, who sits 
with him at lunch and tries her obstreperous best to draw him out. Velveeta has a 
grief of her own, however, as her elderly neighbor, who had been like a grandfather 
to her and softened the hard edges of her life with her alcoholic mother, has passed 
away. She senses in Travis a kindred spirit, even though neither one talks about 
what they are feeling, and their unaffected friendship attracts a third outsider to 
their group, a smart, undersized kid named Bradley. Soon, one of Travis’ teachers 
OcTOBer 2011 • 107
discovers he can’t read and persuades him to give it one more chance. Without 
a trace of sentimentality, Schmatz configures her little cast of characters into a 
genuinely moving story of growing compassion and interdependence, as Travis 
helps Bradley cope with bullies, Velveeta and Travis work out their mutual crush, 
Grandpa confesses to his role in Rosco’s disappearance, and Travis learns to read 
with the help of Velveeta and his teacher. The intertextual reference to Zusak’s The 
Book Thief (BCCB 5/06) is an effective one on multiple levels; through that title, 
Velveeta learns what’s going on with Travis as he circles words in his book, and the 
emotional undercurrent of love and community between people shadowed by loss 
is remarkably similar between that very big book and this very small one. Readers 
seeking emotional warmth, congenial humor, and an affirmation of forgiveness 
and friendship will cozy up to these characters.  KC 
schWAB, victoriA The Near Witch. Hyperion, 2011 [282p]
ISBN 978-1-4231-3787-0 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Lexi lives with her little sister and her mother on the outskirts of Near, a village 
that doesn’t like strangers or witches. The locals are therefore already suspicious 
of a strange new boy in the area, but when their children start disappearing in the 
night without a trace, they threaten to become murderous, suspecting the stranger 
to be a witch. Lexi, however, sees witches differently; she was influenced by the 
stories told by her father, who was fascinated by the power that flows through the 
moor and respectful of the witches who could channel that power. As more chil-
dren start disappearing and the town’s anger toward the strange boy grows, Lexi 
takes it upon herself to befriend him, and with his help she attempts to solve the 
mystery of the disappearing children. Lexi’s investigations lead her to the truth 
behind the legend, and she and the stranger, whom she calls Cole, must fight to 
save the children before it’s too late. A pervasive atmosphere of mystery is evoked 
immediately by the beautifully haunting words the bedtime stories Lexi tells her 
sister and weaves its way through the narrative as the eerie, disturbing tale of the 
legendary Near Witch unfolds; the mood is heavy with dark and persistent fore-
boding as the men of the village threaten to repeat a destructive history. Sunshine 
peeks in, though, as Lexi and Cole develop their relationship; Cole, it turns out, 
is haunted by his own powers, but Lexi is enough like her father in both strength 
and open-mindedness to help him understand that those powers can be a blessing 
as well as a curse. Splendidly imagined and delightfully spooky, this evocative tale 
will appeal to readers who enjoy folkloric traditions.  KC 
scieszKA, Jon, ed. Guys Read: Thriller; illus. by Brett Helquist. Walden Pond/
HarperCollins, 2011 [288p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-06-196376-6 $16.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-06-196375-9 $6.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 3-6
This collection of short stories by well-known children’s and young adult authors 
follows the debut title Funny Business (BCCB 11/10). Perhaps that volume’s comedic 
success has leaked into this effort, since many of these stories have a humorous tone 
better calculated to eliciting giggles than shivers. It is notable that the two most 
genuinely thrilling tales eschew supernatural plots in favor of earthbound crime: 
Walter Dean Myers’ story of a Somali pirate attack, and Gennifer Choldenko’s 
108 • The BulleTin
story of an investigative reporter being held by reptile smugglers. The balance of 
the collection, by the likes of M. T. Anderson, Margaret Peterson Haddix, Bruce 
Hale, Anthony Horowitz, and James Patterson, are given over to miscellaneous 
hauntings—amiable, predictable, and virtually shudder-free, except to readers with 
a notably low thrill threshold. Still, there’s a persistent demand for entry-level scary 
stories, and the manageable length of these tales recommend them to teachers who 
need to address a range of skittishness in classroom readalouds. Brett Helquist’s 
black-and-white artwork for each chapter supplies the visual creeps and will encour-
age browsers to thumb the volume for promising tales.  EB
scott, elizABeth As I Wake. Dutton, 2011 [224p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42209-9 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
This tale of amnesia and dystopia hits the ground running as Ava wakes, disoriented, 
first in a bedroom she doesn’t recognize, then in the hospital with a mother she 
doesn’t remember fretting over her, and finally, every day, in a world she neither 
remembers nor understands. Still she has flashes of familiarity—a classmate’s sad 
eyes, a friend’s power-hungry smile, her mother’s tired anxiety—that, along with 
brief stretches of memory, gradually lead her to the realization that she is from 
another, parallel world where she knows different versions of the friends and antago-
nists surrounding her. The world of Ava’s memory is brutal and hyper-surveilled, 
and she was a nothing in it, trying to work her way up by becoming a spy for the 
government. When her assigned target—and, it turns out, love interest—shows 
up in her current reality, everything begins to unravel. The glimpses of the way 
various individuals change (or don’t) in different situations, how they are honed 
or broken or corrupted, are rich with both chills and poignancy. Unfortunately, 
the reader is just as much as at sea as Ava for a significant portion of the book, and 
the multiple plot threads, untethered from any sense of what connects them, make 
for a somewhat splintered narrative arc. It’s not always clear who is in the know, 
and the ultimate explanation for what Ava is doing in this world and how the two 
realities are connected rings a bit hollow. Still, Ava herself is a complex, involving 
character, a survivor who got to where she is by never sticking her neck out, and 
it is interesting to watch her weigh safety against responsibility, love against fear. 
Hand this to fans of Shusterman’s Unwind (BCCB 2/08) and Scott’s own Grace 
(BCCB 10/10).  CG
seifert, christine The Predicteds. Sourcebooks Fire, 2011 [352p]
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-4022-6049-0 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 9-12
PROFILE, a new algorithm that generates a reliable prediction for whether a 
teen will commit violence in the future based on academic and psychological test 
scores, family history, genetics, and other factors, is being piloted at Quiet High. 
Unfortunately the results weren’t released soon enough to prevent a school shoot-
ing, but in its aftermath the rhetoric surrounding the test scores’ import reaches a 
fever pitch. For Daphne, who’s new to the school, PROFILE adds a new layer of 
tension to the problem of fitting in and hanging with the “right” people—espe-
cially since her crush, Jesse, is first rumored and then revealed to be a “Predicted,” 
someone destined to commit a violent crime. The plot unsurprisingly escalates to 
OcTOBer 2011 • 109
a quintessential witch-hunt tale, complete with segregated facilities, edicts against 
mixed dating, and the non-Predicteds’ unquestioning acceptance of their status as 
a superior class of human. The plot has an appealing similarity to Minority Report, 
and Seifert conveys both the allure of knowing exactly who the bad guys are and the 
dangers of convicting people for acts they haven’t yet committed—not to mention 
the psychological damage wrought on those who now believe they are inescapably 
destined to do evil. Attempted parallels between PROFILE and racial persecution 
are overly pointed and don’t hold up terribly well, though, especially given that, 
despite the many hypocrisies of the “good” kids, the people who end up committing 
the book’s major crimes actually are all Predicted. Questions of fate versus free will, 
punitive versus rehabilitative justice, and the role of evidence versus character in 
the justice system are nevertheless ably explored, and the backdrop of social clique 
drama on steroids, combined with a fraught romance and a public out for blood, 
makes this it-could-it-happen-to-you tale 100% reluctant reader–ready.  CG
selznicK, BriAn Wonderstruck; written and illus. by Brian Selznick. Scholastic, 
2011 [640p]
ISBN 978-0-545-02789-2 $29.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-8
In a return to the form he used for The Invention of Hugo Cabret (BCCB 4/07), 
Selznick again explores multiple narratives through illustration, text, and the part-
nership between the two as they overlap or diverge to tell stories. Here, there are 
two tales, set fifty years apart (1927 and 1977), both about deaf children who are 
coping with loneliness and loss and attempting to define their identities. Rose’s 
1920s search for her mother is told exclusively through illustrations, while Ben’s 
1970s quest for family and home unfolds through text, until the two protagonists 
meet; the book then becomes more of a traditional graphic novel, with text and 
illustrations working in concert to tell a single narrative. Selznick’s distinctive 
monochromatic drawings, while always elegant and sometimes startlingly detailed, 
sometimes lack variety in long stretches of visual narrative, but the story will still 
keep reader/viewers absorbed. There is a vulnerability, a keen sense of nearly but 
not actually belonging, that is poignantly conveyed in both Rose and Ben’s jour-
neys, and it is this common thread that will likely stay with readers as much as 
the nifty natural history collections (a long-term interest for both Rose and Ben) 
or glimpses into the way deaf children engage with the world. Notes include an 
explanation of how the author was drawn to exploring Deaf culture and natural 
history museums, and the places where the two pursuits converged to make this 
book. A selected bibliography is not always an exact age/reading match but will 
certainly send curious readers in the right directions.  AS
sendAK, mAurice Bumble-Ardy; written and illus. by Maurice Sendak. di 
Capua/HarperCollins, 2011 [36p]
ISBN 978-0-06-205198-1 $17.95
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 5-8 yrs
There’s a birthday coming for Bumble-Ardy the pig (recently adopted by his aunt 
Adeline after the tragic consumption of his parents), who’s turning nine, and who 
enjoys a genteel celebration with his aunt. Later, though, Bumble invites a pack of 
swine to party down at a birthday masquerade (“No mud wallowing!”), and the 
110 • The BulleTin
costumed crowd, arriving while Aunt Adeline is at work, breaks into her brine and 
rocks the rafters—until Auntie’s outraged return and Bumble’s exile to his room. The 
story unfolds in conversational rhyming lines that eschew structure for absurdity, 
returning repeatedly to “nine” and its rhymes until the rhyme words are almost a 
punchline in their own right; additional text comes from the speech balloons and 
labeling in the illustrations, which expand and inform the main text. The party 
gone wild is a kid-appealing notion, and the turns of phrase (“His immediate family 
gorged and gained weight./ And got ate”) are lilting and funny, with the folkloric 
edge of nursery rhymes. The story itself is less successful, though, with the events 
overshadowed by the rhyme and the plot turns logically fuzzy, with Adeline going 
from enraged (eliciting a slightly alarming promise from Bumble that he “won’t ever 
turn ten”) to cuddly and forgiving with the irrational speed of a mood disorder. The 
illustrations are a world unto themselves, filled with eccentric detail even before the 
party bedlam breaks out, and the exquisitely individual draftsmanship and softly 
grainy pencil shading and modeling are a testament to Sendak’s legendary skill. The 
party itself builds and explodes in a sequence of textless spreads à la Wild Things, 
and the crammed chaos has a genuinely creepy edge, with pigs piloting colorful 
blank-eyed human costumes in a Fellini-esque porcine pantomime set firmly in 
the uncanny valley. Fascinating as the pageantry is, it doesn’t fit in with the pac-
ing all that effectively and stops the plot rather than sending it soaring silently. A 
party gone over the top is hard to resist, though, and even kids whose thoughts go 
straight to bacon will pore over the amusing yet haunting pig masquerade.  DS
shAW, susAn Tunnel Vision. McElderry, 2011 [272p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0839-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-0841-8 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-10
It all happens so fast. One moment Liza Wellington is elbowing her way through 
a bunch of rowdy men in an underpass near her house; the next moment Mom 
is yelling a warning to her from the yard; and then there’s a gun blast and Mom’s 
on the ground in a pool of blood. Before Liza and her father can get an emotional 
grip on their loss, the police have informed them that Liza was likely the intended 
victim, and the pair are hustled into the witness-protection program and whisked 
out of town with nothing more than the clothes on their backs. Shaw concocts a 
dandy thriller, giving equal attention to the devastating emotional toll exacted by 
the Wellingtons’ inability to grieve and find closure for Liza’s mother’s death, and 
their constant anxiety at being pursued, discovered, and relocated again and again. 
There’s some clunky authorial contrivance (Dad’s career is handily untroubled by 
their going underground, for instance), but the breakneck pacing and unresolved 
ending easily trump that glitch. Exhausted the Caroline Cooney books? Step right 
this way.  EB
sheehAn, AnnA A Long, Long Sleep. Candlewick, 2011 342p
ISBN 978-0-7636-5260-9 $16.99   
R Gr. 9-12
Rosalinda has been in stasis for sixty-two years, and the world has left her behind 
in the interim. While it is at first appears that she was placed in stasis for her own 
safety (soon after she was put in, millions were killed during what is now called the 
Dark Times) and then simply forgotten, the truth is even more horrific: Rose, as 
she had been many times before, was put in for her parents’ convenience, and this 
OcTOBer 2011 • 111
time she was simply left there. The truth requires a paradigm shift for the cloistered 
Rose, who was raised to believe that her placement in stasis was a caring choice from 
parents who felt it was, for example, better than her being awake at home while they 
traveled. She also must survive a long-dormant assassin who has been reenergized 
by her own awakening and sort through her crushing grief for all she has lost. If she 
succeeds, however, then Rose, defiant, brilliant, and creative, may find that she is 
better off in a time when her parents are long-dead, stasis is strictly regulated, and 
a teen girl with a strong brain might actually be listened to and respected. The raw 
vulnerability of the protagonist, paired with the slowly unfolding horror story that 
was her actual life, makes for compelling realistic fiction even in the science-fiction 
setting. Sheehan has captured the grief, shock, and resignation that anyone abused 
and rejected by their own parents, stripped of a first love, or suddenly thrown into 
a completely unfamiliar environment would experience, and readers will likely find 
it as unbearable as Rose that she has been handed all three of these at once (not to 
mention the zombie/robot would-be assassin). Fans of The Adoration of Jenna Fox 
(BCCB 4/08) will be equally intrigued by this similar examination of a girl who 
wakes up indelibly changed.  AS
sKovron, Jon Misfit. Amulet/Abrams, 2011 362p
ISBN 978-1-4197-0021-7 $16.95   
R Gr. 9-12
Jael is half-demon, but her father had the demon essence sucked out of her as a baby 
to prevent Bilial, a purity-obsessed demon bent on her destruction, from tracking 
her. When the full truth of her past is revealed and her demon essence restored, Jael 
decides to stay put and fight Bilial rather than spend her remaining years on the 
run; to that end, her demon uncle Dagon starts teaching her how to control her 
powers, which consist of being able to converse with and influence the elements 
(earth, air, fire, water, and spirit). Meanwhile, she’s trying to fly under the radar at 
her Catholic school (her father enlisted the Church in her protection years ago), 
even as things move sweetly forward with her crush, and as a kindly old professor, 
who turns out to be a former exorcist, sees right through her and then turns out 
to be completely psychotic. There’s an interesting parallel between the corruption 
Jael runs up against in the Catholic Church and the corruption that now rules the 
demon world, turning its dominant culture from pagan and wild and joyous to cruel 
and power-hungry. That the demons are former gods who “reflect what the world 
wants us to be” is a twist that recalls Gaiman’s American Gods, but Jael herself—a 
scrappy character with the powers and perception of a centuries-old demon but the 
instincts and experience of a sixteen-year-old girl—is wholly original and compel-
ling in her own right. Occasional sparks of humor, such as a voodoo spirit’s dry 
comment that zombies can’t really eat demons, but they “just keep trying anyway,” 
add extra zing to this epic, action-packed hero tale.  CG
soBol, richArd The Mysteries of Angkor Wat: Exploring Cambodia’s Ancient 
Temple; written and illus. with photographs by Richard Sobol. Candlewick, 
2011 40p (Traveling Photographer)
ISBN 978-0-7636-4166-5 $17.99   
Ad Gr. 3-5
Photographs trump text in this tour of the famous temple to the god Vishnu, “to this 
day the largest religious monument in the world” and certainly the current iconic 
image associated with Cambodia, past or present. With little solid information to 
offer concerning the construction and historic uses of the temple, Sobol spends 
112 • The BulleTin
much of his page space on the children who help support their families by selling 
souvenirs to tourists (but never quite exploring the poverty that might lurk behind 
their photogenic faces). Promise of a mystery known only among Sobol’s young 
guides keeps readers’ interest alive as they wait for the revelation of the dee no soo, 
which turns out to be a stone carving that bears uncanny resemblance to a green 
plastic stegosaurus that one child offers for comparison, eliciting Sobol’s effusive 
astonishment and thanks. However thin the text, the color photographs of the ruins 
themselves, the children cavorting sure-footedly therein, and the pictures of stone 
carvings juxtaposed with similar scenes from twenty-first century daily life are both 
appealing and informative. Endnotes, maps, and a glossary with pronunciation 
guide are included. Consider this a tasty appetizer for heartier research to follow.  EB
spielmAn, gloriA Marcel Marceau: Master of Mime; illus. by Manon Gauthi-
er. Kar-Ben, 2011 [32p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-3961-8 $17.95
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-7613-3962-5 $7.95
Reviewed from galleys   
R 6-9 yrs
From his first big-screen encounter with Chaplin’s Little Tramp, young Marcel 
Mangel wanted to be a silent-movie actor. His timing couldn’t have been worse, 
since talkies were on their way in, shouldering aside their silent forebears. Hitler 
would also put a cramp in his plans, as the German invasion forced the Mangels 
from their home in Strasbourg to Limoges, where his father was deported to Aus-
chwitz, and Marcel and brother Alain joined the French Resistance. It was while 
smuggling Jewish children over the border into Switzerland that Marcel began to 
hone his acting craft, keeping the children quiet and amused during their journey. 
With a new surname, Marceau, to help disguise his identity, Marcel made his way 
to Paris, where he would study drama, become a liaison to post-war Allied troops, 
and create his signature character, Bip, the white-faced, bucket-hatted Everyman 
who, on a bare stage with minimal props, lithely enacted ordinary life. Gauthier’s 
mixed-media pictures—robust cousins to G. Brian Karas’s typical cast—capture 
both the playfulness of Marceau’s art and the tense wartime setting in which he 
came of age. Children will find the final spread, comprising four photographs of 
Bip in action, a welcome bonus. No notes are included, but adults can easily guide 
kids to Bip clips on YouTube to view the real deal.  EB
tennApel, doug Bad Island; written and illus. by Doug TenNapel. Graphix/
Scholastic, 2011 220p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-545-31479-4 $24.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-0-545-31480-0 $10.99   
R Gr. 6-8
No one is happy about the boating trip meant to save Reese, Janie, and their par-
ents from becoming even more distant from each other, but the family members 
quickly set aside their suddenly irrelevant differences when the boat wrecks on an 
island that’s more death trap than balmy tropical location. Weird plants and animals 
threaten their lives, an odd mystery may awaken an ages-old island spirit, and the 
dead snake (the remains of the young girl’s pet, whic unfortunately did not survive 
the initial wreck) they are carrying around is starting to decompose—all in all, it’s 
a rough vacation. A cool subplot in this graphic novel involving an interplanetary 
battle (tied to the mystery behind this bad island, which is actually a giant alien 
OcTOBer 2011 • 113
in cryo-sleep for 1500 years) draws on the same family struggles and bonding as 
the story of the humans, gently making points about the universality of children 
testing boundaries and, almost always, landing somewhere more appreciative of 
their parents on the other side. The polished, accessible illustrations feature a dark 
palette (grey tones for the alien battles, greens and browns for the island) that 
emphasizes the dangers that abound. Frequent comic-book-style exclamations, 
a sharp and well-developed plot, and gripping visual struggles make this an ideal 
selection to offer reluctant readers or adventure-focused kids moving out of comics 
and into graphic novels.  AS
thomAs, JAn Is Everyone Ready for Fun?; written and illus. by Jan Thomas. Beach 
Lane/Simon, 2011 40p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2364-0 $12.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-3574-2 $12.99   
R 2-4 yrs
Well, is everyone ready for fun? The trio of grinning cows in this crisply silly 
picture book is: they’re delightedly jumping up and down on the sofa. There’s less 
fun for Chicken, however, because it’s Chicken’s sofa that the heifers are gleefully 
flattening, and an attempt to forbid the cows’ jumping just results (as any contrary 
preschooler could have told you) in their choosing instead to dance and then wiggle 
on the increasingly smushed couch. Finally the tuckered-out trio opts for the fun of 
napping, whereupon Chicken decides that if you can’t beat ’em, you might as well 
join ’em. As usual, Thomas produces a snappy, structured text that’s a draw both 
for bouncy pre-readers and kids just starting to dip into reading for themselves; 
here, though, the hyperactive cows are having so much fun that audiences will 
probably be unable to resist jumping, dancing, and wiggling along. Big bold lines, 
solid high-contrast colors, and simple compositions combine in vivid illustrations 
that let nothing distract from the barnyard crowd’s goofing off. The cows’ manic 
cheer is funny in its own right, especially in the extreme close-ups that bring the 
viewer face to face with their huge, happy eyes, while poor Chicken is banished to 
the periphery of the spreads, sometimes only managing to poke his head up above 
the bottom margin. Pile on the floor pillows and have ’em act this one out as a sly 
lead-in to naptime as well as fun everyone is definitely ready for.  DS
trAsler, JAnee Caveman: A B.C. Story; written and illus. by Janee Trasler. Ster-
ling, 2011 36p
ISBN 978-1-4027-7119-4 $14.95   
R 3-6 yrs
It starts with an acorn, chased by a squirrel that’s chased by a caveman. A bear, 
rival for the acorn, chases the pair into a cave, which is occupied by a dinosaur, 
which eats the acorn, causing the squirrel to faint from fright. Our lead players 
have barely recovered from the shock of this initial episode when the caveman 
finds an armadillo caught in ice. Freed several letters later as the ice melts, the ar-
madillo is now caveman’s new friend, following him around on a leash. They run 
from the dino, are saved by a pterodactyl, land in a tree, and after the caveman is 
nearly fried by a lightning bolt (x-ray), the whole cast makes friends (Yay!) and 
snuggles together for a night’s shut-eye (Zzzz). The pudgy, button-eyed cartoon 
crew are adorably emotive, tossed together in a most improbable Paleozoic milieu. 
The situational humor is easy for pre-readers to follow, while broad context clues 
and mostly monosyllabic “text” assist emergent readers in decoding. Comedy and 
114 • The BulleTin
reading levels are pitched to the Jan Thomas crowd, and kids who are cutting their 
literary teeth on her Rhyming Dust Bunnies (BCCB 1/09) and Shannon’s No, David 
(BCCB 9/98) should find this a hoot.  EB
treggiAri, Jo Ashes, Ashes. Scholastic, 2011 341p
ISBN 978-0-545-25563-9 $17.99   
R Gr. 8-10 
Epidemics and environmental catastrophes killed off most of the world’s population, 
and the survivors face a harsh landscape, the constant risk of infection, and, just to 
add to the fun, the real chance that they will be picked up by Sweepers who gather 
up healthy individuals for the purpose of medical experimentation.  Sixteen-year-
old Lucy has been getting by on her own in what used to be Central Park, but the 
weather, dogs, and other risks finally force her to join up with a group of survivors 
nearby. Lucy doesn’t know it, but she is very much the target of the Sweepers, as 
she appears to be the only person who is truly immune to the most dangerous 
contagion; since they intend to kill her in order to study her, Lucy isn’t too keen 
on helping science.  The action starts immediately and in a realistically grim spot, 
with Lucy contemplating the butchery of a turtle she killed, and ends in what is a 
hopeful (and rather romantically mushy) but still quite uncertain moment where 
Lucy is left contemplating the nature of love, life, and sacrifice in a post-apocalyptic 
world.  The relatively straightforward plot, smaller cast of characters, and cool “girl 
in the wild” vibe will appeal to adventure and survival fans, even while the plagues, 
underwater geography, and slightly futuristic tones will grab sci-fi readers.  A map 
orients readers to the new watery, tree-filled New York.  AS
ursu, Anne Breadcrumbs; illus. by Erin McGuire. Walden Pond/HarperCol-
lins, 2011 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-06-201505-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 4-7
See this month’s Big Picture, p. 67, for review.
vAron, sArA Bake Sale; written and illus. by Sara Varon. First Second/Roaring 
Brook, 2011 158p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-740-1 $19.99
Paper ed. ISBN 978-1-59643-419-6 $16.99   
Ad Gr. 4-6
Cupcake has a modest but thriving bakery, a loyal customer base, a gig as drum-
mer in a local band, and a good friend, Eggplant. This should be enough to keep 
him content, even happy, but dissatisfaction creeps into his life when he discovers 
that Eggplant has a personal connection (through an aunt in Istanbul) with world-
renowned baker Turkish Delight. Suddenly Cupcake has lost enthusiasm for his 
favorite bakery offerings, he drops out of the band, and all he can concentrate on 
is accumulating enough money to accompany Eggplant on an overseas trip to meet 
his idol. Although Cupcake never makes it to Turkey (having used his own money 
to fund Eggplant’s trip instead), his friend returns with spices from Turkish Delight, 
and soon the buddies are whipping up innovative culinary pleasures to enter the 
Exotic Baked Goods Contest. Varon’s switch from a city populated by animals to 
one inhabited by foodstuffs (which do, however, keep pets) is largely successful, 
with spindly limbs and google eyes as expressive on vegetables as on cats and dogs. 
OcTOBer 2011 • 115
Her reliance on dialogue in this title, however, is a bit of a letdown following her 
richly imagined silent stories (Robot Dreams 11/07, Chicken and Cat, BCCB 3/06), 
with a more mundane tone and less sheer creative inspiration. She also misses op-
portunities to explore promising situations: for instance, an extended scene in a 
Turkish bathhouse, which should be replete with tragi-comic possibilities for its 
comestible patrons, results only in Cupcake’s paper wrapper coming a bit loose. 
While this title may end up becoming a gift book exchanged between adult baking 
enthusiasts, there’s enough weight to the friendship story to satisfy established Varon 
fans. Recipes for some of Cupcake’s featured efforts are appended.  EB
venKAtrAmAn, pAdmA Island’s End. Putnam, 2011 228p
ISBN 978-0-399-25099-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 6-8
In spite of the title, Uido has no intention of letting her island haven come to 
anything resembling an end. She is its new spiritual leader, and her first instinct 
is to reject the strangers who come from the mainland (as well as their mysterious 
conveniences, such as matches), although she quickly sees that effective leadership 
comes through compromise, sacrifice, and an intentional folding in of the new 
with the best parts of the old. Unfortunately, the mainlanders seem mostly set on 
enlightening the backward islanders, and their approach vacillates between well-
intentioned condescension and outright hostile takeover. A natural disaster, while 
upending life as all know it, is actually a small gift for Uido, buying the villagers 
some time to regain perspective and decide what they actually need from the rest 
of the world. It is clear that the author intended for this novel to reflect the experi-
ences of actual isolated tribes, and a brief note mentions the Andaman Islands, 
hundreds of miles off India, as an inspiration point. Uido, all fire and passion and 
easy strength, is a strong, personable element on which to hang this novel, which is 
as much a political and social commentary as it is a middle-school adventure read. 
There is a careful and effective balance achieved, however, so that fans of survival 
novels, who will be enthralled with the constant dangers and gifts of island life, and 
informed readers curious to know more about how modern society would impact 
an isolated tribe will both feel they’ve found the right book.  AS
vernicK, Audrey Water Balloon. Clarion, 2011 [320p]
ISBN 978-0-547-59554-2 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R* Gr. 5-8
The summer after seventh grade looks to be horrible for Marley Baird, who’s spend-
ing the months before school alone with her father after her parents’ recent separa-
tion and the end of her “Perfectly Good Life.” Not only has her father obligated her 
to a babysitting job caring for twin hellions, her two best friends have embarked on 
the theatrical life in a summer drama program that allows them to rub shoulders 
with older high-schoolers—and to leave Marley behind. Vernick resembles Frances 
O’Roark Dowell and Rachel Vail in her ability to bring keen understanding and 
tender sympathy to the ordinary. Marley’s experience isn’t a hyperdramatic summer 
of a melodramatic family rediscovery; it’s just the strain of change and unfamiliar-
ity of a house with “the wrong kind of orange juice” and the desperate moments 
when your friends are refashioning themselves without you alongside them. Her 
thinning relationship with her friends is portrayed with awful authenticity, with 
the other two clearly trying on their own new identities and Marley suffering their 
116 • The BulleTin
anger for not sensing and honoring their new social ambitions. Her adaptation, 
so gradual that she doesn’t really notice it herself, is credibly and non-didactically 
depicted, and her reward of a relationship with a genuinely nice neighbor boy is 
one that readers will envy. Kids struggling with the challenges of identifying what 
changes are necessary and paying the price for those thrust upon them will be glad 
to see an author who gets it.  DS
vrettos, Adrienne mAriA Burnout. McElderry, 2011 [208p]
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-9469-5 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4391-6312-2 $9.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 8-10
The “Nanapocalypse” is Nan’s word for the drunken meltdown that led to her stint 
in rehab. Since then she’s been on the straight and narrow, staying away from her 
troubled and charismatic friend, Seemy, with whom she did all of her drinking. 
That’s until last night, apparently, because now she’s woken up on the subway, 
decked out in a slutty Halloween costume with no memory of Halloween—or 
anything else—the evening before. Nan knows that a relapse will, if detected, 
destroy her restored prospects, but as she scrambles to slip back into her life before 
her bender is noticed, she begins to recall scenes from the previous night and to 
realize it wasn’t simply drunken carousing with Seemy—and that Seemy is still in 
grave danger. While the revelations about the previous night are pretty high on 
the sensationalism register (she and Seemy were drugged by men with nefarious 
intentions), it just enhances the Go Ask Alice allure of the story of a girl overin-
fluenced by a friend to the point of needing rehab. Vrettos deftly threads the tale 
of Nan’s piecing together her previous night into the flashback story about Nan’s 
relationship with Seemy, from the girls’ first meeting to anxious Nan’s growing 
adoration of Seemy and her willingness to do anything to be with her bold and 
troubled friend. While there’s taut suspense in the immediate story, it’s the sharply 
observed human dynamics of the relationship plot and the nuanced exploration 
of Nan’s spin out of control that make this story compelling. A quick and intense 
read, this should appeal to readers who like high stakes, psychological mysteries, 
and battles with real-life darkness.  DS
WArner, penny The Secret of the Skeleton Key. Egmont, 2011 [224p] (The 
Code Busters Club)
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-162-4 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-60684-281-2 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 3-6
This clever novel introduces the members of the Code Busters Club—Cody, Quinn, 
Luke, and M.E.—as they take on the task of solving a mystery surrounding the 
reclusive Mr. Skelton, whose house catches on fire the night after Cody and Quinn 
spot him in an upstairs window signaling for help. The foursome begins a seemingly 
hopeless search for information and end up uncovering a clue hidden behind a 
framed certificate, which leads them to another, and to another, until finally they 
piece it all together. Add in a couple of shady distant cousins who keep showing up 
wherever the club members are, rumors of large amounts of money hidden in the 
house, and the tremendous likability of kids gifted with decoding and detection 
skills and you’ve got a great story and a solid setup for a series. Throughout the 
OcTOBer 2011 • 117
narrative, clues and information are presented in code and cipher—Morse code, 
American Sign Language fingerspelling, semaphores, Braille, Caesar’s cipher—and 
readers are invited to decode the statements and check the back of the book for 
the answer. This serves to add interest for a whole new crowd of readers who will 
find the interactive element very appealing. The villains are deeply villainous, the 
heroes remarkably heroic, and the plot, while a bit of a stretch, is a whole lot of 
fun. The final pages point to a second installment set on Alcatraz Island; expect 
requests upon return of this volume.  HM 
WilliAms, michAel Now Is the Time for Running. Little, 2011 234p
ISBN 978-0-316-07790-3 $17.99   
R Gr. 8-12
Soldiers arrive in fourteen-year-old Deo’s rural Zimbabwean village and, on the 
president’s orders, brutally massacre all of the residents, including Deo’s mother 
and grandfather. Deo escapes only because he was off looking for his mentally im-
paired older brother, Innocent, who had been tortured and left for dead the night 
before. Deo and Innocent make an epic journey from Zimbabwe to South Africa 
only to end up homeless in Johannesburg. There the brothers are living under a 
bridge with a motley group of other transients when race riots erupt; after days of 
searching, Deo finds Innocent murdered. Eighteen months later, Deo, living on 
the streets and sniffing glue, is recruited to participate in the Street Soccer World 
Cup; the guidance of the coach helps Deo and his teammates, many of whom are 
also refugees, figure out who they are and where they are going. Williams’ novel is 
based upon his research on the 2008 xenophobic attacks that took place in South 
Africa, which then led him to explore the backstories of the many refugees settled 
in Johannesburg. Deo’s story is wracked with tension, and the brutality of the many 
events described herein will remain with readers. His complicated relationship 
with Innocent adds considerable depth to the plot; though ten years his junior, 
Deo is responsible for the safety of his childlike brother, and this challenge proves 
enormous when the two brothers are in situations of extreme danger where Deo 
must both master the complexities of getting out of the circumstances and keeping 
his brother calm and on task. While some readers may find the seemingly hopeful 
ending a bit of a stretch, most will cheer for Deo’s victory in the face of profound 
tragedy. An informative author’s note is included.  HM 
WillinghAm, Bill Down the Mysterly River; illus. by Mark Bucking-
ham. Starscape/Tor, 2011 [336p]
ISBN 978-0-7653-2792-5 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad Gr. 5-8
Waking up alone in a strange forest with no memory of how he got there, twelve-
year-old Max does what any resourceful kid detective/BoyScout extraordinaire 
would do: gathers his supplies and takes stock of what he knows. Unfortunately, 
that isn’t a whole lot, but soon he meets Banderbrock, a talking badger, and gets 
his first clue: English-speaking animals must indicate that Max must be dreaming. 
The physical pain he experiences when he is attacked by a hunter with a menacing 
blue sword, however, leads Max to reevaluate this initial conclusion. After narrowly 
escaping the assault, Max and Banderbrock are joined by Walden the bear and 
McTavish the cat, both as loquacious and baffled about their existence as Max and 
Banderbrock. Pursued by more mysterious attackers, the group travels through the 
118 • The BulleTin
forest, eventually making their way to the Wizard’s palace where Max learns what 
he has already begun to suspect: he and his companions are all major characters 
from book series, and their stories have now come to an end. Willingham, author 
of the acclaimed graphic-novel series Fables, brings a distinctly moralistic tone to 
this endeavor: in an apparent jab at censors and critics alike, the blue-sword war-
riors are stunted creators intent on making intriguing characters like Max bland 
and boring by literally cutting out his more interesting qualities. Fortunately, this 
sort of preaching occurs mainly in the closing chapters and is preceded by a rather 
rollicking adventure story that features effective villains, plenty of close calls, and a 
host of heroic antics. Admittedly, Max is already a little boring, but his furry friends 
are charming, and readers may find themselves wishing the creatures’ original tales 
were actually, well, real. A quest story with a side of meta-fiction, this is sure to 
please the thinking kid with a taste for danger.  KQG 
Wolf, AllAn The Watch That Ends the Night: Voices from the Titanic. Candle-
wick, 2011 [480p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3703-3 $21.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 7-10
You’ve devoured the books, perused the exhibits, and wept over the movie, but your 
Titanic jones remains unsated? Wolf’s poetic recreation of the epic disaster is the 
next big thing, giving fictional voice to a score of real life passengers, an undertaker 
who helped retrieve bodies from the sea, and a pair of non-human participants 
in the catastrophe. Wolf allows readers to experience the tragedy from all decks, 
fairly portraying the viewpoints of Captain Smith and White Star Line honcho 
Bruce Ismay within the context of their time, and interweaving plausible stories 
among the lesser-known passengers and crew. The commentary of undertaker John 
Snow, which closes each chronologically sequential section (or, in nautical terms, 
a “watch”), is particularly chilling in its clinical objectivity as it steadily refocuses 
readers’ attention from personal stories to the inexorable conclusion. The voice of 
a ship’s rat, caught up in its single-minded pursuit of food, is an effective agent 
of irony, more poignant than some prescient remarks by doomed passengers. The 
anthropomorphized iceberg however, is an unnecessarily histrionic voice, imbued 
with both motive and omniscience out of keeping in a novel so carefully aligned 
with fact. Titanic enthusiasts will, no doubt, overlook or forgive those few lapses 
into cheesiness, and will certainly revel in the extensive end matter, comprising 
trivia about the ship itself, specific details about featured players in Wolf’s drama, 
lists of the lost and saved whose names appear anywhere in the text, and a bibli-
ography of resources in multiple formats, with indications of where to begin for 
further reading.  EB
Wolitzer, meg The Fingertips of Duncan Dorfman. Dutton, 2011 [304p]
ISBN 978-0-525-42304-1 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 5-7
Dorky Duncan Dorfman wants to make a place for himself in his peer group; 
nonathletic April Blunt wants to prove to her jock family that Scrabble is a sport 
too; skateboarder Nate Saviano wants to get his Scrabble-obsessed dad off his back. 
These three, along with their partners, travel to the Youth Scrabble Tournament 
(airing on Thwap! TV) in Florida, where they meet, compete, and struggle with 
OcTOBer 2011 • 119
their secrets—especially Duncan, who has the supernatural ability to read text with 
his fingers, allowing him to cheat like mad in a Scrabble draw. Wolitzer writes with 
a solid matter-of-factness that brims with unpretentious wit (“The kids around the 
table howled; it was like lunchtime at a school for wolves”), and she balances the 
essential warm-heartedness of her story with an acknowledgment of human frailty 
and unkindness. Though there’s fantasy in the notion of Duncan’s superpower, that’s 
a bit of a red herring, since the book focuses mostly on his not using it; instead, 
there’s Scrabble-playing action and deftly portrayed human dynamics. Characters 
are drawn economically but effectively, with game teammates vivid as well (April’s 
funny, ingenious partner Lucy is particularly deserving of her own book), and the 
many effectively balanced subplots (ranging from Duncan’s growing interest in his 
mysterious, ostensibly late father to April’s search for a boy she met on vacation) 
ensure everybody has rich personal lives in addition to their tournament goals. Fans 
of Konigsburg’s The View from Saturday (BCCB 11/96) will find this mixture of 
competition and comity just to their liking.  DS
Wood, douglAs Franklin and Winston: A Christmas That Changed the World; 
illus. by Barry Moser. Candlewick, 2011 [40p]
ISBN 978-0-7636-3383-7 $15.99
Reviewed from galleys   
M Gr. 3-6
Immediately after the December 7, 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor, the United States 
was scrambling to put its alliances in order, and British Prime Minister Winston 
Churchill crossed the Atlantic to spend the Christmas holiday in negotiation with 
his counterpart, President Franklin Roosevelt. The personal rapport that would 
be established between the men would further cement the bond between their 
countries. Wood’s account of the visit is long on Allied fervor and purple rhetoric 
(“Even now, in this storm-tossed crossing, the prowling of Nazi submarines seemed 
more dangerous than the fury of the ocean”) but decidedly short on background 
and facts about the content of the meetings. Readers receive a page of biographi-
cal detail on each leader and plenty of human interest tidbits on dinners, church 
services, and, notably, Churchill’s getting caught au naturel exiting his bath. The 
truly world-changing activities suggested in the subtitle are, however, glossed over 
in a few underinformative generalizations: “The days and nights were packed with 
important meetings and difficult negotiations”; “Generals, cabinet secretaries, and 
chiefs of staff met around the clock”; “The two leaders keenly felt that the future 
of their countries and the world depended upon their decisions and their ability 
to work together.” Although Moser’s watercolors, based on period photographs, 
capture iconic moments likely to imprint on readers’ memories the gravity of the 
meeting, they do not provide enough visual information to meaningfully supple-
ment Wood’s thin narrative. Readers who are sensitive to the irony of war in the 
Christian season of peace will be vastly better served by Jim Murphy’s World War 
I title, Truce (BCCB 12/09).  EB
Woods, BrendA Saint Louis Armstrong Beach. Paulsen/Penguin, 2011 136p
ISBN 978-0-399-25507-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 4-7
Saint Louis Armstrong Beach is a seventh-grade prodigy, playing his clarinet for 
tourists in the Quarter in New Orleans to make money for his first goal, a new 
clarinet, and his ultimate one, Juilliard. He’s well known around the neighbor-
120 • The BulleTin
hood, and he has a special interest in the neighborhood dog, Shadow, even though 
his father won’t let him claim Shadow as his own. As Hurricane Katrina develops 
in strength and changes its course, he and his dad, along with other men in the 
neighborhood, board up windows and prepare for evacuation, but old Miz Moran 
hides from her daughter when it’s time to go. Saint is supposed to go with his uncle 
to Baton Rouge, but he insists on taking Shadow, and when the dog runs away, 
so does Saint. He ends up with Shadow at Miz Moran’s house, where they hole 
up in the attic as the storm rages and Miz Moran’s forgotten her insulin. This will 
obviously beg comparison with Jewell Parke Rhodes’s Ninth Ward (BCCB 10/10), 
where another gifted child ends up in an attic with an elderly woman in need of 
medical attention and gets help from a supernatural source. Ultimately, both books 
are solid reads that feature likable protagonists with distinctive, readable voices, and 
emphasize the importance of faith, community, and resilience. Pair them to help 
young readers imagine what it must have been like for survivors before, during, 
and after one of the deadliest hurricanes in American history.  KC
yee, pAul Money Boy. Groundwood, 2011 184p
ISBN 978-1-55498-094-9 $16.95   
R Gr. 9-12
Ray Liu struggles in his Toronto high school largely due to his poor English skills, 
and he spends what he considers his real life as a warrior in the online role-playing 
game Rebel State. There the points he accrues for blood and honor make up for the 
regular scoldings he gets from his imperious father and his poor academic showing 
alongside his stepbrother and friends. The tenuous balance of this double life is 
destroyed when his father checks his computer search history and discovers Ray’s 
been visiting gay-themed websites, whereupon he coolly tosses Ray’s belongings 
on the lawn and locks the door behind him. Eighteen-year-old Ray, whose street 
smarts, motivation, and personal resources are just about nil, spends the week trying 
to survive and fantasizing how his father will come and find him, apologize, and 
take him home. In reality, Ray slowly loses everything he has; his money and iPod 
are stolen, his bank card can’t be replaced because he never bothered to learn his 
vital document numbers, his laptop is stolen, and his mother back in China is now 
a prostitute unable to assist him. Unwilling to take any low status employment, 
he decides to work a street corner as a “money boy,” convincing himself that male 
prostitution will be a path toward financial independence and an introduction to 
the joys of gay sex. And indeed, his first encounter seems to qualify as a success, 
until he learns his john is actually a pimp with plans for more than an affair. The 
unrealistically happy resolution to Ray’s plight, which is truer to his wilder fantasies 
than to plausibility, is offset by the painfully realistic depths of the naïve young 
man’s self deception, and his inability to see that his own misplaced pride is the 
very trait he so resents in his father. Teens venturing into gritty new-adult writing 
will be both fascinated by his tumble from grace and relieved that there’s a safety 
net to break his fall.  EB
young, JAnet ruth The Babysitter Murders. Atheneum, 2011 321p
Trade ed. ISBN 978-1-4169-5944-1 $16.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-1-4424-2382-4 $9.99   
R Gr. 8-12
Seventeen-year-old Dani seems to have everything together until weird, unwanted, 
and inappropriate thoughts start plaguing her. She thinks of grabbing her teacher’s 
OcTOBer 2011 • 121
testicles, calling her mother and her best friend (who has recently come out to her) 
rude and degrading names, and, worst of all, killing the little boy she babysits. 
She decides she has to stop babysitting Alex for his own safety; when she tells his 
mother why, Alex’s mother calls the police, and the small town, the internet, and the 
press are soon abuzz with the irresistible gossip regarding a potentially murderous 
babysitter. Dani finally manages to get counseling for what her therapist explains is 
OCD; meanwhile, though, she’s become the target of a group of vigilantes whose 
ostensible goal is to protect children from predators, but who have themselves 
resorted to tactics well outside the law. Short chapters from various characters’ 
perspectives intermingle with excerpts from blogs and news stories to create the 
feeling of a true-crime TV documentary; the present-tense narration adds to this 
quality as it walks readers through the minute-by-minute actions and thought 
processes of the characters. The result is a highly accessible as well as a dramatic 
account, readable also for younger audiences prepared for the occasional brutality 
and profanity of Dani’s uncontrollable thoughts. Fortunately for Dani, she has a few 
steadfast supporters who can see the disorder for what it is; however, the narrator 
is unstinting in her depiction of the people who don’t understand the difference 
between mental and moral disorders and who are dangerous as a result. Readers 
interested in understanding the facts of OCD through an unfortunately credible 
narrative of sensationalism run amok will find this intriguing.  KC
yum, hyeWon The Twins’ Blanket; written and illus. by Hyewon Yum. Foster/
Farrar, 2011 [36p]
ISBN 978-0-374-37972-8 $16.99
Reviewed from galleys   
Ad 3-6 yrs
It’s the first time in separate beds for identical twin girls, who have always shared 
everything. A lingering point of contention is the matter of who gets to sleep with 
the beloved striped blanket that they have shared since birth (“I think I should 
have this blanket. Because I’m the big sister, and I can’t sleep without it.” “No, I 
think I should have it. Because . . . well . . . I can’t sleep without it, either. And 
you’re only three minutes older than me!”). After their mother sews them each a 
new blanket containing a part of the old, the two fall asleep in their separate twin 
beds holding hands across the gap. Yum, who is herself a twin, effectively captures 
the banter between the two girls, from warm teasing to edgy bickering. There’s 
actually rather a lot of bickering, though, and the bare-bones style of the narrative, 
with its sometimes choppy pattern of back-and-forth short sentences between the 
girls, offers little to soften it or develop the story. The illustrations, soft brushings of 
watercolor textured and lined with pencil, are similarly but more effectively spare, 
with abundant white space filling the pages. The girls have black bowl haircuts and 
rosy cheeks that grow increasingly redder as they get angrier with one another, and 
there is plenty of extra detail provided by their expressive faces. Depictions of family 
photos on the walls add additional appeal and conceptual layering, as in the spread 
of the two girls fighting over a doll sitting in front of two framed photos of them 
staring at each other standoffishly. Add this to your collection of sibling stories, or 
grab it for an alternative take on the trials and tribulations of sharing space.  HM 
122 • The BulleTin
ziegler, Jennifer Sass & Serendipity. Delacorte, 2011 371p
Library ed. ISBN 978-0-385-90762-0 $18.99
Trade ed. ISBN 978-0-385-73898-9 $15.99
E-book ed. ISBN 978-0-375-89681-1 $15.99   
R Gr. 7-10
Sisters Daphne and Gabby Rivera couldn’t be more different. Gabby is super-serious 
and hyper-responsible with a strong cynical streak where love is concerned, while 
Daphne is a hopeless romantic, spinning a chance encounter with a new boy at 
school into a full-fledged fantasy of true love and destiny. Predictably, the girls agree 
on very little, with Gabby continually preaching and Daphne feeling unjustly put 
upon. When their landlord raises their rent beyond what they can afford, Daphne 
goes into denial while Gabby tries to help their divorced, cash-strapped mother 
find a new place; against Gabby’s wishes, they end up living on the grounds of the 
town’s richest family, which includes a very good-looking boy whom Gabby feels 
she has reason to loathe beyond class jealousy. Since the girls’ characterizations 
and circumstances are based loosely on Austen’s Sense and Sensibility, there are 
few surprises in the plot arc; that predictability doesn’t detract from story’s appeal, 
though, which lies largely in the details of the girls’ relationships with each other 
and their respective crushes. Like real sisters, the girls bicker with stamina and 
enthusiasm; like their classical counterparts, each sister learns the lesson about love 
that she needs: Gabby to be more open and forgiving, and Daphne to temper her 
dreams with something a bit closer to reality, with the modern twist of negotiating 
parental divorce and high-school gossip. Readers who savor realistic sibling stories 
with shades of romance will enjoy this homage to Jane Austen.  KC 
zielin, lArA The Implosion of Aggie Winchester. Putnam, 2011 278p
ISBN 978-0-399-25411-6 $16.99   
R Gr. 7-10
A devastating run-in with the mean, popular girls in ninth grade sparks a fashion 
and attitude change in Aggie, the principal’s daughter, who goes Goth and starts 
hanging out with angry, outspoken Sylvia. When Sylvia gets pregnant, she’s de-
termined to convince everyone that she’s just as good as the town elite, a move 
that Aggie knows is doomed. Aggie’s reality checks are not appreciated, however, 
and when Sylvia gets nominated for prom queen, she ditches Aggie so that Aggie 
won’t know about her plan to stuff the ballot box so that she can share the stage 
with her Prom King baby-daddy. Scandal rocks the school, implicating Aggie’s 
principal mother and leading to her resignation, and all of Aggie’s attempts to help 
turn into cringeworthy disasters. As the huge chunks of reputation debris fall all 
around her and her mom, they finally begin to understand each other as mother 
and daughter rather than as professional educator and teenage demographic, a 
shift that is as seismic as it is welcome for Aggie. The level of drama here warrants 
the in-text references to Jerry Springer and his ilk, as people commit big mistakes 
and then make even bigger ones as they try to do damage control, making this 
compulsively readable. The resolution is a tad hokey but ultimately welcome as it 
emphasizes that the most important relationship a girl has in high school is with 
her mom, no matter what the romance novels say.  KC
OcTOBer 2011 • 123
zimmermAn, dWight Jon, ad. Saga of the Sioux: An Adaptation of Dee Brown’s 
Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee. Holt, 2011 [240p] illus. with photographs
ISBN 978-0-8050-9364-3 $18.99
Reviewed from galleys   
R Gr. 6-9
At the fortieth anniversary of the publication of Dee Brown’s seminal Bury My 
Heart at Wounded Knee, Zimmerman offers an adaptation for middle-schoolers. In 
an opening note he carefully explains how he has trimmed the original, focusing 
solely on the experience of the Sioux and bookending the main chapters with added 
context on tribal and linguistic relationships within the nation and an epilogue 
touching on events after the December 1890 massacre at Wounded Knee. The result 
is a cogent, heartbreaking narration of treaties made and promptly broken by white 
authorities, shrinking tribal lands, heroic and ultimately futile Sioux attempts to 
hold and regain territory, the hope-filled resurgence by Ghost Dance adherents, and 
the harrowing final image of the massacre at Wounded Knee (“When the torn and 
bleeding bodies were carried into the candlelit church, those who were conscious 
could see Christmas greenery hanging from the open rafters. Above the pulpit was 
strung a banner: Peace On Earth, Good Will To Men”). While this relatively trim 
volume doesn’t match the scope of Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee, it should 
encourage young readers to tackle the original as soon as they’re able. Black-and-
white illustrations, a timeline, Sioux calendar, glossary, index, and lists for print 
and online reading are included.  EB 
cOrrecTiOns:
Bloomsbury informs us that the appended reading guide for Walker’s Small Town 
Sinners, reviewed in the September issue, will not be included in the final copy.
In our September review of Bonnie Christiansen’s Fabulous!: A Portrait of Andy 
Warhol we stated that the text mentions Warhol’s original last name but never 
explains that his name was changed; in fact, the appended timeline chronicles his 
name change. 
The Bulletin regrets the errors.
124 • The BulleTin
ProfessIonAL ConneCtIons: resourCes for teAChers And LIBrArIAns
mArcus, leonArd The Annotated Phantom Tollbooth. Knopf, 2011 284p
ISBN 978-0375857157 $29.99 illus. with photographs 
Reviewed from galleys
Fifty years after young Milo rescued Rhyme and Reason, noted children’s literature 
scholar (also recent adjunct faculty member here at the University of Illinois Gradu-
ate School of Library and Information Science) Leonard Marcus takes readers back 
to the Lands Beyond for a literary jaunt that will please old and new fans of Juster’s 
classic tale. Drawing upon Juster’s own notes as well as interviews with the author 
and illustrator, Marcus offers a host of informative tidbits regarding the creative 
process behind the work and its cultural context (and particularly its parallels to 
another famous journey through other worlds, Alice in Wonderland ) while remaining 
true to the playful wit of the original. Marcus’ fondness for his subject is clear both 
in his extensively researched notes and the illuminating introduction that provides a 
concise but comprehensive look at the lives of author and illustrator and the fateful 
meeting that brought about Milo’s adventures. Readers nostalgic for the Humbug, 
the Dodecahedron, and of course, Tock will find their favorite characters lovingly 
treated here and discover an entirely new way to experience the lands beyond the 
Phantom Tollbooth. An index and bibliography are included.  KQG 
OctOber 2011 • 125
Actors and acting:  Spielman
Adventure:  Auxier; Barrett; 
Carson; Falkner; Higgins; Jobling; 
national Children’s Book and 
Literacy Alliance; Phelan; reeve; 
tennapel; Willingham
African Americans–fiction:  Bradley; 
english; Woods
Africa–stories:  Cunnane
Afterlife–fiction:  Martin, C.
Aliens–fiction:  Anderson; tennapel
ALPHABet BookS:  trasler
Animals–fiction:  Willingham
Animals–stories:  Becker; thomas
AntHoLogieS:  Link; nye; 
Scieszka
Anthropology:  venkatraman
Art: intriago
Art and artists–fiction:  Lewis; 
McMann
Asian Americans–fiction:  Conkling; 
Yee
Asian Americans–stories:  Yum
Aviation:  griffith
Babies–fiction:  greenman
BedtiMe StorieS:  Blackall; 
Yum
Behavior–stories:  offill
BiogrAPHieS:  demi; griffith; 
krull Henson; Spielman
Biology:  Harris
Boarding school–fiction:  Johnson
Books and reading–fiction:  Falkner; 
reed; Schmatz; Willingham
Brothers–fiction:  Williams
Brothers and sisters–fiction:  nation-
al Children’s Book and Literacy 
Alliance
Bullies–fiction:  Humphrey
Butterflies:  Martin
Cars–stories:  Lareau
Censorship–fiction:  reed
Clothing–stories:  Johnston
Clubs–fiction:  Warner
Codes and ciphers–fiction:  Warner
Competitions–fiction:  ganeshram
ConCePt BookS:  intriago
Contests–fiction:  Wolitzer
Creative writing:  gerstein
Crime and criminals–fiction:  
Coben; downham; Johnson; Litt-
man; o’dell; Pfeffer; Plum-ucci; 
Seifert; Shaw; vrettos
deafness–fiction:  Selznick
death–fiction:  Lewis; Williams
demons–fiction:  gustafson; Mc-
neil; Skovron
deteCtive StorieS:  Coben
disabilities–fiction:  Acampora; 
Auxier; Selznick; Williams
disasters–fiction:  gray; Wolf; 
Woods
dogs–fiction:  Mills; orr
dystopias–fiction:  Bick; Hirsch; 
McMann; treggiari
elections–fiction:  english
epidemics–fiction:  treggiari
Ethics and values:  Castan; down-
ham; durst; Levithan; nolan; 
Subject and uSe Index
keyed to The Bulletin’s alphabetical arrangement by author, this index, which 
appears in each issue, can be used in three ways. entries in regular type refer to 
subjects; entries in bold type refer to curricular or other uses; entries in ALL-CAPS 
refer to genres and appeals. in the case of subject headings, the subhead “stories” 
refers to books for the readaloud audience; “fiction,” to those books intended for 
independent reading.
126 • the bulletin
Pearson; Pfeffer; reed; Sandler; 
Seifert
explorers and exploring:  Phelan
Fairies–fiction:  Paterson
Families–fiction:  Bradley; down-
ham; ganeshram; greenman; 
Lewis; nolan; orr; Pfeffer; Plum-
ucci; Skovron; tennapel
Families–stories:  Cunnane
FAntASY:  Auxier; Barnhill; durst; 
Jay; Jobling; Malkin; Marr; Mc-
neil; Murdock; Paterson; Pearce; 
Powell; Schwab; Skovron; ursu; 
Willingham
Fathers–fiction: vernick
FoLktALeS And FAirY tALeS:  
Pearce; ursu
Food and eating:  Sayre
Food and eating–fiction:  ganesh-
ram; Pearce; varon
Football–fiction:  Lupica
Friends–fiction:  Acampora; Castan; 
english; Falkner; Humphrey; 
LaFleur; Levithan; Mills; Morris; 
Pearson; Schmatz; varon; ver-
nick; vrettos; Wolitzer; Zielin
Friends–stories:  Becker
Future–fiction:  Pearson; treggiari
games–fiction:  Powell; Wolitzer
gangs–fiction:  Castan
gays and lesbians–fiction:  Yee
genetic engineering–fiction:  Sandler
gHoSt StorieS:  Morris
ghosts–fiction:  Malkin
grAPHiC noveLS:  Phelan; 
reed; Selznick
grief–fiction:  Castle; Morris; Plum-
ucci; Schmatz; Shaw; Levithan
Hair:  krull Big
Health:  Harris
HiStoriCAL FiCtion:  Bradley; 
Colón; Conkling; Selznick; Wolf
History, European:  demi; Spiel-
man
History, U.S.:   Johnston; Wood; 
Zimmerman
History, world:  griffith; krull Big; 
Phelan; Wood
Horror:  Higgins; Priestly
HuMor:  Auxier; Becker; Black-
all; diPucchio; durst; Lareau; 
Menchin; offill; Scieszka; 
thomas; trasler
Hurricanes–fiction:  Woods
identity–fiction:  Pearson; Scott
illness–stories:  Becker
imagination–stories:  Menchin
immigrants–fiction:  Yee
immigrants–stories:  Colón
indian Americans–fiction:  Chari
insects:  Martin
internet–fiction:  Littman
islands–fiction:  venkatraman
Journalists–fiction:  Plum-ucci
kidnapping–fiction:  kephart
Language arts:  nye
Latinos–fiction:  Castan; Conkling
Latinos–stories:  Colón
Literature, American:  gustafson
Literature, English:  Jay; Priestly; 
Ziegler
Magic–fiction:  Chari; o’dell
Media–fiction:  Young
Memory–fiction:  Scott
Mothers–fiction:  kephart; Lewis
Music and musicians–fiction:  Acam-
pora; Chari; Malkin
MYSterieS:  Coben; gustafson; 
Higgins; Warner
native Americans:  Zimmerman
Nature study:  Martin
new orleans–fiction:  Woods
night—stories:  Blackall
obsessive-compulsive disorder–fic-
tion:  Young
opposites:  intriago
orphans–fiction:  Castle; gustafson; 
LaFleur; Priestly; reeve
Parenting–fiction:  greenman
Pets–fiction:  Mills
Photography–fiction:  Levithan
Play–stories:  thomas
PoetrY:  gerstein
Popularity–fiction:  Zielin
Presidents:  Wood
Presidents–fiction:  Bradley
Prostitution–fiction:  Yee
Puppets: krull Henson
OctOber 2011 • 127
Quests–fiction:  Jobling
racism–fiction:  Conkling
Reading aloud:  gerstein; Paterson
Reading, beginning:  trasler
Reading, easy:  diPucchio; english; 
Mills; orr
Reading, reluctant:  Auxier
relationships–fiction:  Castle; down-
ham; greenman; nolan; Schwab; 
Sheehan; vernick; Ziegler
Religious studies:  demi
rHYMing StorieS:  Martin; 
Sayre; Sendak
robots–fiction:  national Children’s 
Book and Literacy Alliance; Shee-
han
romance–fiction:  gray; Jay; Malkin
royalty–fiction:  Murdock
rumors–fiction:  Young
Saints:  demi
SCArY StorieS:  Barnhill
School–fiction:  english; Humphrey; 
LaFleur; Schmatz; Zielin
Science and scientists–stories: offill
SCienCe FiCtion:  Anderson; 
Bick; Falkner; McMann; Pearson; 
Priestly; Sandler; Scott; Seifert; 
Sheehan
Secrets–fiction:  kephart; LaFleur; 
Lewis
Sex education:  Harris
Sexual relations–fiction:  Littman
Sharing–stories:  Yum
Ships and sailing–fiction:  Wolf
SHort StorieS:  Link; Marr; nye; 
Scieszka
Sisters–fiction:  Ziegler
Sisters–stories:  Yum
Slavery–fiction:  Bradley
South Africa–fiction: Williams
Sports–fiction:  Lupica
SteAMPunk:  Link; reeve
Stepfamilies–fiction:  Pfeffer
Substance abuse–fiction:  vrettos
Suicide–fiction:  Levithan
Summer–fiction:  Barnhill; vernick
SuPernAturAL StorieS:  
Johnson; Malkin; Mcneil; o’dell; 
Powell; Skovron
SurvivAL StorieS:  Bick; Hirsch; 
tennapel; treggiari; venkatraman; 
Woods
SuSPenSe:  Scieszka; Shaw; vrettos
Synesthesia–fiction:  Anderson
tALL tALeS:  Johnston
teen pregnancy–fiction:  nolan; 
Zielin
television:  krull Henson
television–fiction:  ganeshram
time travel–fiction:  Falkner
toddLer BookS:  thomas
transformation–stories:  Lareau
Transportation:  griffith
trinidadian-Americans–fiction:  gane-
shram
twins–stories:  Yum
vampires–fiction:  durst
verSe noveLS:  Wolf
violence–fiction:  Williams
voyages and travel:  Phelan; Sobol
voyages and travel–fiction:  gray; 
Marr; Murdock; reeve; tennapel; 
ursu; varon
Werewolves–fiction:  gray; Jobling; 
Pearce
Winter–fiction:  ursu
Witches–fiction:  Schwab
Work–stories:  Cunnane
World cultures:  Sobol
World War ii:  Wood
World War ii–fiction:  Conkling
Zombies–fiction:  diPucchio
T
he Johns Hopkins University Press wants to be more than 
just your publisher—we want to be your partner. 
JHUP will help you cultivate the most original ideas and 
research; we’ve been publishing scholarly journals since . 
T e Johns Hopkins University Press publishes in a variety of ﬁ elds 
including history, the classics, philosophy, medicine, science, technology, 
literature, psychology, cultural studies, and many others. 
We take care of the business of publishing and association 
management so that you can focus on developing engaging content, 
conferences, and conversations. 
Join the JHUP family, and allow us to add value to your journal, 
increase its usage, and help you ﬁ nd and keep subscriber-members. 
For more information on the journals program at Hopkins, 
visit our website: http://press.jhu.edu/journals
T H E JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY PRESS
A PUBLISHER 
WHO CARES.
 
